A Ghost
By GUY DE MAUPASSANT

Translated for this volume by M. Charles Sommer.

We were speaking of sequestration, alluding to a recent
    lawsuit. It was at the close of a friendly evening in a very
    old mansion in the Rue de Grenelle, and each of the guests had
    a story to tell, which he assured us was true.
Then the old Marquis de la Tour-Samuel, eighty-two years of
    age, rose and came forward to lean on the mantelpiece. He told
    the following story in his slightly quavering voice.
"I, also, have witnessed a strange thing—so strange
    that it has been the nightmare of my life. It happened
    fifty-six years ago, and yet there is not a month when I do not
    see it again in my dreams. From that day I have borne a mark, a
    stamp of fear,—do you understand?
"Yes, for ten minutes I was a prey to terror, in such a way
    that ever since a constant dread has remained in my soul.
    Unexpected sounds chill me to the heart; objects which I can
    ill distinguish in the evening shadows make me long to flee. I
    am afraid at night.
"No! I would not have owned such a thing before reaching my
    present age. But now I may tell everything. One may fear
    imaginary dangers at eighty-two years old. But before actual
    danger I have never turned back, mesdames.
"That affair so upset my mind, filled me with such a deep,
    mysterious unrest that I never could tell it. I kept it in that
    inmost part, that corner where we conceal our sad, our shameful
    secrets, all the weaknesses of our life which cannot be
    confessed.
"I will tell you that strange happening just as it took
    place, with no attempt to explain it. Unless I went mad for one
    short hour it must be explainable, though. Yet I was not mad,
    and I will prove it to you. Imagine what you will. Here are the
    simple facts:
"It was in 1827, in July. I was quartered with my regiment
    in Rouen.
"One day, as I was strolling on the quay, I came across a
    man I believed I recognized, though I could not place him with
    certainty. I instinctively went more slowly, ready to pause.
    The stranger saw my impulse, looked at me, and fell into my
    arms.
"It was a friend of my younger days, of whom I had been very
    fond. He seemed to have become half a century older in the five
    years since I had seen him. His hair was white, and he stooped
    in his walk, as if he were exhausted. He understood my
    amazement and told me the story of his life.
"A terrible event had broken him down. He had fallen madly
    in love with a young girl and married her in a kind of
    dreamlike ecstasy. After a year of unalloyed bliss and
    unexhausted passion, she had died suddenly of heart disease, no
    doubt killed by love itself.
"He had left the country on the very day of her funeral, and
    had come to live in his hotel at Rouen. He remained there,
    solitary and desperate, grief slowly mining him, so wretched
    that he constantly thought of suicide.
"'As I thus came across you again,' he said, 'I shall ask a
    great favor of you. I want you to go to my château and
    get some papers I urgently need. They are in the writing-desk
    of my room, of our room. I cannot send a servant or a
    lawyer, as the errand must be kept private. I want absolute
    silence.
"'I shall give you the key of the room, which I locked
    carefully myself before leaving, and the key to the
    writing-desk. I shall also give you a note for the gardener,
    who will let you in.
"'Come to breakfast with me to-morrow, and we'll talk the
    matter over.'
"I promised to render him that slight service. It would mean
    but a pleasant excursion for me, his home not being more than
    twenty-five miles from Rouen. I could go there in an hour on
    horseback.
"At ten o'clock the next day I was with him. We breakfasted
    alone together, yet he did not utter more than twenty words. He
    asked me to excuse him. The thought that I was going to visit
    the room where his happiness lay shattered, upset him, he said.
    Indeed, he seemed perturbed, worried, as if some mysterious
    struggle were taking place in his soul.
"At last he explained exactly what I was to do. It was very
    simple. I was to take two packages of letters and some papers,
    locked in the first drawer at the right of the desk of which I
    had the key. He added:
"'I need not ask you not to glance at them.'
"I was almost hurt by his words, and told him so, rather
    sharply. He stammered:
"'Forgive me. I suffer so much!'
"And tears came to his eyes.
"I left about one o'clock to accomplish my errand.
"The day was radiant, and I rushed through the meadows,
    listening to the song of the larks, and the rhythmical beat of
    my sword on my riding-boots.
"Then I entered the forest, and I set my horse to walking.
    Branches of the trees softly caressed my face, and now and then
    I would catch a leaf between my teeth and bite it with avidity,
    full of the joy of life, such as fills you without reason, with
    a tumultuous happiness almost indefinable, a kind of magical
    strength.
"As I neared the house I took out the letter for the
    gardener, and noted with surprise that it was sealed. I was so
    amazed and so annoyed that I almost turned back without
    fulfilling my mission. Then I thought that I should thus
    display over-sensitiveness and bad taste. My friend might have
    sealed it unconsciously, worried as he was.
"The manor looked as though it had been deserted the last
    twenty years. The gate, wide-open and rotten, held, one
    wondered how. Grass filled the paths; you could not tell the
    flower-beds from the lawn.
"At the noise I made kicking a shutter, an old man came out
    from a side-door and was apparently amazed to see me there. I
    dismounted from my horse and gave him the letter. He read it
    once or twice, turned it over, looked at me with suspicion, and
    asked:
"'Well, what do you want?'
"I answered sharply:
"'You must know it as you have read your master's orders. I
    want to get in the house.'
"He appeared overwhelmed. He said:
"'So—you are going in—in his room?'
"I was getting impatient.
"'Parbleu! Do you intend to question me, by
    chance?'
"He stammered:
"'No—monsieur—only—it has not been opened
    since—since the death. If you will wait five minutes, I
    will go in to see whether——'
"I interrupted angrily:
"'See here, are you joking? You can't go in that room, as I
    have the key!'
"He no longer knew what to say.
"'Then, monsieur, I will show you the way.'
"'Show me the stairs and leave me alone. I can find it
    without your help.'
"'But—still—monsieur——'
"Then I lost my temper.
"'Now be quiet! Else you'll be sorry!'
"I roughly pushed him aside and went into the house.
"I first went through the kitchen, then crossed two small
    rooms occupied by the man and his wife. From there I stepped
    into a large hall. I went up the stairs, and I recognized the
    door my friend had described to me.
"I opened it with ease and went in.
"The room was so dark that at first I could not distinguish
    anything. I paused, arrested by that moldy and stale odor
    peculiar to deserted and condemned rooms, of dead rooms. Then
    gradually my eyes grew accustomed to the gloom, and I saw
    rather clearly a great room in disorder, a bed without sheets
    having still its mattresses and pillows, one of which bore the
    deep print of an elbow or a head, as if someone had just been
    resting on it.
"The chairs seemed all in confusion. I noticed that a door,
    probably that of a closet, had remained ajar.
"I first went to the window and opened it to get some light,
    but the hinges of the outside shutters were so rusted that I
    could not loosen them.
"I even tried to break them with my sword, but did not
    succeed. As those fruitless attempts irritated me, and as my
    eyes were by now adjusted to the dim light, I gave up hope of
    getting more light and went toward the writing-desk.
"I sat down in an arm-chair, folded back the top, and opened
    the drawer. It was full to the edge. I needed but three
    packages, which I knew how to distinguish, and I started
    looking for them.
"I was straining my eyes to decipher the inscriptions, when
    I thought I heard, or rather felt a rustle behind me. I took no
    notice, thinking a draft had lifted some curtain. But a minute
    later, another movement, almost indistinct, sent a disagreeable
    little shiver over my skin. It was so ridiculous to be moved
    thus even so slightly, that I would not turn round, being
    ashamed. I had just discovered the second package I needed, and
    was on the point of reaching for the third, when a great and
    sorrowful sigh, close to my shoulder, made me give a mad leap
    two yards away. In my spring I had turned round, my hand on the
    hilt of my sword, and surely had I not felt that, I should have
    fled like a coward.
"A tall woman, dressed in white, was facing me, standing
    behind the chair in which I had sat a second before.
"Such a shudder ran through me that I almost fell back! Oh,
    no one who has not felt them can understand those gruesome and
    ridiculous terrors! The soul melts; your heart seems to stop;
    your whole body becomes limp as a sponge, and your innermost
    parts seem collapsing.
"I do not believe in ghosts; and yet I broke down before the
    hideous fear of the dead; and I suffered, oh, I suffered more
    in a few minutes, in the irresistible anguish of supernatural
    dread, than I have suffered in all the rest of my life!
"If she had not spoken, I might have died. But she did
    speak; she spoke in a soft and plaintive voice which set my
    nerves vibrating. I could not say that I regained my
    self-control. No, I was past knowing what I did; but the kind
    of pride I have in me, as well as a military pride, helped me
    to maintain, almost in spite of myself, an honorable
    countenance. I was making a pose, a pose for myself, and for
    her, for her, whatever she was, woman, or phantom. I realized
    this later, for at the time of the apparition, I could think of
    nothing. I was afraid.
"She said:
"'Oh, you can be of great help to me, monsieur!'
"I tried to answer, but I was unable to utter one word. A
    vague sound came from my throat.
"She continued:
"'Will you? You can save me, cure me. I suffer terribly. I
    always suffer. I suffer, oh, I suffer!'
"And she sat down gently in my chair. She looked at me.
"'Will you?'
"I nodded my head, being still paralyzed.
"Then she handed me a woman's comb of tortoise-shell, and
    murmured:
"'Comb my hair! Oh, comb my hair! That will cure me. Look at
    my head—how I suffer! And my hair—how it
    hurts!'
"Her loose hair, very long, very black, it seemed to me,
    hung over the back of the chair, touching the floor.
"Why did I do it? Why did I, shivering, accept that comb,
    and why did I take between my hands her long hair, which left
    on my skin a ghastly impression of cold, as if I had handled
    serpents? I do not know.
"That feeling still clings about my fingers, and I shiver
    when I recall it.
"I combed her, I handled, I know not how, that hair of ice.
    I bound and unbound it; I plaited it as one plaits a horse's
    mane. She sighed, bent her head, seemed happy.
"Suddenly she said, 'Thank you!' tore the comb from my
    hands, and fled through the door which I had noticed was half
    opened.
"Left alone, I had for a few seconds the hazy feeling one
    feels in waking up from a nightmare. Then I recovered myself. I
    ran to the window and broke the shutters by my furious
    assault.
"A stream of light poured in. I rushed to the door through
    which that being had gone. I found it locked and immovable.
"Then a fever of flight seized on me, a panic, the true
    panic of battle. I quickly grasped the three packages of
    letters from the open desk; I crossed the room running, I took
    the steps of the stairway four at a time. I found myself
    outside, I don't know how, and seeing my horse close by, I
    mounted in one leap and left at a full gallop.
"I didn't stop till I reached Rouen and drew up in front of
    my house. Having thrown the reins to my orderly, I flew to my
    room and locked myself in to think.
"Then for an hour I asked myself whether I had not been the
    victim of an hallucination. Certainly I must have had one of
    those nervous shocks, one of those brain disorders such as give
    rise to miracles, to which the supernatural owes its
    strength.
"And I had almost concluded that it was a vision, an
    illusion of my senses, when I came near to the window. My eyes
    by chance looked down. My tunic was covered with hairs, long
    woman's hairs which had entangled themselves around the
    buttons!
"I took them off one by one and threw them out of the window
    with trembling fingers.
"I then called my orderly. I felt too perturbed, too moved,
    to go and see my friend on that day. Besides, I needed to think
    over what I should tell him.
"I had his letters delivered to him. He gave a receipt to
    the soldier. He inquired after me and was told that I was not
    well. I had had a sunstroke, or something. He seemed
    distressed.
"I went to see him the next day, early in the morning, bent
    on telling him the truth. He had gone out the evening before
    and had not come back.
"I returned the same day, but he had not been seen. I waited
    a week. He did not come back. I notified the police. They
    searched for him everywhere, but no one could find any trace of
    his passing or of his retreat.
"A careful search was made in the deserted manor. No
    suspicious clue was discovered.
"There was no sign that a woman had been concealed
    there.
"The inquest gave no result, and so the search went no
    further.
"And in fifty-six years I have learned nothing more. I never
    found out the truth."