A ROSE OF THE GHETTO, By Israel Zangwill
    

      One day it occurred to Leibel that he ought to get married. He went to
      Sugarman the Shadchan forthwith.
    

      “I have the very thing for you,” said the great marriage broker.
    

      “Is she pretty?” asked Leibel.
    

      “Her father has a boot and shoe warehouse,” replied Sugarman,
      enthusiastically.
    

      “Then there ought to be a dowry with her,” said Leibel, eagerly.
    

      “Certainly a dowry! A fine man like you!”
     

      “How much do you think it would be?”
     

      “Of course it is not a large warehouse; but then you could get your boots
      at trade price, and your wife’s, perhaps, for the cost of the leather.”
     

      “When could I see her?”
     

      “I will arrange for you to call next Sabbath afternoon.”
     

      “You won’t charge me more than a sovereign?”
     

      “Not a groschen more! Such a pious maiden! I’m sure you will be happy. She
      has so much way-of-the-country [breeding]. And of course five per cent on
      the dowry?”
     

      “H’m! Well, I don’t mind!” “Perhaps they won’t give a dowry,” he thought
      with a consolatory sense of outwitting the Shadchan.
    

      On the Saturday Leibel went to see the damsel, and on the Sunday he went
      to see Sugarman the Shadchan.
    

      “But your maiden squints!” he cried, resentfully.
    

      “An excellent thing!” said Sugarman. “A wife who squints can never look
      her husband straight in the face and overwhelm him. Who would quail before
      a woman with a squint?”
     

      “I could endure the squint,” went on Leibel, dubiously, “but she also
      stammers.”
     

      “Well, what is better, in the event of a quarrel? The difficulty she has
      in talking will keep her far more silent than most wives. You had best
      secure her while you have the chance.”
     

      “But she halts on the left leg,” cried Leibel, exasperated.
    

      “Gott in Himmel! Do you mean to say you do not see what an
      advantage it is to have a wife unable to accompany you in all your
      goings?”
     

      Leibel lost patience.
    

      “Why, the girl is a hunchback!” he protested, furiously.
    

      “My dear Leibel,” said the marriage broker, deprecatingly shrugging his
      shoulders and spreading out his palms, “you can’t expect perfection!”
     

      Nevertheless Leibel persisted in his unreasonable attitude. He accused
      Sugarman of wasting his time, of making a fool of him.
    

      “A fool of you!” echoed the Shadchan, indignantly, “when I give you a
      chance of a boot and shoe manufacturer’s daughter? You will make a fool of
      yourself if you refuse. I dare say her dowry would be enough to set you up
      as a master tailor. At present you are compelled to slave away as a cutter
      for thirty shillings a week. It is most unjust. If you only had a few
      machines you would be able to employ your own cutters. And they can be got
      so cheap nowadays.”
     

      This gave Leibel pause, and he departed without having definitely broken
      the negotiations. His whole week was befogged by doubt, his work became
      uncertain, his chalk marks lacked their usual decision, and he did not
      always cut his coat according to his cloth. His aberrations became so
      marked that pretty Rose Green, the sweater’s eldest daughter, who managed
      a machine in the same room, divined, with all a woman’s intuition, that he
      was in love.
    

      “What is the matter?” she said, in rallying Yiddish, when they were taking
      their lunch of bread and cheese and ginger-beer amid the clatter of
      machines, whose serfs had not yet knocked off work.
    

      “They are proposing me a match,” he answered, sullenly.
    

      “A match!” ejaculated Rose. “Thou!” She had worked by his side for years,
      and familiarity bred the second person singular. Leibel nodded his head,
      and put a mouthful of Dutch cheese into it.
    

      “With whom?” asked Rose. Somehow he felt ashamed. He gurgled the answer
      into the stone ginger-beer bottle, which he put to his thirsty lips.
    

      “With Leah Volcovitch!”
     

      “Leah Volcovitch!” gasped Rose. “Leah, the boot and shoe manufacturer’s
      daughter?”
     

      Leibel hung his head—he scarce knew why. He did not dare meet her
      gaze. His droop said “Yes.” There was a long pause.
    

      “And why dost thou not have her?” said Rose. It was more than an inquiry;
      there was contempt in it, and perhaps even pique.
    

      Leibel did not reply. The embarrassing silence reigned again, and reigned
      long. Rose broke it at last.
    

      “Is it that thou likest me better?” she asked.
    

      Leibel seemed to see a ball of lightning in the air; it burst, and he felt
      the electric current strike right through his heart. The shock threw his
      head up with a jerk, so that his eyes gazed into a face whose beauty and
      tenderness were revealed to him for the first time. The face of his old
      acquaintance had vanished; this was a cajoling, coquettish, smiling face,
      suggesting undreamed-of things.
    

      “Nu, yes,” he replied, without perceptible pause.
    

      “Nu, good!” she rejoined as quickly.
    

      And in the ecstasy of that moment of mutual understanding Leibel forgot to
      wonder why he had never thought of Rose before. Afterward he remembered
      that she had always been his social superior.
    

      The situation seemed too dream-like for explanation to the room just yet.
      Leibel lovingly passed a bottle of ginger-beer, and Rose took a sip, with
      a beautiful air of plighting troth, understood only of those two. When
      Leibel quaffed the remnant it intoxicated him. The relics of the bread and
      cheese were the ambrosia to this nectar. They did not dare kiss; the
      suddenness of it all left them bashful, and the smack of lips would have
      been like a cannon-peal announcing their engagement. There was a subtler
      sweetness in this sense of a secret, apart from the fact that neither
      cared to break the news to the master tailor, a stern little old man.
      Leibel’s chalk marks continued indecisive that afternoon, which shows how
      correctly Rose had connected them with love.
    

      Before he left that night Rose said to him, “Art thou sure thou wouldst
      not rather have Leah Volcovitch?”
     

      “Not for all the boots and shoes in the world,” replied Leibel,
      vehemently.
    

      “And I,” protested Rose, “would rather go without my own than without
      thee.”
     

      The landing outside the workshop was so badly lighted that their lips came
      together in the darkness.
    

      “Nay, nay; thou must not yet,” said Rose. “Thou art still courting Leah
      Volcovitch. For aught thou knowest, Sugarman the Shadchan may have
      entangled thee beyond redemption.”
     

      “Not so,” asserted Leibel. “I have only seen the maiden once.”
     

      “Yes. But Sugarman has seen her father several times,” persisted Rose.
      “For so misshapen a maiden his commission would be large. Thou must go to
      Sugarman to-night, and tell him that thou canst not find it in thy heart
      to go on with the match.”
     

      “Kiss me, and I will go,” pleaded Leibel.
    

      “Go, and I will kiss thee,” said Rose, resolutely.
    

      “And when shall we tell thy father?” he asked, pressing her hand, as the
      next best thing to her lips.
    

      “As soon as thou art free from Leah.”
     

      “But will he consent?”
     

      “He will not be glad,” said Rose, frankly. “But after mother’s death—peace
      be upon her—the rule passed from her hands into mine.”
     

      “Ah, that is well,” said Leibel. He was a superficial thinker.
    

      Leibel found Sugarman at supper. The great Shadchan offered him a chair,
      but nothing else. Hospitality was associated in his mind with special
      occasions only, and involved lemonade and “stuffed monkeys.”
     

      He was very put out—almost to the point of indigestion—to hear
      of Leibel’s final determination, and plied him with reproachful inquiries.
    

      “You don’t mean to say that you give up a boot and shoe manufacturer
      merely because his daughter has round shoulders!” he exclaimed,
      incredulously.
    

      “It is more than round shoulders—it is a hump!” cried Leibel.
    

      “And suppose? See how much better off you will be when you get your own
      machines! We do not refuse to let camels carry our burdens because they
      have humps.”
     

      “Ah, but a wife is not a camel,” said Leibel, with a sage air.
    

      “And a cutter is not a master tailor,” retorted Sugarman.
    

      “Enough, enough!” cried Leibel. “I tell you, I would not have her if she
      were a machine warehouse.”
     

      “There sticks something behind,” persisted Sugarman, unconvinced.
    

      Leibel shook his head. “Only her hump” he said with a flash of humour.
    

      “Moses Mendelssohn had a hump,” expostulated Sugarman, reproachfully.
    

      “Yes, but he was a heretic,” rejoined Leibel, who was not without reading.
      “And then he was a man! A man with two humps could find a wife for each.
      But a woman with a hump cannot expect a husband in addition.”
     

      “Guard your tongue from evil,” quoth the Shadchan, angrily. “If everybody
      were to talk like you Leah Volcovitch would never be married at all.”
     

      Leibel shrugged his shoulders, and reminded him that hunchbacked girls who
      stammered and squinted and halted on left legs were not usually led under
      the canopy.
    

      “Nonsense! Stuff!” cried Sugarman, angrily. “That is because they do not
      come to me.”
     

      “Leah Volcovitch has come to you,” said Leibel, “but she shall not
      come to me.” And he rose, anxious to escape.
    

      Instantly Sugarman gave a sigh of resignation. “Be it so! Then I shall
      have to look out for another, that’s all.”
     

      “No, I don’t want any,” replied Leibel, quickly.
    

      Sugarman stopped eating. “You don’t want any?” he cried. “But you came to
      me for one?”
     

      “I—I—know,” stammered Leibel. “But I’ve—I’ve altered my
      mind.”
     

      “One needs Hillel’s patience to deal with you!” cried Sugarman. “But I
      shall charge you, all the same, for my trouble. You cannot cancel an order
      like this in the middle! No, no! You can play fast and loose with Leah
      Volcovitch, but you shall not make a fool of me.”
     

      “But if I don’t want one?” said Leibel, sullenly.
    

      Sugarman gazed at him with a cunning look of suspicion. “Didn’t I say
      there was something sticking behind?”
     

      Leibel felt guilty. “But whom have you got in your eye?” he inquired,
      desperately.
    

      “Perhaps you may have some one in yours!” naively answered Sugarman.
    

      Leibel gave a hypocritic long-drawn “U-m-m-m! I wonder if Rose Green—where
      I work—” he said, and stopped.
    

      “I fear not,” said Sugarman. “She is on my list. Her father gave her to me
      some months ago, but he is hard to please. Even the maiden herself is not
      easy, being pretty.”
     

      “Perhaps she has waited for some one,” suggested Leibel.
    

      Sugarman’s keen ear caught the note of complacent triumph.
    

      “You have been asking her yourself!” he exclaimed, in horror-stricken
      accents.
    

      “And if I have?” said Leibel, defiantly.
    

      “You have cheated me! And so has Eliphaz Green—I always knew he was
      tricky! You have both defrauded me!”
     

      “I did not mean to,” said Leibel, mildly.
    

      “You did mean to. You had no business to take the matter out of my
      hands. What right had you to propose to Rose Green?”
     

      “I did not,” cried Leibel, excitedly.
    

      “Then you asked her father!”
     

      “No; I have not asked her father yet.”
     

      “Then how do you know she will have you?”
     

      “I—I know,” stammered Leibel, feeling himself somehow a liar as well
      as a thief. His brain was in a whirl; he could not remember how the thing
      had come about. Certainly he had not proposed; nor could he say that she
      had.
    

      “You know she will have you,” repeated Sugarman, reflectively. “And does
      she know?”
     

      “Yes. In fact,” he blurted out, “we arranged it together.”
     

      “Ah, you both know. And does her father know?”
     

      “Not yet.”
     

      “Ah, then I must get his consent,” said Sugarman, decisively.
    

      “I—I thought of speaking to him myself.”
     

      “Yourself!” echoed Sugarman, in horror. “Are you unsound in the head? Why,
      that would be worse than the mistake you have already made!”
     

      “What mistake?” asked Leibel, firing up.
    

      “The mistake of asking the maiden herself. When you quarrel with her after
      your marriage she will always throw it in your teeth that you wished to
      marry her. Moreover, if you tell a maiden you love her, her father will
      think you ought to marry her as she stands. Still, what is done is done.”
       And he sighed regretfully.
    

      “And what more do I want? I love her.”
     

      “You piece of clay!” cried Sugarman, contemptuously. “Love will not turn
      machines, much less buy them. You must have a dowry. Her father has a big
      stocking; he can well afford it.”
     

      Leibel’s eyes lit up. There was really no reason why he should not have
      bread and cheese with his kisses.
    

      “Now, if you went to her father,” pursued the Shadchan, “the odds
      are that he would not even give you his daughter—to say nothing of
      the dowry. After all, it is a cheek of you to aspire so high. As you told
      me from the first, you haven’t saved a penny. Even my commission you won’t
      be able to pay till you get the dowry. But if I go I do not despair
      of getting a substantial sum—to say nothing of the daughter.”
     

      “Yes, I think you had better go,” said Leibel, eagerly.
    

      “But if I do this thing for you I shall want a pound more,” rejoined
      Sugarman.
    

      “A pound more!” echoed Leibel, in dismay. “Why?”
     

      “Because Rose Green’s hump is of gold,” replied Sugarman, oracularly.
      “Also, she is fair to see, and many men desire her.”
     

      “But you have always your five per cent, on the dowry.”
     

      “It will be less than Volcovitch’s,” explained Sugarman. “You see, Green
      has other and less beautiful daughters.”
     

      “Yes, but then it settles itself more easily. Say five shillings.”
     

      “Eliphaz Green is a hard man,” said the Shadchan instead.
    

      “Ten shillings is the most I will give!”
     

      “Twelve and sixpence is the least I will take. Eliphaz Green haggles so
      terribly.”
     

      They split the difference, and so eleven and threepence represented the
      predominance of Eliphaz Green’s stinginess over Volcovitch’s.
    

      The very next day Sugarman invaded the Green workroom. Rose bent over her
      seams, her heart fluttering. Leibel had duly apprised her of the
      roundabout manner in which she would have to be won, and she had
      acquiesced in the comedy. At the least it would save her the trouble of
      father-taming.
    

      Sugarman’s entry was brusque and breathless. He was overwhelmed with
      joyous emotion. His blue bandana trailed agitatedly from his coat-tail.
    

      “At last!” he cried, addressing the little white-haired master tailor; “I
      have the very man for you.”
     

      “Yes?” grunted Eliphaz, unimpressed. The monosyllable was packed with
      emotion. It said, “Have you really the face to come to me again with an
      ideal man?”
     

      “He has all the qualities that you desire,” began the Shadchan, in a tone
      that repudiated the implications of the monosyllable. “He is young,
      strong, God-fearing—”
     

      “Has he any money?” grumpily interrupted Eliphaz.
    

      “He will have money,” replied Sugarman, unhesitatingly, “when he
      marries.”
     

      “Ah!” The father’s voice relaxed, and his foot lay limp on the treadle. He
      worked one of his machines himself, and paid himself the wages so as to
      enjoy the profit. “How much will he have?”
     

      “I think he will have fifty pounds; and the least you can do is to let him
      have fifty pounds,” replied Sugarman, with the same happy ambiguity.
    

      Eliphaz shook his head on principle.
    

      “Yes, you will,” said Sugarman, “when you learn how fine a man he is.”
     

      The flush of confusion and trepidation already on Leibel’s countenance
      became a rosy glow of modesty, for he could not help overhearing what was
      being said, owing to the lull of the master tailor’s machine.
    

      “Tell me, then,” rejoined Eliphaz.
    

      “Tell me, first, if you will give fifty to a young, healthy, hard-working,
      God-fearing man, whose idea it is to start as a master tailor on his own
      account? And you know how profitable that is!”
     

      “To a man like that,” said Eliphaz, in a burst of enthusiasm, “I would
      give as much as twenty-seven pounds ten!”
     

      Sugarman groaned inwardly, but Leibel’s heart leaped with joy. To get four
      months’ wages at a stroke! With twenty-seven pounds ten he could certainly
      procure several machines, especially on the instalment system. Out of the
      corners of his eyes he shot a glance at Rose, who was beyond earshot.
    

      “Unless you can promise thirty it is waste of time mentioning his name,”
       said Sugarman.
    

      “Well, well—who is he?”
     

      Sugarman bent down, lowering his voice into the father’s ear.
    

      “What! Leibel!” cried Eliphaz, outraged.
    

      “Sh!” said Sugarman, “or he will overhear your delight, and ask more. He
      has his nose high enough, as it is.”
     

      “B—b—b—ut,” sputtered the bewildered parent, “I know
      Leibel myself. I see him every day. I don’t want a Shadchan to find me a
      man I know—a mere hand in my own workshop!”
     

      “Your talk has neither face nor figure,” answered Sugarman, sternly. “It
      is just the people one sees every day that one knows least. I warrant that
      if I had not put it into your head you would never have dreamt of Leibel
      as a son-in-law. Come now, confess.”
     

      Eliphaz grunted vaguely, and the Shadchan went on triumphantly: “I thought
      as much. And yet where could you find a better man to keep your daughter?”
     

      “He ought to be content with her alone,” grumbled her father.
    

      Sugarman saw the signs of weakening, and dashed in, full strength: “It’s a
      question whether he will have her at all. I have not been to him about her
      yet. I awaited your approval of the idea.” Leibel admired the verbal
      accuracy of these statements, which he had just caught.
    

      “But I didn’t know he would be having money,” murmured Eliphaz.
    

      “Of course you didn’t know. That’s what the Shadchan is for—to point
      out the things that are under your nose.”
     

      “But where will he be getting this money from?”
     

      “From you,” said Sugarman, frankly.
    

      “From me?”
     

      “From whom else? Are you not his employer? It has been put by for his
      marriage day.”
     

      “He has saved it?”
     

      “He has not spent it,” said Sugarman, impatiently.
    

      “But do you mean to say he has saved fifty pounds?”
     

      “If he could manage to save fifty pounds out of your wages he would be
      indeed a treasure,” said Sugarman. “Perhaps it might be thirty.”
     

      “But you said fifty.”
     

      “Well, you came down to thirty,” retorted the Shadchan. “You cannot
      expect him to have more than your daughter brings.”
     

      “I never said thirty,” Eliphaz reminded him. “Twenty-seven ten was my last
      bid.”
     

      “Very well; that will do as a basis of negotiations,” said Sugarman,
      resignedly. “I will call upon him this evening. If I were to go over and
      speak to him now, he would perceive you were anxious, and raise his terms,
      and that will never do. Of course you will not mind allowing me a pound
      more for finding you so economical a son-in-law?”
     

      “Not a penny more.”
     

      “You need not fear,” said Sugarman, resentfully. “It is not likely I shall
      be able to persuade him to take so economical a father-in-law. So you will
      be none the worse for promising.”
     

      “Be it so,” said Eliphaz, with a gesture of weariness, and he started his
      machine again.
    

      “Twenty-seven pounds ten, remember,” said Sugarman, above the whir.
    

      Eliphaz nodded his head, whirring his wheel-work louder.
    

      “And paid before the wedding, mind.”
     

      The machine took no notice.
    

      “Before the wedding, mind,” repeated Sugarman. “Before we go under the
      canopy.”
     

      “Go now, go now!” grunted Eliphaz, with a gesture of impatience. “It shall
      all be well.” And the white-haired head bowed immovably over its work.
    

      In the evening Rose extracted from her father the motive of Sugarman’s
      visit, and confessed that the idea was to her liking.
    

      “But dost thou think he will have me, little father?” she asked, with
      cajoling eyes.
    

      “Any one would have my Rose.”
     

      “Ah, but Leibel is different. So many years he has sat at my side and said
      nothing.”
     

      “He had his work to think of. He is a good, saving youth.”
     

      “At this very moment Sugarman is trying to persuade him—not so? I
      suppose he will want much money.”
     

      “Be easy, my child.” And he passed his discoloured hand over her hair.
    

      Sugarman turned up the next day, and reported that Leibel was unobtainable
      under thirty pounds, and Eliphaz, weary of the contest, called over
      Leibel, till that moment carefully absorbed in his scientific chalk marks,
      and mentioned the thing to him for the first time. “I am not a man to
      bargain,” Eliphaz said, and so he gave the young man his tawny hand, and a
      bottle of rum sprang from somewhere, and work was suspended for five
      minutes, and the “hands” all drank amid surprised excitement. Sugarman’s
      visits had prepared them to congratulate Rose; but Leibel was a shock.
    

      The formal engagement was marked by even greater junketing, and at last
      the marriage day came. Leibel was resplendent in a diagonal frockcoat, cut
      by his own hand; and Rose stepped from the cab a medley of flowers,
      fairness, and white silk, and behind her came two bridesmaids,—her
      sisters,—a trio that glorified the spectator-strewn pavement outside
      the synagogue. Eliphaz looked almost tall in his shiny high hat and
      frilled shirt-front. Sugarman arrived on foot, carrying red-socked little
      Ebenezer tucked under his arm.
    

      Leibel and Rose were not the only couple to be disposed of, for it was the
      thirty-third day of the Omer—a day fruitful in marriages.
    

      But at last their turn came. They did not, however, come in their turn,
      and their special friends among the audience wondered why they had lost
      their precedence. After several later marriages had taken place a whisper
      began to circulate. The rumour of a hitch gained ground steadily, and the
      sensation was proportionate. And, indeed, the rose was not to be picked
      without a touch of the thorn.
    

      Gradually the facts leaked out, and a buzz of talk and comment ran through
      the waiting synagogue. Eliphaz had not paid up!
    

      At first he declared he would put down the money immediately after the
      ceremony. But the wary Sugarman, schooled by experience, demanded its
      instant delivery on behalf of his other client. Hard pressed, Eliphaz
      produced ten sovereigns from his trousers-pocket, and tendered them on
      account. These Sugarman disdainfully refused, and the negotiations were
      suspended. The bridegroom’s party was encamped in one room, the bride’s in
      another, and after a painful delay Eliphaz sent an emissary to say that
      half the amount should be forthcoming, the extra five pounds in a bright
      new Bank of England note. Leibel, instructed and encouraged by Sugarman,
      stood firm.
    

      And then arose a hubbub of voices, a chaos of suggestions; friends rushed
      to and fro between the camps, some emerging from their seats in the
      synagogue to add to the confusion. But Eliphaz had taken his stand upon a
      rock—he had no more ready money. To-morrow, the next day, he would
      have some. And Leibel, pale and dogged, clutched tighter at those machines
      that were slipping away momently from him. He had not yet seen his bride
      that morning, and so her face was shadowy compared with the tangibility of
      those machines. Most of the other maidens were married women by now, and
      the situation was growing desperate. From the female camp came terrible
      rumours of bridesmaids in hysterics, and a bride that tore her wreath in a
      passion of shame and humiliation. Eliphaz sent word that he would give an
      I O U for the balance, but that he really could not muster any more
      current coin. Sugarman instructed the ambassador to suggest that Eliphaz
      should raise the money among his friends.
    

      And the short spring day slipped away. In vain the minister, apprised of
      the block, lengthened out the formulae for the other pairs, and blessed
      them with more reposeful unction. It was impossible to stave off the
      Leibel-Green item indefinitely, and at last Rose remained the only
      orange-wreathed spinster in the synagogue. And then there was a hush of
      solemn suspense, that swelled gradually into a steady rumble of babbling
      tongues, as minute succeeded minute and the final bridal party still
      failed to appear. The latest bulletin pictured the bride in a dead faint.
      The afternoon was waning fast. The minister left his post near the canopy,
      under which so many lives had been united, and came to add his white tie
      to the forces for compromise. But he fared no better than the others.
      Incensed at the obstinacy of the antagonists, he declared he would close
      the synagogue. He gave the couple ten minutes to marry in or quit. Then
      chaos came, and pandemonium—a frantic babel of suggestion and
      exhortation from the crowd. When five minutes had passed a legate from
      Eliphaz announced that his side had scraped together twenty pounds, and
      that this was their final bid.
    

      Leibel wavered; the long day’s combat had told upon him; the reports of
      the bride’s distress had weakened him. Even Sugarman had lost his
      cocksureness of victory. A few minutes more and both commissions might
      slip through his fingers. Once the parties left the synagogue, it would
      not be easy to drive them there another day. But he cheered on his man
      still: one could always surrender at the tenth minute.
    

      At the eighth the buzz of tongues faltered suddenly, to be transposed into
      a new key, so to speak. Through the gesticulating assembly swept that
      murmur of expectation which crowds know when the procession is coming at
      last. By some mysterious magnetism all were aware that the BRIDE herself—the
      poor hysteric bride—had left the paternal camp, was coming in person
      to plead with her mercenary lover.
    

      And as the glory of her and the flowers and the white draperies loomed
      upon Leibel’s vision his heart melted in worship, and he knew his citadel
      would crumble in ruins at her first glance, at her first touch. Was it
      fair fighting? As his troubled vision cleared, and as she came nigh unto
      him, he saw to his amazement that she was speckless and composed—no
      trace of tears dimmed the fairness of her face, there was no disarray in
      her bridal wreath.
    

      The clock showed the ninth minute.
    

      She put her hand appeallingly on his arm, while a heavenly light came into
      her face—the expression of a Joan of Arc animating her country.
    

      “Do not give in, Leibel!” she said. “Do not have me! Do not let them
      persuade thee! By my life, thou must not! Go home!”
     

      So at the eleventh minute the vanquished Eliphaz produced the balance, and
      they all lived happily ever afterward.