At the Gate
By MYLA JO CLOSSER

From the Century Magazine. By permission of the
        Century Company and Myla J. Closser.

A shaggy Airedale scented his way along the highroad. He had
    not been there before, but he was guided by the trail of his
    brethren who had preceded him. He had gone unwillingly upon
    this journey, yet with the perfect training of dogs he had
    accepted it without complaint. The path had been lonely, and
    his heart would have failed him, traveling as he must without
    his people, had not these traces of countless dogs before him
    promised companionship of a sort at the end of the road.
The landscape had appeared arid at first, for the
    translation from recent agony into freedom from pain had been
    so numbing in its swiftness that it was some time before he
    could fully appreciate the pleasant dog-country through which
    he was passing. There were woods with leaves upon the ground
    through which to scurry, long grassy slopes for extended runs,
    and lakes into which he might plunge for sticks and bring them
    back to—But he did not complete his thought, for the boy
    was not with him. A little wave of homesickness possessed
    him.
It made his mind easier to see far ahead a great gate as
    high as the heavens, wide enough for all. He understood that
    only man built such barriers and by straining his eyes he
    fancied he could discern humans passing through to whatever lay
    beyond. He broke into a run that he might the more quickly gain
    this inclosure made beautiful by men and women; but his
    thoughts outran his pace, and he remembered that he had left
    the family behind, and again this lovely new compound became
    not perfect, since it would lack the family.
The scent of the dogs grew very strong now, and coming
    nearer, he discovered, to his astonishment that of the myriads
    of those who had arrived ahead of him thousands were still
    gathered on the outside of the portal. They sat in a wide
    circle spreading out on each side of the entrance, big, little,
    curly, handsome, mongrel, thoroughbred dogs of every age,
    complexion, and personality. All were apparently waiting for
    something, someone, and at the pad of the Airedale's feet on
    the hard road they arose and looked in his direction.
That the interest passed as soon as they discovered the
    new-comer to be a dog puzzled him. In his former dwelling-place
    a four-footed brother was greeted with enthusiasm when he was a
    friend, with suspicious diplomacy when a stranger, and with
    sharp reproof when an enemy; but never had he been utterly
    ignored.
He remembered something that he had read many times on great
    buildings with lofty entrances. "Dogs not admitted," the signs
    had said, and he feared this might be the reason for the
    waiting circle outside the gate. It might be that this noble
    portal stood as the dividing-line between mere dogs and humans.
    But he had been a member of the family, romping with them in
    the living-room, sitting at meals with them in the dining-room,
    going upstairs at night with them, and the thought that he was
    to be "kept out" would be unendurable.
He despised the passive dogs. They should be treating a
    barrier after the fashion of their old country, leaping against
    it, barking, and scratching the nicely painted door. He bounded
    up the last little hill to set them an example, for he was
    still full of the rebellion of the world; but he found no door
    to leap against. He could see beyond the entrance dear masses
    of people, yet no dog crossed the threshold. They continued in
    their patient ring, their gaze upon the winding road.
He now advanced cautiously to examine the gate. It occurred
    to him that it must be fly-time in this region, and he did not
    wish to make himself ridiculous before all these strangers by
    trying to bolt through an invisible mesh like the one that had
    baffled him when he was a little chap. Yet there were no
    screens, and despair entered his soul. What bitter punishment
    these poor beasts must have suffered before they learned to
    stay on this side the arch that led to human beings! What had
    they done on earth to merit this? Stolen bones troubled his
    conscience, runaway days, sleeping in the best chair until the
    key clicked in the lock. These were sins.
At that moment an English bull-terrier, white, with
    liver-colored spots and a jaunty manner, approached him,
    snuffling in a friendly way. No sooner had the bull-terrier
    smelt his collar than he fell to expressing his joy at meeting
    him. The Airedale's reserve was quite thawed by this welcome,
    though he did not know just what to make of it.
"I know you! I know you!" exclaimed the bull-terrier, adding
    inconsequently, "What's your name?"
"Tam o'Shanter. They call me Tammy," was the answer, with a
    pardonable break in the voice.
"I know them," said the bull-terrier. "Nice folks."
"Best ever," said the Airedale, trying to be nonchalant, and
    scratching a flea which was not there. "I don't remember you.
    When did you know them?"
"About fourteen tags ago, when they were first married. We
    keep track of time here by the license-tags. I had four."
"This is my first and only one. You were before my time, I
    guess." He felt young and shy.
"Come for a walk, and tell me all about them," was his new
    friend's invitation.
"Aren't we allowed in there?" asked Tam, looking toward the
    gate.
"Sure. You can go in whenever you want to. Some of us do at
    first, but we don't stay."
"Like it better outside?"
"No, no; it isn't that."
"Then why are all you fellows hanging around here? Any old
    dog can see it's better beyond the arch."
"You see, we're waiting for our folks to come."
The Airedale grasped it at once, and nodded
    understandingly.
"I felt that way when I came along the road. It wouldn't be
    what it's supposed to be without them. It wouldn't be the
    perfect place."
"Not to us," said the bull-terrier.
"Fine! I've stolen bones, but it must be that I have been
    forgiven, if I'm to see them here again. It's the great good
    place all right. But look here," he added as a new thought
    struck him, "do they wait for us?"
The older inhabitant coughed in slight embarrassment.
"The humans couldn't do that very well. It wouldn't be the
    thing to have them hang around outside for just a dog—not
    dignified."
"Quite right," agreed Tam. "I'm glad they go straight to
    their mansions. I'd—I'd hate to have them missing me as I
    am missing them." He sighed. "But, then, they wouldn't have to
    wait so long."
"Oh, well, they're getting on. Don't be discouraged,"
    comforted the terrier. "And in the meantime it's like a big
    hotel in summer—watching the new arrivals. See, there is
    something doing now."
All the dogs were aroused to excitement by a little figure
    making its way uncertainly up the last slope. Half of them
    started to meet it, crowding about in a loving, eager pack.
"Look out; don't scare it," cautioned the older animals,
    while word was passed to those farthest from the gate: "Quick!
    Quick! A baby's come!"
Before they had entirely assembled, however, a gaunt yellow
    hound pushed through the crowd, gave one sniff at the small
    child, and with a yelp of joy crouched at its feet. The baby
    embraced the hound in recognition, and the two moved toward the
    gate. Just outside the hound stopped to speak to an
    aristocratic St. Bernard who had been friendly:
"Sorry to leave you, old fellow," he said, "but I'm going in
    to watch over the kid. You see, I'm all she has up here."
The bull-terrier looked at the Airedale for
    appreciation.
"That's the way we do it," he said proudly.
"Yes, but—" the Airedale put his head on one side in
    perplexity.
"Yes, but what?" asked the guide.
"The dogs that don't have any people—the nobodies'
    dogs?"
"That's the best of all. Oh, everything is thought out here.
    Crouch down,—you must be tired,—and watch," said
    the bull-terrier.
Soon they spied another small form making the turn in the
    road. He wore a Boy Scout's uniform, but he was a little
    fearful, for all that, so new was this adventure. The dogs rose
    again and snuffled, but the better groomed of the circle held
    back, and in their place a pack of odds and ends of the company
    ran down to meet him. The Boy Scout was reassured by their
    friendly attitude, and after petting them impartially, he chose
    an old-fashioned black and tan, and the two passed in.
Tam looked questioningly.
"They didn't know each other!" he exclaimed.
"But they've always wanted to. That's one of the boys who
    used to beg for a dog, but his father wouldn't let him have
    one. So all our strays wait for just such little fellows to
    come along. Every boy gets a dog, and every dog gets a
    master."
"I expect the boy's father would like to know that now,"
    commented the Airedale. "No doubt he thinks quite often, 'I
    wish I'd let him have a dog.'"
The bull-terrier laughed.
"You're pretty near the earth yet, aren't you?"
Tam admitted it.
"I've a lot of sympathy with fathers and with boys, having
    them both in the family, and a mother as well."
The bull-terrier leaped up in astonishment.
"You don't mean to say they keep a boy?"
"Sure; greatest boy on earth. Ten this year."
"Well, well, this is news! I wish they'd kept a boy when I
    was there."
The Airedale looked at his new friend intently.
"See here, who are you?" he demanded.
But the other hurried on:
"I used to run away from them just to play with a boy.
    They'd punish me, and I always wanted to tell them it was their
    fault for not getting one."
"Who are you, anyway?" repeated Tam. "Talking all this
    interest in me, too. Whose dog were you?"
"You've already guessed. I see it in your quivering snout.
    I'm the old dog that had to leave them about ten years
    ago."
"Their old dog Bully?"
"Yes, I'm Bully." They nosed each other with deeper
    affection, then strolled about the glades shoulder to shoulder.
    Bully the more eagerly pressed for news. "Tell me, how are they
    getting along?"
"Very well indeed; they've paid for the house."
"I—I suppose you occupy the kennel?"
"No. They said they couldn't stand it to see another dog in
    your old place."
Bully stopped to howl gently.
"That touches me. It's generous in you to tell it. To think
    they missed me!"
For a little while they went on in silence, but as evening
    fell, and the light from the golden streets inside of the city
    gave the only glow to the scene, Bully grew nervous and
    suggested that they go back.
"We can't see so well at night, and I like to be pretty
    close to the path, especially toward morning."
Tam assented.
"And I will point them out. You might not know them just at
    first."
"Oh, we know them. Sometimes the babies have so grown up
    they're rather hazy in their recollection of how we look. They
    think we're bigger than we are; but you can't fool us
    dogs."
"It's understood," Tam cunningly arranged, "that when he or
    she arrives you'll sort of make them feel at home while I wait
    for the boy?"
"That's the best plan," assented Bully, kindly. "And if by
    any chance the little fellow should come first,—there's
    been a lot of them this summer—of course you'll introduce
    me?"
"I shall be proud to do it."
And so with muzzles sunk between their paws, and with their
    eyes straining down the pilgrims' road, they wait outside the
    gate.

Ligeia
By EDGAR ALLAN POE

And the will therein lieth, which dieth not. Who knoweth
        the mystery of the will, with its vigor? For God is but a
        great will pervading all things by nature of its
        intentness. Man doth not yield himself to the angels, nor
        unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his
        feeble will.—Joseph Glanvill.

I cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or even precisely
    where, I first became acquainted with the lady Ligeia. Long
    years have since elapsed, and my memory is feeble through much
    suffering. Or, perhaps, I cannot now bring these
    points to mind, because, in truth, the character of my beloved,
    her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast of beauty, and
    the thrilling and enthralling eloquence of her low musical
    language, made their way into my heart by paces so steadily and
    stealthily progressive, that they have been unnoticed and
    unknown. Yet I believe that I met her first and most frequently
    in some large, old, decaying city near the Rhine. Of her
    family—I have surely heard her speak. That it is of a
    remotely ancient date cannot be doubted. Ligeia! Ligeia! Buried
    in studies of a nature more than all else adapted to deaden
    impressions of the outward world, it is by that sweet word
    alone—by Ligeia—that I bring before mine eyes in
    fancy the image of her who is no more. And now, while I write,
    a recollection flashes upon me that I have never known
    the paternal name of her who was my friend and my bethrothed,
    and who became the partner of my studies, and finally the wife
    of my bosom. Was it a playful charge on the part of my Ligeia?
    or was it a test of my strength of affection, that I should
    institute no inquiries upon this point? or was it rather a
    caprice of my own—a wildly romantic offering on the
    shrine of the most passionate devotion? I but indistinctly
    recall the fact itself—what wonder that I have utterly
    forgotten the circumstances which originated or attended it?
    And, indeed, if ever that spirit which is entitled
    Romance—if ever she, the wan misty-winged
    Ashtophet of idolatrous Egypt, presided, as they tell,
    over marriages ill-omened, then most surely she presided over
    mine.
There is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fails
    me not. It is the person of Ligeia. In stature she was
    tall, somewhat slender, and, in her latter days, even
    emaciated. I would in vain attempt to portray the majesty, the
    quiet ease of her demeanor, or the incomprehensible lightness
    and elasticity of her footfall. She came and departed as a
    shadow. I was never made aware of her entrance into my closed
    study, save by the dear music of her low sweet voice, as she
    placed her marble hand upon my shoulder. In beauty of face no
    maiden ever equaled her. It was the radiance of an
    opium-dream—an airy and spirit-lifting vision more wildly
    divine than the phantasies which hovered about the slumbering
    souls of the daughters of Delos. Yet her features were not of
    that regular mold which we have been falsely taught to worship
    in the classical labors of the heathen. "There is no exquisite
    beauty," says Bacon, Lord Verulam, speaking truly of all the
    forms and genera of beauty, "without some
    strangeness in the proportion." Yet, although I saw
    that the features of Ligeia were not of a classic
    regularity—although I perceived that her loveliness was
    indeed "exquisite," and felt that there was much of
    "strangeness" pervading it, yet I have tried in vain to detect
    the irregularity and to trace home my own perception of "the
    strange." I examined the contour of the lofty and pale
    forehead—it was faultless—how cold indeed that word
    when applied to a majesty so divine!—the skin rivaling
    the purest ivory, the commanding extent and repose, the gentle
    prominence of the regions above the temples; and then the
    raven-black, the glossy, the luxuriant, and naturally-curling
    tresses, setting forth the full force of the Homeric epithet,
    "hyacinthine!" I looked at the delicate outlines of the
    nose—and nowhere but in the graceful medallions of the
    Hebrews had I beheld a similar perfection. There were the same
    luxurious smoothness of surface, the same scarcely perceptible
    tendency to the aquiline, the same harmoniously curved nostrils
    speaking the free spirit. I regarded the sweet mouth. Here was
    indeed the triumph of all things heavenly—the magnificent
    turn of the short upper lip—the soft, voluptuous slumber
    of the under—the dimples which sported, and the color
    which spoke—the teeth glancing back, with a brilliancy
    almost startling, every ray of the holy light which fell upon
    them in her serene and placid yet most exultingly radiant of
    all smiles. I scrutinized the formation of the chin—and,
    here, too, I found the gentleness of breadth, the softness and
    the majesty, the fullness and the spirituality, of the
    Greek—the contour which the god Apollo revealed but in a
    dream, to Cleomenes, the son of the Athenian. And then I peered
    into the large eyes of Ligeia.
For eyes we have no models in the remotely antique. It might
    have been, too, that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret
    to which Lord Verulam alludes. They were, I must believe, far
    larger than the ordinary eyes of our own race. They were even
    fuller than the fullest of the gazelle eyes of the tribe of the
    valley of Nourjahad. Yet it was only at intervals—in
    moments of intense excitement—that this peculiarity
    became more than slightly noticeable in Ligeia. And at such
    moments was her beauty—in my heated fancy thus it
    appeared perhaps—the beauty of beings either above or
    apart from the earth—the beauty of the fabulous Houri of
    the Turk. The hue of the orbs was the most brilliant of black,
    and, far over them, hung jetty lashes of great length. The
    brows, slightly irregular in outline, had the same tint. The
    "strangeness," however, which I found in the eyes was of a
    nature distinct from the formation, or the color, or the
    brilliancy of the features, and must, after all, be referred to
    the expression. Ah, word of no meaning! behind whose
    vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our ignorance of so
    much of the spiritual. The expression of the eyes of Ligeia!
    How for long hours have I pondered upon it! How have I, through
    the whole of a midsummer night, struggled to fathom it! What
    was it—that something more profound than the well of
    Democritus—which lay far within the pupils of my beloved?
    What was it? I was possessed with a passion to
    discover. Those eyes! those large, those shining, those divine
    orbs! they became to me twin stars of Leda, and I to them
    devoutest of astrologers.
There is no point, among the many incomprehensible anomalies
    of the science of mind, more thrillingly exciting than the
    fact—never, I believe, noticed in the schools—than
    in our endeavors to recall to memory something long forgotten,
    we often find ourselves upon the very verge of
    remembrance, without being able, in the end, to remember. And
    thus how frequently, in my intense scrutiny of Ligeia's eyes,
    have I felt approaching the full knowledge of their
    expression—felt it approaching—yet not quite be
    mine—and so at length entirely depart! And (strange, oh,
    strangest mystery of all!) I found, in the commonest objects of
    the universe, a circle of analogies to that expression. I mean
    to say that, subsequently to the period when Ligeia's beauty
    passed into my spirit, there dwelling as in a shrine, I
    derived, from many existences in the material world, a
    sentiment such as I felt always around, within me, by her large
    and luminous orbs. Yet not the more could I define that
    sentiment, or analyze, or even steadily view it. I recognized
    it, let me repeat, sometimes in the survey of a rapidly growing
    vine—in the contemplation of a moth, a butterfly, a
    chrysalis, a stream of running water. I have felt it in the
    ocean—in the falling of a meteor. I have felt it in the
    glances of unusually aged people. And there are one or two
    stars in heaven (one especially, a star of the sixth magnitude,
    double and changeable, to be found near the large star in Lyra)
    in a telescopic scrutiny of which I have been made aware of the
    feeling. I have been filled with it by certain sounds from
    stringed instruments, and not unfrequently by passages from
    books. Among innumerable other instances, I well remember
    something in a volume of Joseph Glanvill, which (perhaps merely
    from its quaintness—who shall say?) never failed to
    inspire me with the sentiment: "And the will therein lieth,
    which dieth not. Who knoweth the mysteries of the will, with
    its vigor? For God is but a great will pervading all things by
    nature of its intentness. Man doth not yield him to the angels,
    nor unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his
    feeble will."
Length of years and subsequent reflection have enabled me to
    trace, indeed, some remote connection between this passage in
    the English moralist and a portion of the character of Ligeia.
    An intensity in thought, action, or speech was
    possibly, in her, a result, or at least an index, of that
    gigantic volition which, during our long intercourse, failed to
    give other and more immediate evidence of its existence. Of all
    the women whom I have ever known, she, the outwardly calm, the
    ever-placid Ligeia, was the most violently a prey to the
    tumultuous vultures of stern passion. And of such passion I
    could form no estimate, save by the miraculous expansion of
    those eyes which at once so delighted and appalled me,—by
    the almost magical melody, modulation, distinctness, and
    placidity of her very low voice,—and by the fierce energy
    (rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner of
    utterance) of the wild words which she habitually uttered.
I have spoken of the learning of Ligeia: it was
    immense—such as I have never known in woman. In the
    classical tongues was she deeply proficient, and as far as my
    own acquaintance extended in regard to the modern dialects of
    Europe, I have never known her at fault. Indeed upon any theme
    of the most admired because simply the most abstruse of the
    boasted erudition of the Academy, have I ever found
    Ligeia at fault? How singularly—how thrillingly, this one
    point in the nature of my wife has forced itself, at this late
    period only, upon my attention! I said her knowledge was such
    as I have never known in woman—but where breathes the man
    who has traversed, and successfully, all the wide
    areas of moral, physical, and mathematical science? I saw not
    then what I now clearly perceive that the acquisitions of
    Ligeia were gigantic, were astounding; yet I was sufficiently
    aware of her infinite supremacy to resign myself, with a
    child-like confidence, to her guidance through the chaotic
    world of metaphysical investigation at which I was most busily
    occupied during the earlier years of our marriage. With how
    vast a triumph—with how vivid a delight—with how
    much of all that is ethereal in hope did I feel, as
    she bent over me in studies but little sought—but less
    known,—that delicious vista by slow degrees expanding
    before me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, I
    might at length pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too
    divinely precious not to be forbidden.
How poignant, then, must have been the grief with which,
    after some years, I beheld my well-grounded expectations take
    wings to themselves and fly away! Without Ligeia I was but as a
    child groping benighted. Her presence, her readings alone,
    rendered vividly luminous the many mysteries of the
    transcendentalism in which we were immersed. Wanting the
    radiant luster of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew
    duller than Saturnian lead. And now those eyes shone less and
    less frequently upon the pages over which I pored. Ligeia grew
    ill. The wild eyes blazed with a too—too glorious
    effulgence; the pale fingers became of the transparent waxen
    hue of the grave; and the blue veins upon the lofty forehead
    swelled and sank impetuously with the tides of the most gentle
    emotion. I saw that she must die—and I struggled
    desperately in spirit with the grim Azrael. And the struggles
    of the passionate wife were, to my astonishment, even more
    energetic than my own. There had been much in her stern nature
    to impress me with the belief that, to her, death would have
    come without its terrors; but not so. Words are impotent to
    convey any just idea of the fierceness of resistance with which
    she wrestled with the Shadow. I groaned in anguish at the
    pitiable spectacle. I would have soothed—I would have
    reasoned; but in the intensity of her wild desire for
    life—for life—but for life—solace
    and reason were alike the uttermost of folly. Yet not until the
    last instance, amid the most convulsive writhings of her fierce
    spirit, was shaken the external placidity of her demeanor. Her
    voice grew more gentle—grew more low—yet I would
    not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning of the quietly uttered
    words. My brain reeled as I hearkened, entranced, to a melody
    more than mortal—to assumptions and aspirations which
    mortality had never before known.
That she loved me I should not have doubted; and I might
    have been easily aware that, in a bosom such as hers, love
    would have reigned no ordinary passion. But in death only was I
    fully impressed with the strength of her affection. For long
    hours, detaining my hand, would she pour out before me the
    overflowing of a heart whose more than passionate devotion
    amounted to idolatry. How had I deserved to be so blessed by
    such confessions?—how had I deserved to be so cursed with
    the removal of my beloved in the hour of my making them? But
    upon this subject I cannot bear to dilate. Let me say only,
    that in Ligeia's more than womanly abandonment to a love, alas!
    all unmerited, all unworthily bestowed, I at length, recognized
    the principle of her longing, with so wildly earnest a desire,
    for the life which was now fleeing so rapidly away. It is this
    wild longing—it is this eager vehemence of desire for
    life—but for life—that I have no power to
    portray—no utterance capable of expressing.
At high noon of the night in which she departed, beckoning
    me, peremptorily, to her side, she bade me repeat certain
    verses composed by herself not many days before. I obeyed her.
    They were these:—


Lo! 'tis a gala night
Within the lonesome latter years!
An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
In veils, and drowned in tears,
Sit in a theatre, to see
A play of hopes and fears,
While the orchestra breathes fitfully
The music of the spheres.


Mimes, in the form of God on high,
Mutter and mumble low,
And hither and thither fly;
Mere puppets they, who come and go
At bidding of vast formless things
That shift the scenery to and fro,
Flapping from out their condor wings
Invisible Wo!


That motley drama!—oh, be sure
It shall not be forgot!
With its Phantom chased for evermore
By a crowd that seize it not,
Through a circle that ever returneth in
To the self-same spot;
And much of Madness, and more of Sin
And Horror, the soul of the plot!


But see, amid the mimic rout,
A crawling shape intrude!
A blood-red thing that writhes from out
The scenic solitude!
It writhes!—it writhes!—with mortal
            pangs
The mimes become its food,
And the seraphs sob at vermin fangs
In human gore imbued.


Out—out are the lights—out all:
And over each quivering form,
The curtain, a funeral pall,
Comes down with the rush of a
            storm—
And the angels, all pallid and wan,
Uprising, unveiling, affirm
That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
And its hero, the conqueror Worm.


"O God!" half shrieked Ligeia, leaping to her feet and
    extending her arms aloft with a spasmodic movement, as I made
    an end of these lines—"O God! O Divine
    Father!—shall these things be undeviatingly
    so?—shall this conqueror be not once conquered? Are we
    not part and parcel in Thee? Who—who knoweth the
    mysteries of the will with its vigor? Man doth not yield him to
    the angels, nor unto death utterly, save only through
    the weakness of his feeble will."
And now, as if exhausted with emotion, she suffered her
    white arms to fall, and returned solemnly to her bed of death.
    And as she breathed her last sighs, there came mingled with
    them a low murmur from her lips. I bent to them my ear, and
    distinguished, again, the concluding words of the passage in
    Glanvill: "Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto
    death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble
    will."
She died: and I, crushed into the very dust with sorrow,
    could no longer endure the lonely desolation of my dwelling in
    the dim and decaying city by the Rhine. I had no lack of what
    the world calls wealth. Ligeia had brought me far more, very
    far more, than ordinarily falls to the lot of mortals. After a
    few months, therefore, of weary and aimless wandering, I
    purchased and put in some repair, an abbey, which I shall not
    name, in one of the wildest and least frequented portions of
    fair England. The gloomy and dreary grandeur of the building,
    the almost savage aspect of the domain, the many melancholy and
    time-honored memories connected with both, had much in unison
    with the feelings of utter abandonment which had driven me into
    that remote and unsocial region of the country. Yet although
    the external abbey, with its verdant decay hanging about it,
    suffered but little alteration, I gave way, with a child-like
    perversity, and perchance with a faint hope of alleviating my
    sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnificence within.
    For such follies, even in childhood, I had imbibed a taste, and
    now they came back to me as if in the dotage of grief. Alas, I
    feel how much even of incipient madness might have been
    discovered in the gorgeous and fantastic draperies, in the
    solemn carvings of Egypt, in the wild cornices and furniture,
    in the Bedlam patterns of the carpets of tufted gold! I had
    become a bounden slave in the trammels of opium, and my labors
    and my orders had taken a coloring from my dreams. But these
    absurdities I must not pause to detail. Let me speak only of
    that one chamber, ever accursed, whither, in a moment of mental
    alienation, I led from the altar as my bride—as the
    successor of the unforgotten Ligeia—the fair-haired and
    blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion, of Tremaine.
There is no individual portion of the architecture and
    decoration of that bridal chamber which is not visibly before
    me. Where were the souls of the haughty family of the bride,
    when, through thirst of gold, they permitted to pass the
    threshold of an apartment so bedecked, a maiden and a
    daughter so beloved? I have said, that I minutely remember the
    details of the chamber—yet I am sadly forgetful on topics
    of deep moment; and here there was no system, no keeping, in
    the fantastic display to take hold upon the memory. The room
    lay in a high turret of the castellated abbey, was pentagonal
    in shape, and of capacious size. Occupying the whole southern
    face of the pentagonal was the sole window—an immense
    sheet of unbroken glass from Venice—a single pane, and
    tinted of a leaden hue, so that the rays of either the sun or
    moon passing through it, fell with a ghastly luster on the
    objects within. Over the upper portion of this huge window
    extended the trellis-work of an aged vine, which clambered up
    the massy walls of the turret. The ceiling, of gloomy-looking
    oak, was excessively lofty, vaulted, and elaborately fretted
    with the wildest and most grotesque specimens of a semi-Gothic,
    semi-Druidical device. From out the most central recess of this
    melancholy vaulting, depended, by a single chain of gold with
    long links, a huge censer of the same metal, Saracenic in
    pattern, and with many perforations so contrived that there
    writhed in and out of them, as if endued with a serpent
    vitality, a continual succession of parti-colored fires.
Some few ottomans and golden candelabra, of Eastern figure,
    were in various stations about; and there was the couch,
    too—the bridal couch—of an Indian model, and low,
    and sculptured of solid ebony, with a pall-like canopy above.
    In each of the angles of the chamber stood on end a gigantic
    sarcophagus of black granite, from the tombs of the kings over
    against Luxor, with their aged lids full of immemorial
    sculpture. But in the draping of the apartment lay, alas! the
    chief phantasy of all. The lofty walls, gigantic in
    height—even unproportionably so—were hung from
    summit to foot, in vast folds, with a heavy and massive-looking
    tapestry—tapestry of a material which was found alike as
    a carpet on the floor, as a covering for the ottomans and the
    ebony bed, as a canopy for the bed, and as the gorgeous volutes
    of the curtains which partially shaded the window. The material
    was the richest cloth of gold. It was spotted all over, at
    irregular intervals, with arabesque figures, about a foot in
    diameter, and wrought upon the cloth in patterns of the most
    jetty black. But these figures partook of the true character of
    the arabesque only when regarded from a single point of view.
    By a contrivance now common, and indeed traceable to a very
    remote period of antiquity, they were made changeable in
    aspect. To one entering the room, they bore the appearance of
    simple monstrosities; but upon a farther advance, this
    appearance gradually departed; and, step by step, as the
    visitor moved his station in the chamber, he saw himself
    surrounded by an endless succession of the ghastly forms which
    belong to the superstition of the Norman, or arise in the
    guilty slumbers of the monk. The phantasmagoric effect was
    vastly heightened by the artificial introduction of a strong
    continual current of wind behind the draperies—giving a
    hideous and uneasy animation to the whole.
In halls such as these—in a bridal chamber such as
    this—I passed, with the Lady of Tremaine, the unhallowed
    hours of the first month of our marriage—passed them with
    but little disquietude. That my wife dreaded the fierce
    moodiness of my temper—that she shunned me, and loved me
    but little—I could not help perceiving; but it gave me
    rather pleasure than otherwise. I loathed her with a hatred
    belonging more to demon than to man. My memory flew back (oh,
    with what intensity of regret!) to Ligeia, the beloved, the
    august, the beautiful, the entombed. I reveled in recollections
    of her purity, of her wisdom, of her lofty—her ethereal
    nature, of her passionate, her idolatrous love. Now, then, did
    my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the fires of
    her own. In the excitement of my opium dreams (for I was
    habitually fettered in the shackles of the drug), I would call
    aloud upon her name, during the silence of the night, or among
    the sheltered recesses of the glens by day, as if, through the
    wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the consuming ardor of my
    longing for the departed, I could restore her to the pathways
    she had abandoned—ah, could it be
    forever?—upon the earth.
About the commencement of the second month of the marriage,
    the Lady Rowena was attacked with sudden illness, from which
    her recovery was slow. The fever which consumed her rendered
    her nights uneasy; and in her perturbed state of half-slumber,
    she spoke of sounds, and of motions, in and about the chamber
    of the turret, which I concluded had no origin save in the
    distemper of her fancy, or perhaps in the phantasmagoric
    influences of the chamber itself. She became at length
    convalescent—finally, well. Yet but a second more violent
    disorder again threw her upon a bed of suffering; and from this
    attack her frame, at all times feeble, never altogether
    recovered. Her illnesses were, after this epoch, of alarming
    character, and of more alarming recurrence, defying alike the
    knowledge and the great exertions of her physicians. With the
    increase of the chronic disease, which had thus, apparently,
    taken too sure hold upon her constitution to be eradicated by
    human means, I could not fail to observe a similar increase in
    the nervous irritation of her temperament, and in her
    excitability by trivial causes of fear. She spoke again, and
    now more frequently and pertinaciously, of the sounds—of
    the slight sounds—and of the unusual motions among the
    tapestries, to which she had formerly alluded.
One night, near the closing in of September, she pressed
    this distressing subject with more than usual emphasis upon my
    attention. She had just awakened from an unquiet slumber, and I
    had been watching, with feelings half of anxiety, half of vague
    terror, the workings of her emaciated countenance. I sat by the
    side of her ebony bed, upon one of the ottomans of India. She
    partly arose, and spoke, in an earnest low whisper, of sounds
    which she then heard, but which I could not
    hear—of motions which she then saw, but which I
    could not perceive. The wind was rushing hurriedly behind the
    tapestries, and I wished to show her (what, let me confess it,
    I could not all believe) that those almost
    inarticulate breathings, and those very gentle variations of
    the figures upon the wall, were but the natural effects of that
    customary rushing of the wind. But a deadly pallor,
    overspreading her face, had proved to me that my exertions to
    reassure her would be fruitless. She appeared to be fainting,
    and no attendants were within call. I remembered where was
    deposited a decanter of light wine which had been ordered by
    her physicians, and hastened across the chamber to procure it.
    But, as I stepped beneath the light of the censer, two
    circumstances of a startling nature attracted my attention. I
    had felt that some palpable although invisible object had
    passed lightly by my person; and I saw that there lay upon the
    golden carpet, in the very middle of the rich luster thrown
    from the censer, a shadow—a faint, indefinite shadow of
    angelic aspect—such as might be fancied for the shadow of
    a shade. But I was wild with the excitement of an immoderate
    dose of opium, and heeded these things but little, nor spoke of
    them to Rowena. Having found the wine, I recrossed the chamber,
    and poured out a gobletful, which I held to the lips of the
    fainting lady. She had now partially recovered, however, and
    took the vessel herself, while I sank upon an ottoman near me,
    with my eyes fastened upon her person. It was then that I
    became distinctly aware of a gentle footfall upon the carpet,
    and near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as Rowena was
    in the act of raising the wine to her lips, I saw, or may have
    dreamed that I saw, fall within the goblet, as if from some
    invisible spring in the atmosphere of the room, three or four
    large drops of a brilliant and ruby colored fluid. If this I
    saw—not so Rowena. She swallowed the wine unhesitatingly,
    and I forebore to speak to her of a circumstance which must,
    after all, I considered, have been but the suggestion of a
    vivid imagination, rendered morbidly active by the terror of
    the lady, by the opium, and by the hour.
Yet I cannot 
    conceal it from my own perception that, immediately
    subsequent to the fall of the ruby drops, a rapid change for
    the worse took place in the disorder of my wife; so that, on
    the third subsequent night, the hands of her menials prepared
    her for the tomb, and on the fourth, I sat alone, with her
    shrouded body, in that fantastic chamber which had received her
    as my bride. Wild visions, opium-engendered, flitted,
    shadow-like, before me. I gazed with unquiet eye upon the
    sarcophagi in the angles of the room, upon the varying figures
    of the drapery, and upon the writhing of the parti-colored
    fires in the censer overhead. My eyes then fell, as I called to
    mind the circumstances of a former night, to the spot beneath
    the glare of the censer where I had seen the faint traces of
    the shadow. It was there, however, no longer; and breathing
    with greater freedom, I turned my glances to the pallid and
    rigid figure upon the bed. Then rushed upon me a thousand
    memories of Ligeia—and then came back upon my heart, with
    the turbulent violence of a flood, the whole of that
    unutterable woe with which I had regarded her thus
    enshrouded. The night waned; and still, with a bosom full of
    bitter thoughts of the one only and supremely beloved, I
    remained gazing upon the body of Rowena.
It might have been midnight, or perhaps earlier, or later,
    for I had taken no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but
    very distinct, startled me from my revery. I felt that
    it came from the bed of ebony—the bed of death. I
    listened in an agony of superstitious terror—but there
    was no repetition of the sound. I strained my vision to detect
    any motion in the corpse—but there was not the slightest
    perceptible. Yet I could not have been deceived. I had
    heard the noise, however faint, and my soul was awakened within
    me. I resolutely and perseveringly kept my attention riveted
    upon the body. Many minutes elapsed before any circumstance
    occurred tending to throw light upon the mystery. At length it
    became evident that a slight, a very feeble, and barely
    noticeable tinge of color had flushed up within the cheeks, and
    along the sunken small veins of the eyelids. Through a species
    of unutterable horror and awe, for which the language of
    mortality has no sufficiently energetic expression, I felt my
    heart cease to beat, my limbs grow rigid where I sat. Yet a
    sense of duty finally operated to restore my self-possession. I
    could no longer doubt that we had been precipitate in our
    preparations—that Rowena still lived. It was necessary
    that some immediate exertion be made; yet the turret was
    altogether apart from the portion of the abbey tenanted by the
    servants—there were none within call—I had no means
    of summoning them to my aid without leaving the room for many
    minutes—and this I could not venture to do. I therefore
    struggled alone in my endeavors to call back the spirit still
    hovering. In a short period it was certain, however, that a
    relapse had taken place; the color disappeared from both eyelid
    and cheek, leaving a wanness even more than that of marble; the
    lips became doubly shriveled and pinched up in the ghastly
    expression of death; a repulsive clamminess and coldness
    overspread rapidly the surface of the body; and all the usual
    rigorous stiffness immediately supervened. I fell back with a
    shudder upon the couch from which I had been so startlingly
    aroused, and again gave myself up to passionate waking visions
    of Ligeia.
An hour thus elapsed, when (could it be possible?) I was a
    second time aware of some vague sound issuing from the region
    of the bed. I listened—in extremity of horror. The sound
    came again—it was a sigh. Rushing to the corpse, I
    saw—distinctly saw—a tremor upon the lips. In a
    minute afterward they relaxed, disclosing a bright line of the
    pearly teeth. Amazement now struggled in my bosom with the
    profound awe which had hitherto reigned there alone. I felt
    that my vision grew dim, that my reason wandered; and it was
    only by a violent effort that I at length succeeded in nerving
    myself to the task which duty thus once more had pointed out.
    There was now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the
    cheek and throat; a perceptible warmth pervaded the whole
    frame; there was even a slight pulsation at the heart. The lady
    lived; and with redoubled ardor I betook myself to the
    task of restoration. I chafed and bathed the temples and the
    hands and used every exertion which experience, and no little
    medical reading, could suggest. But in vain. Suddenly, the
    color fled, the pulsation ceased, the lips resumed the
    expression of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole
    body took upon itself the icy chilliness, the livid hue, the
    intense rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsome
    peculiarities of that which has been, for many days, a tenant
    of the tomb.
And again I sunk into visions of Ligeia—and again
    (what marvel that I shudder while I write?), again
    there reached my ears a low sob from the region of the ebony
    bed. But why shall I minutely detail the unspeakable horrors of
    that night? Why shall I pause to relate how, time after time,
    until near the period of the gray dawn, this hideous drama of
    revivification was repeated; how each terrific relapse was only
    into a sterner and apparently more irredeemable death; how each
    agony wore the aspect of a struggle with some invisible foe;
    and how each struggle was succeeded by I know not what of wild
    change in the personal appearance of the corpse? Let me hurry
    to a conclusion.
The greater part of the fearful night had worn away, and she
    who had been dead once again stirred—and now more
    vigorously than hitherto, although arousing from a dissolution
    more appalling in its utter hopelessness than any. I had long
    ceased to struggle or to move, and remained sitting rigidly
    upon the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl of violent
    emotions, of which extreme awe was perhaps the least terrible,
    the least consuming. The corpse, I repeat, stirred, and now
    more vigorously than before. The hues of life flushed up with
    unwonted energy into the countenance—the limbs
    relaxed—and, save that the eyelids were yet pressed
    heavily together, and that the bandages and draperies of the
    grave still imparted their charnel character to the figure, I
    might have dreamed that Rowena had indeed shaken off, utterly,
    the fetters of Death. But if this idea was not, even then,
    altogether adopted, I could at least doubt no longer, when,
    arising from the bed, tottering, with feeble steps, with closed
    eyes, and with the manner of one bewildered in a dream, the
    thing that was enshrouded advanced boldly and palpably into the
    middle of the apartment.
I trembled not—I stirred not—for a crowd of
    unutterable fancies connected with the air, the stature, the
    demeanor, of the figure, rushing hurriedly through my brain,
    had paralyzed—had chilled me into stone. I stirred
    not—but gazed upon the apparition. There was a mad
    disorder in my thoughts—a tumult unappeasable. Could it,
    indeed, be the living Rowena who confronted me? Could
    it, indeed, be Rowena at all—the fair-haired,
    the blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion of Tremaine? Why,
    why should I doubt it? The bandage lay heavily about
    the mouth—but then might it not be the mouth of the
    breathing Lady of Tremaine? And the cheeks—there were the
    roses as in her noon of life—yes, these might indeed be
    the fair cheeks of the living Lady of Tremaine. And the chin,
    with its dimples, as in health, might it not be hers?—but
    had she then grown taller since her malady? What
    inexpressible madness seized me with that thought? One bound,
    and I had reached her feet! Shrinking from my touch, she let
    fall from her head, unloosened, the ghastly cerements which had
    confined it, and there streamed forth into the rushing
    atmosphere of the chamber huge masses of long and disheveled
    hair; it was blacker than the raven wings of midnight.
    And now slowly opened the eyes of the figure which
    stood before me. "Here then, at least," I shrieked aloud, "can
    I never—can I never be mistaken—these are the full,
    and the black, and the wild eyes—of my lost love—of
    the Lady—of the LADY LIGEIA."

The Haunted Orchard
By RICHARD LE GALLIENNE

From Harper's Magazine, January, 1912. By
        permission of Harper and Brothers and Richard Le
        Gallienne.

Spring was once more in the world. As she sang to herself in
    the faraway woodlands her voice reached even the ears of the
    city, weary with the long winter. Daffodils flowered at the
    entrances to the Subway, furniture removing vans blocked the
    side streets, children clustered like blossoms on the
    doorsteps, the open cars were running, and the cry of the "cash
    clo'" man was once more heard in the land.
Yes, it was the spring, and the city dreamed wistfully of
    lilacs and the dewy piping of birds in gnarled old apple-trees,
    of dogwood lighting up with sudden silver the thickening woods,
    of water-plants unfolding their glossy scrolls in pools of
    morning freshness.
On Sunday mornings, the outbound trains were thronged with
    eager pilgrims, hastening out of the city, to behold once more
    the ancient marvel of the spring; and, on Sunday evenings, the
    railway termini were aflower with banners of blossom from
    rifled woodland and orchard carried in the hands of the
    returning pilgrims, whose eyes still shone with the spring
    magic, in whose ears still sang the fairy music.
And as I beheld these signs of the vernal equinox I knew
    that I, too, must follow the music, forsake awhile the
    beautiful siren we call the city, and in the green silences
    meet once more my sweetheart Solitude.
As the train drew out of the Grand Central, I hummed to
    myself,


"I've a neater, sweeter maiden, in a greener,
            cleaner land"


and so I said good-by to the city, and went
    forth with beating heart to meet the spring.
I had been told of an almost forgotten corner on the south
    coast of Connecticut, where the spring and I could live in an
    inviolate loneliness—a place uninhabited save by birds
    and blossoms, woods and thick grass, and an occasional silent
    farmer, and pervaded by the breath and shimmer of the
    Sound.
Nor had rumor lied, for when the train set me down at my
    destination I stepped out into the most wonderful green hush, a
    leafy Sabbath silence through which the very train, as it went
    farther on its way, seemed to steal as noiselessly as possible
    for fear of breaking the spell.
After a winter in the town, to be dropped thus suddenly into
    the intense quiet of the country-side makes an almost ghostly
    impression upon one, as of an enchanted silence, a silence that
    listens and watches but never speaks, finger on lip. There is a
    spectral quality about everything upon which the eye falls: the
    woods, like great green clouds, the wayside flowers, the still
    farm-houses half lost in orchard bloom—all seem to exist
    in a dream. Everything is so still, everything so
    supernaturally green. Nothing moves or talks, except the gentle
    susurrus of the spring wind swaying the young buds high up in
    the quiet sky, or a bird now and again, or a little brook
    singing softly to itself among the crowding rushes.
Though, from the houses one notes here and there, there are
    evidently human inhabitants of this green silence, none are to
    be seen. I have often wondered where the countryfolk hide
    themselves, as I have walked hour after hour, past farm and
    croft and lonely door-yards, and never caught sight of a human
    face. If you should want to ask the way, a farmer is as shy as
    a squirrel, and if you knock at a farm-house door, all is as
    silent as a rabbit-warren.
As I walked along in the enchanted stillness, I came at
    length to a quaint old farm-house—"old Colonial" in its
    architecture—embowered in white lilacs, and surrounded by
    an orchard of ancient apple-trees which cast a rich shade on
    the deep spring grass. The orchard had the impressiveness of
    those old religious groves, dedicated to the strange worship of
    sylvan gods, gods to be found now only in Horace or Catullus,
    and in the hearts of young poets to whom the beautiful antique
    Latin is still dear.
The old house seemed already the abode of Solitude. As I
    lifted the latch of the white gate and walked across the
    forgotten grass, and up on to the veranda already festooned
    with wistaria, and looked into the window, I saw Solitude
    sitting by an old piano, on which no composer later than Bach
    had ever been played.
In other words, the house was empty; and going round to the
    back, where old barns and stables leaned together as if falling
    asleep, I found a broken pane, and so climbed in and walked
    through the echoing rooms. The house was very lonely. Evidently
    no one had lived in it for a long time. Yet it was all ready
    for some occupant, for whom it seemed to be waiting. Quaint old
    four-poster bedsteads stood in three rooms—dimity
    curtains and spotless linen—old oak chests and mahogany
    presses; and, opening drawers in Chippendale sideboards, I came
    upon beautiful frail old silver and exquisite china that set me
    thinking of a beautiful grandmother of mine, made out of old
    lace and laughing wrinkles and mischievous old blue eyes.
There was one little room that particularly interested me, a
    tiny bedroom all white, and at the window the red roses were
    already in bud. But what caught my eye with peculiar sympathy
    was a small bookcase, in which were some twenty or thirty
    volumes, wearing the same forgotten expression—forgotten
    and yet cared for—which lay like a kind of memorial charm
    upon everything in the old house. Yes, everything seemed
    forgotten and yet everything, curiously—even
    religiously—remembered. I took out book after book from
    the shelves, once or twice flowers fell out from the
    pages—and I caught sight of a delicate handwriting here
    and there and frail markings. It was evidently the little
    intimate library of a young girl. What surprised me most was to
    find that quite half the books were in French—French
    poets and French romancers: a charming, very rare edition of
    Ronsard, a beautifully printed edition of Alfred de Musset, and
    a copy of Théophile Gautier's Mademoiselle de
    Maupin. How did these exotic books come to be there alone
    in a deserted New England farm-house?
This question was to be answered later in a strange way.
    Meanwhile I had fallen in love with the sad, old, silent place,
    and as I closed the white gate and was once more on the road, I
    looked about for someone who could tell me whether or not this
    house of ghosts might be rented for the summer by a
    comparatively living man.
I was referred to a fine old New England farm-house shining
    white through the trees a quarter of a mile away. There I met
    an ancient couple, a typical New England farmer and his wife;
    the old man, lean, chin-bearded, with keen gray eyes flickering
    occasionally with a shrewd humor, the old lady with a kindly
    old face of the withered-apple type and ruddy. They were
    evidently prosperous people, but their minds—for some
    reason I could not at the moment divine—seemed to be
    divided between their New England desire to drive a hard
    bargain and their disinclination to let the house at all.
Over and over again they spoke of the loneliness of the
    place. They feared I would find it very lonely. No one had
    lived in it for a long time, and so on. It seemed to me that
    afterwards I understood their curious hesitation, but at the
    moment only regarded it as a part of the circuitous New England
    method of bargaining. At all events, the rent I offered finally
    overcame their disinclination, whatever its cause, and so I
    came into possession—for four months—of that silent
    old house, with the white lilacs, and the drowsy barns, and the
    old piano, and the strange orchard; and, as the summer came on,
    and the year changed its name from May to June, I used to lie
    under the apple-trees in the afternoons, dreamily reading some
    old book, and through half-sleepy eyelids watching the silken
    shimmer of the Sound.
I had lived in the old house for about a month, when one
    afternoon a strange thing happened to me. I remember the date
    well. It was the afternoon of Tuesday, June 13th. I was
    reading, or rather dipping here and there, in Burton's
    Anatomy of Melancholy. As I read, I remember that a
    little unripe apple, with a petal or two of blossom still
    clinging to it, fell upon the old yellow page. Then I suppose I
    must have fallen into a dream, though it seemed to me that both
    my eyes and my ears were wide open, for I suddenly became aware
    of a beautiful young voice singing very softly somewhere among
    the leaves. The singing was very frail, almost imperceptible,
    as though it came out of the air. It came and went fitfully,
    like the elusive fragrance of sweetbrier—as though a girl
    was walking to and fro, dreamily humming to herself in the
    still afternoon. Yet there was no one to be seen. The orchard
    had never seemed more lonely. And another fact that struck me
    as strange was that the words that floated to me out of the
    aerial music were French, half sad, half gay snatches of some
    long-dead singer of old France, I looked about for the origin
    of the sweet sounds, but in vain. Could it be the birds that
    were singing in French in this strange orchard? Presently the
    voice seemed to come quite close to me, so near that it might
    have been the voice of a dryad singing to me out of the tree
    against which I was leaning. And this time I distinctly caught
    the words of the sad little song:


"Chante, rossignol, chante,
Toi qui as le cœur gai;
Tu as le cœur à rire,
Moi, je l'ai-t-à pleurer."


But, though the voice was at my shoulder, I could see no
    one, and then the singing stopped with what sounded like a sob;
    and a moment or two later I seemed to hear a sound of sobbing
    far down the orchard. Then there followed silence, and I was
    left to ponder on the strange occurrence. Naturally, I decided
    that it was just a day-dream between sleeping and waking over
    the pages of an old book; yet when next day and the day after
    the invisible singer was in the orchard again, I could not be
    satisfied with such mere matter-of-fact explanation.


"A la claire fontaine,"


went the voice to and fro through the thick
    orchard boughs,


"M'en allant promener,
J'ai trouvé l'eau si belle
Que je m'y suis baigné,
Lui y a longtemps que je t'aime,
Jamais je ne t'oubliai."


It was certainly uncanny to hear that voice going to and fro
    the orchard, there somewhere amid the bright sun-dazzled
    boughs—yet not a human creature to be seen—not
    another house even within half a mile. The most materialistic
    mind could hardly but conclude that here was something "not
    dreamed of in our philosophy." It seemed to me that the only
    reasonable explanation was the entirely irrational
    one—that my orchard was haunted: haunted by some
    beautiful young spirit, with some sorrow of lost joy that would
    not let her sleep quietly in her grave.
And next day I had a curious confirmation of my theory. Once
    more I was lying under my favorite apple-tree, half reading and
    half watching the Sound, lulled into a dream by the whir of
    insects and the spices called up from the earth by the hot sun.
    As I bent over the page, I suddenly had the startling
    impression that someone was leaning over my shoulder and
    reading with me, and that a girl's long hair was falling over
    me down on to the page. The book was the Ronsard I had found in
    the little bedroom. I turned, but again there was nothing
    there. Yet this time I knew that I had not been dreaming, and I
    cried out:
"Poor child! tell me of your grief—that I may help
    your sorrowing heart to rest."
But, of course, there was no answer; yet that night I
    dreamed a strange dream. I thought I was in the orchard again
    in the afternoon and once again heard the strange
    singing—but this time, as I looked up, the singer was no
    longer invisible. Coming toward me was a young girl with
    wonderful blue eyes filled with tears and gold hair that fell
    to her waist. She wore a straight, white robe that might have
    been a shroud or a bridal dress. She appeared not to see me,
    though she came directly to the tree where I was sitting. And
    there she knelt and buried her face in the grass and sobbed as
    if her heart would break. Her long hair fell over her like a
    mantle, and in my dream I stroked it pityingly and murmured
    words of comfort for a sorrow I did not understand.... Then I
    woke suddenly as one does from dreams. The moon was shining
    brightly into the room. Rising from my bed, I looked out into
    the orchard. It was almost as bright as day. I could plainly
    see the tree of which I had been dreaming, and then a fantastic
    notion possessed me. Slipping on my clothes, I went out into
    one of the old barns and found a spade. Then I went to the tree
    where I had seen the girl weeping in my dream and dug down at
    its foot.
I had dug little more than a foot when my spade struck upon
    some hard substance, and in a few more moments I had uncovered
    and exhumed a small box, which, on examination, proved to be
    one of those pretty old-fashioned Chippendale work-boxes used
    by our grandmothers to keep their thimbles and needles in,
    their reels of cotton and skeins of silk. After smoothing down
    the little grave in which I had found it, I carried the box
    into the house, and under the lamplight examined its
    contents.
Then at once I understood why that sad young spirit went to
    and fro the orchard singing those little French songs—for
    the treasure-trove I had found under the apple-tree, the buried
    treasure of an unquiet, suffering soul, proved to be a number
    of love-letters written mostly in French in a very picturesque
    hand—letters, too, written but some five or six years
    before. Perhaps I should not have read them—yet I read
    them with such reverence for the beautiful, impassioned love
    that animated them, and literally made them "smell sweet and
    blossom in the dust," that I felt I had the sanction of the
    dead to make myself the confidant of their story. Among the
    letters were little songs, two of which I had heard the strange
    young voice singing in the orchard, and, of course, there were
    many withered flowers and such like remembrances of bygone
    rapture.
Not that night could I make out all the story, though it was
    not difficult to define its essential tragedy, and later on a
    gossip in the neighborhood and a headstone in the churchyard
    told me the rest. The unquiet young soul that had sung so
    wistfully to and fro the orchard was my landlord's daughter.
    She was the only child of her parents, a beautiful, willful
    girl, exotically unlike those from whom she was sprung and
    among whom she lived with a disdainful air of exile. She was,
    as a child, a little creature of fairy fancies, and as she grew
    up it was plain to her father and mother that she had come from
    another world than theirs. To them she seemed like a child in
    an old fairy-tale strangely found on his hearth by some
    shepherd as he returns from the fields at evening—a
    little fairy girl swaddled in fine linen, and dowered with a
    mysterious bag of gold.
Soon she developed delicate spiritual needs to which her
    simple parents were strangers. From long truancies in the woods
    she would come home laden with mysterious flowers, and soon she
    came to ask for books and pictures and music, of which the poor
    souls that had given her birth had never heard. Finally she had
    her way, and went to study at a certain fashionable college;
    and there the brief romance of her life began. There she met a
    romantic young Frenchman who had read Ronsard to her and
    written her those picturesque letters I had found in the old
    mahogany work-box. And after a while the young Frenchman had
    gone back to France, and the letters had ceased. Month by month
    went by, and at length one day, as she sat wistful at the
    window, looking out at the foolish sunlit road, a message came.
    He was dead. That headstone in the village churchyard tells the
    rest. She was very young to die—scarcely nineteen years;
    and the dead who have died young, with all their hopes and
    dreams still like unfolded buds within their hearts, do not
    rest so quietly in the grave as those who have gone through the
    long day from morning until evening and are only too glad to
    sleep.

Next day I took the little box to a quiet corner of the
    orchard, and made a little pyre of fragrant boughs—for so
    I interpreted the wish of that young, unquiet spirit—and
    the beautiful words are now safe, taken up again into the
    aerial spaces from which they came.
But since then the birds sing no more little French songs in
    my old orchard.