COLONEL STARBOTTLE FOR THE PLAINTIFF
    

      By Bret Harte (1839-1902)
    

      [From Harper's Magazine, March, 1901. Republished in the volume, Openings
      in the Old Trail (1902), by Bret Harte; copyright, 1902, by Houghton
      Mifflin Company, the authorized publishers of Bret Harte's complete works;
      reprinted by their permission.]
    

      It had been a day of triumph for Colonel Starbottle. First, for his
      personality, as it would have been difficult to separate the Colonel's
      achievements from his individuality; second, for his oratorical abilities
      as a sympathetic pleader; and third, for his functions as the leading
      counsel for the Eureka Ditch Company versus the State of
      California. On his strictly legal performances in this issue I prefer not
      to speak; there were those who denied them, although the jury had accepted
      them in the face of the ruling of the half-amused, half-cynical Judge
      himself. For an hour they had laughed with the Colonel, wept with him,
      been stirred to personal indignation or patriotic exaltation by his
      passionate and lofty periods—what else could they do than give him
      their verdict? If it was alleged by some that the American eagle, Thomas
      Jefferson, and the Resolutions of '98 had nothing whatever to do with the
      contest of a ditch company over a doubtfully worded legislative document;
      that wholesale abuse of the State Attorney and his political motives had
      not the slightest connection with the legal question raised—it was,
      nevertheless, generally accepted that the losing party would have been
      only too glad to have the Colonel on their side. And Colonel Starbottle
      knew this, as, perspiring, florid, and panting, he rebuttoned the lower
      buttons of his blue frock-coat, which had become loosed in an oratorical
      spasm, and readjusted his old-fashioned, spotless shirt frill above it as
      he strutted from the court-room amidst the hand-shakings and acclamations
      of his friends.
    

      And here an unprecedented thing occurred. The Colonel absolutely declined
      spirituous refreshment at the neighboring Palmetto Saloon, and declared
      his intention of proceeding directly to his office in the adjoining
      square. Nevertheless the Colonel quitted the building alone, and
      apparently unarmed except for his faithful gold-headed stick, which hung
      as usual from his forearm. The crowd gazed after him with undisguised
      admiration of this new evidence of his pluck. It was remembered also that
      a mysterious note had been handed to him at the conclusion of his speech—evidently
      a challenge from the State Attorney. It was quite plain that the Colonel—a
      practised duellist—was hastening home to answer it.
    

      But herein they were wrong. The note was in a female hand, and simply
      requested the Colonel to accord an interview with the writer at the
      Colonel's office as soon as he left the court. But it was an engagement
      that the Colonel—as devoted to the fair sex as he was to the "code"—was
      no less prompt in accepting. He flicked away the dust from his spotless
      white trousers and varnished boots with his handkerchief, and settled his
      black cravat under his Byron collar as he neared his office. He was
      surprised, however, on opening the door of his private office to find his
      visitor already there; he was still more startled to find her somewhat
      past middle age and plainly attired. But the Colonel was brought up in a
      school of Southern politeness, already antique in the republic, and his
      bow of courtesy belonged to the epoch of his shirt frill and strapped
      trousers. No one could have detected his disappointment in his manner,
      albeit his sentences were short and incomplete. But the Colonel's
      colloquial speech was apt to be fragmentary incoherencies of his larger
      oratorical utterances.
    

      "A thousand pardons—for—er—having kept a lady waiting—er!
      But—er—congratulations of friends—and—er—courtesy
      due to them—er—interfered with—though perhaps only
      heightened—by procrastination—pleasure of—ha!" And the
      Colonel completed his sentence with a gallant wave of his fat but white
      and well-kept hand.
    

      "Yes! I came to see you along o' that speech of yours. I was in court.
      When I heard you gettin' it off on that jury, I says to myself that's the
      kind o' lawyer I want. A man that's flowery and convincin'! Just
      the man to take up our case."
    

      "Ah! It's a matter of business, I see," said the Colonel, inwardly
      relieved, but externally careless. "And—er—may I ask the
      nature of the case?"
    

      "Well! it's a breach-o'-promise suit," said the visitor, calmly.
    

      If the Colonel had been surprised before, he was now really startled, and
      with an added horror that required all his politeness to conceal.
      Breach-of-promise cases were his peculiar aversion. He had always held
      them to be a kind of litigation which could have been obviated by the
      prompt killing of the masculine offender—in which case he would have
      gladly defended the killer. But a suit for damages!—damages!—with
      the reading of love-letters before a hilarious jury and court, was against
      all his instincts. His chivalry was outraged; his sense of humor was small—and
      in the course of his career he had lost one or two important cases through
      an unexpected development of this quality in a jury.
    

      The woman had evidently noticed his hesitation, but mistook its cause. "It
      ain't me—but my darter."
    

      The Colonel recovered his politeness. "Ah! I am relieved, my dear madam! I
      could hardly conceive a man ignorant enough to—er—er—throw
      away such evident good fortune—or base enough to deceive the
      trustfulness of womanhood—matured and experienced only in the
      chivalry of our sex, ha!"
    

      The woman smiled grimly. "Yes!—it's my darter, Zaidee Hooker—so
      ye might spare some of them pretty speeches for her—before
      the jury."
    

      The Colonel winced slightly before this doubtful prospect, but smiled.
      "Ha! Yes!—certainly—the jury. But—er—my dear lady,
      need we go as far as that? Cannot this affair be settled—er—out
      of court? Could not this—er—individual—be admonished—told
      that he must give satisfaction—personal satisfaction—for his
      dastardly conduct—to —er—near relative—or even
      valued personal friend? The—er—arrangements necessary for that
      purpose I myself would undertake."
    

      He was quite sincere; indeed, his small black eyes shone with that fire
      which a pretty woman or an "affair of honor" could alone kindle. The
      visitor stared vacantly at him, and said, slowly:
    

      "And what good is that goin' to do us?"
    

      "Compel him to—er—perform his promise," said the Colonel,
      leaning back in his chair.
    

      "Ketch him doin' it!" said the woman, scornfully. "No—that ain't wot
      we're after. We must make him pay! Damages—and nothin' short
      o' that."
    

      The Colonel bit his lip. "I suppose," he said, gloomily, "you have
      documentary evidence—written promises and protestations—er—er—
      love-letters, in fact?"
    

      "No—nary a letter! Ye see, that's jest it—and that's where you
      come in. You've got to convince that jury yourself. You've got to show
      what it is—tell the whole story your own way. Lord! to a man like
      you that's nothin'."
    

      Startling as this admission might have been to any other lawyer,
      Starbottle was absolutely relieved by it. The absence of any
      mirth-provoking correspondence, and the appeal solely to his own powers of
      persuasion, actually struck his fancy. He lightly put aside the compliment
      with a wave of his white hand.
    

      "Of course," said the Colonel, confidently, "there is strongly presumptive
      and corroborative evidence? Perhaps you can give me—er—a brief
      outline of the affair?"
    

      "Zaidee kin do that straight enough, I reckon," said the woman; "what I
      want to know first is, kin you take the case?"
    

      The Colonel did not hesitate; his curiosity was piqued. "I certainly can.
      I have no doubt your daughter will put me in possession of sufficient
      facts and details—to constitute what we call—er—a
      brief."
    

      "She kin be brief enough—or long enough—for the matter of
      that," said the woman, rising. The Colonel accepted this implied witticism
      with a smile.
    

      "And when may I have the pleasure of seeing her?" he asked, politely.
    

      "Well, I reckon as soon as I can trot out and call her. She's just
      outside, meanderin' in the road—kinder shy, ye know, at first."
    

      She walked to the door. The astounded Colonel nevertheless gallantly
      accompanied her as she stepped out into the street and called, shrilly,
      "You Zaidee!"
    

      A young girl here apparently detached herself from a tree and the
      ostentatious perusal of an old election poster, and sauntered down towards
      the office door. Like her mother, she was plainly dressed; unlike her, she
      had a pale, rather refined face, with a demure mouth and downcast eyes.
      This was all the Colonel saw as he bowed profoundly and led the way into
      his office, for she accepted his salutations without lifting her head. He
      helped her gallantly to a chair, on which she seated herself sideways,
      somewhat ceremoniously, with her eyes following the point of her parasol
      as she traced a pattern on the carpet. A second chair offered to the
      mother that lady, however, declined. "I reckon to leave you and Zaidee
      together to talk it out," she said; turning to her daughter, she added,
      "Jest you tell him all, Zaidee," and before the Colonel could rise again,
      disappeared from the room. In spite of his professional experience,
      Starbottle was for a moment embarrassed. The young girl, however, broke
      the silence without looking up.
    

      "Adoniram K. Hotchkiss," she began, in a monotonous voice, as if it were a
      recitation addressed to the public, "first began to take notice of me a
      year ago. Arter that—off and on——"
    

      "One moment," interrupted the astounded Colonel; "do you mean Hotchkiss
      the President of the Ditch Company?" He had recognized the name of a
      prominent citizen—a rigid ascetic, taciturn, middle-aged man—a
      deacon—and more than that, the head of the company he had just
      defended. It seemed inconceivable.
    

      "That's him," she continued, with eyes still fixed on the parasol and
      without changing her monotonous tone—"off and on ever since. Most of
      the time at the Free-Will Baptist church—at morning service,
      prayer-meetings, and such. And at home—outside—er—in the
      road."
    

      "Is it this gentleman—Mr. Adoniram K. Hotchkiss—who—er—promised
      marriage?" stammered the Colonel.
    

      "Yes."
    

      The Colonel shifted uneasily in his chair. "Most extraordinary! for—you
      see—my dear young lady—this becomes—a—er—most
      delicate affair."
    

      "That's what maw said," returned the young woman, simply, yet with the
      faintest smile playing around her demure lips and downcast cheek.
    

      "I mean," said the Colonel, with a pained yet courteous smile, "that this—er—gentleman—is
      in fact—er—one of my clients."
    

      "That's what maw said, too, and of course your knowing him will make it
      all the easier for you," said the young woman.
    

      A slight flush crossed the Colonel's cheek as he returned quickly and a
      little stiffly, "On the contrary—er—it may make it impossible
      for me to—er—act in this matter."
    

      The girl lifted her eyes. The Colonel held his breath as the long lashes
      were raised to his level. Even to an ordinary observer that sudden
      revelation of her eyes seemed to transform her face with subtle witchery.
      They were large, brown, and soft, yet filled with an extraordinary
      penetration and prescience. They were the eyes of an experienced woman of
      thirty fixed in the face of a child. What else the Colonel saw there
      Heaven only knows! He felt his inmost secrets plucked from him—his
      whole soul laid bare—his vanity, belligerency, gallantry—even
      his medieval chivalry, penetrated, and yet illuminated, in that single
      glance. And when the eyelids fell again, he felt that a greater part of
      himself had been swallowed up in them.
    

      "I beg your pardon," he said, hurriedly. "I mean—this matter may be
      arranged—er—amicably. My interest with—and as you wisely
      say—my—er—knowledge of my client—er—Mr.
      Hotchkiss—may affect—a compromise."
    

      "And damages," said the young girl, readdressing her parasol, as if
      she had never looked up.
    

      The Colonel winced. "And—er—undoubtedly compensation—if
      you do not press a fulfilment of the promise. Unless," he said, with an
      attempted return to his former easy gallantry, which, however, the
      recollection of her eyes made difficult, "it is a question of—er—the
      affections?"
    

      "Which?" said his fair client, softly.
    

      "If you still love him?" explained the Colonel, actually blushing.
    

      Zaidee again looked up; again taking the Colonel's breath away with eyes
      that expressed not only the fullest perception of what he had said,
      but of what he thought and had not said, and with an added subtle
      suggestion of what he might have thought. "That's tellin'," she said,
      dropping her long lashes again. The Colonel laughed vacantly. Then feeling
      himself growing imbecile, he forced an equally weak gravity. "Pardon me—I
      understand there are no letters; may I know the way in which he formulated
      his declaration and promises?"
    

      "Hymn-books," said the girl, briefly.
    

      "I beg your pardon," said the mystified lawyer.
    

      "Hymn-books—marked words in them with pencil—and passed 'em on
      to me," repeated Zaidee. "Like 'love,' 'dear,' 'precious,' 'sweet,' and
      'blessed,'" she added, accenting each word with a push of her parasol on
      the carpet. "Sometimes a whole line outer Tate and Brady—and Solomon's
      Song, you know, and sich."
    

      "I believe," said the Colonel, loftily, "that the—er—phrases
      of sacred psalmody lend themselves to the language of the affections. But
      in regard to the distinct promise of marriage—was there—er—no
      other expression?"
    

      "Marriage Service in the prayer-book—lines and words outer that—all
      marked," said Zaidee. The Colonel nodded naturally and approvingly. "Very
      good. Were others cognizant of this? Were there any witnesses?"
    

      "Of course not," said the girl. "Only me and him. It was generally at
      church-time—or prayer-meeting. Once, in passing the plate, he
      slipped one o' them peppermint lozenges with the letters stamped on it 'I
      love you' for me to take."
    

      The Colonel coughed slightly. "And you have the lozenge?"
    

      "I ate it," said the girl, simply.
    

      "Ah," said the Colonel. After a pause he added, delicately: "But were
      these attentions—er—confined to—er—-sacred
      precincts? Did he meet you elsewhere?"
    

      "Useter pass our house on the road," returned the girl, dropping into her
      monotonous recital, "and useter signal."
    

      "Ah, signal?" repeated the Colonel, approvingly.
    

      "Yes! He'd say 'Kerrow,' and I'd say 'Kerree.' Suthing like a bird, you
      know."
    

      Indeed, as she lifted her voice in imitation of the call the Colonel
      thought it certainly very sweet and birdlike. At least as she gave
      it. With his remembrance of the grim deacon he had doubts as to the
      melodiousness of his utterance. He gravely made her repeat it.
    

      "And after that signal?" he added, suggestively.
    

      "He'd pass on," said the girl.
    

      The Colonel coughed slightly, and tapped his desk with his pen-holder.
    

      "Were there any endearments—er—caresses—er—such as
      taking your hand—er—clasping your waist?" he suggested, with a
      gallant yet respectful sweep of his white hand and bowing of his head;—"er—
      slight pressure of your fingers in the changes of a dance—I mean,"
      he corrected himself, with an apologetic cough—"in the passing of
      the plate?"
    

      "No;—he was not what you'd call 'fond,'" returned the girl.
    

      "Ah! Adoniram K. Hotchkiss was not 'fond' in the ordinary acceptance of
      the word," said the Colonel, with professional gravity.
    

      She lifted her disturbing eyes, and again absorbed his in her own. She
      also said "Yes," although her eyes in their mysterious prescience of all
      he was thinking disclaimed the necessity of any answer at all. He smiled
      vacantly. There was a long pause. On which she slowly disengaged her
      parasol from the carpet pattern and stood up.
    

      "I reckon that's about all," she said.
    

      "Er—yes—but one moment," said the Colonel, vaguely. He would
      have liked to keep her longer, but with her strange premonition of him he
      felt powerless to detain her, or explain his reason for doing so. He
      instinctively knew she had told him all; his professional judgment told
      him that a more hopeless case had never come to his knowledge. Yet he was
      not daunted, only embarrassed. "No matter," he said, vaguely. "Of course I
      shall have to consult with you again." Her eyes again answered that she
      expected he would, but she added, simply, "When?"
    

      "In the course of a day or two," said the Colonel, quickly. "I will send
      you word." She turned to go. In his eagerness to open the door for her he
      upset his chair, and with some confusion, that was actually youthful, he
      almost impeded her movements in the hall, and knocked his broad-brimmed
      Panama hat from his bowing hand in a final gallant sweep. Yet as her
      small, trim, youthful figure, with its simple Leghorn straw hat confined
      by a blue bow under her round chin, passed away before him, she looked
      more like a child than ever.
    

      The Colonel spent that afternoon in making diplomatic inquiries. He found
      his youthful client was the daughter of a widow who had a small ranch on
      the cross-roads, near the new Free-Will Baptist church—the evident
      theatre of this pastoral. They led a secluded life; the girl being little
      known in the town, and her beauty and fascination apparently not yet being
      a recognized fact. The Colonel felt a pleasurable relief at this, and a
      general satisfaction he could not account for. His few inquiries
      concerning Mr. Hotchkiss only confirmed his own impressions of the alleged
      lover—a serious-minded, practically abstracted man—abstentive
      of youthful society, and the last man apparently capable of levity of the
      affections or serious flirtation. The Colonel was mystified—but
      determined of purpose—whatever that purpose might have been.
    

      The next day he was at his office at the same hour. He was alone—as
      usual—the Colonel's office really being his private lodgings,
      disposed in connecting rooms, a single apartment reserved for
      consultation. He had no clerk; his papers and briefs being taken by his
      faithful body-servant and ex-slave "Jim" to another firm who did his
      office-work since the death of Major Stryker—the Colonel's only law
      partner, who fell in a duel some years previous. With a fine constancy the
      Colonel still retained his partner's name on his door-plate—and, it
      was alleged by the superstitious, kept a certain invincibility also
      through the manes of that lamented and somewhat feared man.
    

      The Colonel consulted his watch, whose heavy gold case still showed the
      marks of a providential interference with a bullet destined for its owner,
      and replaced it with some difficulty and shortness of breath in his fob.
      At the same moment he heard a step in the passage, and the door opened to
      Adoniram K. Hotchkiss. The Colonel was impressed; he had a duellist's
      respect for punctuality.
    

      The man entered with a nod and the expectant, inquiring look of a busy
      man. As his feet crossed that sacred threshold the Colonel became all
      courtesy; he placed a chair for his visitor, and took his hat from his
      half-reluctant hand. He then opened a cupboard and brought out a bottle of
      whiskey and two glasses.
    

      "A—er—slight refreshment, Mr. Hotchkiss," he suggested,
      politely. "I never drink," replied Hotchkiss, with the severe attitude of
      a total abstainer. "Ah—er—not the finest bourbon whiskey,
      selected by a Kentucky friend? No? Pardon me! A cigar, then—the
      mildest Havana."
    

      "I do not use tobacco nor alcohol in any form," repeated Hotchkiss,
      ascetically. "I have no foolish weaknesses."
    

      The Colonel's moist, beady eyes swept silently over his client's sallow
      face. He leaned back comfortably in his chair, and half closing his eyes
      as in dreamy reminiscence, said, slowly: "Your reply, Mr. Hotchkiss,
      reminds me of—er—sing'lar circumstances that —er—occurred,
      in point of fact—at the St. Charles Hotel, New Orleans. Pinkey
      Hornblower—personal friend—invited Senator Doolittle to join
      him in social glass. Received, sing'larly enough, reply similar to yours.
      'Don't drink nor smoke?' said Pinkey. 'Gad, sir, you must be mighty sweet
      on the ladies.' Ha!" The Colonel paused long enough to allow the faint
      flush to pass from Hotchkiss's cheek, and went on, half closing his eyes:
      "'I allow no man, sir, to discuss my personal habits,' said Doolittle,
      over his shirt collar. 'Then I reckon shootin' must be one of those
      habits,' said Pinkey, coolly. Both men drove out on the Shell Road back of
      cemetery next morning. Pinkey put bullet at twelve paces through
      Doolittle's temple. Poor Doo never spoke again. Left three wives and seven
      children, they say —two of 'em black."
    

      "I got a note from you this morning," said Hotchkiss, with badly concealed
      impatience. "I suppose in reference to our case. You have taken judgment,
      I believe." The Colonel, without replying, slowly filled a glass of
      whiskey and water. For a moment he held it dreamily before him, as if
      still engaged in gentle reminiscences called up by the act. Then tossing
      it off, he wiped his lips with a large white handkerchief, and leaning
      back comfortably in his chair, said, with a wave of his hand, "The
      interview I requested, Mr. Hotchkiss, concerns a subject—which I may
      say is—er—er—at present not of a public or
      business nature—although later it might become—er—er—both.
      It is an affair of some—er—delicacy."
    

      The Colonel paused, and Mr. Hotchkiss regarded him with increased
      impatience. The Colonel, however, continued, with unchanged deliberation:
      "It concerns—er—a young lady—a beautiful, high-souled
      creature, sir, who, apart from her personal loveliness— er—er—I
      may say is of one of the first families of Missouri, and— er—not—remotely
      connected by marriage with one of—er—er—my boyhood's
      dearest friends. The latter, I grieve to say, was a pure invention of the
      Colonel's—an oratorical addition to the scanty information he had
      obtained the previous day. The young lady," he continued, blandly, "enjoys
      the further distinction of being the object of such attention from you as
      would make this interview— really—a confidential matter—er—er—among
      friends and—er—er— relations in present and future. I
      need not say that the lady I refer to is Miss Zaidee Juno Hooker, only
      daughter of Almira Ann Hooker, relict of Jefferson Brown Hooker, formerly
      of Boone County, Kentucky, and latterly of—er—Pike County,
      Missouri."
    

      The sallow, ascetic hue of Mr. Hotchkiss's face had passed through a livid
      and then a greenish shade, and finally settled into a sullen red. "What's
      all this about?" he demanded, roughly. The least touch of belligerent fire
      came into Starbottle's eye, but his bland courtesy did not change. "I
      believe," he said, politely, "I have made myself clear as between—er—gentlemen,
      though perhaps not as clear as I should to—er—er—jury."
    

      Mr. Hotchkiss was apparently struck with some significance in the lawyer's
      reply. "I don't know," he said, in a lower and more cautious voice, "what
      you mean by what you call 'my attentions' to—any one—or how it
      concerns you. I have not exhausted half a dozen words with—the
      person you name—have never written her a line—nor even called
      at her house." He rose with an assumption of ease, pulled down his
      waistcoat, buttoned his coat, and took up his hat. The Colonel did not
      move. "I believe I have already indicated my meaning in what I have called
      'your attentions,'" said the Colonel, blandly, "and given you my 'concern'
      for speaking as—er—er mutual friend. As to your
      statement of your relations with Miss Hooker, I may state that it is fully
      corroborated by the statement of the young lady herself in this very
      office yesterday."
    

      "Then what does this impertinent nonsense mean? Why am I summoned here?"
      said Hotchkiss, furiously.
    

      "Because," said the Colonel, deliberately, "that statement is infamously—yes,
      damnably to your discredit, sir!"
    

      Mr. Hotchkiss was here seized by one of those important and inconsistent
      rages which occasionally betray the habitually cautious and timid man. He
      caught up the Colonel's stick, which was lying on the table. At the same
      moment the Colonel, without any apparent effort, grasped it by the handle.
      To Mr. Hotchkiss's astonishment, the stick separated in two pieces,
      leaving the handle and about two feet of narrow glittering steel in the
      Colonel's hand. The man recoiled, dropping the useless fragment. The
      Colonel picked it up, fitting the shining blade in it, clicked the spring,
      and then rising, with a face of courtesy yet of unmistakably genuine pain,
      and with even a slight tremor in his voice, said, gravely:
    

      "Mr. Hotchkiss, I owe you a thousand apologies, sir, that—er—
      a weapon should be drawn by me—even through your own inadvertence—
      under the sacred protection of my roof, and upon an unarmed man. I beg
      your pardon, sir, and I even withdraw the expressions which provoked that
      inadvertence. Nor does this apology prevent you from holding me
      responsible—personally responsible—elsewhere for an
      indiscretion committed in behalf of a lady—my—er—client."
    

      "Your client? Do you mean you have taken her case? You, the counsel for
      the Ditch Company?" said Mr. Hotchkiss, in trembling indignation.
    

      "Having won your case, sir," said the Colonel, coolly, "the—er—usages
      of advocacy do not prevent me from espousing the cause of the weak and
      unprotected."
    

      "We shall see, sir," said Hotchkiss, grasping the handle of the door and
      backing into the passage. "There are other lawyers who—"
    

      "Permit me to see you out," interrupted the Colonel, rising politely.
    

      "—will be ready to resist the attacks of blackmail," continued
      Hotchkiss, retreating along the passage.
    

      "And then you will be able to repeat your remarks to me in the street,"
      continued the Colonel, bowing, as he persisted in following his visitor to
      the door.
    

      But here Mr. Hotchkiss quickly slammed it behind him, and hurried away.
      The Colonel returned to his office, and sitting down, took a sheet of
      letter paper bearing the inscription "Starbottle and Stryker, Attorneys
      and Counsellors," and wrote the following lines:
    

  Hooker versus Hotchkiss.

  DEAR MADAM,—Having had a visit from the defendant in
  above, we should be pleased to have an interview with you at
  2 p.m. to-morrow. Your obedient servants,
                                            STARBOTTLE AND STRYKER.


      This he sealed and despatched by his trusted servant Jim, and then devoted
      a few moments to reflection. It was the custom of the Colonel to act
      first, and justify the action by reason afterwards.
    

      He knew that Hotchkiss would at once lay the matter before rival counsel.
      He knew that they would advise him that Miss Hooker had "no case"—that
      she would be non-suited on her own evidence, and he ought not to
      compromise, but be ready to stand trial. He believed, however, that
      Hotchkiss feared that exposure, and although his own instincts had been at
      first against that remedy, he was now instinctively in favor of it. He
      remembered his own power with a jury; his vanity and his chivalry alike
      approved of this heroic method; he was bound by the prosaic facts—he
      had his own theory of the case, which no mere evidence could gainsay. In
      fact, Mrs. Hooker's own words that "he was to tell the story in his own
      way" actually appeared to him an inspiration and a prophecy.
    

      Perhaps there was something else, due possibly to the lady's wonderful
      eyes, of which he had thought much. Yet it was not her simplicity that
      affected him solely; on the contrary, it was her apparent intelligent
      reading of the character of her recreant lover—and of his own! Of
      all the Colonel's previous "light" or "serious" loves none had ever before
      flattered him in that way. And it was this, combined with the respect
      which he had held for their professional relations, that precluded his
      having a more familiar knowledge of his client, through serious
      questioning, or playful gallantry. I am not sure it was not part of the
      charm to have a rustic femme incomprise as a client.
    

      Nothing could exceed the respect with which he greeted her as she entered
      his office the next day. He even affected not to notice that she had put
      on her best clothes, and he made no doubt appeared as when she had first
      attracted the mature yet faithless attentions of Deacon Hotchkiss at
      church. A white virginal muslin was belted around her slim figure by a
      blue ribbon, and her Leghorn hat was drawn around her oval cheek by a bow
      of the same color. She had a Southern girl's narrow feet, encased in white
      stockings and kid slippers, which were crossed primly before her as she
      sat in a chair, supporting her arm by her faithful parasol planted firmly
      on the floor. A faint odor of southernwood exhaled from her, and, oddly
      enough, stirred the Colonel with a far-off recollection of a pine-shaded
      Sunday school on a Georgia hillside and of his first love, aged ten, in a
      short, starched frock. Possibly it was the same recollection that revived
      something of the awkwardness he had felt then.
    

      He, however, smiled vaguely and, sitting down, coughed slightly, and
      placed his fingertips together. "I have had an—er—interview
      with Mr. Hotchkiss, but—I—er—regret to say there seems
      to be no prospect of—er—compromise." He paused, and to his
      surprise her listless "company" face lit up with an adorable smile. "Of
      course!—ketch him!" she said. "Was he mad when you told him?" She
      put her knees comfortably together and leaned forward for a reply.
    

      For all that, wild horses could not have torn from the Colonel a word
      about Hotchkiss's anger. "He expressed his intention of employing counsel—and
      defending a suit," returned the Colonel, affably basking in her smile. She
      dragged her chair nearer his desk. "Then you'll fight him tooth and nail?"
      she said eagerly; "you'll show him up? You'll tell the whole story your
      own way? You'll give him fits?—and you'll make him pay? Sure?" she
      went on, breathlessly.
    

      "I—er—will," said the Colonel, almost as breathlessly.
    

      She caught his fat white hand, which was lying on the table, between her
      own and lifted it to her lips. He felt her soft young fingers even through
      the lisle-thread gloves that encased them and the warm moisture of her
      lips upon his skin. He felt himself flushing—but was unable to break
      the silence or change his position. The next moment she had scuttled back
      with her chair to her old position.
    

      "I—er—certainly shall do my best," stammered the Colonel, in
      an attempt to recover his dignity and composure.
    

      "That's enough! You'll do it," said the girl, enthusiastically.
      "Lordy! Just you talk for me as ye did for his old Ditch
      Company, and you'll fetch it—every time! Why, when you made that
      jury sit up the other day—when you got that off about the Merrikan
      flag waving equally over the rights of honest citizens banded together in
      peaceful commercial pursuits, as well as over the fortress of official
      proflig—"
    

      "Oligarchy," murmured the Colonel, courteously.
    

      "Oligarchy," repeated the girl, quickly, "my breath was just took away. I
      said to maw, 'Ain't he too sweet for anything!' I did, honest Injin! And
      when you rolled it all off at the end—never missing a word—(you
      didn't need to mark 'em in a lesson-book, but had 'em all ready on your
      tongue), and walked out—Well! I didn't know you nor the Ditch
      Company from Adam, but I could have just run over and kissed you there
      before the whole court!"
    

      She laughed, with her face glowing, although her strange eyes were cast
      down. Alack! the Colonel's face was equally flushed, and his own beady
      eyes were on his desk. To any other woman he would have voiced the banal
      gallantry that he should now, himself, look forward to that reward, but
      the words never reached his lips. He laughed, coughed slightly, and when
      he looked up again she had fallen into the same attitude as on her first
      visit, with her parasol point on the floor.
    

      "I must ask you to—er—direct your memory—to—er—another
      point; the breaking off of the—er—er—er—engagement.
      Did he—er—give any reason for it? Or show any cause?"
    

      "No; he never said anything," returned the girl.
    

      "Not in his usual way?—er—no reproaches out of the hymn-book?—or
      the sacred writings?"
    

      "No; he just quit."
    

      "Er—ceased his attentions," said the Colonel, gravely. "And
      naturally you—er—were not conscious of any cause for his doing
      so." The girl raised her wonderful eyes so suddenly and so penetratingly
      without reply in any other way that the Colonel could only hurriedly say:
      "I see! None, of course!"
    

      At which she rose, the Colonel rising also. "We—shall begin
      proceedings at once. I must, however, caution you to answer no questions
      nor say anything about this case to any one until you are in court."
    

      She answered his request with another intelligent look and a nod. He
      accompanied her to the door. As he took her proffered hand he raised the
      lisle-thread fingers to his lips with old-fashioned gallantry. As if that
      act had condoned for his first omissions and awkwardness, he became his
      old-fashioned self again, buttoned his coat, pulled out his shirt frill,
      and strutted back to his desk.
    

      A day or two later it was known throughout the town that Zaidee Hooker had
      sued Adoniram Hotchkiss for breach of promise, and that the damages were
      laid at five thousand dollars. As in those bucolic days the Western press
      was under the secure censorship of a revolver, a cautious tone of
      criticism prevailed, and any gossip was confined to personal expression,
      and even then at the risk of the gossiper. Nevertheless, the situation
      provoked the intensest curiosity. The Colonel was approached—until
      his statement that he should consider any attempt to overcome his
      professional secrecy a personal reflection withheld further advances. The
      community were left to the more ostentatious information of the
      defendant's counsel, Messrs. Kitcham and Bilser, that the case was
      "ridiculous" and "rotten," that the plaintiff would be nonsuited, and the
      fire-eating Starbottle would be taught a lesson that he could not "bully"
      the law—and there were some dark hints of a conspiracy. It was even
      hinted that the "case" was the revengeful and preposterous outcome of the
      refusal of Hotchkiss to pay Starbottle an extravagant fee for his late
      services to the Ditch Company. It is unnecessary to say that these words
      were not reported to the Colonel. It was, however, an unfortunate
      circumstance for the calmer, ethical consideration of the subject that the
      church sided with Hotchkiss, as this provoked an equal adherence to the
      plaintiff and Starbottle on the part of the larger body of
      non-church-goers, who were delighted at a possible exposure of the
      weakness of religious rectitude. "I've allus had my suspicions o' them
      early candle-light meetings down at that gospel shop," said one critic,
      "and I reckon Deacon Hotchkiss didn't rope in the gals to attend jest for
      psalm-singing." "Then for him to get up and leave the board afore the
      game's finished and try to sneak out of it," said another. "I suppose
      that's what they call religious."
    

      It was therefore not remarkable that the courthouse three weeks later was
      crowded with an excited multitude of the curious and sympathizing. The
      fair plaintiff, with her mother, was early in attendance, and under the
      Colonel's advice appeared in the same modest garb in which she had first
      visited his office. This and her downcast modest demeanor were perhaps at
      first disappointing to the crowd, who had evidently expected a paragon of
      loveliness—as the Circe of the grim ascetic defendant, who sat
      beside his counsel. But presently all eyes were fixed on the Colonel, who
      certainly made up in his appearance any deficiency of his fair
      client. His portly figure was clothed in a blue dress-coat with brass
      buttons, a buff waistcoat which permitted his frilled shirt front to
      become erectile above it, a black satin stock which confined a boyish
      turned-down collar around his full neck, and immaculate drill trousers,
      strapped over varnished boots. A murmur ran round the court. "Old
      'Personally Responsible' had got his war-paint on," "The Old War-Horse is
      smelling powder," were whispered comments. Yet for all that the most
      irreverent among them recognized vaguely, in this bizarre figure,
      something of an honored past in their country's history, and possibly felt
      the spell of old deeds and old names that had once thrilled their boyish
      pulses. The new District Judge returned Colonel Starbottle's profoundly
      punctilious bow. The Colonel was followed by his negro servant, carrying a
      parcel of hymn-books and Bibles, who, with a courtesy evidently imitated
      from his master, placed one before the opposite counsel. This, after a
      first curious glance, the lawyer somewhat superciliously tossed aside. But
      when Jim, proceeding to the jury-box, placed with equal politeness the
      remaining copies before the jury, the opposite counsel sprang to his feet.
    

      "I want to direct the attention of the Court to this unprecedented
      tampering with the jury, by this gratuitous exhibition of matter
      impertinent and irrelevant to the issue."
    

      The Judge cast an inquiring look at Colonel Starbottle.
    

      "May it please the Court," returned Colonel Starbottle with dignity,
      ignoring the counsel, "the defendant's counsel will observe that he is
      already furnished with the matter—which I regret to say he has
      treated—in the presence of the Court—and of his client, a
      deacon of the church—with—er—-great superciliousness.
      When I state to your Honor that the books in question are hymn-books and
      copies of the Holy Scriptures, and that they are for the
      instruction of the jury, to whom I shall have to refer them in the course
      of my opening, I believe I am within my rights."
    

      "The act is certainly unprecedented," said the Judge, dryly, "but unless
      the counsel for the plaintiff expects the jury to sing from these
      hymn-books, their introduction is not improper, and I cannot admit the
      objection. As defendant's counsel are furnished with copies also, they
      cannot plead 'surprise,' as in the introduction of new matter, and as
      plaintiff's counsel relies evidently upon the jury's attention to his
      opening, he would not be the first person to distract it." After a pause
      he added, addressing the Colonel, who remained standing, "The Court is
      with you, sir; proceed."
    

      But the Colonel remained motionless and statuesque, with folded arms.
    

      "I have overruled the objection," repeated the Judge; "you may go on."
    

      "I am waiting, your Honor, for the—er—withdrawal by the
      defendant's counsel of the word 'tampering,' as refers to myself, and of
      'impertinent,' as refers to the sacred volumes."
    

      "The request is a proper one, and I have no doubt will be acceded to,"
      returned the Judge, quietly. The defendant's counsel rose and mumbled a
      few words of apology, and the incident closed. There was, however, a
      general feeling that the Colonel had in some way "scored," and if his
      object had been to excite the greatest curiosity about the books, he had
      made his point.
    

      But impassive of his victory, he inflated his chest, with his right hand
      in the breast of his buttoned coat, and began. His usual high color had
      paled slightly, but the small pupils of his prominent eyes glittered like
      steel. The young girl leaned forward in her chair with an attention so
      breathless, a sympathy so quick, and an admiration so artless and
      unconscious that in an instant she divided with the speaker the attention
      of the whole assemblage. It was very hot; the court was crowded to
      suffocation; even the open windows revealed a crowd of faces outside the
      building, eagerly following the Colonel's words.
    

      He would remind the jury that only a few weeks ago he stood there as the
      advocate of a powerful company, then represented by the present defendant.
      He spoke then as the champion of strict justice against legal oppression;
      no less should he to-day champion the cause of the unprotected and the
      comparatively defenseless—save for that paramount power which
      surrounds beauty and innocence—even though the plaintiff of
      yesterday was the defendant of to-day. As he approached the court a moment
      ago he had raised his eyes and beheld the starry flag flying from its dome—and
      he knew that glorious banner was a symbol of the perfect equality, under
      the Constitution, of the rich and the poor, the strong and the weak—an
      equality which made the simple citizen taken from the plough in the veld,
      the pick in the gulch, or from behind the counter in the mining town, who
      served on that jury, the equal arbiters of justice with that highest legal
      luminary whom they were proud to welcome on the bench to-day. The Colonel
      paused, with a stately bow to the impassive Judge. It was this, he
      continued, which lifted his heart as he approached the building. And yet—he
      had entered it with an uncertain—he might almost say—a timid
      step. And why? He knew, gentlemen, he was about to confront a profound—aye!
      a sacred responsibility! Those hymn-books and holy writings handed to the
      jury were not, as his Honor surmised, for the purpose of enabling
      the jury to indulge in—er—preliminary choral exercise! He
      might, indeed, say "alas not!" They were the damning, incontrovertible
      proofs of the perfidy of the defendant. And they would prove as terrible a
      warning to him as the fatal characters upon Belshazzar's wall. There was a
      strong sensation. Hotchkiss turned a sallow green. His lawyers assumed a
      careless smile.
    

      It was his duty to tell them that this was not one of those ordinary
      "breach-of-promise" cases which were too often the occasion of ruthless
      mirth and indecent levity in the courtroom. The jury would find nothing of
      that here, There were no love-letters with the epithets of endearment, nor
      those mystic crosses and ciphers which, he had been credibly informed,
      chastely hid the exchange of those mutual caresses known as "kisses."
      There was no cruel tearing of the veil from those sacred privacies of the
      human affection—there was no forensic shouting out of those fond
      confidences meant only for one. But there was, he was shocked to
      say, a new sacrilegious intrusion. The weak pipings of Cupid were mingled
      with the chorus of the saints—the sanctity of the temple known as
      the "meeting-house" was desecrated by proceedings more in keeping with the
      shrine of Venus—and the inspired writings themselves were used as
      the medium of amatory and wanton flirtation by the defendant in his sacred
      capacity as Deacon.
    

      The Colonel artistically paused after this thunderous denunciation. The
      jury turned eagerly to the leaves of the hymn-books, but the larger gaze
      of the audience remained fixed upon the speaker and the girl, who sat in
      rapt admiration of his periods. After the hush, the Colonel continued in a
      lower and sadder voice: "There are, perhaps, few of us here, gentlemen—with
      the exception of the defendant—who can arrogate to themselves the
      title of regular churchgoers, or to whom these humbler functions of the
      prayer-meeting, the Sunday-school, and the Bible class are habitually
      familiar. Yet"—more solemnly—"down in your hearts is the deep
      conviction of our short-comings and failings, and a laudable desire that
      others at least should profit by the teachings we neglect. Perhaps," he
      continued, closing his eyes dreamily, "there is not a man here who does
      not recall the happy days of his boyhood, the rustic village spire, the
      lessons shared with some artless village maiden, with whom he later
      sauntered, hand in hand, through the woods, as the simple rhyme rose upon
      their lips,
    

  Always make it a point to have it a rule
  Never to be late at the Sabbath-school."


      He would recall the strawberry feasts, the welcome annual picnic, redolent
      with hunks of gingerbread and sarsaparilla. How would they feel to know
      that these sacred recollections were now forever profaned in their memory
      by the knowledge that the defendant was capable of using such occasions to
      make love to the larger girls and teachers, whilst his artless companions
      were innocently—the Court will pardon me for introducing what I am
      credibly informed is the local expression 'doing gooseberry'?" The
      tremulous flicker of a smile passed over the faces of the listening crowd,
      and the Colonel slightly winced. But he recovered himself instantly, and
      continued:
    

      "My client, the only daughter of a widowed mother—who has for years
      stemmed the varying tides of adversity—in the western precincts of
      this town—stands before you today invested only in her own
      innocence. She wears no—er—rich gifts of her faithless admirer—is
      panoplied in no jewels, rings, nor mementoes of affection such as lovers
      delight to hang upon the shrine of their affections; hers is not the glory
      with which Solomon decorated the Queen of Sheba, though the defendant, as
      I shall show later, clothed her in the less expensive flowers of the
      king's poetry. No! gentlemen! The defendant exhibited in this affair a
      certain frugality of—er—pecuniary investment, which I am
      willing to admit may be commendable in his class. His only gift was
      characteristic alike of his methods and his economy. There is, I
      understand, a certain not unimportant feature of religious exercise known
      as 'taking a collection.' The defendant, on this occasion, by the mute
      presentation of a tip plate covered with baize, solicited the pecuniary
      contributions of the faithful. On approaching the plaintiff, however, he
      himself slipped a love-token upon the plate and pushed it towards her.
      That love-token was a lozenge—a small disk, I have reason to
      believe, concocted of peppermint and sugar, bearing upon its reverse
      surface the simple words, 'I love you!' I have since ascertained that
      these disks may be bought for five cents a dozen—or at considerably
      less than one half-cent for the single lozenge. Yes, gentlemen, the words
      'I love you!'—the oldest legend of all; the refrain, 'when the
      morning stars sang together'—were presented to the plaintiff by a
      medium so insignificant that there is, happily, no coin in the republic
      low enough to represent its value.
    

      "I shall prove to you, gentlemen of the jury," said the Colonel, solemnly,
      drawing a Bible from his coat-tail pocket, "that the defendant, for
      the last twelve months, conducted an amatory correspondence with the
      plaintiff by means of underlined words of sacred writ and church psalmody,
      such as 'beloved,' 'precious,' and 'dearest,' occasionally appropriating
      whole passages which seemed apposite to his tender passion. I shall call
      your attention to one of them. The defendant, while professing to be a
      total abstainer—a man who, in my own knowledge, has refused
      spirituous refreshment as an inordinate weakness of the flesh, with
      shameless hypocrisy underscores with his pencil the following passage and
      presents it to the plaintiff. The gentlemen of the jury will find it in
      the Song of Solomon, page 548, chapter II, verse 5." After a pause,
      in which the rapid rustling of leaves was heard in the jury-box, Colonel
      Starbottle declaimed in a pleading, stentorian voice, "'Stay me with
      —er—flagons, comfort me with—er—apples—for
      I am—er—sick of love.' Yes, gentlemen!—yes, you may well
      turn from those accusing pages and look at the double-faced defendant. He
      desires—to—er—be —'stayed with flagons'! I am not
      aware, at present, what kind of liquor is habitually dispensed at these
      meetings, and for which the defendant so urgently clamored; but it will be
      my duty before this trial is over to discover it, if I have to summon
      every barkeeper in this district. For the moment, I will simply call your
      attention to the quantity. It is not a single drink that the
      defendant asks for —not a glass of light and generous wine, to be
      shared with his inamorata—but a number of flagons or vessels, each
      possibly holding a pint measure—for himself!"
    

      The smile of the audience had become a laugh. The Judge looked up
      warningly, when his eye caught the fact that the Colonel had again winced
      at this mirth. He regarded him seriously. Mr. Hotchkiss's counsel had
      joined in the laugh affectedly, but Hotchkiss himself was ashy pale. There
      was also a commotion in the jury-box, a hurried turning over of leaves,
      and an excited discussion.
    

      "The gentlemen of the jury," said the Judge, with official gravity, "will
      please keep order and attend only to the speeches of counsel. Any
      discussion here is irregular and premature—and must be
      reserved for the jury-room—after they have retired."
    

      The foreman of the jury struggled to his feet. He was a powerful man, with
      a good-humored face, and, in spite of his unfelicitous nickname of "The
      Bone-Breaker," had a kindly, simple, but somewhat emotional nature.
      Nevertheless, it appeared as if he were laboring under some powerful
      indignation.
    

      "Can we ask a question, Judge?" he said, respectfully, although his voice
      had the unmistakable Western-American ring in it, as of one who was
      unconscious that he could be addressing any but his peers.
    

      "Yes," said the Judge, good-humoredly.
    

      "We're finding in this yere piece, out of which the Kernel hes just bin
      a-quotin', some language that me and my pardners allow hadn't orter to be
      read out afore a young lady in court—and we want to know of you—ez
      a fair-minded and impartial man—ef this is the reg'lar kind o' book
      given to gals and babies down at the meetin'-house."
    

      "The jury will please follow the counsel's speech, without comment," said
      the Judge, briefly, fully aware that the defendant's counsel would spring
      to his feet, as he did promptly. "The Court will allow us to explain to
      the gentlemen that the language they seem to object to has been accepted
      by the best theologians for the last thousand years as being purely
      mystic. As I will explain later, those are merely symbols of the Church—"
    

      "Of wot?" interrupted the foreman, in deep scorn.
    

      "Of the Church!"
    

      "We ain't askin' any questions o' you—and we ain't takin' any
      answers," said the foreman, sitting down promptly.
    

      "I must insist," said the Judge, sternly, "that the plaintiff's counsel be
      allowed to continue his opening without interruption. You" (to defendant's
      counsel) "will have your opportunity to reply later."
    

      The counsel sank down in his seat with the bitter conviction that the jury
      was manifestly against him, and the case as good as lost. But his face was
      scarcely as disturbed as his client's, who, in great agitation, had begun
      to argue with him wildly, and was apparently pressing some point against
      the lawyer's vehement opposal. The Colonel's murky eyes brightened as he
      still stood erect with his hand thrust in his breast.
    

      "It will be put to you, gentlemen, when the counsel on the other side
      refrains from mere interruption and confines himself to reply, that my
      unfortunate client has no action—no remedy at law—because
      there were no spoken words of endearment. But, gentlemen, it will depend
      upon you to say what are and what are not articulate expressions of
      love. We all know that among the lower animals, with whom you may possibly
      be called upon to classify the defendant, there are certain signals more
      or less harmonious, as the case may be. The ass brays, the horse neighs,
      the sheep bleats—the feathered denizens of the grove call to their
      mates in more musical roundelays. These are recognized facts, gentlemen,
      which you yourselves, as dwellers among nature in this beautiful land, are
      all cognizant of. They are facts that no one would deny—and we
      should have a poor opinion of the ass who, at—er—such a
      supreme moment, would attempt to suggest that his call was unthinking and
      without significance. But, gentlemen, I shall prove to you that such was
      the foolish, self-convicting custom of the defendant. With the greatest
      reluctance, and the—er—greatest pain, I succeeded in wresting
      from the maidenly modesty of my fair client the innocent confession that
      the defendant had induced her to correspond with him in these methods.
      Picture to yourself, gentlemen, the lonely moonlight road beside the
      widow's humble cottage. It is a beautiful night, sanctified to the
      affections, and the innocent girl is leaning from her casement. Presently
      there appears upon the road a slinking, stealthy figure—the
      defendant, on his way to church. True to the instruction she has received
      from him, her lips part in the musical utterance" (the Colonel lowered his
      voice in a faint falsetto, presumably in fond imitation of his fair
      client),"'Kerree!' Instantly the night became resonant with the
      impassioned reply" (the Colonel here lifted his voice in stentorian
      tones), "'Kerrow.' Again, as he passes, rises the soft 'Kerree'; again, as
      his form is lost in the distance, comes back the deep 'Kerrow.'"
    

      A burst of laughter, long, loud, and irrepressible, struck the whole
      courtroom, and before the Judge could lift his half-composed face and take
      his handkerchief from his mouth, a faint "Kerree" from some unrecognized
      obscurity of the courtroom was followed by a loud "Kerrow" from some
      opposite locality. "The sheriff will clear the court," said the Judge,
      sternly; but alas, as the embarrassed and choking officials rushed hither
      and thither, a soft "Kerree" from the spectators at the window, outside
      the courthouse, was answered by a loud chorus of "Kerrows" from the
      opposite windows, filled with onlookers. Again the laughter arose
      everywhere—even the fair plaintiff herself sat convulsed behind her
      handkerchief.
    

      The figure of Colonel Starbottle alone remained erect—white and
      rigid. And then the Judge, looking up, saw what no one else in the court
      had seen—that the Colonel was sincere and in earnest; that what he
      had conceived to be the pleader's most perfect acting, and most elaborate
      irony, were the deep, serious, mirthless convictions of a man
      without the least sense of humor. There was a touch of this respect in the
      Judge's voice as he said to him, gently, "You may proceed, Colonel
      Starbottle."
    

      "I thank your Honor," said the Colonel, slowly, "for recognizing and doing
      all in your power to prevent an interruption that, during my thirty years'
      experience at the bar, I have never yet been subjected to without the
      privilege of holding the instigators thereof responsible—personally
      responsible. It is possibly my fault that I have failed, oratorically, to
      convey to the gentlemen of the jury the full force and significance of the
      defendant's signals. I am aware that my voice is singularly deficient in
      producing either the dulcet tones of my fair client or the impassioned
      vehemence of the defendant's repose. I will," continued the Colonel, with
      a fatigued but blind fatuity that ignored the hurriedly knit brows and
      warning eyes of the Judge, "try again. The note uttered by my client"
      (lowering his voice to the faintest of falsettos) "was 'Kerree'; the
      response was 'Kerrow'"—and the Colonel's voice fairly shook the dome
      above him.
    

      Another uproar of laughter followed this apparently audacious repetition,
      but was interrupted by an unlooked-for incident. The defendant rose
      abruptly, and tearing himself away from the withholding hand and pleading
      protestations of his counsel, absolutely fled from the courtroom, his
      appearance outside being recognized by a prolonged "Kerrow" from the
      bystanders, which again and again followed him in the distance. In the
      momentary silence which followed, the Colonel's voice was heard saying,
      "We rest here, your Honor," and he sat down. No less white, but more
      agitated, was the face of the defendant's counsel, who instantly rose.
    

      "For some unexplained reason, your Honor, my client desires to suspend
      further proceedings, with a view to effect a peaceable compromise with the
      plaintiff. As he is a man of wealth and position, he is able and willing
      to pay liberally for that privilege. While I, as his counsel, am still
      convinced of his legal irresponsibility, as he has chosen, however, to
      publicly abandon his rights here, I can only ask your Honor's permission
      to suspend further proceedings until I can confer with Colonel
      Starbottle."
    

      "As far as I can follow the pleadings," said the Judge, gravely, "the case
      seems to be hardly one for litigation, and I approve of the defendant's
      course, while I strongly urge the plaintiff to accept it."
    

      Colonel Starbottle bent over his fair client. Presently he rose, unchanged
      in look or demeanor. "I yield, your Honor, to the wishes of my client, and—er—lady.
      We accept."
    

      Before the court adjourned that day it was known throughout the town that
      Adoniram K. Hotchkiss had compromised the suit for four thousand dollars
      and costs.
    

      Colonel Starbottle had so far recovered his equanimity as to strut
      jauntily towards his office, where he was to meet his fair client. He was
      surprised, however, to find her already there, and in company with a
      somewhat sheepish-looking young man—a stranger. If the Colonel had
      any disappointment in meeting a third party to the interview, his
      old-fashioned courtesy did not permit him to show it. He bowed graciously,
      and politely motioned them each to a seat.
    

      "I reckoned I'd bring Hiram round with me," said the young lady, lifting
      her searching eyes, after a pause, to the Colonel's, "though he was awful
      shy, and allowed that you didn't know him from Adam—or even
      suspected his existence. But I said, 'That's just where you slip up,
      Hiram; a pow'ful man like the Colonel knows everything—and I've seen
      it in his eye.' Lordy!" she continued, with a laugh, leaning forward over
      her parasol, as her eyes again sought the Colonel's, "don't you remember
      when you asked me if I loved that old Hotchkiss, and I told you 'That's
      tellin',' and you looked at me, Lordy! I knew then you suspected
      there was a Hiram somewhere—as good as if I'd told you. Now,
      you, jest get up, Hiram, and give the Colonel a good handshake. For if it
      wasn't for him and his searchin' ways, and his awful
      power of language, I wouldn't hev got that four thousand dollars out o'
      that flirty fool Hotchkiss—enough to buy a farm, so as you and me
      could get married! That's what you owe to him. Don't stand there
      like a stuck fool starin' at him. He won't eat you—though he's
      killed many a better man. Come, have I got to do all the
      kissin'!"
    

      It is of record that the Colonel bowed so courteously and so profoundly
      that he managed not merely to evade the proffered hand of the shy Hiram,
      but to only lightly touch the franker and more impulsive fingertips of the
      gentle Zaidee. "I—er—offer my sincerest congratulations—though
      I think you—er—overestimate—my—er—powers of
      penetration. Unfortunately, a pressing engagement, which may oblige me
      also to leave town to-night, forbids my saying more. I have—er—left
      the—er—business settlement of this—er—case in the
      hands of the lawyers who do my office-work, and who will show you every
      attention. And now let me wish you a very good afternoon."
    

      Nevertheless, the Colonel returned to his private room, and it was nearly
      twilight when the faithful Jim entered, to find him sitting meditatively
      before his desk. "'Fo' God! Kernel—I hope dey ain't nuffin de
      matter, but you's lookin' mightly solemn! I ain't seen you look dat way,
      Kernel, since de day pooh Marse Stryker was fetched home shot froo de
      head."
    

      "Hand me down the whiskey, Jim," said the Colonel, rising slowly.
    

      The negro flew to the closet joyfully, and brought out the bottle. The
      Colonel poured out a glass of the spirit and drank it with his old
      deliberation.
    

      "You're quite right, Jim," he said, putting down his glass, "but I'm—er—getting
      old—and—somehow—I am missing poor Stryker damnably!"