GRANDMA KEELER GETS GRANDPA READY FOR SUNDAY-SCHOOL
BY SARAH P. McLEAN GREENE
Sunday morning nothing arose in Wallencamp save the sun.
At least, that celestial orb had long forgotten all the roseate flaming
of his youth, in an honest, straightforward march through the heavens,
ere the first signs of smoke came curling lazily up from the Wallencamp
chimneys.
I had retired at night, very weary, with the delicious consciousness
that it wouldn't make any difference when I woke up the next morning, or
whether, indeed, I woke at all. So I opened my eyes leisurely and lay
half-dreaming, half-meditating on a variety of things.
I deciphered a few of the texts on the scriptural patchwork quilt which
covered my couch. There were—"Let not your heart be troubled,"
"Remember Lot's wife," and "Philander Keeler," traced in inky
hieroglyphics, all in close conjunction.
Finally I reached out for my watch, and, having ascertained the time of
day, I got up and proceeded to dress hastily enough, wondering to hear
no signs of life in the house.
I went noiselessly down the stairs. All was silent below, except for the
peaceful snoring of Mrs. Philander and the little Keelers, which was
responded to from some remote western corner of the Ark by the
triumphant snores of Grandma and Grandpa Keeler.
I attempted to kindle a fire in the stove, but it sizzled a little
while, spitefully, as much as to say, "What, Sunday morning? Not I!" and
went out. So I concluded to put on some wraps and go out and warm myself
in the sun.
I climbed the long hill back of the Ark, descended, and walked along the
bank of the river. It was a beautiful morning. The air was—everything
that could be desired in the way of air, but I felt a desperate need of
something more substantial.
Standing alone with nature, on the bank of the lovely river, I thought,
with tears in my eyes, of the delicious breakfast already recuperating
the exhausted energies of my far-away home friends.
When I got back to the house, Mrs. Philander, in simple and unaffected
attire, was bustling busily about the stove.
The snores from Grandma and Grandpa's quarter had ceased, signifying
that they, also, had advanced a stage in the grand processes of Sunday
morning.
The children came teasing me to dress them, so I fastened for them a
variety of small articles which I flattered myself on having combined in
a very ingenious and artistic manner, though I believe those infant
Keelers went weeping to Grandma afterward, and were remodeled by her
all-comforting hand with much skill and patience.
In the midst of her preparations for breakfast, Madeline abruptly
assumed her hat and shawl, and was seen from the window, walking
leisurely across the fields in the direction of the woods. She returned
in due time, bearing an armful of fresh evergreens, which she twisted
around the family register.
When the ancient couple made their appearance, I remarked silently, in
regard to Grandma Keeler's hair, what proved afterward to be its usual
holiday morning arrangement. It was confined in six infinitesimal braids
which appeared to be sprouting out, perpendicularly, in all directions
from her head. The effect of redundancy and expansiveness thus
heightened and increased on Grandma's features was striking in the
extreme.
While we were eating breakfast, that good soul observed to Grandpa
Keeler: "Wall, pa, I suppose you'll be all ready when the time comes to
take teacher and me over to West Wallen to Sunday-school, won't ye?"
Grandpa coughed, and coughed again, and raised his eyes helplessly to
the window.
"Looks some like showers," said he. "A-hem! a-hem! Looks mightily to me
like showers, over yonder."
"Thar', r'aly, husband! I must say I feel mortified for ye," said
Grandma. "Seein' as you're a perfessor, too, and thar' ain't been a
single Sunday mornin' since I've lived with ye, pa, summer or winter,
but what you've seen showers, and it r'aly seems to me it's dreadful
inconsistent when thar' ain't no cloud in the sky, and don't look no
more like rain than I do." And Grandma's face, in spite of her
reproachful tones, was, above all, blandly sunlike and expressive of
anything rather than deluge and watery disaster.
Grandpa was silent a little while, then coughed again. I had never seen
Grandpa in worse straits.
"A-hem! a-hem! 'Fanny' seems to be a little lame, this mornin'," said
he. "I shouldn't wonder. She's been goin' pretty stiddy this week."
"It does beat all, pa," continued Grandma Keeler, "how 't all the horses
you've ever had since I've known ye have always been took lame Sunday
mornin'. Thar' was 'Happy Jack,' he could go anywhers through the week,
and never limp a step, as nobody could see, and Sunday mornin' he was
always took lame! And thar' was 'Tantrum'—"
"Tantrum" was the horse that had run away with Grandma when she was
thrown from the wagon, and generally smashed to pieces. And now, Grandma
branched off into the thrilling reminiscences connected with this
incident of her life, which was the third time during the week that the
horrible tale had been repeated for my delectation.
When she had finished, Grandpa shook his head with painful earnestness,
reverting to the former subject of discussion.
"It's a long jaunt!" said he; "a long jaunt!"
"Thar's a long hill to climb before we reach Zion's mount," said Grandma
Keeler, impressively.
"Wall, there's a darned sight harder one on the road to West Wallen!"
burst out the old sea-captain desperately; "say nothin' about the
devilish stones!"
"Thar' now," said Grandma, with calm though awful reproof; "I think
we've gone fur enough for one day; we've broke the Sabbath, and took the
name of the Lord in vain, and that ought to be enough for perfessors."
Grandpa replied at length in a greatly subdued tone: "Wall, if you and
the teacher want to go over to Sunday-school to-day, I suppose we can go
if we get ready," a long submissive sigh—"I suppose we can."
"They have preachin' service in the mornin', I suppose," said Grandma.
"But we don't generally git along to that. It makes such an early start.
We generally try to get around, when we go, in time for Sunday-school.
They have singin' and all. It's just about as interestin', I think, as
preachin'. The old man r'aly likes it," she observed aside to me; "when
he once gets started, but he kind o' dreads the gittin' started."
When I beheld the ordeal through which Grandpa Keeler was called to
pass, at the hands of his faithful consort, before he was considered in
a fit condition of mind and body to embark for the sanctuary, I marveled
not at the old man's reluctance, nor that he had indeed seen clouds and
tempest fringing the horizon.
Immediately after breakfast, he set out for the barn, ostensibly to "see
to the chores;" really, I believe, to obtain a few moments' respite,
before worse evil should come upon him.
Pretty soon Grandma was at the back door calling in firm though
persuasive tones:
"Husband! husband! come in, now, and get ready."
No answer. Then it was in another key, weighty, yet expressive of no
weak irritation, that Grandma called "Come, pa! pa-a! pa-a-a!" Still no
answer.
Then that voice of Grandma's sung out like a trumpet, terrible with
meaning—"Bijonah Keeler!"
But Grandpa appeared not. Next, I saw Grandma slowly but surely
gravitating in the direction of the barn, and soon she returned,
bringing with her that ancient delinquent, who looked like a lost sheep
indeed and a truly unreconciled one.
"Now the first thing," said Grandma, looking her forlorn captive over;
"is boots. Go and get on yer meetin' gaiters, pa."
The old gentleman, having dutifully invested himself, with those sacred
relics, came pathetically limping into the room.
"I declare, ma," said he; "somehow these things—phew! Somehow they
pinch my feet dreadfully. I don't know what it is,—phew! They're
dreadful oncomf'table things somehow."
"Since I've known ye, pa," solemnly ejaculated Grandma Keeler, "you've
never had a pair o' meetin' boots that set easy on yer feet. You'd ought
to get boots big enough for ye, pa," she continued, looking down
disapprovingly on the old gentleman's pedal extremities, which resembled
two small scows at anchor in black cloth encasements: "and not be so
proud as to go to pinchin' yer feet into gaiters a number o' sizes too
small for ye."
"They're number tens, I tell ye!" roared Grandpa nettled outrageously by
this cutting taunt.
"Wall, thar', now, pa," said Grandma, soothingly; "if I had sech feet as
that, I wouldn't go to spreadin' it all over town, if I was you—but
it's time we stopped bickerin' now, husband, and got ready for meetin';
so set down and let me wash yer head."
"I've washed once this mornin'. It's clean enough," Grandpa protested,
but in vain. He was planted in a chair, and Grandma Keeler, with rag and
soap and a basin of water, attacked the old gentleman vigorously, much
as I have seen cruel mothers wash the faces of their earth-begrimed
infants. He only gave expression to such groans as:
"Thar', ma! don't tear my ears to pieces! Come, ma! you've got my eyes
so full o' soap now, ma, that I can't see nothin'. Phew, Lordy! ain't ye
most through with this, ma?"
Then came the dyeing process, which Grandma Keeler assured me, aside,
made Grandpa "look like a man o' thirty;" but to me, after it he looked
neither old nor young, human nor inhuman, nor like anything that I had
ever seen before under the sun.
"There's the lotion, the potion, the dye-er, and the setter," said
Grandma, pointing to four bottles on the table. "Now whar's the
directions, Madeline?"
These having been produced from between the leaves of the family Bible,
Madeline read, while Grandma made a vigorous practical application of
the various mixtures.
"This admirable lotion"—in soft ecstatic tones Madeline rehearsed the
flowery language of the recipe—"though not so instantaneously startling
in its effect as our inestimable dyer and setter, yet forms a most
essential part of the whole process, opening, as it does, the dry and
lifeless pores of the scalp, imparting to them new life and beauty, and
rendering them more easily susceptible to the applications which follow.
But we must go deeper than this; a tone must be given to the whole
system by means of the cleansing and rejuvenating of the very centre of
our beings, and, for this purpose, we have prepared our wonderful
potion." Here Grandpa, with a wry face, was made to swallow a spoonful
of the mixture. "Our unparalleled dyer," Madeline continued, "restores
black hair to a more than original gloss and brilliancy, and gives to
the faded golden tress the sunny flashes of youth." Grandpa was dyed.
"Our world-renowned setter completes and perfects the whole process by
adding tone and permanency to the efficacious qualities of the lotion,
potion, and dyer, etc.;" while on Grandpa's head the unutterable dye was
set.
"Now, read teacher some of the testimonials, daughter," said Grandma
Keeler, whose face was one broad, generous illustration of that rare and
peculiar virtue called faith.
So Madeline continued: "Mrs. Hiram Briggs, of North Dedham, writes: 'I
was terribly afflicted with baldness, so that, for months, I was little
more than an outcast from society, and an object of pity to my most
familiar friends. I tried every remedy in vain. At length I heard of
your wonderful restorative. After a week's application, my hair had
already begun to grow in what seemed the most miraculous manner. At the
end of ten months it had assumed such length and proportions as to be a
most luxurious burden, and where I had before been regarded with pity
and aversion, I became the envied and admired of all beholders.'"
"Just think!" said Grandma Keeler, with rapturous sympathy and
gratitude, "how that poor creetur must a' felt!"
"'Orion Spaulding, of Weedsville, Vermont,'" Madeline went on—but,
here, I had to beg to be excused, and went to my room to get ready for
the Sunday-school.
When I came down again, Grandpa Keeler was seated, completely arrayed in
his best clothes, opposite Grandma, who held the big family Bible in her
lap, and a Sunday-school question book in one hand.
"Now, pa," said she; "what tribe was it in sacred writ that wore
bunnits?"
I was compelled to infer from the tone of Grandpa Keeler's answer that
his temper had not undergone a mollifying process during my absence.
"Come, ma," said he; "how much longer ye goin' to pester me in this
way?"
"Why, pa," Grandma rejoined calmly; "until you git a proper
understandin' of it. What tribe was it in sacred writ that wore
bunnits?"
"Lordy!" exclaimed the old man. "How d'ye suppose I know! They must 'a'
been a tarnal old womanish lookin' set anyway."
"The tribe o' Judah, pa," said Grandma, gravely. "Now, how good it is,
husband, to have your understandin' all freshened up on the scripters!"
"Come, come, ma!" said Grandpa, rising nervously. "It's time we was
startin'. When I make up my mind to go anywhere I always want to git
there in time. If I was goin' to the Old Harry, I should want to git
there in time."
"It's my consarn that we shall git thar' before time, some on us," said
Grandma, with sad meaning, "unless we larn to use more respec'ful
language."
I shall never forget how we set off for church that Sabbath morning, way
out at one of the sunny back doors of the Ark: for there was Madeline's
little cottage that fronted the highway, or lane, and then there was a
long backward extension of the Ark, only one story in height. This
belonged peculiarly to Grandma and Grandpa Keeler. It contained the
"parlor" and three "keepin'" rooms opening one into the other, all of
the same size and general bare and gloomy appearance, all possessing the
same sacredly preserved atmosphere, through which we passed with
becoming silence and solemnity into the "end" room, the sunny kitchen
where Grandma and Grandpa kept house by themselves in the summer time,
and there at the door, her very yellow coat reflecting the rays of the
sun, stood Fanny, presenting about as much appearance of life and
animation as a pensive summer squash.
The carriage, I thought, was a fac-simile of the one in which I had been
brought from West Wallen on the night of my arrival. One of the most
striking peculiarities of this sort of vehicle was the width at which
the wheels were set apart. The body seemed comparatively narrow. It was
very long, and covered with white canvas. It had neither windows nor
doors, but just the one guarded opening in front. There were no steps
leading to this, and, indeed, a variety of obstacles before it. And the
way Grandma effected an entrance was to put a chair on a mound of earth,
and a cricket on top of the chair, and thus, having climbed up to
Fanny's reposeful back, she slipped passively down, feet foremost, to
the whiffle-tree; from thence she easily gained the plane of the
carriage floor.
Grandpa and I took a less circuitous, though, perhaps, not less
difficult route.
I sat with Grandpa on the "front" seat—it may be remarked that the
"front" seat was very much front, and the "back" seat very much
back—there was a kind of wooden shelf built outside as a resting-place
for the feet, so that while our heads were under cover, our feet were
out, utterly exposed to the weather, and we must either lay them on the
shelf or let them hang off into space.
Madeline and the children stood at the door to see us off.
"All aboard! ship ballasted! wind fa'r! go ahead thar', Fanny!" shouted
Grandpa, who seemed quite restored in spirits, and held the reins and
wielded the whip with a masterful air.
He spun sea-yarns, too, all the way—marvelous ones, and Grandma's
reproving voice was mellowed by the distance, and so confusedly mingled
with the rumbling of the wheels, that it seemed hardly to reach him at
all. Not that Grandma looked discomfited on this account, or in bad
humor. On the contrary, as she sat back there in the ghostly shadows,
with her hands folded, and her hair combed out in resplendent waves on
either side of her head, she appeared conscious that every word she
uttered was taking root in some obdurate heart. She was, in every
respect, the picture of good-will and contentment.
But the face under Grandpa's antiquated beaver began to give me a fresh
shock every time I looked up at him, for the light and the air were
rapidly turning his rejuvenated locks and his poor, thin fringe of
whiskers to an unnatural greenish tint, while his bushy eyebrows,
untouched by the hand of art, shone as white as ever.
In spite of the old sea-captain's entertaining stories, it seemed,
indeed, "a long jaunt" to West Wallen.
To say that Fanny was a slow horse would be but a feeble expression of
the truth.
A persevering "click! click! click!" began to arise from Grandma's
quarter. This annoyed Grandpa exceedingly.
"Shet up, ma!" he was moved to exclaim at last. "I'm steerin' this
craft."
"Click! click! click!" came perseveringly from behind.
"Dum it, ma! thar', ma!" cried Grandpa, exasperated beyond measure. "How
is this hoss goin' to hear anything that I say ef you keep up such a
tarnal cacklin'?"
Just as we were coming out of the thickest part of the woods, about a
mile beyond Wallencamp, we discovered a man walking in the distance. It
was the only human being we had seen since we started.
"Hullo, there's Lovell!" exclaimed Grandpa. "I was wonderin' why we
hadn't overtook him before. We gin'ally take him in on the road. Yis,
yis; that's Lovell, ain't it, teacher?"
I put up my glasses, helplessly.
"I'm sure," I said, "I can't tell, positively. I have seen Mr. Barlow
but once, and at that distance I shouldn't know my own father."
"Must be Lovell," said Grandpa. "Yis, I know him! Hullo, thar'! Ship
ahoy! ship ahoy!"
Grandpa's voice suggested something of the fire and vigor it must have
had when it rang out across the foam of waves and pierced the tempest's
roar.
The man turned and looked at us, and then went on again.
"He don't seem to recognize us," said Grandma.
"Ship a-hoy! Ship a-hoy!" shouted Grandpa.
The man turned and looked at us again, and this time he stopped and kept
on looking.
When we got up to him we saw that it wasn't Lovell Barlow at all, but a
stranger of trampish appearance, drunk and fiery, and fixed in an
aggressive attitude.
I was naturally terrified. What if he should attack us in that lonely
spot! Grandpa was so old! And moreover, Grandpa was so taken aback to
find that it wasn't Lovell that he began some blunt and stammering
expression of surprise, which only served to increase the stranger's
ire. Grandma, imperturbable soul! who never failed to come to the rescue
even in the most desperate emergencies—Grandma climbed over to the
front, thrust out her benign head, and said in that deep, calm voice of
hers:
"We're a goin' to the house of God, brother; won't you git in and go
too?"
"No!" our brother replied, doubling up his fists and shaking them
menacingly in our faces: "I won't go to no house o' God. What d'ye mean
by overhauling me on the road, and askin' me to git into yer d—d old
traveling lunatic asylum?"
"Drive on, pa," said Grandma, coldly. "He ain't in no condition to be
labored with now. Drive on kind o' quick!"
"Kind o' quick" we could not go, but Fanny was made to do her best, and
we did not pause to look behind.
When we got to the church Sunday-school had already begun. There was
Lovell Barlow looking preternaturally stiff in his best clothes, sitting
with a class of young men. He saw us when we came in, and gave me a look
of deep meaning. It was the same expression—as though there was some
solemn, mutual understanding between us—which he had worn on that night
when he gave me his picture.
"There's plenty of young folks' classes," said Grandma; "but seein' as
we're late maybe you'd jest as soon go right along in with us."
I said that I should like that best, so I went into the "old folks'"
class with Grandma and Grandpa Keeler.
There were three pews of old people in front of us, and the teacher, who
certainly seemed to me the oldest person I had ever seen, sat in an
otherwise vacant pew in front of all, so that, his voice being very thin
and querulous, we could hear very little that he said, although we were
edified in some faint sense by his pious manner of shaking his head and
rolling his eyes toward the ceiling.
The church was a square wooden edifice, of medium size, and contained
three stoves all burning brightly. Against this, and the drowsy effect
of their long drive in the sun and wind, my two companions proved
powerless to struggle.
Grandpa looked furtively up at Grandma, then endeavored to put on as a
sort of apology for what he felt was inevitably coming, a sanctimonious
expression which was most unnatural to him, and which soon faded away as
the sweet unconsciousness of slumber overspread his features. His head
fell back helplessly, his mouth opened wide. He snored, but not very
loudly. I looked at Grandma, wondering why her vigilance had failed on
this occasion, and lo! her head was falling peacefully from side to
side. She was fast asleep, too. She woke up first, however, and then
Grandpa was speedily and adroitly aroused by some means, I think it was
a pin; and Grandma fed him with bits of unsweetened flag-root, which he
munched penitently, though evidently without relish, until he dropped
off to sleep again, and she dropped off to sleep again, and so they
continued.
But it always happened that Grandma woke up first. And whereas Grandpa,
when the avenging pin pierced his shins, recovered himself with a start
and an air of guilty confusion, Grandma opened her eyes at regular
intervals, with the utmost calm and placidity, as though she had merely
been closing them to engage in a few moments of silent prayer.