HIDE AND SEEK


BY FIODOR SOLOGUB

Everything in Lelechka’s nursery was bright, pretty, and cheerful.
Lelechka’s sweet voice charmed her mother. Lelechka was a delightful
child. There was no other such child, there never had been, and there
never would be. Lelechka’s mother, Serafima Aleksandrovna, was sure
of that. Lelechka’s eyes were dark and large, her cheeks were rosy,
her lips were made for kisses and for laughter. But it was not these
charms in Lelechka that gave her mother the keenest joy. Lelechka was her
mother’s only child. That was why every movement of Lelechka’s
bewitched her mother. It was great bliss to hold Lelechka on her knees and
to fondle her; to feel the little girl in her arms—a thing as lively
and as bright as a little bird.


To tell the truth, Serafima Aleksandrovna felt happy only in the nursery.
She felt cold with her husband.


Perhaps it was because he himself loved the cold—he loved to drink
cold water, and to breathe cold air. He was always fresh and cool, with a
frigid smile, and wherever he passed cold currents seemed to move in the
air.


The Nesletyevs, Sergey Modestovich and Serafima Aleksandrovna, had married
without love or calculation, because it was the accepted thing. He was a
young man of thirty-five, she a young woman of twenty-five; both were of
the same circle and well brought up; he was expected to take a wife, and
the time had come for her to take a husband.


It even seemed to Serafima Aleksandrovna that she was in love with her
future husband, and this made her happy. He looked handsome and well-bred;
his intelligent grey eyes always preserved a dignified expression; and he
fulfilled his obligations of a fiancÃ© with irreproachable gentleness.


The bride was also good-looking; she was a tall, dark-eyed, dark-haired
girl, somewhat timid but very tactful. He was not after her dowry, though
it pleased him to know that she had something. He had connexions, and his
wife came of good, influential people. This might, at the proper
opportunity, prove useful. Always irreproachable and tactful, Nesletyev
got on in his position not so fast that any one should envy him, nor yet
so slow that he should envy any one else—everything came in the
proper measure and at the proper time.


After their marriage there was nothing in the manner of Sergey Modestovich
to suggest anything wrong to his wife. Later, however, when his wife was
about to have a child, Sergey Modestovich established connexions elsewhere
of a light and temporary nature. Serafima Aleksandrovna found this out,
and, to her own astonishment, was not particularly hurt; she awaited her
infant with a restless anticipation that swallowed every other feeling.


A little girl was born; Serafima Aleksandrovna gave herself up to her. At
the beginning she used to tell her husband, with rapture, of all the
joyous details of Lelechka’s existence. But she soon found that he
listened to her without the slightest interest, and only from the habit of
politeness. Serafima Aleksandrovna drifted farther and farther away from
him. She loved her little girl with the ungratified passion that other
women, deceived in their husbands, show their chance young lovers.


“Mamochka, let’s play priatki” (hide and
seek), cried Lelechka, pronouncing the r like the l, so that
the word sounded “pliatki.”


This charming inability to speak always made Serafima Aleksandrovna smile
with tender rapture. Lelechka then ran away, stamping with her plump
little legs over the carpets, and hid herself behind the curtains near her
bed.


“Tiu-tiu, mamochka!” she cried out in her sweet,
laughing voice, as she looked out with a single roguish eye.


“Where is my baby girl?” the mother asked, as she looked for
Lelechka and made believe that she did not see her.


And Lelechka poured out her rippling laughter in her hiding place. Then
she came out a little farther, and her mother, as though she had only just
caught sight of her, seized her by her little shoulders and exclaimed
joyously: “Here she is, my Lelechka!”


Lelechka laughed long and merrily, her head close to her mother’s
knees, and all of her cuddled up between her mother’s white hands.
Her mother’s eyes glowed with passionate emotion.


“Now, mamochka, you hide,” said Lelechka, as she ceased
laughing.


Her mother went to hide. Lelechka turned away as though not to see, but
watched her mamochka stealthily all the time. Mamma hid behind the
cupboard, and exclaimed: “Tiu-tiu, baby girl!”


Lelechka ran round the room and looked into all the corners, making
believe, as her mother had done before, that she was seeking—though
she really knew all the time where her mamochka was standing.


“Where’s my mamochka?” asked Lelechka. “She’s
not here, and she’s not here,” she kept on repeating, as she
ran from corner to corner.


Her mother stood, with suppressed breathing, her head pressed against the
wall, her hair somewhat disarranged. A smile of absolute bliss played on
her red lips.


The nurse, Fedosya, a good-natured and fine-looking, if somewhat stupid
woman, smiled as she looked at her mistress with her characteristic
expression, which seemed to say that it was not for her to object to
gentlewomen’s caprices. She thought to herself: “The mother is
like a little child herself—look how excited she is.”


Lelechka was getting nearer her mother’s corner. Her mother was
growing more absorbed every moment by her interest in the game; her heart
beat with short quick strokes, and she pressed even closer to the wall,
disarranging her hair still more. Lelechka suddenly glanced toward her
mother’s corner and screamed with joy.


“I’ve found ‘oo,” she cried out loudly and
joyously, mispronouncing her words in a way that again made her mother
happy.


She pulled her mother by her hands to the middle of the room, they were
merry and they laughed; and Lelechka again hid her head against her mother’s
knees, and went on lisping and lisping, without end, her sweet little
words, so fascinating yet so awkward.


Sergey Modestovich was coming at this moment toward the nursery. Through
the half-closed doors he heard the laughter, the joyous outcries, the
sound of romping. He entered the nursery, smiling his genial cold smile;
he was irreproachably dressed, and he looked fresh and erect, and he
spread round him an atmosphere of cleanliness, freshness and coldness. He
entered in the midst of the lively game, and he confused them all by his
radiant coldness. Even Fedosya felt abashed, now for her mistress, now for
herself. Serafima Aleksandrovna at once became calm and apparently cold—and
this mood communicated itself to the little girl, who ceased to laugh, but
looked instead, silently and intently, at her father.


Sergey Modestovich gave a swift glance round the room. He liked coming
here, where everything was beautifully arranged; this was done by Serafima
Aleksandrovna, who wished to surround her little girl, from her very
infancy, only with the loveliest things. Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed
herself tastefully; this, too, she did for Lelechka, with the same end in
view. One thing Sergey Modestovich had not become reconciled to, and this
was his wife’s almost continuous presence in the nursery.


“It’s just as I thought... I knew that I’d find you
here,” he said with a derisive and condescending smile.


They left the nursery together. As he followed his wife through the door
Sergey Modestovich said rather indifferently, in an incidental way, laying
no stress on his words: “Don’t you think that it would be well
for the little girl if she were sometimes without your company? Merely,
you see, that the child should feel its own individuality,” he
explained in answer to Serafima Aleksandrovna’s puzzled glance.


“She’s still so little,” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.


“In any case, this is but my humble opinion. I don’t insist.
It’s your kingdom there.”


“I’ll think it over,” his wife answered, smiling, as he
did, coldly but genially.


Then they began to talk of something else.


II

Nurse Fedosya, sitting in the kitchen that evening, was telling the
silent housemaid Darya and the talkative old cook Agathya about the young
lady of the house, and how the child loved to play priatki with her
mother—“She hides her little face, and cries ‘tiutiu’!”


“And the mistress herself is like a little one,” added
Fedosya, smiling.


Agathya listened and shook her head ominously; while her face became grave
and reproachful.


“That the mistress does it, well, that’s one thing; but that
the young lady does it, that’s bad.”


“Why?” asked Fedosya with curiosity.


This expression of curiosity gave her face the look of a wooden,
roughly-painted doll.


“Yes, that’s bad,” repeated Agathya with conviction.
“Terribly bad!”


“Well?” said Fedosya, the ludicrous expression of curiosity on
her face becoming more emphatic.


“She’ll hide, and hide, and hide away,” said Agathya, in
a mysterious whisper, as she looked cautiously toward the door.


“What are you saying?” exclaimed Fedosya, frightened.


“It’s the truth I’m saying, remember my words,”
Agathya went on with the same assurance and secrecy. “It’s the
surest sign.”


The old woman had invented this sign, quite suddenly, herself; and she was
evidently very proud of it.


III

Lelechka was asleep, and Serafima Aleksandrovna was sitting in her own
room, thinking with joy and tenderness of Lelechka. Lelechka was in her
thoughts, first a sweet, tiny girl, then a sweet, big girl, then again a
delightful little girl; and so until the end she remained mamma’s
little Lelechka.


Serafima Aleksandrovna did not even notice that Fedosya came up to her and
paused before her. Fedosya had a worried, frightened look.


“Madam, madam,” she said quietly, in a trembling voice.


Serafima Aleksandrovna gave a start. Fedosya’s face made her
anxious.


“What is it, Fedosya?” she asked with great concern. “Is
there anything wrong with Lelechka?”


“No, madam,” said Fedosya, as she gesticulated with her hands
to reassure her mistress and to make her sit down. “Lelechka is
asleep, may God be with her! Only I’d like to say something—you
see—Lelechka is always hiding herself—that’s not good.”


Fedosya looked at her mistress with fixed eyes, which had grown round from
fright.


“Why not good?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna, with vexation,
succumbing involuntarily to vague fears.


“I can’t tell you how bad it is,” said Fedosya, and her
face expressed the most decided confidence.


“Please speak in a sensible way,” observed Serafima
Aleksandrovna dryly. “I understand nothing of what you are saying.”


“You see, madam, it’s a kind of omen,” explained Fedosya
abruptly, in a shamefaced way.


“Nonsense!” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.


She did not wish to hear any further as to the sort of omen it was, and
what it foreboded. But, somehow, a sense of fear and of sadness crept into
her mood, and it was humiliating to feel that an absurd tale should
disturb her beloved fancies, and should agitate her so deeply.


“Of course I know that gentlefolk don’t believe in omens, but
it’s a bad omen, madam,” Fedosya went on in a doleful voice,
“the young lady will hide, and hide...”


Suddenly she burst into tears, sobbing out loudly: “She’ll
hide, and hide, and hide away, angelic little soul, in a damp grave,”
she continued, as she wiped her tears with her apron and blew her nose.


“Who told you all this?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna in an
austere low voice.


“Agathya says so, madam,” answered Fedosya; “it’s
she that knows.”


“Knows!” exclaimed Serafima Aleksandrovna in irritation, as
though she wished to protect herself somehow from this sudden anxiety.
“What nonsense! Please don’t come to me with any such notions
in the future. Now you may go.”


Fedosya, dejected, her feelings hurt, left her mistress.


“What nonsense! As though Lelechka could die!” thought
Serafima Aleksandrovna to herself, trying to conquer the feeling of
coldness and fear which took possession, of her at the thought of the
possible death of Lelechka. Serafima Aleksandrovna, upon reflection,
attributed these women’s beliefs in omens to ignorance. She saw
clearly that there could be no possible connexion between a child’s
quite ordinary diversion and the continuation of the child’s life.
She made a special effort that evening to occupy her mind with other
matters, but her thoughts returned involuntarily to the fact that Lelechka
loved to hide herself.


When Lelechka was still quite small, and had learned to distinguish
between her mother and her nurse, she sometimes, sitting in her nurse’s
arms, made a sudden roguish grimace, and hid her laughing face in the
nurse’s shoulder. Then she would look out with a sly glance.


Of late, in those rare moments of the mistress’ absence from the
nursery, Fedosya had again taught Lelechka to hide; and when Lelechka’s
mother, on coming in, saw how lovely the child looked when she was hiding,
she herself began to play hide and seek with her tiny daughter.


IV

The next day Serafima Aleksandrovna, absorbed in her joyous cares for
Lelechka, had forgotten Fedosya’s words of the day before.


But when she returned to the nursery, after having ordered the dinner, and
she heard Lelechka suddenly cry “Tiu-tiu!” from under
the table, a feeling of fear suddenly took hold of her. Though she
reproached herself at once for this unfounded, superstitious dread,
nevertheless she could not enter wholeheartedly into the spirit of
Lelechka’s favourite game, and she tried to divert Lelechka’s
attention to something else.


Lelechka was a lovely and obedient child. She eagerly complied with her
mother’s new wishes. But as she had got into the habit of hiding
from her mother in some corner, and of crying out “Tiu-tiu!”
so even that day she returned more than once to the game.


Serafima Aleksandrovna tried desperately to amuse Lelechka. This was not
so easy because restless, threatening thoughts obtruded themselves
constantly.


“Why does Lelechka keep on recalling the tiu-tiu? Why does
she not get tired of the same thing—of eternally closing her eyes,
and of hiding her face? Perhaps,” thought Serafima Aleksandrovna,
“she is not as strongly drawn to the world as other children, who
are attracted by many things. If this is so, is it not a sign of organic
weakness? Is it not a germ of the unconscious non-desire to live?”


Serafima Aleksandrovna was tormented by presentiments. She felt ashamed of
herself for ceasing to play hide and seek with Lelechka before Fedosya.
But this game had become agonising to her, all the more agonising because
she had a real desire to play it, and because something drew her very
strongly to hide herself from Lelechka and to seek out the hiding child.
Serafima Aleksandrovna herself began the game once or twice, though she
played it with a heavy heart. She suffered as though committing an evil
deed with full consciousness.


It was a sad day for Serafima Aleksandrovna.












V


Lelechka was about to fall asleep. No sooner had she climbed into her
little bed, protected by a network on all sides, than her eyes began to
close from fatigue. Her mother covered her with a blue blanket. Lelechka
drew her sweet little hands from under the blanket and stretched them out
to embrace her mother. Her mother bent down. Lelechka, with a tender
expression on her sleepy face, kissed her mother and let her head fall on
the pillow. As her hands hid themselves under the blanket Lelechka
whispered: “The hands tiu-tiu!”


The mother’s heart seemed to stop—Lelechka lay there so small,
so frail, so quiet. Lelechka smiled gently, closed her eyes and said
quietly: “The eyes tiu-tiu!”


Then even more quietly: “Lelechka tiu-tiu!”


With these words she fell asleep, her face pressing the pillow. She seemed
so small and so frail under the blanket that covered her. Her mother
looked at her with sad eyes.


Serafima Aleksandrovna remained standing over Lelechka’s bed a long
while, and she kept looking at Lelechka with tenderness and fear.


“I’m a mother: is it possible that I shouldn’t be able
to protect her?” she thought, as she imagined the various ills that
might befall Lelechka.


She prayed long that night, but the prayer did not relieve her sadness.


VI

Several days passed. Lelechka caught cold. The fever came upon her at
night. When Serafima Aleksandrovna, awakened by Fedosya, came to Lelechka
and saw her looking so hot, so restless, and so tormented, she instantly
recalled the evil omen, and a hopeless despair took possession of her from
the first moments.


A doctor was called, and everything was done that is usual on such
occasions—but the inevitable happened. Serafima Aleksandrovna tried
to console herself with the hope that Lelechka would get well, and would
again laugh and play—yet this seemed to her an unthinkable
happiness! And Lelechka grew feebler from hour to hour.


All simulated tranquillity, so as not to frighten Serafima Aleksandrovna,
but their masked faces only made her sad.


Nothing made her so unhappy as the reiterations of Fedosya, uttered
between sobs: “She hid herself and hid herself, our Lelechka!”


But the thoughts of Serafima Aleksandrovna were confused, and she could
not quite grasp what was happening.


Fever was consuming Lelechka, and there were times when she lost
consciousness and spoke in delirium. But when she returned to herself she
bore her pain and her fatigue with gentle good nature; she smiled feebly
at her mamochka, so that her mamochka should not see how
much she suffered. Three days passed, torturing like a nightmare. Lelechka
grew quite feeble. She did not know that she was dying.


She glanced at her mother with her dimmed eyes, and lisped in a scarcely
audible, hoarse voice: “Tiu-tiu, mamochka! Make tiu-tiu,
mamochka!”


Serafima Aleksandrovna hid her face behind the curtains near Lelechka’s
bed. How tragic!


“Mamochka!” called Lelechka in an almost inaudible
voice.


Lelechka’s mother bent over her, and Lelechka, her vision grown
still more dim, saw her mother’s pale, despairing face for the last
time.


“A white mamochka!” whispered Lelechka.


Mamochka’s white face became blurred, and everything grew
dark before Lelechka. She caught the edge of the bed-cover feebly with her
hands and whispered: “Tiu-tiu!”


Something rattled in her throat; Lelechka opened and again closed her
rapidly paling lips, and died.


Serafima Aleksandrovna was in dumb despair as she left Lelechka, and went
out of the room. She met her husband.


“Lelechka is dead,” she said in a quiet, dull voice.


Sergey Modestovich looked anxiously at her pale face. He was struck by the
strange stupor in her formerly animated handsome features.


VII

Lelechka was dressed, placed in a little coffin, and carried into the
parlour. Serafima Aleksandrovna was standing by the coffin and looking
dully at her dead child. Sergey Modestovich went to his wife and,
consoling her with cold, empty words, tried to draw her away from the
coffin. Serafima Aleksandrovna smiled.


“Go away,” she said quietly. “Lelechka is playing. She’ll
be up in a minute.”


“Sima, my dear, don’t agitate yourself,” said Sergey
Modestovich in a whisper. “You must resign yourself to your fate.”


“She’ll be up in a minute,” persisted Serafima
Aleksandrovna, her eyes fixed on the dead little girl.


Sergey Modestovich looked round him cautiously: he was afraid of the
unseemly and of the ridiculous.


“Sima, don’t agitate yourself,” he repeated. “This
would be a miracle, and miracles do not happen in the nineteenth century.”


No sooner had he said these words than Sergey Modestovich felt their
irrelevance to what had happened. He was confused and annoyed.


He took his wife by the arm, and cautiously led her away from the coffin.
She did not oppose him.


Her face seemed tranquil and her eyes were dry. She went into the nursery
and began to walk round the room, looking into those places where Lelechka
used to hide herself. She walked all about the room, and bent now and then
to look under the table or under the bed, and kept on repeating
cheerfully: “Where is my little one? Where is my Lelechka?”


After she had walked round the room once she began to make her quest anew.
Fedosya, motionless, with dejected face, sat in a corner, and looked
frightened at her mistress; then she suddenly burst out sobbing, and she
wailed loudly:


“She hid herself, and hid herself, our Lelechka, our angelic little
soul!”


Serafima Aleksandrovna trembled, paused, cast a perplexed look at Fedosya,
began to weep, and left the nursery quietly.


VIII

Sergey Modestovich hurried the funeral. He saw that Serafima
Aleksandrovna was terribly shocked by her sudden misfortune, and as he
feared for her reason he thought she would more readily be diverted and
consoled when Lelechka was buried.


Next morning Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed with particular care—for
Lelechka. When she entered the parlour there were several people between
her and Lelechka. The priest and deacon paced up and down the room; clouds
of blue smoke drifted in the air, and there was a smell of incense. There
was an oppressive feeling of heaviness in Serafima Aleksandrovna’s
head as she approached Lelechka. Lelechka lay there still and pale, and
smiled pathetically. Serafima Aleksandrovna laid her cheek upon the edge
of Lelechka’s coffin, and whispered: “Tiu-tiu, little
one!”


The little one did not reply. Then there was some kind of stir and
confusion around Serafima Aleksandrovna; strange, unnecessary faces bent
over her, some one held her—and Lelechka was carried away somewhere.


Serafima Aleksandrovna stood up erect, sighed in a lost way, smiled, and
called loudly: “Lelechka!”


Lelechka was being carried out. The mother threw herself after the coffin
with despairing sobs, but she was held back. She sprang behind the door,
through which Lelechka had passed, sat down there on the floor, and as she
looked through the crevice, she cried out: “Lelechka, tiu-tiu!”


Then she put her head out from behind the door, and began to laugh.


Lelechka was quickly carried away from her mother, and those who carried
her seemed to run rather than to walk.