HOW THE WIDOW WON THE DEACON
    

      By William James Lampton ( -1917)
    

      [From Harper's Bazaar, April, 1911; copyright, 1911, by Harper &
      Brothers; republished by permission.]
    

      Of course the Widow Stimson never tried to win Deacon Hawkins, nor any
      other man, for that matter. A widow doesn't have to try to win a man; she
      wins without trying. Still, the Widow Stimson sometimes wondered why the
      deacon was so blind as not to see how her fine farm adjoining his equally
      fine place on the outskirts of the town might not be brought under one
      management with mutual benefit to both parties at interest. Which one that
      management might become was a matter of future detail. The widow knew how
      to run a farm successfully, and a large farm is not much more difficult to
      run than one of half the size. She had also had one husband, and knew
      something more than running a farm successfully. Of all of which the
      deacon was perfectly well aware, and still he had not been moved by the
      merging spirit of the age to propose consolidation.
    

      This interesting situation was up for discussion at the Wednesday
      afternoon meeting of the Sisters' Sewing Society.
    

      "For my part," Sister Susan Spicer, wife of the Methodist minister,
      remarked as she took another tuck in a fourteen-year-old girl's skirt for
      a ten-year-old—"for my part, I can't see why Deacon Hawkins and Kate
      Stimson don't see the error of their ways and depart from them."
    

      "I rather guess she has," smiled Sister Poteet, the grocer's better
      half, who had taken an afternoon off from the store in order to be
      present.
    

      "Or is willing to," added Sister Maria Cartridge, a spinster still
      possessing faith, hope, and charity, notwithstanding she had been on the
      waiting list a long time.
    

      "Really, now," exclaimed little Sister Green, the doctor's wife, "do you
      think it is the deacon who needs urging?"
    

      "It looks that way to me," Sister Poteet did not hesitate to affirm.
    

      "Well, I heard Sister Clark say that she had heard him call her 'Kitty'
      one night when they were eating ice-cream at the Mite Society," Sister
      Candish, the druggist's wife, added to the fund of reliable information on
      hand.
    

      "'Kitty,' indeed!" protested Sister Spicer. "The idea of anybody calling
      Kate Stimson 'Kitty'! The deacon will talk that way to 'most any woman,
      but if she let him say it to her more than once, she must be getting
      mighty anxious, I think."
    

      "Oh," Sister Candish hastened to explain, "Sister Clark didn't say she had
      heard him say it twice.'"
    

      "Well, I don't think she heard him say it once," Sister Spicer asserted
      with confidence.
    

      "I don't know about that," Sister Poteet argued. "From all I can see and
      hear I think Kate Stimson wouldn't object to 'most anything the deacon
      would say to her, knowing as she does that he ain't going to say anything
      he shouldn't say."
    

      "And isn't saying what he should," added Sister Green, with a sly snicker,
      which went around the room softly.
    

      "But as I was saying—" Sister Spicer began, when Sister Poteet,
      whose rocker, near the window, commanded a view of the front gate,
      interrupted with a warning, "'Sh-'sh."
    

      "Why shouldn't I say what I wanted to when—" Sister Spicer began.
    

      "There she comes now," explained Sister Poteet, "and as I live the deacon
      drove her here in his sleigh, and he's waiting while she comes in. I
      wonder what next," and Sister Poteet, in conjunction with the entire
      society, gasped and held their eager breaths, awaiting the entrance of the
      subject of conversation.
    

      Sister Spicer went to the front door to let her in, and she was greeted
      with the greatest cordiality by everybody.
    

      "We were just talking about you and wondering why you were so late
      coming," cried Sister Poteet. "Now take off your things and make up for
      lost time. There's a pair of pants over there to be cut down to fit that
      poor little Snithers boy."
    

      The excitement and curiosity of the society were almost more than could be
      borne, but never a sister let on that she knew the deacon was at the gate
      waiting. Indeed, as far as the widow could discover, there was not the
      slightest indication that anybody had ever heard there was such a person
      as the deacon in existence.
    

      "Oh," she chirruped, in the liveliest of humors, "you will have to excuse
      me for today. Deacon Hawkins overtook me on the way here, and here said I
      had simply got to go sleigh-riding with him. He's waiting out at the gate
      now."
    

      "Is that so?" exclaimed the society unanimously, and rushed to the window
      to see if it were really true.
    

      "Well, did you ever?" commented Sister Poteet, generally.
    

      "Hardly ever," laughed the widow, good-naturedly, "and I don't want to
      lose the chance. You know Deacon Hawkins isn't asking somebody every day
      to go sleighing with him. I told him I'd go if he would bring me around
      here to let you know what had become of me, and so he did. Now, good-by,
      and I'll be sure to be present at the next meeting. I have to hurry
      because he'll get fidgety."
    

      The widow ran away like a lively schoolgirl. All the sisters watched her
      get into the sleigh with the deacon, and resumed the previous discussion
      with greatly increased interest.
    

      But little recked the widow and less recked the deacon. He had bought a
      new horse and he wanted the widow's opinion of it, for the Widow Stimson
      was a competent judge of fine horseflesh. If Deacon Hawkins had one
      insatiable ambition it was to own a horse which could fling its heels in
      the face of the best that Squire Hopkins drove. In his early manhood the
      deacon was no deacon by a great deal. But as the years gathered in behind
      him he put off most of the frivolities of youth and held now only to the
      one of driving a fast horse. No other man in the county drove anything
      faster except Squire Hopkins, and him the deacon had not been able to
      throw the dust over. The deacon would get good ones, but somehow never
      could he find one that the squire didn't get a better. The squire had also
      in the early days beaten the deacon in the race for a certain pretty girl
      he dreamed about. But the girl and the squire had lived happily ever after
      and the deacon, being a philosopher, might have forgotten the squire's
      superiority had it been manifested in this one regard only. But in horses,
      too—that graveled the deacon.
    

      "How much did you give for him?" was the widow's first query, after they
      had reached a stretch of road that was good going and the deacon had let
      him out for a length or two.
    

      "Well, what do you suppose? You're a judge."
    

      "More than I would give, I'll bet a cookie."
    

      "Not if you was as anxious as I am to show Hopkins that he can't drive by
      everything on the pike."
    

      "I thought you loved a good horse because he was a good horse," said the
      widow, rather disapprovingly.
    

      "I do, but I could love him a good deal harder if he would stay in front
      of Hopkins's best."
    

      "Does he know you've got this one?"
    

      "Yes, and he's been blowing round town that he is waiting to pick me up on
      the road some day and make my five hundred dollars look like a pewter
      quarter."
    

      "So you gave five hundred dollars for him, did you?" laughed the widow.
    

      "Is it too much?"
    

      "Um-er," hesitated the widow, glancing along the graceful lines of the
      powerful trotter, "I suppose not if you can beat the squire."
    

      "Right you are," crowed the deacon, "and I'll show him a thing or two in
      getting over the ground," he added with swelling pride.
    

      "Well, I hope he won't be out looking for you today, with me in your
      sleigh," said the widow, almost apprehensively, "because, you know,
      deacon, I have always wanted you to beat Squire Hopkins."
    

      The deacon looked at her sharply. There was a softness in her tones that
      appealed to him, even if she had not expressed such agreeable sentiments.
      Just what the deacon might have said or done after the impulse had been
      set going must remain unknown, for at the crucial moment a sound of
      militant bells, bells of defiance, jangled up behind them, disturbing
      their personal absorption, and they looked around simultaneously. Behind
      the bells was the squire in his sleigh drawn by his fastest stepper, and
      he was alone, as the deacon was not. The widow weighed one hundred and
      sixty pounds, net—which is weighting a horse in a race rather more
      than the law allows.
    

      But the deacon never thought of that. Forgetting everything except his
      cherished ambition, he braced himself for the contest, took a twist hold
      on the lines, sent a sharp, quick call to his horse, and let him out for
      all that was in him. The squire followed suit and the deacon. The road was
      wide and the snow was worn down smooth. The track couldn't have been in
      better condition. The Hopkins colors were not five rods behind the Hawkins
      colors as they got away. For half a mile it was nip and tuck, the deacon
      encouraging his horse and the widow encouraging the deacon, and then the
      squire began creeping up. The deacon's horse was a good one, but he was
      not accustomed to hauling freight in a race. A half-mile of it was as much
      as he could stand, and he weakened under the strain.
    

      Not handicapped, the squire's horse forged ahead, and as his nose pushed
      up to the dashboard of the deacon's sleigh, that good man groaned in
      agonized disappointment and bitterness of spirit. The widow was mad all
      over that Squire Hopkins should take such a mean advantage of his rival.
      Why didn't he wait till another time when the deacon was alone, as he was?
      If she had her way she never would, speak to Squire Hopkins again, nor to
      his wife, either. But her resentment was not helping the deacon's horse to
      win.
    

      Slowly the squire pulled closer to the front; the deacon's horse,
      realizing what it meant to his master and to him, spurted bravely, but,
      struggle as gamely as he might, the odds were too many for him, and he
      dropped to the rear. The squire shouted in triumph as he drew past the
      deacon, and the dejected Hawkins shrivelled into a heap on the seat, with
      only his hands sufficiently alive to hold the lines. He had been beaten
      again, humiliated before a woman, and that, too, with the best horse that
      he could hope to put against the ever-conquering squire. Here sank his
      fondest hopes, here ended his ambition. From this on he would drive a mule
      or an automobile. The fruit of his desire had turned to ashes in his
      mouth.
    

      But no. What of the widow? She realized, if the deacon did not, that she,
      not the squire's horse, had beaten the deacon's, and she was ready to make
      what atonement she could. As the squire passed ahead of the deacon she was
      stirred by a noble resolve. A deep bed of drifted snow lay close by the
      side of the road not far in front. It was soft and safe and she smiled as
      she looked at it as though waiting for her. Without a hint of her purpose,
      or a sign to disturb the deacon in his final throes, she rose as the
      sleigh ran near its edge, and with a spring which had many a time sent her
      lightly from the ground to the bare back of a horse in the meadow, she
      cleared the robes and lit plump in the drift. The deacon's horse knew
      before the deacon did that something had happened in his favor, and was
      quick to respond. With his first jump of relief the deacon suddenly
      revived, his hopes came fast again, his blood retingled, he gathered
      himself, and, cracking his lines, he shot forward, and three minutes later
      he had passed the squire as though he were hitched to the fence. For a
      quarter of a mile the squire made heroic efforts to recover his vanished
      prestige, but effort was useless, and finally concluding that he was
      practically left standing, he veered off from the main road down a farm
      lane to find some spot in which to hide the humiliation of his defeat. The
      deacon, still going at a clipping gait, had one eye over his shoulder as
      wary drivers always have on such occasions, and when he saw the squire was
      off the track he slowed down and jogged along with the apparent intention
      of continuing indefinitely. Presently an idea struck him, and he looked
      around for the widow. She was not where he had seen her last. Where was
      she? In the enthusiasm of victory he had forgotten her. He was so dejected
      at the moment she had leaped that he did not realize what she had done,
      and two minutes later he was so elated that, shame on him! he did not
      care. With her, all was lost; without her, all was won, and the deacon's
      greatest ambition was to win. But now, with victory perched on his
      horse-collar, success his at last, he thought of the widow, and he did
      care. He cared so much that he almost threw his horse off his feet by the
      abrupt turn he gave him, and back down the pike he flew as if a legion of
      squires were after him.
    

      He did not know what injury she might have sustained; She might have been
      seriously hurt, if not actually killed. And why? Simply to make it
      possible for him to win. The deacon shivered as he thought of it, and
      urged his horse to greater speed. The squire, down the lane, saw him
      whizzing along and accepted it profanely as an exhibition for his especial
      benefit. The deacon now had forgotten the squire as he had only so shortly
      before forgotten the widow. Two hundred yards from the drift into which
      she had jumped there was a turn in the road, where some trees shut off the
      sight, and the deacon's anxiety increased momentarily until he reached
      this point. From here he could see ahead, and down there in the middle of
      the road stood the widow waving her shawl as a banner of triumph, though
      she could only guess at results. The deacon came on with a rush, and
      pulled up alongside of her in a condition of nervousness he didn't think
      possible to him.
    

      "Hooray! hooray!" shouted the widow, tossing her shawl into the air. "You
      beat him. I know you did. Didn't you? I saw you pulling ahead at the turn
      yonder. Where is he and his old plug?"
    

      "Oh, bother take him and his horse and the race and everything. Are you
      hurt?" gasped the deacon, jumping out, but mindful to keep the lines in
      his hand. "Are you hurt?" he repeated, anxiously, though she looked
      anything but a hurt woman.
    

      "If I am," she chirped, cheerily, "I'm not hurt half as bad as I would
      have been if the squire had beat you, deacon. Now don't you worry about
      me. Let's hurry back to town so the squire won't get another chance, with
      no place for me to jump."
    

      And the deacon? Well, well, with the lines in the crook of his elbow the
      deacon held out his arms to the widow and——. The sisters at
      the next meeting of the Sewing Society were unanimously of the opinion
      that any woman who would risk her life like that for a husband was mighty
      anxious.