MARIQUITA THE BALD
Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch
It is as sorry a matter to use words of whose meaning one is ignorant
as it is a blemish for a man of sense to speak of what he knows
nothing about. I say this to those of you who may have the present
story in your hands, however often you may have happened to have heard
Mariquita the Bald mentioned, and I swear by my doublet that you
shall soon know who Mariquita the Bald was, as well as I know who ate
the Christmas turkey, setting aside the surmise that it certainly must
have been a mouth.
I desire, therefore, to enlighten your ignorance of this subject, and
beg to inform you that the said noted Maria (Mariquita is a diminutive
of Maria) was born in the District of Segovia, and in the town of San
Garcia, the which town is famed for the beauty of the maidens reared
within its walls, who for the most part have such gentle and lovely
faces that may I behold such around me at the hour of my death.
Maria's father was an honest farmer, by name Juan Lanas, a Christian
old man and much beloved, who had inherited no mean estate from his
forefathers, though with but little wit in his crown,—a lack which
was the cause of much calamity to both the father and the daughter,
for in the times to which we have attained, God forgive me if it is
not necessary to have more of the knave than of the fool in one's
composition.
Now it came to pass that Juan Lanas, for the castigation of his sins,
must needs commit himself to a lawsuit with one of his neighbors about
a vine stock which was worth about fifty maravedis; and Juan was in
the right, and the judges gave the verdict in his favor, so that he
won his case, excepting that the suit lasted no less than ten years
and the costs amounted to nothing less than fifty thousand
maravedis, not to speak of a disease of the eyes which, after all
was over, left him blind. When he found himself with diminished
property and without his eyesight, in sorrow and disgust he turned
into money such part of his patrimony as sufficed to rid him of the
hungry herd of scriveners and lawyers, and took his way to Toledo with
his daughter, who was already entering upon her sixteenth year, and
had matured into one of the most beautiful, graceful, and lovable
damsels to be found throughout all Castile and the kingdoms beyond.
For she was white as the lily and red like the rose, straight and tall
of stature, and slender in the waist, with fair, shapely hips; and
again her foot and hand were plump and small to a marvel, and she
possessed a head of hair which reached to her knees. For I knew the
widow Sarmiento who was their housekeeper, and she told me how she
could scarcely clasp Mariquita's hair with both hands, and that she
could not comb the hair unless Maria stood up and the housekeeper
mounted on a footstool, for if Maria sat down the long tresses swept
the ground, and therefore became all entangled.
And do not imagine, her beauty and grace being such, that she sinned
greatly in pride and levity, as is the wont of girls in this age. She
was as humble as a cloistered lay-sister, and as silent as if she were
not a woman, and patient as the sucking lamb, and industrious as the
ant, clean as the ermine, and pure as a saint of those times in which,
by the grace of the Most High, saintly women were born into the world.
But I must confide to you in friendship that our Mariquita was not a
little vain about her hair, and loved to display it, and for this
reason, now in the streets, now when on a visit, now when at mass, it
is said she used to subtilely loosen her mantilla so that her tresses
streamed down her back, the while feigning forgetfulness and
carelessness. She never wore a hood, for she said it annoyed her and
choked her; and every time that her father reproached her for some
deed deserving of punishment and threatened to cut off her hair, I
warrant you she suffered three times more than after a lash from the
whip, and would then be good for three weeks successively; so much so
that Juan Lanas, perceiving her amendment, would laugh under his
cloak, and when saying his say to his gossips would tell them that his
daughter, like the other saint of Sicily, would reach heaven by her
hair.
Having read so far, you must now know that Juan Lanas, the blind man,
with the change of district and dwelling did not change his judgment
and if he was crack-brained at San Garcia, he remained crack-brained
at Toledo, consuming in this resort his money upon worthless drugs and
quacks which did not cure his blindness and impoverished him more and
more every day, so that if his daughter had not been so dexterous with
her fingers in making and broidering garments of linen, wool, and
silk, I promise you that this miserable Juan would have had to go for
more than four Sundays without a clean shirt to put on or a mouthful
to eat, unless he had begged it from door to door.
The years passed by to find Maria every day more beautiful, and her
father every day more blind and more desirous to see, until his
affliction and trouble took such forcible possession of his breast and
mind, that Maria saw as clear as daylight that if her father did not
recover his sight, he would die of grief. Maria thereupon straightway
took her father and led him to the house of an Arabian physician of
great learning who dwelt at Toledo, and told the Moor to see if there
were any cure for the old man's sight. The Arabian examined and
touched Juan, and made this and that experiment with him, and
everything prospered, in that the physician swore great oaths by the
heel-bone of Mohammed that there was a complete certainty of curing
Juan and making him to see his daughter again, if only he, the
physician, were paid for the cure with five hundred maravedis all in
gold. A sad termination for such a welcome beginning, for the two
unhappy creatures, Juan and Maria, had neither maravedi nor
cuarto in the money box! So they went thence all downcast, and Maria
never ceased praying to his Holiness Saint John and his Holiness Saint
James (the patron saint of Spain) to repair to their assistance in
this sad predicament.
"In what way," conjectured she inwardly, "in what way can I raise five
hundred maravedis to be quits with the Moor who will give back his
sight to my poor old father? All! I have it. I am a pretty maid, and
suitors innumerable, commoners and nobles, pay their addresses and
compliments to me. But all are trifling youths who only care for
love-making and who seek light o' loves rather than spouses according
to the law of the Lord Jesus Christ. I remember, notwithstanding, that
opposite our house lives the sword-cutler, Master Palomo, who is
always looking at me and never speaks to me, and the Virgin assist me,
he appears a man of very good condition for a husband; but what
maiden, unless she were cross-eyed, or hunch-backed, could like a man
with such a flat nose, with that skin the color of a ripe date, with
those eyes like a dead calf's, and with those huge hands, which are
more like the paws of a wild beast that the belongings of a person who
with them should softly caress the woman whom Destiny bestows upon him
for a companion? 'Tis said that he is no drunkard, nor cudgeler, nor
dallier with women, nor a liar, and that he is besides possessed of
much property and very rich. Pity 'tis that one who is so ugly and
stiff-necked should unite such parts."
Thus turning the matter over and over in her mind, Maria together
with Juan reached their home, where was awaiting them an esquire in a
long mourning robe, who told Maria that the aunt of the mayor of the
city had died in an honest estate and in the flower of her age, for
she had not yet completed her seventy years, and that the obsequies of
this sexagenarian damsel were to be performed the following day, on
which occasion her coffin would be carried to the church by maidens,
and he was come to ask Maria if she would please to be one of the
bearers of the dead woman, for which she would receive a white robe,
and to eat, and ducat, and thanks into the bargain.
Maria, since she was a well-brought-up maid, replied that if it seemed
well to her father, it would also seem well to her.
Juan accepted, and Maria was rejoiced to be able to make a display of
her hair, for it is well known that the maidens who bear one another
to the grave walk with disheveled locks. And when on the morrow the
tiring-women of the mayoress arrayed Maria in a robe white as the
driven snow and fine as the skin of an onion; and when they girt her
slender waist with a sash of crimson silk, the ends of which hung down
to the broad hem of the skirt; and when they crowned her smooth and
white forehead with a wreath of white flowers, I warrant you that,
what with the robe and the sash and the wreath, and the beautiful
streaming hair and her lovely countenance and gracious mien, she
seemed no female formed of flesh and blood, but a superhuman creature
or blessed resident of those shining circles in which dwell the
celestial hierarchies. The mayor and the other mourners stepped forth
to see her, and all unceasingly praised God, who was pleased to
perform such miracles for the consolation and solace of those living
in this world.
And there in a corner of the hall, motionless like a heap of broken
stones, stood one of the mutes with the hood of his long cloak
covering his head, so that nothing could be seen but his eyes, the
which he kept fixed on the fair damsel. The latter modestly lowered
her eyes to the ground with her head a little bent and her cheeks red
for bashfulness, although it pleased her no little to hear the praises
of her beauty. At this moment a screen was pushed aside, and there
began to appear a huge bulk of petticoats, which was nothing less than
the person of the mayoress, for she was with child and drawing near to
her time. And when she saw Maria, she started, opened her eyes a
hand's-breadth wide, bit her lips, and called hurriedly for her
husband. They stepped aside for a good while, and then hied them
thence, and when they returned the mutes and maidens had all gone.
While they were burying the defunct lady I must tell you, curious
readers, that the mayor and mayoress had been married for many years
without having any children, and they longed for them like the
countryman for rain in the month of May, and at last her hour of bliss
came to the mayoress, to the great content of her husband. Now, it
was whispered that the said lady had always been somewhat capricious;
judge for yourselves what she would be now in the time of her
pregnancy! And as she was already on the way to fifty, she was more
than mediocrely bald and hairless, and on these very same days had
commissioned a woman barber, who lived in the odor of witchcraft, to
prepare for her some false hair, but it was not to be that of a dead
woman, for the mayoress said very sensibly that if the hair belonged
to a dead woman who rejoiced in supreme glory, or was suffering for
her sins in purgatory, it would be profanation to wear any pledge of
theirs, and if they were in hell, it was a terrible thing to wear on
one's person relics of one of the damned. And when the mayoress saw
the abundant locks of Maria, she coveted them for herself, and it was
for this reason that she called to the mayor to speak to her in
private and besought him eagerly to persuade Mario to allow herself to
be shorn upon the return from the burial.
"I warn you," said the mayor, "that you are desirous of entering upon
a very knotty bargain, for the disheveled girl idolizes her hair in
such wise that she would sooner lose a finger than suffer one of her
tresses to be cut off."
"I warn you," replied the mayoress, "that if on this very day the head
of this young girl is not shorn smooth beneath my hand as a melon, the
child to which I am about to give birth will have a head of hair on
its face, and if it happens to be a female, look you, a pretty
daughter is in store for you!"
"But bethink yourself that Maria will ask, who knows, a good few
crowns for this shaving."
"Bethink yourself that if not, your heir or heiress, begotten after
many years' marriage, will come amiss; and bear in mind, by the way,
that we are not so young as to hope to replace this by another."
Upon this she turned her back to the mayor, and went to her apartment
crying out: "I want the hair, I must have the hair, and if I do not
get the hair, by my halidom I shall never become a mother."
In the meantime the funeral had taken place without any novelty to
mention, excepting that if in the streets any loose fellow in the
crowd assayed to annoy the fair Maria, the hooded mute, of whom we
made mention before, quickly drew from beneath his cloak a strap, with
which he gave a lash to the insolent rogue without addressing one word
to him, and then walked straight on as if nothing had happened. When
all the mourners returned, the mayor seized hold of Maria's hand and
said to her:
"And now, fair maid, let us withdraw for a little while into this
other apartment," and thus talking whilst in motion he brought her
into his wife's private tiring-room, and sat himself down in a chair
and bent his head and stroked his beard with the mien of one who is
studying what beginning to give his speech. Maria, a little foolish
and confused, remained standing in front of the mayor, and she also
humbly lowered before him her eyes, black as the sloe; and to occupy
herself with something, gently fingered the ends of the sash, which
girded her waist and hung down over her skirt, not knowing what to
expect from the grave mien and long silence of the mayor, who, raising
his eyes and looking up at Maria, when he beheld her in so modest a
posture, devised thence a motive with which to begin, saying:
"Forsooth, Maria, so modest and sanctimonious is thy bearing, that it
is easy to see thou art preparing thyself to become a black-wimpled
nun. And if it be so, as I presume it to be, I now offer of my own
accord to dispose of thy entry into the cloisters without any dowry,
on the condition that thou dost give me something that thou hast on
thy head, and which then will not be necessary for thee."
"Nay, beshrew me, Sir Mayor," replied Maria, "for I durst not think
that the Lord calls upon me to take that step, for then my poor father
would remain in the world without the staff of his old age."
"Then, now, I desire to give thee some wise counsel, maid Maria. Thou
dost gain thy bread with great fatigue. Thou shouldst make use of thy
time as much as is possible. Now one of thy neighbors hath told me
that in the dressing of thy hair thou dost waste every day more than
an hour. It would be better far if thou didst spend this hour on thy
work rather than in the dressing and braiding which thou dost to thy
hair."
"That is true, Sir Mayor," replied Maria, turning as red as a
carnation, "but, look you, it is not my fault if I have a wealth of
tresses, the combing and plaiting of which necessitate so long a time
every morning."
"I tell thee it is thy fault," retorted the mayor, "for if thou didst
cut off this mane, thou wouldst save thyself all this combing and
plaiting, and thus wouldst have more time for work, and so gain more
money, and wouldst also give no occasion to people to call thee vain.
They even say that the devil will some day carry thee off by thy hair.
Nay, do not be distressed, for I already perceive the tears gathering
in thine eyes, for thou hast them indeed very ready at hand; I
admonish thee for thine own good without any self-interest. Cut thy
hair off, shear thyself, shave thyself, good Maria, and to allay the
bitterness of the shearing, I will give fifty maravedis, always on
condition that thou dost hand me over the hair."
When Maria at first heard this offer of so reasonable a sum for this
her hair, it seemed to her a jest of the mayor's, and she smiled right
sweetly while she dried her tears, repeating:
"You will give me fifty maravedis if I shave myself?"
Now it appeared to the mayor (who, it is said, was not gifted with all
the prudence of Ulysses) that the smile signified that the maid was
not satisfied with so small a price, and he added:
"If thou wilt not be content with fifty maravedis, I will give thee
a hundred."
Then Maria saw some hangings of the apartment moving in front of her,
and perceiving a bulky protuberance, she immediately divined that the
mayoress was hiding behind there, and that the protuberance was caused
by her portly form. Now she discovered the mayor's design, and that it
was probably a caprice of his spouse, and she made a vow not to suffer
herself to be shorn unless she acquired by these means the five
hundred maravedis needful to pay the Arabian physician who would
give her father back his eyesight.
Then the mayor raised his price from a hundred maravedis to a
hundred and fifty, and afterwards to two hundred, and Maria continued
her sweet smiling, shaking of the head, and gestures, and every time
that the mayor bid higher and Maria feigned to be reluctant, she
almost hoped that the mayor would withdraw from his proposition, for
the great grief it caused her to despoil herself of that precious
ornament, notwithstanding that my means of it she might gain her
father's health. Finally the mayor, anxious to conclude the treaty,
for he saw the stirring of the curtains, and knew by them the anxiety
and state of mind of the listener, closed by saying:
"Go to, hussy, I will give thee five hundred maravedis. See, once
and for all, if thou canst agree on these terms."
"Be it so," replied Maria, sighing as if her soul would flee from her
flesh with these words—"be it so, so long that nobody doth know that
I remain bald."
"I will give my word for it," said the mayoress, stepping from behind
the curtains with a pair of sharp shears in her hands and a wrapper
over her arm.
When Maria saw the scissors she turned as yellow as wax, and when they
told her to sit down on the sacrificial chair, she felt herself grow
faint and had to ask for a drink of water; and when they tied the
wrapper round her throat it is related that she would have immediately
torn it asunder if her courage had not failed her. And when at the
first movement of the shears she felt the cold iron against her skull,
I tell you it seemed to her as if they were piercing her heart with a
bright dagger. It is possible that she did not keep her head still for
a moment while this tonsuring was taking place; she moved it in spite
of herself, now to one side, now to another, to flee from the clipping
scissors, of which the rude cuts and the creaking axis wounded her
ears. Her posture and movements, however, were of no avail to the poor
shorn maiden, and the pertinacious shearer, with the anxiety and
covetousness of a pregnant woman satisfying a caprice, seized the hair
well, or ill, by handfuls, and went on bravely clipping, and the locks
fell on to the white wrapper, slipping down thence till they reached
the ground.
At last the business came to an end, and the mayoress, who was beside
herself with joy, caressingly passed the palm of her hand again and
again over the maid's bald head from the front to the back, saying:
"By my mother's soul, I have shorn you so regularly and close to the
root that the most skilful barber could not have shorn you better.
Get up and braid the hair while my husband goes to get the money and I
your clothes, so that you can leave the house without anyone
perceiving it."
The mayor and mayoress went out of the room, and Maria, as soon as she
found herself alone, went to look at herself in a mirror that hung
there; and when she saw herself bald she lost the patience she had had
until then, and groaned with rage and struck herself, and even tried
to wrench off her ears, which appeared to her now outrageously large,
although they were not so in reality. She stamped upon her hair and
cursed herself for having ever consented to lose it, without
remembering her father, and just as if she had no father at all. But
as it is a quality of human nature to accept what cannot be altered,
poor angry Maria calmed down little by little, and she picked up the
hair from the ground and bound it together and braided it into great
ropes, not without kissing it and lamenting over it many times.
The mayor and the mayoress returned, he with the money and she with
the every-day clothes of Maria, who undressed and folded her white
robe in a kerchief, put on her old gown, hid herself with her shawl to
the eyes, and walked, moaning, to the house of the Moor, without
noticing that the man with the hood over his head was following behind
her, and that when she, in a moment of forgetfulness, lowered her
shawl through the habit she had of displaying her tresses, her bald
head could be plainly seen. The Moor received the five hundred
maravedis with that good-will with which money is always received,
and told Maria to bring Juan Lanas to his house to stay there so long
as there was any risk in the cure. Maria went to fetch the old man,
and kept silence as to her shorn head so as not to grieve him, and
whilst Juan remained the physician's guest, Maria durst not leave her
home except after nightfall, and then well enveloped. This, however,
did not hinder her being followed by the muffled-up man.
One evening the Moor told her in secret that the next morning he would
remove the bandages from Juan's eyes. Maria went to bed that night
with great rejoicing, but thought to herself that when her father saw
her (which would be with no little pleasure) he would be pleased three
or four times more if he could see her with the pretty head-dress
which she used to wear in her native town. Amidst such cavillation she
donned the next day her best petticoat and ribbons to his to the
Arabian's house; and while she was sitting down to shoe herself she of
a sudden felt something like a hood closing over her head, and,
turning round, she saw behind her the muffled-up man of before, who,
throwing aside his cloak, discovered himself to be the sword-cutler,
Master Palomo, who, without speaking, presented Maria with a little
Venetian mirror, in which she looked and saw herself with her own hair
and garb in such wise that she wondered for a good time if it were not
a dream that the mayoress had shorn her.
The fact was that Master Palomo was a great crony of the old woman
barber, and had seen in her house Maria's tresses on the very same
afternoon of the morning in which he saw Maria was bald, and keeping
silence upon the matter, had wheedled the old woman into keeping
Maria's hair for him, and dressing for the mayoress some other hair of
the same hue which the crone had from a dead woman—a bargain by which
the crafty old dame acquired many a bright crown. And the story
relates that as soon as Maria regained her much lamented and
sighed-for hair by the hands of the gallant sword-cutler, the master
appeared to her much less ugly than before. I do not know if it tells
that from that moment she began to look on him with more favorable
eyes, but i' sooth it is a fact that upon his asking her to accept his
escort to the Moor's house, she gave her assent, and the two set out
hand in hand, the maiden holding her head up free from mufflers. As
they both entered the physician's apartment her father threw himself
into Maria's arms, crying:
"Glory to God, I see thee now, my beloved daughter. How tall and
beautiful thou art grown! Verily, it is worth while to become blind
for five years to see one's daughter matured thus! Now that I see
daylight again, it is only right that I should no longer be a burden
to thee. I shall work for myself, for as for thee it is already time
for thee to marry."
"For this very purpose am I come," broke in at this opportune moment
the silent sword-cutler; "I, as you will have already recognized by
my voice, am your neighbor, Master Palomo. I love Maria, and ask you
for her hand."
"Lack-a-day, master, but your exterior is not very prepossessing.
Howbeit, if Maria doth accept you, I am content."
"I," replied Maria, wholly abashed, and smoothing the false hair
(which then weighed upon her head and heart like a burden of five
hundred weight)—"I, so may God enlighten me, for I durst not venture
to reply."
Palomo took her right hand without saying anything, and as he did so
Maria looked at the master's wrists, and observed the wristbands of
his shirt, neatly embroidered, and with some suspicion and beating of
her heart said to him:
"If you wish to please me, good neighbor, tell me by what seamstress
is this work?"
"It is the work," replied the master, jocularly, "the work of a pretty
maiden who for five years has toiled for my person, albeit she hath
not known it till now."
"Now I perceive," said Maria, "how that all the women who have come to
give me linen to sew and embroider were sent by you, and that is why
they paid me more than is customary."
The master did not reply, but he smiled and held out his arms to
Maria. Maria threw herself into them, embracing him very caressingly;
and Juan himself said to the two:
"In good sooth, you are made one for the other."
"By my troth, my beloved one," continued the sword-cutler after a
while, "if my countenance had only been more pleasing, I should not
have been silent towards you for so many long days, nor would I have
been content with, gazing at you from afar. I should have spoken to
you, you would have made me the confidant of your troubles, and I
would have given you the five hundred maravedis for the cure of your
good father."
And whispering softly into her ear, he added: "And then you would not
have passed that evil moment under the hands of the mayoress. But if
you fear that she may break the promise she made to you to keep
silence as to your cropped head, let us, if it please you, set out for
Seville, where nobody knows you, and thus—"
"No more," exclaimed Maria, resolutely throwing on the ground the
hair, which Juan picked up all astonished. "Send this hair to the
mayoress, since it was for this and not for that of the dead woman
that she paid so dearly. For I, to cure myself of my vanity, now make
a vow, with your good permission, to go shorn all my life. Such
artificial adornments are little befitting to the wives of honest
burghers."
"But rely upon it," replied the master-cutler, "that as soon as it is
known that you have no hair, the girls of the city, envious of your
beauty, will give you the nickname of Mariquita the Bald!"
"They may do so," replied Maria, "and that they may see that I do not
care a fig for this or any other nickname, I swear to you that from
this day forth I will not suffer anybody to call me by another name
than Mariquita the Bald."
This was the event that rendered so famous throughout all Castile the
beautiful daughter of good Juan Lanas, who in effect married Master
Palomo, and became one of the most honorable and prolific women of the
most illustrious city of Toledo.