THE LAST LESSON By Alphonse Daudet
    

      I started for school very late that morning and was in great dread of a
      scolding, especially because M. Hamel had said that he would question us
      on participles, and I did not know the first word about them. For a moment
      I thought of running away and spending the day out of doors. It was so
      warm, so bright! The birds were chirping at the edge of the woods; and in
      the open field back of the saw-mill the Prussian soldiers were drilling.
      It was all much more tempting than the rule for participles, but I had the
      strength to resist, and hurried off to school.
    

      When I passed the town hall there was a crowd in front of the
      bulletin-board. For the last two years all our bad news had come from
      there—the lost battles, the draft, the orders of the commanding
      officer—and I thought to myself, without stopping:
    

      “What can be the matter now?”
    

      Then, as I hurried by as fast as I could go, the blacksmith, Wachter, who
      was there, with his apprentice, reading the bulletin, called after me:
    

      “Don’t go so fast, bub; you’ll get to your school in
      plenty of time!”
    

      I thought he was making fun of me, and reached M. Hamel’s little
      garden all out of breath.
    

      Usually, when school began, there was a great bustle, which could be heard
      out in the street, the opening and closing of desks, lessons repeated in
      unison, very loud, with our hands over our ears to understand better, and
      the teacher’s great ruler rapping on the table. But now it was all
      so still! I had counted on the commotion to get to my desk without being
      seen; but, of course, that day everything had to be as quiet as Sunday
      morning. Through the window I saw my classmates, already in their places,
      and M. Hamel walking up and down with his terrible iron ruler under his
      arm. I had to open the door and go in before everybody. You can imagine
      how I blushed and how frightened I was.
    

      But nothing happened, M. Hamel saw me and said very kindly:
    

      “Go to your place quickly, little Franz. We were beginning without
      you.”
    

      I jumped over the bench and sat down at my desk. Not till then, when I had
      got a little over my fright, did I see that our teacher had on his
      beautiful green coat, his frilled shirt, and the little black silk cap,
      all embroidered, that he never wore except on inspection and prize days.
      Besides, the whole school seemed so strange and solemn. But the thing that
      surprised me most was to see, on the back benches that were always empty,
      the village people sitting quietly like ourselves; old Hauser, with his
      three-cornered hat, the former mayor, the former postmaster, and several
      others besides. Everybody looked sad; and Hauser had brought an old
      primer, thumbed at the edges, and he held it open on his knees with his
      great spectacles lying across the pages.
    

      While I was wondering about it all, M. Hamel mounted his chair, and, in
      the same grave and gentle tone which he had used to me, said:
    

      “My children, this is the last lesson I shall give you. The order
      has come from Berlin to teach only German in the schools of Alsace and
      Lorraine. The new master comes to-morrow. This is your last French lesson.
      I want you to be very attentive.”
    

      What a thunder-clap these words were to me!
    

      Oh, the wretches; that was what they had put up at the town-hall!
    

      My last French lesson! Why, I hardly knew how to write! I should never
      learn any more! I must stop there, then! Oh, how sorry I was for not
      learning my lessons, for seeking birds’ eggs, or going sliding on
      the Saar! My books, that had seemed such a nuisance a while ago, so heavy
      to carry, my grammar, and my history of the saints, were old friends now
      that I couldn’t give up. And M. Hamel, too; the idea that he was
      going away, that I should never see him again, made me forget all about
      his ruler and how cranky he was.
    

      Poor man! It was in honor of this last lesson that he had put on his fine
      Sunday-clothes, and now I understood why the old men of the village were
      sitting there in the back of the room. It was because they were sorry,
      too, that they had not gone to school more. It was their way of thanking
      our master for his forty years of faithful service and of showing their
      respect for the country that was theirs no more.
    

      While I was thinking of all this, I heard my name called. It was my turn
      to recite. What would I not have given to be able to say that dreadful
      rule for the participle all through, very loud and clear, and without one
      mistake? But I got mixed up on the first words and stood there, holding on
      to my desk, my heart beating, and not daring to look up. I heard M. Hamel
      say to me:
    

      “I won’t scold you, little Franz; you must feel bad enough.
      See how it is! Every day we have said to ourselves: ‘Bah! I’ve
      plenty of time. I’ll learn it to-morrow.’ And now you see
      where we’ve come out. Ah, that’s the great trouble with
      Alsace; she puts off learning till to-morrow. Now those fellows out there
      will have the right to say to you: ‘How is it; you pretend to be
      Frenchmen, and yet you can neither speak nor write your own language?’
      But you are not the worst, poor little Franz. We’ve all a great deal
      to reproach ourselves with.
    

      “Your parents were not anxious enough to have you learn. They
      preferred to put you to work on a farm or at the mills, so as to have a
      little more money. And I? I’ve been to blame also. Have I not often
      sent you to water my flowers instead of learning your lessons? And when I
      wanted to go fishing, did I not just give you a holiday?”
    

      Then, from one thing to another, M. Hamel went on to talk of the French
      language, saying that it was the most beautiful language in the world—the
      clearest, the most logical; that we must guard it among us and never
      forget it, because when a people are enslaved, as long as they hold fast
      to their language it is as if they had the key to their prison. Then he
      opened a grammar and read us our lesson. I was amazed to see how well I
      understood it. All he said seemed so easy, so easy! I think, too, that I
      had never listened so carefully, and that he had never explained
      everything with so much patience. It seemed almost as if the poor man
      wanted to give us all he knew before going away, and to put it all into
      our heads at one stroke.
    

      After the grammar, we had a lesson in writing. That day M. Hamel had new
      copies for us, written in a beautiful round hand: France, Alsace, France,
      Alsace. They looked like little flags floating everywhere in the
      school-room, hung from the rod at the top of our desks. You ought to have
      seen how every one set to work, and how quiet it was! The only sound was
      the scratching of the pens over the paper. Once some beetles flew in; but
      nobody paid any attention to them, not even the littlest ones, who worked
      right on tracing their fish-hooks, as if that was French, too. On the roof
      the pigeons cooed very low, and I thought to myself:
    

      “Will they make them sing in German, even the pigeons?”
    

      Whenever I looked up from my writing I saw M. Hamel sitting motionless in
      his chair and gazing first at one thing, then at another, as if he wanted
      to fix in his mind just how everything looked in that little school-room.
      Fancy! For forty years he had been there in the same place, with his
      garden outside the window and his class in front of him, just like that.
      Only the desks and benches had been worn smooth; the walnut-trees in the
      garden were taller, and the hop-vine, that he had planted himself twined
      about the windows to the roof. How it must have broken his heart to leave
      it all, poor man; to hear his sister moving about in the room above,
      packing their trunks! For they must leave the country next day.
    

      But he had the courage to hear every lesson to the very last. After the
      writing, we had a lesson in history, and then the babies chanted their ba,
      be, bi, bo, bu. Down there at the back of the room old Hauser had put on
      his spectacles and, holding his primer in both hands, spelled the letters
      with them. You could see that he, too, was crying; his voice trembled with
      emotion, and it was so funny to hear him that we all wanted to laugh and
      cry. Ah, how well I remember it, that last lesson!
    

      All at once the church-clock struck twelve. Then the Angelus. At the same
      moment the trumpets of the Prussians, returning from drill, sounded under
      our windows. M. Hamel stood up, very pale, in his chair. I never saw him
      look so tall.
    

      “My friends,” said he, “I—I—” But
      something choked him. He could not go on.
    

      Then he turned to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk, and, bearing on
      with all his might, he wrote as large as he could:
    

      “Vive La France!”
    

      Then he stopped and leaned his head against the wall, and, without a word,
      he made a gesture to us with his hand; “School is dismissed—you
      may go.”