THE OMNIBUS, By Quiller-Couch
    

      All that follows was spoken in a small tavern, a stone’s throw from
      Cheapside, the day before I left London. It was spoken in a dull voice,
      across a greasy table-cloth, and amid an atmosphere so thick with the reek
      of cooking that one longed to change it for the torrid street again, to
      broil in an ampler furnace. Old Tom Pickford spoke it, who has been a
      clerk for fifty-two years in Tweedy’s East India warehouse, and in all
      that time has never been out of London, but when he takes a holiday spends
      it in hanging about Tweedy’s, and observing that unlovely place of
      business from the outside. The dust, if not the iron, of Tweedy’s has
      entered into his soul; and Tweedy’s young men know him as “the Mastodon.”
       He is a thin, bald septuagenarian, with sloping shoulders, and a habit of
      regarding the pavement when he walks, so that he seems to steer his way by
      instinct rather than sight. In general he keeps silence while eating his
      chop; and on this occasion there was something unnatural in his utterance,
      a divorce of manner between the speaker and his words, such as one would
      expect in a sibyl disclaiming under stress of the god. I fancied it had
      something to do with a black necktie that he wore instead of the blue
      bird’s-eye cravat familiar to Tweedy’s, and with his extraordinary conduct
      in refusing to-day the chop that the waiter brought, and limiting his
      lunch to cheese and lettuce.
    

      Having pulled the lettuce to pieces, he pushed himself back a little from
      the table, looked over his spectacles at me, then at the table-cloth, and
      began in a dreamy voice:
    

      “Old Gabriel is dead. I heard the news at the office this morning, and
      went out and bought a black tie. I am the oldest man in Tweedy’s now—older
      by six years than Sam Collins, who comes next; so there is no mistake
      about it. Sam is looking for the place; I saw it in his eye when he told
      me, and I expect he’ll get it. But I’m the oldest clerk in Tweedy’s. Only
      God Almighty can alter that, and it’s very satisfactory to me. I don’t
      care about the money. Sam Collins will be stuck up over it, like enough;
      but he’ll never write a hand like Gabriel’s, not if he lives to be a
      hundred; and he knows it, and knows I’ll be there to remind him of it.
      Gabriel’s was a beautiful fist—so small, too, if he chose. Why,
      once, in his spare hours, he wrote out all the Psalms, with the headings,
      on one side of a folio sheet, and had it framed and hung up in his
      parlour, out at Shepherd’s Bush. He died in the night—oh yes, quite
      easily. He was down at the office all yesterday, and spoke to me as brisk
      as a bird. They found him dead in his bed this morning.
    

      “I seem cut up about it? Well, not exactly. Ah, you noticed that I refused
      my chop to-day. Bless your soul, that’s not on Gabriel’s account. I am
      well on in years, and I suppose it would be natural of me to pity old men,
      and expect pity. But I can’t; no, it’s only the young that I pity.
      If you must know, I didn’t take the chop to-day because I haven’t
      the money in my pocket to pay for it. You see, there was this black tie
      that I gave eighteenpence for; but something else happened this morning
      that I’ll tell you about.
    

      “I came down in a ‘bus, as usual. You remember what muggy weather it was
      up to ten o’clock—though you wouldn’t think it, to feel the heat
      now. Well, the ‘bus was packed, inside and out. At least, there was just
      room for one more inside when we pulled up by Charing Cross, and there he
      got in—a boy with a stick and a bundle in a blue handkerchief.
    

      “He wasn’t more than thirteen; bound for the docks, you could tell at a
      glance; and by the way he looked about you could tell as easily that in
      stepping outside Charing Cross station he’d set foot on London stones for
      the first time. God knows how it struck him—the slush and drizzle,
      the ugly shop-fronts, the horses slipping in the brown mud, the crowd on
      the pavement pushing him this side and that. The poor little chap was
      standing in the middle of it with dazed eyes, like a hare’s, when the ‘bus
      pulled up. His eyelids were pink and swollen; but he wasn’t crying, though
      he wanted to. Instead, he gave a gulp as he came on board with stick and
      bundle, and tried to look brave as a lion.
    

      “I’d have given worlds to speak to him, but I couldn’t. On my word, sir, I
      should have cried. It wasn’t so much the little chap’s look. But to the
      knot of his bundle there was tied a bunch of cottage flowers,—sweet-williams,
      boy’s-love, and a rose or two,—and the sight and smell of them in
      that stuffy omnibus were like tears on thirsty eyelids. It’s the young
      that I pity, sir. For Gabriel, in his bed up at Shepherd’s Bush, there’s
      no more to be said, as far as I can see; and as for me, I’m the oldest
      clerk in Tweedy’s, which is very satisfactory. It’s the young faces, set
      toward the road along which we have travelled, that trouble me. Sometimes,
      sir, I lie awake in my lodgings and listen, and the whole of this London
      seems filled with the sound of children’s feet running, and I can sob
      aloud. You may say that it is only selfishness, and what I really pity is
      my own boyhood. I dare say you’re right. It’s certain that, as I kept
      glancing at the boy and his sea kit and his bunch of flowers, my mind went
      back to the January morning, sixty-five years back, when the coach took me
      off for the first time from the village where I was born to a London
      charity-school. I was worse off than the boy in the omnibus, for I had
      just lost father and mother. Yet it was the sticks and stones and
      flower-beds that I mostly thought of. I went round and said good-bye to
      the lilacs, and told them to be in flower by the time I came back. I said
      to the rose-bush, ‘You must be as high as my window next May; you know you
      only missed it by three inches last summer.’ Then I went to the cow-house,
      and kissed the cows, one by one. They were to be sold by auction the very
      next week, but I guessed nothing of it, and ordered them not to forget me.
      And last I looked at the swallows’ nests under the thatch,—the last
      year’s nests,—and told myself that they would be filled again when I
      returned. I remembered this, and how I stretched out my hands to the place
      from the coach-top; and how at Reading, where we stopped, I spent the two
      shillings that I possessed in a cocoanut and a bright clasp-knife; and
      how, when I opened it, the nut was sour; and how I cried myself to sleep,
      and woke in London.
    

      “The young men in Tweedy’s, though they respect my long standing there,
      make fun of me at times because I never take a holiday in the country.
      Why, sir, I dare not. I should wander back to my old village, and—Well,
      I know how it would be then. I should find it smaller and meaner; I should
      search about for the flowers and nests, and listen for the music that I
      knew sixty-five years ago, and remember; and they would not be
      discoverable. Also every face would stare at me, for all the faces I know
      are dead. Then I should think I had missed my way and come to the wrong
      place; or (worse) that no such spot ever existed, and I have been cheating
      myself all these years; that, in fact, I was mad all the while, and have
      no stable reason for existing—I, the oldest clerk in Tweedy’s! To be
      sure, there would be my parents’ headstones in the churchyard. But what
      are they, if the churchyard itself is changed?
    

      “As it is, with three hundred pounds per annum, and enough laid by to keep
      him, if I fail, an old bachelor has no reason to grumble. But the sight of
      that little chap’s nosegay, and the thought of the mother who tied it
      there, made my heart swell as I fancy the earth must swell when rain is
      coming. His eyes filled once, and he brushed them under the pretence of
      pulling his cap forward, and stole a glance round to see if any one had
      noticed him. The other passengers were busy with their own thoughts, and I
      pretended to stare out of the window opposite; but there was the drop,
      sure enough, on his hand as he laid it on his lap again.
    

      “He was bound for the docks, and thence for the open sea, and I, that was
      bound for Tweedy’s only, had to get out at the top of Cheapside. I know
      the ‘bus conductor,—a very honest man,—and, in getting out, I
      slipped half a crown into his hand to give to the boy, with my blessing,
      at his journey’s end. When I picture his face, sir, I wish I had made it
      five shillings, and gone without a new tie and dinner altogether.”