THE REVOLUTIONIST


BY MICHAÃL P. ARTZYBASHEV


I

Gabriel Andersen, the teacher, walked to the edge of the school garden,
where he paused, undecided what to do. Off in the distance, two miles
away, the woods hung like bluish lace over a field of pure snow. It was a
brilliant day. A hundred tints glistened on the white ground and the iron
bars of the garden railing. There was a lightness and transparency in the
air that only the days of early spring possess. Gabriel Andersen turned
his steps toward the fringe of blue lace for a tramp in the woods.


“Another spring in my life,” he said, breathing deep and
peering up at the heavens through his spectacles. Andersen was rather
given to sentimental poetising. He walked with his hands folded behind
him, dangling his cane.


He had gone but a few paces when he noticed a group of soldiers and horses
on the road beyond the garden rail. Their drab uniforms stood out dully
against the white of the snow, but their swords and horses’ coats
tossed back the light. Their bowed cavalry legs moved awkwardly on the
snow. Andersen wondered what they were doing there. Suddenly the nature of
their business flashed upon him. It was an ugly errand they were upon, an
instinct rather that his reason told him. Something unusual and terrible
was to happen. And the same instinct told him he must conceal himself from
the soldiers. He turned to the left quickly, dropped on his knees, and
crawled on the soft, thawing, crackling snow to a low haystack, from
behind which, by craning his neck, he could watch what the soldiers were
doing.


There were twelve of them, one a stocky young officer in a grey cloak
caught in prettily at the waist by a silver belt. His face was so red that
even at that distance Andersen caught the odd, whitish gleam of his light
protruding moustache and eyebrows against the vivid colour of his skin.
The broken tones of his raucous voice reached distinctly to where the
teacher, listening intently, lay hidden.


“I know what I am about. I don’t need anybody’s advice,”
the officer cried. He clapped his arms akimbo and looked down at some one
among the group of bustling soldiers. “I’ll show you how to be
a rebel, you damned skunk.”


Andersen’s heart beat fast. “Good heavens!” he thought.
“Is it possible?” His head grew chill as if struck by a cold
wave.


“Officer,” a quiet, restrained, yet distinct voice came from
among the soldiers, “you have no right—It’s for the
court to decide—you aren’t a judge—it’s plain
murder, not—” “Silence!” thundered the officer,
his voice choking with rage. “I’ll give you a court. Ivanov,
go ahead.”


He put the spurs to his horse and rode away. Gabriel Andersen mechanically
observed how carefully the horse picked its way, placing its feet daintily
as if for the steps of a minuet. Its ears were pricked to catch every
sound. There was momentary bustle and excitement among the soldiers. Then
they dispersed in different directions, leaving three persons in black
behind, two tall men and one very short and frail. Andersen could see the
hair of the short one’s head. It was very light. And he saw his rosy
ears sticking out on each side.


Now he fully understood what was to happen. But it was a thing so out of
the ordinary, so horrible, that he fancied he was dreaming.


“It’s so bright, so beautiful—the snow, the field, the
woods, the sky. The breath of spring is upon everything. Yet people are
going to be killed. How can it be? Impossible!” So his thoughts ran
in confusion. He had the sensation of a man suddenly gone insane, who
finds he sees, hears and feels what he is not accustomed to, and ought not
hear, see and feel.


The three men in black stood next to one another hard by the railing, two
quite close together, the short one some distance away.


“Officer!” one of them cried in a desperate voice—Andersen
could not see which it was—“God sees us! Officer!”


Eight soldiers dismounted quickly, their spurs and sabres catching
awkwardly. Evidently they were in a hurry, as if doing a thief’s
job.


Several seconds passed in silence until the soldiers placed themselves in
a row a few feet from the black figures and levelled their guns. In doing
so one soldier knocked his cap from his head. He picked it up and put it
on again without brushing off the wet snow.


The officer’s mount still kept dancing on one spot with his ears
pricked, while the other horses, also with sharp ears erect to catch every
sound, stood motionless looking at the men in black, their long wise heads
inclined to one side.


“Spare the boy at least!” another voice suddenly pierced the
air. “Why kill a child, damn you! What has the child done?”


“Ivanov, do what I told you to do,” thundered the officer,
drowning the other voice. His face turned as scarlet as a piece of red
flannel.


There followed a scene savage and repulsive in its gruesomeness. The short
figure in black, with the light hair and the rosy ears, uttered a wild
shriek in a shrill child’s tones and reeled to one side. Instantly
it was caught up by two or three soldiers. But the boy began to struggle,
and two more soldiers ran up.


“Ow-ow-ow-ow!” the boy cried. “Let me go, let me go!
Ow-ow!”


His shrill voice cut the air like the yell of a stuck porkling not quite
done to death. Suddenly he grew quiet. Some one must have struck him. An
unexpected, oppressive silence ensued. The boy was being pushed forward.
Then there came a deafening report. Andersen started back all in a
tremble. He saw distinctly, yet vaguely as in a dream, the dropping of two
dark bodies, the flash of pale sparks, and a light smoke rising in the
clean, bright atmosphere. He saw the soldiers hastily mounting their
horses without even glancing at the bodies. He saw them galloping along
the muddy road, their arms clanking, their horses’ hoofs clattering.


He saw all this, himself now standing in the middle of the road, not
knowing when and why he had jumped from behind the haystack. He was
deathly pale. His face was covered with dank sweat, his body was aquiver.
A physical sadness smote and tortured him. He could not make out the
nature of the feeling. It was akin to extreme sickness, though far more
nauseating and terrible.


After the soldiers had disappeared beyond the bend toward the woods,
people came hurrying to the spot of the shooting, though till then not a
soul had been in sight.


The bodies lay at the roadside on the other side of the railing, where the
snow was clean, brittle and untrampled and glistened cheerfully in the
bright atmosphere. There were three dead bodies, two men and a boy. The
boy lay with his long soft neck stretched on the snow. The face of the man
next to the boy was invisible. He had fallen face downward in a pool of
blood. The third was a big man with a black beard and huge, muscular arms.
He lay stretched out to the full length of his big body, his arms extended
over a large area of blood-stained snow.


The three men who had been shot lay black against the white snow,
motionless. From afar no one could have told the terror that was in their
immobility as they lay there at the edge of the narrow road crowded with
people.


That night Gabriel Andersen in his little room in the schoolhouse did not
write poems as usual. He stood at the window and looked at the distant
pale disk of the moon in the misty blue sky, and thought. And his thoughts
were confused, gloomy, and heavy as if a cloud had descended upon his
brain.


Indistinctly outlined in the dull moonlight he saw the dark railing, the
trees, the empty garden. It seemed to him that he beheld them—the
three men who had been shot, two grown up, one a child. They were lying
there now at the roadside, in the empty, silent field, looking at the
far-off cold moon with their dead, white eyes as he with his living eyes.


“The time will come some day,” he thought, “when the
killing of people by others will be an utter impossibility. The time will
come when even the soldiers and officers who killed these three men will
realise what they have done and will understand that what they killed them
for is just as necessary, important, and dear to them—to the
officers and soldiers—as to those whom they killed.”


“Yes,” he said aloud and solemnly, his eyes moistening,
“that time will come. They will understand.” And the pale disk
of the moon was blotted out by the moisture in his eyes.


A large pity pierced his heart for the three victims whose eyes looked at
the moon, sad and unseeing. A feeling of rage cut him as with a sharp
knife and took possession of him.


But Gabriel Andersen quieted his heart, whispering softly, “They
know not what they do.” And this old and ready phrase gave him the
strength to stifle his rage and indignation.


II

The day was as bright and white, but the spring was already advanced. The
wet soil smelt of spring. Clear cold water ran everywhere from under the
loose, thawing snow. The branches of the trees were springy and elastic.
For miles and miles around, the country opened up in clear azure
stretches.


Yet the clearness and the joy of the spring day were not in the village.
They were somewhere outside the village, where there were no people—in
the fields, the woods and the mountains. In the village the air was
stifling, heavy and terrible as in a nightmare.


Gabriel Andersen stood in the road near a crowd of dark, sad,
absent-minded people and craned his neck to see the preparations for the
flogging of seven peasants.


They stood in the thawing snow, and Gabriel Andersen could not persuade
himself that they were people whom he had long known and understood. By
that which was about to happen to them, the shameful, terrible,
ineradicable thing that was to happen to them, they were separated from
all the rest of the world, and so were unable to feel what he, Gabriel
Andersen, felt, just as he was unable to feel what they felt. Round them
were the soldiers, confidently and beautifully mounted on high upon their
large steeds, who tossed their wise heads and turned their dappled wooden
faces slowly from side to side, looking contemptuously at him, Gabriel
Andersen, who was soon to behold this horror, this disgrace, and would do
nothing, would not dare to do anything. So it seemed to Gabriel Andersen;
and a sense of cold, intolerable shame gripped him as between two clamps
of ice through which he could see everything without being able to move,
cry out or utter a groan.


They took the first peasant. Gabriel Andersen saw his strange, imploring,
hopeless look. His lips moved, but no sound was heard, and his eyes
wandered. There was a bright gleam in them as in the eyes of a madman. His
mind, it was evident, was no longer able to comprehend what was happening.


And so terrible was that face, at once full of reason and of madness, that
Andersen felt relieved when they put him face downward on the snow and,
instead of the fiery eyes, he saw his bare back glistening—a
senseless, shameful, horrible sight.


The large, red-faced soldier in a red cap pushed toward him, looked down
at his body with seeming delight, and then cried in a clear voice:


“Well, let her go, with God’s blessing!”


Andersen seemed not to see the soldiers, the sky, the horses or the crowd.
He did not feel the cold, the terror or the shame. He did not hear the
swish of the knout in the air or the savage howl of pain and despair. He
only saw the bare back of a man’s body swelling up and covered over
evenly with white and purple stripes. Gradually the bare back lost the
semblance of human flesh. The blood oozed and squirted, forming patches,
drops and rivulets, which ran down on the white, thawing snow.


Terror gripped the soul of Gabriel Andersen as he thought of the moment
when the man would rise and face all the people who had seen his body
bared out in the open and reduced to a bloody pulp. He closed his eyes.
When he opened them, he saw four soldiers in uniform and red hats forcing
another man down on the snow, his back bared just as shamefully, terribly
and absurdly—a ludicrously tragic sight.


Then came the third, the fourth, and so on, to the end.


And Gabriel Andersen stood on the wet, thawing snow, craning his neck,
trembling and stuttering, though he did not say a word. Dank sweat poured
from his body. A sense of shame permeated his whole being. It was a
humiliating feeling, having to escape being noticed so that they should
not catch him and lay him there on the snow and strip him bare—him,
Gabriel Andersen.


The soldiers pressed and crowded, the horses tossed their heads, the knout
swished in the air, and the bare, shamed human flesh swelled up, tore, ran
over with blood, and curled like a snake. Oaths, wild shrieks rained upon
the village through the clean white air of that spring day.


Andersen now saw five men’s faces at the steps of the town hall, the
faces of those men who had already undergone their shame. He quickly
turned his eyes away. After seeing this a man must die, he thought.


III

There were seventeen of them, fifteen soldiers, a subaltern and a young
beardless officer. The officer lay in front of the fire looking intently
into the flames. The soldiers were tinkering with the firearms in the
wagon.


Their grey figures moved about quietly on the black thawing ground, and
occasionally stumbled across the logs sticking out from the blazing fire.


Gabriel Andersen, wearing an overcoat and carrying his cane behind his
back, approached them. The subaltern, a stout fellow with a moustache,
jumped up, turned from the fire, and looked at him.


“Who are you? What do you want?” he asked excitedly. From his
tone it was evident that the soldiers feared everybody in that district,
through which they went scattering death, destruction and torture.


“Officer,” he said, “there is a man here I don’t
know.”


The officer looked at Andersen without speaking.


“Officer,” said Andersen in a thin, strained voice, “my
name is Michelson. I am a business man here, and I am going to the village
on business. I was afraid I might be mistaken for some one else—you
know.”


“Then what are you nosing about here for?” the officer said
angrily, and turned away.


“A business man,” sneered a soldier. “He ought to be
searched, this business man ought, so as not to be knocking about at
night. A good one in the jaw is what he needs.”


“He’s a suspicious character, officer,” said the
subaltern. “Don’t you think we’d better arrest him,
what?”


“Don’t,” answered the officer lazily. “I’m
sick of them, damn ‘em.”


Gabriel Andersen stood there without saying anything. His eyes flashed
strangely in the dark by the firelight. And it was strange to see his
short, substantial, clean, neat figure in the field at night among the
soldiers, with his overcoat and cane and glasses glistening in the
firelight.


The soldiers left him and walked away. Gabriel Andersen remained standing
for a while. Then he turned and left, rapidly disappearing in the
darkness.


The night was drawing to a close. The air turned chilly, and the tops of
the bushes defined themselves more clearly in the dark. Gabriel Andersen
went again to the military post. But this time he hid, crouching low as he
made his way under the cover of the bushes. Behind him people moved about
quietly and carefully, bending the bushes, silent as shadows. Next to
Gabriel, on his right, walked a tall man with a revolver in his hand.


The figure of a soldier on the hill outlined itself strangely,
unexpectedly, not where they had been looking for it. It was faintly
illumined by the gleam from the dying fire. Gabriel Andersen recognised
the soldier. It was the one who had proposed that he should be searched.
Nothing stirred in Andersen’s heart. His face was cold and
motionless, as of a man who is asleep. Round the fire the soldiers lay
stretched out sleeping, all except the subaltern, who sat with his head
drooping over his knees.


The tall thin man on Andersen’s right raised the revolver and pulled
the trigger. A momentary blinding flash, a deafening report.


Andersen saw the guard lift his hands and then sit down on the ground
clasping his bosom. From all directions short, crackling sparks flashed up
which combined into one riving roar. The subaltern jumped up and dropped
straight into the fire. Grey soldiers’ figures moved about in all
directions like apparitions, throwing up their hands and falling and
writhing on the black earth. The young officer ran past Andersen,
fluttering his hands like some strange, frightened bird. Andersen, as if
he were thinking of something else, raised his cane. With all his strength
he hit the officer on the head, each blow descending with a dull, ugly
thud. The officer reeled in a circle, struck a bush, and sat down after
the second blow, covering his head with both hands, as children do. Some
one ran up and discharged a revolver as if from Andersen’s own hand.
The officer sank together in a heap and lunged with great force head
foremost on the ground. His legs twitched for a while, then he curled up
quietly.


The shots ceased. Black men with white faces, ghostly grey in the dark,
moved about the dead bodies of the soldiers, taking away their arms and
ammunition.


Andersen watched all this with a cold, attentive stare. When all was over,
he went up, took hold of the burned subaltern’s legs, and tried to
remove the body from the fire. But it was too heavy for him, and he let it
go.


IV

Andersen sat motionless on the steps of the town hall, and thought. He
thought of how he, Gabriel Andersen, with his spectacles, cane, overcoat
and poems, had lied and betrayed fifteen men. He thought it was terrible,
yet there was neither pity, shame nor regret in his heart. Were he to be
set free, he knew that he, Gabriel Andersen, with the spectacles and
poems, would go straightway and do it again. He tried to examine himself,
to see what was going on inside his soul. But his thoughts were heavy and
confused. For some reason it was more painful for him to think of the
three men lying on the snow, looking at the pale disk of the far-off moon
with their dead, unseeing eyes, than of the murdered officer whom he had
struck two dry, ugly blows on the head. Of his own death he did not think.
It seemed to him that he had done with everything long, long ago.
Something had died, had gone out and left him empty, and he must not think
about it.


And when they grabbed him by the shoulder and he rose, and they quickly
led him through the garden where the cabbages raised their dry heads, he
could not formulate a single thought.


He was conducted to the road and placed at the railing with his back to
one of the iron bars. He fixed his spectacles, put his hands behind him,
and stood there with his neat, stocky body, his head slightly inclined to
one side.


At the last moment he looked in front of him and saw rifle barrels
pointing at his head, chest and stomach, and pale faces with trembling
lips. He distinctly saw how one barrel levelled at his forehead suddenly
dropped.


Something strange and incomprehensible, as if no longer of this world, no
longer earthly, passed through Andersen’s mind. He straightened
himself to the full height of his short body and threw back his head in
simple pride. A strange indistinct sense of cleanness, strength and pride
filled his soul, and everything—the sun and the sky and the people
and the field and death—seemed to him insignificant, remote and
useless.


The bullets hit him in the chest, in the left eye, in the stomach, went
through his clean coat buttoned all the way up. His glasses shivered into
bits. He uttered a shriek, circled round, and fell with his face against
one of the iron bars, his one remaining eye wide open. He clawed the
ground with his outstretched hands as if trying to support himself.


The officer, who had turned green, rushed toward him, and senselessly
thrust the revolver against his neck, and fired twice. Andersen stretched
out on the ground.


The soldiers left quickly. But Andersen remained pressed flat to the
ground. The index finger of his left hand continued to quiver for about
ten seconds.