The Messenger
By ROBERT W. CHAMBERS


Little gray messenger,
Robed like painted Death,
Your robe is dust.
Whom do you seek
Among lilies and closed buds
At dusk?


Among lilies and closed buds
At dusk,
Whom do you seek,
Little gray messenger,
Robed in the awful panoply
Of painted Death?


R.W.C.

From The Mystery of Choice, by Robert W.
        Chambers. Published, 1897, by D. Appleton and Company.
        Copyright by Robert W. Chambers. By permission of Robert W.
        Chambers.




All-wise,
Hast thou seen all there is to see with thy two
            eyes?
Dost thou know all there is to know, and
            so,
Omniscient,
Darest thou still to say thy brother lies?


R.W.C.
I
"The bullet entered here," said Max Fortin, and he placed
    his middle finger over a smooth hole exactly in the center of
    the forehead.
I sat down upon a mound of dry seaweed and unslung my
    fowling piece.
The little chemist cautiously felt the edges of the
    shot-hole, first with his middle finger, and then with his
    thumb.
"Let me see the skull again," said I.
Max Fortin picked it up from the sod.
"It's like all the others," he repeated, wiping his glasses
    on his handkerchief. "I thought you might care to see one of
    the skulls, so I brought this over from the gravel pit. The men
    from Bannalec are digging yet. They ought to stop."
"How many skulls are there altogether?" I inquired.
"They found thirty-eight skulls; there are thirty-nine noted
    in the list. They lie piled up in the gravel pit on the edge of
    Le Bihan's wheat field. The men are at work yet. Le Bihan is
    going to stop them."
"Let's go over," said I; and I picked up my gun and started
    across the cliffs, Portin on one side, Môme on the
    other.
"Who has the list?" I asked, lighting my pipe. "You say
    there is a list?"
"The list was found rolled up in a brass cylinder," said the
    chemist. He added: "You should not smoke here. You know that if
    a single spark drifted into the wheat—"
"Ah, but I have a cover to my pipe," said I, smiling.
Fortin watched me as I closed the pepper-box arrangement
    over the glowing bowl of the pipe. Then he continued:
"The list was made out on thick yellow paper; the brass tube
    has preserved it. It is as fresh to-day as it was in 1760. You
    shall see it."
"Is that the date?"
"The list is dated 'April, 1760.' The Brigadier Durand has
    it. It is not written in French."
"Not written in French!" I exclaimed.
"No," replied Fortin solemnly, "it is written in
    Breton."
"But," I protested, "the Breton language was never written
    or printed in 1760."
"Except by priests," said the chemist.
"I have heard of but one priest who ever wrote the Breton
    language," I began.
Fortin stole a glance at my face.
"You mean—the Black Priest?" he asked.
I nodded.
Fortin opened his mouth to speak again, hesitated, and
    finally shut his teeth obstinately over the wheat stem that he
    was chewing.
"And the Black Priest?" I suggested encouragingly. But I
    knew it was useless; for it is easier to move the stars from
    their courses than to make an obstinate Breton talk. We walked
    on for a minute or two in silence.
"Where is the Brigadier Durand?" I asked, motioning
    Môme to come out of the wheat, which he was trampling as
    though it were heather. As I spoke we came in sight of the
    farther edge of the wheat field and the dark, wet mass of
    cliffs beyond.
"Durand is down there—you can see him; he stands just
    behind the mayor of St. Gildas."
"I see," said I; and we struck straight down, following a
    sun-baked cattle path across the heather.
When we reached the edge of the wheat field, Le Bihan, the
    mayor of St. Gildas, called to me, and I tucked my gun under my
    arm and skirted the wheat to where he stood.
"Thirty-eight skulls," he said in his thin, high-pitched
    voice; "there is but one more, and I am opposed to further
    search. I suppose Fortin told you?"
I shook hands with him, and returned the salute of the
    Brigadier Durand.
"I am opposed to further search," repeated Le Bihan,
    nervously picking at the mass of silver buttons which covered
    the front of his velvet and broadcloth jacket like a
    breastplate of scale armor.
Durand pursed up his lips, twisted his tremendous mustache,
    and hooked his thumbs in his saber belt.
"As for me," he said, "I am in favor of further search."
"Further search for what—for the thirty-ninth skull?"
    I asked.
Le Bihan nodded. Durand frowned at the sunlit sea, rocking
    like a bowl of molten gold from the cliffs to the horizon. I
    followed his eyes. On the dark glistening cliffs, silhouetted
    against the glare of the sea, sat a cormorant, black,
    motionless, its horrible head raised toward heaven.
"Where is that list, Durand?" I asked.
The gendarme rummaged in his despatch pouch and produced a
    brass cylinder about a foot long. Very gravely he unscrewed the
    head and dumped out a scroll of thick yellow paper closely
    covered with writing on both sides. At a nod from Le Bihan he
    handed me the scroll. But I could make nothing of the coarse
    writing, now faded to a dull brown.
"Come, come, Le Bihan," I said impatiently, "translate it,
    won't you? You and Max Fortin make a lot of mystery out of
    nothing, it seems."
Le Bihan went to the edge of the pit where the three
    Bannalec men were digging, gave an order or two in Breton, and
    turned to me.
As I came to the edge of the pit the Bannalec men were
    removing a square piece of sailcloth from what appeared to be a
    pile of cobblestones.
"Look!" said Le Bihan shrilly. I looked. The pile below was
    a heap of skulls. After a moment I clambered down the gravel
    sides of the pit and walked over to the men of Bannalec. They
    saluted me gravely, leaning on their picks and shovels, and
    wiping their sweating faces with sunburned hands.
"How many?" said I in Breton.
"Thirty-eight," they replied.
I glanced around. Beyond the heap of skulls lay two piles of
    human bones. Beside these was a mound of broken, rusted bits of
    iron and steel. Looking closer, I saw that this mound was
    composed of rusty bayonets, saber blades, scythe blades, with
    here and there a tarnished buckle attached to a bit of leather
    hard as iron.
I picked up a couple of buttons and a belt plate. The
    buttons bore the royal arms of England; the belt plate was
    emblazoned with the English arms and also with the number
    "27."
"I have heard my grandfather speak of the terrible English
    regiment, the 27th Foot, which landed and stormed the fort up
    there," said one of the Bannalec men.
"Oh!" said I; "then these are the bones of English
    soldiers?"
"Yes," said the men of Bannalec.
Le Bihan was calling to me from the edge of the pit above,
    and I handed the belt plate and buttons to the men and climbed
    the side of the excavation.
"Well," said I, trying to prevent Môme from leaping up
    and licking my face as I emerged from the pit, "I suppose you
    know what these bones are. What are you going to do with
    them?"
"There was a man," said Le Bihan angrily, "an Englishman,
    who passed here in a dog-cart on his way to Quimper about an
    hour ago, and what do you suppose he wished to do?"
"Buy the relics?" I asked, smiling.
"Exactly—the pig!" piped the mayor of St. Gildas.
    "Jean Marie Tregunc, who found the bones, was standing there
    where Max Fortin stands, and do you know what he answered? He
    spat upon the ground, and said: 'Pig of an Englishman, do you
    take me for a desecrator of graves?'"
I knew Tregunc, a sober, blue-eyed Breton, who lived from
    one year's end to the other without being able to afford a
    single bit of meat for a meal.
"How much did the Englishman offer Tregunc?" I asked.
"Two hundred francs for the skulls alone."
I thought of the relic hunters and the relic buyers on the
    battlefields of our civil war.
"Seventeen hundred and sixty is long ago," I said.
"Respect for the dead can never die," said Fortin.
"And the English soldiers came here to kill your fathers and
    burn your homes," I continued.
"They were murderers and thieves, but—they are dead,"
    said Tregunc, coming up from the beach below, his long sea rake
    balanced on his dripping jersey.
"How much do you earn every year, Jean Marie?" I asked,
    turning to shake hands with him.
"Two hundred and twenty francs, monsieur."
"Forty-five dollars a year," I said. "Bah! you are worth
    more, Jean. Will you take care of my garden for me? My wife
    wished me to ask you. I think it would be worth one hundred
    francs a month to you and to me. Come on, Le Bihan—come
    along, Fortin—and you, Durand. I want somebody to
    translate that list into French for me."
Tregunc stood gazing at me, his blue eyes dilated.
"You may begin at once," I said, smiling, "if the salary
    suits you?"
"It suits," said Tregunc, fumbling for his pipe in a silly
    way that annoyed Le Bihan.
"Then go and begin your work," cried the mayor impatiently;
    and Tregunc started across the moors toward St. Gildas, taking
    off his velvet-ribboned cap to me and gripping his sea rake
    very hard.
"You offer him more than my salary," said the mayor, after a
    moment's contemplation of his silver buttons.
"Pooh!" said I, "what do you do for your salary except play
    dominoes with Max Portin at the Groix Inn?"
Le Bihan turned red, but Durand rattled his saber and winked
    at Max Fortin, and I slipped my arm through the arm of the
    sulky magistrate, laughing.
"There's a shady spot under the cliff," I said; "come on, Le
    Bihan, and read me what is in the scroll."
In a few moments we reached the shadow of the cliff, and I
    threw myself upon the turf, chin on hand, to listen.
The gendarme, Durand, also sat down, twisting his mustache
    into needlelike points. Fortin leaned against the cliff,
    polishing his glasses and examining us with vague, near-sighted
    eyes; and Le Bihan, the mayor, planted himself in our midst,
    rolling up the scroll and tucking it under his arm.
"First of all," he began in a shrill voice, "I am going to
    light my pipe, and while lighting it I shall tell you what I
    have heard about the attack on the fort yonder. My father told
    me; his father told him."
He jerked his head in the direction of the ruined fort, a
    small, square stone structure on the sea cliff, now nothing but
    crumbling walls. Then he slowly produced a tobacco pouch, a bit
    of flint and tinder, and a long-stemmed pipe fitted with a
    microscopical bowl of baked clay. To fill such a pipe requires
    ten minutes' close attention. To smoke it to a finish takes but
    four puffs. It is very Breton, this Breton pipe. It is the
    crystallization of everything Breton.
"Go on," said I, lighting a cigarette.
"The fort," said the mayor, "was built by Louis XIV, and was
    dismantled twice by the English. Louis XV restored it in 1730.
    In 1760 it was carried by assault by the English. They came
    across from the island of Groix—three shiploads, and they
    stormed the fort and sacked St. Julien yonder, and they started
    to burn St. Gildas—you can see the marks of their bullets
    on my house yet; but the men of Bannalec and the men of Lorient
    fell upon them with pike and scythe and blunderbuss, and those
    who did not run away lie there below in the gravel pit
    now—thirty-eight of them."
"And the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked, finishing my
    cigarette.
The mayor had succeeded in filling his pipe, and now he
    began to put his tobacco pouch away.
"The thirty-ninth skull," he mumbled, holding the pipe stem
    between his defective teeth—"the thirty-ninth skull is no
    business of mine. I have told the Bannalec men to cease
    digging."
"But what is—whose is the missing skull?" I persisted
    curiously.
The mayor was busy trying to strike a spark to his tinder.
    Presently he set it aglow, applied it to his pipe, took the
    prescribed four puffs, knocked the ashes out of the bowl, and
    gravely replaced the pipe in his pocket.
"The missing skull?" he asked.
"Yes," said I, impatiently.
The mayor slowly unrolled the scroll and began to read,
    translating from the Breton into French. And this is what he
    read:

    "On the Cliffs of St. Gildas,
    April 13, 1760.
"On this day, by order of the Count of Soisic, general in
    chief of the Breton forces now lying in Kerselec Forest, the
    bodies of thirty-eight English soldiers of the 27th, 50th, and
    72d regiments of Foot were buried in this spot, together with
    their arms and equipments."
The mayor paused and glanced at me reflectively.
"Go on, Le Bihan," I said.
"With them," continued the mayor, turning the scroll and
    reading on the other side, "was buried the body of that vile
    traitor who betrayed the fort to the English. The manner of his
    death was as follows: By order of the most noble Count of
    Soisic, the traitor was first branded upon the forehead with
    the brand of an arrowhead. The iron burned through the flesh
    and was pressed heavily so that the brand should even burn into
    the bone of the skull. The traitor was then led out and bidden
    to kneel. He admitted having guided the English from the island
    of Groix. Although a priest and a Frenchman, he had violated
    his priestly office to aid him in discovering the password to
    the fort. This password he extorted during confession from a
    young Breton girl who was in the habit of rowing across from
    the island of Groix to visit her husband in the fort. When the
    fort fell, this young girl, crazed by the death of her husband,
    sought the Count of Soisic and told how the priest had forced
    her to confess to him all she knew about the fort. The priest
    was arrested at St. Gildas as he was about to cross the river
    to Lorient. When arrested he cursed the girl, Marie
    Trevec——"
"What!" I exclaimed, "Marie Trevec!"
"Marie Trevec," repeated Le Bihan; "the priest cursed Marie
    Trevec, and all her family and descendants. He was shot as he
    knelt, having a mask of leather over his face, because the
    Bretons who composed the squad of execution refused to fire at
    a priest unless his face was concealed. The priest was
    l'Abbé Sorgue, commonly known as the Black Priest on
    account of his dark face and swarthy eyebrows. He was buried
    with a stake through his heart."
Le Bihan paused, hesitated, looked at me, and handed the
    manuscript back to Durand. The gendarme took it and slipped it
    into the brass cylinder.
"So," said I, "the thirty-ninth skull is the skull of the
    Black Priest."
"Yes," said Fortin. "I hope they won't find it."
"I have forbidden them to proceed," said the mayor
    querulously. "You heard me, Max Fortin."
I rose and picked up my gun. Môme came and pushed his
    head into my hand.
"That's a fine dog," observed Durand, also rising.
"Why don't you wish to find his skull?" I asked Le Bihan.
    "It would be curious to see whether the arrow brand really
    burned into the bone."
"There is something in that scroll that I didn't read to
    you," said the mayor grimly. "Do you wish to know what it
    is?"
"Of course," I replied in surprise.
"Give me the scroll again, Durand," he said; then he read
    from the bottom: "I, l'Abbé Sorgue, forced to write the
    above by my executioners, have written it in my own blood; and
    with it I leave my curse. My curse on St. Gildas, on Marie
    Trevec, and on her descendants. I will come back to St. Gildas
    when my remains are disturbed. Woe to that Englishman whom my
    branded skull shall touch!"
"What rot!" I said. "Do you believe it was really written in
    his own blood?"
"I am going to test it," said Fortin, "at the request of
    Monsieur le Maire. I am not anxious for the job, however."
"See," said Le Bihan, holding out the scroll to me, "it is
    signed, 'L'Abbé Sorgue.'"
I glanced curiously over the paper.
"It must be the Black Priest," I said. "He was the only man
    who wrote in the Breton language. This is a wonderfully
    interesting discovery, for now, at last, the mystery of the
    Black Priest's disappearance is cleared up. You will, of
    course, send this scroll to Paris, Le Bihan?"
"No," said the mayor obstinately, "it shall be buried in the
    pit below where the rest of the Black Priest lies."
I looked at him and recognized that argument would be
    useless. But still I said, "It will be a loss to history,
    Monsieur Le Bihan."
"All the worse for history, then," said the enlightened
    Mayor of St. Gildas.
We had sauntered back to the gravel pit while speaking. The
    men of Bannalec were carrying the bones of the English soldiers
    toward the St. Gildas cemetery, on the cliffs to the east,
    where already a knot of white-coiffed women stood in attitudes
    of prayer; and I saw the somber robe of a priest among the
    crosses of the little graveyard.
"They were thieves and assassins; they are dead now,"
    muttered Max Fortin.
"Respect the dead," repeated the Mayor of St. Gildas,
    looking after the Bannalec men.
"It was written in that scroll that Marie Trevec, of Groix
    Island, was cursed by the priest—she and her
    descendants," I said, touching Le Bihan on the arm. "There was
    a Marie Trevec who married an Yves Trevec of St.
    Gildas——"
"It is the same," said Le Bihan, looking at me
    obliquely.
"Oh!" said I; "then they were ancestors of my wife."
"Do you fear the curse?" asked Le Bihan.
"What?" I laughed.
"There was the case of the Purple Emperor," said Max Fortin
    timidly.
Startled for a moment, I faced him, then shrugged my
    shoulders and kicked at a smooth bit of rock which lay near the
    edge of the pit, almost embedded in gravel.
"Do you suppose the Purple-Emperor drank himself crazy
    because he was descended from Marie Trevec?" I asked
    contemptuously.
"Of course not," said Max Fortin hastily.
"Of course not," piped the mayor. "I only—Hellow!
    what's that you're kicking?"
"What?" said I, glancing down, at the same time
    involuntarily giving another kick. The smooth bit of rock
    dislodged itself and rolled out of the loosened gravel at my
    feet.
"The thirty-ninth skull!" I exclaimed. "By jingo, it's the
    noddle of the Black Priest! See! there is the arrowhead branded
    on the front!"
The mayor stepped back. Max Fortin also retreated. There was
    a pause, during which I looked at them, and they looked
    anywhere but at me.
"I don't like it," said the mayor at last, in a husky, high
    voice. "I don't like it! The scroll says he will come back to
    St. Gildas when his remains are disturbed. I—I don't like
    it, Monsieur Darrel—"
"Bosh!" said I; "the poor wicked devil is where he can't get
    out. For Heaven's sake, Le Bihan, what is this stuff you are
    talking in the year of grace 1896?"
The mayor gave me a look.
"And he says 'Englishman.' You are an Englishman, Monsieur
    Darrel," he announced.
"You know better. You know I'm an American."
"It's all the same," said the Mayor of St. Gildas,
    obstinately.
"No, it isn't!" I answered, much exasperated, and
    deliberately pushed the skull till it rolled into the bottom of
    the gravel pit below.
"Cover it up," said I; "bury the scroll with it too, if you
    insist, but I think you ought to send it to Paris. Don't look
    so gloomy, Fortin, unless you believe in werewolves and ghosts.
    Hey! what the—what the devil's the matter with you,
    anyway? What are you staring at, Le Bihan?"
"Come, come," muttered the mayor in a low, tremulous voice,
    "it's time we got out of this. Did you see? Did you see,
    Fortin?"
"I saw," whispered Max Fortin, pallid with fright.
The two men were almost running across the sunny pasture
    now, and I hastened after them, demanding to know what was the
    matter.
"Matter!" chattered the mayor, gasping with exasperation and
    terror. "The skull is rolling up hill again," and he burst into
    a terrified gallop, Max Fortin followed close behind.
I watched them stampeding across the pasture, then turned
    toward the gravel pit, mystified, incredulous. The skull was
    lying on the edge of the pit, exactly where it had been before
    I pushed it over the edge. For a second I stared at it; a
    singular chilly feeling crept up my spinal column, and I turned
    and walked away, sweat starting from the root of every hair on
    my head. Before I had gone twenty paces the absurdity of the
    whole thing struck me. I halted, hot with shame and annoyance,
    and retraced my steps.
There lay the skull.
"I rolled a stone down instead of the skull," I muttered to
    myself. Then with the butt of my gun I pushed the skull over
    the edge of the pit and watched it roll to the bottom; and as
    it struck the bottom of the pit, Môme, my dog, suddenly
    whipped his tail between his legs, whimpered, and made off
    across the moor.
"Môme!" I shouted, angry and astonished; but the dog
    only fled the faster, and I ceased calling from sheer
    surprise.
"What the mischief is the matter with that dog!" I thought.
    He had never before played me such a trick.
Mechanically I glanced into the pit, but I could not see the
    skull. I looked down. The skull lay at my feet again, touching
    them.
"Good heavens!" I stammered, and struck at it blindly with
    my gunstock. The ghastly thing flew into the air, whirling over
    and over, and rolled again down the sides of the pit to the
    bottom. Breathlessly I stared at it, then, confused and
    scarcely comprehending, I stepped back from the pit, still
    facing it, one, ten, twenty paces, my eyes almost starting from
    my head, as though I expected to see the thing roll up from the
    bottom of the pit under my very gaze. At last I turned my back
    to the pit and strode out across the gorse-covered moorland
    toward my home. As I reached the road that winds from St.
    Gildas to St. Julien I gave one hasty glance at the pit over my
    shoulder. The sun shone hot on the sod about the excavation.
    There was something white and bare and round on the turf at the
    edge of the pit. It might have been a stone; there were plenty
    of them lying about.
II
When I entered my garden I saw Môme sprawling on the
    stone doorstep. He eyed me sideways and flopped his tail.
"Are you not mortified, you idiot dog?" I said, looking
    about the upper windows for Lys.
Môme rolled over on his back and raised one
    deprecating forepaw, as though to ward off calamity.
"Don't act as though I was in the habit of beating you to
    death," I said, disgusted. I had never in my life raised whip
    to the brute. "But you are a fool dog," I continued. "No, you
    needn't come to be babied and wept over; Lys can do that, if
    she insists, but I am ashamed of you, and you can go to the
    devil."
Môme slunk off into the house, and I followed,
    mounting directly to my wife's boudoir. It was empty.
"Where has she gone?" I said, looking hard at Môme,
    who had followed me. "Oh! I see you don't know. Don't pretend
    you do. Come off that lounge! Do you think Lys wants
    tan-colored hairs all over her lounge?"
I rang the bell for Catherine and Fine, but they didn't know
    where "madame" had gone; so I went into my room, bathed,
    exchanged my somewhat grimy shooting clothes for a suit of
    warm, soft knickerbockers, and, after lingering some extra
    moments over my toilet—for I was particular, now that I
    had married Lys—I went down to the garden and took a
    chair out under the fig-trees.
"Where can she be?" I wondered, Môme came sneaking out
    to be comforted, and I forgave him for Lys's sake, whereupon he
    frisked.
"You bounding cur," said I, "now what on earth started you
    off across the moor? If you do it again I'll push you along
    with a charge of dust shot."
As yet I had scarcely dared think about the ghastly
    hallucination of which I had been a victim, but now I faced it
    squarely, flushing a little with mortification at the thought
    of my hasty retreat from the gravel pit.
"To think," I said aloud, "that those old woman's tales of
    Max Fortin and Le Bihan should have actually made me see what
    didn't exist at all! I lost my nerve like a schoolboy in a dark
    bedroom." For I knew now that I had mistaken a round stone for
    a skull each time, and had pushed a couple of big pebbles into
    the pit instead of the skull itself.
"By jingo!" said I, "I'm nervous; my liver must be in a
    devil of a condition if I see such things when I'm awake! Lys
    will know what to give me."
I felt mortified and irritated and sulky, and thought
    disgustedly of Le Bihan and Max Fortin.
But after a while I ceased speculating, dismissed the mayor,
    the chemist, and the skull from my mind, and smoked pensively,
    watching the sun low dipping in the western ocean. As the
    twilight fell for a moment over ocean and moorland, a wistful,
    restless happiness filled my heart, the happiness that all men
    know—all men who have loved.
Slowly the purple mist crept out over the sea; the cliffs
    darkened; the forest was shrouded.
Suddenly the sky above burned with the afterglow, and the
    world was alight again.
Cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the cliffs were
    tinted with it; moor and pasture, heather and forest burned and
    pulsated with the gentle flush. I saw the gulls turning and
    tossing above the sand bar, their snowy wings tipped with pink;
    I saw the sea swallows sheering the surface of the still river,
    stained to its placid depths with warm reflections of the
    clouds. The twitter of drowsy hedge birds broke out in the
    stillness; a salmon rolled its shining side above
    tidewater.
The interminable monotone of the ocean intensified the
    silence. I sat motionless, holding my breath as one who listens
    to the first low rumor of an organ. All at once the pure
    whistle of a nightingale cut the silence, and the first
    moonbeam silvered the wastes of mist-hung waters.
I raised my head.
Lys stood before me in the garden.
When we had kissed each other, we linked arms and moved up
    and down the gravel walks, watching the moonbeams sparkle on
    the sand bar as the tide ebbed and ebbed. The broad beds of
    white pinks about us were atremble with hovering white moths;
    the October roses hung all abloom, perfuming the salt wind.
"Sweetheart," I said, "where is Yvonne? Has she promised to
    spend Christmas with us?"
"Yes, Dick; she drove me down from Plougat this afternoon.
    She sent her love to you. I am not jealous. What did you
    shoot?"
"A hare and four partridges. They are in the gun room. I
    told Catherine not to touch them until you had seen them."
Now I suppose I knew that Lys could not be particularly
    enthusiastic over game or guns; but she pretended she was, and
    always scornfully denied that it was for my sake and not for
    the pure love of sport. So she dragged me off to inspect the
    rather meager game bag, and she paid me pretty compliments, and
    gave a little cry of delight and pity as I lifted the enormous
    hare out of the sack by his ears.
"He'll eat no more of our lettuce," I said attempting to
    justify the assassination.
"Unhappy little bunny—and what a beauty! O Dick, you
    are a splendid shot, are you not?"
I evaded the question and hauled out a partridge.
"Poor little dead things'" said Lys in a whisper; "it seems
    a pity—doesn't it, Dick? But then you are so
    clever——"
"We'll have them broiled," I said guardedly, "tell
    Catherine."
Catherine came in to take away the game, and presently 'Fine
    Lelocard, Lys's maid, announced dinner, and Lys tripped away to
    her boudoir.
I stood an instant contemplating her blissfully, thinking,
    "My boy, you're the happiest fellow in the world—you're
    in love with your wife'"
I walked into the dining-room, beamed at the plates, walked
    out again; met Tregunc in the hallway, beamed on him; glanced
    into the kitchen, beamed at Catherine, and went up stairs,
    still beaming.
Before I could knock at Lys's door it opened, and Lys came
    hastily out. When she saw me she gave a little cry of relief,
    and nestled close to my breast.
"There is something peering in at my window," she said.
"What!" I cried angrily.
"A man, I think, disguised as a priest, and he has a mask
    on. He must have climbed up by the bay tree."
I was down the stairs and out of doors in no time. The
    moonlit garden was absolutely deserted. Tregunc came up, and
    together we searched the hedge and shrubbery around the house
    and out to the road.
"Jean Marie," said I at length, "loose my bulldog—he
    knows you—and take your supper on the porch where you can
    watch. My wife says the fellow is disguised as a priest, and
    wears a mask."
Tregunc showed his white teeth in a smile. "He will not care
    to venture in here again, I think, Monsieur Darrel."
I went back and found Lys seated quietly at the table.
"The soup is ready, dear," she said. "Don't worry; it was
    only some foolish lout from Bannalec. No one in St. Gildas or
    St. Julien would do such a thing."
I was too much exasperated to reply at first, but Lys
    treated it as a stupid joke, and after a while I began to look
    at it in that light.
Lys told me about Yvonne, and reminded me of my promise to
    have Herbert Stuart down to meet her.
"You wicked diplomat!" I protested. "Herbert is in Paris,
    and hard at work for the Salon."
"Don't you think he might spare a week to flirt with the
    prettiest girl in Finistere?" inquired Lys innocently.
"Prettiest girl! Not much!" I said.
"Who is, then?" urged Lys.
I laughed a trifle sheepishly.
"I suppose you mean me, Dick," said Lys, coloring up.
"Now I bore you, don't I?"
"Bore me? Ah, no, Dick."
After coffee and cigarettes were served I spoke about
    Tregunc, and Lys approved.
"Poor Jean! He will be glad, won't he? What a dear fellow
    you are!"
"Nonsense," said I; "we need a gardener; you said so
    yourself, Lys."
But Lys leaned over and kissed me, and then bent down and
    hugged Môme—who whistled through his nose in
    sentimental appreciation.
"I am a very happy woman," said Lys.
"Môme was a very bad dog to-day," I observed.
"Poor Môme!" said Lys, smiling.
When dinner was over and Môme lay snoring before the
    blaze—for the October nights are often chilly in
    Finistere—Lys curled up in the chimney corner with her
    embroidery, and gave me a swift glance from under her dropping
    lashes.
"You look like a schoolgirl, Lys," I said teasingly. "I
    don't believe you are sixteen yet."
She pushed back her heavy burnished hair thoughtfully. Her
    wrist was as white as surf foam.
"Have we been married four years? I don't believe it," I
    said.
She gave me another swift glance and touched the embroidery
    on her knee, smiling faintly.
"I see," said I, also smiling at the embroidered garment.
    "Do you think it will fit?"
"Fit?" repeated Lys. Then she laughed
"And," I persisted, "are you perfectly sure that
    you—er—we shall need it?"
"Perfectly," said Lys. A delicate color touched her cheeks
    and neck. She held up the little garment, all fluffy with misty
    lace and wrought with quaint embroidery.
"It is very gorgeous," said I; "don't use your eyes too
    much, dearest. May I smoke a pipe?"
"Of course," she said selecting a skein of pale blue
    silk.
For a while I sat and smoked in silence, watching her
    slender fingers among the tinted silks and thread of gold.
Presently she spoke: "What did you say your crest is,
    Dick?"
"My crest? Oh, something or other rampant on a something or
    other——"
"Dick!"
"Dearest?"
"Don't be flippant."
"But I really forget. It's an ordinary crest; everybody in
    New York has them. No family should be without 'em."
"You are disagreeable, Dick. Send Josephine upstairs for my
    album."
"Are you going to put that crest on
    the—the—whatever it is?"
"I am; and my own crest, too."
I thought of the Purple Emperor and wondered a little.
"You didn't know I had one, did you?" she smiled.
"What is it?" I replied evasively.
"You shall see. Ring for Josephine."
I rang, and, when 'Fine appeared, Lys gave her some orders
    in a low voice, and Josephine trotted away, bobbing her
    white-coiffed head with a "Bien, Madame!"
After a few minutes she returned, bearing a tattered, musty
    volume, from which the gold and blue had mostly
    disappeared.
I took the book in my hands and examined the ancient
    emblazoned covers.
"Lilies!" I exclaimed.
"Fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely.
"Oh!" said I, astonished, and opened the book.
"You have never before seen this book?" asked Lys, with a
    touch of malice in her eyes.
"You know I haven't. Hello! What's this? Oho! So there
    should be a de before Trevec? Lys de Trevec? Then why in the
    world did the Purple Emperor——"
"Dick!" cried Lys.
"All right," said I. "Shall I read about the Sieur de Trevec
    who rode to Saladin's tent alone to seek for medicine for St.
    Louise? Or shall I read about—what is it? Oh, here it is,
    all down in black and white—about the Marquis de Trevec
    who drowned himself before Alva's eyes rather than surrender
    the banner of the fleur-de-lis to Spain? It's all written here.
    But, dear, how about that soldier named Trevec who was killed
    in the old fort on the cliff yonder?"
"He dropped the de, and the Trevecs since then have been
    Republicans," said Lys—"all except me."
"That's quite right," said I; "it is time that we
    Republicans should agree upon some feudal system. My dear, I
    drink to the king!" and I raised my wine glass and looked at
    Lys.
"To the king," said Lys, flushing. She smoothed out the tiny
    garment on her knees; she touched the glass with her lips; her
    eyes were very sweet. I drained the glass to the king.
After a silence I said: "I will tell the king stories. His
    majesty shall be amused."
"His majesty," repeated Lys softly.
"Or hers," I laughed. "Who knows?"
"Who knows?" murmured Lys; with a gentle sigh.
"I know some stories about Jack the Giant-Killer," I
    announced. "Do you, Lys?"
"I? No, not about a giant-killer, but I know all about the
    werewolf, and Jeanne-la-Flamme, and the Man in Purple Tatters,
    and—O dear me, I know lots more."
"You are very wise," said I. "I shall teach his majesty,
    English."
"And I Breton," cried Lys jealously.
"I shall bring playthings to the king," said I—"big
    green lizards from the gorse, little gray mullets to swim in
    glass globes, baby rabbits from the forest of
    Kerselec——"
"And I," said Lys, "will bring the first primrose, the first
    branch of aubepine, the first jonquil, to the king—my
    king."
"Our king," said I; and there was peace in Finistere.
I lay back, idly turning the leaves of the curious old
    volume.
"I am looking," said I, "for the crest."
"The crest, dear? It is a priest's head with an arrow-shaped
    mark on the forehead, on a field——"
I sat up and stared at my wife.
"Dick, whatever is the matter?" she smiled. "The story is
    there in that book. Do you care to read it? No? Shall I tell it
    to you? Well, then: It happened in the third crusade. There was
    a monk whom men called the Black Priest. He turned apostate,
    and sold himself to the enemies of Christ. A Sieur de Trevec
    burst into the Saracen camp, at the head of only one hundred
    lances, and carried the Black Priest away out of the very midst
    of their army."
"So that is how you come by the crest," I said quietly; but
    I thought of the branded skull in the gravel pit, and
    wondered.
"Yes," said Lys. "The Sieur de Trevec cut the Black Priest's
    head off, but first he branded him with an arrow mark on the
    forehead. The book says it was a pious action, and the Sieur de
    Trevec got great merit by it. But I think it was cruel, the
    branding," she sighed.
"Did you ever hear of any other Black Priest?"
"Yes. There was one in the last century, here in St. Gildas.
    He cast a white shadow in the sun. He wrote in the Breton
    language. Chronicles, too, I believe. I never saw them. His
    name was the same as that of the old chronicler, and of the
    other priest, Jacques Sorgue. Some said he was a lineal
    descendant of the traitor. Of course the first Black Priest was
    bad enough for anything. But if he did have a child, it need
    not have been the ancestor of the last Jacques Sorgue. They say
    he was so good he was not allowed to die, but was caught up to
    heaven one day," added Lys, with believing eyes.
I smiled.
"But he disappeared," persisted Lys.
"I'm afraid his journey was in another direction," I said
    jestingly, and thoughtlessly told her the story of the morning.
    I had utterly forgotten the masked man at her window, but
    before I finished I remembered him fast enough, and realized
    what I had done as I saw her face whiten.
"Lys," I urged tenderly, "that was only some clumsy clown's
    trick. You said so yourself. You are not superstitious, my
    dear?"
Her eyes were on mine. She slowly drew the little gold cross
    from her bosom and kissed it. But her lips trembled as they
    pressed the symbol of faith.
III
About nine o'clock the next morning I walked into the Groix
    Inn and sat down at the long discolored oaken table, nodding
    good-day to Marianne Bruyere, who in turn bobbed her white
    coiffe at me.
"My clever Bannalec maid," said I, "what is good for a
    stirrup-cup at the Groix Inn?"
"Schist?" she inquired in Breton.
"With a dash of red wine, then," I replied.
She brought the delicious Quimperle cider, and I poured a
    little Bordeaux into it. Marianne watched me with laughing
    black eyes.
"What makes your cheeks so red, Marianne?" I asked. "Has
    Jean Marie been here?"
"We are to be married, Monsieur Darrel," she laughed.
"Ah! Since when has Jean Marie Tregunc lost his head?"
"His head? Oh, Monsieur Darrel—his heart, you
    mean!"
"So I do," said I. "Jean Marie is a practical fellow."
"It is all due to your kindness—" began the girl, but
    I raised my hand and held up the glass.
"It's due to himself. To your happiness, Marianne"; and I
    took a hearty draught of the schist. "Now," said I, "tell me
    where I can find Le Bihan and Max Fortin."
"Monsieur Le Bihan and Monsieur Fortin are above in the
    broad room. I believe they are examining the Red Admiral's
    effects."
"To send them to Paris? Oh, I know. May I go up,
    Marianne?"
"And God go with you," smiled the girl.
When I knocked at the door of the broad room above little
    Max Fortin opened it. Dust covered his spectacles and nose; his
    hat, with the tiny velvet ribbons fluttering, was all awry.
"Come in, Monsieur Darrel," he said; "the mayor and I are
    packing up the effects of the Purple Emperor and of the poor
    Red Admiral."
"The collections?" I asked, entering the room. "You must be
    very careful in packing those butterfly cases; the slightest
    jar might break wings and antennas, you know."
Le Bihan shook hands with me and pointed to the great pile
    of boxes.
"They're all cork lined," he said, "but Fortin and I are
    putting felt around each box. The Entomological Society of
    Paris pays the freight."
The combined collection of the Red Admiral and the Purple
    Emperor made a magnificent display.
I lifted and inspected case after case set with gorgeous
    butterflies and moths, each specimen carefully labelled with
    the name in Latin. There were cases filled with crimson tiger
    moths all aflame with color; cases devoted to the common yellow
    butterflies; symphonies in orange and pale yellow; cases of
    soft gray and dun-colored sphinx moths; and cases of grayish
    nettle-bed butterflies of the numerous family of Vanessa.
All alone in a great case by itself was pinned the purple
    emperor, the Apatura Iris, that fatal specimen that had given
    the Purple Emperor his name and quietus.
I remembered the butterfly, and stood looking at it with
    bent eyebrows.
Le Bihan glanced up from the floor where he was nailing down
    the lid of a box full of cases.
"It is settled, then," said he, "that madame, your wife,
    gives the Purple Emperor's entire Collection to the city of
    Paris?"
I nodded.
"Without accepting anything for it?"
"It is a gift," I said.
"Including the purple emperor there in the case? That
    butterfly is worth a great deal of money," persisted Le
    Bihan.
"You don't suppose that we would wish to sell that specimen,
    do you?" I answered a trifle sharply.
"If I were you I should destroy it," said the mayor in his
    high-pitched voice.
"That would be nonsense," said I, "like your burying the
    brass cylinder and scroll yesterday."
"It was not nonsense," said Le Bihan doggedly, "and I should
    prefer not to discuss the subject of the scroll."
I looked at Max Portin, who immediately avoided my eyes.
"You are a pair of superstitious old women," said I, digging
    my hands into my pockets; "you swallow every nursery tale that
    is invented."
"What of it?" said Le Bihan sulkily; "there's more truth
    than lies in most of 'em."
"Oh!" I sneered, "does the Mayor of St. Gildas and St.
    Julien believe in the loup-garou?"
"No, not in the loup-garou."
"In what, then—Jeanne-la-Flamme?"
"That," said Le Bihan with conviction, "is history."
"The devil it is!" said I; "and perhaps, Monsieur the mayor,
    your faith in giants is unimpaired?"
"There were giants—everybody knows it," growled Max
    Fortin.
"And you a chemist!" I observed scornfully.
"Listen, Monsieur Darrel," squeaked Le Bihan; "you know
    yourself that the Purple Emperor was a scientific man. Now
    suppose I should tell you that he always refused to include in
    his collection a Death's Messenger?"
"A what?" I exclaimed.
"You know what I mean—that moth that flies by night;
    some call it the Death's Head, but in St. Gildas we call it
    'Death's Messenger.'"
"Oh!" said I, "you mean that big sphinx moth that is
    commonly known as the 'death's-head moth.' Why the mischief
    should the people here call it death's messenger?"
"For hundreds of years it has been known as death's
    messenger in St. Gildas," said Max Fortin. "Even Froissart
    speaks of it in his commentaries on Jacques Sorgue's
    Chronicles. The book is in your library."
"Sorgue? And who was Jacques Sorgue? I never read his
    book."
"Jacques Sorgue
         was the son of some unfrocked priest—I forget. It
         was during the crusades."
"Good Heavens!" I burst out, "I've been hearing of nothing
    but crusades and priests and death and sorcery ever since I
    kicked that skull into the gravel pit, and I am tired of it, I
    tell you frankly. One would think we lived in the dark ages. Do
    you know what year of our Lord it is, Le Bihan?"
"Eighteen hundred and ninety-six," replied the mayor.
"And yet you two hulking men are afraid of a death's-head
    moth."
"I don't care to have one fly into the window," said Max
    Fortin; "it means evil to the house and the people in it."
"God alone knows why he marked one of his creatures with a
    yellow death's head on the back," observed Le Bihan piously,
    "but I take it that he meant it as a warning; and I propose to
    profit by it," he added triumphantly.
"See here, Le Bihan," I said; "by a stretch of imagination
    one can make out a skull on the thorax of a certain big sphinx
    moth. What of it?"
"It is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor wagging his
    head.
"It squeaks when handled," added Max Fortin.
"Some creatures squeak all the time," I observed, looking
    hard at Le Bihan.
"Pigs," added the mayor.
"Yes, and asses," I replied. "Listen, Le Bihan: do you mean
    to tell me that you saw that skull roll uphill yesterday?"
The mayor shut his mouth tightly and picked up his
    hammer.
"Don't be obstinate," I said; "I asked you a question."
"And I refuse to answer," snapped Le Bihan. "Fortin saw what
    I saw; let him talk about it."
I looked searchingly at the little chemist.
"I don't say that I saw it actually roll up out of the pit,
    all by itself," said Fortin with a shiver, "but—but then,
    how did it come up out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by
    itself?"
"It didn't come up at all; that was a yellow cobblestone
    that you mistook for the skull again," I replied. "You were
    nervous, Max."
"A—a very curious cobblestone, Monsieur Darrel," said
    Fortin.
"I also was a victim to the same hallucination," I
    continued, "and I regret to say that I took the trouble to roll
    two innocent cobblestones into the gravel pit, imagining each
    time that it was the skull I was rolling."
"It was," observed Le Bihan with a morose shrug.
"It just shows," said I, ignoring the mayor's remark, "how
    easy it is to fix up a train of coincidences so that the result
    seems to savor of the supernatural. Now, last night my wife
    imagined that she saw a priest in a mask peer in at her
    window——"
Fortin and Le Bihan scrambled hastily from their knees,
    dropping hammer and nails.
"W-h-a-t—what's that?" demanded the mayor.
I repeated what I had said. Max Fortin turned livid.
"My God!" muttered Le Bihan, "the Black Priest is in St.
    Gildas!"
"D-don't you—you know the old prophecy?" stammered
    Fortin; "Froissart quotes it from Jacques Sorgue:


"'When the Black Priest rises from the dead,
St. Gildas folk shall shriek in bed;
When the Black Priest rises from his grave,
May the good God St. Gildas save!'"


"Aristide Le Bihan," I said angrily, "and you, Max Fortin,
    I've got enough of this nonsense! Some foolish lout from
    Bannalec has been in St. Gildas playing tricks to frighten old
    fools like you. If you have nothing better to talk about than
    nursery legends I'll wait until you come to your senses.
    Good-morning." And I walked out, more disturbed than I cared to
    acknowledge to myself.
The day had become misty and overcast. Heavy, wet clouds
    hung in the east. I heard the surf thundering against the
    cliffs, and the gray gulls squealed as they tossed and turned
    high in the sky. The tide was creeping across the river sands,
    higher, higher, and I saw the seaweed floating on the beach,
    and the lancons springing from the foam, silvery threadlike
    flashes in the gloom. Curlew were flying up the river in twos
    and threes; the timid sea swallows skimmed across the moors
    toward some quiet, lonely pool, safe from the coming tempest.
    In every hedge field birds were gathering, huddling together,
    twittering restlessly.
When I reached the cliffs I sat down, resting my chin on my
    clenched hands. Already a vast curtain of rain, sweeping across
    the ocean miles away, hid the island of Groix. To the east,
    behind the white semaphore on the hills, black clouds crowded
    up over the horizon. After a little the thunder boomed, dull,
    distant, and slender skeins of lightning unraveled across the
    crest of the coming storm. Under the cliff at my feet the surf
    rushed foaming over the shore, and the lancons jumped and
    skipped and quivered until they seemed to be but the
    reflections of the meshed lightning.
I turned to the east. It was raining over Groix, it was
    raining at Sainte Barbe, it was raining now at the semaphore.
    High in the storm whirl a few gulls pitched; a nearer cloud
    trailed veils of rain in its wake; the sky was spattered with
    lightning; the thunder boomed.
As I rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the back of my
    hand, and another, and yet another on my face. I gave a last
    glance at the sea, where the waves were bursting into strange
    white shapes that seemed to fling out menacing arms toward me.
    Then something moved on the cliff, something black as the black
    rock it clutched—a filthy cormorant, craning its hideous
    head at the sky.
Slowly I plodded homeward across the somber moorland, where
    the gorse stems glimmered with a dull metallic green, and the
    heather, no longer violet and purple, hung drenched and
    dun-colored among the dreary rocks. The wet turf creaked under
    my heavy boots, the black-thorn scraped and grated against knee
    and elbow. Over all lay a strange light, pallid, ghastly, where
    the sea spray whirled across the landscape and drove into my
    face until it grew numb with the cold. In broad bands, rank
    after rank, billow on billow, the rain burst out across the
    endless moors, and yet there was no wind to drive it at such a
    pace.
Lys stood at the door as I turned into the garden, motioning
    me to hasten; and then for the first time I became conscious
    that I was soaked to the skin.
"However in the world did you come to stay out when such a
    storm threatened?" she said. "Oh, you are dripping! Go quickly
    and change; I have laid your warm underwear on the bed,
    Dick."
I kissed my wife, and went upstairs to change my dripping
    clothes for something more comfortable.
When I returned to the morning room there was a driftwood
    fire on the hearth, and Lys sat in the chimney corner
    embroidering.
"Catherine tells me that the fishing fleet from Lorient is
    out. Do you think they are in danger, dear?" asked Lys, raising
    her blue eyes to mine as I entered.
"There is no wind, and there will be no sea," said I,
    looking out of the window. Far across the moor I could see the
    black cliffs looming in the mist.
"How it rains!" murmured Lys; "come to the fire, Dick."
I threw myself on the fur rug, my hands in my pockets, my
    head on Lys's knees.
"Tell me a story," I said. "I feel like a boy of ten."
Lys raised a finger to her scarlet lips. I always waited for
    her to do that.
"Will you be very still, then?" she said.
"Still as death."
"Death," echoed a voice, very softly.
"Did you speak, Lys?" I asked, turning so that I could see
    her face.
"No; did you, Dick?"
"Who said 'death'?" I asked, startled.
"Death," echoed a voice, softly.
I sprang up and looked about. Lys rose too, her needles and
    embroidery falling to the floor. She seemed about to faint,
    leaning heavily on me, and I led her to the window and opened
    it a little way to give her air. As I did so the chain
    lightning split the zenith, the thunder crashed, and a sheet of
    rain swept into the room, driving with it something that
    fluttered—something that flapped, and squeaked, and beat
    upon the rug with soft, moist wings.
We bent over it together, Lys clinging to me, and we saw
    that it was a death's-head moth drenched with rain.
The dark day passed slowly as we sat beside the fire, hand
    in hand, her head against my breast, speaking of sorrow and
    mystery and death. For Lys believed that there were things on
    earth that none might understand, things that must be nameless
    forever and ever, until God rolls up the scroll of life and all
    is ended. We spoke of hope and fear and faith, and the mystery
    of the saints; we spoke of the beginning and the end, of the
    shadow of sin, of omens, and of love. The moth still lay on the
    floor quivering its somber wings in the warmth of the fire, the
    skull and ribs clearly etched upon its neck and body.
"If it is a messenger of death to this house," I said, "why
    should we fear, Lys?"
"Death should be welcome to those who love God," murmured
    Lys, and she drew the cross from her breast and kissed it.
"The moth might die if I threw it out into the storm," I
    said after a silence.
"Let it remain," sighed Lys.
Late that night my wife lay sleeping, and I sat beside her
    bed and read in the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue. I shaded the
    candle, but Lys grew restless, and finally I took the book down
    into the morning room, where the ashes of the fire rustled and
    whitened on the hearth.
The death's-head moth lay on the rug before the fire where I
    had left it. At first I thought it was dead, but when I looked
    closer I saw a lambent fire in its amber eyes. The straight
    white shadow it cast across the floor wavered as the candle
    flickered.
The pages of the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue were damp and
    sticky; the illuminated gold and blue initials left flakes of
    azure and gilt where my hand brushed them.
"It is not paper at all; it is thin parchment," I said to
    myself; and I held the discolored page close to the candle
    flame and read, translating laboriously:
"I, Jacques Sorgue, saw all these things. And I saw the
    Black Mass celebrated in the chapel of St. Gildas-on-the-Cliff.
    And it was said by the Abbé Sorgue, my kinsman: for
    which deadly sin the apostate priest was seized by the most
    noble Marquis of Plougastel and by him condemned to be burned
    with hot irons, until his seared soul quit its body and fly to
    its master the devil. But when the Black Priest lay in the
    crypt of Plougastel, his master Satan came at night and set him
    free, and carried him across land and sea to Mahmoud, which is
    Soldan or Saladin. And I, Jacques Sorgue, traveling afterward
    by sea, beheld with my own eyes my kinsman, the Black Priest of
    St. Gildas, borne along in the air upon a vast black wing,
    which was the wing of his master Satan. And this was seen also
    by two men of the crew."
I turned the page. The wings of the moth on the floor began
    to quiver. I read on and on, my eyes blurring under the
    shifting candle flame. I read of battles and of saints, and I
    learned how the Great Soldan made his pact with Satan, and then
    I came to the Sieur de Trevec, and read how he seized the Black
    Priest in the midst of Saladin's tents and carried him away and
    cut off his head first branding him on the forehead. "And
    before he suffered," said the Chronicle, "he cursed the Sieur
    de Trevec and his descendants, and he said he would surely
    return to St. Gildas. 'For the violence you do to me, I will do
    violence to you. For the evil I suffer at your hands, I will
    work evil on you and your descendants. Woe to your children,
    Sieur de Trevec!'" There was a whirr, a beating of strong
    wings, and my candle flashed up as in a sudden breeze. A
    humming filled the room; the great moth darted hither and
    thither, beating, buzzing, on ceiling and wall. I flung down my
    book and stepped forward. Now it lay fluttering upon the window
    sill, and for a moment I had it under my hand, but the thing
    squeaked and I shrank back. Then suddenly it darted across the
    candle flame; the light flared and went out, and at the same
    moment a shadow moved in the darkness outside. I raised my eyes
    to the window. A masked face was peering in at me.
Quick as thought I whipped out my revolver and fired every
    cartridge, but the face advanced beyond the window, the glass
    melting away before it like mist, and through the smoke of my
    revolver I saw something creep swiftly into the room. Then I
    tried to cry out, but the thing was at my throat, and I fell
    backward among the ashes of the hearth.

When my eyes unclosed I was lying on the hearth, my head
    among the cold ashes. Slowly I got on my knees, rose painfully,
    and groped my way to a chair. On the floor lay my revolver,
    shining in the pale light of early morning. My mind clearing by
    degrees, I looked, shuddering, at the window. The glass was
    unbroken. I stooped stiffly, picked up my revolver and opened
    the cylinder. Every cartridge had been fired. Mechanically I
    closed the cylinder and placed the revolver in my pocket. The
    book, the Chronicles of Jacques Sorgue, lay on the table beside
    me, and as I started to close it I glanced at the page. It was
    all splashed with rain, and the lettering had run, so that the
    page was merely a confused blur of gold and red and black. As I
    stumbled toward the door I cast a fearful glance over my
    shoulder. The death's-head moth crawled shivering on the
    rug.
IV
The sun was about three hours high. I must have slept, for I
    was aroused by the sudden gallop of horses under our window.
    People were shouting and calling in the road. I sprang up and
    opened the sash. Le Bihan was there, an image of helplessness,
    and Max Fortin stood beside him polishing his glasses. Some
    gendarmes had just arrived from Quimperle, and I could hear
    them around the corner of the house, stamping, and rattling
    their sabres and carbines, as they led their horses into my
    stable.
Lys sat up, murmuring half-sleepy, half-anxious
    questions.
"I don't know," I answered. "I am going out to see what it
    means."
"It is like the day they came to arrest you," Lys said,
    giving me a troubled look. But I kissed her and laughed at her
    until she smiled too. Then I flung on coat and cap and hurried
    down the stairs.
The first person I saw standing in the road was the
    Brigadier Durand.
"Hello!" said I, "have you come to arrest me again? What the
    devil is all this fuss about, anyway?"
"We were telegraphed for an hour ago," said Durand briskly,
    "and for a sufficient reason, I think. Look there, Monsieur
    Darrel!"
He pointed to the ground almost under my feet.
"Good heavens!" I cried, "where did that puddle of blood
    come from?"
"That's what I want to know, Monsieur Darrel. Max Fortin
    found it at daybreak. See, it's splashed all over the grass,
    too. A trail of it leads into your garden, across the flower
    beds to your very window, the one that opens from the morning
    room. There is another trail leading from this spot across the
    road to the cliffs, then to the gravel pit, and thence across
    the moor to the forest of Kerselec. We are going to mount in a
    minute and search the bosquets. Will you join us? Bon Dieu! but
    the fellow bled like an ox. Max Fortin says it's human blood,
    or I should not have believed it."
The little chemist of Quimperle came up at that moment,
    rubbing his glasses with a colored handkerchief.
"Yes, it is human blood," he said, "but one thing puzzles
    me: the corpuscles are yellow. I never saw any human blood
    before with yellow corpuscles. But your English Doctor Thompson
    asserts that he has——"
"Well, it's human blood, anyway—isn't it?" insisted
    Durand, impatiently.
"Ye-es," admitted Max Fortin.
"Then it's my business to trail it," said the big gendarme,
    and he called his men and gave the order to mount.
"Did you hear anything last night?" asked Durand of me.
"I heard the rain. I wonder the rain did not wash away these
    traces."
"They must have come after the rain ceased. See this thick
    splash, how it lies over and weighs down the wet grass blades.
    Pah!"
It was a heavy, evil-looking clot, and I stepped back from
    it, my throat closing in disgust.
"My theory," said the brigadier, "is this: Some of those
    Biribi fishermen, probably the Icelanders, got an extra glass
    of cognac into their hides and quarreled on the road. Some of
    them were slashed, and staggered to your house. But there is
    only one trail, and yet—and yet, how could all that blood
    come from only one person? Well, the wounded man, let us say,
    staggered first to your house and then back here, and he
    wandered off, drunk and dying, God knows where. That's my
    theory."
"A very good one," said I calmly. "And you are going to
    trail him?"
"Yes."
"When?"
"At once. Will you come?"
"Not now. I'll gallop over by-and-bye. You are going to the
    edge of the Kerselec forest?"
"Yes; you will hear us calling. Are you coming, Max Fortin?
    And you, Le Bihan? Good; take the dog-cart."
The big gendarme tramped around the corner to the stable and
    presently returned mounted on a strong gray horse, his sabre
    shone on his saddle; his pale yellow and white facings were
    spotless. The little crowd of white-coiffed women with their
    children fell back as Durand touched spurs and clattered away
    followed by his two troopers. Soon after Le Bihan and Max
    Fortin also departed in the mayor's dingy dog-cart.
"Are you coming?" piped Le Bihan shrilly.
"In a quarter of an hour," I replied, and went back to the
    house.
When I opened the door of the morning room the death's-head
    moth was beating its strong wings against the window. For a
    second I hesitated, then walked over and opened the sash. The
    creature fluttered out, whirred over the flower beds a moment,
    then darted across the moorland toward the sea. I called the
    servants together and questioned them. Josephine, Catherine,
    Jean Marie Tregunc, not one of them had heard the slightest
    disturbance during the night. Then I told Jean Marie to saddle
    my horse, and while I was speaking Lys came down.
"Dearest," I began, going to her.
"You must tell me everything you know, Dick," she
    interrupted, looking me earnestly in the face.
"But there is nothing to tell—only a drunken brawl,
    and some one wounded."
"And you are going to ride—where, Dick?"
"Well, over to the edge of Kerselec forest. Durand and the
    mayor, and Max Fortin, have gone on, following a—a
    trail."
"What trail?"
"Some blood."
"Where did they find it?"
"Out in the road there." Lys crossed herself.
"Does it come near our house?"
"Yes."
"How near?"
"It comes up to the morning room window," said I, giving
    in.
Her hand on my arm grew heavy. "I dreamed last
    night——"
"So did I—" but I thought of the empty cartridges in
    my revolver, and stopped.
"I dreamed that you were in great danger, and I could not
    move hand or foot to save you; but you had your revolver, and I
    called out to you to fire——"
"I did fire!" I cried excitedly.
"You—you fired?"
I took her in my arms. "My darling," I said "something
    strange has happened—something that I cannot understand
    as yet. But, of course, there is an explanation. Last night I
    thought I fired at the Black Priest."
"Ah!" gasped Lys.
"Is that what you dreamed?"
"Yes, yes, that was it! I begged you to
    fire——"
"And I did."
Her heart was beating against my breast. I held her close in
    silence.
"Dick," she said at length, "perhaps you killed
    the—the thing."
"If it was human I did not miss," I answered grimly. "And it
    was human," I went on, pulling myself together, ashamed of
    having so nearly gone to pieces. "Of course it was human! The
    whole affair is plain enough. Not a drunken brawl, as Durand
    thinks; it was a drunken lout's practical joke, for which he
    has suffered. I suppose I must have filled him pretty full of
    bullets, and he has crawled away to die in Kerselec forest.
    It's a terrible affair; I'm sorry I fired so hastily; but that
    idiot Le Bihan and Max Fortin have been working on my nerves
    till I am as hysterical as a schoolgirl," I ended angrily.
"You fired—but the window glass was not shattered,"
    said Lys in a low voice.
"Well, the window was open, then. And as for the—the
    rest—I've got nervous indigestion, and a doctor will
    settle the Black Priest for me, Lys."
I glanced out of the window at Tregunc waiting with my horse
    at the gate.
"Dearest, I think I had better go to join Durand and the
    others."
"I will go, too."
"Oh, no!"
"Yes, Dick."
"Don't, Lys."
"I shall suffer every moment you are away."
"The ride is too fatiguing, and we can't tell what
    unpleasant sight you may come upon. Lys, you don't really think
    there is anything supernatural in this affair?"
"Dick," she answered gently, "I am a Bretonne." With both
    arms around my neck, my wife said, "Death is the gift of God. I
    do not fear it when we are together. But alone—oh, my
    husband, I should fear a God who could take you away from
    me!"
We kissed each other soberly, simply, like two children.
    Then Lys hurried away to change her gown, and I paced up and
    down the garden waiting for her.
She came, drawing on her slender gauntlets. I swung her into
    the saddle, gave a hasty order to Jean Marie, and mounted.
Now, to quail under thoughts of terror on a morning like
    this, with Lys in the saddle beside me, no matter what had
    happened or might happen was impossible. Moreover, Môme
    came sneaking after us. I asked Tregunc to catch him, for I was
    afraid he might be brained by our horses' hoofs if he followed,
    but the wily puppy dodged and bolted after Lys, who was
    trotting along the highroad. "Never mind," I thought; "if he's
    hit he'll live, for he has no brains to lose."
Lys was waiting for me in the road beside the Shrine of Our
    Lady of St. Gildas when I joined her. She crossed herself, I
    doffed my cap, then we shook out our bridles and galloped
    toward the forest of Kerselec.
We said very little as we rode. I always loved to watch Lys
    in the saddle. Her exquisite figure and lovely face were the
    incarnation of youth and grace; her curling hair glistened like
    threaded gold.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw the spoiled puppy
    Môme come bounding cheerfully alongside, oblivious of our
    horses' heels. Our road swung close to the cliffs. A filthy
    cormorant rose from the black rocks and flapped heavily across
    our path. Lys's horse reared, but she pulled him down, and
    pointed at the bird with her riding crop.
"I see," said I; "it seems to be going our way. Curious to
    see a cormorant in a forest, isn't it?"
"It is a bad sign," said Lys. "You know the Morbihan
    proverb: 'When the cormorant turns from the sea, Death laughs
    in the forest, and wise woodsmen build boats.'"
"I wish," said I sincerely, "that there were fewer proverbs
    in Brittany."
We were in sight of the forest now; across the gorse I could
    see the sparkle of gendarmes' trappings, and the glitter of Le
    Bihan's silver-buttoned jacket. The hedge was low and we took
    it without difficulty, and trotted across the moor to where Le
    Bihan and Durand stood gesticulating.
They bowed ceremoniously to Lys as we rode up.
"The trail is horrible—it is a river," said the mayor
    in his squeaky voice. "Monsieur Darrel, I think perhaps madame
    would scarcely care to come any nearer."
Lys drew bridle and looked at me.
"It is horrible!" said Durand, walking up beside me; "it
    looks as though a bleeding regiment had passed this way. The
    trail winds and winds about here in the thickets; we lose it at
    times, but we always find it again. I can't understand how one
    man—no, nor twenty—could bleed like that!"
A halloo, answered by another, sounded from the depths of
    the forest.
"It's my men; they are following the trail," muttered the
    brigadier. "God alone knows what is at the end!"
"Shall we gallop back, Lys?" I asked.
"No; let us ride along the western edge of the woods and
    dismount. The sun is so hot now, and I should like to rest for
    a moment," she said.
"The western forest is clear of anything disagreeable," said
    Durand.
"Very well," I answered; "call me, Le Bihan, if you find
    anything."
Lys wheeled her mare, and I followed across the springy
    heather, Môme trotting cheerfully in the rear.
We entered the sunny woods about a quarter of a kilometer
    from where we left Durand. I took Lys from her horse, flung
    both bridles over a limb, and, giving my wife my arm, aided her
    to a flat mossy rock which overhung a shallow brook gurgling
    among the beech trees. Lys sat down and drew off her gauntlets.
    Môme pushed his head into her lap, received an undeserved
    caress, and came doubtfully toward me. I was weak enough to
    condone his offense, but I made him lie down at my feet,
    greatly to his disgust.
I rested my head on Lys's knees, looking up at the sky
    through the crossed branches of the trees.
"I suppose I have killed him," I said. "It shocks me
    terribly, Lys."
"You could not have known, dear. He may have been a robber,
    and—if—not—did—have you ever fired your
    revolver since that day four years ago when the Red Admiral's
    son tried to kill you? But I know you have not."
"No," said I, wondering. "It's a fact, I have not. Why?"
"And don't you remember that I asked you to let me load it
    for you the day when Yves went off, swearing to kill you and
    his father?"
"Yes, I do remember. Well?"
"Well, I—I took the cartridges first to St. Gildas
    chapel and dipped them in holy water. You must not laugh,
    Dick," said Lys gently, laying her cool hands on my lips.
"Laugh, my darling!"
Overhead the October sky was pale amethyst, and the sunlight
    burned like orange flame through the yellow leaves of beech and
    oak. Gnats and midges danced and wavered overhead; a spider
    dropped from a twig halfway to the ground and hung suspended on
    the end of his gossamer thread.
"Are you sleepy, dear?" asked Lys, bending over me.
"I am—a little; I scarcely slept two hours last
    night," I answered.
"You may sleep, if you wish," said Lys, and touched my eyes
    caressingly.
"Is my head heavy on your knees?"
"No, Dick."
I was already in a half doze; still I heard the brook
    babbling under the beeches and the humming of forest flies
    overhead. Presently even these were stilled.
The next thing I knew I was sitting bolt upright, my ears
    ringing with a scream, and I saw Lys cowering beside me,
    covering her white face with both hands.
As I sprang to my feet she cried again and clung to my
    knees. I saw my dog rush growling into a thicket, then I heard
    him whimper, and he came backing out, whining, ears flat, tail
    down. I stooped and disengaged Lys's hand.
"Don't go, Dick!" she cried. "O God, it's the Black
    Priest!"
In a moment I had leaped across the brook and pushed my way
    into the thicket. It was empty. I stared about me; I scanned
    every tree trunk, every bush. Suddenly I saw him. He was seated
    on a fallen log, his head resting in his hands, his rusty black
    robe gathered around him. For a moment my hair stirred under my
    cap; sweat started on forehead and cheek bone; then I recovered
    my reason, and understood that the man was human and was
    probably wounded to death. Ay, to death; for there at my feet,
    lay the wet trail of blood, over leaves and stones, down into
    the little hollow, across to the figure in black resting
    silently under the trees.
I saw that he could not escape even if he had the strength,
    for before him, almost at his very feet, lay a deep, shining
    swamp.
As I stepped forward my foot broke a twig. At the sound the
    figure started a little, then its head fell forward again. Its
    face was masked. Walking up to the man, I bade him tell where
    he was wounded. Durand and the others broke through the thicket
    at the same moment and hurried to my side.
"Who are you who hide a masked face in a priest's robe?"
    said the gendarme loudly.
There was no answer.
"See—see the stiff blood all over his robe," muttered
    Le Bihan to Fortin.
"He will not speak," said I.
"He may be too badly wounded," whispered Le Bihan.
"I saw him raise his head," I said, "my wife saw him creep
    up here."
Durand stepped forward and touched the figure.
"Speak!" he said.
"Speak!" quavered Fortin.
Durand waited a moment, then with a sudden upward movement
    he stripped off the mask and threw back the man's head. We were
    looking into the eye sockets of a skull. Durand stood rigid;
    the mayor shrieked. The skeleton burst out from its rotting
    robes and collapsed on the ground before us. From between the
    staring ribs and the grinning teeth spurted a torrent of black
    blood, showering the shrinking grasses; then the thing
    shuddered, and fell over into the black ooze of the bog. Little
    bubbles of iridescent air appeared from the mud; the bones were
    slowly engulfed, and, as the last fragments sank out of sight,
    up from the depths and along the bank crept a creature, shiny,
    shivering, quivering its wings.
It was a death's-head moth.

I wish I had time to tell you how Lys outgrew
    superstitions—for she never knew the truth about the
    affair, and she never will know, since she has promised not to
    read this book. I wish I might tell you about the king and his
    coronation, and how the coronation robe fitted. I wish that I
    were able to write how Yvonne and Herbert Stuart rode to a boar
    hunt in Quimperle, and how the hounds raced the quarry right
    through the town, overturning three gendarmes, the notary, and
    an old woman. But I am becoming garrulous and Lys is calling me
    to come and hear the king say that he is sleepy. And his
    highness shall not be kept waiting.
THE KING'S CRADLE SONG


Seal with a seal of gold
The scroll of a life unrolled;
Swathe him deep in his purple stole;
Ashes of diamonds, crystalled coal,
Drops of gold in each scented fold.


Crimson wings of the Little Death,
Stir his hair with your silken
            breath;
Flaming wings of sins to be,
Splendid pinions of prophecy,
Smother his eyes with hues and dyes,
While the white moon spins and the winds arise,
And the stars drip through the skies.


Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
Seal his sight and stifle his breath,
Cover his breast with the gemmed shroud
            pressed;
From north to north, from west to
            west,
Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
Till the white moon reels in the cracking skies,
And the ghosts of God arise.



Lazarus
By LEONID ANDREYEV
TRANSLATED BY ABRAHAM YARMOLINSKY

From Lazarus and the Gentleman from San
        Francisco. Published by The Stratford Company. By
        permission of the publishers.

I
When Lazarus left the grave, where, for three days and three
    nights he had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and
    returned alive to his dwelling, for a long time no one noticed
    in him those sinister oddities, which, as time went on, made
    his very name a terror. Gladdened unspeakably by the sight of
    him who had been returned to life, those near to him caressed
    him unceasingly, and satiated their burning desire to serve
    him, in solicitude for his food and drink and garments. And
    they dressed him gorgeously, in bright colors of hope and
    laughter, and when, like to a bridegroom in his bridal
    vestures, he sat again among them at the table, and again ate
    and drank, they wept, overwhelmed with tenderness. And they
    summoned the neighbors to look at him who had risen
    miraculously from the dead. These came and shared the serene
    joy of the hosts. Strangers from far-off towns and hamlets came
    and adored the miracle in tempestuous words. Like to a beehive
    was the house of Mary and Martha.
Whatever was found new in Lazarus' face and gestures was
    thought to be some trace of a grave illness and of the shocks
    recently experienced. Evidently, the destruction wrought by
    death on the corpse was only arrested by the miraculous power,
    but its effects were still apparent; and what death had
    succeeded in doing with Lazarus' face and body, was like an
    artist's unfinished sketch seen under thin glass. On Lazarus'
    temples, under his eyes, and in the hollows of his cheeks, lay
    a deep and cadaverous blueness; cadaverously blue also were his
    long fingers, and around his fingernails, grown long in the
    grave, the blue had become purple and dark. On his lips the
    skin, swollen in the grave, had burst in places, and thin,
    reddish cracks were formed, shining as though covered with
    transparent mica. And he had grown stout. His body, puffed up
    in the grave, retained its monstrous size and showed those
    frightful swellings, in which one sensed the presence of the
    rank liquid of decomposition. But the heavy corpse-like odor
    which penetrated Lazarus' graveclothes and, it seemed, his very
    body, soon entirely disappeared, the blue spots on his face and
    hands grew paler, and the reddish cracks closed up, although
    they never disappeared altogether. That is how Lazarus looked
    when he appeared before people, in his second life, but his
    face looked natural to those who had seen him in the
    coffin.
In addition to the changes in his appearance, Lazarus'
    temper seemed to have undergone a transformation, but this
    circumstance startled no one and attracted no attention. Before
    his death Lazarus had always been cheerful and carefree, fond
    of laughter and a merry joke. It was because of this brightness
    and cheerfulness, with not a touch of malice and darkness, that
    the Master had grown so fond of him. But now Lazarus had grown
    grave and taciturn, he never jested, himself, nor responded
    with laughter to other people's jokes; and the words which he
    uttered, very infrequently, were the plainest, most ordinary,
    and necessary words, as deprived of depth and significance, as
    those sounds with which animals express pain and pleasure,
    thirst and hunger. They were the words that one can say all
    one's life, and yet they give no indication of what pains and
    gladdens the depths of the soul.
Thus, with the face of a corpse which for three days had
    been under the heavy sway of death, dark and taciturn, already
    appallingly transformed, but still unrecognized by anyone in
    his new self, he was sitting at the feasting table, among
    friends and relatives, and his gorgeous nuptial garments
    glittered with yellow gold and bloody scarlet. Broad waves of
    jubilation, now soft, now tempestuously sonorous surged around
    him; warm glances of love were reaching out for his face, still
    cold with the coldness of the grave; and a friend's warm palm
    caressed his blue, heavy hand. And music played the tympanum
    and the pipe, the cithara and the harp. It was as though bees
    hummed, grasshoppers chirped and birds warbled over the happy
    house of Mary and Martha.
II
One of the guests incautiously lifted the veil. By a
    thoughtless word he broke the serene charm and uncovered the
    truth in all its naked ugliness. Ere the thought formed itself
    in his mind, his lips uttered with a smile:
"Why dost thou not tell us what happened yonder?"
And all grew silent, startled by the question. It was as if
    it occurred to them only now that for three days Lazarus had
    been dead, and they looked at him, anxiously awaiting his
    answer. But Lazarus kept silence.
"Thou dost not wish to tell us,"—wondered the man, "is
    it so terrible yonder?"
And again his thought came after his words. Had it been
    otherwise, he would not have asked this question, which at that
    very moment oppressed his heart with its insufferable horror.
    Uneasiness seized all present, and with a feeling of heavy
    weariness they awaited Lazarus' words, but he was silent,
    sternly and coldly, and his eyes were lowered. And as if for
    the first time, they noticed the frightful blueness of his face
    and his repulsive obesity. On the table, as though forgotten by
    Lazarus, rested his bluish-purple wrist, and to this all eyes
    turned, as if it were from it that the awaited answer was to
    come. The musicians were still playing, but now the silence
    reached them too, and even as water extinguishes scattered
    embers, so were their merry tunes extinguished in the silence.
    The pipe grew silent; the voices of the sonorous tympanum and
    the murmuring harp died away; and as if the strings had burst,
    the cithara answered with a tremulous, broken note.
    Silence.
"Thou dost not wish to say?" repeated the guest, unable to
    check his chattering tongue. But the stillness remained
    unbroken, and the bluish-purple hand rested motionless. And
    then he stirred slightly and everyone felt relieved. He lifted
    up his eyes, and lo! straightway embracing everything in one
    heavy glance, fraught with weariness and horror, he looked at
    them,—Lazarus who had arisen from the dead.
It was the third day since Lazarus had left the grave. Ever
    since then many had experienced the pernicious power of his
    eye, but neither those who were crushed by it forever, nor
    those who found the strength to resist in it the primordial
    sources of life,—which is as mysterious as
    death,—never could they explain the horror which lay
    motionless in the depth of his black pupils. Lazarus looked
    calmly and simply with no desire to conceal anything, but also
    with no intention to say anything; he looked coldly, as he who
    is infinitely indifferent to those alive. Many carefree people
    came close to him without noticing him, and only later did they
    learn with astonishment and fear who that calm stout man was,
    that walked slowly by, almost touching them with his gorgeous
    and dazzling garments. The sun did not cease shining, when he
    was looking, nor did the fountain hush its murmur, and the sky
    overhead remained cloudless and blue. But the man under the
    spell of his enigmatical look heard no more the fountain and
    saw not the sky overhead. Sometimes, he wept bitterly,
    sometimes he tore his hair and in frenzy called for help; but
    more often it came to pass that apathetically and quietly he
    began to die, and so he languished many years, before
    everybody's very eyes, wasted away, colorless, flabby, dull,
    like a tree, silently drying up in a stony soil. And of those
    who gazed at him, the ones who wept madly, sometimes felt again
    the stir of life; the others never.
"So thou dost not wish to tell us what thou hast seen
    yonder?" repeated the man. But now his voice was impassive and
    dull, and deadly gray weariness showed in Lazarus' eyes. And
    deadly gray weariness covered like dust all the faces, and with
    dull amazement the guests stared at each other and did not
    understand wherefore they had gathered here and sat at the rich
    table. The talk ceased. They thought it was time to go home,
    but could not overcome the flaccid lazy weariness which glued
    their muscles, and they kept on sitting there, yet apart and
    torn away from each other, like pale fires scattered over a
    dark field.
But the musicians were paid to play and again they took
    their instruments and again tunes full of studied mirth and
    studied sorrow began to flow and to rise. They unfolded the
    customary melody but the guests hearkened in dull amazement.
    Already they knew not wherefore is it necessary, and why is it
    well, that people should pluck strings, inflate their cheeks,
    blow in thin pipes, and produce a bizarre, many-voiced
    noise.
"What bad music," said someone.
The musicians took offense and left. Following them, the
    guests left one after another, for night was already come. And
    when placid darkness encircled them and they began to breathe
    with more ease, suddenly Lazarus' image loomed up before each
    one in formidable radiance: the blue face of a corpse,
    grave-clothes gorgeous and resplendent, a cold look, in the
    depths of which lay motionless an unknown horror. As though
    petrified, they were standing far apart, and darkness enveloped
    them, but in the darkness blazed brighter and brighter the
    supernatural vision of him who for three days had been under
    the enigmatical sway of death. For three days had he been dead:
    thrice had the sun risen and set, but he had been dead;
    children had played, streams murmured over pebbles, the
    wayfarer had lifted up hot dust in the highroad,—but he
    had been dead. And now he is again among them,—touches
    them,—looks at them,—looks at them! and through the
    black discs of his pupils, as through darkened glass, stares
    the unknowable Yonder.
III
No one was taking care of Lazarus, for no friends no
    relatives were left to him, and the great desert which
    encircled the holy city, came near the very threshold of his
    dwelling. And the desert entered his house, and stretched on
    his couch, like a wife and extinguished the fires. No one was
    taking care of Lazarus. One after the other, his
    sisters—Mary and Martha—forsook him. For a long
    while Martha was loath to abandon him, for she knew not who
    would feed him and pity him, she wept and prayed. But one
    night, when the wind was roaming in the desert and with a
    hissing sound the cypresses were bending over the roof, she
    dressed noiselessly and secretly left the house. Lazarus
    probably heard the door slam; it banged against the side-post
    under the gusts of the desert wind, but he did not rise to go
    out and to look at her that was abandoning him. All the night
    long the cypresses hissed over his head and plaintively thumped
    the door, letting in the cold, greedy desert.
Like a leper he was shunned by everyone, and it was proposed
    to tie a bell to his neck, as is done with lepers, to warn
    people against sudden meetings. But someone remarked, growing
    frightfully pale, that it would be too horrible if by night the
    moaning of Lazarus' bell were suddenly heard under the
    windows,—and so the project was abandoned.
And since he did not take care of himself, he would probably
    have starved to death, had not the neighbors brought him food
    in fear of something that they sensed but vaguely. The food was
    brought to him by children; they were not afraid of Lazarus,
    nor did they mock him with naive cruelty, as children are wont
    to do with the wretched and miserable. They were indifferent to
    him, and Lazarus answered them with the same coldness; he had
    no desire to caress the black little curls, and to look into
    their innocent shining eyes. Given to Time and to the Desert,
    his house was crumbling down, and long since had his famishing,
    lowing goats wandered away to the neighboring pastures. And his
    bridal garments became threadbare. Ever since that happy day,
    when the musicians played, he had worn them unaware of the
    difference of the new and the worn. The bright colors grew dull
    and faded; vicious dogs and the sharp thorn of the Desert
    turned the tender fabric into rags.
By day, when the merciless sun slew all things alive, and
    even scorpions sought shelter under stones and writhed there in
    a mad desire to sting, he sat motionless under the sunrays, his
    blue face and the uncouth, bushy beard lifted up, bathing in
    the fiery flood.
When people still talked to him, he was once asked:
"Poor Lazarus, does it please thee to sit thus and to stare
    at the sun?"
And he had answered:
"Yes, it does."
So strong, it seemed, was the cold of his three days' grave,
    so deep the darkness, that there was no heat on earth to warm
    Lazarus, nor a splendor that could brighten the darkness of his
    eyes. That is what came to the mind of those who spoke to
    Lazarus, and with a sigh they left him.
And when the scarlet, flattened globe would lower, Lazarus
    would set out for the desert and walk straight toward the sun,
    as though striving to reach it. He always walked straight
    toward the sun and those who tried to follow him and to spy
    upon what he was doing at night in the desert, retained in
    their memory the black silhouette of a tall stout man against
    the red background of an enormous flattened disc. Night pursued
    them with her horrors, and so they did not learn of Lazarus'
    doings in the desert, but the vision of the black on red was
    forever branded on their brain. Just as a beast with a splinter
    in its eye furiously rubs its muzzle with its paws, so they too
    foolishly rubbed their eyes, but what Lazarus had given was
    indelible, and Death alone could efface it.
But there were people who lived far away, who never saw
    Lazarus and knew of him only by report. With daring curiosity,
    which is stronger than fear and feeds upon it, with hidden
    mockery, they would come to Lazarus who was sitting in the sun
    and enter into conversation with him. By this time Lazarus'
    appearance had changed for the better and was not so terrible.
    The first minute they snapped their fingers and thought of how
    stupid the inhabitants of the holy city were; but when the
    short talk was over and they started homeward, their looks were
    such that the inhabitants of the holy city recognized them at
    once and said:
"Look, there is one more fool on whom Lazarus has set his
    eye,"—and they shook their heads regretfully, and lifted
    up their arms.
There came brave, intrepid warriors, with tinkling weapons;
    happy youths came with laughter and song; busy tradesmen,
    jingling their money, ran in for a moment, and haughty priests
    leaned their crosiers against Lazarus' door, and they were all
    strangely changed, as they came back. The same terrible shadow
    swooped down upon their souls and gave a new appearance to the
    old familiar world.
Those who still had the desire to speak, expressed their
    feelings thus:
"All things tangible and visible grew hollow, light, and
    transparent,—similar to lightsome shadows in the darkness
    of night;
"for, that great darkness, which holds the whole cosmos, was
    dispersed neither by the sun or by the moon and the stars, but
    like an immense black shroud enveloped the earth and, like a
    mother, embraced it;
"it penetrated all the bodies, iron and stone,—and the
    particles of the bodies, having lost their ties, grew lonely;
    and it penetrated into the depth of the particles, and the
    particles of particles became lonely;
"for that great void, which encircles the cosmos, was not
    filled by things visible: neither by the sun, nor by the moon
    and the stars, but reigned unrestrained, penetrating
    everywhere, severing body from body, particle from
    particle;
"in the void hollow trees spread hollow roots threatening a
    fantastic fall; temples, palaces, and horses loomed up and they
    were hollow; and in the void men moved about restlessly but
    they were light and hollow like shadows;
"for, Time was no more, and the beginning of all things came
    near their end: the building was still being built, and
    builders were still hammering away, and its ruins were already
    seen and the void in its place; the man was still being born,
    but already funeral candles were burning at his head, and now
    they were extinguished, and there was the void in place of the
    man and of the funeral candles.
"and wrapped by void and darkness the man in despair
    trembled in the face of the Horror of the Infinite."
Thus spake the men who had still a desire to speak. But,
    surely, much more could have told those who wished not to
    speak, and died in silence.
IV
At that time there lived in Rome a renowned sculptor. In
    clay, marble, and bronze he wrought bodies of gods and men, and
    such was their beauty, that people called them immortal. But he
    himself was discontented and asserted that there was something
    even more beautiful, that he could not embody either in marble
    or in bronze. "I have not yet gathered the glimmers of the
    moon, nor have I my fill of sunshine," he was wont to say, "and
    there is no soul in my marble, no life in my beautiful bronze."
    And when on moonlit nights he slowly walked along the road,
    crossing the black shadows of cypresses, his white tunic
    glittering in the moonshine, those who met him would laugh in a
    friendly way and say:
"Art thou going to gather moonshine, Aurelius? Why then
    didst thou not fetch baskets?"
And he would answer, laughing and pointing to his eyes:
"Here are the baskets wherein I gather the sheen of the moon
    and the glimmer of the sun."
And so it was: the moon glimmered in his eyes and the sun
    sparkled therein. But he could not translate them into marble
    and therein lay the serene tragedy of his life.
He was descended from an ancient patrician race, had a good
    wife and children, and suffered from no want.
When the obscure rumor about Lazarus reached him, he
    consulted his wife and friends and undertook the far journey to
    Judea to see him who had miraculously risen from the dead. He
    was somewhat weary in those days and he hoped that the road
    would sharpen his blunted senses. What was said of Lazarus did
    not frighten him: he had pondered much over Death, did not like
    it, but he disliked also those who confused it with life.


"In this life,—life and beauty;
beyond,—Death, the enigmatical"—


thought he, and there is no better thing
    for a man to do than to delight in life and in the beauty of
    all things living. He had even a vainglorious desire to
    convince Lazarus of the truth of his own view and restore his
    soul to life, as his body had been restored. This seemed so
    much easier because the rumors, shy and strange, did not render
    the whole truth about Lazarus and but vaguely warned against
    something frightful.
Lazarus had just risen from the stone in order to follow the
    sun which was setting in the desert, when a rich Roman attended
    by an armed slave, approached him and addressed him in a
    sonorous tone of voice:
"Lazarus!"
And Lazarus beheld a superb face, lit with glory, and
    arrayed in fine clothes, and precious stones sparkling in the
    sun. The red light lent to the Roman's face and head the
    appearance of gleaming bronze—that also Lazarus noticed.
    He resumed obediently his place and lowered his weary eyes.
"Yes, thou art ugly, my poor Lazarus,"—quietly said
    the Roman, playing with his golden chain; "thou art even
    horrible, my poor friend; and Death was not lazy that day when
    thou didst fall so heedlessly into his hands. But thou art
    stout, and, as the great Cæsar used to say, fat people
    are not ill-tempered; to tell the truth, I don't understand why
    men fear thee. Permit me to spend the night in thy house; the
    hour is late, and I have no shelter."
Never had anyone asked Lazarus' hospitality.
"I have no bed," said he.
"I am somewhat of a soldier and I can sleep sitting," the
    Roman answered. "We shall build a fire."
"I have no fire."
"Then we shall have our talk in the darkness, like two
    friends. I think thou wilt find a bottle of wine."
"I have no wine."
The Roman laughed.
"Now I see why thou art so somber and dislikest thy second
    life. No wine! Why, then we shall do without it: there are
    words that make the head go round better than the
    Falernian."
By a sign he dismissed the slave, and they remained all
    alone. And again the sculptor started speaking, but it was as
    if, together with the setting sun, life had left his words; and
    they grew pale and hollow, as if they staggered on unsteady
    feet, as if they slipped and fell down, drunk with the heavy
    lees of weariness and despair. And black chasms grew up between
    the words—like far-off hints of the great void and the
    great darkness.
"Now I am thy guest, and thou wilt not be unkind to me,
    Lazarus!"—said he. "Hospitality is the duty even of those
    who for three days were dead. Three days, I was told, thou
    didst rest in the grave. There it must be cold ... and that is
    whence comes thy ill habit of going without fire and wine. As
    to me, I like fire; it grows dark here so rapidly.... The lines
    of thy eyebrows and forehead are quite, quite interesting: they
    are like ruins of strange palaces, buried in ashes after an
    earthquake. But why dost thou wear such ugly and queer
    garments? I have seen bridegrooms in thy country, and they wear
    such clothes—are they not funny—and terrible....
    But art thou a bridegroom?"
The sun had already disappeared, a monstrous black shadow
    came running from the east—it was as if gigantic bare
    feet began rumbling on the sand, and the wind sent a cold wave
    along the backbone.
"In the darkness thou seemest still larger, Lazarus, as if
    thou hast grown stouter in these moments. Dost thou feed on
    darkness, Lazarus? I would fain have a little fire—at
    least a little fire, a little fire. I feel somewhat chilly,
    your nights are so barbarously cold.... Were it not so dark, I
    should say that thou wert looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems
    to me, thou art looking.... Why, thou art looking at me, I feel
    it,—but there thou art smiling."
Night came, and filled the air with heavy blackness.
"How well it will be, when the sun will rise to-morrow
    anew.... I am a great sculptor, thou knowest; that is how my
    friends call me. I create. Yes, that is the word ... but I need
    daylight. I give life to the cold marble, I melt sonorous
    bronze in fire, in bright hot fire.... Why didst thou touch me
    with thy hand?"
"Come"—said Lazarus—"Thou art my guest."
And they went to the house. And a long night enveloped the
    earth.
The slave, seeing that his master did not come, went to seek
    him, when the sun was already high in the sky. And he beheld
    his master side by side with Lazarus: in profound silence were
    they sitting right under the dazzling and scorching sunrays and
    looking upward. The slave began to weep and cried out:
"My master, what has befallen thee, master?"
The very same day the sculptor left for Rome. On the way
    Aurelius was pensive and taciturn, staring attentively at
    everything—the men, the ship, the sea, as though trying
    to retain something. On the high sea a storm burst upon them,
    and all through it Aurelius stayed on the deck and eagerly
    scanned the seas looming near and sinking with a thud.
At home his friends were frightened at the change which had
    taken place in Aurelius, but he calmed them, saying
    meaningly:
"I have found it."
And without changing the dusty clothes he wore on his
    journey, he fell to work, and the marble obediently resounded
    under his sonorous hammer. Long and eagerly worked he,
    admitting no one, until one morning he announced that the work
    was ready and ordered his friends to be summoned, severe
    critics and connoisseurs of art. And to meet them he put on
    bright and gorgeous garments, that glittered with yellow
    gold—and—scarlet byssus.
"Here is my work," said he thoughtfully.
His friends glanced and a shadow of profound sorrow covered
    their faces. It was something monstrous, deprived of all the
    lines and shapes familiar to the eye, but not without a hint at
    some new, strange image.
On a thin, crooked twig, or rather on an ugly likeness of a
    twig rested askew a blind, ugly, shapeless, outspread mass of
    something utterly and inconceivably distorted, a mad leap of
    wild and bizarre fragments, all feebly and vainly striving to
    part from one another. And, as if by chance, beneath one of the
    wildly-rent salients a butterfly was chiseled with divine
    skill, all airy loveliness, delicacy, and beauty, with
    transparent wings, which seemed to tremble with an impotent
    desire to take flight.
"Wherefore this wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?" said
    somebody falteringly.
"I know not"—was the sculptor's answer.
But it was necessary to tell the truth, and one of his
    friends who loved him best said firmly:
"This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be destroyed. Give me
    the hammer."
And with two strokes he broke the monstrous man into pieces,
    leaving only the infinitely delicate butterfly untouched.
From that time on Aurelius created nothing. With profound
    indifference he looked at marble and bronze, and on his former
    divine works, where everlasting beauty rested. With the purpose
    of arousing his former fervent passion for work and, awakening
    his deadened soul, his friends took him to see other artists'
    beautiful works,—but he remained indifferent as before,
    and the smile did not warm up his tightened lips. And only
    after listening to lengthy talks about beauty, he would retort
    wearily and indolently:
"But all this is a lie."
And by the day, when the sun was shining, he went into his
    magnificent, skilfully built garden and having found a place
    without shadow, he exposed his bare head to the glare and heat.
    Red and white butterflies fluttered around; from the crooked
    lips of a drunken satyr, water streamed down with a splash into
    a marble cistern, but he sat motionless and silent,—like
    a pallid reflection of him who, in the far-off distance, at the
    very gates of the stony desert, sat under the fiery sun.
V
And now it came to pass that the great, deified Augustus
    himself summoned Lazarus. The imperial messengers dressed him
    gorgeously, in solemn nuptial clothes, as if Time had legalized
    them, and he was to remain until his very death the bridegroom
    of an unknown bride. It was as though an old, rotting coffin
    had been gilt and furnished with new, gay tassels. And men, all
    in trim and bright attire, rode after him, as if in bridal
    procession indeed, and those foremost trumpeted loudly, bidding
    people to clear the way for the emperor's messengers. But
    Lazarus' way was deserted: his native land cursed the hateful
    name of him who had miraculously risen from the dead, and
    people scattered at the very news of his appalling approach.
    The solitary voice of the brass trumpets sounded in the
    motionless air, and the wilderness alone responded with its
    languid echo.
Then Lazarus went by sea. And his was the most magnificently
    arrayed and the most mournful ship that ever mirrored itself in
    the azure waves of the Mediterranean Sea. Many were the
    travelers aboard, but like a tomb was the ship, all silence and
    stillness, and the despairing water sobbed at the steep,
    proudly curved prow. All alone sat Lazarus exposing his head to
    the blaze of the sun, silently listening to the murmur and
    splash of the wavelets, and afar seamen and messengers were
    sitting, a vague group of weary shadows. Had the thunder burst
    and the wind attacked the red sails, the ships would probably
    have perished, for none of those aboard had either the will or
    the strength to struggle for life. With a supreme effort some
    mariners would reach the board and eagerly scan the blue,
    transparent deep, hoping to see a naiad's pink shoulder flash
    in the hollow of an azure wave, or a drunken gay centaur dash
    along and in frenzy splash the wave with his hoof. But the sea
    was like a wilderness, and the deep was dumb and deserted.
With utter indifference did Lazarus set his feet on the
    street of the eternal city. As though all her wealth, all the
    magnificence of her palaces built by giants, all the
    resplendence, beauty, and music of her refined life were but
    the echo of the wind in the wilderness, the reflection of the
    desert quicksand. Chariots were dashing, and along the streets
    were moving crowds of strong, fair, proud builders of the
    eternal city and haughty participants in her life; a song
    sounded; fountains and women laughed a pearly laughter; drunken
    philosophers harangued, and the sober listened to them with a
    smile; hoofs struck the stone pavements. And surrounded by
    cheerful noise, a stout, heavy man was moving, a cold spot of
    silence and despair, and on his way he sowed disgust, anger,
    and vague, gnawing weariness. Who dares to be sad in Rome,
    wondered indignantly the citizens, and frowned. In two days the
    entire city already knew all about him who had miraculously
    risen from the dead, and shunned him shyly.
But some daring people there were, who wanted to test their
    strength, and Lazarus obeyed their imprudent summons. Kept busy
    by state affairs, the emperor constantly delayed the reception,
    and seven days did he who had risen from the dead go about
    visiting others.
And Lazarus came to a cheerful Epicurean, and the host met
    him with laughter on his lips:
"Drink, Lazarus, drink!"—shouted he. "Would not
    Augustus laugh to see thee drunk!"
And half-naked drunken women laughed, and rose petals fell
    on Lazarus' blue hands. But then the Epicurean looked into
    Lazarus' eyes, and his gaiety ended forever. Drunkard remained
    he for the rest of his life; never did he drink, yet forever
    was he drunk. But instead of the gay reverie which wine brings
    with it, frightful dreams began to haunt him, the sole food of
    his stricken spirit. Day and night he lived in the poisonous
    vapors of his nightmares, and death itself was not more
    frightful than her raving, monstrous forerunners.
And Lazarus came to a youth and his beloved, who loved each
    other and were most beautiful in their passions. Proudly and
    strongly embracing his love, the youth said with serene
    regret:
"Look at us, Lazarus, and share our joy. Is there anything
    stronger than love?"
And Lazarus looked. And for the rest of their life they kept
    on loving each other, but their passion grew gloomy and
    joyless, like those funeral cypresses whose roots feed on the
    decay of the graves and whose black summits in a still evening
    hour seek in vain to reach the sky. Thrown by the unknown
    forces of life into each other's embraces, they mingled tears
    with kisses, voluptuous pleasures with pain, and they felt
    themselves doubly slaves, obedient slaves to life, and patient
    servants of the silent Nothingness. Ever united, ever severed,
    they blazed like sparks and like sparks lost themselves in the
    boundless Dark.
And Lazarus came to a haughty sage, and the sage said to
    him:
"I know all the horrors thou canst reveal to me. Is there
    anything thou canst frighten me with?"
But before long the sage felt that the knowledge of horror
    was far from being the horror itself, and that the vision of
    Death, was not Death. And he felt that wisdom and folly are
    equal before the face of Infinity, for Infinity knows them not.
    And it vanished, the dividing-line between knowledge and
    ignorance, truth and falsehood, top and bottom, and the
    shapeless thought hung suspended in the void. Then the sage
    clutched his gray head and cried out frantically:
"I cannot think! I cannot think!"
Thus under the indifferent glance for him, who miraculously
    had risen from the dead, perished everything that asserts life,
    its significance and joys. And it was suggested that it was
    dangerous to let him see the emperor, that it was better to
    kill him and, having buried him secretly, to tell the emperor
    that he had disappeared no one knew whither. Already swords
    were being whetted and youths devoted to the public welfare
    prepared for the murder, when Augustus ordered Lazarus to be
    brought before him next morning, thus destroying the cruel
    plans.
If there was no way of getting rid of Lazarus, at least it
    was possible to soften the terrible impression his face
    produced. With this in view, skillful painters, barbers, and
    artists were summoned, and all night long they were busy over
    Lazarus' head. They cropped his beard, curled it, and gave it a
    tidy, agreeable appearance. By means of paints they concealed
    the corpse-like blueness of his hands and face. Repulsive were
    the wrinkles of suffering that furrowed his old face, and they
    were puttied, painted, and smoothed; then, over the smooth
    background, wrinkles of good-tempered laughter and pleasant,
    carefree mirth were skillfully painted with fine brushes.
Lazarus submitted indifferently to everything that was done
    to him. Soon he was turned into a becomingly stout, venerable
    old man, into a quiet and kind grandfather of numerous
    offspring. It seemed that the smile, with which only a while
    ago he was spinning funny yarns, was still lingering on his
    lips, and that in the corner of his eye serene tenderness was
    hiding, the companion of old age. But people did not dare
    change his nuptial garments, and they could not change his
    eyes, two dark and frightful glasses through which looked at
    men, the unknowable Yonder.
VI
Lazarus was not moved by the magnificence of the imperial
    palace. It was as though he saw no difference between the
    crumbling house, closely pressed by the desert, and the stone
    palace, solid and fair, and indifferently he passed into it.
    And the hard marble of the floors under his feet grew similar
    to the quicksand of the desert, and the multitude of richly
    dressed and haughty men became like void air under his glance.
    No one looked into his face, as Lazarus passed by, fearing to
    fall under the appalling influence of his eyes; but when the
    sound of his heavy footsteps had sufficiently died down, the
    courtiers raised their heads and with fearful curiosity
    examined the figure of a stout, tall, slightly bent old man,
    who was slowly penetrating into the very heart of the imperial
    palace. Were Death itself passing, it would be faced with no
    greater fear: for until then the dead alone knew Death, and
    those alive knew Life only—and there was no bridge
    between them. But this extraordinary man, although alive, knew
    Death, and enigmatical, appalling, was his cursed knowledge.
    "Woe," people thought, "he will take the life of our great,
    deified Augustus," and they sent curses after Lazarus, who
    meanwhile kept on advancing into the interior of the
    palace.
Already did the emperor know who Lazarus was, and prepared
    to meet him. But the monarch was a brave man, and felt his own
    tremendous, unconquerable power, and in his fatal duel with him
    who had miraculously risen from the dead he wanted not to
    invoke human help. And so he met Lazarus face to face:
"Lift not thine eyes upon me, Lazarus," he ordered. "I heard
    thy face is like that of Medusa and turns into stone whomsoever
    thou lookest at. Now, I wish to see thee and to have a talk
    with thee, before I turn into stone,"—added he in a tone
    of kingly jesting, not devoid of fear.
Coming close to him, he carefully examined Lazarus' face and
    his strange festal garments. And although he had a keen eye, he
    was deceived by his appearance.
"So. Thou dost not appear terrible, my venerable old man.
    But the worse for us, if horror assumes such a respectable and
    pleasant air. Now let us have a talk."
Augustus sat, and questioning Lazarus with his eye as much
    as with words, started the conversation:
"Why didst thou not greet me as thou enteredst?"
Lazarus answered indifferent:
"I knew not it was necessary."
"Art thou a Christian?"
"No."
Augustus approvingly shook his head.
"That is good. I do not like Christians. They shake the tree
    of life before it is covered with fruit, and disperse its
    odorous bloom to the winds. But who art thou?"
With a visible effort Lazarus answered:
"I was dead."
"I had heard that. But who art thou now?"
Lazarus was silent, but at last repeated in a tone of weary
    apathy:
"I was dead."
"Listen to me, stranger," said the emperor, distinctly and
    severely giving utterance to the thought that had come to him
    at the beginning, "my realm is the realm of Life, my people are
    of the living, not of the dead. Thou art here one too many. I
    know not who thou art and what thou sawest there; but, if thou
    liest, I hate thy lies, and if thou tellst the truth, I hate
    thy truth. In my bosom I feel the throb of life; I feel
    strength in my arm, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, pierce
    the space. And yonder in the shelter of my rule, under the
    protection of laws created by me, people live and toil and
    rejoice. Dost thou hear the battle-cry, the challenge men throw
    into the face of the future?"
Augustus, as in prayer, stretched forth his arms and
    exclaimed solemnly:
"Be blessed, O great and divine Life!"
Lazarus was silent, and with growing sternness the emperor
    went on:
"Thou art not wanted here, miserable remnant, snatched from
    under Death's teeth, thou inspirest weariness and disgust with
    life; like a caterpillar in the fields, thou gloatest on the
    rich ear of joy and belchest out the drivel of despair and
    sorrow. Thy truth is like a rusty sword in the hands of a
    nightly murderer,—and as a murderer thou shalt be
    executed. But before that, let me look into thine eyes.
    Perchance, only cowards are afraid of them, but in the brave
    they awake the thirst for strife and victory; then thou shalt
    be rewarded, not executed.... Now, look at me, Lazarus."
At first it appeared to the deified Augustus that a friend
    was looking at him,—so soft, so tenderly fascinating was
    Lazarus' glance. It promised not horror, but sweet rest and the
    Infinite seemed to him a tender mistress, a compassionate
    sister, a mother. But stronger and stronger grew its embraces,
    and already the mouth, greedy of hissing kisses, interfered
    with the monarch's breathing, and already to the surface of the
    soft tissues of the body came the iron of the bones and
    tightened its merciless circle,—and unknown fangs, blunt
    and cold, touched his heart and sank into it with slow
    indolence.
"It pains," said the deified Augustus, growing pale. "But
    look at me, Lazarus, look."
It was as though some heavy gates, ever closed, were slowly
    moving apart, and through the growing interstice the appalling
    horror of the Infinite poured in slowly and steadily. Like two
    shadows there entered the shoreless void and the unfathomable
    darkness; they extinguished the sun, ravished the earth from
    under the feet, and the roof from over the head. No more did
    the frozen heart ache.
"Look, look, Lazarus," ordered Augustus tottering.
Time stood still, and the beginning of each thing grew
    frightfully near to its end. Augustus' throne just erected,
    crumbled down, and the void was already in the place of the
    throne and of Augustus. Noiselessly did Rome crumble down, and
    a new city stood on its site and it too was swallowed by the
    void. Like fantastic giants, cities, states, and countries fell
    down and vanished in the void darkness—and with uttermost
    indifference did the insatiable black womb of the Infinite
    swallow them.
"Halt!"—ordered the emperor.
In his voice sounded already a note of indifference, his
    hands dropped in languor, and in the vain struggle with the
    onrushing darkness his fiery eyes now blazed up, and now went
    out.
"My life thou hast taken from me, Lazarus,"—said he in
    a spiritless, feeble voice.
And these words of hopelessness saved him. He remembered his
    people, whose shield he was destined to be, and keen salutary
    pain pierced his deadened heart. "They are doomed to death," he
    thought wearily. "Serene shadows in the darkness of the
    Infinite," thought he, and horror grew upon him. "Frail vessels
    with living seething blood with a heart that knows sorrow and
    also great joy," said he in his heart, and tenderness pervaded
    it.
Thus pondering and oscillating between the poles of Life and
    Death, he slowly came back to life, to find in its suffering
    and in its joys a shield against the darkness of the void and
    the horror of the Infinite.
"No, thou hast not murdered me, Lazarus," said he firmly,
    "but I will take thy life. Be gone."
That evening the deified Augustus partook of his meats and
    drinks with particular joy. Now and then his lifted hand
    remained suspended in the air, and a dull glimmer replaced the
    bright sheen of his fiery eye. It was the cold wave of Horror
    that surged at his feet. Defeated, but not undone, ever
    awaiting its hour, that Horror stood at the emperor's bedside,
    like a black shadow all through his life; it swayed his nights,
    but yielded the days to the sorrows and joys of life.
The following day, the hangman with a hot iron burned out
    Lazarus' eyes. Then he was sent home. The deified Augustus
    dared not kill him.

Lazarus returned to the desert, and the wilderness met him
    with hissing gusts of wind and the heat of the blazing sun.
    Again he was sitting on a stone, his rough, bushy beard lifted
    up; and the two black holes in place of his eyes looked at the
    sky with an expression of dull terror. Afar-off the holy city
    stirred noisily and restlessly, but around him everything was
    deserted and dumb. No one approached the place where lived he
    who had miraculously risen from the dead, and long since his
    neighbors had forsaken their houses. Driven by the hot iron
    into the depth of his skull, his cursed knowledge hid there in
    an ambush. As though leaping out from an ambush it plunged its
    thousand invisible eyes into the man,—and no one dared
    look at Lazarus.
And in the evening, when the sun, reddening and growing
    wider, would come nearer and nearer the western horizon, the
    blind Lazarus would slowly follow it. He would stumble against
    stones and fall, stout and weak as he was; would rise heavily
    to his feet and walk on again; and on the red screen of the
    sunset his black body and outspread hands would form a
    monstrous likeness of a cross.
And it came to pass that once he went out and did not come
    back. Thus seemingly ended the second life of him who for three
    days had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and rose
    miraculously from the dead.

The Beast with Five Fingers
By W. F. HARVEY

From The New Decameron, by Various Hands.
        Copyright, 1919, by Robert M. McBride and Company. By
        permission of the publishers.

When I was a little boy I once went with my father to call
    on Adrian Borlsover. I played on the floor with a black spaniel
    while my father appealed for a subscription. Just before we
    left my father said, "Mr. Borlsover, may my son here shake
    hands with you? It will be a thing to look back upon with pride
    when he grows to be a man."
I came up to the bed on which the old man was lying and put
    my hand in his, awed by the still beauty of his face. He spoke
    to me kindly, and hoped that I should always try to please my
    father. Then he placed his right hand on my head and asked for
    a blessing to rest upon me. "Amen!" said my father, and I
    followed him out of the room, feeling as if I wanted to cry.
    But my father was in excellent spirits.
"That old gentleman, Jim," said he, "is the most wonderful
    man in the whole town. For ten years he has been quite
    blind."
"But I saw his eyes," I said. "They were ever so black and
    shiny; they weren't shut up like Nora's puppies. Can't he see
    at all?"
And so I learnt for the first time that a man might have
    eyes that looked dark and beautiful and shining without being
    able to see.
"Just like Mrs. Tomlinson has big ears," I said, "and can't
    hear at all except when Mr. Tomlinson shouts."
"Jim," said my father, "it's not right to talk about a
    lady's ears. Remember what Mr. Borlsover said about pleasing me
    and being a good boy."
That was the only time I saw Adrian Borlsover. I soon forgot
    about him and the hand which he laid in blessing on my head.
    But for a week I prayed that those dark tender eyes might
    see.
"His spaniel may have puppies," I said in my prayers, "and
    he will never be able to know how funny they look with their
    eyes all closed up. Please let old Mr. Borlsover see."

Adrian Borlsover, as my father had said, was a wonderful
    man. He came of an eccentric family. Borlsovers' sons, for some
    reason, always seemed to marry very ordinary women, which
    perhaps accounted for the fact that no Borlsover had been a
    genius, and only one Borlsover had been mad. But they were
    great champions of little causes, generous patrons of odd
    sciences, founders of querulous sects, trustworthy guides to
    the bypath meadows of erudition.
Adrian was an authority on the fertilization of orchids. He
    had held at one time the family living at Borlsover Conyers,
    until a congenital weakness of the lungs obliged him to seek a
    less rigorous climate in the sunny south coast watering-place
    where I had seen him. Occasionally he would relieve one or
    other of the local clergy. My father described him as a fine
    preacher, who gave long and inspiring sermons from what many
    men would have considered unprofitable texts. "An excellent
    proof," he would add, "of the truth of the doctrine of direct
    verbal inspiration."
Adrian Borlsover was exceedingly clever with his hands. His
    penmanship was exquisite. He illustrated all his scientific
    papers, made his own woodcuts, and carved the reredos that is
    at present the chief feature of interest in the church at
    Borlsover Conyers. He had an exceedingly clever knack in
    cutting silhouettes for young ladies and paper pigs and cows
    for little children, and made more than one complicated wind
    instrument of his own devising.
When he was fifty years old Adrian Borlsover lost his sight.
    In a wonderfully short time he had adapted himself to the new
    conditions of life. He quickly learned to read Braille. So
    marvelous indeed was his sense of touch that he was still able
    to maintain his interest in botany. The mere passing of his
    long supple fingers over a flower was sufficient means for its
    identification, though occasionally he would use his lips. I
    have found several letters of his among my father's
    correspondence. In no case was there anything to show that he
    was afflicted with blindness and this in spite of the fact that
    he exercised undue economy in the spacing of lines. Towards the
    close of his life the old man was credited with powers of touch
    that seemed almost uncanny: it has been said that he could tell
    at once the color of a ribbon placed between his fingers. My
    father would neither confirm nor deny the story.
I
Adrian Borlsover was a bachelor. His elder brother George
    had married late in life, leaving one son, Eustace, who lived
    in the gloomy Georgian mansion at Borlsover Conyers, where he
    could work undisturbed in collecting material for his great
    book on heredity.
Like his uncle, he was a remarkable man. The Borlsovers had
    always been born naturalists, but Eustace possessed in a
    special degree the power of systematizing his knowledge. He had
    received his university education in Germany, and then, after
    post-graduate work in Vienna and Naples, had traveled for four
    years in South America and the East, getting together a huge
    store of material for a new study into the processes of
    variation.
He lived alone at Borlsover Conyers with Saunders his
    secretary, a man who bore a somewhat dubious reputation in the
    district, but whose powers as a mathematician, combined with
    his business abilities, were invaluable to Eustace.
Uncle and nephew saw little of each other. The visits of
    Eustace were confined to a week in the summer or autumn: long
    weeks, that dragged almost as slowly as the bath-chair in which
    the old man was drawn along the sunny sea front. In their way
    the two men were fond of each other, though their intimacy
    would doubtless have been greater had they shared the same
    religious views. Adrian held to the old-fashioned evangelical
    dogmas of his early manhood; his nephew for many years had been
    thinking of embracing Buddhism. Both men possessed, too, the
    reticence the Borlsovers had always shown, and which their
    enemies sometimes called hypocrisy. With Adrian it was a
    reticence as to the things he had left undone; but with Eustace
    it seemed that the curtain which he was so careful to leave
    undrawn hid something more than a half-empty chamber.

Two years before his death Adrian Borlsover developed,
    unknown to himself, the not uncommon power of automatic
    writing. Eustace made the discovery by accident. Adrian was
    sitting reading in bed, the forefinger of his left hand tracing
    the Braille characters, when his nephew noticed that a pencil
    the old man held in his right hand was moving slowly along the
    opposite page. He left his seat in the window and sat down
    beside the bed. The right hand continued to move, and now he
    could see plainly that they were letters and words which it was
    forming.
"Adrian Borlsover," wrote the hand, "Eustace Borlsover,
    George Borlsover, Francis Borlsover Sigismund Borlsover, Adrian
    Borlsover, Eustace Borlsover, Saville Borlsover. B, for
    Borlsover. Honesty is the Best Policy. Beautiful Belinda
    Borlsover."
"What curious nonsense!" said Eustace to himself.
"King George the Third ascended the throne in 1760," wrote
    the hand. "Crowd, a noun of multitude; a collection of
    individuals—Adrian Borlsover, Eustace Borlsover."
"It seems to me," said his uncle, closing the book, "that
    you had much better make the most of the afternoon sunshine and
    take your walk now." "I think perhaps I will," Eustace answered
    as he picked up the volume. "I won't go far, and when I come
    back I can read to you those articles in Nature about
    which we were speaking."
He went along the promenade, but stopped at the first
    shelter, and seating himself in the corner best protected from
    the wind, he examined the book at leisure. Nearly every page
    was scored with a meaningless jungle of pencil marks: rows of
    capital letters, short words, long words, complete sentences,
    copy-book tags. The whole thing, in fact, had the appearance of
    a copy-book, and on a more careful scrutiny Eustace thought
    that there was ample evidence to show that the handwriting at
    the beginning of the book, good though it was was not nearly so
    good as the handwriting at the end.
He left his uncle at the end of October, with a promise to
    return early in December. It seemed to him quite clear that the
    old man's power of automatic writing was developing rapidly,
    and for the first time he looked forward to a visit that
    combined duty with interest.
But on his return he was at first disappointed. His uncle,
    he thought, looked older. He was listless too, preferring
    others to read to him and dictating nearly all his letters. Not
    until the day before he left had Eustace an opportunity of
    observing Adrian Borlsover's new-found faculty.
The old man, propped up in bed with pillows, had sunk into a
    light sleep. His two hands lay on the coverlet, his left hand
    tightly clasping his right. Eustace took an empty manuscript
    book and placed a pencil within reach of the fingers of the
    right hand. They snatched at it eagerly; then dropped the
    pencil to unloose the left hand from its restraining grasp.
"Perhaps to prevent interference I had better hold that
    hand," said Eustace to himself, as he watched the pencil.
    Almost immediately it began to write.
"Blundering Borlsovers, unnecessarily unnatural,
    extraordinarily eccentric, culpably curious."
"Who are you?" asked Eustace, in a low voice.
"Never you mind," wrote the hand of Adrian.
"Is it my uncle who is writing?"
"Oh, my prophetic soul, mine uncle."
"Is it anyone I know?"
"Silly Eustace, you'll see me very soon."
"When shall I see you?"
"When poor old Adrian's dead."
"Where shall I see you?"
"Where shall you not?"
Instead of speaking his next question, Borlsover wrote it.
    "What is the time?"
The fingers dropped the pencil and moved three or four times
    across the paper. Then, picking up the pencil, they wrote:
"Ten minutes before four. Put your book away, Eustace.
    Adrian mustn't find us working at this sort of thing. He
    doesn't know what to make of it, and I won't have poor old
    Adrian disturbed. Au revoir."
Adrian Borlsover awoke with a start.
"I've been dreaming again," he said; "such queer dreams of
    leaguered cities and forgotten towns. You were mixed up in this
    one, Eustace, though I can't remember how. Eustace, I want to
    warn you. Don't walk in doubtful paths. Choose your friends
    well. Your poor grandfather——"
A fit of coughing put an end to what he was saying, but
    Eustace saw that the hand was still writing. He managed
    unnoticed to draw the book away. "I'll light the gas," he said,
    "and ring for tea." On the other side of the bed curtain he saw
    the last sentences that had been written.
"It's too late, Adrian," he read. "We're friends already;
    aren't we, Eustace Borlsover?"
On the following day Eustace Borlsover left. He thought his
    uncle looked ill when he said good-by, and the old man spoke
    despondently of the failure his life had been.
"Nonsense, uncle!" said his nephew. "You have got over your
    difficulties in a way not one in a hundred thousand would have
    done. Every one marvels at your splendid perseverance in
    teaching your hand to take the place of your lost sight. To me
    it's been a revelation of the possibilities of education."
"Education," said his uncle dreamily, as if the word had
    started a new train of thought, "education is good so long as
    you know to whom and for what purpose you give it. But with the
    lower orders of men, the base and more sordid spirits, I have
    grave doubts as to its results. Well, good-by, Eustace, I may
    not see you again. You are a true Borlsover, with all the
    Borlsover faults. Marry, Eustace. Marry some good, sensible
    girl. And if by any chance I don't see you again, my will is at
    my solicitor's. I've not left you any legacy, because I know
    you're well provided for, but I thought you might like to have
    my books. Oh, and there's just one other thing. You know,
    before the end people often lose control over themselves and
    make absurd requests. Don't pay any attention to them, Eustace.
    Good-by!" and he held out his hand. Eustace took it. It
    remained in his a fraction of a second longer than he had
    expected, and gripped him with a virility that was surprising.
    There was, too, in its touch a subtle sense of intimacy.
"Why, uncle!" he said, "I shall see you alive and well for
    many long years to come."
Two months later Adrian Borlsover died.
II
Eustace Borlsover was in Naples at the time. He read the
    obituary notice in the Morning Post on the day
    announced for the funeral.
"Poor old fellow!" he said. "I wonder where I shall find
    room for all his books."
The question occurred to him again with greater force when
    three days later he found himself standing in the library at
    Borlsover Conyers, a huge room built for use, and not for
    beauty, in the year of Waterloo by a Borlsover who was an
    ardent admirer of the great Napoleon. It was arranged on the
    plan of many college libraries, with tall, projecting bookcases
    forming deep recesses of dusty silence, fit graves for the old
    hates of forgotten controversy, the dead passions of forgotten
    lives. At the end of the room, behind the bust of some unknown
    eighteenth-century divine, an ugly iron corkscrew stair led to
    a shelf-lined gallery. Nearly every shelf was full.
"I must talk to Saunders about it," said Eustace. "I suppose
    that it will be necessary to have the billiard-room fitted up
    with book cases."
The two men met for the first time after many weeks in the
    dining-room that evening.
"Hullo!" said Eustace, standing before the fire with his
    hands in his pockets. "How goes the world, Saunders? Why these
    dress togs?" He himself was wearing an old shooting-jacket. He
    did not believe in mourning, as he had told his uncle on his
    last visit; and though he usually went in for quiet-colored
    ties, he wore this evening one of an ugly red, in order to
    shock Morton the butler, and to make them thrash out the whole
    question of mourning for themselves in the servants' hall.
    Eustace was a true Borlsover. "The world," said Saunders, "goes
    the same as usual, confoundedly slow. The dress togs are
    accounted for by an invitation from Captain Lockwood to
    bridge."
"How are you getting there?"
"I've told your coachman to drive me in your carriage. Any
    objection?"
"Oh, dear me, no! We've had all things in common for far too
    many years for me to raise objections at this hour of the
    day."
"You'll find your correspondence in the library," went on
    Saunders. "Most of it I've seen to. There are a few private
    letters I haven't opened. There's also a box with a rat, or
    something, inside it that came by the evening post. Very likely
    it's the six-toed albino. I didn't look, because I didn't want
    to mess up my things but I should gather from the way it's
    jumping about that it's pretty hungry."
"Oh, I'll see to it," said Eustace, "while you and the
    Captain earn an honest penny."
Dinner over and Saunders gone, Eustace went into the
    library. Though the fire had been lit the room was by no means
    cheerful.
"We'll have all the lights on at any rate," he said, as he
    turned the switches. "And, Morton," he added, when the butler
    brought the coffee, "get me a screwdriver or something to undo
    this box. Whatever the animal is, he's kicking up the deuce of
    a row. What is it? Why are you dawdling?"
"If you please, sir, when the postman brought it he told me
    that they'd bored the holes in the lid at the post-office.
    There were no breathin' holes in the lid, sir, and they didn't
    want the animal to die. That is all, sir."
"It's culpably careless of the man, whoever he was," said
    Eustace, as he removed the screws, "packing an animal like this
    in a wooden box with no means of getting air. Confound it all!
    I meant to ask Morton to bring me a cage to put it in. Now I
    suppose I shall have to get one myself."
He placed a heavy book on the lid from which the screws had
    been removed, and went into the billiard-room. As he came back
    into the library with an empty cage in his hand he heard the
    sound of something falling, and then of something scuttling
    along the floor.
"Bother it! The beast's got out. How in the world am I to
    find it again in this library!"
To search for it did indeed seem hopeless. He tried to
    follow the sound of the scuttling in one of the recesses where
    the animal seemed to be running behind the books in the
    shelves, but it was impossible to locate it. Eustace resolved
    to go on quietly reading. Very likely the animal might gain
    confidence and show itself. Saunders seemed to have dealt in
    his usual methodical manner with most of the correspondence.
    There were still the private letters.
What was that? Two sharp clicks and the lights in the
    hideous candelabra that hung from the ceiling suddenly went
    out.
"I wonder if something has gone wrong with the fuse," said
    Eustace, as he went to the switches by the door. Then he
    stopped. There was a noise at the other end of the room, as if
    something was crawling up the iron corkscrew stair. "If it's
    gone into the gallery," he said, "well and good." He hastily
    turned on the lights, crossed the room, and climbed up the
    stair. But he could see nothing. His grandfather had placed a
    little gate at the top of the stair, so that children could run
    and romp in the gallery without fear of accident. This Eustace
    closed, and having considerably narrowed the circle of his
    search, returned to his desk by the fire.
How gloomy the library was! There was no sense of intimacy
    about the room. The few busts that an eighteenth-century
    Borlsover had brought back from the grand tour, might have been
    in keeping in the old library. Here they seemed out of place.
    They made the room feel cold, in spite of the heavy red damask
    curtains and great gilt cornices.
With a crash two heavy books fell from the gallery to the
    floor; then, as Borlsover looked, another and yet another.
"Very well; you'll starve for this, my beauty!" he said.
    "We'll do some little experiments on the metabolism of rats
    deprived of water. Go on! Chuck them down! I think I've got the
    upper hand." He turned once again to his correspondence. The
    letter was from the family solicitor. It spoke of his uncle's
    death and of the valuable collection of books that had been
    left to him in the will.
"There was one request," he read, "which certainly came as a
    surprise to me. As you know, Mr. Adrian Borlsover had left
    instructions that his body was to be buried in as simple a
    manner as possible at Eastbourne. He expressed a desire that
    there should be neither wreaths nor flowers of any kind, and
    hoped that his friends and relatives would not consider it
    necessary to wear mourning. The day before his death we
    received a letter canceling these instructions. He wished his
    body to be embalmed (he gave us the address of the man we were
    to employ—Pennifer, Ludgate Hill), with orders that his
    right hand was to be sent to you, stating that it was at your
    special request. The other arrangements as to the funeral
    remained unaltered."
"Good Lord!" said Eustace; "what in the world was the old
    boy driving at? And what in the name of all that's holy is
    that?"
Someone was in the gallery. Someone had pulled the cord
    attached to one of the blinds, and it had rolled up with a
    snap. Someone must be in the gallery, for a second blind did
    the same. Someone must be walking round the gallery, for one
    after the other the blinds sprang up, letting in the
    moonlight.
"I haven't got to the bottom of this yet," said Eustace,
    "but I will do before the night is very much older," and he
    hurried up the corkscrew stair. He had just got to the top when
    the lights went out a second time, and he heard again the
    scuttling along the floor. Quickly he stole on tiptoe in the
    dim moonshine in the direction of the noise, feeling as he went
    for one of the switches. His fingers touched the metal knob at
    last. He turned on the electric light.
About ten yards in front of him, crawling along the floor,
    was a man's hand. Eustace stared at it in utter astonishment.
    It was moving quickly, in the manner of a geometer caterpillar,
    the fingers humped up one moment, flattened out the next; the
    thumb appeared to give a crab-like motion to the whole. While
    he was looking, too surprised to stir, the hand disappeared
    round the corner. Eustace ran forward. He no longer saw it, but
    he could hear it as it squeezed its way behind the books on one
    of the shelves. A heavy volume had been displaced. There was a
    gap in the row of books where it had got in. In his fear lest
    it should escape him again, he seized the first book that came
    to his hand and plugged it into the hole. Then, emptying two
    shelves of their contents, he took the wooden boards and
    propped them up in front to make his barrier doubly sure.
"I wish Saunders was back," he said; "one can't tackle this
    sort of thing alone." It was after eleven, and there seemed
    little likelihood of Saunders returning before twelve. He did
    not dare to leave the shelf unwatched, even to run downstairs
    to ring the bell. Morton the butler often used to come round
    about eleven to see that the windows were fastened, but he
    might not come. Eustace was thoroughly unstrung. At last he
    heard steps down below.
"Morton!" he shouted; "Morton!"
"Sir?"
"Has Mr. Saunders got back yet?"
"Not yet, sir."
"Well, bring me some brandy, and hurry up about it. I'm up
    here in the gallery, you duffer."
"Thanks," said Eustace, as he emptied the glass. "Don't go
    to bed yet, Morton. There are a lot of books that have fallen
    down by accident; bring them up and put them back in their
    shelves."
Morton had never seen Borlsover in so talkative a mood as on
    that night. "Here," said Eustace, when the books had been put
    back and dusted, "you might hold up these boards for me,
    Morton. That beast in the box got out, and I've been chasing it
    all over the place."
"I think I can hear it chawing at the books, sir. They're
    not valuable, I hope? I think that's the carriage, sir; I'll go
    and call Mr. Saunders."
It seemed to Eustace that he was away for five minutes, but
    it could hardly have been more than one when he returned with
    Saunders. "All right, Morton, you can go now. I'm up here,
    Saunders."
"What's all the row?" asked Saunders, as he lounged forward
    with his hands in his pockets. The luck had been with him all
    the evening. He was completely satisfied, both with himself and
    with Captain Lockwood's taste in wines. "What's the matter? You
    look to me to be in an absolute blue funk."
"That old devil of an uncle of mine," began
    Eustace—"oh, I can't explain it all. It's his hand that's
    been playing old Harry all the evening. But I've got it
    cornered behind these books. You've got to help me catch
    it."
"What's up with you, Eustace? What's the game?"
"It's no game, you silly idiot! If you don't believe me take
    out one of those books and put your hand in and feel."
"All right," said Saunders; "but wait till I've rolled up my
    sleeve. The accumulated dust of centuries, eh?" He took off his
    coat, knelt down, and thrust his arm along the shelf.
"There's something there right enough," he said. "It's got a
    funny stumpy end to it, whatever it is, and nips like a crab.
    Ah, no, you don't!" He pulled his hand out in a flash. "Shove
    in a book quickly. Now it can't get out."
"What was it?" asked Eustace.
"It was something that wanted very much to get hold of me. I
    felt what seemed like a thumb and forefinger. Give me some
    brandy."
"How are we to get it out of there?"
"What about a landing net?"
"No good. It would be too smart for us. I tell you,
    Saunders, it can cover the ground far faster than I can walk.
    But I think I see how we can manage it. The two books at the
    end of the shelf are big ones that go right back against the
    wall. The others are very thin. I'll take out one at a time,
    and you slide the rest along until we have it squashed between
    the end two."
It certainly seemed to be the best plan. One by one, as they
    took out the books, the space behind grew smaller and smaller.
    There was something in it that was certainly very much alive.
    Once they caught sight of fingers pressing outward for a way of
    escape. At last they had it pressed between the two big
    books.
"There's muscle there, if there isn't flesh and blood," said
    Saunders, as he held them together. "It seems to be a hand
    right enough, too. I suppose this is a sort of infectious
    hallucination. I've read about such cases before."
"Infectious fiddlesticks!" said Eustace, his face white with
    anger; "bring the thing downstairs. We'll get it back into the
    box."
It was not altogether easy, but they were successful at
    last. "Drive in the screws," said Eustace, "we won't run any
    risks. Put the box in this old desk of mine. There's nothing in
    it that I want. Here's the key. Thank goodness, there's nothing
    wrong with the lock."
"Quite a lively evening," said Saunders. "Now let's hear
    more about your uncle."
They sat up together until early morning. Saunders had no
    desire for sleep. Eustace was trying to explain and to forget:
    to conceal from himself a fear that he had never felt
    before—the fear of walking alone down the long corridor
    to his bedroom.
III
"Whatever it was," said Eustace to Saunders on the following
    morning, "I propose that we drop the subject. There's nothing
    to keep us here for the next ten days. We'll motor up to the
    Lakes and get some climbing."
"And see nobody all day, and sit bored to death with each
    other every night. Not for me thanks. Why not run up to town?
    Run's the exact word in this case, isn't it? We're both in such
    a blessed funk. Pull yourself together Eustace, and let's have
    another look at the hand."
"As you like," said Eustace; "there's the key." They went
    into the library and opened the desk. The box was as they had
    left it on the previous night.
"What are you waiting for?" asked Eustace.
"I am waiting for you to volunteer to open the lid. However,
    since you seem to funk it, allow me. There doesn't seem to be
    the likelihood of any rumpus this morning, at all events." He
    opened the lid and picked out the hand.
"Cold?" asked Eustace.
"Tepid. A bit below blood-heat by the feel. Soft and supple
    too. If it's the embalming, it's a sort of embalming I've never
    seen before. Is it your uncle's hand?"
"Oh, yes, it's his all right," said Eustace. "I should know
    those long thin fingers anywhere. Put it back in the box,
    Saunders. Never mind about the screws. I'll lock the desk, so
    that there'll be no chance of its getting out. We'll compromise
    by motoring up to town for a week. If we get off soon after
    lunch we ought to be at Grantham or Stamford by night."
"Right," said Saunders; "and to-morrow—Oh, well, by
    to-morrow we shall have forgotten all about this beastly
    thing."
If when the morrow came they had not forgotten, it was
    certainly true that at the end of the week they were able to
    tell a very vivid ghost story at the little supper Eustace gave
    on Hallow E'en.
"You don't want us to believe that it's true, Mr. Borlsover?
    How perfectly awful!"
"I'll take my oath on it, and so would Saunders here;
    wouldn't you, old chap?"
"Any number of oaths," said Saunders. "It was a long thin
    hand, you know, and it gripped me just like that."
"Don't Mr. Saunders! Don't! How perfectly horrid! Now tell
    us another one, do. Only a really creepy one, please!"

"Here's a pretty mess!" said Eustace on the following day as
    he threw a letter across the table to Saunders. "It's your
    affair, though. Mrs. Merrit, if I understand it, gives a
    month's notice."
"Oh, that's quite absurd on Mrs. Merrit's part," Saunders
    replied. "She doesn't know what she's talking about. Let's see
    what she says."
"Dear
    Sir," he read, "this is to let you know that I must give
    you a month's notice as from Tuesday the 13th. For a long time
    I've felt the place too big for me, but when Jane Parfit, and
    Emma Laidlaw go off with scarcely as much as an 'if you
    please,' after frightening the wits out of the other girls, so
    that they can't turn out a room by themselves or walk alone
    down the stairs for fear of treading on half-frozen toads or
    hearing it run along the passages at night, all I can say is
    that it's no place for me. So I must ask you, Mr. Borlsover,
    sir, to find a new housekeeper that has no objection to large
    and lonely houses, which some people do say, not that I believe
    them for a minute, my poor mother always having been a
    Wesleyan, are haunted.
"Yours faithfully,
Elizabeth Merrit.
"P.S.—I
    should be obliged if you would give my respects to Mr.
    Saunders. I hope that he won't run no risks with his cold."
"Saunders," said Eustace, "you've always had a wonderful way
    with you in dealing with servants. You mustn't let poor old
    Merrit go."
"Of course she shan't go," said Saunders. "She's probably
    only angling for a rise in salary. I'll write to her this
    morning."
"No; there's nothing like a personal interview. We've had
    enough of town. We'll go back to-morrow, and you must work your
    cold for all it's worth. Don't forget that it's got on to the
    chest, and will require weeks of feeding up and nursing."
"All right. I think I can manage Mrs. Merrit."
But Mrs. Merrit was more obstinate than he had thought. She
    was very sorry to hear of Mr. Saunders's cold, and how he lay
    awake all night in London coughing; very sorry indeed. She'd
    change his room for him gladly, and get the south room aired.
    And wouldn't he have a basin of hot bread and milk last thing
    at night? But she was afraid that she would have to leave at
    the end of the month.
"Try her with an increase of salary," was the advice of
    Eustace.
It was no use. Mrs. Merrit was obdurate, though she knew of
    a Mrs. Handyside who had been housekeeper to Lord Gargrave, who
    might be glad to come at the salary mentioned.
"What's the matter with the servants, Morton?" asked Eustace
    that evening when he brought the coffee into the library.
    "What's all this about Mrs. Merrit wanting to leave?"
"If you please, sir, I was going to mention it myself. I
    have a confession to make, sir. When I found your note asking
    me to open that desk and take out the box with the rat, I broke
    the lock as you told me, and was glad to do it, because I could
    hear the animal in the box making a great noise, and I thought
    it wanted food. So I took out the box, sir, and got a cage, and
    was going to transfer it, when the animal got away."
"What in the world are you talking about? I never wrote any
    such note."
"Excuse me, sir, it was the note I picked up here on the
    floor on the day you and Mr. Saunders left. I have it in my
    pocket now."
It certainly seemed to be in Eustace's handwriting. It was
    written in pencil, and began somewhat abruptly.
"Get a hammer, Morton," he read, "or some other tool, and
    break open the lock in the old desk in the library. Take out
    the box that is inside. You need not do anything else. The lid
    is already open. Eustace Borlsover."
"And you opened the desk?"
"Yes, sir; and as I was getting the cage ready the animal
    hopped out."
"What animal?"
"The animal inside the box, sir."
"What did it look like?"
"Well, sir, I couldn't tell you," said Morton nervously; "my
    back was turned, and it was halfway down the room when I looked
    up."
"What was its color?" asked Saunders; "black?"
"Oh, no, sir, a grayish white. It crept along in a very
    funny way, sir. I don't think it had a tail."
"What did you do then?"
"I tried to catch it, but it was no use. So I set the
    rat-traps and kept the library shut. Then that girl Emma
    Laidlaw left the door open when she was cleaning, and I think
    it must have escaped."
"And you think it was the animal that's been frightening the
    maids?"
"Well, no, sir, not quite. They said it was—you'll
    excuse me, sir—a hand that they saw. Emma trod on it once
    at the bottom of the stairs. She thought then it was a
    half-frozen toad, only white. And then Parfit was washing up
    the dishes in the scullery. She wasn't thinking about anything
    in particular. It was close on dusk. She took her hands out of
    the water and was drying them absent-minded like on the roller
    towel, when she found that she was drying someone else's hand
    as well, only colder than hers."
"What nonsense!" exclaimed Saunders.
"Exactly, sir; that's what I told her; but we couldn't get
    her to stop."
"You don't believe all this?" said Eustace, turning suddenly
    towards the butler.
"Me, sir? Oh, no, sir! I've not seen anything."
"Nor heard anything?"
"Well, sir, if you must know, the bells do ring at odd
    times, and there's nobody there when we go; and when we go
    round to draw the blinds of a night, as often as not somebody's
    been there before us. But as I says to Mrs. Merrit, a young
    monkey might do wonderful things, and we all know that Mr.
    Borlsover has had some strange animals about the place."
"Very well, Morton, that will do."
"What do you make of it?" asked Saunders when they were
    alone. "I mean of the letter he said you wrote."
"Oh, that's simple enough," said Eustace. "See the paper
    it's written on? I stopped using that years ago, but there were
    a few odd sheets and envelopes left in the old desk. We never
    fastened up the lid of the box before locking it in. The hand
    got out, found a pencil, wrote this note, and shoved it through
    a crack on to the floor where Morton found it. That's plain as
    daylight."
"But the hand couldn't write?"
"Couldn't it? You've not seen it do the things I've seen,"
    and he told Saunders more of what had happened at
    Eastbourne.
"Well," said Saunders, "in that case we have at least an
    explanation of the legacy. It was the hand which wrote unknown
    to your uncle that letter to your solicitor, bequeathing itself
    to you. Your uncle had no more to do with that request than I.
    In fact, it would seem that he had some idea of this automatic
    writing, and feared it."
"Then if it's not my uncle, what is it?"
"I suppose some people might say that a disembodied spirit
    had got your uncle to educate and prepare a little body for it.
    Now it's got into that little body and is off on its own."
"Well, what are we to do?"
"We'll keep our eyes open," said Saunders, "and try to catch
    it. If we can't do that, we shall have to wait till the bally
    clockwork runs down. After all, if it's flesh and blood, it
    can't live for ever."
For two days nothing happened. Then Saunders saw it sliding
    down the banister in the hall. He was taken unawares, and lost
    a full second before he started in pursuit, only to find that
    the thing had escaped him. Three days later, Eustace, writing
    alone in the library at night, saw it sitting on an open book
    at the other end of the room. The fingers crept over the page,
    feeling the print as if it were reading; but before he had time
    to get up from his seat, it had taken the alarm and was pulling
    itself up the curtains. Eustace watched it grimly as it hung on
    to the cornice with three fingers, flicking thumb and
    forefinger at him in an expression of scornful derision.
"I know what I'll do," he said. "If I only get it into the
    open I'll set the dogs on to it."
He spoke to Saunders of the suggestion.
"It's jolly good idea," he said; "only we won't wait till we
    find it out of doors. We'll get the dogs. There are the two
    terriers and the under-keeper's Irish mongrel that's on to rats
    like a flash. Your spaniel has not got spirit enough for this
    sort of game." They brought the dogs into the house, and the
    keeper's Irish mongrel chewed up the slippers, and the terriers
    tripped up Morton as he waited at table; but all three were
    welcome. Even false security is better than no security at
    all.
For a fortnight nothing happened. Then the hand was caught,
    not by the dogs, but by Mrs. Merrit's gray parrot. The bird was
    in the habit of periodically removing the pins that kept its
    seed and water tins in place, and of escaping through the holes
    in the side of the cage. When once at liberty Peter would show
    no inclination to return, and would often be about the house
    for days. Now, after six consecutive weeks of captivity, Peter
    had again discovered a new means of unloosing his bolts and was
    at large, exploring the tapestried forests of the curtains and
    singing songs in praise of liberty from cornice and picture
    rail.
"It's no use your trying to catch him," said Eustace to Mrs.
    Merrit, as she came into the study one afternoon towards dusk
    with a step-ladder. "You'd much better leave Peter alone.
    Starve him into surrender, Mrs. Merrit, and don't leave bananas
    and seed about for him to peck at when he fancies he's hungry.
    You're far too softhearted."
"Well, sir, I see he's right out of reach now on that
    picture rail, so if you wouldn't mind closing the door, sir,
    when you leave the room, I'll bring his cage in to-night and
    put some meat inside it. He's that fond of meat, though it does
    make him pull out his feathers to suck the quills. They
    do say that if you cook—"
"Never mind, Mrs. Merrit," said Eustace, who was busy
    writing. "That will do; I'll keep an eye on the bird."
There was silence in the room, unbroken but for the
    continuous whisper of his pen.
"Scratch poor Peter," said the bird. "Scratch poor old
    Peter!"
"Be quiet, you beastly bird!"
"Poor old Peter! Scratch poor Peter, do."
"I'm more likely to wring your neck if I get hold of you."
    He looked up at the picture rail, and there was the hand
    holding on to a hook with three fingers, and slowly scratching
    the head of the parrot with the fourth. Eustace ran to the bell
    and pressed it hard; then across to the window, which he closed
    with a bang. Frightened by the noise the parrot shook its wings
    preparatory to flight, and as it did so the fingers of the hand
    got hold of it by the throat. There was a shrill scream from
    Peter as he fluttered across the room, wheeling round in
    circles that ever descended, borne down under the weight that
    clung to him. The bird dropped at last quite suddenly, and
    Eustace saw fingers and feathers rolled into an inextricable
    mass on the floor. The struggle abruptly ceased as finger and
    thumb squeezed the neck; the bird's eyes rolled up to show the
    whites, and there was a faint, half-choked gurgle. But before
    the fingers had time to loose their hold, Eustace had them in
    his own.
"Send Mr. Saunders here at once," he said to the maid who
    came in answer to the bell. "Tell him I want him
    immediately."
Then he went with the hand to the fire. There was a ragged
    gash across the back where the bird's beak had torn it, but no
    blood oozed from the wound. He noticed with disgust that the
    nails had grown long and discolored.
"I'll burn the beastly thing," he said. But he could not
    burn it. He tried to throw it into the flames, but his own
    hands, as if restrained by some old primitive feeling, would
    not let him. And so Saunders found him pale and irresolute,
    with the hand still clasped tightly in his fingers.
"I've got it at last," he said in a tone of triumph.
"Good; let's have a look at it."
"Not when it's loose. Get me some nails and a hammer and a
    board of some sort."
"Can you hold it all right?"
"Yes, the thing's quite limp; tired out with throttling poor
    old Peter, I should say."
"And now," said Saunders when he returned with the things,
    "what are we going to do?"
"Drive a nail through it first, so that it can't get away;
    then we can take our time over examining it."
"Do it yourself," said Saunders. "I don't mind helping you
    with guinea-pigs occasionally when there's something to be
    learned; partly because I don't fear a guinea-pig's revenge.
    This thing's different."
"All right, you miserable skunk. I won't forget the way
    you've stood by me."
He took up a nail, and before Saunders had realised what he
    was doing had driven it through the hand, deep into the
    board.
"Oh, my aunt," he giggled hysterically, "look at it now,"
    for the hand was writhing in agonized contortions, squirming
    and wriggling upon the nail like a worm upon the hook.
"Well," said Saunders, "you've done it now. I'll leave you
    to examine it."
"Don't go, in heaven's name. Cover it up, man, cover it up!
    Shove a cloth over it! Here!" and he pulled off the
    antimacassar from the back of a chair and wrapped the board in
    it. "Now get the keys from my pocket and open the safe. Chuck
    the other things out. Oh, Lord, it's getting itself into
    frightful knots! and open it quick!" He threw the thing in and
    banged the door.
"We'll keep it there till it dies," he said. "May I burn in
    hell if I ever open the door of that safe again."

Mrs. Merrit departed at the end of the month. Her successor
    certainly was more successful in the management of the
    servants. Early in her rule she declared that she would stand
    no nonsense, and gossip soon withered and died. Eustace
    Borlsover went back to his old way of life. Old habits crept
    over and covered his new experience. He was, if anything, less
    morose, and showed a greater inclination to take his natural
    part in country society.
"I shouldn't be surprised if he marries one of these days,"
    said Saunders. "Well, I'm in no hurry for such an event. I know
    Eustace far too well for the future Mrs. Borlsover to like me.
    It will be the same old story again: a long friendship slowly
    made—marriage—and a long friendship quickly
    forgotten."
IV
But Eustace Borlsover did not follow the advice of his uncle
    and marry. He was too fond of old slippers and tobacco. The
    cooking, too, under Mrs. Handyside's management was excellent,
    and she seemed, too, to have a heaven-sent faculty in knowing
    when to stop dusting.
Little by little the old life resumed its old power. Then
    came the burglary. The men, it was said, broke into the house
    by way of the conservatory. It was really little more than an
    attempt, for they only succeeded in carrying away a few pieces
    of plate from the pantry. The safe in the study was certainly
    found open and empty, but, as Mr. Borlsover informed the police
    inspector, he had kept nothing of value in it during the last
    six months.
"Then you're lucky in getting off so easily, sir," the man
    replied. "By the way they have gone about their business, I
    should say they were experienced cracksmen. They must have
    caught the alarm when they were just beginning their evening's
    work."
"Yes," said Eustace, "I suppose I am lucky."
"I've no doubt," said the inspector, "that we shall be able
    to trace the men. I've said that they must have been old hands
    at the game. The way they got in and opened the safe shows
    that. But there's one little thing that puzzles me. One of them
    was careless enough not to wear gloves, and I'm bothered if I
    know what he was trying to do. I've traced his finger-marks on
    the new varnish on the window sashes in every one of the
    downstairs rooms. They are very distinct ones too."
"Right hand or left, or both?" asked Eustace.
"Oh, right every time. That's the funny thing. He must have
    been a foolhardy fellow, and I rather think it was him that
    wrote that." He took out a slip of paper from his pocket.
    "That's what he wrote, sir. 'I've got out, Eustace Borlsover,
    but I'll be back before long.' Some gaol bird just escaped, I
    suppose. It will make it all the easier for us to trace him. Do
    you know the writing, sir?"
"No," said Eustace; "it's not the writing of anyone I
    know."
"I'm not going to stay here any longer," said Eustace to
    Saunders at luncheon. "I've got on far better during the last
    six months than ever I expected, but I'm not going to run the
    risk of seeing that thing again. I shall go up to town this
    afternoon. Get Morton to put my things together, and join me
    with the car at Brighton on the day after to-morrow. And bring
    the proofs of those two papers with you. We'll run over them
    together."
"How long are you going to be away?"
"I can't say for certain, but be prepared to stay for some
    time. We've stuck to work pretty closely through the summer,
    and I for one need a holiday. I'll engage the rooms at
    Brighton. You'll find it best to break the journey at Hitchin.
    I'll wire to you there at the Crown to tell you the Brighton
    address."
The house he chose at Brighton was in a terrace. He had been
    there before. It was kept by his old college gyp, a man of
    discreet silence, who was admirably partnered by an excellent
    cook. The rooms were on the first floor. The two bedrooms were
    at the back, and opened out of each other. "Saunders can have
    the smaller one, though it is the only one with a fireplace,"
    he said. "I'll stick to the larger of the two, since it's got a
    bathroom adjoining. I wonder what time he'll arrive with the
    car."
Saunders came about seven, cold and cross and dirty. "We'll
    light the fire in the dining-room," said Eustace, "and get
    Prince to unpack some of the things while we are at dinner.
    What were the roads like?"
"Rotten; swimming with mud, and a beastly cold wind against
    us all day. And this is July. Dear old England!"
"Yes," said Eustace, "I think we might do worse than leave
    dear old England for a few months."
They turned in soon after twelve.
"You oughtn't to feel cold, Saunders," said Eustace, "when
    you can afford to sport a great cat-skin lined coat like this.
    You do yourself very well, all things considered. Look at those
    gloves, for instance. Who could possibly feel cold when wearing
    them?"
"They are far too clumsy though for driving. Try them on and
    see," and he tossed them through the door on to Eustace's bed,
    and went on with his unpacking. A minute later he heard a
    shrill cry of terror. "Oh, Lord," he heard, "it's in the glove!
    Quick, Saunders, quick!" Then came a smacking thud. Eustace had
    thrown it from him. "I've chucked it into the bathroom," he
    gasped, "it's hit the wall and fallen into the bath. Come now
    if you want to help." Saunders, with a lighted candle in his
    hand, looked over the edge of the bath. There it was, old and
    maimed, dumb and blind, with a ragged hole in the middle,
    crawling, staggering, trying to creep up the slippery sides,
    only to fall back helpless.
"Stay there," said Saunders. "I'll empty a collar box or
    something, and we'll jam it in. It can't get out while I'm
    away."
"Yes, it can," shouted Eustace. "It's getting out now. It's
    climbing up the plug chain. No, you brute, you filthy brute,
    you don't! Come back, Saunders, it's getting away from me. I
    can't hold it; it's all slippery. Curse its claw! Shut the
    window, you idiot! The top too, as well as the bottom. You
    utter idiot! It's got out!" There was the sound of something
    dropping on to the hard flagstones below, and Eustace fell back
    fainting.

For a fortnight he was ill.
"I don't know what to make of it," the doctor said to
    Saunders. "I can only suppose that Mr. Borlsover has suffered
    some great emotional shock. You had better let me send someone
    to help you nurse him. And by all means indulge that whim of
    his never to be left alone in the dark. I would keep a light
    burning all night if I were you. But he must have more
    fresh air. It's perfectly absurd this hatred of open
    windows."
Eustace, however, would have no one with him but Saunders.
    "I don't want the other men," he said. "They'd smuggle it in
    somehow. I know they would."
"Don't worry about it, old chap. This sort of thing can't go
    on indefinitely. You know I saw it this time as well as you. It
    wasn't half so active. It won't go on living much longer,
    especially after that fall. I heard it hit the flags myself. As
    soon as you're a bit stronger we'll leave this place; not bag
    and baggage, but with only the clothes on our backs, so that it
    won't be able to hide anywhere. We'll escape it that way. We
    won't give any address, and we won't have any parcels sent
    after us. Cheer up, Eustace! You'll be well enough to leave in
    a day or two. The doctor says I can take you out in a chair
    to-morrow."
"What have I done?" asked Eustace. "Why does it come after
    me? I'm no worse than other men. I'm no worse than you,
    Saunders; you know I'm not. It was you who were at the bottom
    of that dirty business in San Diego, and that was fifteen years
    ago."
"It's not that, of course," said Saunders. "We are in the
    twentieth century, and even the parsons have dropped the idea
    of your old sins finding you out. Before you caught the hand in
    the library it was filled with pure malevolence—to you
    and all mankind. After you spiked it through with that nail it
    naturally forgot about other people, and concentrated its
    attention on you. It was shut up in the safe, you know, for
    nearly six months. That gives plenty of time for thinking of
    revenge."
Eustace Borlsover would not leave his room, but he thought
    that there might be something in Saunders's suggestion to leave
    Brighton without notice. He began rapidly to regain his
    strength.
"We'll go on the first of September," he said.

The evening of August 31st was oppressively warm. Though at
    midday the windows had been wide open, they had been shut an
    hour or so before dusk. Mrs. Prince had long since ceased to
    wonder at the strange habits of the gentlemen on the first
    floor. Soon after their arrival she had been told to take down
    the heavy window curtains in the two bedrooms, and day by day
    the rooms had seemed to grow more bare. Nothing was left lying
    about.
"Mr. Borlsover doesn't like to have any place where dirt can
    collect," Saunders had said as an excuse. "He likes to see into
    all the corners of the room."
"Couldn't I open the window just a little?" he said to
    Eustace that evening. "We're simply roasting in here, you
    know."
"No, leave well alone. We're not a couple of boarding-school
    misses fresh from a course of hygiene lectures. Get the
    chessboard out."
They sat down and played. At ten o'clock Mrs. Prince came to
    the door with a note. "I am sorry I didn't bring it before,"
    she said, "but it was left in the letter-box."
"Open it, Saunders, and see if it wants answering."
It was very brief. There was neither address nor
    signature.
"Will eleven
    o'clock to-night be suitable for our last appointment?"
"Who is it from?" asked Borlsover.
"It was meant for me," said Saunders. "There's no answer,
    Mrs. Prince," and he put the paper into his pocket. "A dunning
    letter from a tailor; I suppose he must have got wind of our
    leaving."
It was a clever lie, and Eustace asked no more questions.
    They went on with their game.
On the landing outside Saunders could hear the grandfather's
    clock whispering the seconds, blurting out the
    quarter-hours.
"Check!" said Eustace. The clock struck eleven. At the same
    time there was a gentle knocking on the door; it seemed to come
    from the bottom panel.
"Who's there?" asked Eustace.
There was no answer.
"Mrs. Prince, is that you?"
"She is up above," said Saunders; "I can hear her walking
    about the room."
"Then lock the door; bolt it too. Your move, Saunders."
While Saunders sat with his eyes on the chessboard, Eustace
    walked over to the window and examined the fastenings. He did
    the same in Saunders's room and the bathroom. There were no
    doors between the three rooms, or he would have shut and locked
    them too.
"Now, Saunders," he said, "don't stay all night over your
    move. I've had time to smoke one cigarette already. It's bad to
    keep an invalid waiting. There's only one possible thing for
    you to do. What was that?"
"The ivy blowing against the window. There, it's your move
    now, Eustace."
"It wasn't the ivy, you idiot. It was someone tapping at the
    window," and he pulled up the blind. On the outer side of the
    window, clinging to the sash, was the hand.
"What is it that it's holding?"
"It's a pocket-knife. It's going to try to open the window
    by pushing back the fastener with the blade."
"Well, let it try," said Eustace. "Those fasteners screw
    down; they can't be opened that way. Anyhow, we'll close the
    shutters. It's your move, Saunders. I've played."
But Saunders found it impossible to fix his attention on the
    game. He could not understand Eustace, who seemed all at once
    to have lost his fear. "What do you say to some wine?" he
    asked. "You seem to be taking things coolly, but I don't mind
    confessing that I'm in a blessed funk."
"You've no need to be. There's nothing supernatural about
    that hand, Saunders. I mean it seems to be governed by the laws
    of time and space. It's not the sort of thing that vanishes
    into thin air or slides through oaken doors. And since that's
    so, I defy it to get in here. We'll leave the place in the
    morning. I for one have bottomed the depths of fear. Fill your
    glass, man! The windows are all shuttered, the door is locked
    and bolted. Pledge me my uncle Adrian! Drink, man! What are you
    waiting for?"
Saunders was standing with his glass half raised. "It can
    get in," he said hoarsely; "it can get in! We've forgotten.
    There's the fireplace in my bedroom. It will come down the
    chimney."
"Quick!" said Eustace, as he rushed into the other room; "we
    haven't a minute to lose. What can we do? Light the fire,
    Saunders. Give me a match, quick!"
"They must be all in the other room. I'll get them."
"Hurry, man, for goodness' sake! Look in the bookcase! Look
    in the bathroom! Here, come and stand here; I'll look."
"Be quick!" shouted Saunders. "I can hear something!"
"Then plug a sheet from your bed up the chimney. No, here's
    a match." He had found one at last that had slipped into a
    crack in the floor.
"Is the fire laid? Good, but it may not burn. I
    know—the oil from that old reading-lamp and this
    cotton-wool. Now the match, quick! Pull the sheet away, you
    fool! We don't want it now."
There was a great roar from the grate as the flames shot up.
    Saunders had been a fraction of a second too late with the
    sheet. The oil had fallen on to it. It, too, was burning.
"The whole place will be on fire!" cried Eustace, as he
    tried to beat out the flames with a blanket. "It's no good! I
    can't manage it. You must open the door, Saunders, and get
    help."
Saunders ran to the door and fumbled with the bolts. The key
    was stiff in the lock.
"Hurry!" shouted Eustace; "the whole place is ablaze!"
The key turned in the lock at last. For half a second
    Saunders stopped to look back. Afterwards he could never be
    quite sure as to what he had seen, but at the time he thought
    that something black and charred was creeping slowly, very
    slowly, from the mass of flames towards Eustace Borlsover. For
    a moment he thought of returning to his friend, but the noise
    and the smell of the burning sent him running down the passage
    crying, "Fire! Fire!" He rushed to the telephone to summon
    help, and then back to the bathroom—he should have
    thought of that before—for water. As he burst open the
    bedroom door there came a scream of terror which ended
    suddenly, and then the sound of a heavy fall.

The Mass of Shadows
By ANATOLE FRANCE

From Mother of Pearl, by Anatole France.
        Copyright by John Lane Company. By permission of the
        publishers.

This tale the sacristan of the church of St. Eulalie at
    Neuville d'Aumont told me, as we sat under the arbor of the
    White Horse, one fine summer evening, drinking a bottle of old
    wine to the health of the dead man, now very much at his ease,
    whom that very morning he had borne to the grave with full
    honors, beneath a pall powdered with smart silver tears.
"My poor father who is dead" (it is the sacristan who is
    speaking,) "was in his lifetime a grave-digger. He was of an
    agreeable disposition, the result, no doubt, of the calling he
    followed, for it has often been pointed out that people who
    work in cemeteries are of a jovial turn. Death has no terrors
    for them; they never give it a thought. I, for instance,
    monsieur, enter a cemetery at night as little perturbed as
    though it were the arbor of the White Horse. And if by chance I
    meet with a ghost, I don't disturb myself in the least about
    it, for I reflect that he may just as likely have business of
    his own to attend to as I. I know the habits of the dead, and I
    know their character. Indeed, so far as that goes, I know
    things of which the priests themselves are ignorant. If I were
    to tell you all I have seen, you would be astounded. But a
    still tongue makes a wise head, and my father, who, all the
    same, delighted in spinning a yarn, did not disclose a
    twentieth part of what he knew. To make up for this he often
    repeated the same stories, and to my knowledge he told the
    story of Catherine Fontaine at least a hundred times.
"Catherine Fontaine was an old maid whom he well remembered
    having seen when he was a mere child. I should not be surprised
    if there were still, perhaps, three old fellows in the district
    who could remember having heard folks speak of her, for she was
    very well known and of excellent reputation, though poor
    enough. She lived at the corner of the Rue aux Nonnes, in the
    turret which is still to be seen there, and which formed part
    of an old half-ruined mansion looking on to the garden of the
    Ursuline nuns. On that turret can still be traced certain
    figures and half-obliterated inscriptions. The late curé
    of St. Eulalie, Monsieur Levasseur, asserted that there are the
    words in Latin, Love is stronger than death, 'which is
    to be understood,' so he would add, 'of divine love.'
"Catherine Fontaine lived by herself in this tiny apartment.
    She was a lace-maker. You know, of course, that the lace made
    in our part of the world was formerly held in high esteem. No
    one knew anything of her relatives or friends. It was reported
    that when she was eighteen years of age she had loved the young
    Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry, and had been secretly
    affianced to him. But decent folk didn't believe a word of it,
    and said it was nothing but a tale concocted because Catherine
    Fontaine's demeanor was that of a lady rather than that of a
    working woman, and because, moreover, she possessed beneath her
    white locks the remains of great beauty. Her expression was
    sorrowful, and on one finger she wore one of those rings
    fashioned by the goldsmith into the semblance of two tiny hands
    clasped together. In former days folks were accustomed to
    exchange such rings at their betrothal ceremony. I am sure you
    know the sort of thing I mean.
"Catherine Fontaine lived a saintly life. She spent a great
    deal of time in churches, and every morning, whatever might be
    the weather, she went to assist at the six o'clock Mass at St.
    Eulalie.
"Now one December night, whilst she was in her little
    chamber, she was awakened by the sound of bells, and nothing
    doubting that they were ringing for the first Mass, the pious
    woman dressed herself, and came downstairs and out into the
    street. The night was so obscure that not even the walls of the
    houses were visible, and not a ray of light shone from the
    murky sky. And such was the silence amid this black darkness,
    that there was not even the sound of a distant dog barking, and
    a feeling of aloofness from every living creature was
    perceptible. But Catherine Fontaine knew well every single
    stone she stepped on, and, as she could have found her way to
    the church with her eyes shut, she reached without difficulty
    the corner of the Rue aux Nonnes and the Rue de la Paroisse,
    where the timbered house stands with the tree of Jesse carved
    on one of its massive beams. When she reached this spot she
    perceived that the church doors were open, and that a great
    light was streaming out from the wax tapers. She resumed her
    journey, and when she had passed through the porch she found
    herself in the midst of a vast congregation which entirely
    filled the church. But she did not recognize any of the
    worshipers and was surprised to observe that all of these
    people were dressed in velvets and brocades, with feathers in
    their hats, and that they wore swords in the fashion of days
    gone by. Here were gentlemen who carried tall canes with gold
    knobs, and ladies with lace caps fastened with coronet-shaped
    combs. Chevaliers of the Order of St. Louis extended their
    hands to these ladies, who concealed behind their fans painted
    faces, of which only the powdered brow and the patch at the
    corner of the eye were visible! All of them proceeded to take
    their places without the slightest sound, and as they moved
    neither the sound of their footsteps on the pavement, nor the
    rustle of their garments could be heard. The lower places were
    filled with a crowd of young artisans in brown jackets, dimity
    breeches, and blue stockings, with their arms round the waists
    of pretty blushing girls who lowered their eyes. Near the holy
    water stoups peasant women, in scarlet petticoats and laced
    bodices, sat upon the ground as immovable as domestic animals,
    whilst young lads, standing up behind them, stared out from
    wide-open eyes and twirled their hats round and round on their
    fingers, and all these sorrowful countenances seemed centred
    irremovably on one and the same thought, at once sweet and
    sorrowful. On her knees, in her accustomed place, Catherine
    Fontaine saw the priest advance toward the altar, preceded by
    two servers. She recognized neither priest nor clerks. The Mass
    began. It was a silent Mass, during which neither the sound of
    the moving lips nor the tinkle of the bell was audible.
    Catherine Fontaine felt that she was under the observation and
    the influence also of her mysterious neighbor, and when,
    scarcely turning her head, she stole a glance at him, she
    recognized the young Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry, who had
    once loved her, and who had been dead for five and forty years.
    She recognized him by a small mark which he had over the left
    ear, and above all by the shadow which his long black eyelashes
    cast upon his cheeks. He was dressed in his hunting clothes,
    scarlet with gold lace, the very clothes he wore that day when
    he met her in St. Leonard's Wood, begged of her a drink, and
    stole a kiss. He had preserved his youth and good looks. When
    he smiled, he still displayed magnificent teeth. Catherine said
    to him in an undertone:
"'Monseigneur, you who were my friend, and to whom in days
    gone by I gave all that a girl holds most dear, may God keep
    you in His grace! O, that He would at length inspire me with
    regret for the sin I committed in yielding to you; for it is a
    fact that, though my hair is white and I approach my end, I
    have not yet repented of having loved you. But, dear dead
    friend and noble seigneur, tell me, who are these folk, habited
    after the antique fashion, who are here assisting at this
    silent Mass?'
"The Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry replied in a voice
    feebler than a breath, but none the less crystal clear:
"'Catherine, these men and women are souls from purgatory
    who have grieved God by sinning as we ourselves sinned through
    love of the creature, but who are not on that account cast off
    by God, inasmuch as their sin, like ours, was not
    deliberate.
"'Whilst separated from those whom they loved upon earth,
    they are purified in the cleansing fires of purgatory, they
    suffer the pangs of absence, which is for them the most cruel
    of tortures. They are so unhappy that an angel from heaven
    takes pity upon their love-torment. By the permission of the
    Most High, for one hour in the night, he reunites each year
    lover to loved in their parish church, where they are permitted
    to assist at the Mass of Shadows, hand clasped in hand. These
    are the facts. If it has been granted to me to see thee before
    thy death, Catherine, it is a boon which is bestowed by God's
    special permission.'
"And Catherine Fontaine answered him:
"'I would die gladly enough, dear, dead lord, if I might
    recover the beauty that was mine when I gave you to drink in
    the forest.'
"Whilst they thus conversed under their breath, a very old
    canon was taking the collection and proffering to the
    worshipers a great copper dish, wherein they let fall, each in
    his turn, ancient coins which have long since ceased to pass
    current: écus of six livres, florins, ducats and
    ducatoons, jacobuses and rose-nobles, and the pieces fell
    silently into the dish. When at length it was placed before the
    Chevalier, he dropped into it a louis which made no more sound
    than had the other pieces of gold and silver.
"Then the old canon stopped before Catherine Fontaine, who
    fumbled in her pocket without being able to find a farthing.
    Then, being unwilling to allow the dish to pass without an
    offering from herself, she slipped from her finger the ring
    which the Chevalier had given her the day before his death, and
    cast it into the copper bowl. As the golden ring fell, a sound
    like the heavy clang of a bell rang out, and on the stroke of
    this reverberation the Chevalier, the canon, the celebrant, the
    servers, the ladies and their cavaliers, the whole assembly
    vanished utterly; the candles guttered out, and Catherine
    Fontaine was left alone in the darkness."
Having concluded his narrative after this fashion, the
    sacristan drank a long draught of wine, remained pensive for a
    moment, and then resumed his talk in these words:
"I have told you this tale exactly as my father has told it
    to me over and over again, and I believe that it is authentic,
    because it agrees in all respects with what I have observed of
    the manners and customs peculiar to those who have passed away.
    I have associated a good deal with the dead ever since my
    childhood, and I know that they are accustomed to return to
    what they have loved.
"It is on this account that the miserly dead wander at night
    in the neighborhood of the treasures they conceal during their
    life time. They keep a strict watch over their gold; but the
    trouble they give themselves, far from being of service to
    them, turns to their disadvantage; and it is not a rare thing
    at all to come upon money buried in the ground on digging in a
    place haunted by a ghost. In the same way deceased husbands
    come by night to harass their wives who have made a second
    matrimonial venture, and I could easily name several who have
    kept a better watch over their wives since death than they ever
    did while living.
"That sort of thing is blameworthy, for in all fairness the
    dead have no business to stir up jealousies. Still I do but
    tell you what I have observed myself. It is a matter to take
    into account if one marries a widow. Besides, the tale I have
    told you is vouchsafed for in the manner following:
"The morning after that extraordinary night Catherine
    Fontaine was discovered dead in her chamber. And the beadle
    attached to St. Eulalie found in the copper bowl used for the
    collection a gold ring with two clasped hands. Besides, I'm not
    the kind of man to make jokes. Suppose we order another bottle
    of wine?..."

What Was It?
By FITZ-JAMES O'BRIEN
It is, I confess, with considerable diffidence, that I
    approach the strange narrative which I am about to relate. The
    events which I purpose detailing are of so extraordinary a
    character that I am quite prepared to meet with an unusual
    amount of incredulity and scorn. I accept all such beforehand.
    I have, I trust, the literary courage to face unbelief. I have,
    after mature consideration resolved to narrate, in as simple
    and straightforward a manner as I can compass, some facts that
    passed under my observation, in the month of July last, and
    which, in the annals of the mysteries of physical science, are
    wholly unparalleled.
I live at No. —— Twenty-sixth Street, in New
    York. The house is in some respects a curious one. It has
    enjoyed for the last two years the reputation of being haunted.
    It is a large and stately residence, surrounded by what was
    once a garden, but which is now only a green enclosure used for
    bleaching clothes. The dry basin of what has been a fountain,
    and a few fruit trees ragged and unpruned, indicate that this
    spot in past days was a pleasant, shady retreat, filled with
    fruits and flowers and the sweet murmur of waters.
The house is very spacious. A hall of noble size leads to a
    large spiral staircase winding through its center, while the
    various apartments are of imposing dimensions. It was built
    some fifteen or twenty years since by Mr. A——, the
    well-known New York merchant, who five years ago threw the
    commercial world into convulsions by a stupendous bank fraud.
    Mr. A——, as everyone knows, escaped to Europe, and
    died not long after, of a broken heart. Almost immediately
    after the news of his decease reached this country and was
    verified, the report spread in Twenty-sixth Street that No.
    —— was haunted. Legal measures had dispossessed the
    widow of its former owner, and it was inhabited merely by a
    caretaker and his wife, placed there by the house agent into
    whose hands it had passed for the purposes of renting or sale.
    These people declared that they were troubled with unnatural
    noises. Doors were opened without any visible agency. The
    remnants of furniture scattered through the various rooms were,
    during the night, piled one upon the other by unknown hands.
    Invisible feet passed up and down the stairs in broad daylight,
    accompanied by the rustle of unseen silk dresses, and the
    gliding of viewless hands along the massive balusters. The
    caretaker and his wife declared they would live there no
    longer. The house agent laughed, dismissed them, and put others
    in their place. The noises and supernatural manifestations
    continued. The neighborhood caught up the story, and the house
    remained untenanted for three years. Several persons negotiated
    for it; but, somehow, always before the bargain was closed they
    heard the unpleasant rumors and declined to treat any
    further.
It was in this state of things that my landlady, who at that
    time kept a boarding-house in Bleecker Street, and who wished
    to move further up town, conceived the bold idea of renting No.
    —— Twenty-sixth Street. Happening to have in her
    house rather a plucky and philosophical set of boarders, she
    laid her scheme before us, stating candidly everything she had
    heard respecting the ghostly qualities of the establishment to
    which she wished to remove us. With the exception of two timid
    persons,—a sea-captain and a returned Californian, who
    immediately gave notice that they would leave,—all of
    Mrs. Moffat's guests declared that they would accompany her in
    her chivalric incursion into the abode of spirits.
Our removal was effected in the month of May, and we were
    charmed with our new residence. The portion of Twenty-sixth
    Street where our house is situated, between Seventh and Eighth
    Avenues, is one of the pleasantest localities in New York. The
    gardens back of the houses, running down nearly to the Hudson,
    form, in the summer time, a perfect avenue of verdure. The air
    is pure and invigorating, sweeping, as it does, straight across
    the river from the Weehawken heights, and even the ragged
    garden which surrounded the house, although displaying on
    washing days rather too much clothesline, still gave us a piece
    of greensward to look at, and a cool retreat in the summer
    evenings, where we smoked our cigars in the dusk, and watched
    the fireflies flashing their dark lanterns in the long
    grass.
Of course we had no sooner established ourselves at No.
    —— than we began to expect ghosts. We absolutely
    awaited their advent with eagerness. Our dinner conversation
    was supernatural. One of the boarders, who had purchased Mrs.
    Crowe's Night Side of Nature for his own private
    delectation, was regarded as a public enemy by the entire
    household for not having bought twenty copies. The man led a
    life of supreme wretchedness while he was reading this volume.
    A system of espionage was established, of which he was the
    victim. If he incautiously laid the book down for an instant
    and left the room, it was immediately seized and read aloud in
    secret places to a select few. I found myself a person of
    immense importance, it having leaked out that I was tolerably
    well versed in the history of supernaturalism, and had once
    written a story the foundation of which was a ghost. If a table
    or a wainscot panel happened to warp when we were assembled in
    the large drawing-room, there was an instant silence, and
    everyone was prepared for an immediate clanking of chains and a
    spectral form.
After a month of psychological excitement, it was with the
    utmost dissatisfaction that we were forced to acknowledge that
    nothing in the remotest degree approaching the supernatural had
    manifested itself. Once the black butler asseverated that his
    candle had been blown out by some invisible agency while he was
    undressing himself for the night; but as I had more than once
    discovered this colored gentleman in a condition when one
    candle must have appeared to him like two, thought it possible
    that, by going a step further in his potations, he might have
    reversed this phenomenon, and seen no candle at all where he
    ought to have beheld one.
Things were in this state when an accident took place so
    awful and inexplicable in its character that my reason fairly
    reels at the bare memory of the occurrence. It was the tenth of
    July. After dinner was over I repaired, with my friend Dr.
    Hammond, to the garden to smoke my evening pipe. Independent of
    certain mental sympathies which existed between the Doctor and
    myself, we were linked together by a vice. We both smoked
    opium. We knew each other's secret, and respected it. We
    enjoyed together that wonderful expansion of thought, that
    marvelous intensifying of the perceptive faculties, that
    boundless feeling of existence when we seem to have points of
    contact with the whole universe,—in short, that
    unimaginable spiritual bliss, which I would not surrender for a
    throne, and which I hope you, reader, will never—never
    taste.
Those hours of opium happiness which the Doctor and I spent
    together in secret were regulated with a scientific accuracy.
    We did not blindly smoke the drug of paradise, and leave our
    dreams to chance. While smoking, we carefully steered our
    conversation through the brightest and calmest channels of
    thought. We talked of the East, and endeavored to recall the
    magical panorama of its glowing scenery. We criticized the most
    sensuous poets,—those who painted life ruddy with health,
    brimming with passion, happy in the possession of youth and
    strength and beauty. If we talked of Shakespeare's
    Tempest, we lingered over Ariel, and avoided Caliban.
    Like the Guebers, we turned our faces to the East, and saw only
    the sunny side of the world.
This skillful coloring of our train of thought produced in
    our subsequent visions a corresponding tone. The splendors of
    Arabian fairyland dyed our dreams. We paced the narrow strip of
    grass with the tread and port of kings. The song of the
    Rana arborea, while he clung to the bark of the ragged
    plum-tree, sounded like the strains of divine musicians.
    Houses, walls, and streets melted like rain clouds, and vistas
    of unimaginable glory stretched away before us. It was a
    rapturous companionship. We enjoyed the vast delight more
    perfectly because, even in our most ecstatic moments, we were
    conscious of each other's presence. Our pleasures, while
    individual, were still twin, vibrating and moving in musical
    accord.
On the evening in question, the tenth of July, the Doctor
    and myself drifted into an unusually metaphysical mood. We lit
    our large meerschaums, filled with fine Turkish tobacco, in the
    core of which burned a little black nut of opium, that, like
    the nut in the fairy tale, held within its narrow limits
    wonders beyond the reach of kings; we paced to and fro,
    conversing. A strange perversity dominated the currents of our
    thought. They would not flow through the sun-lit
    channels into which we strove to divert them. For some
    unaccountable reason, they constantly diverged into dark and
    lonesome beds, where a continual gloom brooded. It was in vain
    that, after our old fashion, we flung ourselves on the shores
    of the East, and talked of its gay bazaars, of the splendors of
    the time of Haroun, of harems and golden palaces. Black afreets
    continually arose from the depths of our talk, and expanded,
    like the one the fisherman released from the copper vessel,
    until they blotted everything bright from our vision.
    Insensibly, we yielded to the occult force that swayed us, and
    indulged in gloomy speculation. We had talked some time upon
    the proneness of the human mind to mysticism, and the almost
    universal love of the terrible, when Hammond suddenly said to
    me. "What do you consider to be the greatest element of
    terror?"
The question puzzled me. That many things were terrible, I
    knew. Stumbling over a corpse in the dark; beholding, as I once
    did, a woman floating down a deep and rapid river, with wildly
    lifted arms, and awful, upturned face, uttering, as she
    drifted, shrieks that rent one's heart while we, spectators,
    stood frozen at a window which overhung the river at a height
    of sixty feet, unable to make the slightest effort to save her,
    but dumbly watching her last supreme agony and her
    disappearance. A shattered wreck, with no life visible,
    encountered floating listlessly on the ocean, is a terrible
    object, for it suggests a huge terror, the proportions of which
    are veiled. But it now struck me, for the first time, that
    there must be one great and ruling embodiment of fear,—a
    King of Terrors, to which all others must succumb. What might
    it be? To what train of circumstances would it owe its
    existence?
"I confess, Hammond," I replied to my friend, "I never
    considered the subject before. That there must be one Something
    more terrible than any other thing, I feel. I cannot attempt,
    however, even the most vague definition."
"I am somewhat like you, Harry," he answered. "I feel my
    capacity to experience a terror greater than anything yet
    conceived by the human mind;—something combining in
    fearful and unnatural amalgamation hitherto supposed
    incompatible elements. The calling of the voices in Brockden
    Brown's novel of Wieland is awful; so is the picture
    of the Dweller of the Threshold, in Bulwer's Zanoni;
    but," he added, shaking his head gloomily, "there is something
    more horrible still than those."
"Look here, Hammond," I rejoined, "let us drop this kind of
    talk, for Heaven's sake! We shall suffer for it, depend on
    it."
"I don't know what's the matter with me to-night," he
    replied, "but my brain is running upon all sorts of weird and
    awful thoughts. I feel as if I could write a story like
    Hoffman, to-night, if I were only master of a literary
    style."
"Well, if we are going to be Hoffmanesque in our talk, I'm
    off to bed. Opium and nightmares should never be brought
    together. How sultry it is! Good-night, Hammond."
"Good-night, Harry. Pleasant dreams to you."
"To you, gloomy wretch, afreets, ghouls, and
    enchanters."
We parted, and each sought his respective chamber. I
    undressed quickly and got into bed, taking with me, according
    to my usual custom, a book, over which I generally read myself
    to sleep. I opened the volume as soon as I had laid my head
    upon the pillow, and instantly flung it to the other side of
    the room. It was Goudon's History of Monsters,—a
    curious French work, which I had lately imported from Paris,
    but which, in the state of mind I had then reached, was
    anything but an agreeable companion. I resolved to go to sleep
    at once; so, turning down my gas until nothing but a little
    blue point of light glimmered on the top of the tube, I
    composed myself to rest.
The room was in total darkness. The atom of gas that still
    remained alight did not illuminate a distance of three inches
    round the burner. I desperately drew my arm across my eyes, as
    if to shut out even the darkness, and tried to think of
    nothing. It was in vain. The confounded themes touched on by
    Hammond in the garden kept obtruding themselves on my brain. I
    battled against them. I erected ramparts of would-be blackness
    of intellect to keep them out. They still crowded upon me.
    While I was lying still as a corpse, hoping that by a perfect
    physical inaction I should hasten mental repose, an awful
    incident occurred. A Something dropped, as it seemed, from the
    ceiling, plumb upon my chest, and the next instant I felt two
    bony hands encircling my throat, endeavoring to choke me.
I am no coward, and am possessed of considerable physical
    strength. The suddenness of the attack, instead of stunning me,
    strung every nerve to its highest tension. My body acted from
    instinct, before my brain had time to realize the terrors of my
    position. In an instant I wound two muscular arms around the
    creature, and squeezed it, with all the strength of despair,
    against my chest. In a few seconds the bony hands that had
    fastened on my throat loosened their hold, and I was free to
    breathe once more. Then commenced a struggle of awful
    intensity. Immersed in the most profound darkness, totally
    ignorant of the nature of the Thing by which I was so suddenly
    attacked, finding my grasp slipping every moment, by reason, it
    seemed to me, of the entire nakedness of my assailant, bitten
    with sharp teeth in the shoulder, neck, and chest, having every
    moment to protect my throat against a pair of sinewy, agile
    hands, which my utmost efforts could not confine,—these
    were a combination of circumstances to combat which required
    all the strength, skill, and courage that I possessed.
At last, after a silent, deadly, exhausting struggle, I got
    my assailant under by a series of incredible efforts of
    strength. Once pinned, with my knee on what I made out to be
    its chest, I knew that I was victor. I rested for a moment to
    breathe. I heard the creature beneath me panting in the
    darkness, and felt the violent throbbing of a heart. It was
    apparently as exhausted as I was; that was one comfort. At this
    moment I remembered that I usually placed under my pillow,
    before going to bed, a large yellow silk pocket handkerchief. I
    felt for it instantly; it was there. In a few seconds more I
    had, after a fashion, pinioned the creature's arms.
I now felt tolerably secure. There was nothing more to be
    done but to turn on the gas, and, having first seen what my
    midnight assailant was like, arouse the household. I will
    confess to being actuated by a certain pride in not giving the
    alarm before; I wished to make the capture alone and
    unaided.
Never losing my hold for an instant, I slipped from the bed
    to the floor, dragging my captive with me. I had but a few
    steps to make to reach the gas-burner; these I made with the
    greatest caution, holding the creature in a grip like a vice.
    At last I got within arm's length of the tiny speck of blue
    light which told me where the gas-burner lay. Quick as
    lightning I released my grasp with one hand and let on the full
    flood of light. Then I turned to look at my captive.
I cannot even attempt to give any definition of my
    sensations the instant after I turned on the gas. I suppose I
    must have shrieked with terror, for in less than a minute
    afterward my room was crowded with the inmates of the house. I
    shudder now as I think of that awful moment. I saw
    nothing! Yes; I had one arm firmly clasped round a
    breathing, panting, corporeal shape, my other hand gripped with
    all its strength a throat as warm, as apparently fleshy, as my
    own; and yet, with this living substance in my grasp, with its
    body pressed against my own, and all in the bright glare of a
    large jet of gas, I absolutely beheld nothing! Not even an
    outline,—a vapor!
I do not, even at this hour, realize the situation in which
    I found myself. I cannot recall the astounding incident
    thoroughly. Imagination in vain tries to compass the awful
    paradox.
It breathed. I felt its warm breath upon my cheek. It
    struggled fiercely. It had hands. They clutched me. Its skin
    was smooth, like my own. There it lay, pressed close up against
    me, solid as stone,—and yet utterly invisible!
I wonder that I did not faint or go mad on the instant. Some
    wonderful instinct must have sustained me; for, absolutely, in
    place of loosening my hold on the terrible Enigma, I seemed to
    gain an additional strength in my moment of horror, and
    tightened my grasp with such wonderful force that I felt the
    creature shivering with agony.
Just then Hammond entered my room at the head of the
    household. As soon as he beheld my face—which, I suppose,
    must have been an awful sight to look at—he hastened
    forward, crying, "Great heaven, Harry! what has happened?"
"Hammond! Hammond!" I cried, "come here. O, this is awful! I
    have been attacked in bed by something or other, which I have
    hold of; but I can't see it,—I can't see it!"
Hammond, doubtless struck by the unfeigned horror expressed
    in my countenance, made one or two steps forward with an
    anxious yet puzzled expression. A very audible titter burst
    from the remainder of my visitors. This suppressed laughter
    made me furious. To laugh at a human being in my position! It
    was the worst species of cruelty. Now, I can
    understand why the appearance of a man struggling violently, as
    it would seem, with an airy nothing, and calling for assistance
    against a vision, should have appeared ludicrous.
    Then, so great was my rage against the mocking crowd
    that had I the power I would have stricken them dead where they
    stood.
"Hammond! Hammond!" I cried again, despairingly, "for God's
    sake come to me. I can hold the—the thing but a short
    while longer. It is overpowering me. Help me! Help me!"
"Harry," whispered Hammond, approaching me, "you have been
    smoking too much opium."
"I swear to you, Hammond, that this is no vision," I
    answered, in the same low tone. "Don't you see how it shakes my
    whole frame with its struggles? If you don't believe me,
    convince yourself. Feel it,—touch it."
Hammond advanced and laid his hand in the spot I indicated.
    A wild cry of horror burst from him. He had felt it!
In a moment he had discovered somewhere in my room a long
    piece of cord, and was the next instant winding it and knotting
    it about the body of the unseen being that I clasped in my
    arms.
"Harry," he said, in a hoarse, agitated voice, for, though
    he preserved his presence of mind, he was deeply moved, "Harry,
    it's all safe now. You may let go, old fellow, if you're tired.
    The Thing can't move."
I was utterly exhausted, and I gladly loosed my hold.
Hammond stood holding the ends of the cord that bound the
    Invisible, twisted round his hand, while before him,
    self-supporting as it were, he beheld a rope laced and
    interlaced, and stretching tightly around a vacant space. I
    never saw a man look so thoroughly stricken with awe.
    Nevertheless his face expressed all the courage and
    determination which I knew him to possess. His lips, although
    white, were set firmly, and one could perceive at a glance
    that, although stricken with fear, he was not daunted.
The confusion that ensued among the guests of the house who
    were witnesses of this extraordinary scene between Hammond and
    myself,—who beheld the pantomime of binding this
    struggling Something,—who beheld me almost sinking from
    physical exhaustion when my task of jailer was over,—the
    confusion and terror that took possession of the bystanders,
    when they saw all this, was beyond description. The weaker ones
    fled from the apartment. The few who remained clustered near
    the door and could not be induced to approach Hammond and his
    Charge. Still incredulity broke out through their terror. They
    had not the courage to satisfy themselves, and yet they
    doubted. It was in vain that I begged of some of the men to
    come near and convince themselves by touch of the existence in
    that room of a living being which was invisible. They were
    incredulous, but did not dare to undeceive themselves. How
    could a solid, living, breathing body be invisible, they asked.
    My reply was this. I gave a sign to Hammond, and both of
    us—conquering our fearful repugnance to touch the
    invisible creature—lifted it from the ground, manacled as
    it was, and took it to my bed. Its weight was about that of a
    boy of fourteen.
"Now my friends," I said, as Hammond and myself held the
    creature suspended over the bed, "I can give you self-evident
    proof that here is a solid, ponderable body, which,
    nevertheless, you cannot see. Be good enough to watch the
    surface of the bed attentively."
I was astonished at my own courage in treating this strange
    event so calmly; but I had recovered from my first terror, and
    felt a sort of scientific pride in the affair, which dominated
    every other feeling.
The eyes of the bystanders were immediately fixed on my bed.
    At a given signal Hammond and I let the creature fall. There
    was a dull sound of a heavy body alighting on a soft mass. The
    timbers of the bed creaked. A deep impression marked itself
    distinctly on the pillow, and on the bed itself. The crowd who
    witnessed this gave a low cry, and rushed from the room.
    Hammond and I were left alone with our Mystery.
We remained silent for some time, listening to the low,
    irregular breathing of the creature on the bed, and watching
    the rustle of the bedclothes as it impotently struggled to free
    itself from confinement. Then Hammond spoke.
"Harry, this is awful."
"Ay, awful."
"But not unaccountable."
"Not unaccountable! What do you mean? Such a thing has never
    occurred since the birth of the world. I know not what to
    think, Hammond. God grant that I am not mad, and that this is
    not an insane fantasy!"
"Let us reason a little, Harry. Here is a solid body which
    we touch, but which we cannot see. The fact is so unusual that
    it strikes us with terror. Is there no parallel, though, for
    such a phenomenon? Take a piece of pure glass. It is tangible
    and transparent. A certain chemical coarseness is all that
    prevents its being so entirely transparent as to be totally
    invisible. It is not theoretically impossible, mind
    you, to make a glass which shall not reflect a single ray of
    light,—a glass so pure and homogeneous in its atoms that
    the rays from the sun will pass through it as they do through
    the air, refracted but not reflected. We do not see the air,
    and yet we feel it."
"That's all very well, Hammond, but these are inanimate
    substances. Glass does not breathe, air does not breathe.
    This thing has a heart that palpitates,—a will
    that moves it,—lungs that play, and inspire and
    respire."
"You forget the phenomena of which we have so often heard of
    late," answered the Doctor, gravely. "At the meetings called
    'spirit circles,' invisible hands have been thrust into the
    hands of those persons round the table,—warm, fleshly
    hands that seemed to pulsate with mortal life."
"What? Do you think, then, that this thing
    is——"
"I don't know what it is," was the solemn reply; "but please
    the gods I will, with your assistance, thoroughly investigate
    it."
We watched together, smoking many pipes, all night long, by
    the bedside of the unearthly being that tossed and panted until
    it was apparently wearied out. Then we learned by the low,
    regular breathing that it slept.
The next morning the house was all astir. The boarders
    congregated on the landing outside my room, and Hammond and
    myself were lions. We had to answer a thousand questions as to
    the state of our extraordinary prisoner, for as yet not one
    person in the house except ourselves could be induced to set
    foot in the apartment.
The creature was awake. This was evidenced by the convulsive
    manner in which the bedclothes were moved in its efforts to
    escape. There was something truly terrible in beholding, as it
    were, those second-hand indications of the terrible writhings
    and agonized struggles for liberty which themselves were
    invisible.
Hammond and myself had racked our brains during the long
    night to discover some means by which we might realize the
    shape and general appearance of the Enigma. As well as we could
    make out by passing our hands over the creature's form, its
    outlines and lineaments were human. There was a mouth; a round,
    smooth head without hair; a nose, which, however, was little
    elevated above the cheeks; and its hands and feet felt like
    those of a boy. At first we thought of placing the being on a
    smooth surface and tracing its outlines with chalk, as
    shoemakers trace the outline of the foot. This plan was given
    up as being of no value. Such an outline would give not the
    slightest idea of its conformation.
A happy thought struck me. We would take a cast of it in
    plaster of Paris. This would give us the solid figure, and
    satisfy all our wishes. But how to do it? The movements of the
    creature would disturb the setting of the plastic covering, and
    distort the mold. Another thought. Why not give it chloroform?
    It had respiratory organs,—that was evident by its
    breathing. Once reduced to a state of insensibility, we could
    do with it what we would. Doctor X—— was sent for;
    and after the worthy physician had recovered from the first
    shock of amazement, he proceeded to administer the chloroform.
    In three minutes afterward we were enabled to remove the
    fetters from the creature's body, and a modeler was busily
    engaged in covering the invisible form with the moist clay. In
    five minutes more we had a mold, and before evening a rough
    facsimile of the Mystery. It was shaped like a
    man—distorted, uncouth, and horrible, but still a man. It
    was small, not over four feet and some inches in height, and
    its limbs revealed a muscular development that was
    unparalleled. Its face surpassed in hideousness anything I had
    ever seen. Gustav Doré, or Callot, or Tony Johannot,
    never conceived anything so horrible. There is a face in one of
    the latter's illustrations to Un Voyage où il vous
    plaira, which somewhat approaches the countenance of this
    creature, but does not equal it. It was the physiognomy of what
    I should fancy a ghoul might be. It looked as if it was capable
    of feeding on human flesh.
Having satisfied our curiosity, and bound every one in the
    house to secrecy, it became a question what was to be done with
    our Enigma? It was impossible that we should keep such a horror
    in our house; it was equally impossible that such an awful
    being should be let loose upon the world. I confess that I
    would have gladly voted for the creature's destruction. But who
    would shoulder the responsibility? Who would undertake the
    execution of this horrible semblance of a human being? Day
    after day this question was deliberated gravely. The boarders
    all left the house. Mrs. Moffat was in despair, and threatened
    Hammond and myself with all sorts of legal penalties if we did
    not remove the Horror. Our answer was, "We will go if you like,
    but we decline taking this creature with us. Remove it yourself
    if you please. It appeared in your house. On you the
    responsibility rests." To this there was, of course, no answer.
    Mrs. Moffat could not obtain for love or money a person who
    would even approach the Mystery.
The most singular part of the affair was that we were
    entirely ignorant of what the creature habitually fed on.
    Everything in the way of nutriment that we could think of was
    placed before it, but was never touched. It was awful to stand
    by, day after day, and see the clothes toss, and hear the hard
    breathing, and know that it was starving.
Ten, twelve days, a fortnight passed, and it still lived.
    The pulsations of the heart, however, were daily growing
    fainter, and had now nearly ceased. It was evident that the
    creature was dying for want of sustenance. While this terrible
    life-struggle was going on, I felt miserable. I could not
    sleep. Horrible as the creature was, it was pitiful to think of
    the pangs it was suffering.
At last it died. Hammond and I found it cold and stiff one
    morning in the bed. The heart had ceased to beat, the lungs to
    inspire. We hastened to bury it in the garden. It was a strange
    funeral, the dropping of that viewless corpse into the damp
    hole. The cast of its form I gave to Doctor X——,
    who keeps it in his museum in Tenth Street.
As I am on the eve of a long journey from which I may not
    return, I have drawn up this narrative of an event the most
    singular that has ever come to my knowledge.

The Middle Toe of the Right Foot
By AMBROSE BIERCE

From Can Such Things Be? by Ambrose Bierce.
        Copyright by the Neale Publishing Company. By permission of
        the publishers.

I
It is well known that the old Manton house is haunted. In
    all the rural district near about, and even in the town of
    Marshall, a mile away, not one person of unbiased mind
    entertains a doubt of it; incredulity is confined to those
    opinionated persons who will be called "cranks" as soon as the
    useful word shall have penetrated the intellectual demesne of
    the Marshall Advance. The evidence that the house is
    haunted is of two kinds; the testimony of disinterested
    witnesses who have had ocular proof, and that of the house
    itself. The former may be disregarded and ruled out on any of
    the various grounds of objection which may be urged against it
    by the ingenious; but facts within the observation of all are
    material and controlling.
In the first place the Manton house has been unoccupied by
    mortals for more than ten years, and with its outbuildings is
    slowly falling into decay—a circumstance which in itself
    the judicious will hardly venture to ignore. It stands a little
    way off the loneliest reach of the Marshall and Harriston road,
    in an opening which was once a farm and is still disfigured
    with strips of rotting fence and half covered with brambles
    overrunning a stony and sterile soil long unacquainted with the
    plow. The house itself is in tolerably good condition, though
    badly weather-stained and in dire need of attention from the
    glazier, the smaller male population of the region having
    attested in the manner of its kind its disapproval of dwelling
    without dwellers. It is two stories in height, nearly square,
    its front pierced by a single doorway flanked on each side by a
    window boarded up to the very top. Corresponding windows above,
    not protected, serve to admit light and rain to the rooms of
    the upper floor. Grass and weeds grow pretty rankly all about,
    and a few shade trees, somewhat the worse for wind, and leaning
    all in one direction, seem to be making a concerted effort to
    run away. In short, as the Marshall town humorist explained in
    the columns of the Advance, "the proposition that the
    Manton house is badly haunted is the only logical conclusion
    from the premises." The fact that in this dwelling Mr. Manton
    thought it expedient one night some ten years ago to rise and
    cut the throats of his wife and two small children, removing at
    once to another part of the country, has no doubt done its
    share in directing public attention to the fitness of the place
    for supernatural phenomena.
To this house, one summer evening, came four men in a wagon.
    Three of them promptly alighted, and the one who had been
    driving hitched the team to the only remaining post of what had
    been a fence. The fourth remained seated in the wagon. "Come,"
    said one of his companions, approaching him, while the others
    moved away in the direction of the dwelling—"this is the
    place."
The man addressed did not move. "By God!" he said harshly,
    "this is a trick, and it looks to me as if you were in it."
"Perhaps I am," the other said, looking him straight in the
    face and speaking in a tone which had something of contempt in
    it. "You will remember, however, that the choice of place was
    with your own assent left to the other side. Of course if you
    are afraid of spooks—"
"I am afraid of nothing," the man interrupted with another
    oath, and sprang to the ground. The two then joined the others
    at the door, which one of them had already opened with some
    difficulty, caused by rust of lock and hinge. All entered.
    Inside it was dark, but the man who had unlocked the door
    produced a candle and matches and made a light. He then
    unlocked a door on their right as they stood in the passage.
    This gave them entrance to a large, square room that the candle
    but dimly lighted. The floor had a thick carpeting of dust,
    which partly muffled their footfalls. Cobwebs were in the
    angles of the walls and depended from the ceiling like strips
    of rotting lace making undulatory movements in the disturbed
    air. The room had two windows in adjoining sides, but from
    neither could anything be seen except the rough inner surfaces
    of boards a few inches from the glass. There was no fireplace,
    no furniture; there was nothing: besides the cobwebs and the
    dust, the four men were the only objects there which were not a
    part of the structure.
Strange enough they looked in the yellow light of the
    candle. The one who had so reluctantly alighted was especially
    spectacular—he might have been called sensational. He was
    of middle age, heavily built, deep chested, and broad
    shouldered. Looking at his figure, one would have said that he
    had a giant's strength; at his features, that he would use it
    like a giant. He was clean shaven, his hair rather closely
    cropped and gray. His low forehead was seamed with wrinkles
    above the eyes, and over the nose these became vertical. The
    heavy black brows followed the same law, saved from meeting
    only by an upward turn at what would otherwise have been the
    point of contact. Deeply sunken beneath these, glowed in the
    obscure light a pair of eyes of uncertain color, but obviously
    enough too small. There was something forbidding in their
    expression, which was not bettered by the cruel mouth and wide
    jaw. The nose was well enough, as noses go; one does not expect
    much of noses. All that was sinister in the man's face seemed
    accentuated by an unnatural pallor—he appeared altogether
    bloodless.
The appearance of the other men was sufficiently
    commonplace; they were such persons as one meets and forgets
    that he met. All were younger than the man described, between
    whom and the eldest of the others, who stood apart, there was
    apparently no kindly feeling. They avoided looking at each
    other.
"Gentlemen," said the man holding the candle and keys, "I
    believe everything is right. Are you ready, Mr. Rosser?"
The man standing apart from the group bowed and smiled.
"And you, Mr. Grossmith?"
The heavy man bowed and scowled.
"You will be pleased to remove your outer clothing."
Their hats, coats, waistcoats, and neckwear were soon
    removed and thrown outside the door, in the passage. The man
    with the candle now nodded, and the fourth man—he who had
    urged Grossmith to leave the wagon—produced from the
    pocket of his overcoat two long, murderous-looking
    bowie-knives, which he drew now from their leather
    scabbards.
"They are exactly alike," he said, presenting one to each of
    the two principals—for by this time the dullest observer
    would have understood the nature of this meeting. It was to be
    a duel to the death.
Each combatant took a knife, examined it critically near the
    candle and tested the strength of the blade and handle across
    his lifted knee. Their persons were then searched in turn, each
    by the second of the other.
"If it is agreeable to you, Mr. Grossmith," said the man
    holding the light, "you will place yourself in that
    corner."
He indicated the angle of the room farthest from the door,
    whither Grossmith retired, his second parting from him with a
    grasp of the hand which had nothing of cordiality in it. In the
    angle nearest the door Mr. Rosser stationed himself, and after
    a whispered consultation his second left him, joining the other
    near the door. At that moment the candle was suddenly
    extinguished, leaving all in profound darkness. This may have
    been done by a draught from the opened door; whatever the
    cause, the effect was startling.
"Gentlemen," said a voice which sounded strangely unfamiliar
    in the altered condition affecting the relations of the
    senses—"gentlemen, you will not move until you hear the
    closing of the outer door."
A sound of trampling ensued, then the closing of the inner
    door; and finally the outer one closed with a concussion which
    shook the entire building.
A few minutes afterward a belated farmer's boy met a light
    wagon which was being driven furiously toward the town of
    Marshall. He declared that behind the two figures on the front
    seat stood a third, with its hands upon the bowed shoulders of
    the others, who appeared to struggle vainly to free themselves
    from its grasp. This figure, unlike the others, was clad in
    white, and had undoubtedly boarded the wagon as it passed the
    haunted house. As the lad could boast a considerable former
    experience with the supernatural thereabouts his word had the
    weight justly due to the testimony of an expert. The story (in
    connection with the next day's events) eventually appeared in
    the Advance, with some slight literary embellishments
    and a concluding intimation that the gentlemen referred to
    would be allowed the use of the paper's columns for their
    version of the night's adventure. But the privilege remained
    without a claimant.
II
The events that led up to this "duel in the dark" were
    simple enough. One evening three young men of the town of
    Marshall were sitting in a quiet corner of the porch of the
    village hotel, smoking and discussing such matters as three
    educated young men of a Southern village would naturally find
    interesting. Their names were King, Sancher, and Rosser. At a
    little distance, within easy hearing, but taking no part in the
    conversation, sat a fourth. He was a stranger to the others.
    They merely knew that on his arrival by the stage-coach that
    afternoon he had written in the hotel register the name of
    Robert Grossmith. He had not been observed to speak to anyone
    except the hotel clerk. He seemed, indeed, singularly fond of
    his own company—or, as the personnel of the
    Advance expressed it, "grossly addicted to evil
    associations." But then it should be said in justice to the
    stranger that the personnel was himself of a too
    convivial disposition fairly to judge one differently gifted,
    and had, moreover, experienced a slight rebuff in an effort at
    an "interview."
"I hate any kind of deformity in a woman," said King,
    "whether natural or—acquired. I have a theory that any
    physical defect has its correlative mental and moral
    defect."
"I infer, then," said Rosser, gravely, "that a lady lacking
    the moral advantage of a nose would find the struggle to become
    Mrs. King an arduous enterprise."
"Of course you may put it that way," was the reply; "but,
    seriously, I once threw over a most charming girl on learning
    quite accidentally that she had suffered amputation of a toe.
    My conduct was brutal if you like, but if I had married that
    girl I should have been miserable for life and should have made
    her so."
"Whereas," said Sancher, with a light laugh, "by marrying a
    gentleman of more liberal view she escaped with a parted
    throat."
"Ah, you know to whom I refer. Yes, she married Manton, but
    I don't know about his liberality; I'm not sure but he cut her
    throat because he discovered that she lacked that excellent
    thing in woman, the middle toe of the right foot."
"Look at that chap!" said Rosser in a low voice, his eyes
    fixed upon the stranger.
That chap was obviously listening intently to the
    conversation.
"Damn his impudence!" muttered King—"what ought we to
    do?"
"That's an easy one," Rosser replied, rising. "Sir," he
    continued, addressing the stranger, "I think it would be better
    if you would remove your chair to the other end of the veranda.
    The presence of gentlemen is evidently an unfamiliar situation
    to you."
The man sprang to his feet and strode forward with clenched
    hands, his face white with rage. All were now standing. Sancher
    stepped between the belligerents.
"You are hasty and unjust," he said to Rosser; "this
    gentleman has done nothing to deserve such language."
But Rosser would not withdraw a word. By the custom of the
    country and the time there could be but one outcome to the
    quarrel.
"I demand the satisfaction due to a gentleman," said the
    stranger, who had become more calm. "I have not an acquaintance
    in this region. Perhaps you, sir," bowing to Sancher, "will be
    kind enough to represent me in this matter."
Sancher accepted the trust—somewhat reluctantly it
    must be confessed, for the man's appearance and manner were not
    at all to his liking. King, who during the colloquy had hardly
    removed his eyes from the stranger's face and had not spoken a
    word, consented with a nod to act for Rosser, and the upshot of
    it was that, the principals having retired, a meeting was
    arranged for the next evening. The nature of the arrangements
    has been already disclosed. The duel with knives in a dark room
    was once a commoner feature of Southwestern life than it is
    likely to be again. How thin a veneering of "chivalry" covered
    the essential brutality of the code under which such encounters
    were possible we shall see.
III
In the blaze of a midsummer noonday the old Manton house was
    hardly true to its traditions. It was of the earth, earthy. The
    sunshine caressed it warmly and affectionately, with evident
    disregard of its bad reputation. The grass greening all the
    expanse in its front seemed to grow, not rankly, but with a
    natural and joyous exuberance, and the weeds blossomed quite
    like plants. Full of charming lights and shadows and populous
    with pleasant-voiced birds, the neglected shade trees no longer
    struggled to run away, but bent reverently beneath their
    burdens of sun and song. Even in the glassless upper windows
    was an expression of peace and contentment, due to the light
    within. Over the stony fields the visible heat danced with a
    lively tremor incompatible with the gravity which is an
    attribute of the supernatural.
Such was the aspect under which the place presented itself
    to Sheriff Adams and two other men who had come out from
    Marshall to look at it. One of these men was Mr. King, the
    sheriff's deputy; the other, whose name was Brewer, was a
    brother of the late Mrs. Manton. Under a beneficent law of the
    State relating to property which has been for a certain period
    abandoned by an owner whose residence cannot be ascertained,
    the sheriff was legal custodian of the Manton farm and
    appurtenances thereunto belonging. His present visit was in
    mere perfunctory compliance with some order of a court in which
    Mr. Brewer had an action to get possession of the property as
    heir to his deceased sister. By a mere coincidence, the visit
    was made on the day after the night that Deputy King had
    unlocked the house for another and very different purpose. His
    presence now was not of his own choosing: he had been ordered
    to accompany his superior, and at the moment could think of
    nothing more prudent than simulated alacrity in obedience to
    the command.
Carelessly opening the front door, which to his surprise was
    not locked, the sheriff was amazed to see, lying on the floor
    of the passage into which it opened, a confused heap of men's
    apparel. Examination showed it to consist of two hats, and the
    same number of coats, waistcoats, and scarves all in a
    remarkably good state of preservation, albeit somewhat defiled
    by the dust in which they lay. Mr. Brewer was equally
    astonished, but Mr. King's emotion is not of record. With a new
    and lively interest in his own actions the sheriff now
    unlatched and pushed open a door on the right, and the three
    entered. The room was apparently vacant—no; as their eyes
    became accustomed to the dimmer light something was visible in
    the farthest angle of the wall. It was a human
    figure—that of a man crouching close in the corner.
    Something in the attitude made the intruders halt when they had
    barely passed the threshold. The figure more and more clearly
    defined itself. The man was upon one knee, his back in the
    angle of the wall, his shoulders elevated to the level of his
    ears, his hands before his face, palms outward, the fingers
    spread and crooked like claws; the white face turned upward on
    the retracted neck had an expression of unutterable fright, the
    mouth half open, the eyes incredibly expanded. He was stone
    dead. Yet with the exception of a bowie-knife, which had
    evidently fallen from his own hand, not another object was in
    the room.
In thick dust that covered the floor were some confused
    footprints near the door and along the wall through which it
    opened. Along one of the adjoining walls, too, past the
    boarded-up windows was the trail made by the man himself in
    reaching his corner. Instinctively in approaching the body the
    three men followed that trail. The sheriff grasped one of the
    outthrown arms; it was as rigid as iron, and the application of
    a gentle force rocked the entire body without altering the
    relation of its parts. Brewer, pale with excitement, gazed
    intently into the distorted face. "God of mercy!" he suddenly
    cried, "it is Manton!"
"You are right," said King, with an evident attempt at
    calmness: "I knew Manton. He then wore a full beard and his
    hair long, but this is he."
He might have added: "I recognized him when he challenged
    Rosser. I told Rosser and Sancher who he was before we played
    him this horrible trick. When Rosser left this dark room at our
    heels, forgetting his outer clothing in the excitement, and
    driving away with us in his shirt sleeves—all through the
    discreditable proceedings we knew with whom we were dealing,
    murderer and coward that he was!"
But nothing of this did Mr. King say. With his better light
    he was trying to penetrate the mystery of the man's death. That
    he had not once moved from the corner where he had been
    stationed; that his posture was that of neither attack nor
    defense; that he had dropped his weapon; that he had obviously
    perished of sheer horror of something that he
    saw—these were circumstances which Mr. King's
    disturbed intelligence could not rightly comprehend.
Groping in intellectual darkness for a clew to his maze of
    doubt, his gaze, directed mechanically downward in the way of
    one who ponders momentous matters, fell upon something which,
    there, in the light of day and in the presence of living
    companions, affected him with terror. In the dust of years that
    lay thick upon the floor—leading from the door by which
    they had entered, straight across the room to within a yard of
    Manton's crouching corpse—were three parallel lines of
    footprints—light but definite impressions of bare feet,
    the outer ones those of small children, the inner a woman's.
    From the point at which they ended they did not return; they
    pointed all one way. Brewer, who had observed them at the same
    moment, was leaning forward in an attitude of rapt attention,
    horribly pale.
"Look at that!" he cried, pointing with both hands at the
    nearest print of the woman's right foot, where she had
    apparently stopped and stood. "The middle toe is
    missing—it was Gertrude!"
Gertrude was the late Mrs. Manton, sister to Mr. Brewer.

The Shell of Sense
By OLIVIA HOWARD DUNBAR

From Harper's Magazine, December, 1908. By permission of
        Harper and Brothers and Olivia Howard Dunbar.

It was intolerably unchanged, the dim, dark-toned room. In
    an agony of recognition my glance ran from one to another of
    the comfortable, familiar things that my earthly life had been
    passed among. Incredibly distant from it all as I essentially
    was. I noted sharply that the very gaps that I myself had left
    in my bookshelves still stood unfilled; that the delicate
    fingers of the ferns that I had tended were still stretched
    futilely toward the light; that the soft agreeable chuckle of
    my own little clock, like some elderly woman with whom
    conversation has become automatic, was undiminished.
Unchanged—or so it seemed at first. But there were
    certain trivial differences that shortly smote me. The windows
    were closed too tightly; for I had always kept the house very
    cool, although I had known that Theresa preferred warm rooms.
    And my work-basket was in disorder; it was preposterous that so
    small a thing should hurt me so. Then, for this was my first
    experience of the shadow-folded transition, the odd alteration
    of my emotions bewildered me. For at one moment the place
    seemed so humanly familiar, so distinctly my own proper
    envelope, that for love of it I could have laid my cheek
    against the wall; while in the next I was miserably conscious
    of strange new shrillnesses. How could they be
    endured—and had I ever endured them?—those harsh
    influences that I now perceived at the window; light and color
    so blinding that they obscured the form of the wind, tumult so
    discordant that one could scarcely hear the roses open in the
    garden below?
But Theresa did not seem to mind any of these things.
    Disorder, it is true, the dear child had never minded. She was
    sitting all this time at my desk—at my
    desk—occupied, I could only too easily surmise how. In
    the light of my own habits of precision it was plain that that
    sombre correspondence should have been attended to before; but
    I believe that I did not really reproach Theresa, for I knew
    that her notes, when she did write them, were perhaps less
    perfunctory than mine. She finished the last one as I watched
    her, and added it to the heap of black-bordered envelopes that
    lay on the desk. Poor girl! I saw now that they had cost her
    tears. Yet, living beside her day after day, year after year, I
    had never discovered what deep tenderness my sister possessed.
    Toward each other it had been our habit to display only a
    temperate affection, and I remember having always thought it
    distinctly fortunate for Theresa, since she was denied my
    happiness, that she could live so easily and pleasantly without
    emotions of the devastating sort.... And now, for the first
    time, I was really to behold her.... Could it be Theresa, after
    all, this tangle of subdued turbulences? Let no one suppose
    that it is an easy thing to bear, the relentlessly lucid
    understanding that I then first exercised; or that, in its
    first enfranchisement, the timid vision does not yearn for its
    old screens and mists.
Suddenly, as Theresa sat there, her head, filled with its
    tender thoughts of me, held in her gentle hands, I felt Allan's
    step on the carpeted stair outside. Theresa felt it,
    too,—but how? for it was not audible. She gave a start,
    swept the black envelopes out of sight, and pretended to be
    writing in a little book. Then I forgot to watch her any longer
    in my absorption in Allan's coming. It was he, of course, that
    I was awaiting. It was for him that I had made this first
    lonely, frightened effort to return, to recover.... It was not
    that I had supposed he would allow himself to recognize my
    presence, for I had long been sufficiently familiar with his
    hard and fast denials of the invisible. He was so reasonable
    always, so sane—so blindfolded. But I had hoped that
    because of his very rejection of the ether that now contained
    me I could perhaps all the more safely, the more secretly,
    watch him, linger near him. He was near now, very
    near,—but why did Theresa, sitting there in the room that
    had never belonged to her, appropriate for herself his coming?
    It was so manifestly I who had drawn him, I whom he had come to
    seek.
The door was ajar. He knocked softly at it "Are you there,
    Theresa?" he called. He expected to find her, then, there in my
    room? I shrank back, fearing, almost, to stay.
"I shall have finished in a moment," Theresa told him, and
    he sat down to wait for her.
No spirit still unreleased can understand the pang that I
    felt with Allan sitting almost within my touch. Almost
    irresistibly the wish beset me to let him for an instant feel
    my nearness. Then I checked myself, remembering—oh,
    absurd, piteous human fears!—that my too unguarded
    closeness might alarm him. It was not so remote a time that I
    myself had known them, those blind, uncouth timidities. I came,
    therefore, somewhat nearer—but I did not touch him. I
    merely leaned toward him and with incredible softness whispered
    his name. That much I could not have forborne; the spell of
    life was still too strong in me.
But it gave him no comfort, no delight. "Theresa!" he
    called, in a voice dreadful with alarm—and in that
    instant the last veil fell, and desperately, scarce
    believingly, I beheld how it stood between them, those two.
She turned to him that gentle look of hers.
"Forgive me," came from him hoarsely. "But I had suddenly
    the most—unaccountable sensation. Can there be too many
    windows open? There is such a—chill—about."
"There are no windows open," Theresa assured him. "I took
    care to shut out the chill. You are not well, Allan!"
"Perhaps not." He embraced the suggestion. "And yet I feel
    no illness apart from this abominable sensation that
    persists—persists.... Theresa, you must tell me: do I
    fancy it, or do you, too, feel—something—strange
    here?"
"Oh, there is something very strange here," she half sobbed.
    "There always will be."
"Good heavens, child, I didn't mean that!" He rose and stood
    looking about him. "I know, of course, that you have your
    beliefs, and I respect them, but you know equally well that I
    have nothing of the sort! So—don't let us conjure up
    anything inexplicable."
I stayed impalpably, imponderably near him. Wretched and
    bereft though I was, I could not have left him while he stood
    denying me.
"What I mean," he went on, in his low, distinct voice, "is a
    special, an almost ominous sense of cold. Upon my soul,
    Theresa,"—he paused—"if I were
    superstitious, if I were a woman, I should probably
    imagine it to seem—a presence!"
He spoke the last word very faintly, but Theresa shrank from
    it nevertheless.
"Don't say that, Allan!" she cried out. "Don't
    think it, I beg of you! I've tried so hard myself not to think
    it—and you must help me. You know it is only perturbed,
    uneasy spirits that wander. With her it is quite different. She
    has always been so happy—she must still be."
I listened, stunned, to Theresa's sweet dogmatism. From what
    blind distances came her confident misapprehensions, how dense,
    both for her and for Allan, was the separating vapor!
Allan frowned. "Don't take me literally, Theresa," he
    explained; and I, who a moment before had almost touched him,
    now held myself aloof and heard him with a strange untried
    pity, new born in me. "I'm not speaking of what you
    call—spirits. It's something much more terrible." He
    allowed his head to sink heavily on his chest. "If I did not
    positively know that I had never done her any harm, I should
    suppose myself to be suffering from guilt, from remorse....
    Theresa, you know better than I, perhaps. Was she content,
    always? Did she believe in me?"
"Believe in you?—when she knew you to be so
    good!—when you adored her!"
"She thought that? She said it? Then what in Heaven's name
    ails me?—unless it is all as you believe, Theresa, and
    she knows now what she didn't know then, poor dear, and
    minds——"
"Minds what? What do you mean, Allan?"
I, who with my perhaps illegitimate advantage saw so clear,
    knew that he had not meant to tell her: I did him that justice,
    even in my first jealousy. If I had not tortured him so by
    clinging near him, he would not have told her. But the moment
    came, and overflowed, and he did tell her—passionate,
    tumultuous story that it was. During all our life together,
    Allan's and mine, he had spared me, had kept me wrapped in the
    white cloak of an unblemished loyalty. But it would have been
    kinder, I now bitterly thought, if, like many husbands, he had
    years ago found for the story he now poured forth some
    clandestine listener; I should not have known. But he was
    faithful and good, and so he waited till I, mute and chained,
    was there to hear him. So well did I know him, as I thought, so
    thoroughly had he once been mine, that I saw it in his eyes,
    heard it in his voice, before the words came. And yet, when it
    came, it lashed me with the whips of an unbearable humiliation.
    For I, his wife, had not known how greatly he could love.
And that Theresa, soft little traitor, should, in her still
    way, have cared too! Where was the iron in her, I moaned within
    my stricken spirit, where the steadfastness? From the moment he
    bade her, she turned her soft little petals up to him—and
    my last delusion was spent. It was intolerable; and none the
    less so that in another moment she had, prompted by some
    belated thought of me, renounced him. Allan was hers, yet she
    put him from her; and it was my part to watch them both.
Then in the anguish of it all I remembered, awkward,
    untutored spirit that I was, that I now had the Great Recourse.
    Whatever human things were unbearable, I had no need to bear. I
    ceased, therefore, to make the effort that kept me with them.
    The pitiless poignancy was dulled, the sounds and the light
    ceased, the lovers faded from me, and again I was mercifully
    drawn into the dim, infinite spaces.

There followed a period whose length I cannot measure and
    during which I was able to make no progress in the difficult,
    dizzying experience of release. "Earth-bound" my jealousy
    relentlessly kept me. Though my two dear ones had forsworn each
    other, I could not trust them, for theirs seemed to me an
    affectation of a more than mortal magnanimity. Without a
    ghostly sentinel to prick them with sharp fears and
    recollections, who could believe that they would keep to it? Of
    the efficacy of my own vigilance, so long as I might choose to
    exercise it, I could have no doubt, for I had by this time come
    to have a dreadful exultation in the new power that lived in
    me. Repeated delicate experiment had taught me how a touch or a
    breath, a wish or a whisper, could control Allan's acts, could
    keep him from Theresa. I could manifest myself as palely, as
    transiently, as a thought. I could produce the merest necessary
    flicker, like the shadow of a just-opened leaf, on his
    trembling, tortured consciousness. And these unrealized
    perceptions of me he interpreted, as I had known that he would,
    as his soul's inevitable penance. He had come to believe that
    he had done evil in silently loving Theresa all these years,
    and it was my vengeance to allow him to believe this, to prod
    him ever to believe it afresh.
I am conscious that this frame of mind was not continuous in
    me. For I remember, too, that when Allan and Theresa were
    safely apart and sufficiently miserable I loved them as dearly
    as I ever had, more dearly perhaps. For it was impossible that
    I should not perceive, in my new emancipation, that they were,
    each of them, something more and greater than the two beings I
    had once ignorantly pictured them. For years they had practiced
    a selflessness of which I could once scarcely have conceived,
    and which even now I could only admire without entering into
    its mystery. While I had lived solely for myself, these two
    divine creatures had lived exquisitely for me. They had granted
    me everything, themselves nothing. For my undeserving sake
    their lives had been a constant torment of renunciation—a
    torment they had not sought to alleviate by the exchange of a
    single glance of understanding. There were even marvelous
    moments when, from the depths of my newly informed heart, I
    pitied them—poor creatures, who, withheld from the
    infinite solaces that I had come to know, were still utterly
    within that


Shell of sense
So frail, so piteously contrived for pain.


Within it, yes; yet exercising qualities that so sublimely
    transcended it. Yet the shy, hesitating compassion that thus
    had birth in me was far from being able to defeat the earlier,
    earthlier emotion. The two, I recognized, were in a sort of
    conflict; and I, regarding it, assumed that the conflict would
    never end; that for years, as Allan and Theresa reckoned time,
    I should be obliged to withhold myself from the great spaces
    and linger suffering, grudging, shamed, where they
    lingered.

It can never have been explained, I suppose, what, to
    devitalized perception such as mine, the contact of mortal
    beings with each other appears to be. Once to have exercised
    this sense-freed perception is to realize that the gift of
    prophecy, although the subject of such frequent marvel, is no
    longer mysterious. The merest glance of our sensitive and
    uncloyed vision can detect the strength of the relation between
    two beings, and therefore instantly calculate its duration. If
    you see a heavy weight suspended from a slender string, you can
    know, without any wizardry, that in a few moments the string
    will snap; well, such, if you admit the analogy, is prophecy,
    is foreknowledge. And it was thus that I saw it with Theresa
    and Allan. For it was perfectly visible to me that they would
    very little longer have the strength to preserve, near each
    other, the denuded impersonal relation that they, and that I,
    behind them, insisted on; and that they would have to separate.
    It was my sister, perhaps the more sensitive, who first
    realized this. It had now become possible for me to observe
    them almost constantly, the effort necessary to visit them had
    so greatly diminished; so that I watched her, poor, anguished
    girl, prepare to leave him. I saw each reluctant movement that
    she made. I saw her eyes, worn from self-searching; I heard her
    step grown timid from inexplicable fears; I entered her very
    heart and heard its pitiful, wild beating. And still I did not
    interfere.
For at this time I had a wonderful, almost demoniacal sense
    of disposing of matters to suit my own selfish will. At any
    moment I could have checked their miseries, could have restored
    happiness and peace. Yet it gave me, and I could weep to admit
    it, a monstrous joy to know that Theresa thought she was
    leaving Allan of her own free intention, when it was I who was
    contriving, arranging, insisting.... And yet she wretchedly
    felt my presence near her; I am certain of that.
A few days before the time of her intended departure my
    sister told Allan that she must speak with him after dinner.
    Our beautiful old house branched out from a circular hall with
    great arched doors at either end; and it was through the rear
    doorway that always in summer, after dinner, we passed out into
    the garden adjoining. As usual, therefore, when the hour came,
    Theresa led the way. That dreadful daytime brilliance that in
    my present state I found so hard to endure was now becoming
    softer. A delicate, capricious twilight breeze danced
    inconsequently through languidly whispering leaves. Lovely pale
    flowers blossomed like little moons in the dusk, and over them
    the breath of mignonette hung heavily. It was a perfect
    place—and it had so long been ours, Allan's and mine. It
    made me restless and a little wicked that those two should be
    there together now.
For a little they walked about together, speaking of common,
    daily things. Then suddenly Theresa burst out:
"I am going away, Allan. I have stayed to do everything that
    needed to be done. Now your mother will be here to care for
    you, and it is time for me to go."
He stared at her and stood still. Theresa had been there so
    long, she so definitely, to his mind, belonged there. And she
    was, as I also had jealously known, so lovely there, the small,
    dark, dainty creature, in the old hall, on the wide staircases,
    in the garden.... Life there without Theresa, even the
    intentionally remote, the perpetually renounced
    Theresa—he had not dreamed of it, he could not, so
    suddenly, conceive of it.
"Sit here," he said, and drew her down beside him on a
    bench, "and tell me what it means, why you are going. Is it
    because of something that I have been—have done?"
She hesitated. I wondered if she would dare tell him. She
    looked out and away from him, and he waited long for her to
    speak.
The pale stars were sliding into their places. The
    whispering of the leaves was almost hushed. All about them it
    was still and shadowy and sweet. It was that wonderful moment
    when, for lack of a visible horizon, the not yet darkened world
    seems infinitely greater—a moment when anything can
    happen, anything be believed in. To me, watching, listening,
    hovering, there came a dreadful purpose and a dreadful courage.
    Suppose for one moment, Theresa should not only feel, but
    see me—would she dare to tell him then?
There came a brief space of terrible effort, all my
    fluttering, uncertain forces strained to the utmost. The
    instant of my struggle was endlessly long and the transition
    seemed to take place outside me—as one sitting in a
    train, motionless, sees the leagues of earth float by. And
    then, in a bright, terrible flash I knew I had achieved
    it—I had attained visibility. Shuddering,
    insubstantial, but luminously apparent, I stood there before
    them. And for the instant that I maintained the visible state I
    looked straight into Theresa's soul.
She gave a cry. And then, thing of silly, cruel impulses
    that I was, I saw what I had done. The very thing that I wished
    to avert I had precipitated. For Allan, in his sudden terror
    and pity, had bent and caught her in his arms. For the first
    time they were together; and it was I who had brought them.
Then, to his whispered urging to tell the reason of her cry,
    Theresa said:
"Frances was here. You did not see her, standing there,
    under the lilacs, with no smile on her face?"
"My dear, my dear!" was all that Allan said. I had so long
    now lived invisibly with them, he knew that she was right.
"I suppose you know what it means?" she asked him,
    calmly.
"Dear Theresa," Allan said, slowly, "if you and I should go
    away somewhere, could we not evade all this ghostliness? And
    will you come with me?"
"Distance would not banish her," my sister confidently
    asserted. And then she said, softly: "Have you thought what a
    lonely, awesome thing it must be to be so newly dead? Pity her,
    Allan. We who are warm and alive should pity her. She loves you
    still,—that is the meaning of it all, you know—and
    she wants us to understand that for that reason we must keep
    apart. Oh, it was so plain in her white face as she stood
    there. And you did not see her?"
"It was your face that I saw," Allan solemnly told
    her—oh, how different he had grown from the Allan that I
    had known!—"and yours is the only face that I shall ever
    see." And again he drew her to him.
She sprang from him. "You are defying her, Allan!" she
    cried. "And you must not. It is her right to keep us apart, if
    she wishes. It must be as she insists. I shall go, as I told
    you. And, Allan, I beg of you, leave me the courage to do as
    she demands!"
They stood facing each other in the deep dusk, and the
    wounds that I had dealt them gaped red and accusing. "We must
    pity her," Theresa had said. And as I remembered that
    extraordinary speech, and saw the agony in her face, and the
    greater agony in Allan's, there came the great irreparable
    cleavage between mortality and me. In a swift, merciful flame
    the last of my mortal emotions—gross and tenacious they
    must have been—was consumed. My cold grasp of Allan
    loosened and a new unearthly love of him bloomed in my
    heart.
I was now, however, in a difficulty with which my experience
    in the newer state was scarcely sufficient to deal. How could I
    make it plain to Allan and Theresa that I wished to bring them
    together, to heal the wounds that I had made?
Pityingly, remorsefully, I lingered near them all that night
    and the next day. And by that time had brought myself to the
    point of a great determination. In the little time that was
    left, before Theresa should be gone and Allan bereft and
    desolate, I saw the one way that lay open to me to convince
    them of my acquiescence in their destiny.
In the deepest darkness and silence of the next night I made
    a greater effort than it will ever be necessary for me to make
    again. When they think of me, Allan and Theresa, I pray now
    that they will recall what I did that night, and that my
    thousand frustrations and selfishnesses may shrivel and be
    blown from their indulgent memories.
Yet the following morning, as she had planned, Theresa
    appeared at breakfast dressed for her journey. Above in her
    room there were the sounds of departure. They spoke little
    during the brief meal, but when it was ended Allan said:
"Theresa, there is half an hour before you go. Will you come
    upstairs with me? I had a dream that I must tell you of."
"Allan!" She looked at him, frightened, but went with him.
    "It was of Frances you dreamed," she said, quietly, as they
    entered the library together.
"Did I say it was a dream? But I was awake—thoroughly
    awake. I had not been sleeping well, and I heard, twice, the
    striking of the clock. And as I lay there, looking out at the
    stars, and thinking—thinking of you, Theresa,—she
    came to me, stood there before me, in my room. It was no
    sheeted specter, you understand; it was Frances, literally she.
    In some inexplicable fashion I seemed to be aware that she
    wanted to make me know something, and I waited, watching her
    face. After a few moments it came. She did not speak,
    precisely. That is, I am sure I heard no sound. Yet the words
    that came from her were definite enough. She said: 'Don't let
    Theresa leave you. Take her and keep her.' Then she went away.
    Was that a dream?"
"I had not meant to tell you," Theresa eagerly answered,
    "but now I must. It is too wonderful. What time did your clock
    strike, Allan?"
"One, the last time."
"Yes; it was then that I awoke. And she had been with me. I
    had not seen her, but her arm had been about me and her kiss
    was on my cheek. Oh. I knew; it was unmistakable. And the sound
    of her voice was with me."
"Then she bade you, too——"
"Yes, to stay with you. I am glad we told each other." She
    smiled tearfully and began to fasten her wrap.
"But you are not going—now!" Allan cried.
    "You know that you cannot, now that she has asked you to
    stay."
"Then you believe, as I do, that it was she?" Theresa
    demanded.
"I can never understand, but I know," he answered her. "And
    now you will not go?"

I am freed. There will be no further semblance of me in my
    old home, no sound of my voice, no dimmest echo of my earthly
    self. They have no further need of me, the two that I have
    brought together. Theirs is the fullest joy that the dwellers
    in the shell of sense can know. Mine is the transcendent joy of
    the unseen spaces.

The Woman at Seven Brothers
By WILBUR DANIEL STEELE

From Land's End, by Wilbur Daniel Steele.
        Copyright, 1908, by Harper and Brothers. By permission of
        the publishers and Wilbur Daniel Steele.

I tell you sir, I was innocent. I didn't know any more about
    the world at twenty-two than some do at twelve. My uncle and
    aunt in Duxbury brought me up strict; I studied hard in high
    school, I worked hard after hours, and I went to church twice
    on Sundays, and I can't see it's right to put me in a place
    like this, with crazy people. Oh yes, I know they're
    crazy—you can't tell me. As for what they said
    in court about finding her with her husband, that's the
    Inspector's lie, sir, because he's down on me, and wants to
    make it look like my fault.
No, sir, I can't say as I thought she was handsome—not
    at first. For one thing, her lips were too thin and white, and
    her color was bad. I'll tell you a fact, sir; that first day I
    came off to the Light I was sitting on my cot in the store-room
    (that's where the assistant keeper sleeps at the Seven
    Brothers), as lonesome as I could be, away from home for the
    first time, and the water all around me, and, even though it
    was a calm day, pounding enough on the ledge to send a kind of
    a woom-woom-woom whining up through all that solid
    rock of the tower. And when old Fedderson poked his head down
    from the living-room with the sunshine above making a kind of
    bright frame around his hair and whiskers, to give me a cheery,
    "Make yourself to home, son!" I remember I said to myself:
    "He's all right. I'll get along with him. But
    his wife's enough to sour milk." That was queer, because she
    was so much under him in age—'long about twenty-eight or
    so, and him nearer fifty. But that's what I said, sir.
Of course that feeling wore off, same as any feeling will
    wear off sooner or later in a place like the Seven Brothers.
    Cooped up in a place like that you come to know folks so well
    that you forget what they do look like. There was a
    long time I never noticed her, any more than you'd notice the
    cat. We used to sit of an evening around the table, as if you
    were Fedderson there, and me here, and her somewhere back
    there, in the rocker, knitting. Fedderson would be working on
    his Jacob's-ladder, and I'd be reading. He'd been working on
    that Jacob's-ladder a year, I guess, and every time the
    Inspector came off with the tender he was so astonished to see
    how good that ladder was that the old man would go to work and
    make it better. That's all he lived for.
If I was reading, as I say, I daren't take my eyes off the
    book, or Fedderson had me. And then he'd begin—what the
    Inspector said about him. How surprised the member of the board
    had been, that time, to see everything so clean about the
    light. What the Inspector had said about Fedderson's being
    stuck here in a second-class light—best keeper on the
    coast. And so on and so on, till either he or I had to go aloft
    and have a look at the wicks.
He'd been there twenty-three years, all told, and he'd got
    used to the feeling that he was kept down unfair—so used
    to it, I guess, that he fed on it, and told himself how folks
    ashore would talk when he was dead and gone—best keeper
    on the coast—kept down unfair. Not that he said that to
    me. No, he was far too loyal and humble and respectful, doing
    his duty without complaint, as anybody could see.
And all that time, night after night, hardly ever a word out
    of the woman. As I remember it, she seemed more like a piece of
    furniture than anything else—not even a very good cook,
    nor over and above tidy. One day, when he and I were trimming
    the lamp, he passed the remark that his first wife
    used to dust the lens and take a pride in it. Not that he said
    a word against Anna, though. He never said a word against any
    living mortal; he was too upright.
I don't know how it came about; or, rather, I do
    know, but it was so sudden, and so far away from my thoughts,
    that it shocked me, like the world turned over. It was at
    prayers. That night I remember Fedderson was uncommon
    long-winded. We'd had a batch of newspapers out by the tender,
    and at such times the old man always made a long watch of it,
    getting the world straightened out. For one thing, the United
    States minister to Turkey was dead. Well, from him and his
    soul, Fedderson got on to Turkey and the Presbyterian college
    there, and from that to heathen in general. He rambled on and
    on, like the surf on the ledge, woom-woom-woom, never
    coming to an end.
You know how you'll be at prayers sometimes. My mind
    strayed. I counted the canes in the chair-seat where I was
    kneeling; I plaited a corner of the table-cloth between my
    fingers for a spell, and by and by my eyes went wandering up
    the back of the chair.
The woman, sir, was looking at me. Her chair was back to
    mine, close, and both our heads were down in the shadow under
    the edge of the table, with Fedderson clear over on the other
    side by the stove. And there were her two eyes hunting mine
    between the spindles in the shadow. You won't believe me, sir,
    but I tell you I felt like jumping to my feet and running out
    of the room—it was so queer.
I don't know what her husband was praying about after that.
    His voice didn't mean anything, no more than the seas on the
    ledge away down there. I went to work to count the canes in the
    seat again, but all my eyes were in the top of my head. It got
    so I couldn't stand it. We were at the Lord's prayer, saying it
    singsong together, when I had to look up again. And there her
    two eyes were, between the spindles, hunting mine. Just then
    all of us were saying, "Forgive us our trespasses—" I
    thought of it afterward.
When we got up she was turned the other way, but I couldn't
    help seeing her cheeks were red. It was terrible. I wondered if
    Fedderson would notice, though I might have known he
    wouldn't—not him. He was in too much of a hurry to get at
    his Jacob's-ladder, and then he had to tell me for the tenth
    time what the Inspector'd said that day about getting him
    another light—Kingdom Come, maybe, he said.
I made some excuse or other and got away. Once in the
    store-room, I sat down on my cot and stayed there a long time,
    feeling queerer than anything. I read a chapter in the Bible, I
    don't know why. After I'd got my boots off I sat with them in
    my hands for as much as an hour, I guess, staring at the
    oil-tank and its lopsided shadow on the wall. I tell you, sir,
    I was shocked. I was only twenty-two remember, and I was
    shocked and horrified.
And when I did turn in, finally, I didn't sleep at all well.
    Two or three times I came to, sitting straight up in bed. Once
    I got up and opened the outer door to have a look. The water
    was like glass, dim, without a breath of wind, and the moon
    just going down. Over on the black shore I made out two lights
    in a village, like a pair of eyes watching. Lonely? My, yes!
    Lonely and nervous. I had a horror of her, sir. The dinghy-boat
    hung on its davits just there in front of the door, and for a
    minute I had an awful hankering to climb into it, lower away,
    and row off, no matter where. It sounds foolish.
Well, it seemed foolish next morning, with the sun shining
    and everything as usual—Fedderson sucking his pen and
    wagging his head over his eternal "log," and his wife down in
    the rocker with her head in the newspaper, and her breakfast
    work still waiting. I guess that jarred it out of me more than
    anything else—sight of her slouched down there, with her
    stringy, yellow hair and her dusty apron and the pale back of
    her neck, reading the Society Notes. Society Notes!
    Think of it! For the first time since I came to Seven Brothers
    I wanted to laugh.
I guess I did laugh when I went aloft to clean the lamp and
    found everything so free and breezy, gulls flying high and
    little whitecaps making under a westerly. It was like feeling a
    big load dropped off your shoulders. Fedderson came up with his
    dust-rag and cocked his head at me.
"What's the matter, Ray?" said he.
"Nothing," said I. And then I couldn't help it. "Seems kind
    of out of place for society notes," said I, "out here at Seven
    Brothers."
He was the other side of the lens, and when he looked at me
    he had a thousand eyes, all sober. For a minute I thought he
    was going on dusting, but then he came out and sat down on a
    sill.
"Sometimes," said he, "I get to thinking it may be a mite
    dull for her out here. She's pretty young, Ray. Not much more'n
    a girl, hardly."
"Not much more'n a girl!" It gave me a turn, sir,
    as though I'd seen my aunt in short dresses.
"It's a good home for her, though," he went on slow. "I've
    seen a lot worse ashore, Ray. Of course if I could get a shore
    light——"
"Kingdom Come's a shore light."
He looked at me out of his deep-set eyes, and then he turned
    them around the light-room, where he'd been so long.
"No," said he, wagging his head. "It ain't for such as
    me."
I never saw so humble a man.
"But look here," he went on, more cheerful. "As I was
    telling her just now, a month from yesterday's our fourth
    anniversary, and I'm going to take her ashore for the day and
    give her a holiday—new hat and everything. A girl wants a
    mite of excitement now and then, Ray."
There it was again, that "girl." It gave me the fidgets,
    sir. I had to do something about it. It's close quarters for
    last names in a light, and I'd taken to calling him Uncle Matt
    soon after I came. Now, when I was at table that noon I spoke
    over to where she was standing by the stove, getting him
    another help of chowder.
"I guess I'll have some, too, Aunt Anna," said I,
    matter of fact.
She never said a word nor gave a sign—just stood there
    kind of round-shouldered, dipping the chowder. And that night
    at prayers I hitched my chair around the table, with its back
    the other way.
You get awful lazy in a lighthouse, some ways. No matter how
    much tinkering you've got, there's still a lot of time and
    there's such a thing as too much reading. The changes in
    weather get monotonous, too, by and by; the light burns the
    same on a thick night as it does on a fair one. Of course
    there's the ships, north-bound, south-bound—wind-jammers,
    freighters, passenger-boats full of people. In the watches at
    night you can see their lights go by, and wonder what they are,
    how they're laden, where they'll fetch up, and all. I used to
    do that almost every evening when it was my first watch,
    sitting out on the walk-around up there with my legs hanging
    over the edge and my chin propped on the railing—lazy.
    The Boston boat was the prettiest to see, with her three tiers
    of port-holes lit, like a string of pearls wrapped round and
    round a woman's neck—well away, too, for the ledge must
    have made a couple of hundred fathoms off the Light, like a
    white dog-tooth of a breaker, even on the darkest night.
Well, I was lolling there one night, as I say, watching the
    Boston boat go by, not thinking of anything special, when I
    heard the door on the other side of the tower open and
    footsteps coming around to me.
By and by I nodded toward the boat and passed the remark
    that she was fetching in uncommon close to-night. No answer. I
    made nothing of that, for oftentimes Fedderson wouldn't answer,
    and after I'd watched the lights crawling on through the dark a
    spell, just to make conversation I said I guessed there'd be a
    bit of weather before long.
"I've noticed," said I, "when there's weather coming on, and
    the wind in the northeast, you can hear the orchestra playing
    aboard of her just over there. I make it out now. Do you?"
"Yes. Oh—yes—! I hear it all
    right!"
You can imagine I started. It wasn't him, but her.
    And there was something in the way she said that speech,
    sir—something—well—unnatural. Like a hungry
    animal snapping at a person's hand.
I turned and looked at her sidewise. She was standing by the
    railing, leaning a little outward, the top of her from the
    waist picked out bright by the lens behind her. I didn't know
    what in the world to say, and yet I had a feeling I ought not
    to sit there mum.
"I wonder," said I, "what that captain's thinking of,
    fetching in so handy to-night. It's no way. I tell you, if
    'twasn't for this light, she'd go to work and pile up on the
    ledge some thick night——"
She turned at that and stared straight into the lens. I
    didn't like the look of her face. Somehow, with its edges cut
    hard all around and its two eyes closed down to slits, like a
    cat's, it made a kind of mask.
"And then," I went on, uneasy enough—"and then where'd
    all their music be of a sudden, and their goings-on and their
    singing——"
"And dancing!" She clipped me off so quick it took my
    breath.
"D-d-dancing?" said I.
"That's dance-music," said she. She was looking at the boat
    again.
"How do you know?" I felt I had to keep on talking.
Well, sir—she laughed. I looked at her. She had on a
    shawl of some stuff or other that shined in the light; she had
    it pulled tight around her with her two hands in front at her
    breast, and I saw her shoulders swaying in tune.
"How do I know?" she cried. Then she laughed again,
    the same kind of a laugh. It was queer, sir, to see her, and to
    hear her. She turned, as quick as that, and leaned toward me.
    "Don't you know how to dance, Ray?" said she.
"N-no," I managed, and I was going to say "Aunt
    Anna," but the thing choked in my throat.
I tell you she was looking square at me all the time with
    her two eyes and moving with the music as if she didn't know
    it. By heavens, sir, it came over me of a sudden that she
    wasn't so bad-looking, after all. I guess I must have sounded
    like a fool.
"You—you see," said I, "she's cleared the rip there
    now, and the music's gone. You—you hear?"
"Yes," said she, turning back slow. "That's where it stops
    every night—night after night—it stops just
    there—at the rip."
When she spoke again her voice was different. I never heard
    the like of it, thin and taut as a thread. It made me shiver,
    sir.
"I hate 'em!" That's what she said. "I hate 'em all. I'd
    like to see 'em dead. I'd love to see 'em torn apart on the
    rocks, night after night. I could bathe my hands in their
    blood, night after night."
And do you know, sir, I saw it with my own eyes, her hands
    moving in each other above the rail. But it was her voice,
    though. I didn't know what to do, or what to say, so I poked my
    head through the railing and looked down at the water. I don't
    think I'm a coward, sir, but it was like a
    cold—ice-cold—hand, taking hold of my beating
    heart.
When I looked up finally, she was gone. By and by I went in
    and had a look at the lamp, hardly knowing what I was about.
    Then, seeing by my watch it was time for the old man to come on
    duty, I started to go below. In the Seven Brothers, you
    understand, the stair goes down in a spiral through a well
    against the south wall and first there's the door to the
    keeper's room and then you come to another, and that's the
    living-room, and then down to the store-room. And at night, if
    you don't carry a lantern, it's as black as the pit.
Well, down I went, sliding my hand along the rail, and as
    usual I stopped to give a rap on the keeper's door, in case he
    was taking a nap after supper. Sometimes he did.
I stood there, blind as a bat, with my mind still up on the
    walk-around. There was no answer to my knock. I hadn't expected
    any. Just from habit, and with my right foot already hanging
    down for the next step, I reached out to give the door one more
    tap for luck.
Do you know, sir, my hand didn't fetch up on anything. The
    door had been there a second before, and now the door wasn't
    there. My hand just went on going through the dark, on and on,
    and I didn't seem to have sense or power enough to stop it.
    There didn't seem any air in the well to breathe, and my ears
    were drumming to the surf—that's how scared I was. And
    then my hand touched the flesh of a face, and something in the
    dark said, "Oh!" no louder than a sigh.
Next thing I knew, sir, I was down in the living-room, warm
    and yellow-lit, with Fedderson cocking his head at me across
    the table, where he was at that eternal Jacob's-ladder of
    his.
"What's the matter, Ray?" said he. "Lord's sake, Ray!"
"Nothing," said I. Then I think I told him I was sick. That
    night I wrote a letter to A.L. Peters, the grain-dealer in
    Duxbury, asking for a job—even though it wouldn't go
    ashore for a couple of weeks, just the writing of it made me
    feel better.
It's hard to tell you how those two weeks went by. I don't
    know why, but I felt like hiding in a corner all the time. I
    had to come to meals, but I didn't look at her, though, not
    once, unless it was by accident. Fedderson thought I was still
    ailing and nagged me to death with advice and so on. One thing
    I took care not to do, I can tell you, and that was to knock on
    his door till I'd made certain he wasn't below in the
    living-room—though I was tempted to.
Yes, sir; that's a queer thing, and I wouldn't tell you if I
    hadn't set out to give you the truth. Night after night,
    stopping there on the landing in that black pit, the air gone
    out of my lungs and the surf drumming in my ears and sweat
    standing cold on my neck—and one hand lifting up in the
    air—God forgive me, sir! Maybe I did wrong not to look at
    her more, drooping about her work in her gingham apron, with
    her hair stringing.
When the Inspector came off with the tender, that time, I
    told him I was through. That's when he took the dislike to me,
    I guess, for he looked at me kind of sneering and said, soft as
    I was, I'd have to put up with it till next relief. And then,
    said he, there'd be a whole house-cleaning at Seven Brothers,
    because he'd gotten Fedderson the berth at Kingdom Come. And
    with that he slapped the old man on the back.
I wish you could have seen Fedderson, sir. He sat down on my
    cot as if his knees had given 'way. Happy? You'd think he'd be
    happy, with all his dreams come true. Yes, he was happy,
    beaming all over—for a minute. Then, sir, he began to
    shrivel up. It was like seeing a man cut down in his prime
    before your eyes. He began to wag his head.
"No," said he. "No, no; it's not for such as me. I'm good
    enough for Seven Brothers, and that's all, Mr. Bayliss. That's
    all."
And for all the Inspector could say, that's what he stuck
    to. He'd figured himself a martyr so many years, nursed that
    injustice like a mother with her first-born, sir; and now in
    his old age, so to speak, they weren't to rob him of it.
    Fedderson was going to wear out his life in a second-class
    light, and folks would talk—that was his idea. I heard
    him hailing down as the tender was casting off:
"See you to-morrow, Mr. Bayliss. Yep. Coming ashore with the
    wife for a spree. Anniversary. Yep."
But he didn't sound much like a spree. They had,
    robbed him, partly, after all. I wondered what she
    thought about it. I didn't know till night. She didn't show up
    to supper, which Fedderson and I got ourselves—had a
    headache, be said. It was my early watch. I went and lit up and
    came back to read a spell. He was finishing off the
    Jacob's-ladder, and thoughtful, like a man that's lost a
    treasure. Once or twice I caught him looking about the room on
    the sly. It was pathetic, sir.
Going up the second time, I stepped out on the walk-around
    to have a look at things. She was there on the seaward side,
    wrapped in that silky thing. A fair sea was running across the
    ledge and it was coming on a little thick—not too thick.
    Off to the right the Boston boat was blowing,
    whroom-whroom! Creeping up on us, quarter-speed. There
    was another fellow behind her, and a fisherman's conch farther
    offshore.
I don't know why, but I stopped beside her and leaned on the
    rail. She didn't appear to notice me, one way or another. We
    stood and we stood, listening to the whistles, and the longer
    we stood the more it got on my nerves, her not noticing me. I
    suppose she'd been too much on my mind lately. I began to be
    put out. I scraped my feet. I coughed. By and by I said out
    loud:
"Look here, I guess I better get out the fog-horn and give
    those fellows a toot."
"Why?" said she, without moving her head—calm as
    that.
"Why?" It gave me a turn, sir. For a minute I
    stared at her. "Why? Because if she don't pick up this light
    before very many minutes she'll be too close in to
    wear—tide'll have her on the rocks—that's why!"
I couldn't see her face, but I could see one of her silk
    shoulders lift a little, like a shrug. And there I kept on
    staring at her, a dumb one, sure enough. I know what brought me
    to was hearing the Boston boat's three sharp toots as she
    picked up the light—mad as anything—and swung her
    helm a-port. I turned away from her, sweat stringing down my
    face, and walked around to the door. It was just as well, too,
    for the feed-pipe was plugged in the lamp and the wicks were
    popping. She'd have been out in another five minutes, sir.
When I'd finished, I saw that woman standing in the doorway.
    Her eyes were bright. I had a horror of her, sir, a living
    horror.
"If only the light had been out," said she, low and
    sweet.
"God forgive you," said I. "You don't know what you're
    saying."
She went down the stair into the well, winding out of sight,
    and as long as I could see her, her eyes were watching mine.
    When I went, myself, after a few minutes, she was waiting for
    me on that first landing, standing still in the dark. She took
    hold of my hand, though I tried to get it away.
"Good-by," said she in my ear.
"Good-by?" said I. I didn't understand.
"You heard what he said to-day—about Kingdom Come? Be
    it so—on his own head. I'll never come back here. Once I
    set foot ashore—I've got friends in Brightonboro,
    Ray."
I got away from her and started on down. But I stopped.
    "Brightonboro?" I whispered back. "Why do you tell
    me?" My throat was raw to the words, like a sore.
"So you'd know," said she.
Well, sir, I saw them off next morning, down that new
    Jacob's-ladder into the dinghy-boat, her in a dress of blue
    velvet and him in his best cutaway and derby—rowing away,
    smaller and smaller, the two of them. And then I went back and
    sat on my cot, leaving the door open and the ladder still
    hanging down the wall, along with the boat-falls.
I don't know whether it was relief, or what. I suppose I
    must have been worked up even more than I'd thought those past
    weeks, for now it was all over I was like a rag. I got down on
    my knees, sir, and prayed to God for the salvation of my soul,
    and when I got up and climbed to the living-room it was half
    past twelve by the clock. There was rain on the windows and the
    sea was running blue-black under the sun. I'd sat there all
    that time not knowing there was a squall.
It was funny; the glass stood high, but those black squalls
    kept coming and going all afternoon, while I was at work up in
    the light-room. And I worked hard, to keep myself busy. First
    thing I knew it was five, and no sign of the boat yet. It began
    to get dim and kind of purplish-gray over the land. The sun was
    down. I lit up, made everything snug, and got out the
    night-glasses to have another look for that boat. He'd said he
    intended to get back before five. No sign. And then, standing
    there, it came over me that of course he wouldn't be coming
    off—he'd be hunting her, poor old fool. It
    looked like I had to stand two men's watches that night.
Never mind. I felt like myself again, even if I hadn't had
    any dinner or supper. Pride came to me that night on the
    walk-around, watching the boats go by—little boats, big
    boats, the Boston boat with all her pearls and her dance-music.
    They couldn't see me; they didn't know who I was; but to the
    last of them, they depended on me. They say a man must
    be born again. Well, I was born again. I breathed deep in the
    wind.
Dawn broke hard and red as a dying coal. I put out the light
    and started to go below. Born again; yes, sir. I felt so good I
    whistled in the well, and when I came to the first door on the
    stair I reached out in the dark to give it a rap for luck. And
    then, sir, the hair prickled all over my scalp, when I found my
    hand just going on and on through the air, the same as it had
    gone once before, and all of a sudden I wanted to yell, because
    I thought I was going to touch flesh. It's funny what their
    just forgetting to close their door did to me, isn't it?
Well, I reached for the latch and pulled it to with a bang
    and ran down as if a ghost was after me. I got up some coffee
    and bread and bacon for breakfast. I drank the coffee. But
    somehow I couldn't eat, all along of that open door. The light
    in the room was blood. I got to thinking. I thought how she'd
    talked about those men, women, and children on the rocks, and
    how she'd made to bathe her hands over the rail. I almost
    jumped out of my chair then; it seemed for a wink she was there
    beside the stove watching me with that queer
    half-smile—really, I seemed to see her for a flash across
    the red table-cloth in the red light of dawn.
"Look here!" said I to myself, sharp enough; and then I gave
    myself a good laugh and went below. There I took a look out of
    the door, which was still open, with the ladder hanging down. I
    made sure to see the poor old fool come pulling around the
    point before very long now.
My boots were hurting a little, and, taking them off, I lay
    down on the cot to rest, and somehow I went to sleep. I had
    horrible dreams. I saw her again standing in that blood-red
    kitchen, and she seemed to be washing her hands, and the surf
    on the ledge was whining up the tower, louder and louder all
    the time, and what it whined was, "Night after
    night—night after night." What woke me was cold water in
    my face.
The store-room was in gloom. That scared me at first; I
    thought night had come, and remembered the light. But then I
    saw the gloom was of a storm. The floor was shining wet, and
    the water in my face was spray, flung up through the open door.
    When I ran to close it, it almost made me dizzy to see the
    gray-and-white breakers marching past. The land was gone; the
    sky shut down heavy overhead; there was a piece of wreckage on
    the back of a swell, and the Jacob's-ladder was carried clean
    away. How that sea had picked up so quick I can't think. I
    looked at my watch and it wasn't four in the afternoon yet.
When I closed the door, sir, it was almost dark in the
    store-room. I'd never been in the Light before in a gale of
    wind. I wondered why I was shivering so, till I found it was
    the floor below me shivering, and the walls and stair. Horrible
    crunchings and grindings ran away up the tower, and now and
    then there was a great thud somewhere, like a cannon-shot in a
    cave. I tell you, sir, I was alone, and I was in a mortal
    fright for a minute or so. And yet I had to get myself
    together. There was the light up there not tended to, and an
    early dark coming on and a heavy night and all, and I had to
    go. And I had to pass that door.
You'll say it's foolish, sir, and maybe it was
    foolish. Maybe it was because I hadn't eaten. But I began
    thinking of that door up there the minute I set foot on the
    stair, and all the way up through that howling dark well I
    dreaded to pass it. I told myself I wouldn't stop. I didn't
    stop. I felt the landing underfoot and I went on, four steps,
    five—and then I couldn't. I turned and went back. I put
    out my hand and it went on into nothing. That door, sir, was
    open again.
I left it be; I went on up to the light-room and set to
    work. It was Bedlam there, sir, screeching Bedlam, but I took
    no notice. I kept my eyes down. I trimmed those seven wicks,
    sir, as neat as ever they were trimmed; I polished the brass
    till it shone, and I dusted the lens. It wasn't till that was
    done that I let myself look back to see who it was standing
    there, half out of sight in the well. It was her, sir.
"Where'd you come from?" I asked. I remember my voice was
    sharp.
"Up Jacob's-ladder," said she, and hers was like the syrup
    of flowers.
I shook my head. I was savage, sir. "The ladder's carried
    away."
"I cast it off," said she, with a smile.
"Then," said I, "you must have come while I was asleep."
    Another thought came on me heavy as a ton of lead. "And where's
    he?" said I. "Where's the boat?"
"He's drowned," said she, as easy as that. "And I let the
    boat go adrift. You wouldn't hear me when I called."
"But look here," said I. "If you came through the
    store-room, why didn't you wake me up? Tell me that!" It sounds
    foolish enough, me standing like a lawyer in court, trying to
    prove she couldn't be there.
She didn't answer for a moment. I guess she sighed, though I
    couldn't hear for the gale, and her eyes grew soft, sir, so
    soft.
"I couldn't," said she. "You looked so peaceful—dear
    one."
My cheeks and neck went hot, sir, as if a warm iron was laid
    on them. I didn't know what to say. I began to stammer, "What
    do you mean—" but she was going back down the stair, out
    of sight. My God sir, and I used not to think she was
    good-looking!
I started to follow her. I wanted to know what she meant.
    Then I said to myself, "If I don't go—if I wait
    here—she'll come back." And I went to the weather side
    and stood looking out of the window. Not that there was much to
    see. It was growing dark, and the Seven Brothers looked like
    the mane of a running horse, a great, vast, white horse running
    into the wind. The air was a-welter with it. I caught one peep
    of a fisherman, lying down flat trying to weather the ledge,
    and I said, "God help them all to-night," and then I went hot
    at sound of that "God."
I was right about her, though. She was back again. I wanted
    her to speak first, before I turned, but she wouldn't. I didn't
    hear her go out; I didn't know what she was up to till I saw
    her coming outside on the walk-around, drenched wet already. I
    pounded on the glass for her to come in and not be a fool; if
    she heard she gave no sign of it.
There she stood, and there I stood watching her. Lord,
    sir—was it just that I'd never had eyes to see? Or are
    there women who bloom? Her clothes were shining on her, like a
    carving, and her hair was let down like a golden curtain
    tossing and streaming in the gale, and there she stood with her
    lips half open, drinking, and her eyes half closed, gazing
    straight away over the Seven Brothers, and her shoulders
    swaying, as if in tune with the wind and water and all the
    ruin. And when I looked at her hands over the rail, sir, they
    were moving in each other as if they bathed, and then I
    remembered, sir.
A cold horror took me. I knew now why she had come back
    again. She wasn't a woman—she was a devil. I turned my
    back on her. I said to myself: "It's time to light up. You've
    got to light up"—like that, over and over, out loud. My
    hand was shivering so I could hardly find a match; and when I
    scratched it, it only flared a second and then went out in the
    back draught from the open door. She was standing in the
    doorway, looking at me. It's queer, sir, but I felt like a
    child caught in mischief.
"I—I—was going to light up," I managed to say,
    finally.
"Why?" said she. No, I can't say it as she did.
"Why?" said I. "My God!"
She came nearer, laughing, as if with pity, low, you know.
    "Your God? And who is your God? What is God? What is anything
    on a night like this?"
I drew back from her. All I could say anything about was the
    light.
"Why not the dark?" said she. "Dark is softer than
    light—tenderer—dearer than light. From the dark up
    here, away up here in the wind and storm, we can watch the
    ships go by, you and I. And you love me so. You've loved me so
    long, Ray."
"I never have!" I struck out at her. "I don't! I don't!"
Her voice was lower than ever, but there was the same
    laughing pity in it. "Oh yes, you have." And she was near me
    again.
"I have?" I yelled. "I'll show you! I'll show you if I
    have!"
I got another match, sir, and scratched it on the brass. I
    gave it to the first wick, the little wick that's inside all
    the others. It bloomed like a yellow flower. "I have?"
    I yelled, and gave it to the next.
Then there was a shadow, and I saw she was leaning beside
    me, her two elbows on the brass, her two arms stretched out
    above the wicks, her bare forearms and wrists and hands. I gave
    a gasp:
"Take care! You'll burn them! For God's
    sake——"
She didn't move or speak. The match burned my fingers and
    went out, and all I could do was stare at those arms of hers,
    helpless. I'd never noticed her arms before. They were rounded
    and graceful and covered with a soft down, like a breath of
    gold. Then I heard her speaking close to my ear.
"Pretty arms," she said. "Pretty arms!"
I turned. Her eyes were fixed on mine. They seemed heavy, as
    if with sleep, and yet between their lids they were two wells,
    deep and deep, and as if they held all the things I'd ever
    thought or dreamed in them. I looked away from them, at her
    lips. Her lips were red as poppies, heavy with redness. They
    moved, and I heard them speaking:
"Poor boy, you love me so, and you want to kiss
    me—don't you?"
"No," said I. But I couldn't turn around. I looked at her
    hair. I'd always thought it was stringy hair. Some hair curls
    naturally with damp, they say, and perhaps that was it, for
    there were pearls of wet on it, and it was thick and shimmering
    around her face, making soft shadows by the temples. There was
    green in it, queer strands of green like braids.
"What is it?" said I.
"Nothing but weed," said she, with that slow, sleepy
    smile.
Somehow or other I felt calmer than I had any time. "Look
    here," said I. "I'm going to light this lamp." I took out a
    match, scratched it, and touched the third wick. The flame ran
    around, bigger than the other two together. But still her arms
    hung there. I bit my lip. "By God, I will!" said I to myself,
    and I lit the fourth.
It was fierce, sir, fierce! And yet those arms never
    trembled. I had to look around at her. Her eyes were still
    looking into mine, so deep and deep, and her red lips were
    still smiling with that queer, sleepy droop; the only thing was
    that tears were raining down her cheeks—big, glowing
    round, jewel tears. It wasn't human, sir. It was like a
    dream.
"Pretty arms," she sighed, and then, as if those words had
    broken something in her heart, there came a great sob bursting
    from her lips. To hear it drove me mad. I reached to drag her
    away, but she was too quick, sir; she cringed from me and
    slipped out from between my hands. It was like she faded away,
    sir, and went down in a bundle, nursing her poor arms and
    mourning over them with those terrible, broken sobs.
The sound of them took the manhood out of me—you'd
    have been the same, sir. I knelt down beside her on the floor
    and covered my face.
"Please!" I moaned. "Please! Please!" That's all I could
    say. I wanted her to forgive me. I reached out a hand, blind,
    for forgiveness, and I couldn't find her anywhere. I had hurt
    her so, and she was afraid of me, of me, sir, who
    loved her so deep it drove me crazy.
I could see her down the stair, though it was dim and my
    eyes were filled with tears. I stumbled after her, crying,
    "Please! Please!" The little wicks I'd lit were blowing in the
    wind from the door and smoking the glass beside them black. One
    went out. I pleaded with them, the same as I would plead with a
    human being. I said I'd be back in a second. I promised. And I
    went on down the stair, crying like a baby because I'd hurt
    her, and she was afraid of me—of me, sir.
She had gone into her room. The door was closed against me
    and I could hear her sobbing beyond it, broken-hearted. My
    heart was broken too. I beat on the door with my palms. I
    begged her to forgive me. I told her I loved her. And all the
    answer was that sobbing in the dark.
And then I lifted the latch and went in, groping, pleading.
    "Dearest—please! Because I love you!"
I heard her speak down near the floor. There wasn't any
    anger in her voice; nothing but sadness and despair.
"No," said she. "You don't love me, Ray. You never
    have."
"I do! I have!"
"No, no," said she, as if she was tired out.
"Where are you?" I was groping for her. I thought, and lit a
    match. She had got to the door and was standing there as if
    ready to fly. I went toward her, and she made me stop. She took
    my breath away. "I hurt your arms," said I, in a dream.
"No," said she, hardly moving her lips. She held them out to
    the match's light for me to look and there was never a scar on
    them—not even that soft, golden down was singed, sir.
    "You can't hurt my body," said she, sad as anything. "Only my
    heart, Ray; my poor heart."
I tell you again, she took my breath away. I lit another
    match. "How can you be so beautiful?" I wondered.
She answered in riddles—but oh, the sadness of her,
    sir.
"Because," said she, "I've always so wanted to be."
"How come your eyes so heavy?" said I.
"Because I've seen so many things I never dreamed of," said
    she.
"How come your hair so thick?"
"It's the seaweed makes it thick," said she smiling queer,
    queer.
"How come seaweed there?"
"Out of the bottom of the sea."
She talked in riddles, but it was like poetry to hear her,
    or a song.
"How come your lips so red?" said I.
"Because they've wanted so long to be kissed."
Fire was on me, sir. I reached out to catch her, but she was
    gone, out of the door and down the stair. I followed,
    stumbling. I must have tripped on the turn, for I remember
    going through the air and fetching up with a crash, and I
    didn't know anything for a spell—how long I can't say.
    When I came to, she was there, somewhere, bending over me,
    crooning, "My love—my love—" under her breath like,
    a song.
But then when I got up, she was not where my arms went; she
    was down the stair again, just ahead of me. I followed her. I
    was tottering and dizzy and full of pain. I tried to catch up
    with her in the dark of the store-room, but she was too quick
    for me, sir, always a little too quick for me. Oh, she was
    cruel to me, sir. I kept bumping against things, hurting myself
    still worse, and it was cold and wet and a horrible noise all
    the while, sir; and then, sir, I found the door was open, and a
    sea had parted the hinges.
I don't know how it all went, sir. I'd tell you if I could,
    but it's all so blurred—sometimes it seems more like a
    dream. I couldn't find her any more; I couldn't hear her; I
    went all over, everywhere. Once, I remember, I found myself
    hanging out of that door between the davits, looking down into
    those big black seas and crying like a baby. It's all riddles
    and blur. I can't seem to tell you much, sir. It was
    all—all—I don't know.
I was talking to somebody else—not her. It was the
    Inspector. I hardly knew it was the Inspector. His face was as
    gray as a blanket, and his eyes were bloodshot, and his lips
    were twisted. His left wrist hung down, awkward. It was broken
    coming aboard the Light in that sea. Yes, we were in the
    living-room. Yes, sir, it was daylight—gray daylight. I
    tell you, sir, the man looked crazy to me. He was waving his
    good arm toward the weather windows, and what he was saying,
    over and over, was this:
"Look what you done, damn you! Look what you
    done!"
And what I was saying was this:
"I've lost her!"
I didn't pay any attention to him, nor him to me. By and by
    he did, though. He stopped his talking all of a sudden, and his
    eyes looked like the devil's eyes. He put them up close to
    mine. He grabbed my arm with his good hand, and I cried, I was
    so weak.
"Johnson," said he, "is that it? By the living God—if
    you got a woman out here, Johnson!"
"No," said I. "I've lost her."
"What do you mean—lost her?"
"It was dark," said I—and it's funny how my head was
    clearing up—"and the door was open—the store-room
    door—and I was after her—and I guess she stumbled,
    maybe—and I lost her."
"Johnson," said he, "what do you mean? You sound
    crazy—downright crazy. Who?"
"Her," said I. "Fedderson's wife."
"Who?"
"Her," said I. And with that he gave my arm another
    jerk.
"Listen," said he, like a tiger. "Don't try that on me. It
    won't do any good—that kind of lies—not where
    you're going to. Fedderson and his wife, too—the
    both of 'em's drowned deader 'n a door-nail."
"I know," said I, nodding my head. I was so calm it made him
    wild.
"You're crazy! Crazy as a loon, Johnson!" And he was chewing
    his lip red. "I know, because it was me that found the old man
    laying on Back Water Flats yesterday morning—me!
    And she'd been with him in the boat, too, because he had a
    piece of her jacket tore off, tangled in his arm."
"I know," said I, nodding again, like that.
"You know what, you crazy, murdering
    fool?" Those were his words to me, sir.
"I know," said I, "what I know."
"And I know," said he, "what I know."
And there you are, sir. He's Inspector.
    I'm—nobody.

At the Gate
By MYLA JO CLOSSER

From the Century Magazine. By permission of the
        Century Company and Myla J. Closser.

A shaggy Airedale scented his way along the highroad. He had
    not been there before, but he was guided by the trail of his
    brethren who had preceded him. He had gone unwillingly upon
    this journey, yet with the perfect training of dogs he had
    accepted it without complaint. The path had been lonely, and
    his heart would have failed him, traveling as he must without
    his people, had not these traces of countless dogs before him
    promised companionship of a sort at the end of the road.
The landscape had appeared arid at first, for the
    translation from recent agony into freedom from pain had been
    so numbing in its swiftness that it was some time before he
    could fully appreciate the pleasant dog-country through which
    he was passing. There were woods with leaves upon the ground
    through which to scurry, long grassy slopes for extended runs,
    and lakes into which he might plunge for sticks and bring them
    back to—But he did not complete his thought, for the boy
    was not with him. A little wave of homesickness possessed
    him.
It made his mind easier to see far ahead a great gate as
    high as the heavens, wide enough for all. He understood that
    only man built such barriers and by straining his eyes he
    fancied he could discern humans passing through to whatever lay
    beyond. He broke into a run that he might the more quickly gain
    this inclosure made beautiful by men and women; but his
    thoughts outran his pace, and he remembered that he had left
    the family behind, and again this lovely new compound became
    not perfect, since it would lack the family.
The scent of the dogs grew very strong now, and coming
    nearer, he discovered, to his astonishment that of the myriads
    of those who had arrived ahead of him thousands were still
    gathered on the outside of the portal. They sat in a wide
    circle spreading out on each side of the entrance, big, little,
    curly, handsome, mongrel, thoroughbred dogs of every age,
    complexion, and personality. All were apparently waiting for
    something, someone, and at the pad of the Airedale's feet on
    the hard road they arose and looked in his direction.
That the interest passed as soon as they discovered the
    new-comer to be a dog puzzled him. In his former dwelling-place
    a four-footed brother was greeted with enthusiasm when he was a
    friend, with suspicious diplomacy when a stranger, and with
    sharp reproof when an enemy; but never had he been utterly
    ignored.
He remembered something that he had read many times on great
    buildings with lofty entrances. "Dogs not admitted," the signs
    had said, and he feared this might be the reason for the
    waiting circle outside the gate. It might be that this noble
    portal stood as the dividing-line between mere dogs and humans.
    But he had been a member of the family, romping with them in
    the living-room, sitting at meals with them in the dining-room,
    going upstairs at night with them, and the thought that he was
    to be "kept out" would be unendurable.
He despised the passive dogs. They should be treating a
    barrier after the fashion of their old country, leaping against
    it, barking, and scratching the nicely painted door. He bounded
    up the last little hill to set them an example, for he was
    still full of the rebellion of the world; but he found no door
    to leap against. He could see beyond the entrance dear masses
    of people, yet no dog crossed the threshold. They continued in
    their patient ring, their gaze upon the winding road.
He now advanced cautiously to examine the gate. It occurred
    to him that it must be fly-time in this region, and he did not
    wish to make himself ridiculous before all these strangers by
    trying to bolt through an invisible mesh like the one that had
    baffled him when he was a little chap. Yet there were no
    screens, and despair entered his soul. What bitter punishment
    these poor beasts must have suffered before they learned to
    stay on this side the arch that led to human beings! What had
    they done on earth to merit this? Stolen bones troubled his
    conscience, runaway days, sleeping in the best chair until the
    key clicked in the lock. These were sins.
At that moment an English bull-terrier, white, with
    liver-colored spots and a jaunty manner, approached him,
    snuffling in a friendly way. No sooner had the bull-terrier
    smelt his collar than he fell to expressing his joy at meeting
    him. The Airedale's reserve was quite thawed by this welcome,
    though he did not know just what to make of it.
"I know you! I know you!" exclaimed the bull-terrier, adding
    inconsequently, "What's your name?"
"Tam o'Shanter. They call me Tammy," was the answer, with a
    pardonable break in the voice.
"I know them," said the bull-terrier. "Nice folks."
"Best ever," said the Airedale, trying to be nonchalant, and
    scratching a flea which was not there. "I don't remember you.
    When did you know them?"
"About fourteen tags ago, when they were first married. We
    keep track of time here by the license-tags. I had four."
"This is my first and only one. You were before my time, I
    guess." He felt young and shy.
"Come for a walk, and tell me all about them," was his new
    friend's invitation.
"Aren't we allowed in there?" asked Tam, looking toward the
    gate.
"Sure. You can go in whenever you want to. Some of us do at
    first, but we don't stay."
"Like it better outside?"
"No, no; it isn't that."
"Then why are all you fellows hanging around here? Any old
    dog can see it's better beyond the arch."
"You see, we're waiting for our folks to come."
The Airedale grasped it at once, and nodded
    understandingly.
"I felt that way when I came along the road. It wouldn't be
    what it's supposed to be without them. It wouldn't be the
    perfect place."
"Not to us," said the bull-terrier.
"Fine! I've stolen bones, but it must be that I have been
    forgiven, if I'm to see them here again. It's the great good
    place all right. But look here," he added as a new thought
    struck him, "do they wait for us?"
The older inhabitant coughed in slight embarrassment.
"The humans couldn't do that very well. It wouldn't be the
    thing to have them hang around outside for just a dog—not
    dignified."
"Quite right," agreed Tam. "I'm glad they go straight to
    their mansions. I'd—I'd hate to have them missing me as I
    am missing them." He sighed. "But, then, they wouldn't have to
    wait so long."
"Oh, well, they're getting on. Don't be discouraged,"
    comforted the terrier. "And in the meantime it's like a big
    hotel in summer—watching the new arrivals. See, there is
    something doing now."
All the dogs were aroused to excitement by a little figure
    making its way uncertainly up the last slope. Half of them
    started to meet it, crowding about in a loving, eager pack.
"Look out; don't scare it," cautioned the older animals,
    while word was passed to those farthest from the gate: "Quick!
    Quick! A baby's come!"
Before they had entirely assembled, however, a gaunt yellow
    hound pushed through the crowd, gave one sniff at the small
    child, and with a yelp of joy crouched at its feet. The baby
    embraced the hound in recognition, and the two moved toward the
    gate. Just outside the hound stopped to speak to an
    aristocratic St. Bernard who had been friendly:
"Sorry to leave you, old fellow," he said, "but I'm going in
    to watch over the kid. You see, I'm all she has up here."
The bull-terrier looked at the Airedale for
    appreciation.
"That's the way we do it," he said proudly.
"Yes, but—" the Airedale put his head on one side in
    perplexity.
"Yes, but what?" asked the guide.
"The dogs that don't have any people—the nobodies'
    dogs?"
"That's the best of all. Oh, everything is thought out here.
    Crouch down,—you must be tired,—and watch," said
    the bull-terrier.
Soon they spied another small form making the turn in the
    road. He wore a Boy Scout's uniform, but he was a little
    fearful, for all that, so new was this adventure. The dogs rose
    again and snuffled, but the better groomed of the circle held
    back, and in their place a pack of odds and ends of the company
    ran down to meet him. The Boy Scout was reassured by their
    friendly attitude, and after petting them impartially, he chose
    an old-fashioned black and tan, and the two passed in.
Tam looked questioningly.
"They didn't know each other!" he exclaimed.
"But they've always wanted to. That's one of the boys who
    used to beg for a dog, but his father wouldn't let him have
    one. So all our strays wait for just such little fellows to
    come along. Every boy gets a dog, and every dog gets a
    master."
"I expect the boy's father would like to know that now,"
    commented the Airedale. "No doubt he thinks quite often, 'I
    wish I'd let him have a dog.'"
The bull-terrier laughed.
"You're pretty near the earth yet, aren't you?"
Tam admitted it.
"I've a lot of sympathy with fathers and with boys, having
    them both in the family, and a mother as well."
The bull-terrier leaped up in astonishment.
"You don't mean to say they keep a boy?"
"Sure; greatest boy on earth. Ten this year."
"Well, well, this is news! I wish they'd kept a boy when I
    was there."
The Airedale looked at his new friend intently.
"See here, who are you?" he demanded.
But the other hurried on:
"I used to run away from them just to play with a boy.
    They'd punish me, and I always wanted to tell them it was their
    fault for not getting one."
"Who are you, anyway?" repeated Tam. "Talking all this
    interest in me, too. Whose dog were you?"
"You've already guessed. I see it in your quivering snout.
    I'm the old dog that had to leave them about ten years
    ago."
"Their old dog Bully?"
"Yes, I'm Bully." They nosed each other with deeper
    affection, then strolled about the glades shoulder to shoulder.
    Bully the more eagerly pressed for news. "Tell me, how are they
    getting along?"
"Very well indeed; they've paid for the house."
"I—I suppose you occupy the kennel?"
"No. They said they couldn't stand it to see another dog in
    your old place."
Bully stopped to howl gently.
"That touches me. It's generous in you to tell it. To think
    they missed me!"
For a little while they went on in silence, but as evening
    fell, and the light from the golden streets inside of the city
    gave the only glow to the scene, Bully grew nervous and
    suggested that they go back.
"We can't see so well at night, and I like to be pretty
    close to the path, especially toward morning."
Tam assented.
"And I will point them out. You might not know them just at
    first."
"Oh, we know them. Sometimes the babies have so grown up
    they're rather hazy in their recollection of how we look. They
    think we're bigger than we are; but you can't fool us
    dogs."
"It's understood," Tam cunningly arranged, "that when he or
    she arrives you'll sort of make them feel at home while I wait
    for the boy?"
"That's the best plan," assented Bully, kindly. "And if by
    any chance the little fellow should come first,—there's
    been a lot of them this summer—of course you'll introduce
    me?"
"I shall be proud to do it."
And so with muzzles sunk between their paws, and with their
    eyes straining down the pilgrims' road, they wait outside the
    gate.

Ligeia
By EDGAR ALLAN POE

And the will therein lieth, which dieth not. Who knoweth
        the mystery of the will, with its vigor? For God is but a
        great will pervading all things by nature of its
        intentness. Man doth not yield himself to the angels, nor
        unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his
        feeble will.—Joseph Glanvill.

I cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or even precisely
    where, I first became acquainted with the lady Ligeia. Long
    years have since elapsed, and my memory is feeble through much
    suffering. Or, perhaps, I cannot now bring these
    points to mind, because, in truth, the character of my beloved,
    her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast of beauty, and
    the thrilling and enthralling eloquence of her low musical
    language, made their way into my heart by paces so steadily and
    stealthily progressive, that they have been unnoticed and
    unknown. Yet I believe that I met her first and most frequently
    in some large, old, decaying city near the Rhine. Of her
    family—I have surely heard her speak. That it is of a
    remotely ancient date cannot be doubted. Ligeia! Ligeia! Buried
    in studies of a nature more than all else adapted to deaden
    impressions of the outward world, it is by that sweet word
    alone—by Ligeia—that I bring before mine eyes in
    fancy the image of her who is no more. And now, while I write,
    a recollection flashes upon me that I have never known
    the paternal name of her who was my friend and my bethrothed,
    and who became the partner of my studies, and finally the wife
    of my bosom. Was it a playful charge on the part of my Ligeia?
    or was it a test of my strength of affection, that I should
    institute no inquiries upon this point? or was it rather a
    caprice of my own—a wildly romantic offering on the
    shrine of the most passionate devotion? I but indistinctly
    recall the fact itself—what wonder that I have utterly
    forgotten the circumstances which originated or attended it?
    And, indeed, if ever that spirit which is entitled
    Romance—if ever she, the wan misty-winged
    Ashtophet of idolatrous Egypt, presided, as they tell,
    over marriages ill-omened, then most surely she presided over
    mine.
There is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fails
    me not. It is the person of Ligeia. In stature she was
    tall, somewhat slender, and, in her latter days, even
    emaciated. I would in vain attempt to portray the majesty, the
    quiet ease of her demeanor, or the incomprehensible lightness
    and elasticity of her footfall. She came and departed as a
    shadow. I was never made aware of her entrance into my closed
    study, save by the dear music of her low sweet voice, as she
    placed her marble hand upon my shoulder. In beauty of face no
    maiden ever equaled her. It was the radiance of an
    opium-dream—an airy and spirit-lifting vision more wildly
    divine than the phantasies which hovered about the slumbering
    souls of the daughters of Delos. Yet her features were not of
    that regular mold which we have been falsely taught to worship
    in the classical labors of the heathen. "There is no exquisite
    beauty," says Bacon, Lord Verulam, speaking truly of all the
    forms and genera of beauty, "without some
    strangeness in the proportion." Yet, although I saw
    that the features of Ligeia were not of a classic
    regularity—although I perceived that her loveliness was
    indeed "exquisite," and felt that there was much of
    "strangeness" pervading it, yet I have tried in vain to detect
    the irregularity and to trace home my own perception of "the
    strange." I examined the contour of the lofty and pale
    forehead—it was faultless—how cold indeed that word
    when applied to a majesty so divine!—the skin rivaling
    the purest ivory, the commanding extent and repose, the gentle
    prominence of the regions above the temples; and then the
    raven-black, the glossy, the luxuriant, and naturally-curling
    tresses, setting forth the full force of the Homeric epithet,
    "hyacinthine!" I looked at the delicate outlines of the
    nose—and nowhere but in the graceful medallions of the
    Hebrews had I beheld a similar perfection. There were the same
    luxurious smoothness of surface, the same scarcely perceptible
    tendency to the aquiline, the same harmoniously curved nostrils
    speaking the free spirit. I regarded the sweet mouth. Here was
    indeed the triumph of all things heavenly—the magnificent
    turn of the short upper lip—the soft, voluptuous slumber
    of the under—the dimples which sported, and the color
    which spoke—the teeth glancing back, with a brilliancy
    almost startling, every ray of the holy light which fell upon
    them in her serene and placid yet most exultingly radiant of
    all smiles. I scrutinized the formation of the chin—and,
    here, too, I found the gentleness of breadth, the softness and
    the majesty, the fullness and the spirituality, of the
    Greek—the contour which the god Apollo revealed but in a
    dream, to Cleomenes, the son of the Athenian. And then I peered
    into the large eyes of Ligeia.
For eyes we have no models in the remotely antique. It might
    have been, too, that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret
    to which Lord Verulam alludes. They were, I must believe, far
    larger than the ordinary eyes of our own race. They were even
    fuller than the fullest of the gazelle eyes of the tribe of the
    valley of Nourjahad. Yet it was only at intervals—in
    moments of intense excitement—that this peculiarity
    became more than slightly noticeable in Ligeia. And at such
    moments was her beauty—in my heated fancy thus it
    appeared perhaps—the beauty of beings either above or
    apart from the earth—the beauty of the fabulous Houri of
    the Turk. The hue of the orbs was the most brilliant of black,
    and, far over them, hung jetty lashes of great length. The
    brows, slightly irregular in outline, had the same tint. The
    "strangeness," however, which I found in the eyes was of a
    nature distinct from the formation, or the color, or the
    brilliancy of the features, and must, after all, be referred to
    the expression. Ah, word of no meaning! behind whose
    vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our ignorance of so
    much of the spiritual. The expression of the eyes of Ligeia!
    How for long hours have I pondered upon it! How have I, through
    the whole of a midsummer night, struggled to fathom it! What
    was it—that something more profound than the well of
    Democritus—which lay far within the pupils of my beloved?
    What was it? I was possessed with a passion to
    discover. Those eyes! those large, those shining, those divine
    orbs! they became to me twin stars of Leda, and I to them
    devoutest of astrologers.
There is no point, among the many incomprehensible anomalies
    of the science of mind, more thrillingly exciting than the
    fact—never, I believe, noticed in the schools—than
    in our endeavors to recall to memory something long forgotten,
    we often find ourselves upon the very verge of
    remembrance, without being able, in the end, to remember. And
    thus how frequently, in my intense scrutiny of Ligeia's eyes,
    have I felt approaching the full knowledge of their
    expression—felt it approaching—yet not quite be
    mine—and so at length entirely depart! And (strange, oh,
    strangest mystery of all!) I found, in the commonest objects of
    the universe, a circle of analogies to that expression. I mean
    to say that, subsequently to the period when Ligeia's beauty
    passed into my spirit, there dwelling as in a shrine, I
    derived, from many existences in the material world, a
    sentiment such as I felt always around, within me, by her large
    and luminous orbs. Yet not the more could I define that
    sentiment, or analyze, or even steadily view it. I recognized
    it, let me repeat, sometimes in the survey of a rapidly growing
    vine—in the contemplation of a moth, a butterfly, a
    chrysalis, a stream of running water. I have felt it in the
    ocean—in the falling of a meteor. I have felt it in the
    glances of unusually aged people. And there are one or two
    stars in heaven (one especially, a star of the sixth magnitude,
    double and changeable, to be found near the large star in Lyra)
    in a telescopic scrutiny of which I have been made aware of the
    feeling. I have been filled with it by certain sounds from
    stringed instruments, and not unfrequently by passages from
    books. Among innumerable other instances, I well remember
    something in a volume of Joseph Glanvill, which (perhaps merely
    from its quaintness—who shall say?) never failed to
    inspire me with the sentiment: "And the will therein lieth,
    which dieth not. Who knoweth the mysteries of the will, with
    its vigor? For God is but a great will pervading all things by
    nature of its intentness. Man doth not yield him to the angels,
    nor unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his
    feeble will."
Length of years and subsequent reflection have enabled me to
    trace, indeed, some remote connection between this passage in
    the English moralist and a portion of the character of Ligeia.
    An intensity in thought, action, or speech was
    possibly, in her, a result, or at least an index, of that
    gigantic volition which, during our long intercourse, failed to
    give other and more immediate evidence of its existence. Of all
    the women whom I have ever known, she, the outwardly calm, the
    ever-placid Ligeia, was the most violently a prey to the
    tumultuous vultures of stern passion. And of such passion I
    could form no estimate, save by the miraculous expansion of
    those eyes which at once so delighted and appalled me,—by
    the almost magical melody, modulation, distinctness, and
    placidity of her very low voice,—and by the fierce energy
    (rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner of
    utterance) of the wild words which she habitually uttered.
I have spoken of the learning of Ligeia: it was
    immense—such as I have never known in woman. In the
    classical tongues was she deeply proficient, and as far as my
    own acquaintance extended in regard to the modern dialects of
    Europe, I have never known her at fault. Indeed upon any theme
    of the most admired because simply the most abstruse of the
    boasted erudition of the Academy, have I ever found
    Ligeia at fault? How singularly—how thrillingly, this one
    point in the nature of my wife has forced itself, at this late
    period only, upon my attention! I said her knowledge was such
    as I have never known in woman—but where breathes the man
    who has traversed, and successfully, all the wide
    areas of moral, physical, and mathematical science? I saw not
    then what I now clearly perceive that the acquisitions of
    Ligeia were gigantic, were astounding; yet I was sufficiently
    aware of her infinite supremacy to resign myself, with a
    child-like confidence, to her guidance through the chaotic
    world of metaphysical investigation at which I was most busily
    occupied during the earlier years of our marriage. With how
    vast a triumph—with how vivid a delight—with how
    much of all that is ethereal in hope did I feel, as
    she bent over me in studies but little sought—but less
    known,—that delicious vista by slow degrees expanding
    before me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, I
    might at length pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too
    divinely precious not to be forbidden.
How poignant, then, must have been the grief with which,
    after some years, I beheld my well-grounded expectations take
    wings to themselves and fly away! Without Ligeia I was but as a
    child groping benighted. Her presence, her readings alone,
    rendered vividly luminous the many mysteries of the
    transcendentalism in which we were immersed. Wanting the
    radiant luster of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew
    duller than Saturnian lead. And now those eyes shone less and
    less frequently upon the pages over which I pored. Ligeia grew
    ill. The wild eyes blazed with a too—too glorious
    effulgence; the pale fingers became of the transparent waxen
    hue of the grave; and the blue veins upon the lofty forehead
    swelled and sank impetuously with the tides of the most gentle
    emotion. I saw that she must die—and I struggled
    desperately in spirit with the grim Azrael. And the struggles
    of the passionate wife were, to my astonishment, even more
    energetic than my own. There had been much in her stern nature
    to impress me with the belief that, to her, death would have
    come without its terrors; but not so. Words are impotent to
    convey any just idea of the fierceness of resistance with which
    she wrestled with the Shadow. I groaned in anguish at the
    pitiable spectacle. I would have soothed—I would have
    reasoned; but in the intensity of her wild desire for
    life—for life—but for life—solace
    and reason were alike the uttermost of folly. Yet not until the
    last instance, amid the most convulsive writhings of her fierce
    spirit, was shaken the external placidity of her demeanor. Her
    voice grew more gentle—grew more low—yet I would
    not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning of the quietly uttered
    words. My brain reeled as I hearkened, entranced, to a melody
    more than mortal—to assumptions and aspirations which
    mortality had never before known.
That she loved me I should not have doubted; and I might
    have been easily aware that, in a bosom such as hers, love
    would have reigned no ordinary passion. But in death only was I
    fully impressed with the strength of her affection. For long
    hours, detaining my hand, would she pour out before me the
    overflowing of a heart whose more than passionate devotion
    amounted to idolatry. How had I deserved to be so blessed by
    such confessions?—how had I deserved to be so cursed with
    the removal of my beloved in the hour of my making them? But
    upon this subject I cannot bear to dilate. Let me say only,
    that in Ligeia's more than womanly abandonment to a love, alas!
    all unmerited, all unworthily bestowed, I at length, recognized
    the principle of her longing, with so wildly earnest a desire,
    for the life which was now fleeing so rapidly away. It is this
    wild longing—it is this eager vehemence of desire for
    life—but for life—that I have no power to
    portray—no utterance capable of expressing.
At high noon of the night in which she departed, beckoning
    me, peremptorily, to her side, she bade me repeat certain
    verses composed by herself not many days before. I obeyed her.
    They were these:—


Lo! 'tis a gala night
Within the lonesome latter years!
An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
In veils, and drowned in tears,
Sit in a theatre, to see
A play of hopes and fears,
While the orchestra breathes fitfully
The music of the spheres.


Mimes, in the form of God on high,
Mutter and mumble low,
And hither and thither fly;
Mere puppets they, who come and go
At bidding of vast formless things
That shift the scenery to and fro,
Flapping from out their condor wings
Invisible Wo!


That motley drama!—oh, be sure
It shall not be forgot!
With its Phantom chased for evermore
By a crowd that seize it not,
Through a circle that ever returneth in
To the self-same spot;
And much of Madness, and more of Sin
And Horror, the soul of the plot!


But see, amid the mimic rout,
A crawling shape intrude!
A blood-red thing that writhes from out
The scenic solitude!
It writhes!—it writhes!—with mortal
            pangs
The mimes become its food,
And the seraphs sob at vermin fangs
In human gore imbued.


Out—out are the lights—out all:
And over each quivering form,
The curtain, a funeral pall,
Comes down with the rush of a
            storm—
And the angels, all pallid and wan,
Uprising, unveiling, affirm
That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
And its hero, the conqueror Worm.


"O God!" half shrieked Ligeia, leaping to her feet and
    extending her arms aloft with a spasmodic movement, as I made
    an end of these lines—"O God! O Divine
    Father!—shall these things be undeviatingly
    so?—shall this conqueror be not once conquered? Are we
    not part and parcel in Thee? Who—who knoweth the
    mysteries of the will with its vigor? Man doth not yield him to
    the angels, nor unto death utterly, save only through
    the weakness of his feeble will."
And now, as if exhausted with emotion, she suffered her
    white arms to fall, and returned solemnly to her bed of death.
    And as she breathed her last sighs, there came mingled with
    them a low murmur from her lips. I bent to them my ear, and
    distinguished, again, the concluding words of the passage in
    Glanvill: "Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto
    death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble
    will."
She died: and I, crushed into the very dust with sorrow,
    could no longer endure the lonely desolation of my dwelling in
    the dim and decaying city by the Rhine. I had no lack of what
    the world calls wealth. Ligeia had brought me far more, very
    far more, than ordinarily falls to the lot of mortals. After a
    few months, therefore, of weary and aimless wandering, I
    purchased and put in some repair, an abbey, which I shall not
    name, in one of the wildest and least frequented portions of
    fair England. The gloomy and dreary grandeur of the building,
    the almost savage aspect of the domain, the many melancholy and
    time-honored memories connected with both, had much in unison
    with the feelings of utter abandonment which had driven me into
    that remote and unsocial region of the country. Yet although
    the external abbey, with its verdant decay hanging about it,
    suffered but little alteration, I gave way, with a child-like
    perversity, and perchance with a faint hope of alleviating my
    sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnificence within.
    For such follies, even in childhood, I had imbibed a taste, and
    now they came back to me as if in the dotage of grief. Alas, I
    feel how much even of incipient madness might have been
    discovered in the gorgeous and fantastic draperies, in the
    solemn carvings of Egypt, in the wild cornices and furniture,
    in the Bedlam patterns of the carpets of tufted gold! I had
    become a bounden slave in the trammels of opium, and my labors
    and my orders had taken a coloring from my dreams. But these
    absurdities I must not pause to detail. Let me speak only of
    that one chamber, ever accursed, whither, in a moment of mental
    alienation, I led from the altar as my bride—as the
    successor of the unforgotten Ligeia—the fair-haired and
    blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion, of Tremaine.
There is no individual portion of the architecture and
    decoration of that bridal chamber which is not visibly before
    me. Where were the souls of the haughty family of the bride,
    when, through thirst of gold, they permitted to pass the
    threshold of an apartment so bedecked, a maiden and a
    daughter so beloved? I have said, that I minutely remember the
    details of the chamber—yet I am sadly forgetful on topics
    of deep moment; and here there was no system, no keeping, in
    the fantastic display to take hold upon the memory. The room
    lay in a high turret of the castellated abbey, was pentagonal
    in shape, and of capacious size. Occupying the whole southern
    face of the pentagonal was the sole window—an immense
    sheet of unbroken glass from Venice—a single pane, and
    tinted of a leaden hue, so that the rays of either the sun or
    moon passing through it, fell with a ghastly luster on the
    objects within. Over the upper portion of this huge window
    extended the trellis-work of an aged vine, which clambered up
    the massy walls of the turret. The ceiling, of gloomy-looking
    oak, was excessively lofty, vaulted, and elaborately fretted
    with the wildest and most grotesque specimens of a semi-Gothic,
    semi-Druidical device. From out the most central recess of this
    melancholy vaulting, depended, by a single chain of gold with
    long links, a huge censer of the same metal, Saracenic in
    pattern, and with many perforations so contrived that there
    writhed in and out of them, as if endued with a serpent
    vitality, a continual succession of parti-colored fires.
Some few ottomans and golden candelabra, of Eastern figure,
    were in various stations about; and there was the couch,
    too—the bridal couch—of an Indian model, and low,
    and sculptured of solid ebony, with a pall-like canopy above.
    In each of the angles of the chamber stood on end a gigantic
    sarcophagus of black granite, from the tombs of the kings over
    against Luxor, with their aged lids full of immemorial
    sculpture. But in the draping of the apartment lay, alas! the
    chief phantasy of all. The lofty walls, gigantic in
    height—even unproportionably so—were hung from
    summit to foot, in vast folds, with a heavy and massive-looking
    tapestry—tapestry of a material which was found alike as
    a carpet on the floor, as a covering for the ottomans and the
    ebony bed, as a canopy for the bed, and as the gorgeous volutes
    of the curtains which partially shaded the window. The material
    was the richest cloth of gold. It was spotted all over, at
    irregular intervals, with arabesque figures, about a foot in
    diameter, and wrought upon the cloth in patterns of the most
    jetty black. But these figures partook of the true character of
    the arabesque only when regarded from a single point of view.
    By a contrivance now common, and indeed traceable to a very
    remote period of antiquity, they were made changeable in
    aspect. To one entering the room, they bore the appearance of
    simple monstrosities; but upon a farther advance, this
    appearance gradually departed; and, step by step, as the
    visitor moved his station in the chamber, he saw himself
    surrounded by an endless succession of the ghastly forms which
    belong to the superstition of the Norman, or arise in the
    guilty slumbers of the monk. The phantasmagoric effect was
    vastly heightened by the artificial introduction of a strong
    continual current of wind behind the draperies—giving a
    hideous and uneasy animation to the whole.
In halls such as these—in a bridal chamber such as
    this—I passed, with the Lady of Tremaine, the unhallowed
    hours of the first month of our marriage—passed them with
    but little disquietude. That my wife dreaded the fierce
    moodiness of my temper—that she shunned me, and loved me
    but little—I could not help perceiving; but it gave me
    rather pleasure than otherwise. I loathed her with a hatred
    belonging more to demon than to man. My memory flew back (oh,
    with what intensity of regret!) to Ligeia, the beloved, the
    august, the beautiful, the entombed. I reveled in recollections
    of her purity, of her wisdom, of her lofty—her ethereal
    nature, of her passionate, her idolatrous love. Now, then, did
    my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the fires of
    her own. In the excitement of my opium dreams (for I was
    habitually fettered in the shackles of the drug), I would call
    aloud upon her name, during the silence of the night, or among
    the sheltered recesses of the glens by day, as if, through the
    wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the consuming ardor of my
    longing for the departed, I could restore her to the pathways
    she had abandoned—ah, could it be
    forever?—upon the earth.
About the commencement of the second month of the marriage,
    the Lady Rowena was attacked with sudden illness, from which
    her recovery was slow. The fever which consumed her rendered
    her nights uneasy; and in her perturbed state of half-slumber,
    she spoke of sounds, and of motions, in and about the chamber
    of the turret, which I concluded had no origin save in the
    distemper of her fancy, or perhaps in the phantasmagoric
    influences of the chamber itself. She became at length
    convalescent—finally, well. Yet but a second more violent
    disorder again threw her upon a bed of suffering; and from this
    attack her frame, at all times feeble, never altogether
    recovered. Her illnesses were, after this epoch, of alarming
    character, and of more alarming recurrence, defying alike the
    knowledge and the great exertions of her physicians. With the
    increase of the chronic disease, which had thus, apparently,
    taken too sure hold upon her constitution to be eradicated by
    human means, I could not fail to observe a similar increase in
    the nervous irritation of her temperament, and in her
    excitability by trivial causes of fear. She spoke again, and
    now more frequently and pertinaciously, of the sounds—of
    the slight sounds—and of the unusual motions among the
    tapestries, to which she had formerly alluded.
One night, near the closing in of September, she pressed
    this distressing subject with more than usual emphasis upon my
    attention. She had just awakened from an unquiet slumber, and I
    had been watching, with feelings half of anxiety, half of vague
    terror, the workings of her emaciated countenance. I sat by the
    side of her ebony bed, upon one of the ottomans of India. She
    partly arose, and spoke, in an earnest low whisper, of sounds
    which she then heard, but which I could not
    hear—of motions which she then saw, but which I
    could not perceive. The wind was rushing hurriedly behind the
    tapestries, and I wished to show her (what, let me confess it,
    I could not all believe) that those almost
    inarticulate breathings, and those very gentle variations of
    the figures upon the wall, were but the natural effects of that
    customary rushing of the wind. But a deadly pallor,
    overspreading her face, had proved to me that my exertions to
    reassure her would be fruitless. She appeared to be fainting,
    and no attendants were within call. I remembered where was
    deposited a decanter of light wine which had been ordered by
    her physicians, and hastened across the chamber to procure it.
    But, as I stepped beneath the light of the censer, two
    circumstances of a startling nature attracted my attention. I
    had felt that some palpable although invisible object had
    passed lightly by my person; and I saw that there lay upon the
    golden carpet, in the very middle of the rich luster thrown
    from the censer, a shadow—a faint, indefinite shadow of
    angelic aspect—such as might be fancied for the shadow of
    a shade. But I was wild with the excitement of an immoderate
    dose of opium, and heeded these things but little, nor spoke of
    them to Rowena. Having found the wine, I recrossed the chamber,
    and poured out a gobletful, which I held to the lips of the
    fainting lady. She had now partially recovered, however, and
    took the vessel herself, while I sank upon an ottoman near me,
    with my eyes fastened upon her person. It was then that I
    became distinctly aware of a gentle footfall upon the carpet,
    and near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as Rowena was
    in the act of raising the wine to her lips, I saw, or may have
    dreamed that I saw, fall within the goblet, as if from some
    invisible spring in the atmosphere of the room, three or four
    large drops of a brilliant and ruby colored fluid. If this I
    saw—not so Rowena. She swallowed the wine unhesitatingly,
    and I forebore to speak to her of a circumstance which must,
    after all, I considered, have been but the suggestion of a
    vivid imagination, rendered morbidly active by the terror of
    the lady, by the opium, and by the hour.
Yet I cannot 
    conceal it from my own perception that, immediately
    subsequent to the fall of the ruby drops, a rapid change for
    the worse took place in the disorder of my wife; so that, on
    the third subsequent night, the hands of her menials prepared
    her for the tomb, and on the fourth, I sat alone, with her
    shrouded body, in that fantastic chamber which had received her
    as my bride. Wild visions, opium-engendered, flitted,
    shadow-like, before me. I gazed with unquiet eye upon the
    sarcophagi in the angles of the room, upon the varying figures
    of the drapery, and upon the writhing of the parti-colored
    fires in the censer overhead. My eyes then fell, as I called to
    mind the circumstances of a former night, to the spot beneath
    the glare of the censer where I had seen the faint traces of
    the shadow. It was there, however, no longer; and breathing
    with greater freedom, I turned my glances to the pallid and
    rigid figure upon the bed. Then rushed upon me a thousand
    memories of Ligeia—and then came back upon my heart, with
    the turbulent violence of a flood, the whole of that
    unutterable woe with which I had regarded her thus
    enshrouded. The night waned; and still, with a bosom full of
    bitter thoughts of the one only and supremely beloved, I
    remained gazing upon the body of Rowena.
It might have been midnight, or perhaps earlier, or later,
    for I had taken no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but
    very distinct, startled me from my revery. I felt that
    it came from the bed of ebony—the bed of death. I
    listened in an agony of superstitious terror—but there
    was no repetition of the sound. I strained my vision to detect
    any motion in the corpse—but there was not the slightest
    perceptible. Yet I could not have been deceived. I had
    heard the noise, however faint, and my soul was awakened within
    me. I resolutely and perseveringly kept my attention riveted
    upon the body. Many minutes elapsed before any circumstance
    occurred tending to throw light upon the mystery. At length it
    became evident that a slight, a very feeble, and barely
    noticeable tinge of color had flushed up within the cheeks, and
    along the sunken small veins of the eyelids. Through a species
    of unutterable horror and awe, for which the language of
    mortality has no sufficiently energetic expression, I felt my
    heart cease to beat, my limbs grow rigid where I sat. Yet a
    sense of duty finally operated to restore my self-possession. I
    could no longer doubt that we had been precipitate in our
    preparations—that Rowena still lived. It was necessary
    that some immediate exertion be made; yet the turret was
    altogether apart from the portion of the abbey tenanted by the
    servants—there were none within call—I had no means
    of summoning them to my aid without leaving the room for many
    minutes—and this I could not venture to do. I therefore
    struggled alone in my endeavors to call back the spirit still
    hovering. In a short period it was certain, however, that a
    relapse had taken place; the color disappeared from both eyelid
    and cheek, leaving a wanness even more than that of marble; the
    lips became doubly shriveled and pinched up in the ghastly
    expression of death; a repulsive clamminess and coldness
    overspread rapidly the surface of the body; and all the usual
    rigorous stiffness immediately supervened. I fell back with a
    shudder upon the couch from which I had been so startlingly
    aroused, and again gave myself up to passionate waking visions
    of Ligeia.
An hour thus elapsed, when (could it be possible?) I was a
    second time aware of some vague sound issuing from the region
    of the bed. I listened—in extremity of horror. The sound
    came again—it was a sigh. Rushing to the corpse, I
    saw—distinctly saw—a tremor upon the lips. In a
    minute afterward they relaxed, disclosing a bright line of the
    pearly teeth. Amazement now struggled in my bosom with the
    profound awe which had hitherto reigned there alone. I felt
    that my vision grew dim, that my reason wandered; and it was
    only by a violent effort that I at length succeeded in nerving
    myself to the task which duty thus once more had pointed out.
    There was now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the
    cheek and throat; a perceptible warmth pervaded the whole
    frame; there was even a slight pulsation at the heart. The lady
    lived; and with redoubled ardor I betook myself to the
    task of restoration. I chafed and bathed the temples and the
    hands and used every exertion which experience, and no little
    medical reading, could suggest. But in vain. Suddenly, the
    color fled, the pulsation ceased, the lips resumed the
    expression of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole
    body took upon itself the icy chilliness, the livid hue, the
    intense rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsome
    peculiarities of that which has been, for many days, a tenant
    of the tomb.
And again I sunk into visions of Ligeia—and again
    (what marvel that I shudder while I write?), again
    there reached my ears a low sob from the region of the ebony
    bed. But why shall I minutely detail the unspeakable horrors of
    that night? Why shall I pause to relate how, time after time,
    until near the period of the gray dawn, this hideous drama of
    revivification was repeated; how each terrific relapse was only
    into a sterner and apparently more irredeemable death; how each
    agony wore the aspect of a struggle with some invisible foe;
    and how each struggle was succeeded by I know not what of wild
    change in the personal appearance of the corpse? Let me hurry
    to a conclusion.
The greater part of the fearful night had worn away, and she
    who had been dead once again stirred—and now more
    vigorously than hitherto, although arousing from a dissolution
    more appalling in its utter hopelessness than any. I had long
    ceased to struggle or to move, and remained sitting rigidly
    upon the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl of violent
    emotions, of which extreme awe was perhaps the least terrible,
    the least consuming. The corpse, I repeat, stirred, and now
    more vigorously than before. The hues of life flushed up with
    unwonted energy into the countenance—the limbs
    relaxed—and, save that the eyelids were yet pressed
    heavily together, and that the bandages and draperies of the
    grave still imparted their charnel character to the figure, I
    might have dreamed that Rowena had indeed shaken off, utterly,
    the fetters of Death. But if this idea was not, even then,
    altogether adopted, I could at least doubt no longer, when,
    arising from the bed, tottering, with feeble steps, with closed
    eyes, and with the manner of one bewildered in a dream, the
    thing that was enshrouded advanced boldly and palpably into the
    middle of the apartment.
I trembled not—I stirred not—for a crowd of
    unutterable fancies connected with the air, the stature, the
    demeanor, of the figure, rushing hurriedly through my brain,
    had paralyzed—had chilled me into stone. I stirred
    not—but gazed upon the apparition. There was a mad
    disorder in my thoughts—a tumult unappeasable. Could it,
    indeed, be the living Rowena who confronted me? Could
    it, indeed, be Rowena at all—the fair-haired,
    the blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion of Tremaine? Why,
    why should I doubt it? The bandage lay heavily about
    the mouth—but then might it not be the mouth of the
    breathing Lady of Tremaine? And the cheeks—there were the
    roses as in her noon of life—yes, these might indeed be
    the fair cheeks of the living Lady of Tremaine. And the chin,
    with its dimples, as in health, might it not be hers?—but
    had she then grown taller since her malady? What
    inexpressible madness seized me with that thought? One bound,
    and I had reached her feet! Shrinking from my touch, she let
    fall from her head, unloosened, the ghastly cerements which had
    confined it, and there streamed forth into the rushing
    atmosphere of the chamber huge masses of long and disheveled
    hair; it was blacker than the raven wings of midnight.
    And now slowly opened the eyes of the figure which
    stood before me. "Here then, at least," I shrieked aloud, "can
    I never—can I never be mistaken—these are the full,
    and the black, and the wild eyes—of my lost love—of
    the Lady—of the LADY LIGEIA."

The Haunted Orchard
By RICHARD LE GALLIENNE

From Harper's Magazine, January, 1912. By
        permission of Harper and Brothers and Richard Le
        Gallienne.

Spring was once more in the world. As she sang to herself in
    the faraway woodlands her voice reached even the ears of the
    city, weary with the long winter. Daffodils flowered at the
    entrances to the Subway, furniture removing vans blocked the
    side streets, children clustered like blossoms on the
    doorsteps, the open cars were running, and the cry of the "cash
    clo'" man was once more heard in the land.
Yes, it was the spring, and the city dreamed wistfully of
    lilacs and the dewy piping of birds in gnarled old apple-trees,
    of dogwood lighting up with sudden silver the thickening woods,
    of water-plants unfolding their glossy scrolls in pools of
    morning freshness.
On Sunday mornings, the outbound trains were thronged with
    eager pilgrims, hastening out of the city, to behold once more
    the ancient marvel of the spring; and, on Sunday evenings, the
    railway termini were aflower with banners of blossom from
    rifled woodland and orchard carried in the hands of the
    returning pilgrims, whose eyes still shone with the spring
    magic, in whose ears still sang the fairy music.
And as I beheld these signs of the vernal equinox I knew
    that I, too, must follow the music, forsake awhile the
    beautiful siren we call the city, and in the green silences
    meet once more my sweetheart Solitude.
As the train drew out of the Grand Central, I hummed to
    myself,


"I've a neater, sweeter maiden, in a greener,
            cleaner land"


and so I said good-by to the city, and went
    forth with beating heart to meet the spring.
I had been told of an almost forgotten corner on the south
    coast of Connecticut, where the spring and I could live in an
    inviolate loneliness—a place uninhabited save by birds
    and blossoms, woods and thick grass, and an occasional silent
    farmer, and pervaded by the breath and shimmer of the
    Sound.
Nor had rumor lied, for when the train set me down at my
    destination I stepped out into the most wonderful green hush, a
    leafy Sabbath silence through which the very train, as it went
    farther on its way, seemed to steal as noiselessly as possible
    for fear of breaking the spell.
After a winter in the town, to be dropped thus suddenly into
    the intense quiet of the country-side makes an almost ghostly
    impression upon one, as of an enchanted silence, a silence that
    listens and watches but never speaks, finger on lip. There is a
    spectral quality about everything upon which the eye falls: the
    woods, like great green clouds, the wayside flowers, the still
    farm-houses half lost in orchard bloom—all seem to exist
    in a dream. Everything is so still, everything so
    supernaturally green. Nothing moves or talks, except the gentle
    susurrus of the spring wind swaying the young buds high up in
    the quiet sky, or a bird now and again, or a little brook
    singing softly to itself among the crowding rushes.
Though, from the houses one notes here and there, there are
    evidently human inhabitants of this green silence, none are to
    be seen. I have often wondered where the countryfolk hide
    themselves, as I have walked hour after hour, past farm and
    croft and lonely door-yards, and never caught sight of a human
    face. If you should want to ask the way, a farmer is as shy as
    a squirrel, and if you knock at a farm-house door, all is as
    silent as a rabbit-warren.
As I walked along in the enchanted stillness, I came at
    length to a quaint old farm-house—"old Colonial" in its
    architecture—embowered in white lilacs, and surrounded by
    an orchard of ancient apple-trees which cast a rich shade on
    the deep spring grass. The orchard had the impressiveness of
    those old religious groves, dedicated to the strange worship of
    sylvan gods, gods to be found now only in Horace or Catullus,
    and in the hearts of young poets to whom the beautiful antique
    Latin is still dear.
The old house seemed already the abode of Solitude. As I
    lifted the latch of the white gate and walked across the
    forgotten grass, and up on to the veranda already festooned
    with wistaria, and looked into the window, I saw Solitude
    sitting by an old piano, on which no composer later than Bach
    had ever been played.
In other words, the house was empty; and going round to the
    back, where old barns and stables leaned together as if falling
    asleep, I found a broken pane, and so climbed in and walked
    through the echoing rooms. The house was very lonely. Evidently
    no one had lived in it for a long time. Yet it was all ready
    for some occupant, for whom it seemed to be waiting. Quaint old
    four-poster bedsteads stood in three rooms—dimity
    curtains and spotless linen—old oak chests and mahogany
    presses; and, opening drawers in Chippendale sideboards, I came
    upon beautiful frail old silver and exquisite china that set me
    thinking of a beautiful grandmother of mine, made out of old
    lace and laughing wrinkles and mischievous old blue eyes.
There was one little room that particularly interested me, a
    tiny bedroom all white, and at the window the red roses were
    already in bud. But what caught my eye with peculiar sympathy
    was a small bookcase, in which were some twenty or thirty
    volumes, wearing the same forgotten expression—forgotten
    and yet cared for—which lay like a kind of memorial charm
    upon everything in the old house. Yes, everything seemed
    forgotten and yet everything, curiously—even
    religiously—remembered. I took out book after book from
    the shelves, once or twice flowers fell out from the
    pages—and I caught sight of a delicate handwriting here
    and there and frail markings. It was evidently the little
    intimate library of a young girl. What surprised me most was to
    find that quite half the books were in French—French
    poets and French romancers: a charming, very rare edition of
    Ronsard, a beautifully printed edition of Alfred de Musset, and
    a copy of Théophile Gautier's Mademoiselle de
    Maupin. How did these exotic books come to be there alone
    in a deserted New England farm-house?
This question was to be answered later in a strange way.
    Meanwhile I had fallen in love with the sad, old, silent place,
    and as I closed the white gate and was once more on the road, I
    looked about for someone who could tell me whether or not this
    house of ghosts might be rented for the summer by a
    comparatively living man.
I was referred to a fine old New England farm-house shining
    white through the trees a quarter of a mile away. There I met
    an ancient couple, a typical New England farmer and his wife;
    the old man, lean, chin-bearded, with keen gray eyes flickering
    occasionally with a shrewd humor, the old lady with a kindly
    old face of the withered-apple type and ruddy. They were
    evidently prosperous people, but their minds—for some
    reason I could not at the moment divine—seemed to be
    divided between their New England desire to drive a hard
    bargain and their disinclination to let the house at all.
Over and over again they spoke of the loneliness of the
    place. They feared I would find it very lonely. No one had
    lived in it for a long time, and so on. It seemed to me that
    afterwards I understood their curious hesitation, but at the
    moment only regarded it as a part of the circuitous New England
    method of bargaining. At all events, the rent I offered finally
    overcame their disinclination, whatever its cause, and so I
    came into possession—for four months—of that silent
    old house, with the white lilacs, and the drowsy barns, and the
    old piano, and the strange orchard; and, as the summer came on,
    and the year changed its name from May to June, I used to lie
    under the apple-trees in the afternoons, dreamily reading some
    old book, and through half-sleepy eyelids watching the silken
    shimmer of the Sound.
I had lived in the old house for about a month, when one
    afternoon a strange thing happened to me. I remember the date
    well. It was the afternoon of Tuesday, June 13th. I was
    reading, or rather dipping here and there, in Burton's
    Anatomy of Melancholy. As I read, I remember that a
    little unripe apple, with a petal or two of blossom still
    clinging to it, fell upon the old yellow page. Then I suppose I
    must have fallen into a dream, though it seemed to me that both
    my eyes and my ears were wide open, for I suddenly became aware
    of a beautiful young voice singing very softly somewhere among
    the leaves. The singing was very frail, almost imperceptible,
    as though it came out of the air. It came and went fitfully,
    like the elusive fragrance of sweetbrier—as though a girl
    was walking to and fro, dreamily humming to herself in the
    still afternoon. Yet there was no one to be seen. The orchard
    had never seemed more lonely. And another fact that struck me
    as strange was that the words that floated to me out of the
    aerial music were French, half sad, half gay snatches of some
    long-dead singer of old France, I looked about for the origin
    of the sweet sounds, but in vain. Could it be the birds that
    were singing in French in this strange orchard? Presently the
    voice seemed to come quite close to me, so near that it might
    have been the voice of a dryad singing to me out of the tree
    against which I was leaning. And this time I distinctly caught
    the words of the sad little song:


"Chante, rossignol, chante,
Toi qui as le cœur gai;
Tu as le cœur à rire,
Moi, je l'ai-t-à pleurer."


But, though the voice was at my shoulder, I could see no
    one, and then the singing stopped with what sounded like a sob;
    and a moment or two later I seemed to hear a sound of sobbing
    far down the orchard. Then there followed silence, and I was
    left to ponder on the strange occurrence. Naturally, I decided
    that it was just a day-dream between sleeping and waking over
    the pages of an old book; yet when next day and the day after
    the invisible singer was in the orchard again, I could not be
    satisfied with such mere matter-of-fact explanation.


"A la claire fontaine,"


went the voice to and fro through the thick
    orchard boughs,


"M'en allant promener,
J'ai trouvé l'eau si belle
Que je m'y suis baigné,
Lui y a longtemps que je t'aime,
Jamais je ne t'oubliai."


It was certainly uncanny to hear that voice going to and fro
    the orchard, there somewhere amid the bright sun-dazzled
    boughs—yet not a human creature to be seen—not
    another house even within half a mile. The most materialistic
    mind could hardly but conclude that here was something "not
    dreamed of in our philosophy." It seemed to me that the only
    reasonable explanation was the entirely irrational
    one—that my orchard was haunted: haunted by some
    beautiful young spirit, with some sorrow of lost joy that would
    not let her sleep quietly in her grave.
And next day I had a curious confirmation of my theory. Once
    more I was lying under my favorite apple-tree, half reading and
    half watching the Sound, lulled into a dream by the whir of
    insects and the spices called up from the earth by the hot sun.
    As I bent over the page, I suddenly had the startling
    impression that someone was leaning over my shoulder and
    reading with me, and that a girl's long hair was falling over
    me down on to the page. The book was the Ronsard I had found in
    the little bedroom. I turned, but again there was nothing
    there. Yet this time I knew that I had not been dreaming, and I
    cried out:
"Poor child! tell me of your grief—that I may help
    your sorrowing heart to rest."
But, of course, there was no answer; yet that night I
    dreamed a strange dream. I thought I was in the orchard again
    in the afternoon and once again heard the strange
    singing—but this time, as I looked up, the singer was no
    longer invisible. Coming toward me was a young girl with
    wonderful blue eyes filled with tears and gold hair that fell
    to her waist. She wore a straight, white robe that might have
    been a shroud or a bridal dress. She appeared not to see me,
    though she came directly to the tree where I was sitting. And
    there she knelt and buried her face in the grass and sobbed as
    if her heart would break. Her long hair fell over her like a
    mantle, and in my dream I stroked it pityingly and murmured
    words of comfort for a sorrow I did not understand.... Then I
    woke suddenly as one does from dreams. The moon was shining
    brightly into the room. Rising from my bed, I looked out into
    the orchard. It was almost as bright as day. I could plainly
    see the tree of which I had been dreaming, and then a fantastic
    notion possessed me. Slipping on my clothes, I went out into
    one of the old barns and found a spade. Then I went to the tree
    where I had seen the girl weeping in my dream and dug down at
    its foot.
I had dug little more than a foot when my spade struck upon
    some hard substance, and in a few more moments I had uncovered
    and exhumed a small box, which, on examination, proved to be
    one of those pretty old-fashioned Chippendale work-boxes used
    by our grandmothers to keep their thimbles and needles in,
    their reels of cotton and skeins of silk. After smoothing down
    the little grave in which I had found it, I carried the box
    into the house, and under the lamplight examined its
    contents.
Then at once I understood why that sad young spirit went to
    and fro the orchard singing those little French songs—for
    the treasure-trove I had found under the apple-tree, the buried
    treasure of an unquiet, suffering soul, proved to be a number
    of love-letters written mostly in French in a very picturesque
    hand—letters, too, written but some five or six years
    before. Perhaps I should not have read them—yet I read
    them with such reverence for the beautiful, impassioned love
    that animated them, and literally made them "smell sweet and
    blossom in the dust," that I felt I had the sanction of the
    dead to make myself the confidant of their story. Among the
    letters were little songs, two of which I had heard the strange
    young voice singing in the orchard, and, of course, there were
    many withered flowers and such like remembrances of bygone
    rapture.
Not that night could I make out all the story, though it was
    not difficult to define its essential tragedy, and later on a
    gossip in the neighborhood and a headstone in the churchyard
    told me the rest. The unquiet young soul that had sung so
    wistfully to and fro the orchard was my landlord's daughter.
    She was the only child of her parents, a beautiful, willful
    girl, exotically unlike those from whom she was sprung and
    among whom she lived with a disdainful air of exile. She was,
    as a child, a little creature of fairy fancies, and as she grew
    up it was plain to her father and mother that she had come from
    another world than theirs. To them she seemed like a child in
    an old fairy-tale strangely found on his hearth by some
    shepherd as he returns from the fields at evening—a
    little fairy girl swaddled in fine linen, and dowered with a
    mysterious bag of gold.
Soon she developed delicate spiritual needs to which her
    simple parents were strangers. From long truancies in the woods
    she would come home laden with mysterious flowers, and soon she
    came to ask for books and pictures and music, of which the poor
    souls that had given her birth had never heard. Finally she had
    her way, and went to study at a certain fashionable college;
    and there the brief romance of her life began. There she met a
    romantic young Frenchman who had read Ronsard to her and
    written her those picturesque letters I had found in the old
    mahogany work-box. And after a while the young Frenchman had
    gone back to France, and the letters had ceased. Month by month
    went by, and at length one day, as she sat wistful at the
    window, looking out at the foolish sunlit road, a message came.
    He was dead. That headstone in the village churchyard tells the
    rest. She was very young to die—scarcely nineteen years;
    and the dead who have died young, with all their hopes and
    dreams still like unfolded buds within their hearts, do not
    rest so quietly in the grave as those who have gone through the
    long day from morning until evening and are only too glad to
    sleep.

Next day I took the little box to a quiet corner of the
    orchard, and made a little pyre of fragrant boughs—for so
    I interpreted the wish of that young, unquiet spirit—and
    the beautiful words are now safe, taken up again into the
    aerial spaces from which they came.
But since then the birds sing no more little French songs in
    my old orchard.

The Bowmen
By ARTHUR MACHEN

From The Bowmen, by Arthur Machen. Published in
        England by Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co.,
        Ltd., and in America by G.P. Putnam's Sons. By permission
        of the publishers and Arthur Machen.

It was during the Retreat of the Eighty Thousand, and the
    authority of the Censorship is sufficient excuse for not being
    more explicit. But it was on the most awful day of that awful
    time, on the day when ruin and disaster came so near that their
    shadow fell over London far away; and, without any certain
    news, the hearts of men failed within them and grew faint; as
    if the agony of the army in the battlefield had entered into
    their souls.
On this dreadful day, then, when three hundred thousand men
    in arms with all their artillery swelled like a flood against
    the little English company, there was one point above all other
    points in our battle line that was for a time in awful danger,
    not merely of defeat, but of utter annihilation. With the
    permission of the Censorship and of the military expert, this
    corner may, perhaps, be described as a salient, and if this
    angle were crushed and broken, then the English force as a
    whole would be shattered, the Allied left would be turned, and
    Sedan would inevitably follow.
All the morning the German guns had thundered and shrieked
    against this corner, and against the thousand or so of men who
    held it. The men joked at the shells, and found funny names for
    them, and had bets about them, and greeted them with scraps of
    music-hall songs. But the shells came on and burst, and tore
    good Englishmen limb from limb, and tore brother from brother,
    and as the heat of the day increased so did the fury of that
    terrific cannonade. There was no help, it seemed. The English
    artillery was good, but there was not nearly enough of it; it
    was being steadily battered into scrap iron.
There comes a moment in a storm at sea when people say to
    one another, "It is at its worst; it can blow no harder," and
    then there is a blast ten times more fierce than any before it.
    So it was in these British trenches.
There were no stouter hearts in the whole world than the
    hearts of these men; but even they were appalled as this
    seven-times-heated hell of the German cannonade fell upon them
    and overwhelmed them and destroyed them. And at this very
    moment they saw from their trenches that a tremendous host was
    moving against their lines. Five hundred of the thousand
    remained, and as far as they could see the German infantry was
    pressing on against them, column upon column, a gray world of
    men, ten thousand of them, as it appeared afterwards.
There was no hope at all. They shook hands, some of them.
    One man improvised a new version of the battle-song, "Good-by,
    good-by to Tipperary," ending with "And we shan't get there."
    And they all went on firing steadily. The officer pointed out
    that such an opportunity for high-class fancy shooting might
    never occur again; the Tipperary humorist asked, "What price
    Sidney Street?" And the few machine guns did their best. But
    everybody knew it was of no use. The dead gray bodies lay in
    companies and battalions, as others came on and on and on, and
    they swarmed and stirred, and advanced from beyond and
    beyond.
"World without end. Amen," said one of the British soldiers
    with some irrelevance as he took aim and fired. And then he
    remembered—he says he cannot think why or
    wherefore—a queer vegetarian restaurant in London where
    he had once or twice eaten eccentric dishes of cutlets made of
    lentils and nuts that pretended to be steak. On all the plates
    in this restaurant there was printed a figure of St. George in
    blue, with the motto, "Adsit Anglis Sanctus
    Georgius"—"May St. George be a present help to the
    English." This soldier happened to know Latin and other useless
    things, and now, as he fired at his man in the gray advancing
    mass—three hundred yards away—he uttered the pious
    vegetarian motto. He went on firing to the end, and at last
    Bill on his right had to clout him cheerfully over the head to
    make him stop, pointing out as he did so that the King's
    ammunition cost money and was not lightly to be wasted in
    drilling funny patterns into dead Germans.
For as the Latin scholar uttered his invocation he felt
    something between a shudder and an electric shock pass through
    his body. The roar of the battle died down in his ears to a
    gentle murmur; instead of it, he says, he heard a great voice
    and a shout louder than a thunder-peal crying, "Array, array,
    array!"
His heart grew hot as a burning coal, it grew cold as ice
    within him, as it seemed to him that a tumult of voices
    answered to his summons. He heard, or seemed to hear, thousands
    shouting: "St. George! St. George!"
"Ha! Messire, ha! sweet Saint, grant us good
    deliverance!"
"St. George for merry England!"
"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur St. George, succor us!"
"Ha! St. George! Ha! St. George! a long bow and a strong
    bow."
"Heaven's Knight, aid us!"
And as the soldier heard these voices he saw before him,
    beyond the trench, a long line of shapes, with a shining about
    them. They were like men who drew the bow, and with another
    shout, their cloud of arrows flew singing and tingling through
    the air towards the German hosts.
The other men in the trench were firing all the while. They
    had no hope; but they aimed just as if they had been shooting
    at Bisley.
Suddenly one of them lifted up his voice in the plainest
    English.
"Gawd help us!" he bellowed to the man next to him, "but
    we're blooming marvels! Look at those gray ... gentlemen, look
    at them! D'ye see them? They're not going down in dozens nor in
    'undreds; it's thousands, it is. Look! look! there's a regiment
    gone while I'm talking to ye."
"Shut it!" the other soldier bellowed, taking aim, "what are
    ye gassing about?"
But he gulped with astonishment even as he spoke, for,
    indeed, the gray men were falling by the thousands. The English
    could hear the guttural scream of the German officers, the
    crackle of their revolvers as they shot the reluctant; and
    still line after line crashed to the earth.
All the while the Latin-bred soldier heard the cry:
"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur, dear Saint, quick to our aid!
    St. George help us!"
"High Chevalier, defend us!"
The singing arrows fled so swift and thick that they
    darkened the air, the heathen horde melted from before
    them.
"More machine guns!" Bill yelled to Tom.
"Don't hear them," Tom yelled back.
"But, thank God, anyway; they've got it in the neck."
In fact, there were ten thousand dead German soldiers left
    before that salient of the English army, and consequently there
    was no Sedan. In Germany, a country ruled by scientific
    principles, the Great General Staff decided that the
    contemptible English must have employed shells containing an
    unknown gas of a poisonous nature, as no wounds were
    discernible on the bodies of the dead German soldiers. But the
    man who knew what nuts tasted like when they called themselves
    steak knew also that St. George had brought his Agincourt
    Bowmen to help the English.

A Ghost
By GUY DE MAUPASSANT

Translated for this volume by M. Charles Sommer.

We were speaking of sequestration, alluding to a recent
    lawsuit. It was at the close of a friendly evening in a very
    old mansion in the Rue de Grenelle, and each of the guests had
    a story to tell, which he assured us was true.
Then the old Marquis de la Tour-Samuel, eighty-two years of
    age, rose and came forward to lean on the mantelpiece. He told
    the following story in his slightly quavering voice.
"I, also, have witnessed a strange thing—so strange
    that it has been the nightmare of my life. It happened
    fifty-six years ago, and yet there is not a month when I do not
    see it again in my dreams. From that day I have borne a mark, a
    stamp of fear,—do you understand?
"Yes, for ten minutes I was a prey to terror, in such a way
    that ever since a constant dread has remained in my soul.
    Unexpected sounds chill me to the heart; objects which I can
    ill distinguish in the evening shadows make me long to flee. I
    am afraid at night.
"No! I would not have owned such a thing before reaching my
    present age. But now I may tell everything. One may fear
    imaginary dangers at eighty-two years old. But before actual
    danger I have never turned back, mesdames.
"That affair so upset my mind, filled me with such a deep,
    mysterious unrest that I never could tell it. I kept it in that
    inmost part, that corner where we conceal our sad, our shameful
    secrets, all the weaknesses of our life which cannot be
    confessed.
"I will tell you that strange happening just as it took
    place, with no attempt to explain it. Unless I went mad for one
    short hour it must be explainable, though. Yet I was not mad,
    and I will prove it to you. Imagine what you will. Here are the
    simple facts:
"It was in 1827, in July. I was quartered with my regiment
    in Rouen.
"One day, as I was strolling on the quay, I came across a
    man I believed I recognized, though I could not place him with
    certainty. I instinctively went more slowly, ready to pause.
    The stranger saw my impulse, looked at me, and fell into my
    arms.
"It was a friend of my younger days, of whom I had been very
    fond. He seemed to have become half a century older in the five
    years since I had seen him. His hair was white, and he stooped
    in his walk, as if he were exhausted. He understood my
    amazement and told me the story of his life.
"A terrible event had broken him down. He had fallen madly
    in love with a young girl and married her in a kind of
    dreamlike ecstasy. After a year of unalloyed bliss and
    unexhausted passion, she had died suddenly of heart disease, no
    doubt killed by love itself.
"He had left the country on the very day of her funeral, and
    had come to live in his hotel at Rouen. He remained there,
    solitary and desperate, grief slowly mining him, so wretched
    that he constantly thought of suicide.
"'As I thus came across you again,' he said, 'I shall ask a
    great favor of you. I want you to go to my château and
    get some papers I urgently need. They are in the writing-desk
    of my room, of our room. I cannot send a servant or a
    lawyer, as the errand must be kept private. I want absolute
    silence.
"'I shall give you the key of the room, which I locked
    carefully myself before leaving, and the key to the
    writing-desk. I shall also give you a note for the gardener,
    who will let you in.
"'Come to breakfast with me to-morrow, and we'll talk the
    matter over.'
"I promised to render him that slight service. It would mean
    but a pleasant excursion for me, his home not being more than
    twenty-five miles from Rouen. I could go there in an hour on
    horseback.
"At ten o'clock the next day I was with him. We breakfasted
    alone together, yet he did not utter more than twenty words. He
    asked me to excuse him. The thought that I was going to visit
    the room where his happiness lay shattered, upset him, he said.
    Indeed, he seemed perturbed, worried, as if some mysterious
    struggle were taking place in his soul.
"At last he explained exactly what I was to do. It was very
    simple. I was to take two packages of letters and some papers,
    locked in the first drawer at the right of the desk of which I
    had the key. He added:
"'I need not ask you not to glance at them.'
"I was almost hurt by his words, and told him so, rather
    sharply. He stammered:
"'Forgive me. I suffer so much!'
"And tears came to his eyes.
"I left about one o'clock to accomplish my errand.
"The day was radiant, and I rushed through the meadows,
    listening to the song of the larks, and the rhythmical beat of
    my sword on my riding-boots.
"Then I entered the forest, and I set my horse to walking.
    Branches of the trees softly caressed my face, and now and then
    I would catch a leaf between my teeth and bite it with avidity,
    full of the joy of life, such as fills you without reason, with
    a tumultuous happiness almost indefinable, a kind of magical
    strength.
"As I neared the house I took out the letter for the
    gardener, and noted with surprise that it was sealed. I was so
    amazed and so annoyed that I almost turned back without
    fulfilling my mission. Then I thought that I should thus
    display over-sensitiveness and bad taste. My friend might have
    sealed it unconsciously, worried as he was.
"The manor looked as though it had been deserted the last
    twenty years. The gate, wide-open and rotten, held, one
    wondered how. Grass filled the paths; you could not tell the
    flower-beds from the lawn.
"At the noise I made kicking a shutter, an old man came out
    from a side-door and was apparently amazed to see me there. I
    dismounted from my horse and gave him the letter. He read it
    once or twice, turned it over, looked at me with suspicion, and
    asked:
"'Well, what do you want?'
"I answered sharply:
"'You must know it as you have read your master's orders. I
    want to get in the house.'
"He appeared overwhelmed. He said:
"'So—you are going in—in his room?'
"I was getting impatient.
"'Parbleu! Do you intend to question me, by
    chance?'
"He stammered:
"'No—monsieur—only—it has not been opened
    since—since the death. If you will wait five minutes, I
    will go in to see whether——'
"I interrupted angrily:
"'See here, are you joking? You can't go in that room, as I
    have the key!'
"He no longer knew what to say.
"'Then, monsieur, I will show you the way.'
"'Show me the stairs and leave me alone. I can find it
    without your help.'
"'But—still—monsieur——'
"Then I lost my temper.
"'Now be quiet! Else you'll be sorry!'
"I roughly pushed him aside and went into the house.
"I first went through the kitchen, then crossed two small
    rooms occupied by the man and his wife. From there I stepped
    into a large hall. I went up the stairs, and I recognized the
    door my friend had described to me.
"I opened it with ease and went in.
"The room was so dark that at first I could not distinguish
    anything. I paused, arrested by that moldy and stale odor
    peculiar to deserted and condemned rooms, of dead rooms. Then
    gradually my eyes grew accustomed to the gloom, and I saw
    rather clearly a great room in disorder, a bed without sheets
    having still its mattresses and pillows, one of which bore the
    deep print of an elbow or a head, as if someone had just been
    resting on it.
"The chairs seemed all in confusion. I noticed that a door,
    probably that of a closet, had remained ajar.
"I first went to the window and opened it to get some light,
    but the hinges of the outside shutters were so rusted that I
    could not loosen them.
"I even tried to break them with my sword, but did not
    succeed. As those fruitless attempts irritated me, and as my
    eyes were by now adjusted to the dim light, I gave up hope of
    getting more light and went toward the writing-desk.
"I sat down in an arm-chair, folded back the top, and opened
    the drawer. It was full to the edge. I needed but three
    packages, which I knew how to distinguish, and I started
    looking for them.
"I was straining my eyes to decipher the inscriptions, when
    I thought I heard, or rather felt a rustle behind me. I took no
    notice, thinking a draft had lifted some curtain. But a minute
    later, another movement, almost indistinct, sent a disagreeable
    little shiver over my skin. It was so ridiculous to be moved
    thus even so slightly, that I would not turn round, being
    ashamed. I had just discovered the second package I needed, and
    was on the point of reaching for the third, when a great and
    sorrowful sigh, close to my shoulder, made me give a mad leap
    two yards away. In my spring I had turned round, my hand on the
    hilt of my sword, and surely had I not felt that, I should have
    fled like a coward.
"A tall woman, dressed in white, was facing me, standing
    behind the chair in which I had sat a second before.
"Such a shudder ran through me that I almost fell back! Oh,
    no one who has not felt them can understand those gruesome and
    ridiculous terrors! The soul melts; your heart seems to stop;
    your whole body becomes limp as a sponge, and your innermost
    parts seem collapsing.
"I do not believe in ghosts; and yet I broke down before the
    hideous fear of the dead; and I suffered, oh, I suffered more
    in a few minutes, in the irresistible anguish of supernatural
    dread, than I have suffered in all the rest of my life!
"If she had not spoken, I might have died. But she did
    speak; she spoke in a soft and plaintive voice which set my
    nerves vibrating. I could not say that I regained my
    self-control. No, I was past knowing what I did; but the kind
    of pride I have in me, as well as a military pride, helped me
    to maintain, almost in spite of myself, an honorable
    countenance. I was making a pose, a pose for myself, and for
    her, for her, whatever she was, woman, or phantom. I realized
    this later, for at the time of the apparition, I could think of
    nothing. I was afraid.
"She said:
"'Oh, you can be of great help to me, monsieur!'
"I tried to answer, but I was unable to utter one word. A
    vague sound came from my throat.
"She continued:
"'Will you? You can save me, cure me. I suffer terribly. I
    always suffer. I suffer, oh, I suffer!'
"And she sat down gently in my chair. She looked at me.
"'Will you?'
"I nodded my head, being still paralyzed.
"Then she handed me a woman's comb of tortoise-shell, and
    murmured:
"'Comb my hair! Oh, comb my hair! That will cure me. Look at
    my head—how I suffer! And my hair—how it
    hurts!'
"Her loose hair, very long, very black, it seemed to me,
    hung over the back of the chair, touching the floor.
"Why did I do it? Why did I, shivering, accept that comb,
    and why did I take between my hands her long hair, which left
    on my skin a ghastly impression of cold, as if I had handled
    serpents? I do not know.
"That feeling still clings about my fingers, and I shiver
    when I recall it.
"I combed her, I handled, I know not how, that hair of ice.
    I bound and unbound it; I plaited it as one plaits a horse's
    mane. She sighed, bent her head, seemed happy.
"Suddenly she said, 'Thank you!' tore the comb from my
    hands, and fled through the door which I had noticed was half
    opened.
"Left alone, I had for a few seconds the hazy feeling one
    feels in waking up from a nightmare. Then I recovered myself. I
    ran to the window and broke the shutters by my furious
    assault.
"A stream of light poured in. I rushed to the door through
    which that being had gone. I found it locked and immovable.
"Then a fever of flight seized on me, a panic, the true
    panic of battle. I quickly grasped the three packages of
    letters from the open desk; I crossed the room running, I took
    the steps of the stairway four at a time. I found myself
    outside, I don't know how, and seeing my horse close by, I
    mounted in one leap and left at a full gallop.
"I didn't stop till I reached Rouen and drew up in front of
    my house. Having thrown the reins to my orderly, I flew to my
    room and locked myself in to think.
"Then for an hour I asked myself whether I had not been the
    victim of an hallucination. Certainly I must have had one of
    those nervous shocks, one of those brain disorders such as give
    rise to miracles, to which the supernatural owes its
    strength.
"And I had almost concluded that it was a vision, an
    illusion of my senses, when I came near to the window. My eyes
    by chance looked down. My tunic was covered with hairs, long
    woman's hairs which had entangled themselves around the
    buttons!
"I took them off one by one and threw them out of the window
    with trembling fingers.
"I then called my orderly. I felt too perturbed, too moved,
    to go and see my friend on that day. Besides, I needed to think
    over what I should tell him.
"I had his letters delivered to him. He gave a receipt to
    the soldier. He inquired after me and was told that I was not
    well. I had had a sunstroke, or something. He seemed
    distressed.
"I went to see him the next day, early in the morning, bent
    on telling him the truth. He had gone out the evening before
    and had not come back.
"I returned the same day, but he had not been seen. I waited
    a week. He did not come back. I notified the police. They
    searched for him everywhere, but no one could find any trace of
    his passing or of his retreat.
"A careful search was made in the deserted manor. No
    suspicious clue was discovered.
"There was no sign that a woman had been concealed
    there.
"The inquest gave no result, and so the search went no
    further.
"And in fifty-six years I have learned nothing more. I never
    found out the truth."