STORIES BY ENGLISH AUTHORS
    

 


      THE MYSTERY OF SASASSA VALLEY, By A. Conan Doyle
    

      Do I know why Tom Donahue is called “Lucky Tom”? Yes, I do; and that is
      more than one in ten of those who call him so can say. I have knocked
      about a deal in my time, and seen some strange sights, but none stranger
      than the way in which Tom gained that sobriquet, and his fortune with it.
      For I was with him at the time. Tell it? Oh, certainly; but it is a
      longish story and a very strange one; so fill up your glass again, and
      light another cigar, while I try to reel it off. Yes, a very strange one;
      beats some fairy stories I have heard; but it’s true, sir, every word of
      it. There are men alive at Cape Colony now who’ll remember it and confirm
      what I say. Many a time has the tale been told round the fire in Boers’ 
      cabins from Orange state to Griqualand; yes, and out in the bush and at
      the diamond-fields too.
    

      I’m roughish now, sir; but I was entered at the Middle Temple once, and
      studied for the bar. Tom—worse luck!—was one of my
      fellow-students; and a wildish time we had of it, until at last our
      finances ran short, and we were compelled to give up our so-called
      studies, and look about for some part of the world where two young fellows
      with strong arms and sound constitutions might make their mark. In those
      days the tide of emigration had scarcely begun to set in toward Africa,
      and so we thought our best chance would be down at Cape Colony. Well,—to
      make a long story short,—we set sail, and were deposited in Cape
      Town with less than five pounds in our pockets; and there we parted. We
      each tried our hands at many things, and had ups and downs; but when, at
      the end of three years, chance led each of us up-country and we met again,
      we were, I regret to say, in almost as bad a plight as when we started.
    

      Well, this was not much of a commencement; and very disheartened we were,
      so disheartened that Tom spoke of going back to England and getting a
      clerkship. For you see we didn’t know that we had played out all our small
      cards, and that the trumps were going to turn up. No; we thought our
      “hands” were bad all through. It was a very lonely part of the country
      that we were in, inhabited by a few scattered farms, whose houses were
      stockaded and fenced in to defend them against the Kaffirs. Tom Donahue
      and I had a little hut right out in the bush; but we were known to possess
      nothing, and to be handy with our revolvers, so we had little to fear.
      There we waited, doing odd jobs, and hoping that something would turn up.
      Well, after we had been there about a month something did turn up upon a
      certain night, something which was the making of both of us; and it’s
      about that night, sir, that I’m going to tell you. I remember it well. The
      wind was howling past our cabin, and the rain threatened to burst in our
      rude window. We had a great wood fire crackling and sputtering on the
      hearth, by which I was sitting mending a whip, while Tom was lying in his
      bunk groaning disconsolately at the chance which had led him to such a
      place.
    

      “Cheer up, Tom—cheer up,” said I. “No man ever knows what may be
      awaiting him.”
     

      “Ill luck, ill luck, Jack,” he answered. “I always was an unlucky dog.
      Here have I been three years in this abominable country; and I see lads
      fresh from England jingling the money in their pockets, while I am as poor
      as when I landed. Ah, Jack, if you want to keep your head above water, old
      friend, you must try your fortune away from me.”
     

      “Nonsense, Tom; you’re down in your luck to-night. But hark! Here’s some
      one coming outside. Dick Wharton, by the tread; he’ll rouse you, if any
      man can.”
     

      Even as I spoke the door was flung open, and honest Dick Wharton, with the
      water pouring from him, stepped in, his hearty red face looming through
      the haze like a harvest-moon. He shook himself, and after greeting us sat
      down by the fire to warm himself.
    

      “Where away, Dick, on such a night as this?” said I. “You’ll find the
      rheumatism a worse foe than the Kaffirs, unless you keep more regular
      hours.”
     

      Dick was looking unusually serious, almost frightened, one would say, if
      one did not know the man. “Had to go,” he replied—“had to go. One of
      Madison’s cattle was seen straying down Sasassa Valley, and of course none
      of our blacks would go down that valley at night; and if we had
      waited till morning, the brute would have been in Kaffirland.”
     

      “Why wouldn’t they go down Sasassa Valley at night?” asked Tom.
    

      “Kaffirs, I suppose,” said I.
    

      “Ghosts,” said Dick.
    

      We both laughed.
    

      “I suppose they didn’t give such a matter-of-fact fellow as you a sight of
      their charms?” said Tom, from the bunk.
    

      “Yes,” said Dick, seriously, “yes; I saw what the niggers talk about; and
      I promise you, lads, I don’t want ever to see it again.”
     

      Tom sat up in his bed. “Nonsense, Dick; you’re joking, man! Come, tell us
      all about it; the legend first, and your own experience afterward. Pass
      him over the bottle, Jack.”
     

      “Well, as to the legend,” began Dick. “It seems that the niggers have had
      it handed down to them that Sasassa Valley is haunted by a frightful
      fiend. Hunters and wanderers passing down the defile have seen its glowing
      eyes under the shadows of the cliff; and the story goes that whoever has
      chanced to encounter that baleful glare has had his after-life blighted by
      the malignant power of this creature. Whether that be true or not,”
       continued Dick, ruefully, “I may have an opportunity of judging for
      myself.”
     

      “Go on, Dick—go on,” cried Tom. “Let’s hear about what you saw.”
     

      “Well, I was groping down the valley, looking for that cow of Madison’s,
      and I had, I suppose, got half-way down, where a black craggy cliff juts
      into the ravine on the right, when I halted to have a pull at my flask. I
      had my eye fixed at the time upon the projecting cliff I have mentioned,
      and noticed nothing unusual about it. I then put up my flask and took a
      step or two forward, when in a moment there burst, apparently from the
      base of the rock, about eight feet from the ground and a hundred yards
      from me, a strange, lurid glare, flickering and oscillating, gradually
      dying away and then reappearing again. No, no; I’ve seen many a glow-worm
      and firefly—nothing of that sort. There it was, burning away, and I
      suppose I gazed at it, trembling in every limb, for fully ten minutes.
      Then I took a step forward, when instantly it vanished, vanished like a
      candle blown out. I stepped back again; but it was some time before I
      could find the exact spot and position from which it was visible. At last,
      there it was, the weird reddish light, flickering away as before. Then I
      screwed up my courage, and made for the rock; but the ground was so uneven
      that it was impossible to steer straight; and though I walked along the
      whole base of the cliff, I could see nothing. Then I made tracks for home;
      and I can tell you, boys, that, until you remarked it, I never knew it was
      raining, the whole way along. But hollo! what’s the matter with Tom?”
     

      What indeed? Tom was now sitting with his legs over the side of the bunk,
      and his whole face betraying excitement so intense as to be almost
      painful. “The fiend would have two eyes. How many lights did you see,
      Dick? Speak out!”
     

      “Only one.”
     

      “Hurrah!” cried Tom, “that’s better.” Whereupon he kicked the blankets
      into the middle of the room, and began pacing up and down with long
      feverish strides. Suddenly he stopped opposite Dick, and laid his hand
      upon his shoulder. “I say, Dick, could we get to Sasassa Valley before
      sunrise?”
     

      “Scarcely,” said Dick.
    

      “Well, look here; we are old friends, Dick Wharton, you and I. Now don’t
      you tell any other man what you have told us, for a week. You’ll promise
      that, won’t you?”
     

      I could see by the look on Dick’s face as he acquiesced that he considered
      poor Tom to be mad; and indeed I was myself completely mystified by his
      conduct. I had, however, seen so many proofs of my friend’s good sense and
      quickness of apprehension that I thought it quite possible that Wharton’s
      story had had a meaning in his eyes which I was too obtuse to take in.
    

      All night Tom Donahue was greatly excited, and when Wharton left he begged
      him to remember his promise, and also elicited from him a description of
      the exact spot at which he had seen the apparition, as well as the hour at
      which it appeared. After his departure, which must have been about four in
      the morning, I turned into my bunk and watched Tom sitting by the fire
      splicing two sticks together, until I fell asleep. I suppose I must have
      slept about two hours; but when I awoke Tom was still sitting working away
      in almost the same position. He had fixed the one stick across the top of
      the other so as to form a rough T, and was now busy in fitting a smaller
      stick into the angle between them, by manipulating which, the cross one
      could be either cocked up or depressed to any extent. He had cut notches,
      too, in the perpendicular stick, so that, by the aid of the small prop,
      the cross one could be kept in any position for an indefinite time.
    

      “Look here, Jack!” he cried, when he saw that I was awake. “Come and give
      me your opinion. Suppose I put this cross-stick pointing straight at a
      thing, and arranged this small one so as to keep it so, and left it, I
      could find that thing again if I wanted it—don’t you think I could,
      Jack—don’t you think so?” he continued, nervously, clutching me by
      the arm.
    

      “Well,” I answered, “it would depend on how far off the thing was, and how
      accurately it was pointed. If it were any distance, I’d cut sights on your
      cross-stick; then a string tied to the end of it, and held in a plumb-line
      forward, would lend you pretty near what you wanted. But surely, Tom, you
      don’t intend to localise the ghost in that way?”
     

      “You’ll see to-night, old friend—you’ll see to-night. I’ll carry
      this to the Sasassa Valley. You get the loan of Madison’s crowbar, and
      come with me; but mind you tell no man where you are going, or what you
      want it for.”
     

      All day Tom was walking up and down the room, or working hard at the
      apparatus. His eyes were glistening, his cheeks hectic, and he had all the
      symptoms of high fever. “Heaven grant that Dick’s diagnosis be not
      correct!” I thought, as I returned with the crowbar; and yet, as evening
      drew near, I found myself imperceptibly sharing the excitement.
    

      About six o’clock Tom sprang to his feet and seized his sticks. “I can
      stand it no longer, Jack,” he cried; “up with your crowbar, and hey for
      Sasassa Valley! To-night’s work, my lad, will either make us or mar us!
      Take your six-shooter, in case we meet the Kaffirs. I daren’t take mine,
      Jack,” he continued, putting his hands upon my shoulders—“I daren’t
      take mine; for if my ill luck sticks to me to-night, I don’t know what I
      might not do with it.”
     

      Well, having filled our pockets with provisions, we set out, and, as we
      took our wearisome way toward the Sasassa Valley, I frequently attempted
      to elicit from my companion some clue as to his intentions. But his only
      answer was: “Let us hurry on, Jack. Who knows how many have heard of
      Wharton’s adventure by this time! Let us hurry on, or we may not be first
      in the field!”
     

      Well, sir, we struggled on through the hills for a matter of ten miles;
      till at last, after descending a crag, we saw opening out in front of us a
      ravine so sombre and dark that it might have been the gate of Hades
      itself; cliffs many hundred feet shut in on every side the gloomy
      boulder-studded passage which led through the haunted defile into
      Kaffirland. The moon, rising above the crags, threw into strong relief the
      rough, irregular pinnacles of rock by which they were topped, while all
      below was dark as Erebus.
    

      “The Sasassa Valley?” said I.
    

      “Yes,” said Tom.
    

      I looked at him. He was calm now; the flush and feverishness had passed
      away; his actions were deliberate and slow. Yet there was a certain
      rigidity in his face and glitter in his eye which showed that a crisis had
      come.
    

      We entered the pass, stumbling along amid the great boulders. Suddenly I
      heard a short, quick exclamation from Tom. “That’s the crag!” he cried,
      pointing to a great mass looming before us in the darkness. “Now, Jack,
      for any favour use your eyes! We’re about a hundred yards from that cliff,
      I take it; so you move slowly toward one side and I’ll do the same toward
      the other. When you see anything, stop and call out. Don’t take more than
      twelve inches in a step, and keep your eye fixed on the cliff about eight
      feet from the ground. Are you ready?”
     

      “Yes.” I was even more excited than Tom by this time. What his intention
      or object was I could not conjecture, beyond that he wanted to examine by
      daylight the part of the cliff from which the light came. Yet the
      influence of the romantic situation and my companion’s suppressed
      excitement was so great that I could feel the blood coursing through my
      veins and count the pulses throbbing at my temples.
    

      “Start!” cried Tom; and we moved off, he to the right, I to the left, each
      with our eyes fixed intently on the base of the crag. I had moved perhaps
      twenty feet, when in a moment it burst upon me. Through the growing
      darkness there shone a small, ruddy, glowing point, the light from which
      waned and increased, flickered and oscillated, each change producing a
      more weird effect than the last. The old Kaffir superstition came into my
      mind, and I felt a cold shudder pass over me. In my excitement I stepped a
      pace backward, when instantly the light went out, leaving utter darkness
      in its place; but when I advanced again, there was the ruddy glare glowing
      from the base of the cliff. “Tom, Tom!” I cried.
    

      “Ay, ay!” I heard him exclaim, as he hurried over toward me.
    

      “There it is—there, up against the cliff!”
     

      Tom was at my elbow. “I see nothing,” said he.
    

      “Why, there, there, man, in front of you!” I stepped to the right as I
      spoke, when the light instantly vanished from my eyes.
    

      But from Tom’s ejaculations of delight it was clear that from my former
      position it was visible to him also. “Jack,” he cried, as he turned and
      wrung my hand—“Jack, you and I can never complain of our luck again.
      Now heap up a few stones where we are standing. That’s right. Now we must
      fix my sign-post firmly in at the top. There! It would take a strong wind
      to blow that down; and we only need it to hold out till morning. O Jack,
      my boy, to think that only yesterday we were talking of becoming clerks,
      and you saying that no man knew what was awaiting him, too! By Jove, Jack,
      it would make a good story!”
     

      By this time we had firmly fixed the perpendicular stick in between the
      two large stones; and Tom bent down and peered along the horizontal one.
      For fully a quarter of an hour he was alternately raising and depressing
      it, until at last, with a sigh of satisfaction, he fixed the prop into the
      angle, and stood up. “Look along, Jack,” he said. “You have as straight an
      eye to take a sight as any man I know of.”
     

      I looked along. There beyond the farther sight was the ruddy,
      scintillating speck, apparently at the end of the stick itself, so
      accurately had it been adjusted.
    

      “And now, my boy,” said Tom, “let’s have some supper and a sleep. There’s
      nothing more to be done to-night; but we’ll need all our wits and strength
      to-morrow. Get some sticks and kindle a fire here, and then we’ll be able
      to keep an eye on our signal-post, and see that nothing happens to it
      during the night.”
     

      Well, sir, we kindled a fire, and had supper with the Sasassa demon’s eye
      rolling and glowing in front of us the whole night through. Not always in
      the same place, though; for after supper, when I glanced along the sights
      to have another look at it, it was nowhere to be seen. The information did
      not, however, seem to disturb Tom in any way. He merely remarked, “It’s
      the moon, not the thing, that has shifted;” and coiling himself up, went
      to sleep.
    

      By early dawn we were both up, and gazing along our pointer at the cliff;
      but we could make out nothing save the one dead, monotonous, slaty
      surface, rougher perhaps at the part we were examining than elsewhere, but
      otherwise presenting nothing remarkable.
    

      “Now for your idea, Jack!” said Tom Donahue, unwinding a long thin cord
      from round his waist. “You fasten it, and guide me while I take the other
      end.” So saying, he walked off to the base of the cliff, holding one end
      of the cord, while I drew the other taut, and wound it round the middle of
      the horizontal stick, passing it through the sight at the end. By this
      means I could direct Tom to the right or left, until we had our string
      stretching from the point of attachment, through the sight, and on to the
      rock, which it struck about eight feet from the ground. Tom drew a chalk
      circle of about three feet diameter round the spot, and then called to me
      to come and join him. “We’ve managed this business together, Jack,” he
      said, “and we’ll find what we are to find, together.” The circle he had
      drawn embraced a part of the rock smoother than the rest, save that about
      the centre there were a few rough protuberances or knobs. One of these Tom
      pointed to with a cry of delight. It was a roughish, brownish mass about
      the size of a man’s closed fist, and looking like a bit of dirty glass let
      into the wall of the cliff. “That’s it!” he cried—“that’s it!”
     

      “That’s what?”
     

      “Why, man, a diamond, and such a one as there isn’t a monarch in
      Europe but would envy Tom Donahue the possession of. Up with your crowbar,
      and we’ll soon exorcise the demon of Sasassa Valley!”
     

      I was so astounded that for a moment I stood speechless with surprise,
      gazing at the treasure which had so unexpectedly fallen into our hands.
    

      “Here, hand me the crowbar,” said Tom. “Now, by using this little round
      knob which projects from the cliff here as a fulcrum, we may be able to
      lever it off. Yes; there it goes. I never thought it could have come so
      easily. Now, Jack, the sooner we get back to our hut and then down to Cape
      Town, the better.”
     

      We wrapped up our treasure, and made our way across the hills toward home.
      On the way, Tom told me how, while a law student in the Middle Temple, he
      had come upon a dusty pamphlet in the library, by one Jans van Hounym,
      which told of an experience very similar to ours, which had befallen that
      worthy Dutchman in the latter part of the seventeenth century, and which
      resulted in the discovery of a luminous diamond. This tale it was which
      had come into Tom’s head as he listened to honest Dick Wharton’s
      ghost-story, while the means which he had adopted to verify his
      supposition sprang from his own fertile Irish brain.
    

      “We’ll take it down to Cape Town,” continued Tom, “and if we can’t dispose
      of it with advantage there, it will be worth our while to ship for London
      with it. Let us go along to Madison’s first, though; he knows something of
      these things, and can perhaps give us some idea of what we may consider a
      fair price for our treasure.”
     

      We turned off from the track accordingly, before reaching our hut, and
      kept along the narrow path leading to Madison’s farm. He was at lunch when
      we entered; and in a minute we were seated at each side of him, enjoying
      South African hospitality.
    

      “Well,” he said, after the servants were gone, “what’s in the wind now? I
      see you have something to say to me. What is it?”
     

      Tom produced his packet, and solemnly untied the handkerchiefs which
      enveloped it. “There!” he said, putting his crystal on the table; “what
      would you say was a fair price for that?”
     

      Madison took it up and examined it critically. “Well,” he said, laying it
      down again, “in its crude state about twelve shillings per ton.”
     

      “Twelve shillings!” cried Tom, starting to his feet. “Don’t you see what
      it is?”
     

      “Rock-salt!”
     

      “Rock-salt be d—d! a diamond.”
     

      “Taste it!” said Madison.
    

      Tom put it to his lips, dashed it down with a dreadful exclamation, and
      rushed out of the room.
    

      I felt sad and disappointed enough myself; but presently, remembering what
      Tom had said about the pistol, I, too left the house, and made for the
      hut, leaving Madison open-mouthed with astonishment. When I got in, I
      found Tom lying in his bunk with his face to the wall, too dispirited
      apparently to answer my consolations. Anathematising Dick and Madison, the
      Sasassa demon, and everything else, I strolled out of the hut, and
      refreshed myself with a pipe after our wearisome adventure. I was about
      fifty yards from the hut, when I heard issuing from it the sound which of
      all others I least expected to hear. Had it been a groan or an oath, I
      should have taken it as a matter of course; but the sound which caused me
      to stop and take the pipe out of my mouth was a hearty roar of laughter!
      Next moment Tom himself emerged from the door, his whole face radiant with
      delight. “Game for another ten-mile walk, old fellow?”
     

      “What! for another lump of rock-salt, at twelve shillings a ton?”
     

      “‘No more of that, Hal, an you love me,’ “ grinned Tom. “Now look here,
      Jack. What blessed fools we are to be so floored by a trifle! Just sit on
      this stump for five minutes, and I’ll make it as clear as daylight. You’ve
      seen many a lump of rock-salt stuck in a crag, and so have I, though we
      did make such a mull of this one. Now, Jack, did any of the pieces you
      have ever seen shine in the darkness brighter than any fire-fly?”
     

      “Well, I can’t say they ever did.”
     

      “I’d venture to prophesy that if we waited until night, which we won’t do,
      we would see that light still glimmering among the rocks. Therefore, Jack,
      when we took away this worthless salt, we took the wrong crystal. It is no
      very strange thing in these hills that a piece of rock-salt should be
      lying within a foot of a diamond. It caught our eyes, and we were excited,
      and so we made fools of ourselves, and left the real stone behind.
      Depend upon it, Jack, the Sasassa gem is lying within that magic circle of
      chalk upon the face of yonder cliff. Come, old fellow, light your pipe and
      stow your revolver, and we’ll be off before that fellow Madison has time
      to put two and two together.”
     

      I don’t know that I was very sanguine this time. I had begun, in fact, to
      look upon the diamond as a most unmitigated nuisance. However, rather than
      throw a damper on Tom’s expectations, I announced myself eager to start.
      What a walk it was! Tom was always a good mountaineer, but his excitement
      seemed to lend him wings that day, while I scrambled along after him as
      best I could.
    

      When we got within half a mile he broke into the “double,” and never
      pulled up until he reached the round white circle upon the cliff. Poor old
      Tom! when I came up, his mood had changed, and he was standing with his
      hands in his pockets, gazing vacantly before him with a rueful
      countenance.
    

      “Look!” he said, “look!” and he pointed at the cliff. Not a sign of
      anything in the least resembling a diamond there. The circle included
      nothing but a flat slate-coloured stone, with one large hole, where we had
      extracted the rock-salt, and one or two smaller depressions. No sign of
      the gem.
    

      “I’ve been over every inch of it,” said poor Tom. “It’s not there. Some
      one has been here and noticed the chalk, and taken it. Come home, Jack; I
      feel sick and tired. Oh, had any man ever luck like mine!”
     

      I turned to go, but took one last look at the cliff first. Tom was already
      ten paces off.
    

      “Hollo!” I cried, “don’t you see any change in that circle since
      yesterday?”
     

      “What d’ ye mean?” said Tom.
    

      “Don’t you miss a thing that was there before?”
     

      “The rock-salt?” said Tom.
    

      “No; but the little round knob that we used for a fulcrum. I suppose we
      must have wrenched it off in using the lever. Let’s have a look at what
      it’s made of.”
     

      Accordingly, at the foot of the cliff we searched about among the loose
      stones.
    

      “Here you are, Jack! We’ve done it at last! We’re made men!”
     

      I turned round, and there was Tom radiant with delight, and with the
      little corner of black rock in his hand. At first sight it seemed to be
      merely a chip from the cliff; but near the base there was projecting from
      it an object which Tom was now exultingly pointing out. It looked at first
      something like a glass eye; but there was a depth and brilliancy about it
      such as glass never exhibited. There was no mistake this time; we had
      certainly got possession of a jewel of great value; and with light hearts
      we turned from the valley, bearing away with us the “fiend” which had so
      long reigned there.
    

      There, sir; I’ve spun my story out too long, and tired you perhaps. You
      see, when I get talking of those rough old days, I kind of see the little
      cabin again, and the brook beside it, and the bush around, and seem to
      hear Tom’s honest voice once more. There’s little for me to say now. We
      prospered on the gem. Tom Donahue, as you know, has set up here, and is
      well known about town. I have done well, farming and ostrich-raising in
      Africa. We set old Dick Wharton up in business, and he is one of our
      nearest neighbours. If you should ever be coming up our way, sir, you’ll
      not forget to ask for Jack Turnbull—Jack Turnbull of Sasassa Farm.