TITBOTTOM'S SPECTACLES
    

      BY GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS (1824-1892)
    

      [From Putnam's Monthly, December, 1854. Republished in the volume,
      Prue and I (1856), by George William Curtis (Harper &
      Brothers).]
    

      In my mind's eye, Horatio.
    

      Prue and I do not entertain much; our means forbid it. In truth, other
      people entertain for us. We enjoy that hospitality of which no account is
      made. We see the show, and hear the music, and smell the flowers of great
      festivities, tasting as it were the drippings from rich dishes. Our own
      dinner service is remarkably plain, our dinners, even on state occasions,
      are strictly in keeping, and almost our only guest is Titbottom. I buy a
      handful of roses as I come up from the office, perhaps, and Prue arranges
      them so prettily in a glass dish for the centre of the table that even
      when I have hurried out to see Aurelia step into her carriage to go out to
      dine, I have thought that the bouquet she carried was not more beautiful
      because it was more costly. I grant that it was more harmonious with her
      superb beauty and her rich attire. And I have no doubt that if Aurelia
      knew the old man, whom she must have seen so often watching her, and his
      wife, who ornaments her sex with as much sweetness, although with less
      splendor, than Aurelia herself, she would also acknowledge that the
      nosegay of roses was as fine and fit upon their table as her own sumptuous
      bouquet is for herself. I have that faith in the perception of that lovely
      lady. It is at least my habit—I hope I may say, my nature, to
      believe the best of people, rather than the worst. If I thought that all
      this sparkling setting of beauty—this fine fashion—these
      blazing jewels and lustrous silks and airy gauzes, embellished with
      gold-threaded embroidery and wrought in a thousand exquisite elaborations,
      so that I cannot see one of those lovely girls pass me by without thanking
      God for the vision—if I thought that this was all, and that
      underneath her lace flounces and diamond bracelets Aurelia was a sullen,
      selfish woman, then I should turn sadly homewards, for I should see that
      her jewels were flashing scorn upon the object they adorned, and that her
      laces were of a more exquisite loveliness than the woman whom they merely
      touched with a superficial grace. It would be like a gaily decorated
      mausoleum—bright to see, but silent and dark within.
    

      "Great excellences, my dear Prue," I sometimes allow myself to say, "lie
      concealed in the depths of character, like pearls at the bottom of the
      sea. Under the laughing, glancing surface, how little they are suspected!
      Perhaps love is nothing else than the sight of them by one person. Hence
      every man's mistress is apt to be an enigma to everybody else. I have no
      doubt that when Aurelia is engaged, people will say that she is a most
      admirable girl, certainly; but they cannot understand why any man should
      be in love with her. As if it were at all necessary that they should! And
      her lover, like a boy who finds a pearl in the public street, and wonders
      as much that others did not see it as that he did, will tremble until he
      knows his passion is returned; feeling, of course, that the whole world
      must be in love with this paragon who cannot possibly smile upon anything
      so unworthy as he."
    

      "I hope, therefore, my dear Mrs. Prue," I continue to say to my wife, who
      looks up from her work regarding me with pleased pride, as if I were such
      an irresistible humorist, "you will allow me to believe that the depth may
      be calm although the surface is dancing. If you tell me that Aurelia is
      but a giddy girl, I shall believe that you think so. But I shall know, all
      the while, what profound dignity, and sweetness, and peace lie at the
      foundation of her character."
    

      I say such things to Titbottom during the dull season at the office. And I
      have known him sometimes to reply with a kind of dry, sad humor, not as if
      he enjoyed the joke, but as if the joke must be made, that he saw no
      reason why I should be dull because the season was so.
    

      "And what do I know of Aurelia or any other girl?" he says to me with that
      abstracted air. "I, whose Aurelias were of another century and another
      zone."
    

      Then he falls into a silence which it seems quite profane to interrupt.
      But as we sit upon our high stools at the desk opposite each other, I
      leaning upon my elbows and looking at him; he, with sidelong face,
      glancing out of the window, as if it commanded a boundless landscape,
      instead of a dim, dingy office court, I cannot refrain from saying:
    

      "Well!"
    

      He turns slowly, and I go chatting on—a little too loquacious,
      perhaps, about those young girls. But I know that Titbottom regards such
      an excess as venial, for his sadness is so sweet that you could believe it
      the reflection of a smile from long, long years ago.
    

      One day, after I had been talking for a long time, and we had put up our
      books, and were preparing to leave, he stood for some time by the window,
      gazing with a drooping intentness, as if he really saw something more than
      the dark court, and said slowly:
    

      "Perhaps you would have different impressions of things if you saw them
      through my spectacles."
    

      There was no change in his expression. He still looked from the window,
      and I said:
    

      "Titbottom, I did not know that you used glasses. I have never seen you
      wearing spectacles."
    

      "No, I don't often wear them. I am not very fond of looking through them.
      But sometimes an irresistible necessity compels me to put them on, and I
      cannot help seeing." Titbottom sighed.
    

      "Is it so grievous a fate, to see?" inquired I.
    

      "Yes; through my spectacles," he said, turning slowly and looking at me
      with wan solemnity.
    

      It grew dark as we stood in the office talking, and taking our hats we
      went out together. The narrow street of business was deserted. The heavy
      iron shutters were gloomily closed over the windows. From one or two
      offices struggled the dim gleam of an early candle, by whose light some
      perplexed accountant sat belated, and hunting for his error. A careless
      clerk passed, whistling. But the great tide of life had ebbed. We heard
      its roar far away, and the sound stole into that silent street like the
      murmur of the ocean into an inland dell.
    

      "You will come and dine with us, Titbottom?"
    

      He assented by continuing to walk with me, and I think we were both glad
      when we reached the house, and Prue came to meet us, saying:
    

      "Do you know I hoped you would bring Mr. Titbottom to dine?"
    

      Titbottom smiled gently, and answered:
    

      "He might have brought his spectacles with him, and I have been a happier
      man for it."
    

      Prue looked a little puzzled.
    

      "My dear," I said, "you must know that our friend, Mr. Titbottom, is the
      happy possessor of a pair of wonderful spectacles. I have never seen them,
      indeed; and, from what he says, I should be rather afraid of being seen by
      them. Most short-sighted persons are very glad to have the help of
      glasses; but Mr. Titbottom seems to find very little pleasure in his."
    

      "It is because they make him too far-sighted, perhaps," interrupted Prue
      quietly, as she took the silver soup-ladle from the sideboard.
    

      We sipped our wine after dinner, and Prue took her work. Can a man be too
      far-sighted? I did not ask the question aloud. The very tone in which Prue
      had spoken convinced me that he might.
    

      "At least," I said, "Mr. Titbottom will not refuse to tell us the history
      of his mysterious spectacles. I have known plenty of magic in eyes"—and
      I glanced at the tender blue eyes of Prue—"but I have not heard of
      any enchanted glasses."
    

      "Yet you must have seen the glass in which your wife looks every morning,
      and I take it that glass must be daily enchanted." said Titbottom, with a
      bow of quaint respect to my wife.
    

      I do not think I have seen such a blush upon Prue's cheek since—well,
      since a great many years ago.
    

      "I will gladly tell you the history of my spectacles," began Titbottom.
      "It is very simple; and I am not at all sure that a great many other
      people have not a pair of the same kind. I have never, indeed, heard of
      them by the gross, like those of our young friend, Moses, the son of the
      Vicar of Wakefield. In fact, I think a gross would be quite enough to
      supply the world. It is a kind of article for which the demand does not
      increase with use. If we should all wear spectacles like mine, we should
      never smile any more. Oh—I am not quite sure—we should all be
      very happy."
    

      "A very important difference," said Prue, counting her stitches.
    

      "You know my grandfather Titbottom was a West Indian. A large proprietor,
      and an easy man, he basked in the tropical sun, leading his quiet,
      luxurious life. He lived much alone, and was what people call eccentric,
      by which I understand that he was very much himself, and, refusing the
      influence of other people, they had their little revenges, and called him
      names. It is a habit not exclusively tropical. I think I have seen the
      same thing even in this city. But he was greatly beloved—my bland
      and bountiful grandfather. He was so large-hearted and open-handed. He was
      so friendly, and thoughtful, and genial, that even his jokes had the air
      of graceful benedictions. He did not seem to grow old, and he was one of
      those who never appear to have been very young. He flourished in a
      perennial maturity, an immortal middle-age.
    

      "My grandfather lived upon one of the small islands, St. Kit's, perhaps,
      and his domain extended to the sea. His house, a rambling West Indian
      mansion, was surrounded with deep, spacious piazzas, covered with
      luxurious lounges, among which one capacious chair was his peculiar seat.
      They tell me he used sometimes to sit there for the whole day, his great,
      soft, brown eyes fastened upon the sea, watching the specks of sails that
      flashed upon the horizon, while the evanescent expressions chased each
      other over his placid face, as if it reflected the calm and changing sea
      before him. His morning costume was an ample dressing-gown of gorgeously
      flowered silk, and his morning was very apt to last all day.
    

      "He rarely read, but he would pace the great piazza for hours, with his
      hands sunken in the pockets of his dressing-gown, and an air of sweet
      reverie, which any author might be very happy to produce.
    

      "Society, of course, he saw little. There was some slight apprehension
      that if he were bidden to social entertainments he might forget his coat,
      or arrive without some other essential part of his dress; and there is a
      sly tradition in the Titbottom family that, having been invited to a ball
      in honor of the new governor of the island, my grandfather Titbottom
      sauntered into the hall towards midnight, wrapped in the gorgeous flowers
      of his dressing-gown, and with his hands buried in the pockets, as usual.
      There was great excitement, and immense deprecation of gubernatorial ire.
      But it happened that the governor and my grandfather were old friends, and
      there was no offense. But as they were conversing together, one of the
      distressed managers cast indignant glances at the brilliant costume of my
      grandfather, who summoned him, and asked courteously:
    

      "'Did you invite me or my coat?'
    

      "'You, in a proper coat,' replied the manager.
    

      "The governor smiled approvingly, and looked at my grandfather.
    

      "'My friend," said he to the manager, 'I beg your pardon, I forgot.'
    

      "The next day my grandfather was seen promenading in full ball dress along
      the streets of the little town.
    

      "'They ought to know,' said he, 'that I have a proper coat, and that not
      contempt nor poverty, but forgetfulness, sent me to a ball in my
      dressing-gown.'
    

      "He did not much frequent social festivals after this failure, but he
      always told the story with satisfaction and a quiet smile.
    

      "To a stranger, life upon those little islands is uniform even to
      weariness. But the old native dons like my grandfather ripen in the
      prolonged sunshine, like the turtle upon the Bahama banks, nor know of
      existence more desirable. Life in the tropics I take to be a placid
      torpidity. During the long, warm mornings of nearly half a century, my
      grandfather Titbottom had sat in his dressing-gown and gazed at the sea.
      But one calm June day, as he slowly paced the piazza after breakfast, his
      dreamy glance was arrested by a little vessel, evidently nearing the
      shore. He called for his spyglass, and surveying the craft, saw that she
      came from the neighboring island. She glided smoothly, slowly, over the
      summer sea. The warm morning air was sweet with perfumes, and silent with
      heat. The sea sparkled languidly, and the brilliant blue hung cloudlessly
      over. Scores of little island vessels had my grandfather seen come over
      the horizon, and cast anchor in the port. Hundreds of summer mornings had
      the white sails flashed and faded, like vague faces through forgotten
      dreams. But this time he laid down the spyglass, and leaned against a
      column of the piazza, and watched the vessel with an intentness that he
      could not explain. She came nearer and nearer, a graceful spectre in the
      dazzling morning.
    

      "'Decidedly I must step down and see about that vessel,' said my
      grandfather Titbottom.
    

      "He gathered his ample dressing-gown about him, and stepped from the
      piazza with no other protection from the sun than the little smoking cap
      upon his head. His face wore a calm, beaming smile, as if he approved of
      all the world. He was not an old man, but there was almost a patriarchal
      pathos in his expression as he sauntered along in the sunshine towards the
      shore. A group of idle gazers was collected to watch the arrival. The
      little vessel furled her sails and drifted slowly landward, and as she was
      of very light draft, she came close to the shelving shore. A long plank
      was put out from her side, and the debarkation commenced. My grandfather
      Titbottom stood looking on to see the passengers descend. There were but a
      few of them, and mostly traders from the neighboring island. But suddenly
      the face of a young girl appeared over the side of the vessel, and she
      stepped upon the plank to descend. My grandfather Titbottom instantly
      advanced, and moving briskly reached the top of the plank at the same
      moment, and with the old tassel of his cap flashing in the sun, and one
      hand in the pocket of his dressing gown, with the other he handed the
      young lady carefully down the plank. That young lady was afterwards my
      grandmother Titbottom.
    

      "And so, over the gleaming sea which he had watched so long, and which
      seemed thus to reward his patient gaze, came his bride that sunny morning.
    

      "'Of course we are happy,' he used to say: 'For you are the gift of the
      sun I have loved so long and so well.' And my grandfather Titbottom would
      lay his hand so tenderly upon the golden hair of his young bride, that you
      could fancy him a devout Parsee caressing sunbeams.
    

      "There were endless festivities upon occasion of the marriage; and my
      grandfather did not go to one of them in his dressing-gown. The gentle
      sweetness of his wife melted every heart into love and sympathy. He was
      much older than she, without doubt. But age, as he used to say with a
      smile of immortal youth, is a matter of feeling, not of years. And if,
      sometimes, as she sat by his side upon the piazza, her fancy looked
      through her eyes upon that summer sea and saw a younger lover, perhaps
      some one of those graceful and glowing heroes who occupy the foreground of
      all young maidens' visions by the sea, yet she could not find one more
      generous and gracious, nor fancy one more worthy and loving than my
      grandfather Titbottom. And if in the moonlit midnight, while he lay calmly
      sleeping, she leaned out of the window and sank into vague reveries of
      sweet possibility, and watched the gleaming path of the moonlight upon the
      water, until the dawn glided over it—it was only that mood of
      nameless regret and longing, which underlies all human happiness,—or
      it was the vision of that life of society, which she had never seen, but
      of which she had often read, and which looked very fair and alluring
      across the sea to a girlish imagination which knew that it should never
      know that reality.
    

      "These West Indian years were the great days of the family," said
      Titbottom, with an air of majestic and regal regret, pausing and musing in
      our little parlor, like a late Stuart in exile, remembering England. Prue
      raised her eyes from her work, and looked at him with a subdued
      admiration; for I have observed that, like the rest of her sex, she has a
      singular sympathy with the representative of a reduced family. Perhaps it
      is their finer perception which leads these tender-hearted women to
      recognize the divine right of social superiority so much more readily than
      we; and yet, much as Titbottom was enhanced in my wife's admiration by the
      discovery that his dusky sadness of nature and expression was, as it were,
      the expiring gleam and late twilight of ancestral splendors, I doubt if
      Mr. Bourne would have preferred him for bookkeeper a moment sooner upon
      that account. In truth, I have observed, down town, that the fact of your
      ancestors doing nothing is not considered good proof that you can do
      anything. But Prue and her sex regard sentiment more than action, and I
      understand easily enough why she is never tired of hearing me read of
      Prince Charlie. If Titbottom had been only a little younger, a little
      handsomer, a little more gallantly dressed—in fact, a little more of
      the Prince Charlie, I am sure her eyes would not have fallen again upon
      her work so tranquilly, as he resumed his story.
    

      "I can remember my grandfather Titbottom, although I was a very young
      child, and he was a very old man. My young mother and my young grandmother
      are very distinct figures in my memory, ministering to the old gentleman,
      wrapped in his dressing-gown, and seated upon the piazza. I remember his
      white hair and his calm smile, and how, not long before he died, he called
      me to him, and laying his hand upon my head, said to me:
    

      "My child, the world is not this great sunny piazza, nor life the fairy
      stories which the women tell you here as you sit in their laps. I shall
      soon be gone, but I want to leave with you some memento of my love for
      you, and I know nothing more valuable than these spectacles, which your
      grandmother brought from her native island, when she arrived here one fine
      summer morning, long ago. I cannot quite tell whether, when you grow
      older, you will regard it as a gift of the greatest value or as something
      that you had been happier never to have possessed.'
    

      "'But grandpapa, I am not short-sighted.'
    

      "'My son, are you not human?' said the old gentleman; and how shall I ever
      forget the thoughtful sadness with which, at the same time he handed me
      the spectacles.
    

      "Instinctively I put them on, and looked at my grandfather. But I saw no
      grandfather, no piazza, no flowered dressing-gown: I saw only a luxuriant
      palm-tree, waving broadly over a tranquil landscape. Pleasant homes
      clustered around it. Gardens teeming with fruit and flowers; flocks
      quietly feeding; birds wheeling and chirping. I heard children's voices,
      and the low lullaby of happy mothers. The sound of cheerful singing came
      wafted from distant fields upon the light breeze. Golden harvests
      glistened out of sight, and I caught their rustling whisper of prosperity.
      A warm, mellow atmosphere bathed the whole. I have seen copies of the
      landscapes of the Italian painter Claude which seemed to me faint
      reminiscences of that calm and happy vision. But all this peace and
      prosperity seemed to flow from the spreading palm as from a fountain.
    

      "I do not know how long I looked, but I had, apparently, no power, as I
      had no will, to remove the spectacles. What a wonderful island must Nevis
      be, thought I, if people carry such pictures in their pockets, only by
      buying a pair of spectacles! What wonder that my dear grandmother
      Titbottom has lived such a placid life, and has blessed us all with her
      sunny temper, when she has lived surrounded by such images of peace.
    

      "My grandfather died. But still, in the warm morning sunshine upon the
      piazza, I felt his placid presence, and as I crawled into his great chair,
      and drifted on in reverie through the still, tropical day, it was as if
      his soft, dreamy eye had passed into my soul. My grandmother cherished his
      memory with tender regret. A violent passion of grief for his loss was no
      more possible than for the pensive decay of the year. We have no portrait
      of him, but I see always, when I remember him, that peaceful and luxuriant
      palm. And I think that to have known one good old man—one man who,
      through the chances and rubs of a long life, has carried his heart in his
      hand, like a palm branch, waving all discords into peace, helps our faith
      in God, in ourselves, and in each other, more than many sermons. I hardly
      know whether to be grateful to my grandfather for the spectacles; and yet
      when I remember that it is to them I owe the pleasant image of him which I
      cherish, I seem to myself sadly ungrateful.
    

      "Madam," said Titbottom to Prue, solemnly, "my memory is a long and gloomy
      gallery, and only remotely, at its further end, do I see the glimmer of
      soft sunshine, and only there are the pleasant pictures hung. They seem to
      me very happy along whose gallery the sunlight streams to their very feet,
      striking all the pictured walls into unfading splendor."
    

      Prue had laid her work in her lap, and as Titbottom paused a moment, and I
      turned towards her, I found her mild eyes fastened upon my face, and
      glistening with happy tears.
    

      "Misfortunes of many kinds came heavily upon the family after the head was
      gone. The great house was relinquished. My parents were both dead, and my
      grandmother had entire charge of me. But from the moment that I received
      the gift of the spectacles, I could not resist their fascination, and I
      withdrew into myself, and became a solitary boy. There were not many
      companions for me of my own age, and they gradually left me, or, at least,
      had not a hearty sympathy with me; for if they teased me I pulled out my
      spectacles and surveyed them so seriously that they acquired a kind of awe
      of me, and evidently regarded my grandfather's gift as a concealed magical
      weapon which might be dangerously drawn upon them at any moment. Whenever,
      in our games, there were quarrels and high words, and I began to feel
      about my dress and to wear a grave look, they all took the alarm, and
      shouted, 'Look out for Titbottom's spectacles,' and scattered like a flock
      of scared sheep.
    

      "Nor could I wonder at it. For, at first, before they took the alarm, I
      saw strange sights when I looked at them through the glasses. If two were
      quarrelling about a marble or a ball, I had only to go behind a tree where
      I was concealed and look at them leisurely. Then the scene changed, and no
      longer a green meadow with boys playing, but a spot which I did not
      recognize, and forms that made me shudder or smile. It was not a big boy
      bullying a little one, but a young wolf with glistening teeth and a lamb
      cowering before him; or, it was a dog faithful and famishing—or a
      star going slowly into eclipse—or a rainbow fading—or a flower
      blooming—or a sun rising—or a waning moon. The revelations of
      the spectacles determined my feeling for the boys, and for all whom I saw
      through them. No shyness, nor awkwardness, nor silence, could separate me
      from those who looked lovely as lilies to my illuminated eyes. If I felt
      myself warmly drawn to any one I struggled with the fierce desire of
      seeing him through the spectacles. I longed to enjoy the luxury of
      ignorant feeling, to love without knowing, to float like a leaf upon the
      eddies of life, drifted now to a sunny point, now to a solemn shade—now
      over glittering ripples, now over gleaming calms,—and not to
      determined ports, a trim vessel with an inexorable rudder.
    

      "But, sometimes, mastered after long struggles, I seized my spectacles and
      sauntered into the little town. Putting them to my eyes I peered into the
      houses and at the people who passed me. Here sat a family at breakfast,
      and I stood at the window looking in. O motley meal! fantastic vision! The
      good mother saw her lord sitting opposite, a grave, respectable being,
      eating muffins. But I saw only a bank-bill, more or less crumpled and
      tattered, marked with a larger or lesser figure. If a sharp wind blew
      suddenly, I saw it tremble and flutter; it was thin, flat, impalpable. I
      removed my glasses, and looked with my eyes at the wife. I could have
      smiled to see the humid tenderness with which she regarded her strange vis-à-vis.
      Is life only a game of blind-man's-buff? of droll cross-purposes?
    

      "Or I put them on again, and looked at the wife. How many stout trees I
      saw,—how many tender flowers,—how many placid pools; yes, and
      how many little streams winding out of sight, shrinking before the large,
      hard, round eyes opposite, and slipping off into solitude and shade, with
      a low, inner song for their own solace. And in many houses I thought to
      see angels, nymphs, or at least, women, and could only find broomsticks,
      mops, or kettles, hurrying about, rattling, tinkling, in a state of shrill
      activity. I made calls upon elegant ladies, and after I had enjoyed the
      gloss of silk and the delicacy of lace, and the flash of jewels, I slipped
      on my spectacles, and saw a peacock's feather, flounced and furbelowed and
      fluttering; or an iron rod, thin, sharp, and hard; nor could I possibly
      mistake the movement of the drapery for any flexibility of the thing
      draped,—or, mysteriously chilled, I saw a statue of perfect form, or
      flowing movement, it might be alabaster, or bronze, or marble,—but
      sadly often it was ice; and I knew that after it had shone a little, and
      frozen a few eyes with its despairing perfection, it could not be put away
      in the niches of palaces for ornament and proud family tradition, like the
      alabaster, or bronze, or marble statues, but would melt, and shrink, and
      fall coldly away in colorless and useless water, be absorbed in the earth
      and utterly forgotten.
    

      "But the true sadness was rather in seeing those who, not having the
      spectacles, thought that the iron rod was flexible, and the ice statue
      warm. I saw many a gallant heart, which seemed to me brave and loyal as
      the crusaders sent by genuine and noble faith to Syria and the sepulchre,
      pursuing, through days and nights, and a long life of devotion, the hope
      of lighting at least a smile in the cold eyes, if not a fire in the icy
      heart. I watched the earnest, enthusiastic sacrifice. I saw the pure
      resolve, the generous faith, the fine scorn of doubt, the impatience of
      suspicion. I watched the grace, the ardor, the glory of devotion. Through
      those strange spectacles how often I saw the noblest heart renouncing all
      other hope, all other ambition, all other life, than the possible love of
      some one of those statues. Ah! me, it was terrible, but they had not the
      love to give. The Parian face was so polished and smooth, because there
      was no sorrow upon the heart,—and, drearily often, no heart to be
      touched. I could not wonder that the noble heart of devotion was broken,
      for it had dashed itself against a stone. I wept, until my spectacles were
      dimmed for that hopeless sorrow; but there was a pang beyond tears for
      those icy statues.
    

      "Still a boy, I was thus too much a man in knowledge,—I did not
      comprehend the sights I was compelled to see. I used to tear my glasses
      away from my eyes, and, frightened at myself, run to escape my own
      consciousness. Reaching the small house where we then lived, I plunged
      into my grandmother's room and, throwing myself upon the floor, buried my
      face in her lap; and sobbed myself to sleep with premature grief. But when
      I awakened, and felt her cool hand upon my hot forehead, and heard the
      low, sweet song, or the gentle story, or the tenderly told parable from
      the Bible, with which she tried to soothe me, I could not resist the
      mystic fascination that lured me, as I lay in her lap, to steal a glance
      at her through the spectacles.
    

      "Pictures of the Madonna have not her rare and pensive beauty. Upon the
      tranquil little islands her life had been eventless, and all the fine
      possibilities of her nature were like flowers that never bloomed. Placid
      were all her years; yet I have read of no heroine, of no woman great in
      sudden crises, that it did not seem to me she might have been. The wife
      and widow of a man who loved his own home better than the homes of others,
      I have yet heard of no queen, no belle, no imperial beauty, whom in grace,
      and brilliancy, and persuasive courtesy, she might not have surpassed.
    

      "Madam," said Titbottom to my wife, whose heart hung upon his story; "your
      husband's young friend, Aurelia, wears sometimes a camelia in her hair,
      and no diamond in the ball-room seems so costly as that perfect flower,
      which women envy, and for whose least and withered petal men sigh; yet, in
      the tropical solitudes of Brazil, how many a camelia bud drops from a bush
      that no eye has ever seen, which, had it flowered and been noticed, would
      have gilded all hearts with its memory.
    

      "When I stole these furtive glances at my grandmother, half fearing that
      they were wrong, I saw only a calm lake, whose shores were low, and over
      which the sky hung unbroken, so that the least star was clearly reflected.
      It had an atmosphere of solemn twilight tranquillity, and so completely
      did its unruffled surface blend with the cloudless, star-studded sky,
      that, when I looked through my spectacles at my grandmother, the vision
      seemed to me all heaven and stars. Yet, as I gazed and gazed, I felt what
      stately cities might well have been built upon those shores, and have
      flashed prosperity over the calm, like coruscations of pearls.
    

      "I dreamed of gorgeous fleets, silken sailed and blown by perfumed winds,
      drifting over those depthless waters and through those spacious skies. I
      gazed upon the twilight, the inscrutable silence, like a God-fearing
      discoverer upon a new, and vast, and dim sea, bursting upon him through
      forest glooms, and in the fervor of whose impassioned gaze, a millennial
      and poetic world arises, and man need no longer die to be happy.
    

      "My companions naturally deserted me, for I had grown wearily grave and
      abstracted: and, unable to resist the allurement of my spectacles, I was
      constantly lost in a world, of which those companions were part, yet of
      which they knew nothing. I grew cold and hard, almost morose; people
      seemed to me blind and unreasonable. They did the wrong thing. They called
      green, yellow; and black, white. Young men said of a girl, 'What a lovely,
      simple creature!' I looked, and there was only a glistening wisp of straw,
      dry and hollow. Or they said, 'What a cold, proud beauty!' I looked, and
      lo! a Madonna, whose heart held the world. Or they said, 'What a wild,
      giddy girl!' and I saw a glancing, dancing mountain stream, pure as the
      virgin snows whence it flowed, singing through sun and shade, over pearls
      and gold dust, slipping along unstained by weed, or rain, or heavy foot of
      cattle, touching the flowers with a dewy kiss,—a beam of grace, a
      happy song, a line of light, in the dim and troubled landscape.
    

      "My grandmother sent me to school, but I looked at the master, and saw
      that he was a smooth, round ferule—or an improper noun—or a
      vulgar fraction, and refused to obey him. Or he was a piece of string, a
      rag, a willow-wand, and I had a contemptuous pity. But one was a well of
      cool, deep water, and looking suddenly in, one day, I saw the stars. He
      gave me all my schooling. With him I used to walk by the sea, and, as we
      strolled and the waves plunged in long legions before us, I looked at him
      through the spectacles, and as his eye dilated with the boundless view,
      and his chest heaved with an impossible desire, I saw Xerxes and his army
      tossing and glittering, rank upon rank, multitude upon multitude, out of
      sight, but ever regularly advancing and with the confused roar of
      ceaseless music, prostrating themselves in abject homage. Or, as with arms
      outstretched and hair streaming on the wind, he chanted full lines of the
      resounding Iliad, I saw Homer pacing the AEgean sands in the Greek sunsets
      of forgotten times.
    

      "My grandmother died, and I was thrown into the world without resources,
      and with no capital but my spectacles. I tried to find employment, but men
      were shy of me. There was a vague suspicion that I was either a little
      crazed, or a good deal in league with the Prince of Darkness. My
      companions who would persist in calling a piece of painted muslin a fair
      and fragrant flower had no difficulty; success waited for them around
      every corner, and arrived in every ship. I tried to teach, for I loved
      children. But if anything excited my suspicion, and, putting on my
      spectacles, I saw that I was fondling a snake, or smelling at a bud with a
      worm in it, I sprang up in horror and ran away; or, if it seemed to me
      through the glasses that a cherub smiled upon me, or a rose was blooming
      in my buttonhole, then I felt myself imperfect and impure, not fit to be
      leading and training what was so essentially superior in quality to
      myself, and I kissed the children and left them weeping and wondering.
    

      "In despair I went to a great merchant on the island, and asked him to
      employ me.
    

      "'My young friend,' said he, 'I understand that you have some singular
      secret, some charm, or spell, or gift, or something, I don't know what, of
      which people are afraid. Now, you know, my dear,' said the merchant,
      swelling up, and apparently prouder of his great stomach than of his large
      fortune, 'I am not of that kind. I am not easily frightened. You may spare
      yourself the pain of trying to impose upon me. People who propose to come
      to time before I arrive, are accustomed to arise very early in the
      morning,' said he, thrusting his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat,
      and spreading the fingers, like two fans, upon his bosom. 'I think I have
      heard something of your secret. You have a pair of spectacles, I believe,
      that you value very much, because your grandmother brought them as a
      marriage portion to your grandfather. Now, if you think fit to sell me
      those spectacles, I will pay you the largest market price for glasses.
      What do you say?'
    

      "I told him that I had not the slightest idea of selling my spectacles.
    

      "'My young friend means to eat them, I suppose,' said he with a
      contemptuous smile.
    

      "I made no reply, but was turning to leave the office, when the merchant
      called after me—
    

      "'My young friend, poor people should never suffer themselves to get into
      pets. Anger is an expensive luxury, in which only men of a certain income
      can indulge. A pair of spectacles and a hot temper are not the most
      promising capital for success in life, Master Titbottom.'
    

      "I said nothing, but put my hand upon the door to go out, when the
      merchant said more respectfully,—
    

      "'Well, you foolish boy, if you will not sell your spectacles, perhaps you
      will agree to sell the use of them to me. That is, you shall only put them
      on when I direct you, and for my purposes. Hallo! you little fool!' cried
      he impatiently, as he saw that I intended to make no reply.
    

      "But I had pulled out my spectacles, and put them on for my own purpose,
      and against his direction and desire. I looked at him, and saw a huge
      bald-headed wild boar, with gross chops and a leering eye—only the
      more ridiculous for the high-arched, gold-bowed spectacles, that straddled
      his nose. One of his fore hoofs was thrust into the safe, where his bills
      payable were hived, and the other into his pocket, among the loose change
      and bills there. His ears were pricked forward with a brisk, sensitive
      smartness. In a world where prize pork was the best excellence, he would
      have carried off all the premiums.
    

      "I stepped into the next office in the street, and a mild-faced, genial
      man, also a large and opulent merchant, asked me my business in such a
      tone, that I instantly looked through my spectacles, and saw a land
      flowing with milk and honey. There I pitched my tent, and stayed till the
      good man died, and his business was discontinued.
    

      "But while there," said Titbottom, and his voice trembled away into a
      sigh, "I first saw Preciosa. Spite of the spectacles, I saw Preciosa. For
      days, for weeks, for months, I did not take my spectacles with me. I ran
      away from them, I threw them up on high shelves, I tried to make up my
      mind to throw them into the sea, or down the well. I could not, I would
      not, I dared not look at Preciosa through the spectacles. It was not
      possible for me deliberately to destroy them; but I awoke in the night,
      and could almost have cursed my dear old grandfather for his gift. I
      escaped from the office, and sat for whole days with Preciosa. I told her
      the strange things I had seen with my mystic glasses. The hours were not
      enough for the wild romances which I raved in her ear. She listened,
      astonished and appalled. Her blue eyes turned upon me with a sweet
      deprecation. She clung to me, and then withdrew, and fled fearfully from
      the room. But she could not stay away. She could not resist my voice, in
      whose tones burned all the love that filled my heart and brain. The very
      effort to resist the desire of seeing her as I saw everybody else, gave a
      frenzy and an unnatural tension to my feeling and my manner. I sat by her
      side, looking into her eyes, smoothing her hair, folding her to my heart,
      which was sunken and deep—why not forever?—in that dream of
      peace. I ran from her presence, and shouted, and leaped with joy, and sat
      the whole night through, thrilled into happiness by the thought of her
      love and loveliness, like a wind-harp, tightly strung, and answering the
      airiest sigh of the breeze with music. Then came calmer days—the
      conviction of deep love settled upon our lives—as after the
      hurrying, heaving days of spring, comes the bland and benignant summer.
    

      "'It is no dream, then, after all, and we are happy,' I said to her, one
      day; and there came no answer, for happiness is speechless.
    

      "We are happy then," I said to myself, "there is no excitement now. How
      glad I am that I can now look at her through my spectacles."
    

      "I feared lest some instinct should warn me to beware. I escaped from her
      arms, and ran home and seized the glasses and bounded back again to
      Preciosa. As I entered the room I was heated, my head was swimming with
      confused apprehension, my eyes must have glared. Preciosa was frightened,
      and rising from her seat, stood with an inquiring glance of surprise in
      her eyes. But I was bent with frenzy upon my purpose. I was merely aware
      that she was in the room. I saw nothing else. I heard nothing. I cared for
      nothing, but to see her through that magic glass, and feel at once, all
      the fulness of blissful perfection which that would reveal. Preciosa stood
      before the mirror, but alarmed at my wild and eager movements, unable to
      distinguish what I had in my hands, and seeing me raise them suddenly to
      my face, she shrieked with terror, and fell fainting upon the floor, at
      the very moment that I placed the glasses before my eyes, and beheld—myself,
      reflected in the mirror, before which she had been standing.
    

      "Dear madam," cried Titbottom, to my wife, springing up and falling back
      again in his chair, pale and trembling, while Prue ran to him and took his
      hand, and I poured out a glass of water—"I saw myself."
    

      There was silence for many minutes. Prue laid her hand gently upon the
      head of our guest, whose eyes were closed, and who breathed softly, like
      an infant in sleeping. Perhaps, in all the long years of anguish since
      that hour, no tender hand had touched his brow, nor wiped away the damps
      of a bitter sorrow. Perhaps the tender, maternal fingers of my wife
      soothed his weary head with the conviction that he felt the hand of his
      mother playing with the long hair of her boy in the soft West Indian
      morning. Perhaps it was only the natural relief of expressing a pent-up
      sorrow. When he spoke again, it was with the old, subdued tone, and the
      air of quaint solemnity.
    

      "These things were matters of long, long ago, and I came to this country
      soon after. I brought with me, premature age, a past of melancholy
      memories, and the magic spectacles. I had become their slave. I had
      nothing more to fear. Having seen myself, I was compelled to see others,
      properly to understand my relations to them. The lights that cheer the
      future of other men had gone out for me. My eyes were those of an exile
      turned backwards upon the receding shore, and not forwards with hope upon
      the ocean. I mingled with men, but with little pleasure. There are but
      many varieties of a few types. I did not find those I came to clearer
      sighted than those I had left behind. I heard men called shrewd and wise,
      and report said they were highly intelligent and successful. But when I
      looked at them through my glasses, I found no halo of real manliness. My
      finest sense detected no aroma of purity and principle; but I saw only a
      fungus that had fattened and spread in a night. They all went to the
      theater to see actors upon the stage. I went to see actors in the boxes,
      so consummately cunning, that the others did not know they were acting,
      and they did not suspect it themselves.
    

      "Perhaps you wonder it did not make me misanthropical. My dear friends, do
      not forget that I had seen myself. It made me compassionate, not cynical.
      Of course I could not value highly the ordinary standards of success and
      excellence. When I went to church and saw a thin, blue, artificial flower,
      or a great sleepy cushion expounding the beauty of holiness to pews full
      of eagles, half-eagles, and threepences, however adroitly concealed in
      broadcloth and boots: or saw an onion in an Easter bonnet weeping over the
      sins of Magdalen, I did not feel as they felt who saw in all this, not
      only propriety, but piety. Or when at public meetings an eel stood up on
      end, and wriggled and squirmed lithely in every direction, and declared
      that, for his part, he went in for rainbows and hot water—how could
      I help seeing that he was still black and loved a slimy pool?
    

      "I could not grow misanthropical when I saw in the eyes of so many who
      were called old, the gushing fountains of eternal youth, and the light of
      an immortal dawn, or when I saw those who were esteemed unsuccessful and
      aimless, ruling a fair realm of peace and plenty, either in themselves, or
      more perfectly in another—a realm and princely possession for which
      they had well renounced a hopeless search and a belated triumph. I knew
      one man who had been for years a by-word for having sought the
      philosopher's stone. But I looked at him through the spectacles and saw a
      satisfaction in concentrated energies, and a tenacity arising from
      devotion to a noble dream, which was not apparent in the youths who pitied
      him in the aimless effeminacy of clubs, nor in the clever gentlemen who
      cracked their thin jokes upon him over a gossiping dinner.
    

      "And there was your neighbor over the way, who passes for a woman who has
      failed in her career, because she is an old maid. People wag solemn heads
      of pity, and say that she made so great a mistake in not marrying the
      brilliant and famous man who was for long years her suitor. It is clear
      that no orange flower will ever bloom for her. The young people make
      tender romances about her as they watch her, and think of her solitary
      hours of bitter regret, and wasting longing, never to be satisfied. When I
      first came to town I shared this sympathy, and pleased my imagination with
      fancying her hard struggle with the conviction that she had lost all that
      made life beautiful. I supposed that if I looked at her through my
      spectacles, I should see that it was only her radiant temper which so
      illuminated her dress, that we did not see it to be heavy sables. But
      when, one day, I did raise my glasses and glanced at her, I did not see
      the old maid whom we all pitied for a secret sorrow, but a woman whose
      nature was a tropic, in which the sun shone, and birds sang, and flowers
      bloomed forever. There were no regrets, no doubts and half wishes, but a
      calm sweetness, a transparent peace. I saw her blush when that old lover
      passed by, or paused to speak to her, but it was only the sign of delicate
      feminine consciousness. She knew his love, and honored it, although she
      could not understand it nor return it. I looked closely at her, and I saw
      that although all the world had exclaimed at her indifference to such
      homage, and had declared it was astonishing she should lose so fine a
      match, she would only say simply and quietly—
    

      "'If Shakespeare loved me and I did not love him, how could I marry him?'
    

      "Could I be misanthropical when I saw such fidelity, and dignity, and
      simplicity?
    

      "You may believe that I was especially curious to look at that old lover
      of hers, through my glasses. He was no longer young, you know, when I
      came, and his fame and fortune were secure. Certainly I have heard of few
      men more beloved, and of none more worthy to be loved. He had the easy
      manner of a man of the world, the sensitive grace of a poet, and the
      charitable judgment of a wide traveller. He was accounted the most
      successful and most unspoiled of men. Handsome, brilliant, wise, tender,
      graceful, accomplished, rich, and famous, I looked at him, without the
      spectacles, in surprise, and admiration, and wondered how your neighbor
      over the way had been so entirely untouched by his homage. I watched their
      intercourse in society, I saw her gay smile, her cordial greeting; I
      marked his frank address, his lofty courtesy. Their manner told no tales.
      The eager world was balked, and I pulled out my spectacles.
    

      "I had seen her, already, and now I saw him. He lived only in memory, and
      his memory was a spacious and stately palace. But he did not oftenest
      frequent the banqueting hall, where were endless hospitality and feasting—nor
      did he loiter much in reception rooms, where a throng of new visitors was
      forever swarming—nor did he feed his vanity by haunting the
      apartment in which were stored the trophies of his varied triumphs—nor
      dream much in the great gallery hung with pictures of his travels. But
      from all these lofty halls of memory he constantly escaped to a remote and
      solitary chamber, into which no one had ever penetrated. But my fatal
      eyes, behind the glasses, followed and entered with him, and saw that the
      chamber was a chapel. It was dim, and silent, and sweet with perpetual
      incense that burned upon an altar before a picture forever veiled. There,
      whenever I chanced to look, I saw him kneel and pray; and there, by day
      and by night, a funeral hymn was chanted.
    

      "I do not believe you will be surprised that I have been content to remain
      deputy bookkeeper. My spectacles regulated my ambition, and I early
      learned that there were better gods than Plutus. The glasses have lost
      much of their fascination now, and I do not often use them. Sometimes the
      desire is irresistible. Whenever I am greatly interested, I am compelled
      to take them out and see what it is that I admire.
    

      "And yet—and yet," said Titbottom, after a pause, "I am not sure
      that I thank my grandfather."
    

      Prue had long since laid away her work, and had heard every word of the
      story. I saw that the dear woman had yet one question to ask, and had been
      earnestly hoping to hear something that would spare her the necessity of
      asking. But Titbottom had resumed his usual tone, after the momentary
      excitement, and made no further allusion to himself. We all sat silently;
      Titbottom's eyes fastened musingly upon the carpet: Prue looking wistfully
      at him, and I regarding both.
    

      It was past midnight, and our guest arose to go. He shook hands quietly,
      made his grave Spanish bow to Prue, and taking his hat, went towards the
      front door. Prue and I accompanied him. I saw in her eyes that she would
      ask her question. And as Titbottom opened the door, I heard the low words:
    

      "And Preciosa?"
    

      Titbottom paused. He had just opened the door and the moonlight streamed
      over him as he stood, turning back to us.
    

      "I have seen her but once since. It was in church, and she was kneeling
      with her eyes closed, so that she did not see me. But I rubbed the glasses
      well, and looked at her, and saw a white lily, whose stem was broken, but
      which was fresh; and luminous, and fragrant, still."
    

      "That was a miracle," interrupted Prue.
    

      "Madam, it was a miracle," replied Titbottom, "and for that one sight I am
      devoutly grateful for my grandfather's gift. I saw, that although a flower
      may have lost its hold upon earthly moisture, it may still bloom as
      sweetly, fed by the dews of heaven."
    

      The door closed, and he was gone. But as Prue put her arm in mine and we
      went upstairs together, she whispered in my ear:
    

      "How glad I am that you don't wear spectacles."