VANKA


BY ANTON P. CHEKHOV

Nine-year-old Vanka Zhukov, who had been apprentice to the shoemaker
Aliakhin for three months, did not go to bed the night before Christmas.
He waited till the master and mistress and the assistants had gone out to
an early church-service, to procure from his employer’s cupboard a
small phial of ink and a penholder with a rusty nib; then, spreading a
crumpled sheet of paper in front of him, he began to write.


Before, however, deciding to make the first letter, he looked furtively at
the door and at the window, glanced several times at the sombre ikon, on
either side of which stretched shelves full of lasts, and heaved a
heart-rending sigh. The sheet of paper was spread on a bench, and he
himself was on his knees in front of it.


“Dear Grandfather Konstantin Makarych,” he wrote, “I am
writing you a letter. I wish you a Happy Christmas and all God’s
holy best. I have no mamma or papa, you are all I have.”


Vanka gave a look towards the window in which shone the reflection of his
candle, and vividly pictured to himself his grandfather, Konstantin
Makarych, who was night-watchman at Messrs. Zhivarev. He was a small,
lean, unusually lively and active old man of sixty-five, always smiling
and blear-eyed. All day he slept in the servants’ kitchen or trifled
with the cooks. At night, enveloped in an ample sheep-skin coat, he
strayed round the domain tapping with his cudgel. Behind him, each hanging
its head, walked the old bitch Kashtanka, and the dog Viun, so named
because of his black coat and long body and his resemblance to a loach.
Viun was an unusually civil and friendly dog, looking as kindly at a
stranger as at his masters, but he was not to be trusted. Beneath his
deference and humbleness was hid the most inquisitorial maliciousness. No
one knew better than he how to sneak up and take a bite at a leg, or slip
into the larder or steal a muzhik’s chicken. More than once they had
nearly broken his hind-legs, twice he had been hung up, every week he was
nearly flogged to death, but he always recovered.


At this moment, for certain, Vanka’s grandfather must be standing at
the gate, blinking his eyes at the bright red windows of the village
church, stamping his feet in their high-felt boots, and jesting with the
people in the yard; his cudgel will be hanging from his belt, he will be
hugging himself with cold, giving a little dry, old man’s cough, and
at times pinching a servant-girl or a cook.


“Won’t we take some snuff?” he asks, holding out his
snuff-box to the women. The women take a pinch of snuff, and sneeze.


The old man goes into indescribable ecstasies, breaks into loud laughter,
and cries:


“Off with it, it will freeze to your nose!”


He gives his snuff to the dogs, too. Kashtanka sneezes, twitches her nose,
and walks away offended. Viun deferentially refuses to sniff and wags his
tail. It is glorious weather, not a breath of wind, clear, and frosty; it
is a dark night, but the whole village, its white roofs and streaks of
smoke from the chimneys, the trees silvered with hoar-frost, and the
snowdrifts, you can see it all. The sky scintillates with bright twinkling
stars, and the Milky Way stands out so clearly that it looks as if it had
been polished and rubbed over with snow for the holidays...


Vanka sighs, dips his pen in the ink, and continues to write:


“Last night I got a thrashing, my master dragged me by my hair into
the yard, and belaboured me with a shoe-maker’s stirrup, because,
while I was rocking his brat in its cradle, I unfortunately fell asleep.
And during the week, my mistress told me to clean a herring, and I began
by its tail, so she took the herring and stuck its snout into my face. The
assistants tease me, send me to the tavern for vodka, make me steal the
master’s cucumbers, and the master beats me with whatever is handy.
Food there is none; in the morning it’s bread, at dinner gruel, and
in the evening bread again. As for tea or sour-cabbage soup, the master
and the mistress themselves guzzle that. They make me sleep in the
vestibule, and when their brat cries, I don’t sleep at all, but have
to rock the cradle. Dear Grandpapa, for Heaven’s sake, take me away
from here, home to our village, I can’t bear this any more... I bow
to the ground to you, and will pray to God for ever and ever, take me from
here or I shall die...”


The corners of Vanka’s mouth went down, he rubbed his eyes with his
dirty fist, and sobbed.


“I’ll grate your tobacco for you,” he continued, “I’ll
pray to God for you, and if there is anything wrong, then flog me like the
grey goat. And if you really think I shan’t find work, then I’ll
ask the manager, for Christ’s sake, to let me clean the boots, or I’ll
go instead of Fedya as underherdsman. Dear Grandpapa, I can’t bear
this any more, it’ll kill me... I wanted to run away to our village,
but I have no boots, and I was afraid of the frost, and when I grow up I’ll
look after you, no one shall harm you, and when you die I’ll pray
for the repose of your soul, just like I do for mamma Pelagueya.


“As for Moscow, it is a large town, there are all gentlemen’s
houses, lots of horses, no sheep, and the dogs are not vicious. The
children don’t come round at Christmas with a star, no one is
allowed to sing in the choir, and once I saw in a shop window hooks on a
line and fishing rods, all for sale, and for every kind of fish, awfully
convenient. And there was one hook which would catch a sheat-fish weighing
a pound. And there are shops with guns, like the master’s, and I am
sure they must cost 100 rubles each. And in the meat-shops there are
woodcocks, partridges, and hares, but who shot them or where they come
from, the shopman won’t say.


“Dear Grandpapa, and when the masters give a Christmas tree, take a
golden walnut and hide it in my green box. Ask the young lady, Olga
Ignatyevna, for it, say it’s for Vanka.”


Vanka sighed convulsively, and again stared at the window. He remembered
that his grandfather always went to the forest for the Christmas tree, and
took his grandson with him. What happy times! The frost crackled, his
grandfather crackled, and as they both did, Vanka did the same. Then
before cutting down the Christmas tree his grandfather smoked his pipe,
took a long pinch of snuff, and made fun of poor frozen little Vanka...
The young fir trees, wrapt in hoar-frost, stood motionless, waiting for
which of them would die. Suddenly a hare springing from somewhere would
dart over the snowdrift... His grandfather could not help shouting:


“Catch it, catch it, catch it! Ah, short-tailed devil!”


When the tree was down, his grandfather dragged it to the master’s
house, and there they set about decorating it. The young lady, Olga
Ignatyevna, Vanka’s great friend, busied herself most about it. When
little Vanka’s mother, Pelagueya, was still alive, and was
servant-woman in the house, Olga Ignatyevna used to stuff him with
sugar-candy, and, having nothing to do, taught him to read, write, count
up to one hundred, and even to dance the quadrille. When Pelagueya died,
they placed the orphan Vanka in the kitchen with his grandfather, and from
the kitchen he was sent to Moscow to Aliakhin, the shoemaker.


“Come quick, dear Grandpapa,” continued Vanka, “I
beseech you for Christ’s sake take me from here. Have pity on a poor
orphan, for here they beat me, and I am frightfully hungry, and so sad
that I can’t tell you, I cry all the time. The other day the master
hit me on the head with a last; I fell to the ground, and only just
returned to life. My life is a misfortune, worse than any dog’s... I
send greetings to Aliona, to one-eyed Tegor, and the coachman, and don’t
let any one have my mouth-organ. I remain, your grandson, Ivan Zhukov,
dear Grandpapa, do come.”


Vanka folded his sheet of paper in four, and put it into an envelope
purchased the night before for a kopek. He thought a little, dipped the
pen into the ink, and wrote the address:


“The village, to my grandfather.” He then scratched his head,
thought again, and added: “Konstantin Makarych.” Pleased at
not having been interfered with in his writing, he put on his cap, and,
without putting on his sheep-skin coat, ran out in his shirt-sleeves into
the street.


The shopman at the poulterer’s, from whom he had inquired the night
before, had told him that letters were to be put into post-boxes, and from
there they were conveyed over the whole earth in mail troikas by drunken
post-boys and to the sound of bells. Vanka ran to the first post-box and
slipped his precious letter into the slit.


An hour afterwards, lulled by hope, he was sleeping soundly. In his dreams
he saw a stove, by the stove his grandfather sitting with his legs
dangling down, barefooted, and reading a letter to the cooks, and Viun
walking round the stove wagging his tail.