A CALL

 By Grace MacGowan Cooke (1863- )

 [From Harper's Magazine , August, 1906. Copyright, 1906, by Harper
      & Brothers. Republished by the author's permission.]

 A boy in an unnaturally clean, country-laundered collar walked down a long
      white road. He scuffed the dust up wantonly, for he wished to veil the
      all-too-brilliant polish of his cowhide shoes. Also the memory of the
      whiteness and slipperiness of his collar oppressed him. He was fain to
      look like one accustomed to social diversions, a man hurried from hall to
      hall of pleasure, without time between to change collar or polish boot. He
      stooped and rubbed a crumb of earth on his overfresh neck-linen.

 This did not long sustain his drooping spirit. He was mentally adrift upon
      the Hints and Helps to Young Men in Business and Social Relations ,
      which had suggested to him his present enterprise, when the appearance of
      a second youth, taller and broader than himself, with a shock of light
      curling hair and a crop of freckles that advertised a rich soil threw him
      a lifeline. He put his thumbs to his lips and whistled in a peculiarly
      ear-splitting way. The two boys had sat on the same bench at Sunday-school
      not three hours before; yet what a change had come over the world for one
      of them since then!

 "Hello! Where you goin', Ab?" asked the newcomer, gruffly.

 "Callin'," replied the boy in the collar, laconically, but with carefully
      averted gaze.

 "On the girls?" inquired the other, awestruck. In Mount Pisgah you saw the
      girls home from night church, socials, or parties; you could hang over the
      gate; and you might walk with a girl in the cemetery of a Sunday
      afternoon; but to ring a front-door bell and ask for Miss Heart's Desire
      one must have been in long trousers at least three years—and the two
      boys confronted in the dusty road had worn these dignifying garments
      barely six months.

 "Girls," said Abner, loftily; "I don't know about girls—I'm just
      going to call on one girl—Champe Claiborne." He marched on as though
      the conversation was at an end; but Ross hung upon his flank. Ross and
      Champe were neighbors, comrades in all sorts of mischief; he was in doubt
      whether to halt Abner and pummel him, or propose to enlist under his
      banner.

 "Do you reckon you could?" he debated, trotting along by the irresponsive
      Jilton boy.

 "Run home to your mother," growled the originator of the plan, savagely.
      "You ain't old enough to call on girls; anybody can see that; but I am,
      and I'm going to call on Champe Claiborne."

 Again the name acted as a spur on Ross. "With your collar and boots all
      dirty?" he jeered. "They won't know you're callin'."

 The boy in the road stopped short in his dusty tracks. He was an intense
      creature, and he whitened at the tragic insinuation, longing for the
      wholesome stay and companionship of freckle-faced Ross. "I put the dirt on
      o' purpose so's to look kind of careless," he half whispered, in an agony
      of doubt. "S'pose I'd better go into your house and try to wash it off?
      Reckon your mother would let me?"

 "I've got two clean collars," announced the other boy, proudly generous.
      "I'll lend you one. You can put it on while I'm getting ready. I'll tell
      mother that we're just stepping out to do a little calling on the girls."

 Here was an ally worthy of the cause. Abner welcomed him, in spite of
      certain jealous twinges. He reflected with satisfaction that there were
      two Claiborne girls, and though Alicia was so stiff and prim that no boy
      would ever think of calling on her, there was still the hope that she
      might draw Ross's fire, and leave him, Abner, to make the numerous remarks
      he had stored up in his mind from Hints and Helps to Young Men in
      Social and Business Relations to Champe alone.

 Mrs. Pryor received them with the easy-going kindness of the mother of one
      son. She followed them into the dining-room to kiss and feed him, with an
      absent "Howdy, Abner; how's your mother?"

 Abner, big with the importance of their mutual intention, inclined his
      head stiffly and looked toward Ross for explanation. He trembled a little,
      but it was with delight, as he anticipated the effect of the speech Ross
      had outlined. But it did not come.

 "I'm not hungry, mother," was the revised edition which the freckle-faced
      boy offered to the maternal ear. "I—we are going over to Mr.
      Claiborne's—on—er—on an errand for Abner's father."

 The black-eyed boy looked reproach as they clattered up the stairs to
      Ross's room, where the clean collar was produced and a small stock of
      ties.

 "You'd wear a necktie—wouldn't you?" Ross asked, spreading them upon
      the bureau-top.

 "Yes. But make it fall carelessly over your shirt-front," advised the
      student of Hints and Helps . "Your collar is miles too big for me.
      Say! I've got a wad of white chewing-gum; would you flat it out and stick
      it over the collar button? Maybe that would fill up some. You kick my foot
      if you see me turning my head so's to knock it off."

 "Better button up your vest," cautioned Ross, laboring with the "careless"
      fall of his tie.

 "Huh-uh! I want 'that easy air which presupposes familiarity with society'—that's
      what it says in my book," objected Abner.

 "Sure!" Ross returned to his more familiar jeering attitude. "Loosen up
      all your clothes, then. Why don't you untie your shoes? Flop a sock down
      over one of 'em—that looks 'easy' all right."

 Abner buttoned his vest. "It gives a man lots of confidence to know he's
      good-looking," he remarked, taking all the room in front of the mirror.

 Ross, at the wash-stand soaking his hair to get the curl out of it,
      grumbled some unintelligible response. The two boys went down the stairs
      with tremulous hearts.

 "Why, you've put on another clean shirt, Rossie!" Mrs. Pryor called from
      her chair—mothers' eyes can see so far! "Well—don't get into
      any dirty play and soil it." The boys walked in silence—but it was a
      pregnant silence; for as the roof of the Claiborne house began to peer
      above the crest of the hill, Ross plumped down on a stone and announced,
      "I ain't goin'."

 "Come on," urged the black-eyed boy. "It'll be fun—and everybody
      will respect us more. Champe won't throw rocks at us in recess-time, after
      we've called on her. She couldn't."

 "Called!" grunted Ross. "I couldn't make a call any more than a cow.
      What'd I say? What'd I do? I can behave all right when you just go to
      people's houses—but a call!"

 Abner hesitated. Should he give away his brilliant inside information,
      drawn from the Hints and Helps book, and be rivalled in the glory
      of his manners and bearing? Why should he not pass on alone, perfectly
      composed, and reap the field of glory unsupported? His knees gave way and
      he sat down without intending it.

 "Don't you tell anybody and I'll put you on to exactly what grown-up
      gentlemen say and do when they go calling on the girls," he began.

 "Fire away," retorted Ross, gloomily. "Nobody will find out from me. Dead
      men tell no tales. If I'm fool enough to go, I don't expect to come out of
      it alive."

 Abner rose, white and shaking, and thrusting three fingers into the
      buttoning of his vest, extending the other hand like an orator, proceeded
      to instruct the freckled, perspiring disciple at his feet.

 "'Hang your hat on the rack, or give it to a servant.'" Ross nodded
      intelligently. He could do that.

 "'Let your legs be gracefully disposed, one hand on the knee, the other—'"

 Abner came to an unhappy pause. "I forget what a fellow does with the
      other hand. Might stick it in your pocket, loudly, or expectorate on the
      carpet. Indulge in little frivolity. Let a rich stream of conversation
      flow.'"

 Ross mentally dug within himself for sources of rich streams of
      conversation. He found a dry soil. "What you goin' to talk about?" he
      demanded, fretfully. "I won't go a step farther till I know what I'm goin'
      to say when I get there."

 Abner began to repeat paragraphs from Hints and Helps . "'It is best
      to remark,'" he opened, in an unnatural voice, "'How well you are
      looking!' although fulsome compliments should be avoided. When seated ask
      the young lady who her favorite composer is.'"

 "What's a composer?" inquired Ross, with visions of soothing-syrup in his
      mind.

 "A man that makes up music. Don't butt in that way; you put me all out—'composer
      is. Name yours. Ask her what piece of music she likes best. Name yours. If
      the lady is musical, here ask her to play or sing.'"

 This chanted recitation seemed to have a hypnotic effect on the freckled
      boy; his big pupils contracted each time Abner came to the repetend, "Name
      yours."

 "I'm tired already," he grumbled; but some spell made him rise and fare
      farther.

 When they had entered the Claiborne gate, they leaned toward each other
      like young saplings weakened at the root and locking branches to keep what
      shallow foothold on earth remained.

 "You're goin' in first," asserted Ross, but without conviction. It was his
      custom to tear up to this house a dozen times a week, on his father's old
      horse or afoot; he was wont to yell for Champe as he approached, and
      quarrel joyously with her while he performed such errand as he had come
      upon; but he was gagged and hamstrung now by the hypnotism of Abner's
      scheme.

 "'Walk quietly up the steps; ring the bell and lay your card on the
      servant,'" quoted Abner, who had never heard of a server.

 "'Lay your card on the servant!'" echoed Ross. "Cady'd dodge. There's a
      porch to cross after you go up the steps—does it say anything about
      that?"

 "It says that the card should be placed on the servant," Abner reiterated,
      doggedly. "If Cady dodges, it ain't any business of mine. There are no
      porches in my book. Just walk across it like anybody. We'll ask for Miss
      Champe Claiborne."

 "We haven't got any cards," discovered Ross, with hope.

 "I have," announced Abner, pompously. "I had some struck off in Chicago. I
      ordered 'em by mail. They got my name Pillow, but there's a scalloped gilt
      border around it. You can write your name on my card. Got a pencil?"

 He produced the bit of cardboard; Ross fished up a chewed stump of lead
      pencil, took it in cold, stiff fingers, and disfigured the square with
      eccentric scribblings.

 "They'll know who it's meant for," he said, apologetically, "because I'm
      here. What's likely to happen after we get rid of the card?"

 "I told you about hanging your hat on the rack and disposing your legs."

 "I remember now," sighed Ross. They had been going slower and slower. The
      angle of inclination toward each other became more and more pronounced.

 "We must stand by each other," whispered Abner.

 "I will—if I can stand at all," murmured the other boy, huskily.

 "Oh, Lord!" They had rounded the big clump of evergreens and found Aunt
      Missouri Claiborne placidly rocking on the front porch! Directed to mount
      steps and ring bell, to lay cards upon the servant, how should one deal
      with a rosy-faced, plump lady of uncertain years in a rocking-chair. What
      should a caller lay upon her? A lion in the way could not have been more
      terrifying. Even retreat was cut off. Aunt Missouri had seen them. "Howdy,
      boys; how are you?" she said, rocking peacefully. The two stood before her
      like detected criminals.

 Then, to Ross's dismay, Abner sank down on the lowest step of the porch,
      the westering sun full in his hopeless eyes. He sat on his cap. It was
      characteristic that the freckled boy remained standing. He would walk up
      those steps according to plan and agreement, if at all. He accepted no
      compromise. Folding his straw hat into a battered cone, he watched
      anxiously for the delivery of the card. He was not sure what Aunt
      Missouri's attitude might be if it were laid on her. He bent down to his
      companion. "Go ahead," he whispered. "Lay the card."

 Abner raised appealing eyes. "In a minute. Give me time," he pleaded.

 "Mars' Ross—Mars' Ross! Head 'em off!" sounded a yell, and Babe, the
      house-boy, came around the porch in pursuit of two half-grown chickens.

 "Help him, Rossie," prompted Aunt Missouri, sharply. "You boys can stay to
      supper and have some of the chicken if you help catch them."

 Had Ross taken time to think, he might have reflected that gentlemen
      making formal calls seldom join in a chase after the main dish of the
      family supper. But the needs of Babe were instant. The lad flung himself
      sidewise, caught one chicken in his hat, while Babe fell upon the other in
      the manner of a football player. Ross handed the pullet to the house-boy,
      fearing that he had done something very much out of character, then pulled
      the reluctant negro toward to the steps.

 "Babe's a servant," he whispered to Abner, who had sat rigid through the
      entire performance. "I helped him with the chickens, and he's got to stand
      gentle while you lay the card on."

 Confronted by the act itself, Abner was suddenly aware that he knew not
      how to begin. He took refuge in dissimulation.

 "Hush!" he whispered back. "Don't you see Mr. Claiborne's come out?—He's
      going to read something to us."

 Ross plumped down beside him. "Never mind the card; tell 'em," he urged.

 "Tell 'em yourself."

 "No—let's cut and run."

 "I—I think the worst of it is over. When Champe sees us she'll—"

 Mention of Champe stiffened Ross's spine. If it had been glorious to call
      upon her, how very terrible she would make it should they attempt calling,
      fail, and the failure come to her knowledge! Some things were easier to
      endure than others; he resolved to stay till the call was made.

 For half an hour the boys sat with drooping heads, and the old gentleman
      read aloud, presumably to Aunt Missouri and themselves. Finally their
      restless eyes discerned the two Claiborne girls walking serene in Sunday
      trim under the trees at the edge of the lawn. Arms entwined, they were
      whispering together and giggling a little. A caller, Ross dared not use
      his voice to shout nor his legs to run toward them.

 "Why don't you go and talk to the girls, Rossie?" Aunt Missouri asked, in
      the kindness of her heart. "Don't be noisy—it's Sunday, you know—and
      don't get to playing anything that'll dirty up your good clothes."

 Ross pressed his lips hard together; his heart swelled with the rage of
      the misunderstood. Had the card been in his possession, he would, at that
      instant, have laid it on Aunt Missouri without a qualm.

 "What is it?" demanded the old gentleman, a bit testily.

 "The girls want to hear you read, father," said Aunt Missouri, shrewdly;
      and she got up and trotted on short, fat ankles to the girls in the arbor.
      The three returned together, Alicia casting curious glances at the
      uncomfortable youths, Champe threatening to burst into giggles with every
      breath.

 Abner sat hard on his cap and blushed silently. Ross twisted his hat into
      a three-cornered wreck.

 The two girls settled themselves noisily on the upper step. The old man
      read on and on. The sun sank lower. The hills were red in the west as
      though a brush fire flamed behind their crests. Abner stole a furtive
      glance at his companion in misery, and the dolor of Ross's countenance
      somewhat assuaged his anguish. The freckle-faced boy was thinking of the
      village over the hill, a certain pleasant white house set back in a green
      yard, past whose gate, the two-plank sidewalk ran. He knew lamps were
      beginning to wink in the windows of the neighbors about, as though the
      houses said, "Our boys are all at home—but Ross Pryor's out trying
      to call on the girls, and can't get anybody to understand it." Oh, that he
      were walking down those two planks, drawing a stick across the pickets,
      lifting high happy feet which could turn in at that gate! He wouldn't care
      what the lamps said then. He wouldn't even mind if the whole Claiborne
      family died laughing at him—if only some power would raise him up
      from this paralyzing spot and put him behind the safe barriers of his own
      home!

 The old man's voice lapsed into silence; the light was becoming too dim
      for his reading. Aunt Missouri turned and called over her shoulder into
      the shadows of the big hall: "You Babe! Go put two extra plates on the
      supper-table."

 The boys grew red from the tips of their ears, and as far as any one could
      see under their wilting collars. Abner felt the lump of gum come loose and
      slip down a cold spine. Had their intentions but been known, this
      inferential invitation would have been most welcome. It was but to rise up
      and thunder out, "We came to call on the young ladies."

 They did not rise. They did not thunder out anything. Babe brought a lamp
      and set it inside the window, and Mr. Claiborne resumed his reading.
      Champe giggled and said that Alicia made her. Alcia drew her skirts about
      her, sniffed, and looked virtuous, and said she didn't see anything funny
      to laugh at. The supper-bell rang. The family, evidently taking it for
      granted that the boys would follow, went in.

 Alone for the first time, Abner gave up. "This ain't any use," he
      complained. "We ain't calling on anybody."

 "Why didn't you lay on the card?" demanded Ross, fiercely. "Why didn't you
      say: 'We've-just-dropped-into-call-on-Miss-Champe. It's-a
      -pleasant-evening. We-feel-we-must-be-going,' like you said you would?
      Then we could have lifted our hats and got away decently."

 Abner showed no resentment.

 "Oh, if it's so easy, why didn't you do it yourself?" he groaned.

 "Somebody's coming," Ross muttered, hoarsely. "Say it now. Say it quick."

 The somebody proved to be Aunt Missouri, who advanced only as far as the
      end of the hall and shouted cheerfully: "The idea of a growing boy not
      coming to meals when the bell rings! I thought you two would be in there
      ahead of us. Come on." And clinging to their head-coverings as though
      these contained some charm whereby the owners might be rescued, the
      unhappy callers were herded into the dining-room. There were many things
      on the table that boys like. Both were becoming fairly cheerful, when Aunt
      Missouri checked the biscuit-plate with: "I treat my neighbors' children
      just like I'd want children of my own treated. If your mothers let you eat
      all you want, say so, and I don't care; but if either of them is a little
      bit particular, why, I'd stop at six!"

 Still reeling from this blow, the boys finally rose from the table and
      passed out with the family, their hats clutched to their bosoms, and
      clinging together for mutual aid and comfort. During the usual
      Sunday-evening singing Champe laughed till Aunt Missouri threatened to
      send her to bed. Abner's card slipped from his hand and dropped face up on
      the floor. He fell upon it and tore it into infinitesimal pieces.

 "That must have been a love-letter," said Aunt Missouri, in a pause of the
      music. "You boys are getting 'most old enough to think about beginning to
      call on the girls." Her eyes twinkled.

 Ross growled like a stoned cur. Abner took a sudden dive into Hints and
      Helps , and came up with, "You flatter us, Miss Claiborne," whereat
      Ross snickered out like a human boy. They all stared at him.

 "It sounds so funny to call Aunt Missouri 'Mis' Claiborne,'" the lad of
      the freckles explained.

 "Funny?" Aunt Missouri reddened. "I don't see any particular joke in my
      having my maiden name."

 Abner, who instantly guessed at what was in Ross's mind, turned white at
      the thought of what they had escaped. Suppose he had laid on the card and
      asked for Miss Claiborne!

 "What's the matter, Champe?" inquired Ross, in a fairly natural tone. The
      air he had drawn into his lungs when he laughed at Abner seemed to relieve
      him from the numbing gentility which had bound his powers since he joined
      Abner's ranks.

 "Nothing. I laughed because you laughed," said the girl.

 The singing went forward fitfully. Servants traipsed through the darkened
      yard, going home for Sunday night. Aunt Missouri went out and held some
      low-toned parley with them. Champe yawned with insulting enthusiasm.
      Presently both girls quietly disappeared. Aunt Missouri never returned to
      the parlor—evidently thinking that the girls would attend to the
      final amenities with their callers. They were left alone with old Mr.
      Claiborne. They sat as though bound in their chairs, while the old man
      read in silence for a while. Finally he closed his book, glanced about
      him, and observed absently:

 "So you boys were to spend the night?" Then, as he looked at their
      startled faces: "I'm right, am I not? You are to spent the night?"

 Oh, for courage to say: "Thank you, no. We'll be going now. We just came
      over to call on Miss Champe." But thought of how this would sound in face
      of the facts, the painful realization that they dared not say it because
      they had not said it, locked their lips. Their feet were lead;
      their tongues stiff and too large for their mouths. Like creatures in a
      nightmare, they moved stiffly, one might have said creakingly, up the
      stairs and received each—a bedroom candle!

 "Good night, children," said the absent-minded old man. The two gurgled
      out some sounds which were intended for words and doged behind the bedroom
      door.

 "They've put us to bed!" Abner's black eyes flashed fire. His nervous
      hands clutched at the collar Ross had lent him. "That's what I get for
      coming here with you, Ross Pryor!" And tears of humiliation stood in his
      eyes.

 In his turn Ross showed no resentment. "What I'm worried about is my
      mother," he confessed. "She's so sharp about finding out things. She
      wouldn't tease me—she'd just be sorry for me. But she'll think I
      went home with you."

 "I'd like to see my mother make a fuss about my calling on the girls!"
      growled Abner, glad to let his rage take a safe direction.

 "Calling on the girls! Have we called on any girls?" demanded
      clear-headed, honest Ross.

 "Not exactly—yet," admitted Abner, reluctantly. "Come on—let's
      go to bed. Mr. Claiborne asked us, and he's the head of this household. It
      isn't anybody's business what we came for."

 "I'll slip off my shoes and lie down till Babe ties up the dog in the
      morning," said Ross. "Then we can get away before any of the family is
      up."

 Oh, youth—youth—youth, with its rash promises! Worn out with
      misery the boys slept heavily. The first sound that either heard in the
      morning was Babe hammering upon their bedroom door. They crouched guiltily
      and looked into each other's eyes. "Let pretend we ain't here and he'll go
      away," breathed Abner.

 But Babe was made of sterner stuff. He rattled the knob. He turned it. He
      put in a black face with a grin which divided it from ear to ear. "Cady
      say I mus' call dem fool boys to breakfus'," he announced. "I never named
      you-all dat. Cady, she say dat."

 "Breakfast!" echoed Ross, in a daze.

 "Yessuh, breakfus'," reasserted Babe, coming entirely into the room and
      looking curiously about him. "Ain't you-all done been to bed at all?"
      wrapping his arms about his shoulders and shaking with silent ecstasies of
      mirth. The boys threw themselves upon him and ejected him.

 "Sent up a servant to call us to breakfast," snarled Abner. "If they'd
      only sent their old servant to the door in the first place, all this
      wouldn't 'a' happened. I'm just that way when I get thrown off the track.
      You know how it was when I tried to repeat those things to you—I had
      to go clear back to the beginning when I got interrupted."

 "Does that mean that you're still hanging around here to begin over and
      make a call?" asked Ross, darkly. "I won't go down to breakfast if you
      are."

 Abner brightened a little as he saw Ross becoming wordy in his rage. "I
      dare you to walk downstairs and say,
      'We-just-dropped-in-to-call-on-Miss-Champe'!" he said.

 "I—oh—I—darn it all! there goes the second bell. We may
      as well trot down."

 "Don't leave me, Ross," pleaded the Jilton boy. "I can't stay here—and
      I can't go down."

 The tone was hysterical. The boy with freckles took his companion by the
      arm without another word and marched him down the stairs. "We may get a
      chance yet to call on Champe all by herself out on the porch or in the
      arbor before she goes to school," he suggested, by way of putting some
      spine into the black-eyed boy.

 An emphatic bell rang when they were half-way down the stairs. Clutching
      their hats, they slunk into the dining-room. Even Mr. Claiborne seemed to
      notice something unusual in their bearing as they settled into the chairs
      assigned to them, and asked them kindly if they had slept well.

 It was plain that Aunt Missouri had been posting him as to her
      understanding of the intentions of these young men. The state of affairs
      gave an electric hilarity to the atmosphere. Babe travelled from the
      sideboard to the table, trembling like chocolate pudding. Cady insisted on
      bringing in the cakes herself, and grinned as she whisked her starched
      blue skirts in and out of the dining-room. A dimple even showed itself at
      the corners of pretty Alicia's prim little mouth. Champe giggled, till
      Ross heard Cady whisper:

 "Now you got one dem snickerin' spells agin. You gwine bust yo' dress
      buttons off in the back ef you don't mind."

 As the spirits of those about them mounted, the hearts of the two youths
      sank—if it was like this among the Claibornes, what would it be at
      school and in the world at large when their failure to connect intention
      with result became village talk? Ross bit fiercely upon an unoffending
      batter-cake, and resolved to make a call single-handed before he left the
      house.

 They went out of the dining-room, their hats as ever pressed to their
      breasts. With no volition of their own, their uncertain young legs carried
      them to the porch. The Claiborne family and household followed like small
      boys after a circus procession. When the two turned, at bay, yet with
      nothing between them and liberty but a hypnotism of their own suggestion,
      they saw the black faces of the servants peering over the family
      shoulders.

 Ross was the boy to have drawn courage from the desperation of their case,
      and made some decent if not glorious ending. But at the psychological
      moment there came around the corner of the house that most contemptible
      figure known to the Southern plantation, a shirt-boy—a creature who
      may be described, for the benefit of those not informed, as a pickaninny
      clad only in a long, coarse cotton shirt. While all eyes were fastened
      upon him this inglorious ambassador bolted forth his message:

 "Yo' ma say"—his eyes were fixed upon Abner—"ef yo' don' come
      home, she gwine come after yo'—an' cut yo' into inch pieces wid a
      rawhide when she git yo'. Dat jest what Miss Hortense say."

 As though such a book as Hints and Helps had never existed, Abner
      shot for the gate—he was but a hobbledehoy fascinated with the idea
      of playing gentleman. But in Ross there were the makings of a man. For a
      few half-hearted paces, under the first impulse of horror, he followed his
      deserting chief, the laughter of the family, the unrestrainable guffaws of
      the negroes, sounding in the rear. But when Champe's high, offensive
      giggle, topping all the others, insulted his ears, he stopped dead,
      wheeled, and ran to the porch faster than he had fled from it. White as
      paper, shaking with inexpressible rage, he caught and kissed the tittering
      girl, violently, noisily, before them all.

 The negroes fled—they dared not trust their feelings; even Alicia
      sniggered unobtrusively; Grandfather Claiborne chuckled, and Aunt Missouri
      frankly collapsed into her rocking-chair, bubbling with mirth, crying out:

 "Good for you, Ross! Seems you did know how to call on the girls, after
      all."

 But Ross, paying no attention, walked swiftly toward the gate. He had
      served his novitiate. He would never be afraid again. With cheerful
      alacrity he dodged the stones flung after him with friendly, erratic aim
      by the girl upon whom, yesterday afternoon, he had come to make a social
      call.