A DOG OF FLANDERS, by Ouida

 Nello and Patrasche were left all alone in the world.

 They were friends in a friendship closer than brotherhood. Nello was a
      little Ardennois; Patrasche was a big Fleming. They were both of the same
      age by length of years; yet one was still young, and the other was already
      old. They had dwelt together almost all their days; both were orphaned and
      destitute, and owed their lives to the same hand. It had been the
      beginning of the tie between them,—their first bond of sympathy,—and
      it had strengthened day by day, and had grown with their growth, firm and
      indissoluble, until they loved one another very greatly.

 Their home was a little hut on the edge of a little village—a
      Flemish village a league from Antwerp, set amidst flat breadths of pasture
      and corn-lands, with long lines of poplars and of alders bending in the
      breeze on the edge of the great canal which ran through it. It had about a
      score of houses and homesteads, with shutters of bright green or sky blue,
      and roofs rose red or black and white, and walls whitewashed until they
      shone in the sun like snow. In the centre of the village stood a windmill,
      placed on a little moss-grown slope; it was a landmark to all the level
      country round. It had once been painted scarlet, sails and all; but that
      had been in its infancy, half a century or more earlier, when it had
      ground wheat for the soldiers of Napoleon; and it was now a ruddy brown,
      tanned by wind and weather. It went queerly by fits and starts, as though
      rheumatic and stiff in the joints from age; but it served the whole
      neighborhood, which would have thought it almost as impious to carry grain
      elsewhere as to attend any other religious service than the mass that was
      performed at the altar of the little old gray church, with its conical
      steeple, which stood opposite to it, and whose single bell rang morning,
      noon, and night with that strange, subdued, hollow sadness which every
      bell that hangs in the Low Countries seems to gain as an integral part of
      its melody.

 Within sound of the little melancholy clock almost from their birth
      upward, they had dwelt together, Nello and Patrasche, in the little hut on
      the edge of the village, with the cathedral spire of Antwerp rising in the
      northeast, beyond the great green plain of seeding grass and spreading
      corn that stretched away from them like a tideless, changeless sea. It was
      the hut of a very old man, of a very poor man—of old Jehan Daas, who
      in his time had been a soldier, and who remembered the wars that had
      trampled the country as oxen tread down the furrows, and who had brought
      from his service nothing except a wound, which had made him a cripple.

 When old Jehan Daas had reached his full eighty, his daughter had died in
      the Ardennes, hard by Stavelot, and had left him in legacy her
      two-year-old son. The old man could ill contrive to support himself, but
      he took up the additional burden uncomplainingly, and it soon became
      welcome and precious to him. Little Nello, which was but a pet diminutive
      for Nicolas, throve with him, and the old man and the little child lived
      in the poor little hut contentedly.

 It was a very humble little mud hut indeed, but it was clean and white as
      a sea-shell, and stood in a small plot of garden ground that yielded beans
      and herbs and pumpkins. They were very poor, terribly poor; many a day
      they had nothing at all to eat. They never by any chance had enough; to
      have had enough to eat would have been to have reached paradise at once.
      But the old man was very gentle and good to the boy, and the boy was a
      beautiful, innocent, truthful, tender-natured creature; and they were
      happy on a crust and a few leaves of cabbage, and asked no more of earth
      or heaven—save indeed that Patrasche should be always with them,
      since without Patrasche where would they have been?

 For Patrasche was their alpha and omega; their treasury and granary; their
      store of gold and wand of wealth; their bread-winner and minister; their
      only friend and comforter. Patrasche dead or gone from them, they must
      have laid themselves down and died likewise. Patrasche was body, brains,
      hands, head, and feet to both of them; Patrasche was their very life,
      their very soul. For Jehan Daas was old and a cripple, and Nello was but a
      child; and Patrasche was their dog.

 A dog of Flanders—yellow of hide, large of head and limb, with
      wolf-like ears that stood erect, and legs bowed and feet widened in the
      muscular development wrought in his breed by many generations of hard
      service. Patrasche came of a race which had toiled hard and cruelly from
      sire to son in Flanders many a century—slaves of slaves, dogs of the
      people, beasts of the shafts and the harness, creatures that lived
      straining their sinews in the gall of the cart, and died breaking their
      hearts on the flints of the streets.

 Patrasche had been born of parents who had labored hard all their days
      over the sharp-set stones of the various cities and the long, shadowless,
      weary roads of the two Flanders and of Brabant. He had been born to no
      other heritage than those of pain and of toil. He had been fed on curses
      and baptized with blows. Why not? It was a Christian country, and
      Patrasche was but a dog. Before he was fully grown he had known the bitter
      gall of the cart and the collar. Before he had entered his thirteenth
      month he had become the property of a hardware dealer, who was accustomed
      to wander over the land north and south, from the blue sea to the green
      mountains. They sold him for a small price, because he was so young.

 This man was a drunkard and a brute. The life of Patrasche was a life of
      hell. To deal the tortures of hell on the animal creation is a way which
      the Christians have of showing their belief in it. His purchaser was a
      sullen, ill-living, brutal Brabantois, who heaped his cart full with pots
      and pans and flagons and buckets, and other wares of crockery and brass
      and tin, and left Patrasche to draw the load as best he might, while he
      himself lounged idly by the side in fat and sluggish ease, smoking his
      black pipe and stopping at every wineshop or cafe on the road.

 Happily for Patrasche, or unhappily, he was very strong; he came of an
      iron race, long born and bred to such cruel travail; so that he did not
      die, but managed to drag on a wretched existence under the brutal burdens,
      the scarifying lashes, the hunger, the thirst, the blows, the curses, and
      the exhaustion which are the only wages with which the Flemings repay the
      most patient and laborious of all their four-footed victims. One day,
      after two years of this long and deadly agony, Patrasche was going on as
      usual along one of the straight, dusty, unlovely roads that lead to the
      city of Rubens. It was full midsummer, and very warm. His cart was very
      heavy, piled high with goods in metal and in earthenware. His owner
      sauntered on without noticing him otherwise than by the crack of the whip
      as it curled round his quivering loins. The Brabantois had paused to drink
      beer himself at every wayside house, but he had forbidden Patrasche to
      stop a moment for a draught from the canal. Going along thus, in the full
      sun, on a scorching highway, having eaten nothing for twenty-four hours,
      and, which was far worse to him, not having tasted water for near twelve,
      being blind with dust, sore with blows, and stupefied with the merciless
      weight which dragged upon his loins, Patrasche staggered and foamed a
      little at the mouth, and fell.

 He fell in the middle of the white, dusty road, in the full glare of the
      sun; he was sick unto death, and motionless. His master gave him the only
      medicine in his pharmacy—kicks and oaths and blows with a cudgel of
      oak, which had been often the only food and drink, the only wage and
      reward, ever offered to him. But Patrasche was beyond the reach of any
      torture or of any curses. Patrasche lay, dead to all appearances, down in
      the white powder of the summer dust. After a while, finding it useless to
      assail his ribs with punishment and his ears with maledictions, the
      Brabantois—deeming life gone in him, or going, so nearly that his
      carcass was forever useless, unless, indeed, some one should strip it of
      the skin for gloves—cursed him fiercely in farewell, struck off the
      leathern bands of the harness, kicked his body aside into the grass, and,
      groaning and muttering in savage wrath, pushed the cart lazily along the
      road uphill, and left the dying dog for the ants to sting and for the
      crows to pick.

 It was the last day before kermess away at Louvain, and the Brabantois was
      in haste to reach the fair and get a good place for his truck of brass
      wares. He was in fierce wrath, because Patrasche had been a strong and
      much-enduring animal, and because he himself had now the hard task of
      pushing his charette all the way to Louvain. But to stay to look
      after Patrasche never entered his thoughts; the beast was dying and
      useless, and he would steal, to replace him, the first large dog that he
      found wandering alone out of sight of its master. Patrasche had cost him
      nothing, or next to nothing, and for two long, cruel years he had made him
      toil ceaselessly in his service from sunrise to sunset, through summer and
      winter, in fair weather and foul.

 He had got a fair use and a good profit out of Patrasche; being human, he
      was wise, and left the dog to draw his last breath alone in the ditch, and
      have his bloodshot eyes plucked out as they might be by the birds, whilst
      he himself went on his way to beg and to steal, to eat and to drink, to
      dance and to sing, in the mirth at Louvain. A dying dog, a dog of the cart—why
      should he waste hours over its agonies at peril of losing a handful of
      copper coins, at peril of a shout of laughter?

 Patrasche lay there, flung in the grass-green ditch. It was a busy road
      that day, and hundreds of people, on foot and on mules, in waggons or in
      carts, went by, tramping quickly and joyously on to Louvain. Some saw him;
      most did not even look; all passed on. A dead dog more or less—it
      was nothing in Brabant; it would be nothing anywhere in the world.

 After a time, among the holiday-makers, there came a little old man who
      was bent and lame, and very feeble. He was in no guise for feasting; he
      was very poorly and miserably clad, and he dragged his silent way slowly
      through the dust among the pleasure-seekers. He looked at Patrasche,
      paused, wondered, turned aside, then kneeled down in the rank grass and
      weeds of the ditch, and surveyed the dog with kindly eyes of pity. There
      was with him a little rosy, fair-haired, dark-eyed child of a few years
      old, who pattered in amid the bushes, that were for him breast-high, and
      stood gazing with a pretty seriousness upon the poor, great, quiet beast.

 Thus it was that these two first met—the little Nello and the big
      Patrasche.

 The upshot of that day was, that old Jehan Daas, with much laborious
      effort, drew the sufferer homeward to his own little hut, which was a
      stone’s throw off amidst the fields; and there tended him with so much
      care that the sickness, which had been a brain seizure brought on by heat
      and thirst and exhaustion, with time and shade and rest passed away, and
      health and strength returned, and Patrasche staggered up again upon his
      four stout, tawny legs.

 Now for many weeks he had been useless, powerless, sore, near to death;
      but all this time he had heard no rough word, had felt no harsh touch, but
      only the pitying murmurs of the child’s voice and the soothing caress of
      the old man’s hand.

 In his sickness they two had grown to care for him, this lonely man and
      the little happy child. He had a corner of the hut, with a heap of dry
      grass for his bed; and they had learned to listen eagerly for his
      breathing in the dark night, to tell them that he lived; and when he first
      was well enough to essay a loud, hollow, broken bay, they laughed aloud,
      and almost wept together for joy at such a sign of his sure restoration;
      and little Nello, in delighted glee, hung round his rugged neck chains of
      marguerites, and kissed him with fresh and ruddy lips.

 So then, when Patrasche arose, himself again, strong, big, gaunt,
      powerful, his great wistful eyes had a gentle astonishment in them that
      there were no curses to rouse him and no blows to drive him; and his heart
      awakened to a mighty love, which never wavered once in its fidelity while
      life abode with him.

 But Patrasche, being a dog, was grateful. Patrasche lay pondering long
      with grave, tender, musing brown eyes, watching the movements of his
      friends.

 Now, the old soldier, Jehan Daas, could do nothing for his living but limp
      about a little with a small cart, with which he carried daily the
      milk-cans of those happier neighbours who owned cattle away into the town
      of Antwerp. The villagers gave him the employment a little out of charity;
      more because it suited them well to send their milk into the town by so
      honest a carrier, and bide at home themselves to look after their gardens,
      their cows, their poultry, or their little fields. But it was becoming
      hard work for the old man. He was eighty-three, and Antwerp was a good
      league off, or more.

 Patrasche watched the milk-cans come and go that one day when he had got
      well and was lying in the sun with the wreath of marguerites round his
      tawny neck.

 The next morning, Patrasche, before the old man had touched the cart,
      arose and walked to it and placed himself betwixt its handles, and
      testified as plainly as dumb-show could do his desire and his ability to
      work in return for the bread of charity that he had eaten. Jehan Daas
      resisted long, for the old man was one of those who thought it a foul
      shame to bind dogs to labor for which Nature never formed them. But
      Patrasche would not be gainsaid; finding they did not harness him, he
      tried to draw the cart onward with his teeth.

 At length Jehan Daas gave way, vanquished by the persistence and the
      gratitude of this creature whom he had succored. He fashioned his cart so
      that Patrasche could run in it, and this he did every morning of his life
      thenceforward.

 When the winter came, Jehan Daas thanked the blessed fortune that had
      brought him to the dying dog in the ditch that fair-day of Louvain; for he
      was very old, and he grew feebler with each year, and he would ill have
      known how to pull his load of milk-cans over the snows and through the
      deep ruts in the mud if it had not been for the strength and the industry
      of the animal he had befriended. As for Patrasche, it seemed heaven to
      him. After the frightful burdens that his old master had compelled him to
      strain under, at the call of the whip at every step, it seemed nothing to
      him but amusement to step out with this little light, green cart, with its
      bright brass cans, by the side of the gentle old man who always paid him
      with a tender caress and with a kindly word. Besides, his work was over by
      three or four in the day, and after that time he was free to do as he
      would—to stretch himself, to sleep in the sun, to wander in the
      fields, to romp with the young child, or to play with his fellow-dogs.
      Patrasche was very happy.

 Fortunately for his peace, his former owner was killed in a drunken brawl
      at the kermess of Mechlin, and so sought not after him nor disturbed him
      in his new and well-loved home.

 A few years later, old Jehan Daas, who had always been a cripple, became
      so paralyzed with rheumatism that it was impossible for him to go out with
      the cart any more. Then little Nello, being now grown to his sixth year of
      age, and knowing the town well from having accompanied his grandfather so
      many times, took his place beside the cart, and sold the milk and received
      the coins in exchange, and brought them back to their respective owners
      with a pretty grace and seriousness which charmed all who beheld him.

 The little Ardennois was a beautiful child, with dark, grave, tender eyes,
      and a lovely bloom upon his face, and fair locks that clustered to his
      throat; and many an artist sketched the group as it went by him—the
      green cart with the brass flagons of Teniers and Mieris and Van Tal, and
      the great, tawny-colored, massive dog, with his belled harness that chimed
      cheerily as he went, and the small figure that ran beside him which had
      little white feet in great wooden shoes, and a soft, grave, innocent,
      happy face like the little fair children of Rubens.

 Nello and Patrasche did the work so well and so joyfully together that
      Jehan Daas himself, when the summer came and he was better again, had no
      need to stir out, but could sit in the doorway in the sun and see them go
      forth through the garden wicket, and then doze and dream and pray a
      little, and then awake again as the clock tolled three and watch for their
      return. And on their return Patrasche would shake himself free of his
      harness with a bay of glee, and Nello would recount with pride the doings
      of the day; and they would all go in together to their meal of rye bread
      and milk or soup, and would see the shadows lengthen over the great plain,
      and see the twilight veil the fair cathedral spire; and then lie down
      together to sleep peacefully while the old man said a prayer.

 So the days and the years went on, and the lives of Nello and Patrasche
      were happy, innocent, and healthful.

 In the spring and summer especially were they glad. Flanders is not a
      lovely land, and around the burg of Rubens it is perhaps least lovely of
      all. Corn and colza, pasture and plough, succeed each other on the
      characterless plain in wearying repetition, and, save by some gaunt gray
      tower, with its peal of pathetic bells, or some figure coming athwart the
      fields, made picturesque by a gleaner’s bundle or a woodman’s fagot, there
      is no change, no variety, no beauty anywhere; and he who has dwelt upon
      the mountains or amid the forests feels oppressed as by imprisonment with
      the tedium and the endlessness of that vast and dreary level. But it is
      green and very fertile, and it has wide horizons that have a certain charm
      of their own even in their dulness and monotony; and among the rushes by
      the waterside the flowers grow, and the trees rise tall and fresh where
      the barges glide, with their great hulks black against the sun, and their
      little green barrels and vari-coloured flags gay against the leaves.
      Anyway, there is greenery and breadth of space enough to be as good as
      beauty to a child and a dog; and these two asked no better, when their
      work was done, than to lie buried in the lush grasses on the side of the
      canal, and watch the cumbrous vessels drifting by and bringing the crisp
      salt smell of the sea among the blossoming scents of the country summer.

 True, in the winter it was harder, and they had to rise in the darkness
      and the bitter cold, and they had seldom as much as they could have eaten
      any day; and the hut was scarce better than a shed when the nights were
      cold, although it looked so pretty in warm weather, buried in a great
      kindly clambering vine, that never bore fruit, indeed, but which covered
      it with luxuriant green tracery all through the months of blossom and
      harvest. In winter the winds found many holes in the walls of the poor
      little hut, and the vine was black and leafless, and the bare lands looked
      very bleak and drear without, and sometimes within the floor was flooded
      and then frozen. In winter it was hard, and the snow numbed the little
      white limbs of Nello, and the icicles cut the brave, untiring feet of
      Patrasche.

 But even then they were never heard to lament, either of them. The child’s
      wooden shoes and the dog’s four legs would trot manfully together over the
      frozen fields to the chime of the bells on the harness; and then
      sometimes, in the streets of Antwerp, some housewife would bring them a
      bowl of soup and a handful of bread, or some kindly trader would throw
      some billets of fuel into the little cart as it went homeward, or some
      woman in their own village would bid them keep a share of the milk they
      carried for their own food; and they would run over the white lands,
      through the early darkness, bright and happy, and burst with a shout of
      joy into their home.

 So, on the whole, it was well with them—very well; and Patrasche,
      meeting on the highway or in the public streets the many dogs who toiled
      from daybreak into nightfall, paid only with blows and curses, and
      loosened from the shafts with a kick to starve and freeze as best they
      might—Patrasche in his heart was very grateful to his fate, and
      thought it the fairest and the kindliest the world could hold. Though he
      was often very hungry indeed when he lay down at night; though he had to
      work in the heats of summer noons and the rasping chills of winter dawns;
      though his feet were often tender with wounds from the sharp edges of the
      jagged pavement; though he had to perform tasks beyond his strength and
      against his nature—yet he was grateful and content; he did his duty
      with each day, and the eyes that he loved smiled down on him. It was
      sufficient for Patrasche.

 There was only one thing which caused Patrasche any uneasiness in his
      life, and it was this. Antwerp, as all the world knows, is full at every
      turn of old piles of stones, dark and ancient and majestic, standing in
      crooked courts, jammed against gateways and taverns, rising by the water’s
      edge, with bells ringing above them in the air, and ever and again out of
      their arched doors a swell of music pealing. There they remain, the grand
      old sanctuaries of the past, shut in amid the squalor, the hurry, the
      crowds, the unloveliness, and the commerce of the modern world; and all
      day long the clouds drift and the birds circle and the winds sigh around
      them, and beneath the earth at their feet there sleeps—RUBENS.

 And the greatness of the mighty master still rests upon Antwerp, and
      wherever we turn in its narrow streets his glory lies therein, so that all
      mean things are thereby transfigured; and as we pace slowly through the
      winding ways, and by the edge of the stagnant water, and through the
      noisome courts, his spirit abides with us, and the heroic beauty of his
      visions is about us, and the stones that once felt his footsteps and bore
      his shadow seem to arise and speak of him with living voices. For the city
      which is the tomb of Rubens still lives to us through him, and him alone.

 It is so quiet there by that great white sepulchre—so quiet, save
      only when the organ peals and the choir cries aloud the Salve Regina or
      the Kyrie eleison. Sure no artist ever had a greater gravestone than that
      pure marble sanctuary gives to him in the heart of his birthplace in the
      chancel of St. Jacques.

 Without Rubens, what were Antwerp? A dirty, dusky, bustling mart, which no
      man would ever care to look upon save the traders who do business on its
      wharves. With Rubens, to the whole world of men it is a sacred name, a
      sacred soil, a Bethlehem where a god of art saw light, a Golgotha where a
      god of art lies dead.

 O nations! closely should you treasure your great men; for by them alone
      will the future know of you. Flanders in her generations has been wise. In
      his life she glorified this greatest of her sons, and in his death she
      magnifies his name. But her wisdom is very rare.

 Now, the trouble of Patrasche was this. Into these great, sad piles of
      stones, that reared their melancholy majesty above the crowded roofs, the
      child Nello would many and many a time enter, and disappear through their
      dark, arched portals, while Patrasche, left without upon the pavement,
      would wearily and vainly ponder on what could be the charm which thus
      allured from him his inseparable and beloved companion. Once or twice he
      did essay to see for himself, clattering up the steps with his milk-cart
      behind him; but thereon he had been always sent back again summarily by a
      tall custodian in black clothes and silver chains of office; and fearful
      of bringing his little master into trouble, he desisted, and remained
      couched patiently before the churches until such time as the boy
      reappeared. It was not the fact of his going into them which disturbed
      Patrasche; he knew that people went to church; all the village went to the
      small, tumble-down, gray pile opposite the red windmill. What troubled him
      was that little Nello always looked strangely when he came out, always
      very flushed or very pale; and whenever he returned home after such
      visitations would sit silent and dreaming, not caring to play, but gazing
      out at the evening skies beyond the line of the canal, very subdued and
      almost sad.

 What was it? wondered Patrasche. He thought it could not be good or
      natural for the little lad to be so grave, and in his dumb fashion he
      tried all he could to keep Nello by him in the sunny fields or in the busy
      market-place. But to the churches Nello would go; most often of all would
      he go to the great cathedral; and Patrasche, left without on the stones by
      the iron fragments of Quentin Matsys’s gate, would stretch himself and
      yawn and sigh, and even howl now and then, all in vain, until the doors
      closed and the child perforce came forth again, and winding his arms about
      the dog’s neck would kiss him on his broad, tawny-colored forehead, and
      murmur always the same words, “If I could only see them, Patrasche!—if
      I could only see them!”

 What were they? pondered Patrasche, looking up with large, wistful,
      sympathetic eyes.

 One day, when the custodian was out of the way and the doors left ajar, he
      got in for a moment after his little friend and saw. “They” were two great
      covered pictures on either side of the choir.

 Nello was kneeling, rapt as in an ecstasy, before the altar-picture of the
      Assumption, and when he noticed Patrasche, and rose and drew the dog
      gently out into the air, his face was wet with tears, and he looked up at
      the veiled places as he passed them, and murmured to his companion, “It is
      so terrible not to see them, Patrasche, just because one is poor and
      cannot pay! He never meant that the poor should not see them when he
      painted them, I am sure. He would have had us see them any day, every day;
      that I am sure. And they keep them shrouded there—shrouded! in the
      dark, the beautiful things! And they never feel the light, and no eyes
      look on them, unless rich people come and pay. If I could only see them, I
      would be content to die.”

 But he could not see them, and Patrasche could not help him, for to gain
      the silver piece that the church exacts as the price for looking on the
      glories of the “Elevation of the Cross” and the “Descent of the Cross” was
      a thing as utterly beyond the powers of either of them as it would have
      been to scale the heights of the cathedral spire. They had never so much
      as a sou to spare; if they cleared enough to get a little wood for the
      stove, a little broth for the pot, it was the utmost they could do. And
      yet the heart of the child was set in sore and endless longing upon
      beholding the greatness of the two veiled Rubens.

 The whole soul of the little Ardennois thrilled and stirred with an
      absorbing passion for art. Going on his ways through the old city in the
      early days before the sun or the people had risen, Nello, who looked only
      a little peasant boy, with a great dog drawing milk to sell from door to
      door, was in a heaven of dreams whereof Rubens was the god. Nello, cold
      and hungry, with stockingless feet in wooden shoes, and the winter winds
      blowing among his curls and lifting his poor thin garments, was in a
      rapture of meditation, wherein all that he saw was the beautiful fair face
      of the Mary of the Assumption, with the waves of her golden hair lying
      upon her shoulders, and the light of an eternal sun shining down upon her
      brow. Nello, reared in poverty, and buffeted by fortune, and untaught in
      letters, and unheeded by men, had the compensation or the curse which is
      called genius. No one knew it; he as little as any. No one knew it. Only,
      indeed, Patrasche, who, being with him always, saw him draw with chalk
      upon the stones any and every thing that grew or breathed, heard him on
      his little bed of hay murmur all manner of timid, pathetic prayers to the
      spirit of the great master; watched his gaze darken and his face radiate
      at the evening glow of sunset or the rosy rising of the dawn; and felt
      many and many a time the tears of a strange, nameless pain and joy,
      mingled together, fall hotly from the bright young eyes upon his own
      wrinkled yellow forehead.

 “I should go to my grave quite content if I thought, Nello, that when thou
      growest a man thou couldst own this hut and the little plot of ground, and
      labor for thyself, and be called Baas by thy neighbours,” said the old man
      Jehan many an hour from his bed. For to own a bit of soil, and to be
      called Baas (master) by the hamlet round, is to have achieved the highest
      ideal of a Flemish peasant; and the old soldier, who had wandered over all
      the earth in his youth, and had brought nothing back, deemed in his old
      age that to live and die on one spot in contented humility was the fairest
      fate he could desire for his darling. But Nello said nothing.

 The same leaven was working in him that in other times begat Rubens and
      Jordaens and the Van Eycks, and all their wondrous tribe, and in times
      more recent begat in the green country of the Ardennes, where the Meuse
      washes the old walls of Dijon, the great artist of the Patroclus, whose
      genius is too near us for us aright to measure its divinity.

 Nello dreamed of other things in the future than of tilling the little
      rood of earth, and living under the wattle roof, and being called Baas by
      neighbours a little poorer or a little less poor than himself. The
      cathedral spire, where it rose beyond the fields in the ruddy evening
      skies or in the dim, gray, misty mornings, said other things to him than
      this. But these he told only to Patrasche, whispering, childlike, his
      fancies in the dog’s ear when they went together at their work through the
      fogs of the daybreak, or lay together at their rest among the rustling
      rushes by the water’s side.

 For such dreams are not easily shaped into speech to awake the slow
      sympathies of human auditors; and they would only have sorely perplexed
      and troubled the poor old man bedridden in his corner, who, for his part,
      whenever he had trodden the streets of Antwerp, had thought the daub of
      blue and red that they called a Madonna, on the walls of the wine-shop
      where he drank his sou’s worth of black beer, quite as good as any of the
      famous altarpieces for which the stranger folk traveled far and wide into
      Flanders from every land on which the good sun shone.

 There was only one other beside Patrasche to whom Nello could talk at all
      of his daring fantasies. This other was little Alois, who lived at the old
      red mill on the grassy mound, and whose father, the miller, was the
      best-to-do husbandman in all the village. Little Alois was only a pretty
      baby with soft round, rosy features, made lovely by those sweet dark eyes
      that the Spanish rule has left in so many a Flemish face, in testimony of
      the Alvan dominion, as Spanish art has left broad-sown throughout the
      country majestic palaces and stately courts, gilded house-fronts and
      sculptured lintels—histories in blazonry and poems in stone.

 Little Alois was often with Nello and Patrasche. They played in the
      fields, they ran in the snow, they gathered the daisies and bilberries,
      they went up to the old gray church together, and they often sat together
      by the broad wood fire in the mill-house. Little Alois, indeed, was the
      richest child in the hamlet. She had neither brother nor sister; her blue
      serge dress had never a hole in it; at kermess she had as many gilded nuts
      and Agni Dei in sugar as her hands could hold; and when she went up for
      her first communion her flaxen curls were covered with a cap of richest
      Mechlin lace, which had been her mother’s and her grandmother’s before it
      came to her. Men spoke already, though she had but twelve years, of the
      good wife she would be for their sons to woo and win; but she herself was
      a little gay, simple child, in no wise conscious of her heritage, and she
      loved no playfellows so well as Jehan Daas’s grandson and his dog.

 One day her father, Baas Cogez, a good man, but somewhat stern, came on a
      pretty group in the long meadow behind the mill, where the aftermath had
      that day been cut. It was his little daughter sitting amid the hay, with
      the great tawny head of Patrasche on her lap, and many wreaths of poppies
      and blue corn-flowers round them both; on a clean smooth slab of pine wood
      the boy Nello drew their likeness with a stick of charcoal.

 The miller stood and looked at the portrait with tears in his eyes—it
      was so strangely like, and he loved his only child closely and well. Then
      he roughly chid the little girl for idling there while her mother needed
      her within, and sent her indoors crying and afraid; then, turning, he
      snatched the wood from Nello’s hands. “Dost do much of such folly?” he
      asked, but there was a tremble in his voice.

 Nello coloured and hung his head. “I draw everything I see,” he murmured.

 The miller was silent; then he stretched his hand out with a franc in it.
      “It is folly, as I say, and evil waste of time; nevertheless, it is like
      Alois, and will please the house-mother. Take this silver bit for it and
      leave it for me.”

 The colour died out of the face of the young Ardennois; he lifted his head
      and put his hands behind his back. “Keep your money and the portrait both,
      Baas Cogez,” he said, simply. “You have been often good to me.” Then he
      called Patrasche to him, and walked away across the fields.

 “I could have seen them with that franc,” he murmured to Patrasche, “but I
      could not sell her picture—not even for them.”

 Baas Cogez went into his mill-house sore troubled in his mind. “That lad
      must not be so much with Alois,” he said to his wife that night. “Trouble
      may come of it hereafter; he is fifteen now, and she is twelve; and the
      boy is comely of face and form.”

 “And he is a good lad and a loyal,” said the housewife, feasting her eyes
      on the piece of pine wood where it was throned above the chimney with a
      cuckoo clock in oak and a Calvary in wax.

 “Yea, I do not gainsay that,” said the miller, draining his pewter flagon.

 “Then, if what you think of were ever to come to pass,” said the wife,
      hesitatingly, “would it matter so much? She will have enough for both, and
      one cannot be better than happy.”

 “You are a woman, and therefore a fool,” said the miller, harshly,
      striking his pipe on the table. “The lad is naught but a beggar, and, with
      these painter’s fancies, worse than a beggar. Have a care that they are
      not together in the future, or I will send the child to the surer keeping
      of the nuns of the Sacred Heart.”

 The poor mother was terrified, and promised humbly to do his will. Not
      that she could bring herself altogether to separate the child from her
      favorite playmate, nor did the miller even desire that extreme of cruelty
      to a young lad who was guilty of nothing except poverty. But there were
      many ways in which little Alois was kept away from her chosen companion;
      and Nello, being a boy proud and quiet and sensitive, was quickly wounded,
      and ceased to turn his own steps and those of Patrasche, as he had been
      used to do with every moment of leisure, to the old red mill upon the
      slope. What his offence was he did not know; he supposed he had in some
      manner angered Baas Cogez by taking the portrait of Alois in the meadow;
      and when the child who loved him would run to him and nestle her hand in
      his, he would smile at her very sadly and say with a tender concern for
      her before himself, “Nay, Alois, do not anger your father. He thinks that
      I make you idle, dear, and he is not pleased that you should be with me.
      He is a good man and loves you well; we will not anger him, Alois.”

 But it was with a sad heart that he said it, and the earth did not look so
      bright to him as it had used to do when he went out at sunrise under the
      poplars down the straight roads with Patrasche. The old red mill had been
      a landmark to him, and he had been used to pause by it, going and coming,
      for a cheery greeting with its people as her little flaxen head rose above
      the low mill wicket, and her little rosy hands had held out a bone or a
      crust to Patrasche. Now the dog looked wistfully at a closed door, and the
      boy went on without pausing, with a pang at his heart, and the child sat
      within with tears dropping slowly on the knitting to which she was set on
      her little stool by the stove; and Baas Cogez, working among his sacks and
      his mill-gear, would harden his will and say to himself, “It is best so.
      The lad is all but a beggar, and full of idle, dreaming fooleries. Who
      knows what mischief might not come of it in the future?” So he was wise in
      his generation, and would not have the door unbarred, except upon rare and
      formal occasions, which seemed to have neither warmth nor mirth in them to
      the two children, who had been accustomed so long to a daily gleeful,
      careless, happy interchange of greeting, speech, and pastime, with no
      other watcher of their sports or auditor of their fancies than Patrasche,
      sagely shaking the brazen bells of his collar and responding with all a
      dog’s swift sympathies to their every change of mood.

 All this while the little panel of pine wood remained over the chimney in
      the mill kitchen with the cuckoo clock and the waxen Calvary; and
      sometimes it seemed to Nello a little hard that while his gift was
      accepted, he himself should be denied.

 But he did not complain; it was his habit to be quiet. Old Jehan Daas had
      said ever to him, “We are poor; we must take what God sends—the ill
      with the good; the poor cannot choose.”

 To which the boy had always listened in silence, being reverent of his old
      grandfather; but nevertheless a certain vague, sweet hope, such as
      beguiles the children of genius, had whispered in his heart, “Yet the poor
      do choose sometimes—choose to be great, so that men cannot say them
      nay.” And he thought so still in his innocence; and one day, when the
      little Alois, finding him by chance alone among the corn-fields by the
      canal, ran to him and held him close, and sobbed piteously because the
      morrow would be her saint’s day, and for the first time in all her life
      her parents had failed to bid him to the little supper and romp in the
      great barns with which her feast-day was always celebrated, Nello had
      kissed her and murmured to her in firm faith, “It shall be different one
      day, Alois. One day that little bit of pine wood that your father has of
      mine shall be worth its weight in silver; and he will not shut the door
      against me then. Only love me always, dear little Alois; only love me
      always, and I will be great.”

 “And if I do not love you?” the pretty child asked, pouting a little
      through her tears, and moved by the instinctive coquetries of her sex.

 Nello’s eyes left her face and wandered to the distance, where, in the red
      and gold of the Flemish night, the cathedral spire rose. There was a smile
      on his face so sweet and yet so sad that little Alois was awed by it. “I
      will be great still,” he said under his breath—“great still, or die,
      Alois.”

 “You do not love me,” said the little spoiled child, pushing him away; but
      the boy shook his head and smiled, and went on his way through the tall
      yellow corn, seeing as in a vision some day in a fair future when he
      should come into that old familiar land and ask Alois of her people, and
      be not refused or denied, but received in honour; while the village folk
      should throng to look upon him and say in one another’s ears, “Dost see
      him? He is a king among men; for he is a great artist and the world speaks
      his name; and yet he was only our poor little Nello, who was a beggar, as
      one may say, and only got his bread by the help of his dog.” And he
      thought how he would fold his grandsire in furs and purples, and portray
      him as the old man is portrayed in the Family in the chapel of St.
      Jacques; and of how he would hang the throat of Patrasche with a collar of
      gold, and place him on his right hand, and say to the people, “This was
      once my only friend;” and of how he would build himself a great white
      marble palace, and make to himself luxuriant gardens of pleasure, on the
      slope looking outward to where the cathedral spire rose, and not dwell in
      it himself, but summon to it, as to a home, all men young and poor and
      friendless, but of the will to do mighty things; and of how he would say
      to them always, if they sought to bless his name, “Nay, do not thank me—thank
      Rubens. Without him, what should I have been?” And these dreams—beautiful,
      impossible, innocent, free of all selfishness, full of heroical worship—were
      so closely about him as he went that he was happy—happy even on this
      sad anniversary of Alois’s saint’s day, when he and Patrasche went home by
      themselves to the little dark hut and the meal of black bread, while in
      the mill-house all the children of the village sang and laughed, and ate
      the big round cakes of Dijon and the almond gingerbread of Brabant, and
      danced in the great barn to the light of the stars and the music of flute
      and fiddle.

 “Never mind, Patrasche,” he said, with his arms round the dog’s neck, as
      they both sat in the door of the hut, where the sounds of the mirth at the
      mill came down to them on the night air; “never mind. It shall all be
      changed by-and-by.”

 He believed in the future; Patrasche, of more experience and of more
      philosophy, thought that the loss of the mill supper in the present was
      ill compensated by dreams of milk and honey in some vague hereafter. And
      Patrasche growled whenever he passed by Baas Cogez.

 “This is Alois’s name-day, is it not?” said the old man Daas that night,
      from the corner where he was stretched upon his bed of sacking.

 The boy gave a gesture of assent; he wished that the old man’s memory had
      erred a little, instead of keeping such sure account.

 “And why not there?” his grandfather pursued. “Thou hast never missed a
      year before, Nello.”

 “Thou art too sick to leave,” murmured the lad, bending his handsome head
      over the bed.

 “Tut! tut! Mother Nulette would have come and sat with me, as she does
      scores of times. What is the cause, Nello?” the old man persisted. “Thou
      surely hast not had ill words with the little one?”

 “Nay, grandfather, never,” said the boy quickly, with a hot colour in his
      bent face. “Simply and truly, Baas Cogez did not have me asked this year.
      He has taken some whim against me.”

 “But thou hast done nothing wrong?”

 “That I know—nothing. I took the portrait of Alois on a piece of
      pine; that is all.”

 “Ah!” The old man was silent; the truth suggested itself to him with the
      boy’s innocent answer. He was tied to a bed of dried leaves in the corner
      of a wattle hut, but he had not wholly forgotten what the ways of the
      world were like.

 He drew Nello’s fair head fondly to his breast with a tenderer gesture.
      “Thou art very poor, my child,” he said, with a quiver the more in his
      aged, trembling voice; “so poor! It is very hard for thee.”

 “Nay, I am rich,” murmured Nello; and in his innocence he thought so; rich
      with the imperishable powers that are mightier than the might of kings.
      And he went and stood by the door of the hut in the quiet autumn night,
      and watched the stars troop by and the tall poplars bend and shiver in the
      wind. All the casements of the mill-house were lighted, and every now and
      then the notes of the flute came to him. The tears fell down his cheeks,
      for he was but a child; yet he smiled, for he said to himself, “In the
      future!” He stayed there until all was quite still and dark; then he and
      Patrasche went within and slept together, long and deeply, side by side.

 Now he had a secret which only Patrasche knew. There was a little outhouse
      to the hut which no one entered but himself—a dreary place, but with
      abundant clear light from the north. Here he had fashioned himself rudely
      an easel in rough lumber, and here, on a great gray sea of stretched
      paper, he had given shape to one of the innumerable fancies which
      possessed his brain. No one had ever taught him anything; colours he had
      no means to buy; he had gone without bread many a time to procure even the
      few rude vehicles that he had here; and it was only in black or white that
      he could fashion the things he saw. This great figure which he had drawn
      here in chalk was only an old man sitting on a fallen tree—only
      that. He had seen old Michel, the woodman, sitting so at evening many a
      time. He had never had a soul to tell him of outline or perspective, of
      anatomy or of shadow; and yet he had given all the weary, worn-out age,
      all the sad, quiet patience, all the rugged, care-worn pathos of his
      original, and given them so that the old, lonely figure was a poem,
      sitting there meditative and alone, on the dead tree, with the darkness of
      the descending night behind him.

 It was rude, of course, in a way, and had many faults, no doubt; and yet
      it was real, true in nature, true in art, and very mournful, and in a
      manner beautiful.

 Patrasche had lain quiet countless hours watching its gradual creation
      after the labor of each day was done, and he knew that Nello had a hope—vain
      and wild perhaps, but strongly cherished—of sending this great
      drawing to compete for a prize of two hundred francs a year which it was
      announced in Antwerp would be open to every lad of talent, scholar or
      peasant, under eighteen, who would attempt to win it with some unaided
      work of chalk or pencil. Three of the foremost artists in the town of
      Rubens were to be the judges and elect the victor according to his merits.

 All the spring and summer and autumn Nello had been at work upon this
      treasure, which if triumphant, would build him his first step toward
      independence and the mysteries of the art which he blindly, ignorantly,
      and yet passionately adored.

 He said nothing to any one; his grandfather would not have understood, and
      little Alois was lost to him. Only to Patrasche he told all, and
      whispered, “Rubens would give it me, I think, if he knew.”

 Patrasche thought so too, for he knew that Rubens had loved dogs or he had
      never painted them with such exquisite fidelity; and men who loved dogs
      were, as Patrasche knew, always pitiful.

 The drawings were to go in on the first day of December, and the decision
      be given on the twenty-fourth, so that he who should win might rejoice
      with all his people at the Christmas season.

 In the twilight of a bitter wintry day, and with a beating heart, now
      quick with hope, now faint with fear, Nello placed the great picture on
      his little green milk-cart, and took it, with the help of Patrasche, into
      the town, and there left it, as enjoined, at the doors of a public
      building.

 “Perhaps it is worth nothing at all. How can I tell?” he thought, with the
      heart-sickness of a great timidity. Now that he had left it there, it
      seemed to him so hazardous, so vain, so foolish, to dream that he, a
      little lad with bare feet who barely knew his letters, could do anything
      at which great painters, real artists, could ever deign to look. Yet he
      took heart as he went by the cathedral; the lordly form of Rubens seemed
      to rise from the fog and the darkness, and to loom in its magnificence
      before him, while the lips, with their kindly smile, seemed to him to
      murmur, “Nay, have courage! It was not by a weak heart and by faint fears
      that I wrote my name for all time upon Antwerp.”

 Nello ran home through the cold night, comforted. He had done his best;
      the rest must be as God willed, he thought, in that innocent,
      unquestioning faith which had been taught him in the little gray chapel
      among the willows and the poplar-trees.

 The winter was very sharp already. That night, after they reached the hut,
      snow fell, and fell for very many days after that; so that the paths and
      the divisions in the fields were all obliterated, and all the smaller
      streams were frozen over, and the cold was intense upon the plains. Then,
      indeed, it became hard work to go round for the milk while the world was
      all dark, and carry it through the darkness to the silent town. Hard work,
      especially for Patrasche, for the passage of the years that were only
      bringing Nello a stronger youth were bringing him old age, and his joints
      were stiff and his bones ached often. But he would never give up his share
      of the labour. Nello would fain have spared him and drawn the cart
      himself, but Patrasche would not allow it. All he would ever permit or
      accept was the help of a thrust from behind to the truck as it lumbered
      along through the ice-ruts. Patrasche had lived in harness, and he was
      proud of it. He suffered a great deal sometimes from frost and the
      terrible roads and the rheumatic pains of his limbs; but he only drew his
      breath hard and bent his stout neck, and trod onward with steady patience.

 “Rest thee at home, Patrasche; it is time thou didst rest, and I can quite
      well push in the cart by myself,” urged Nello many a morning; but
      Patrasche, who understood him aright, would no more have consented to stay
      at home than a veteran soldier to shirk when the charge was sounding; and
      every day he would rise and place himself in his shafts, and plod along
      over the snow through the fields that his four round feet had left their
      print upon so many, many years.

 “One must never rest till one dies,” thought Patrasche; and sometimes it
      seemed to him that that time of rest for him was not very far off. His
      sight was less clear than it had been, and it gave him pain to rise after
      the night’s sleep, though he would never lie a moment in his straw when
      once the bell of the chapel tolling five let him know that the daybreak of
      labor had begun.

 “My poor Patrasche, we shall soon lie quiet together, you and I,” said old
      Jehan Daas, stretching out to stroke the head of Patrasche with the old
      withered hand which had always shared with him its one poor crust of
      bread; and the hearts of the old man and the old dog ached together with
      one thought: When they were gone who would care for their darling?

 One afternoon, as they came back from Antwerp over the snow, which had
      become hard and smooth as marble over all the Flemish plains, they found
      dropped in the road a pretty little puppet, a tambourine player, all
      scarlet and gold, about six inches high, and, unlike greater personages
      when Fortune lets them drop, quite unspoiled and unhurt by its fall. It
      was a pretty toy. Nello tried to find its owner, and, failing, thought
      that it was just the thing to please Alois.

 It was quite night when he passed the mill-house; he knew the little
      window of her room; it could be no harm, he thought, if he gave her his
      little piece of treasure-trove—they had been play-fellows so long.
      There was a shed with a sloping roof beneath her casement; he climbed it
      and tapped softly at the lattice; there was a little light within. The
      child opened it and looked out half frightened.

 Nello put the tambourine player into her hands. “Here is a doll I found in
      the snow, Alois. Take it,” he whispered; “take it, and God bless thee,
      dear!”

 He slid down from the shed roof before she had time to thank him, and ran
      off through the darkness.

 That night there was a fire at the mill. Out-buildings and much corn were
      destroyed, although the mill itself and the dwelling-house were unharmed.
      All the village was out in terror, and engines came tearing through the
      snow from Antwerp. The miller was insured, and would lose nothing;
      nevertheless, he was in furious wrath, and declared aloud that the fire
      was due to no accident, but to some foul intent.

 Nello, awakened from his sleep, ran to help with the rest. Baas Cogez
      thrust him angrily aside. “Thou wert loitering here after dark,” he said
      roughly. “I believe, on my soul, that thou dost know more of the fire than
      any one.”

 Nello heard him in silence, stupefied, not supposing that any one could
      say such things except in jest, and not comprehending how any one could
      pass a jest at such a time.

 Nevertheless, the miller said the brutal thing openly to many of his
      neighbours in the day that followed; and though no serious charge was ever
      preferred against the lad, it got bruited about that Nello had been seen
      in the mill-yard after dark on some unspoken errand, and that he bore Baas
      Cogez a grudge for forbidding his intercourse with little Alois; and so
      the hamlet, which followed the sayings of its richest landowner servilely,
      and whose families all hoped to secure the riches of Alois in some future
      time for their sons, took the hint to give grave looks and cold words to
      old Jehan Daas’s grandson. No one said anything to him openly, but all the
      village agreed together to humour the miller’s prejudice, and at the
      cottages and farms where Nello and Patrasche called every morning for the
      milk for Antwerp, downcast glances and brief phrases replaced to them the
      broad smiles and cheerful greetings to which they had been always used. No
      one really credited the miller’s absurd suspicions, nor the outrageous
      accusations born of them; but the people were all very poor and very
      ignorant, and the one rich man of the place had pronounced against him.
      Nello, in his innocence and his friendlessness, had no strength to stem
      the popular tide.

 “Thou art very cruel to the lad,” the miller’s wife dared to say, weeping,
      to her lord. “Sure, he is an innocent lad and a faithful, and would never
      dream of any such wickedness, however sore his heart might be.”

 But Baas Cogez being an obstinate man, having once said a thing, held to
      it doggedly, though in his innermost soul he knew well the injustice that
      he was committing.

 Meanwhile, Nello endured the injury done against him with a certain proud
      patience that disdained to complain; he only gave way a little when he was
      quite alone with old Patrasche. Besides, he thought, “If it should win!
      They will be sorry then, perhaps.”

 Still, to a boy not quite sixteen, and who had dwelt in one little world
      all his short life, and in his childhood had been caressed and applauded
      on all sides, it was a hard trial to have the whole of that little world
      turn against him for naught. Especially hard in that bleak, snow-bound,
      famine-stricken winter-time, when the only light and warmth there could be
      found abode beside the village hearths and in the kindly greetings of
      neighbours. In the winter-time all drew nearer to each other, all to all,
      except to Nello and Patrasche, with whom none now would have anything to
      do, and who were left to fare as they might with the old paralyzed,
      bedridden man in the little cabin, whose fire was often low, and whose
      board was often without bread; for there was a buyer from Antwerp who had
      taken to drive his mule in of a day for the milk of the various dairies,
      and there were only three or four of the people who had refused his terms
      of purchase and remained faithful to the little green cart. So that the
      burden which Patrasche drew had become very light, and the centime pieces
      in Nello’s pouch had become, alas! very small likewise.

 The dog would stop, as usual, at all the familiar gates which were now
      closed to him, and look up at them with wistful, mute appeal; and it cost
      the neighbours a pang to shut their doors and their hearts, and let
      Patrasche draw his cart on again, empty. Nevertheless, they did it, for
      they desired to please Baas Cogez.

 Noel was close at hand.

 The weather was very wild and cold; the snow was six feet deep, and the
      ice was firm enough to bear oxen and men upon it everywhere. At this
      season the little village was always gay and cheerful. At the poorest
      dwelling there were possets and cakes, joking and dancing, sugared saints
      and gilded Jesus. The merry Flemish bells jingled everywhere on the
      horses; everywhere within doors some well-filled soup-pot sang and smoked
      over the stove; and everywhere over the snow without laughing maidens
      pattered in bright kerchiefs and stout kirtles, going to and from the
      mass. Only in the little hut it was very dark and very cold.

 Nello and Patrasche were left utterly alone, for one night in the week
      before the Christmas Day, death entered there, and took away from life
      forever old Jehan Daas, who had never known life aught save its poverty
      and its pains. He had long been half dead, incapable of any movement
      except a feeble gesture, and powerless for anything beyond a gentle word;
      and yet his loss fell on them both with a great horror in it; they mourned
      him passionately. He had passed away from them in his sleep, and when in
      the gray dawn they learned their bereavement, unutterable solitude and
      desolation seemed to close around them. He had long been only a poor,
      feeble, paralyzed old man, who could not raise a hand in their defence;
      but he had loved them well, his smile had always welcomed their return.
      They mourned for him unceasingly, refusing to be comforted, as in the
      white winter day they followed the deal shell that held his body to the
      nameless grave by the little gray church. They were his only mourners,
      these two whom he had left friendless upon earth—the young boy and
      the old dog.

 “Surely, he will relent now and let the poor lad come hither?” thought the
      miller’s wife, glancing at her husband where he smoked by the hearth.

 Baas Cogez knew her thought, but he hardened his heart, and would not
      unbar his door as the little, humble funeral went by. “The boy is a
      beggar,” he said to himself; “he shall not be about Alois.”

 The woman dared not say anything aloud, but when the grave was closed and
      the mourners had gone, she put a wreath of immortelles into Alois’s hands
      and bade her go and lay it reverently on the dark, unmarked mound where
      the snow was displaced.

 Nello and Patrasche went home with broken hearts. But even of that poor,
      melancholy, cheerless home they were denied the consolation. There was a
      month’s rent overdue for their little home, and when Nello had paid the
      last sad service to the dead he had not a coin left. He went and begged
      grace of the owner of the hut, a cobbler who went every Sunday night to
      drink his pint of wine and smoke with Baas Cogez. The cobbler would grant
      no mercy. He was a harsh, miserly man, and loved money. He claimed in
      default of his rent every stick and stone, every pot and pan, in the hut,
      and bade Nello and Patrasche be out of it on the morrow.

 Now, the cabin was lowly enough, and in some sense miserable enough, and
      yet their hearts clove to it with a great affection. They had been so
      happy there, and in the summer, with its clambering vine and its flowering
      beans, it was so pretty and bright in the midst of the sun-lighted fields!
      Their life in it had been full of labor and privation, and yet they had
      been so well content, so gay of heart, running together to meet the old
      man’s never-failing smile of welcome!

 All night long the boy and the dog sat by the fireless hearth in the
      darkness, drawn close together for warmth and sorrow. Their bodies were
      insensible to the cold, but their hearts seemed frozen in them.

 When the morning broke over the white, chill earth it was the morning of
      Christmas Eve. With a shudder, Nello clasped close to him his only friend,
      while his tears fell hot and fast on the dog’s frank forehead. “Let us go,
      Patrasche—dear, dear Patrasche,” he murmured. “We will not wait to
      be kicked out; let us go.”

 Patrasche had no will but his, and they went sadly, side by side, out from
      the little place which was so dear to them both, and in which every
      humble, homely thing was to them precious and beloved. Patrasche drooped
      his head wearily as he passed by his own green cart; it was no longer his,—it
      had to go with the rest to pay the rent,—and his brass harness lay
      idle and glittering on the snow. The dog could have lain down beside it
      and died for very heart-sickness as he went, but while the lad lived and
      needed him Patrasche would not yield and give way.

 They took the old accustomed road into Antwerp. The day had yet scarce
      more than dawned; most of the shutters were still closed, but some of the
      villagers were about. They took no notice while the dog and the boy passed
      by them. At one door Nello paused and looked wistfully within; his
      grandfather had done many a kindly turn in neighbour’s service to the
      people who dwelt there.

 “Would you give Patrasche a crust?” he said, timidly. “He is old, and he
      has had nothing since last forenoon.”

 The woman shut the door hastily, murmuring some vague saying about wheat
      and rye being very dear that season. The boy and the dog went on again
      wearily; they asked no more.

 By slow and painful ways they reached Antwerp as the chimes tolled ten.

 “If I had anything about me I could sell to get him bread!” thought Nello;
      but he had nothing except the wisp of linen and serge that covered him,
      and his pair of wooden shoes.

 Patrasche understood, and nestled his nose into the lad’s hand as though
      to pray him not to be disquieted for any woe or want of his.

 The winner of the drawing prize was to be proclaimed at noon, and to the
      public building where he had left his treasure Nello made his way. On the
      steps and in the entrance-hall there was a crowd of youths,—some of
      his age, some older, all with parents or relatives or friends. His heart
      was sick with fear as he went among them holding Patrasche close to him.
      The great bells of the city clashed out the hour of noon with brazen
      clamour. The doors of the inner hall were opened; the eager, panting
      throng rushed in. It was known that the selected picture would be raised
      above the rest upon a wooden dais.

 A mist obscured Nello’s sight, his head swam, his limbs almost failed him.
      When his vision cleared he saw the drawing raised on high; it was not his
      own! A slow, sonorous voice was proclaiming aloud that victory had been
      adjudged to Stephen Kiesslinger, born in the burg of Antwerp, son of a
      wharfinger in that town.

 When Nello recovered his consciousness he was lying on the stones without,
      and Patrasche was trying with every art he knew to call him back to life.
      In the distance a throng of the youths of Antwerp were shouting around
      their successful comrade, and escorting him with acclamations to his home
      upon the quay.

 The boy staggered to his feet and drew the dog into his embrace. “It is
      all over, dear Patrasche,” he murmured—“all over!”

 He rallied himself as best he could, for he was weak from fasting, and
      retraced his steps to the village. Patrasche paced by his side with his
      head drooping and his old limbs feeble from hunger and sorrow.

 The snow was falling fast; a keen hurricane blew from the north; it was
      bitter as death on the plains. It took them long to traverse the familiar
      path, and the bells were sounding four of the clock as they approached the
      hamlet. Suddenly Patrasche paused, arrested by a scent in the snow,
      scratched, whined, and drew out with his teeth a small case of brown
      leather. He held it up to Nello in the darkness. Where they were there
      stood a little Calvary, and a lamp burned dully under the cross; the boy
      mechanically turned the case to the light; on it was the name of Baas
      Cogez, and within it were notes for two thousand francs.

 The sight roused the lad a little from his stupor. He thrust it in his
      shirt, and stroked Patrasche and drew him onward. The dog looked up
      wistfully in his face.

 Nello made straight for the mill-house, and went to the house door and
      struck on its panels. The miller’s wife opened it weeping, with little
      Alois clinging close to her skirts. “Is it thee, thou poor lad?” she said
      kindly, through her tears. “Get thee gone ere the Baas see thee. We are in
      sore trouble to-night. He is out seeking for a power of money that he has
      let fall riding homeward, and in this snow he never will find it; and God
      knows it will go nigh to ruin us. It is Heaven’s own judgment for the
      things we have done to thee.”

 Nello put the note-case in her hand and called Patrasche within the house.
      “Patrasche found the money to-night,” he said quickly. “Tell Baas Cogez
      so; I think he will not deny the dog shelter and food in his old age. Keep
      him from pursuing me, and I pray of you to be good to him.”

 Ere either woman or dog knew what he meant he had stooped and kissed
      Patrasche, then closed the door hurriedly, and disappeared in the gloom of
      the fast-falling night.

 The woman and the child stood speechless with joy and fear; Patrasche
      vainly spent the fury of his anguish against the iron-bound oak of the
      barred house door. They did not dare unbar the door and let him forth;
      they tried all they could to solace him. They brought him sweet cakes and
      juicy meats; they tempted him with the best they had; they tried to lure
      him to abide by the warmth of the hearth; but it was of no avail.
      Patrasche refused to be comforted or to stir from the barred portal.

 It was six o’clock when from an opposite entrance the miller at last came,
      jaded and broken, into his wife’s presence. “It is lost forever,” he said,
      with an ashen cheek and a quiver in his stern voice. “We have looked with
      lanterns everywhere; it is gone—the little maiden’s portion and
      all!”

 His wife put the money into his hand, and told him how it had come to her.
      The strong man sank trembling into a seat and covered his face, ashamed
      and almost afraid. “I have been cruel to the lad,” he muttered at length;
      “I deserved not to have good at his hands.”

 Little Alois, taking courage, crept close to her father and nestled
      against him her fair curly head. “Nello may come here again, father?” she
      whispered. “He may come to-morrow as he used to do?”

 The miller pressed her in his arms; his hard, sunburnt face was very pale
      and his mouth trembled. “Surely, surely,” he answered his child. “He shall
      bide here on Christmas Day, and any other day he will. God helping me, I
      will make amends to the boy—I will make amends.”

 Little Alois kissed him in gratitude and joy; then slid from his knees and
      ran to where the dog kept watch by the door. “And to-night I may feast
      Patrasche?” she cried in a child’s thoughtless glee.

 Her father bent his head gravely: “Ay, ay! let the dog have the best;” for
      the stern old man was moved and shaken to his heart’s depths.

 It was Christmas eve, and the mill-house was filled with oak logs and
      squares of turf, with cream and honey, with meat and bread, and the
      rafters were hung with wreaths of evergreen, and the Calvary and the
      cuckoo clock looked out from a mass of holly. There were little paper
      lanterns, too, for Alois, and toys of various fashions and sweetmeats in
      bright-pictured papers. There were light and warmth and abundance
      everywhere, and the child would fain have made the dog a guest honoured
      and feasted.

 But Patrasche would neither lie in the warmth nor share in the cheer.
      Famished he was and very cold, but without Nello he would partake neither
      of comfort nor food. Against all temptation he was proof, and close
      against the door he leaned always, watching only for a means of escape.

 “He wants the lad,” said Baas Cogez. “Good dog! good dog! I will go over
      to the lad the first thing at day-dawn.” For no one but Patrasche knew
      that Nello had left the hut, and no one but Patrasche divined that Nello
      had gone to face starvation and misery alone.

 The mill kitchen was very warm; great logs crackled and flamed on the
      hearth; neighbours came in for a glass of wine and a slice of the fat
      goose baking for supper. Alois, gleeful and sure of her playmate back on
      the morrow, bounded and sang and tossed back her yellow hair. Baas Cogez,
      in the fulness of his heart, smiled on her through moistened eyes, and
      spoke of the way in which he would befriend her favourite companion; the
      house-mother sat with calm, contented face at the spinning-wheel; the
      cuckoo in the clock chirped mirthful hours. Amidst it all Patrasche was
      bidden with a thousand words of welcome to tarry there a cherished guest.
      But neither peace nor plenty could allure him where Nello was not.

 When the supper smoked on the board, and the voices were loudest and
      gladdest, and the Christ-child brought choicest gifts to Alois, Patrasche,
      watching always an occasion, glided out when the door was unlatched by a
      careless new-comer, and, as swiftly as his weak and tired limbs would bear
      him sped over the snow in the bitter, black night. He had only one thought—to
      follow Nello. A human friend might have paused for the pleasant meal, the
      cheery warmth, the cosey slumber; but that was not the friendship of
      Patrasche. He remembered a bygone time, when an old man and a little child
      had found him sick unto death in the wayside ditch.

 Snow had fallen freshly all the evening long; it was now nearly ten; the
      trail of the boy’s footsteps was almost obliterated. It took Patrasche
      long to discover any scent. When at last he found it, it was lost again
      quickly, and lost and recovered, and again lost and again recovered, a
      hundred times or more.

 The night was very wild. The lamps under the wayside crosses were blown
      out; the roads were sheets of ice; the impenetrable darkness hid every
      trace of habitations; there was no living thing abroad. All the cattle
      were housed, and in all the huts and homesteads men and women rejoiced and
      feasted. There was only Patrasche out in the cruel cold—old and
      famished and full of pain, but with the strength and the patience of a
      great love to sustain him in his search.

 The trail of Nello’s steps, faint and obscure as it was under the new
      snow, went straightly along the accustomed tracks into Antwerp. It was
      past midnight when Patrasche traced it over the boundaries of the town and
      into the narrow, tortuous, gloomy streets. It was all quite dark in the
      town, save where some light gleamed ruddily through the crevices of house
      shutters, or some group went homeward with lanterns chanting
      drinking-songs. The streets were all white with ice; the high walls and
      roofs loomed black against them. There was scarce a sound save the riot of
      the winds down the passages as they tossed the creaking signs and shook
      the tall lamp-irons.

 So many passers-by had trodden through and through the snow, so many
      diverse paths had crossed and recrossed each other, that the dog had a
      hard task to retain any hold on the track he followed. But he kept on his
      way, though the cold pierced him to the bone, and the jagged ice cut his
      feet, and the hunger in his body gnawed like a rat’s teeth. He kept on his
      way,—a poor gaunt, shivering thing,—and by long patience
      traced the steps he loved into the very heart of the burg and up to the
      steps of the great cathedral.

 “He is gone to the things that he loved,” thought Patrasche; he could not
      understand, but he was full of sorrow and of pity for the art passion that
      to him was so incomprehensible and yet so sacred.

 The portals of the cathedral were unclosed after the midnight mass. Some
      heedlessness in the custodians, too eager to go home and feast or sleep,
      or too drowsy to know whether they turned the keys aright, had left one of
      the doors unlocked. By that accident the footfalls Patrasche sought had
      passed through into the building, leaving the white marks of snow upon the
      dark stone floor. By that slender white thread, frozen as it fell, he was
      guided through the intense silence, through the immensity of the vaulted
      space—guided straight to the gates of the chancel, and, stretched
      there upon the stones, he found Nello. He crept up, and touched the face
      of the boy. “Didst thou dream that I should be faithless and forsake thee?
      I—a dog?” said that mute caress.

 The lad raised himself with a low cry and clasped him close. “Let us lie
      down and die together,” he murmured. “Men have no need of us, and we are
      all alone.”

 In answer, Patrasche crept closer yet, and laid his head upon the young
      boy’s breast. The great tears stood in his brown, sad eyes; not for
      himself—for himself he was happy.

 They lay close together in the piercing cold. The blasts that blew over
      the Flemish dikes from the northern seas were like waves of ice, which
      froze every living thing they touched. The interior of the immense vault
      of stone in which they were was even more bitterly chill than the
      snow-covered plains without. Now and then a bat moved in the shadows; now
      and then a gleam of light came on the ranks of carven figures. Under the
      Rubens they lay together quite still, and soothed almost into a dreaming
      slumber by the numbing narcotic of the cold. Together they dreamed of the
      old glad days when they had chased each other through the flowering
      grasses of the summer meadows, or sat hidden in the tall bulrushes by the
      water’s side, watching the boats go seaward in the sun.

 Suddenly through the darkness a great white radiance streamed through the
      vastness of the aisles; the moon, that was at her height, had broken
      through the clouds; the snow had ceased to fall; the light reflected from
      the snow without was clear as the light of dawn. It fell through the
      arches full upon the two pictures above, from which the boy on his
      entrance had flung back the veil: the “Elevation” and the “Descent of the
      Cross” were for one instant visible.

 Nello rose to his feet and stretched his arms to them; the tears of a
      passionate ecstasy glistened on the paleness of his face. “I have seen
      them at last!” he cried aloud. “O God, it is enough!”

 His limbs failed under him, and he sank upon his knees, still gazing
      upward at the majesty that he adored. For a few brief moments the light
      illumined the divine visions that had been denied to him so long—light
      clear and sweet and strong as though it streamed from the throne of
      Heaven. Then suddenly it passed away; once more a great darkness covered
      the face of Christ.

 The arms of the boy drew close again the body of the dog. “We shall see
      His face— there ,” he murmured; “and He will not part us, I
      think.”

 On the morrow, by the chancel of the cathedral, the people of Antwerp
      found them both. They were both dead; the cold of the night had frozen
      into stillness alike the young life and the old. When the Christmas
      morning broke and the priests came to the temple, they saw them lying thus
      on the stones together. Above, the veils were drawn back from the great
      visions of Rubens, and the fresh rays of the sunrise touched the
      thorn-crowned head of the Christ.

 As the day grew on there came an old, hard-featured man who wept as women
      weep. “I was cruel to the lad,” he muttered; “and now I would have made
      amends,—yea, to the half of my substance,—and he should have
      been to me as a son.”

 There came also, as the day grew apace, a painter who had fame in the
      world, and who was liberal of hand and of spirit. “I seek one who should
      have had the prize yesterday had worth won,” he said to the people—“a
      boy of rare promise and genius. An old wood-cutter on a fallen tree at
      eventide—that was all his theme; but there was greatness for the
      future in it. I would fain find him, and take him with me and teach him
      art.”

 And a little child with curling fair hair, sobbing bitterly as she clung
      to her father’s arm, cried aloud, “Oh, Nello, come! We have all ready for
      thee. The Christ-child’s hands are full of gifts, and the old piper will
      play for us; and the mother says thou shalt stay by the hearth and burn
      nuts with us all the Noel week long—yes, even to the Feast of the
      Kings! And Patrasche will be so happy! Oh, Nello, wake and come!”

 But the young pale face, turned upward to the light of the great Rubens
      with a smile upon its mouth, answered them all, “It is too late.”

 For the sweet, sonorous bells went ringing through the frost, and the
      sunlight shone upon the plains of snow, and the populace trooped gay and
      glad through the streets, but Nello and Patrasche no more asked charity at
      their hands. All they needed now Antwerp gave unbidden.

 Death had been more pitiful to them than longer life would have been. It
      had taken the one in the loyalty of love, and the other in the innocence
      of faith, from a world which for love has no recompense and for faith no
      fulfilment.

 All their lives they had been together, and in their deaths they were not
      divided; for when they were found the arms of the boy were folded too
      closely around the dog to be severed without violence, and the people of
      their little village, contrite and ashamed, implored a special grace for
      them, and, making them one grave, laid them to rest there side by side—forever!