A DOCTOR OF THE OLD SCHOOL, By Ian Maclaren

 [See also the illustrated html version: #9320]

 I A GENERAL PRACTITIONER

 Drumtochty was accustomed to break every law of health, except wholesome
      food and fresh air, and yet had reduced the psalmist’s furthest limit to
      an average life-rate. Our men made no difference in their clothes for
      summer or winter, Drumsheugh and one or two of the larger farmers
      condescending to a top-coat on Sabbath, as a penalty of their position,
      and without regard to temperature. They wore their blacks at a funeral,
      refusing to cover them with anything, out of respect to the deceased, and
      standing longest in the kirkyard when the north wind was blowing across a
      hundred miles of snow. If the rain was pouring at the junction, then
      Drumtochty stood two minutes longer through sheer native dourness till
      each man had a cascade from the tail of his coat, and hazarded the
      suggestion, half-way to Kildrummie, that it had been “a bit scrowie,” and
      “scrowie” being as far short of a “shoor” as a “shoor” fell below “weet.”

 This sustained defiance of the elements provoked occasional judgments in
      the shape of a “hoast” (cough), and the head of the house was then
      exhorted by his women folk to “change his feet” if he had happened to walk
      through a burn on his way home, and was pestered generally with sanitary
      precautions. It is right to add that the gudeman treated such advice with
      contempt, regarding it as suitable for the effeminacy of towns, but not
      seriously intended for Drumtochty. Sandy Stewart “napped” stones on the
      road in his shirt-sleeves, wet or fair, summer and winter, till he was
      persuaded to retire from active duty at eighty-five, and he spent ten
      years more in regretting his hastiness and criticising his successor. The
      ordinary course of life, with fine air and contented minds, was to do a
      full share of work till seventy, and then to look after “orra” jobs well
      into the eighties, and to “slip awa’” within sight of ninety. Persons
      above ninety were understood to be acquitting themselves with credit, and
      assumed airs of authority, brushing aside the opinions of seventy as
      immature, and confirming their conclusions with illustrations drawn from
      the end of last century.

 When Hillocks’s brother so far forgot himself as to “slip awa’” at sixty,
      that worthy man was scandalised, and offered laboured explanations at the
      “beerial.”

 “It’s an awfu’ business ony wy ye look at it, an’ a sair trial tae us a’.
      A’ never heard tell of sic a thing in oor family afore, an’ it ‘s no easy
      accoontin’ for ‘t.

 “The gudewife was sayin’ he wes never the same sin’ a weet nicht he lost
      himsel’ on the muir and slept below a bush; but that’s neither here nor
      there. A’ ‘m thinkin’ he sappit his constitution thae twa years he wes
      grieve aboot England. That wes thirty years syne, but ye’re never the same
      after thae foreign climates.”

 Drumtochty listened patiently to Hillocks’s apologia, but was not
      satisfied.

 “It’s clean havers aboot the muir. Losh keep’s, we’ve a’ sleepit oot and
      never been a hair the waur.

 “A’ admit that England micht hae dune the job; it’s no canny stravagin’ 
      yon wy frae place tae place, but Drums never complained tae me as if he
      hed been nippit in the Sooth.”

 The parish had, in fact, lost confidence in Drums after his wayward
      experiment with a potato-digging machine, which turned out a lamentable
      failure, and his premature departure confirmed our vague impression of his
      character.

 “He’s awa’ noo,” Drumsheugh summed up, after opinion had time to form;
      “an’ there were waur fouk than Drums, but there’s nae doot he wes a wee
      flichty.”

 When illness had the audacity to attack a Drumtochty man, it was described
      as a “whup,” and was treated by the men with a fine negligence. Hillocks
      was sitting in the post-office one afternoon when I looked in for my
      letters, and the right side of his face was blazing red. His subject of
      discourse was the prospects of the turnip “breer,” but he casually
      explained that he was waiting for medical advice.

 “The gudewife is keepin’ up a ding-dong frae mornin’ till nicht aboot ma
      face, and a’ ‘m fair deaved (deafened), so a’ ‘m watchin’ for MacLure tae
      get a bottle as he comes wast; yon’s him noo.”

 The doctor made his diagnosis from horseback on sight, and stated the
      result with that admirable clearness which endeared him to Drumtochty:

 “Confound ye, Hillocks, what are ye ploiterin’ aboot here for in the weet
      wi’ a face like a boiled beer? Div ye no ken that ye’ve a tetch o’ the
      rose (erysipelas), and ocht tae be in the hoose? Gae hame wi’ ye afore a’ 
      leave the bit, and send a halflin’ for some medicine. Ye donnerd idiot,
      are ye ettlin tae follow Drums afore yir time?” And the medical attendant
      of Drumtochty continued his invective till Hillocks started, and still
      pursued his retreating figure with medical directions of a simple and
      practical character:

 “A’ ‘m watchin’, an’ peety ye if ye pit aff time. Keep yir bed the
      mornin’, and dinna show yir face in the fields till a’ see ye. A’ll gie ye
      a cry on Monday,—sic an auld fule,—but there’s no ane o’ them
      tae mind anither in the hale pairish.”

 Hillocks’s wife informed the kirkyard that the doctor “gied the gudeman an
      awful’ clearin’,” and that Hillocks “wes keepin’ the hoose,” which meant
      that the patient had tea breakfast, and at that time was wandering about
      the farm buildings in an easy undress, with his head in a plaid.

 It was impossible for a doctor to earn even the most modest competence
      from a people of such scandalous health, and so MacLure had annexed
      neighbouring parishes. His house—little more than a cottage—stood
      on the roadside among the pines toward the head of our Glen, and from this
      base of operations he dominated the wild glen that broke the wall of the
      Grampians above Drumtochty—where the snow-drifts were twelve feet
      deep in winter, and the only way of passage at times was the channel of
      the river—and the moorland district westward till he came to the
      Dunleith sphere of influence, where there were four doctors and a
      hydropathic. Drumtochty in its length, which was eight miles, and its
      breadth, which was four, lay in his hand; besides a glen behind, unknown
      to the world, which in the night-time he visited at the risk of life, for
      the way thereto was across the big moor with its peat-holes and
      treacherous bogs. And he held the land eastward toward Muirtown so far as
      Geordie. The Drumtochty post travelled every day, and could carry word
      that the doctor was wanted. He did his best for the need of every man,
      woman, and child in this wild, straggling district, year in, year out, in
      the snow and in the heat, in the dark and in the light, without rest, and
      without holiday for forty years.

 One horse could not do the work of this man, but we liked best to see him
      on his old white mare, who died the week after her master, and the passing
      of the two did our hearts good. It was not that he rode beautifully, for
      he broke every canon of art, flying with his arms, stooping till he seemed
      to be speaking into Jess’s ears, and rising in the saddle beyond all
      necessity. But he could ride faster, stay longer in the saddle, and had a
      firmer grip with his knees than any one I ever met, and it was all for
      mercy’s sake. When the reapers in harvest-time saw a figure whirling past
      in a cloud of dust, or the family at the foot of Glen Urtach, gathered
      round the fire on a winter’s night, heard the rattle of a horse’s hoofs on
      the road, or the shepherds, out after the sheep, traced a black speck
      moving across the snow to the upper glen, they knew it was the doctor,
      and, without being conscious of it, wished him God-speed.

 Before and behind his saddle were strapped the instruments and medicines
      the doctor might want, for he never knew what was before him. There were
      no specialists in Drumtochty, so this man had to do everything as best he
      could, and as quickly. He was chest doctor, and doctor for every other
      organ as well; he was accoucheur and surgeon; he was oculist and aurist;
      he was dentist and chloroformist, besides being chemist and druggist. It
      was often told how he was far up Glen Urtach when the feeders of the
      threshing-mill caught young Burnbrae, and how he only stopped to change
      horses at his house, and galloped all the way to Burnbrae, and flung
      himself off his horse, and amputated the arm, and saved the lad’s life.

 “You wud hae thocht that every meenut was an hour,” said Jamie Soutar, who
      had been at the threshing, “an’ a’ ‘ll never forget the puir lad lyin’ as
      white as deith on the floor o’ the loft, wi’ his head on a sheaf, and
      Burnbrae haudin’ the bandage ticht an’ prayin’ a’ the while, and the
      mither greetin’ in the corner.

 “‘Will he never come?’ she cries, an’ a’ heard the soond o’ the horse’s
      feet on the road a mile awa’ in the frosty air.

 “‘The Lord be praised!’ said Burnbrae, and a’ slipped doon the ladder as
      the doctor came skelpin’ intae the close, the foam fleein’ frae his
      horse’s mooth.

 “‘Whar is he?’ wes a’ that passed his lips, an’ in five meenuts he hed him
      on the feedin’ board, and wes at his wark—sic wark, neeburs! but he
      did it weel. An’ ae thing a’ thocht rael thochtfu’ o’ him: he first sent
      aff the laddie’s mither tae get a bed ready.

 “‘Noo that’s feenished, and his constitution ‘ill dae the rest,’ and he
      carried the lad doon the ladder in his airms like a bairn, and laid him in
      his bed, and waits aside him till he wes sleepin’, and then says he,
      ‘Burnbrae, yir a gey lad never tae say, “Collie, will ye lick?” for a’ 
      hevna tasted meat for saxteen hoors.’

 “It was michty tae see him come intae the yaird that day, neeburs; the
      verra look o’ him wes victory.”

 Jamie’s cynicism slipped off in the enthusiasm of this reminiscence, and
      he expressed the feeling of Drumtochty. No one sent for MacLure save in
      great straits, and the sight of him put courage in sinking hearts. But
      this was not by the grace of his appearance, or the advantage of a good
      bedside manner. A tall, gaunt, loosely made man, without an ounce of
      superfluous flesh on his body, his face burned a dark brick colour by
      constant exposure to the weather, red hair and beard turning gray, honest
      blue eyes that look you ever in the face, huge hands with wrist-bones like
      the shank of a ham, and a voice that hurled his salutations across two
      fields, he suggested the moor rather than the drawing-room. But what a
      clever hand it was in an operation—as delicate as a woman’s! and
      what a kindly voice it was in the humble room where the shepherd’s wife
      was weeping by her man’s bedside! He was “ill pitten thegither” to begin
      with, but many of his physical defects were the penalties of his work, and
      endeared him to the Glen. That ugly scar, that cut into his right eyebrow
      and gave him such a sinister expression, was got one night Jess slipped on
      the ice and laid him insensible eight miles from home. His limp marked the
      big snowstorm in the fifties, when his horse missed the road in Glen
      Urtach, and they rolled together in a drift. MacLure escaped with a broken
      leg and the fracture of three ribs, but he never walked like other men
      again. He could not swing himself into the saddle without making two
      attempts and holding Jess’s mane. Neither can you “warstle” through the
      peat-bogs and snow-drifts for forty winters without a touch of rheumatism.
      But they were honourable scars, and for such risks of life men get the
      Victoria Cross in other fields. MacLure got nothing but the secret
      affection of the Glen, which knew that none had ever done one tenth as
      much for it as this ungainly, twisted, battered figure, and I have seen a
      Drumtochty face soften at the sight of MacLure limping to his horse.

 Mr. Hopps earned the ill-will of the Glen for ever by criticising the
      doctor’s dress, but indeed it would have filled any townsman with
      amazement. Black he wore once a year, on sacrament Sunday, and, if
      possible, at a funeral; top-coat or water-proof never. His jacket and
      waistcoat were rough homespun of Glen Urtach wool, which threw off the wet
      like a duck’s back, and below he was clad in shepherd’s tartan trousers,
      which disappeared into unpolished riding-boots. His shirt was gray
      flannel, and he was uncertain about a collar, but certain as to a tie,—which
      he never had, his beard doing instead,—and his hat was soft felt of
      four colours and seven different shapes. His point of distinction in dress
      was the trousers, and they were the subject of unending speculation.

 “Some threep that he’s worn thae eedentical pair the last twenty year, an’ 
      a mind masel’ him getting’ a tear ahint, when he was crossin’ oor palin’,
      an the mend’s still veesible.

 “Ithers declare ‘at he’s got a wab o’ claith, and hes a new pair made in
      Muirtown aince in the twa year maybe, and keeps them in the garden till
      the new look wears aff.

 “For ma ain pairt,” Soutar used to declare, “a’ canna mak’ up my mind, but
      there’s ae thing sure: the Glen wudna like tae see him withoot them; it
      wud be a shock tae confidence. There’s no muckle o’ the check left, but ye
      can aye tell it, and when ye see thae breeks comin’ in ye ken that if
      human pooer can save yir bairn’s life it ‘ill be dune.”

 The confidence of the Glen—and the tributary states—was
      unbounded, and rested partly on long experience of the doctor’s resources,
      and partly on his hereditary connection.

 “His father was here afore him,” Mrs. Macfadyen used to explain; “atween
      them they’ve hed the country-side for weel on tae a century; if MacLure
      disna understand oor constitution, wha dis, a’ wud like tae ask?”

 For Drumtochty had its own constitution and a special throat disease, as
      became a parish which was quite self-contained between the woods and the
      hills, and not dependent on the lowlands either for its diseases or its
      doctors.

 “He’s a skilly man, Dr. MacLure,” continued my friend Mrs. Macfadyen,
      whose judgment on sermons or anything else was seldom at fault; “an’ a
      kind-hearted, though o’ coorse he hes his faults like us a’, an’ he disna
      tribble the kirk often.

 “He aye can tell what’s wrong wi’ a body, an’ maistly he can put ye richt,
      and there’s nae new-fangled wys wi’ him; a blister for the ootside an’ 
      Epsom salts for the inside dis his wark, an’ they say there’s no an herb
      on the hills he disna ken.

 “If we’re tae dee, we’re tae dee; an’ if we’re tae live, we’re tae live,”
       concluded Elspeth, with sound Calvinistic logic; “but a’ ‘ll say this for
      the doctor, that, whether yir tae live or dee, he can aye keep up a sharp
      meisture on the skin.

 “But he’s no verra ceevil gin ye bring him when there’s naethin’ wrang,”
       and Mrs. Macfadyen’s face reflected another of Mr. Hopps’s misadventures
      of which Hillocks held the copyright.

 “Hopps’s laddie ate grosarts (gooseberries) till they hed to sit up a’ 
      nicht wi’ him, an’ naethin’ wud do but they maum hae the doctor, an’ he
      writes ‘immediately’ on a slip o’ paper.

 “Weel, MacLure had been awa’ a’ nicht wi’ a shepherd’s wife Dunleith wy,
      and he comes here withoot drawin’ bridle, mud up tae the een.

 “‘What’s adae here, Hillocks?’ he cries; ‘it’s no an accident, is ‘t?’ and
      when he got aff his horse he cud hardly stand wi’ stiffness and tire.

 “‘It’s nane o’ us, doctor; it’s Hopps’s laddie; he’s been eatin’ ower-mony
      berries.’

 “If he didna turn on me like a tiger!

 “‘Div ye mean tae say—’

 “‘Weesht, weesht,’ an’ I tried tae quiet him, for Hopps wes coomin’ oot.

 “‘Well, doctor,’ begins he, as brisk as a magpie, ‘you’re here at last;
      there’s no hurry with you Scotchmen. My boy has been sick all night, and
      I’ve never had a wink of sleep. You might have come a little quicker,
      that’s all I’ve got to say.’

 “‘We’ve mair tae dae in Drumtochty than attend tae every bairn that hes a
      sair stomach,’ and a’ saw MacLure was roosed.

 “‘I’m astonished to hear you speak. Our doctor at home always says to Mrs.
      ‘Opps, “Look on me as a family friend, Mrs. ‘Opps, and send for me though
      it be only a headache.”’

 “‘He’d be mair spairin’ o’ his offers if he hed four and twenty mile tae
      look aifter. There’s naethin’ wrang wi’ yir laddie but greed. Gie him a
      gud dose o’ castor-oil and stop his meat for a day, an’ he ‘ill be a’richt
      the morn.’

 “‘He ‘ill not take castor-oil, doctor. We have given up those barbarous
      medicines.’

 “‘Whatna kind o’ medicines hae ye noo in the Sooth?’

 “‘Well, you see Dr. MacLure, we’re homoeopathists, and I’ve my little
      chest here,’ and oot Hopps comes wi’ his boxy.

 “‘Let’s see ‘t,’ an’ MacLure sits doon and tak’s oot the bit bottles, and
      he reads the names wi’ a lauch every time.

 “‘Belladonna; did ye ever hear the like? Aconite; it cowes a’. Nux vomica.
      What next? Weel, ma mannie,’ he says tae Hopps, ‘it’s a fine ploy, and ye
      ‘ill better gang on wi’ the nux till it’s dune, and gie him ony ither o’ 
      the sweeties he fancies.

 “‘Noo, Hillocks, a’ maun be aff tae see Drumsheugh’s grieve, for he’s doon
      wi’ the fever, and it’s tae be a teuch fecht. A’ hinna time tae wait for
      dinner; gie me some cheese an’ cake in ma haund, and Jess ‘ill take a pail
      o’ meal an’ water.

 “‘Fee? A’ ‘m no wantin’ yir fees, man; wi’ that boxy ye dinna need a
      doctor; na, na, gie yir siller tae some puir body, Maister Hopps,’ an’ he
      was doon the road as hard as he cud lick.”

 His fees were pretty much what the folk chose to give him, and he
      collected them once a year at Kildrummie fair.

 “Weel, doctor, what am a’ awin’ ye for the wife and bairn? Ye ‘ill need
      three notes for that nicht ye stayed in the hoose an’ a’ the vessits.”

 “Havers,” MacLure would answer, “prices are low, a’ ‘m hearin’; gie ‘s
      thirty shillin’s.”

 “No, a’ ‘ll no, or the wife ‘ill tak’ ma ears aff,” and it was settled for
      two pounds.

 Lord Kilspindie gave him a free house and fields, and one way or other,
      Drumsheugh told me the doctor might get in about one hundred and fifty
      pounds a year, out of which he had to pay his old housekeeper’s wages and
      a boy’s, and keep two horses, besides the cost of instruments and books,
      which he bought through a friend in Edinburgh with much judgment.

 There was only one man who ever complained of the doctor’s charges, and
      that was the new farmer of Milton, who was so good that he was above both
      churches, and held a meeting in his barn. (It was Milton the Glen supposed
      at first to be a Mormon, but I can’t go into that now.) He offered MacLure
      a pound less than he asked, and two tracts, whereupon MacLure expressed
      his opinion of Milton, both from a theological and social standpoint, with
      such vigour and frankness that an attentive audience of Drumtochty men
      could hardly contain themselves.

 Jamie Soutar was selling his pig at the time, and missed the meeting, but
      he hastened to condole with Milton, who was complaining everywhere of the
      doctor’s language.

 “Ye did richt tae resist him; it ‘ill maybe roose the Glen tae mak’ a
      stand; he fair hands them in bondage.

 “Thirty shillin’s for twal’ vessits, and him no mair than seeven mile
      awa’, an’ a’ ‘m telt there werena mair than four at nicht.

 “Ye ‘ill hae the sympathy o’ the Glen, for a’body kens yir as free wi’ yir
      siller as yir tracts.

 “Wes ‘t ‘Beware o’ Gude Warks’ ye offered him? Man, ye chose it weel, for
      he’s been colleckin’ sae mony thae forty years, a’ ‘m feared for him.

 “A’ ‘ve often thocht oor doctor’s little better than the Gude Samaritan,
      an’ the Pharisees didna think muckle o’ his chance aither in this warld or
      that which is tae come.”

 II THROUGH THE FLOOD

 Dr. MacLure did not lead a solemn procession from the sick-bed to the
      dining-room, and give his opinion from the hearth-rug with an air of
      wisdom bordering on the supernatural, because neither the Drumtochty
      houses nor his manners were on that large scale. He was accustomed to
      deliver himself in the yard, and to conclude his directions with one foot
      in the stirrup; but when he left the room where the life of Annie Mitchell
      was ebbing slowly away, our doctor said not one word, and at the sight of
      his face her husband’s heart was troubled.

 He was a dull man, Tammas, who could not read the meaning of a sign, and
      laboured under a perpetual disability of speech; but love was eyes to him
      that day, and a mouth.

 “Is ‘t as bad as yir lookin’, doctor? Tell ‘s the truth. Wull Annie no
      come through?” and Tammas looked MacLure straight in the face, who never
      flinched his duty or said smooth things.

 “A’ wud gie onythin’ tae say Annie has a chance, but a’ daurna; a’ doot
      yir gaein’ to lose her, Tammas.”

 MacLure was in the saddle, and, as he gave his judgment, he laid his hand
      on Tammas’s shoulder with one of the rare caresses that pass between men.

 “It’s a sair business, but ye ‘ill play the man and no vex Annie; she ‘ill
      dae her best, a’ ‘ll warrant.”

 “And a’ ‘ll dae mine,” and Tammas gave MacLure’s hand a grip that would
      have crushed the bones of a weakling. Drumtochty felt in such moments the
      brotherliness of this rough-looking man, and loved him.

 Tammas hid his face in Jess’s mane, who looked round with sorrow in her
      beautiful eyes, for she had seen many tragedies; and in this silent
      sympathy the stricken man drank his cup, drop by drop.

 “A’ wesna prepared for this, for a’ aye thocht she wud live the langest. .
      . . She’s younger than me by ten year, and never was ill. . . . We’ve been
      mairit twal’ year last Martinmas, but it’s juist like a year the day. . .
      . A’ wes never worthy o’ her, the bonniest, snoddest (neatest), kindliest
      lass in the Glen. . . . A’ never cud mak’ oot hoo she ever lookit at me,
      ‘at hesna hed ae word tae say about her till it’s ower-late. . . . She
      didna cuist up to me that a’ wesna worthy o’ her—no her; but aye she
      said, ‘Yir ma ain gudeman, and nane cud be kinder tae me.’ . . . An’ a’ 
      wes minded tae be kind, but a’ see noo mony little trokes a’ micht hae
      dune for her, and noo the time is by. . . . Naebody kens hoo patient she
      wes wi’ me, and aye made the best o’ me, an’ never pit me tae shame afore
      the fouk. . . . An’ we never hed ae cross word, no ane in twal’ year. . .
      . We were mair nor man and wife—we were sweethearts a’ the time. . .
      . Oh, ma bonnie lass, what ‘ill the bairnies an’ me dae without ye,
      Annie?”

 The winter night was falling fast, the snow lay deep upon the ground, and
      the merciless north wind moaned through the close as Tammas wrestled with
      his sorrow dry-eyed, for tears were denied Drumtochty men. Neither the
      doctor nor Jess moved hand or foot, but their hearts were with their
      fellow-creature, and at length the doctor made a sign to Marget Howe, who
      had come out in search of Tammas, and now stood by his side.

 “Dinna mourn tae the brakin’ o’ yir hert, Tammas,” she said, “as if Annie
      an’ you hed never luved. Neither death nor time can pairt them that luve;
      there’s naethin’ in a’ the warld sae strong as luve. If Annie gaes frae
      the sicht o’ yir een she ‘ill come the nearer tae yir hert. She wants tae
      see ye, and tae hear ye say that ye ‘ill never forget her nicht nor day
      till ye meet in the land where there’s nae pairtin’. Oh, a’ ken what a’ ‘m
      sayin’, for it’s five year noo sin’ George gied awa’, an’ he’s mair wi me
      noo than when he was in Edinboro’ and I wes in Drumtochty.”

 “Thank ye kindly, Marget; thae are gude words an’ true, an’ ye hev the
      richt tae say them; but a’ canna dae without seein’ Annie comin’ tae meet
      me in the gloamin’, an’ gaein’ in an’ oot the hoose, an’ hearin’ her ca’ 
      me by ma name; an’ a’ ‘ll no can tell her that a’ luve her when there’s
      nae Annie in the hoose.

 “Can naethin’ be dune, doctor? Ye savit Flora Cammil, and young Burnbrae,
      an’ yon shepherd’s wife Dunleith wy; an’ we were a’ sae prood o’ ye, an’ 
      pleased tae think that ye hed keepit deith frae anither hame. Can ye no
      think o’ somethin’ tae help Annie, and gie her back her man and bairnies?”
       and Tammas searched the doctor’s face in the cold, weird light.

 “There’s nae pooer in heaven or airth like luve,” Marget said to me
      afterward; “it mak’s the weak strong and the dumb tae speak. Oor herts
      were as water afore Tammas’s words, an’ a’ saw the doctor shake in his
      saddle. A’ never kent till that meenut hoo he hed a share in a’body’s
      grief, an’ carried the heaviest wecht o’ a’ the Glen. A’ peetied him wi’ 
      Tammas lookin’ at him sae wistfully, as if he hed the keys o’ life an’ 
      deith in his hands. But he wes honest, and wudna hold oot a false houp tae
      deceive a sore hert or win escape for himsel’.”

 “Ye needna plead wi’ me, Tammas, to dae the best a’ can for yir wife. Man,
      a’ kent her lang afore ye ever luved her; a’ brocht her intae the warld,
      and a’ saw her through the fever when she wes a bit lassikie; a’ closed
      her mither’s een, and it wes me hed tae tell her she wes an orphan; an’ 
      nae man wes better pleased when she got a gude husband, and a’ helpit her
      wi’ her fower bairns. A’ ‘ve naither wife nor bairns o’ ma own, an’ a’ 
      coont a’ the fouk o’ the Glen ma family. Div ye think a’ wudna save Annie
      if I cud? If there wes a man in Muirtown ‘at cud dae mair for her, a’ ‘d
      have him this verra nicht; but a’ the doctors in Perthshire are helpless
      for this tribble.

 “Tammas, ma puir fallow, if it could avail, a’ tell ye a’ wud lay doon
      this auld worn-oot ruckle o’ a body o’ mine juist tae see ye baith sittin’ 
      at the fireside, an’ the bairns round ye, couthy an’ canty again; but it’s
      nae tae be, Tammas, it’s nae tae be.”

 “When a’ lookit at the doctor’s face,” Marget said, “a’ thocht him the
      winsomest man a’ ever saw. He wes transfigured that nicht, for a’ ‘m
      judgin’ there’s nae transfiguration like luve.”

 “It’s God’s wull an’ maun be borne, but it’s a sair wull fur me, an’ a’ ‘m
      no ungratefu’ tae you, doctor, for a’ ye’ve dune and what ye said the
      nicht,” and Tammas went back to sit with Annie for the last time.

 Jess picked her way through the deep snow to the main road, with a skill
      that came of long experience, and the doctor held converse with her
      according to his wont.

 “Eh, Jess, wumman, yon wes the hardest wark a’ hae tae face, and a’ wud
      raither hae taen ma chance o’ anither row in a Glen Urtach drift than tell
      Tammas Mitchell his wife wes deein’.

 “A’ said she cudna be cured, and it was true, for there’s juist ae man in
      the land fit for ‘t, and they micht as weel try tae get the mune oot o’ 
      heaven. Sae a’ said naethin’ tae vex Tammas’s hert, for it’s heavy eneuch
      withoot regrets.

 “But it’s hard, Jess, that money will buy life after a’, an’ if Annie wes
      a duchess her man wudna lose her; but bein’ only a puir cotter’s wife, she
      maun dee afore the week ‘s oot.

 “Gin we hed him the morn there’s little doot she wud be saved, for he
      hesna lost mair than five per cent. o’ his cases, and they ‘ill be puir
      toons-craturs, no strappin’ women like Annie.

 “It’s oot o’ the question, Jess, sae hurry up, lass, for we’ve hed a heavy
      day. But it wud be the grandest thing that wes ever done in the Glen in
      oor time if it could be managed by hook or crook.

 “We’ll gang and see Drumsheugh, Jess; he’s anither man sin’ Geordie Hoo’s
      deith, and he was aye kinder than fouk kent.” And the doctor passed at a
      gallop through the village, whose lights shone across the white
      frost-bound road.

 “Come in by, doctor; a’ heard ye on the road; ye ‘ill hae been at Tammas
      Mitchell’s; hoo’s the gudewife? A’ doot she’s sober.”

 “Annie’s deein’, Drumsheugh, an’ Tammas is like tae brak his hert.”

 “That’s no lichtsome, doctor, no lichtsome, ava, for a’ dinna ken ony man
      in Drumtochty sae bund up in his wife as Tammas, and there’s no a bonnier
      wumman o’ her age crosses oor kirk door than Annie, nor a cleverer at her
      work. Man ye ‘ill need tae pit yir brains in steep. Is she clean beyond
      ye?”

 “Beyond me and every ither in the land but ane, and it wud cost a hundred
      guineas tae bring him tae Drumtochty.”

 “Certes, he’s no blate; it’s a fell chairge for a short day’s work; but
      hundred or no hundred we ‘ill hae him, and no let Annie gang, and her no
      half her years.”

 “Are ye meanin’ it, Drumsheugh?” and MacLure turned white below the tan.

 “William MacLure,” said Drumsheugh, in one of the few confidences that
      ever broke the Drumtochty reserve, “a’ ‘m a lonely man, wi’ naebody o’ ma
      ain blude tae care for me livin’, or tae lift me intae ma coffin when a’ 
      ‘m deid.

 “A’ fecht awa’ at Muirtown market for an extra pund on a beast, or a
      shillin’ on the quarter o’ barley, an’ what’s the gude o’ ‘t? Burnbrae
      gaes aff tae get a goon for his wife or a buke for his college laddie, an’ 
      Lachlan Campbell ‘ill no leave the place noo without a ribbon for Flora.

 “Ilka man in the Kildrummie train has some bit fairin’ in his pooch for
      the fouk at hame that he’s bocht wi’ the siller he won.

 “But there’s naebody tae be lookin’ oot for me, an’ comin’ doon the road
      tae meet me, and daffin’ (joking) wi’ me aboot their fairin’, or feelin’ 
      ma pockets. Ou, ay! A’ ‘ve seen it a’ at ither hooses, though they tried
      tae hide it frae me for fear a’ wud lauch at them. Me lauch, wi’ ma cauld,
      empty hame!

 “Yir the only man kens, Weelum, that I aince luved the noblest wumman in
      the Glen or onywhere, an’ a’ luve her still, but wi’ anither luve noo.

 “She hed given her hert tae anither, or a’ ‘ve thocht a’ micht hae won
      her, though nae man be worthy o’ sic a gift. Ma hert turned tae
      bitterness, but that passed awa’ beside the brier-bush what George Hoo lay
      yon sad simmer-time. Some day a’ ‘ll tell ye ma story, Weelum, for you an’ 
      me are auld freends, and will be till we dee.”

 MacLure felt beneath the table for Drumsheugh’s hand, but neither man
      looked at the other.

 “Weel, a’ we can dae noo, Weelum, gin we haena mickle brightness in oor
      ain hames, is tae keep the licht frae gaein’ oot in anither hoose. Write
      the telegram, man, and Sandy ‘ill send it aff frae Kildrummie this verra
      nicht, and ye ‘ill hae yir man the morn.”

 “Yir the man a’ coonted ye, Drumsheugh, but ye ‘ill grant me a favour. Ye
      ‘ill lat me pay the half, bit by bit. A’ ken yir wullin’ tae dae ‘t a’;
      but a’ haena mony pleasures, an’ a’ wud like tae hae ma ain share in
      savin’ Annie’s life.”

 Next morning a figure received Sir George on the Kildrummie platform, whom
      that famous surgeon took for a gillie, but who introduced himself as
      “MacLure of Drumtochty.” It seemed as if the East had come to meet the
      West when these two stood together, the one in travelling furs, handsome
      and distinguished, with his strong, cultured face and carriage of
      authority, a characteristic type of his profession; and the other more
      marvellously dressed than ever, for Drumsheugh’s top-coat had been forced
      upon him for the occasion, his face and neck one redness with the bitter
      cold, rough and ungainly, yet not without some signs of power in his eye
      and voice, the most heroic type of his noble profession. MacLure compassed
      the precious arrival with observances till he was securely seated in
      Drumsheugh’s dog-cart,—a vehicle that lent itself to history,—with
      two full-sized plaids added to his equipment—Drumsheugh and Hillocks
      had both been requisitioned; and MacLure wrapped another plaid round a
      leather case, which was placed below the seat with such reverence as might
      be given to the Queen’s regalia. Peter attended their departure full of
      interest, and as soon as they were in the fir woods MacLure explained that
      it would be an eventful journey.

 “It’s a’richt in here, for the wind disna get at the snow; but the drifts
      are deep in the Glen, and th’ ‘ill be some engineerin’ afore we get tae
      oor destination.”

 Four times they left the road and took their way over fields; twice they
      forced a passage through a slap in a dyke; thrice they used gaps in the
      paling which MacLure had made on his downward journey.

 “A’ seleckit the road this mornin’, an’ a’ ken the depth tae an inch; we
      ‘ill get through this steadin’ here tae the main road, but our worst job
      ‘ill be crossin’ the Tochty.

 “Ye see, the bridge hes been shakin’ wi’ this winter’s flood, and we
      daurna venture on it, sae we hev tae ford, and the snaw’s been meltin’ up
      Urtach way. There’s nae doot the water’s gey big, and it’s threatenin’ tae
      rise, but we ‘ill win through wi’ a warstle.

 “It micht be safer tae lift the instruments oot o’ reach o’ the water; wud
      ye mind haddin’ them on yir knee till we’re ower, an’ keep firm in yir
      seat in case we come on a stane in the bed o’ the river.”

 By this time they had come to the edge, and it was not a cheering sight.
      The Tochty had spread out over the meadows, and while they waited they
      could see it cover another two inches on the trunk of a tree. There are
      summer floods, when the water is brown and flecked with foam, but this was
      a winter flood, which is black and sullen, and runs in the centre with a
      strong, fierce, silent current. Upon the opposite side Hillocks stood to
      give directions by word and hand, as the ford was on his land, and none
      knew the Tochty better in all its ways.

 They passed through the shallow water without mishap, save when the wheel
      struck a hidden stone or fell suddenly into a rut; but when they neared
      the body of the river MacLure halted, to give Jess a minute’s breathing.

 “It ‘ill tak’ ye a’ yir time, lass, an’ a’ wud raither be on yir back; but
      ye never failed me yet, and a wumman’s life is hangin’ on the crossin’.”

 With the first plunge into the bed of the stream the water rose to the
      axles, and then it crept up to the shafts, so that the surgeon could feel
      it lapping in about his feet, while the dog-cart began to quiver, and it
      seemed as if it were to be carried away. Sir George was as brave as most
      men, but he had never forded a Highland river in flood, and the mass of
      black water racing past beneath, before, behind him, affected his
      imagination and shook his nerves. He rose from his seat and ordered
      MacLure to turn back, declaring that he would be condemned utterly and
      eternally if he allowed himself to be drowned for any person.

 “Sit doon!” thundered MacLure. “Condemned ye will be, suner or later, gin
      ye shirk yir duty, but through the water ye gang the day.”

 Both men spoke much more strongly and shortly, but this is what they
      intended to say, and it was MacLure that prevailed.

 Jess trailed her feet along the ground with cunning art, and held her
      shoulder against the stream; MacLure leaned forward in his seat, a rein in
      each hand, and his eyes fixed on Hillocks, who was now standing up to the
      waist in the water, shouting directions and cheering on horse and driver:

 “Haud tae the richt, doctor; there’s a hole yonder. Keep oot o’ ‘t for ony
      sake. That’s it; yir daein’ fine. Steady, man, steady. Yir at the deepest;
      sit heavy in yir seats. Up the channel noo, and ye ‘ill be oot o’ the
      swirl. Weel dune, Jess! Weel dune, auld mare! Mak’ straicht for me,
      doctor, an’ a’ ‘ll gie ye the road oot. Ma word, ye’ve dune yir best,
      baith o’ ye, this mornin’,” cried Hillocks, splashing up to the dog-cart,
      now in the shallows.

 “Sall, it wes titch an’ go for a meenut in the middle; a Hielan’ ford is a
      kittle (hazardous) road in the snaw-time, but ye ‘re safe noo.

 “Gude luck tae ye up at Westerton, sir; nane but a richt-hearted man wud
      hae riskit the Tochty in flood. Ye ‘re boond tae succeed aifter sic a
      graund beginnin’,” for it had spread already that a famous surgeon had
      come to do his best for Annie, Tammas Mitchell’s wife.

 Two hours later MacLure came out from Annie’s room and laid hold of
      Tammas, a heap of speechless misery by the kitchen fire, and carried him
      off to the barn, and spread some corn on the threshing-floor, and thrust a
      flail into his hands.

 “Noo we ‘ve tae begin, an’ we ‘ill no be dune for an’ ‘oor, and ye ‘ve tae
      lay on without stoppin’ till a’ come for ye; an’ a’ ‘ll shut the door tae
      haud in the noise, an’ keep yir dog beside ye, for there maunna be a cheep
      aboot the house for Annie’s sake.”

 “A’ ‘ll dae onythin’ ye want me, but if—if——”

 “A’ ‘ll come for ye, Tammas, gin there be danger; but what are ye feard
      for wi’ the Queen’s ain surgeon here?”

 Fifty minutes did the flair rise and fall, save twice, when Tammas crept
      to the door and listened, the dog lifting his head and whining.

 It seemed twelve hours instead of one when the door swung back, and
      MacLure filled the doorway, preceded by a great burst of light, for the
      sun had arisen on the snow.

 His face was as tidings of great joy, and Elspeth told me that there was
      nothing like it to be seen that afternoon for glory, save the sun itself
      in the heavens.

 “A’ never saw the marrow o’ ‘t, Tammas, an’ a’ ‘ll never see the like
      again; it’s a’ ower, man, withoot a hitch frae beginnin’ tae end, and
      she’s fa’in’ asleep as fine as ye like.”

 “Dis he think Annie—‘ill live?”

 “Of course he dis, and be aboot the hoose inside a month; that’s the gude
      o’ bein’ a clean-bluided, weel-livin’—

 “Preserve ye, man, what’s wrang wi’ ye? It’s a mercy a’ keppit ye, or we
      wud hev hed anither job for Sir George.

 “Ye ‘re a’richt noo; sit doon on the strae. A’ ‘ll come back in a while,
      an’ ye ‘ill see Annie, juist for a meenut, but ye maunna say a word.”

 Marget took him in and let him kneel by Annie’s bedside.

 He said nothing then or afterward for speech came only once in his
      lifetime to Tammas, but Annie whispered, “Ma ain dear man.”

 When the doctor placed the precious bag beside Sir George in our solitary
      first next morning, he laid a check beside it and was about to leave.

 “No, no!” said the great man. “Mrs. Macfadyen and I were on the gossip
      last night, and I know the whole story about you and your friend.

 “You have some right to call me a coward, but I ‘ll never let you count me
      a mean, miserly rascal,” and the check with Drumsheugh’s painful writing
      fell in fifty pieces on the floor.

 As the train began to move, a voice from the first called so that all the
      station heard:

 “Give ‘s another shake of your hand, MacLure; I’m proud to have met you;
      your are an honour to our profession. Mind the antiseptic dressings.”

 It was market-day, but only Jamie Soutar and Hillocks had ventured down.

 “Did ye hear yon, Hillocks? Hoo dae ye feel? A’ ‘ll no deny a’ ‘m lifted.”

 Half-way to the Junction Hillocks had recovered, and began to grasp the
      situation.

 “Tell ‘us what he said. A’ wud like to hae it exact for Drumsheugh.”

 “Thae’s the eedentical words, an’ they’re true; there’s no a man in
      Drumtochty disna ken that, except ane.”

 “An’ wha’s that Jamie?”

 “It’s Weelum MacLure himsel’. Man, a’ ‘ve often girned that he sud fecht
      awa’ for us a’, and maybe dee before he kent that he had githered mair
      luve than ony man in the Glen.

 “‘A’ ‘m prood tae hae met ye,’ says Sir George, an’ him the greatest
      doctor in the land. ‘Yir an honour tae oor profession.’

 “Hillocks, a’ wudna hae missed it for twenty notes,” said James Soutar,
      cynic in ordinary to the parish of Drumtochty.

  

  









 WANDERING WILLIE’S TALE, By Sir Walter Scott

 “Honest folks like me! How do ye ken whether I am honest, or what I am? I
      may be the deevil himsell for what ye ken, for he has power to come
      disguised like an angel of light; and, besides, he is a prime fiddler. He
      played a sonata to Corelli, ye ken.”

 There was something odd in this speech, and the tone in which it was said.
      It seemed as if my companion was not always in his constant mind, or that
      he was willing to try if he could frighten me. I laughed at the
      extravagance of his language, however, and asked him in reply if he was
      fool enough to believe that the foul fiend would play so silly a
      masquerade.

 “Ye ken little about it—little about it,” said the old man, shaking
      his head and beard, and knitting his brows. “I could tell ye something
      about that.”

 What his wife mentioned of his being a tale-teller as well as a musician
      now occurred to me; and as, you know, I like tales of superstition, I
      begged to have a specimen of his talent as we went along.

 “It is very true,” said the blind man, “that when I am tired of scraping
      thairm or singing ballants I whiles make a tale serve the turn among the
      country bodies; and I have some fearsome anes, that make the auld carlines
      shake on the settle, and the bits o’ bairns skirl on their minnies out
      frae their beds. But this that I am going to tell you was a thing that
      befell in our ain house in my father’s time—that is, my father was
      then a hafflins callant; and I tell it to you, that it may be a lesson to
      you that are but a young thoughtless chap, wha ye draw up wi’ on a lonely
      road; for muckle was the dool and care that came o’ ‘t to my gudesire.”

 He commenced his tale accordingly, in a distinct narrative tone of voice,
      which he raised and depressed with considerable skill; at times sinking
      almost into a whisper, and turning his clear but sightless eyeballs upon
      my face, as if it had been possible for him to witness the impression
      which his narrative made upon my features. I will not spare a syllable of
      it, although it be of the longest; so I make a dash—and begin:

 Ye maun have heard of Sir Robert Redgauntlet of that ilk, who lived in
      these parts before the dear years. The country will lang mind him; and our
      fathers used to draw breath thick if ever they heard him named. He was out
      wi’ the Hielandmen in Montrose’s time; and again he was in the hills wi’ 
      Glencairn in the saxteen hundred and fifty-twa; and sae when King Charles
      the Second came in, wha was in sic favour as the laird of Redgauntlet? He
      was knighted at Lonon Court, wi’ the king’s ain sword; and being a red-hot
      prelatist, he came down here, rampauging like a lion, with commission of
      lieutenancy (and of lunacy, for what I ken), to put down a’ the Whigs and
      Covenanters in the country. Wild wark they made of it; for the Whigs were
      as dour as the Cavaliers were fierce, and it was which should first tire
      the other. Redgauntlet was aye for the strong hand; and his name is kend
      as wide in the country as Claverhouse’s or Tam Dalyell’s. Glen, nor
      dargle, nor mountain, nor cave could hide the puir hill-folk when
      Redgauntlet was out with bugle and bloodhound after them, as if they had
      been sae mony deer. And, troth, when they fand them, they didna make
      muckle mair ceremony than a Hielandman wi’ a roebuck. It was just, “Will
      ye tak’ the test?” If not—“Make ready—present—fire!” and
      there lay the recusant.

 Far and wide was Sir Robert hated and feared. Men thought he had a direct
      compact with Satan; that he was proof against steel, and that bullets
      happed aff his buff-coat like hailstanes from a hearth; that he had a mear
      that would turn a hare on the side of Carrifra-gauns (a precipitous side
      of a mountain in Moffatdale); and muckle to the same purpose, of whilk
      mair anon. The best blessing they wared on him was, “Deil scowp wi’ 
      Redgauntlet!” He wasna a bad master to his ain folk, though, and was weel
      aneugh liked by his tenants; and as for the lackeys and troopers that rade
      out wi’ him to the persecutions, as the Whigs caa’d those killing-times,
      they wad hae drunken themsells blind to his health at ony time.

 Now you are to ken that my gudesire lived on Redgauntlet’s grund—they
      ca’ the place Primrose Knowe. We had lived on the grund, and under the
      Redgauntlets, since the riding-days, and lang before. It was a pleasant
      bit; and, I think the air is callerer and fresher there than onywhere else
      in the country. It’s a’ deserted now; and I sat on the broken door-cheek
      three days since, and was glad I couldna see the plight the place was in—but
      that’s a’ wide o’ the mark. There dwelt my gudesire, Steenie Steenson; a
      rambling, rattling chiel’ he had been in his young days, and could play
      weel on the pipes; he was famous at “hoopers and girders,” a’ Cumberland
      couldna touch him at “Jockie Lattin,” and he had the finest finger for the
      back-lilt between Berwick and Carlisle. The like o’ Steenie wasna the sort
      that they made Whigs o’. And so he became a Tory, as they ca’ it, which we
      now ca’ Jacobites, just out of a kind of needcessity, that he might belang
      to some side or other. He had nae ill-will to the Whig bodies, and liked
      little to see the blude rin, though, being obliged to follow Sir Robert in
      hunting and hoisting, watching and warding, he saw muckle mischief, and
      maybe did some that he couldna avoid.

 Now Steenie was a kind of favourite with his master, and kend a’ the folk
      about the castle, and was often sent for to play the pipes when they were
      at their merriment. Auld Dougal MacCallum, the butler, that had followed
      Sir Robert through gude and ill, thick and thin, pool and stream, was
      specially fond of the pipes, and aye gae my gudesire his gude word wi’ the
      laird; for Dougal could turn his master round his finger.

 Weel, round came the Revolution, and it had like to hae broken the hearts
      baith of Dougal and his master. But the change was not a’thegether sae
      great as they feared and other folk thought for. The Whigs made an unco
      crawing what they wad do with their auld enemies, and in special wi’ Sir
      Robert Redgauntlet. But there were ower-mony great folks dipped in the
      same doings to make a spick-and-span new warld. So Parliament passed it a’ 
      ower easy; and Sir Robert, bating that he was held to hunting foxes
      instead of Covenanters, remained just the man he was. His revel was as
      loud, and his hall as weel lighted, as ever it had been, though maybe he
      lacked the fines of the nonconformists, that used to come to stock his
      larder and cellar; for it is certain he began to be keener about the rents
      than his tenants used to find him before, and they behooved to be prompt
      to the rent-day, or else the laird wasna pleased. And he was sic an awsome
      body that naebody cared to anger him; for the oaths he swore, and the rage
      that he used to get into, and the looks that he put on made men sometimes
      think him a devil incarnate.

 Weel, my gudesire was nae manager—no that he was a very great
      misguider—but he hadna the saving gift, and he got twa terms’ rent
      in arrear. He got the first brash at Whitsunday put ower wi’ fair word and
      piping; but when Martinmas came there was a summons from the grund officer
      to come wi’ the rent on a day preceese, or else Steenie behooved to flit.
      Sair wark he had to get the siller; but he was weel freended, and at last
      he got the haill scraped thegether—a thousand merks. The maist of it
      was from a neighbour they caa’d Laurie Lapraik—a sly tod. Laurie had
      wealth o’ gear, could hunt wi’ the hound and rin wi’ the hare, and be Whig
      or Tory, saunt or sinner, as the wind stood. He was a professor in the
      Revolution warld, but he liked an orra sough of the warld, and a tune on
      the pipes weel aneugh at a by-time; and, bune a’, he thought he had gude
      security for the siller he len my gudesire ower the stocking at Primrose
      Knowe.

 Away trots my gudesire to Redgauntlet Castle wi’ a heavy purse and a light
      heart, glad to be out of the laird’s danger. Weel, the first thing he
      learned at the castle was that Sir Robert had fretted himsell into a fit
      of the gout because he did no appear before twelve o’clock. It wasna
      a’thegether for sake of the money, Dougal thought, but because he didna
      like to part wi’ my gudesire aff the grund. Dougal was glad to see
      Steenie, and brought him into the great oak parlour; and there sat the
      laird his leesome lane, excepting that he had beside him a great,
      ill-favoured jackanape that was a special pet of his. A cankered beast it
      was, and mony an ill-natured trick it played; ill to please it was, and
      easily angered—ran about the haill castle, chattering and rowling,
      and pinching and biting folk, specially before ill weather, or disturbance
      in the state. Sir Robert caa’d it Major Weir, after the warlock that was
      burnt; and few folk liked either the name or the conditions of the
      creature—they thought there was something in it by ordinar—and
      my gudesire was not just easy in mind when the door shut on him, and he
      saw himsell in the room wi’ naebody but the laird, Dougal MacCallum, and
      the major—a thing that hadna chanced to him before.

 Sir Robert sat, or, I should say, lay, in a great arm-chair, wi’ his grand
      velvet gown, and his feet on a cradle, for he had baith gout and gravel,
      and his face looked as gash and ghastly as Satan’s. Major Weir sat
      opposite to him, in a red-laced coat, and the laird’s wig on his head; and
      aye as Sir Robert girned wi’ pain, the jackanape girned too, like a
      sheep’s head between a pair of tangs—an ill-faur’d, fearsome couple
      they were. The laird’s buff-coat was hung on a pin behind him and his
      broadsword and his pistols within reach; for he keepit up the auld fashion
      of having the weapons ready, and a horse saddled day and night, just as he
      used to do when he was able to loup on horseback, and sway after ony of
      the hill-folk he could get speerings of. Some said it was for fear of the
      Whigs taking vengeance, but I judge it was just his auld custom—he
      wasna gine not fear onything. The rental-book, wi’ its black cover and
      brass clasps, was lying beside him; and a book of sculduddery sangs was
      put betwixt the leaves, to keep it open at the place where it bore
      evidence against the goodman of Primrose Knowe, as behind the hand with
      his mails and duties. Sir Robert gave my gudesire a look, as if he would
      have withered his heart in his bosom. Ye maun ken he had a way of bending
      his brows that men saw the visible mark of a horseshoe in his forehead,
      deep-dinted, as if it had been stamped there.

 “Are ye come light-handed, ye son of a toom whistle?” said Sir Robert.
      “Zounds! If you are—”

 My gudesire, with as gude a countenance as he could put on, made a leg,
      and placed the bag of money on the table wi’ a dash, like a man that does
      something clever. The laird drew it to him hastily. “Is all here, Steenie,
      man?”

 “Your honour will find it right,” said my gudesire.

 “Here, Dougal,” said the laird, “gie Steenie a tass of brandy, till I
      count the siller and write the receipt.”

 But they werena weel out of the room when Sir Robert gied a yelloch that
      garr’d the castle rock. Back ran Dougal; in flew the liverymen; yell on
      yell gied the laird, ilk ane mair awfu’ than the ither. My gudesire knew
      not whether to stand or flee, but he ventured back into the parlour, where
      a’ was gaun hirdie-girdie—naebody to say “come in” or “gae out.”
       Terribly the laird roared for cauld water to his feet, and wine to cool
      his throat; and ‘Hell, hell, hell, and its flames’, was aye the word in
      his mouth. They brought him water, and when they plunged his swoln feet
      into the tub, he cried out it was burning; and folks say that it did bubble and sparkle like a seething cauldron. He flung the cup at Dougal’s
      head and said he had given him blood instead of Burgundy; and, sure
      aneugh, the lass washed clotted blood aff the carpet the neist day. The
      jackanape they caa’d Major Weir, it jibbered and cried as if it was
      mocking its master. My gudesire’s head was like to turn; he forgot baith
      siller and receipt, and downstairs he banged; but, as he ran, the shrieks
      came fainter and fainter; there was a deep-drawn shivering groan, and word
      gaed through the castle that the laird was dead.

 Weel, away came my gudesire wi’ his finger in his mouth, and his best hope
      was that Dougal had seen the money-bag and heard the laird speak of
      writing the receipt. The young laird, now Sir John, came from Edinburgh to
      see things put to rights. Sir John and his father never ‘greed weel. Sir
      John had been bred an advocate, and afterward sat in the last Scots
      Parliament and voted for the Union, having gotten, it was thought, a rug
      of the compensations—if his father could have come out of his grave
      he would have brained him for it on his awn hearthstane. Some thought it
      was easier counting with the auld rough knight than the fair-spoken young
      ane—but mair of that anon.

 Dougal MacCallum, poor body, neither grat nor graned, but gaed about the
      house looking like a corpse, but directing, as was his duty, a’ the order
      of the grand funeral. Now Dougal looked aye waur and waur when night was
      coming, and was aye the last to gang to his bed, whilk was in a little
      round just opposite the chamber of dais, whilk his master occupied while
      he was living, and where he now lay in state, as they can’d it, weeladay!
      The night before the funeral Dougal could keep his awn counsel nae longer;
      he came doun wi’ his proud spirit, and fairly asked auld Hutcheon to sit
      in his room with him for an hour. When they were in the round, Dougal took
      a tass of brandy to himsell, and gave another to Hutcheon, and wished him
      all health and lang life, and said that, for himsell, he wasna lang for
      this warld; for that every night since Sir Robert’s death his silver call
      had sounded from the state chamber just as it used to do at nights in his
      lifetime to call Dougal to help to turn him in his bed. Dougal said that
      being alone with the dead on that floor of the tower (for naebody cared to
      wake Sir Robert Redgauntlet like another corpse), he had never daured to
      answer the call, but that now his conscience checked him for neglecting
      his duty; for, “though death breaks service,” said MacCallum, “it shall
      never weak my service to Sir Robert; and I will answer his next whistle,
      so be you will stand by me, Hutcheon.”

 Hutcheon had nae will to the wark, but he had stood by Dougal in battle
      and broil, and he wad not fail him at this pinch; so doun the carles sat
      ower a stoup of brandy, and Hutcheon, who was something of a clerk, would
      have read a chapter of the Bible; but Dougal would hear naething but a
      blaud of Davie Lindsay, whilk was the waur preparation.

 When midnight came, and the house was quiet as the grave, sure enough the
      silver whistle sounded as sharp and shrill as if Sir Robert was blowing
      it; and up got the twa auld serving-men, and tottered into the room where
      the dead man lay. Hutcheon saw aneugh at the first glance; for there were
      torches in the room, which showed him the foul fiend, in his ain shape,
      sitting on the laird’s coffin! Ower he couped as if he had been dead. He
      could not tell how lang he lay in a trance at the door, but when he
      gathered himsell he cried on his neighbour, and getting nae answer raised
      the house, when Dougal was found lying dead within twa steps of the bed
      where his master’s coffin was placed. As for the whistle, it was gane anes
      and aye; but mony a time was it heard at the top of the house on the
      bartizan, and amang the auld chimneys and turrets where the howlets have
      their nests. Sir John hushed the matter up, and the funeral passed over
      without mair bogie wark.

 But when a’ was ower, and the laird was beginning to settle his affairs,
      every tenant was called up for his arrears, and my gudesire for the full
      sum that stood against him in the rental-book. Weel, away he trots to the
      castle to tell his story, and there he is introduced to Sir John, sitting
      in his father’s chair, in deep mourning, with weepers and hanging cravat,
      and a small walking-rapier by his side, instead of the auld broadsword
      that had a hunderweight of steel about it, what with blade, chape, and
      basket-hilt. I have heard their communings so often tauld ower that I
      almost think I was there mysell, though I couldna be born at the time. (In
      fact, Alan, my companion, mimicked, with a good deal of humour, the
      flattering, conciliating tone of the tenant’s address and the hypocritical
      melancholy of the laird’s reply. His grandfather, he said, had while he
      spoke, his eye fixed on the rental-book, as if it were a mastiff-dog that
      he was afraid would spring up and bite him.)

 “I wuss ye joy, sir, of the head seat and the white loaf and the brid
      lairdship. Your father was a kind man to freends and followers; muckle
      grace to you, Sir John, to fill his shoon—his boots, I suld say, for
      he seldom wore shoon, unless it were muils when he had the gout.”

 “Ay, Steenie,” quoth the laird, sighing deeply, and putting his napkin to
      his een, “his was a sudden call, and he will be missed in the country; no
      time to set his house in order—weel prepared Godward, no doubt,
      which is the root of the matter; but left us behind a tangled hesp to
      wind, Steenie. Hem! Hem! We maun go to business, Steenie; much to do, and
      little time to do it in.”

 Here he opened the fatal volume. I have heard of a thing they call
      Doomsday book—I am clear it has been a rental of back-ganging
      tenants.

 “Stephen,” said Sir John, still in the same soft, sleekit tone of voice—“Stephen
      Stevenson, or Steenson, ye are down here for a year’s rent behind the hand—due
      at last term.”

  Stephen. Please your honour, Sir John, I paid it to your father.

  Sir John. Ye took a receipt, then, doubtless, Stephen, and can
      produce it?

  Stephen. Indeed, I hadna time, an it like your honour; for nae
      sooner had I set doun the siller, and just as his honour, Sir Robert,
      that’s gaen, drew it ill him to count it and write out the receipt, he was
      ta’en wi’ the pains that removed him.

 “That was unlucky,” said Sir John, after a pause. “But ye maybe paid it in
      the presence of somebody. I want but a talis qualis evidence,
      Stephen. I would go ower-strictly to work with no poor man.”

  Stephen. Troth, Sir John, there was naebody in the room but Dougal
      MacCallum, the butler. But, as your honour kens, he has e’en followed his
      auld master.

 “Very unlucky again, Stephen,” said Sir John, without altering his voice a
      single note. “The man to whom ye paid the money is dead, and the man who
      witnessed the payment is dead too; and the siller, which should have been
      to the fore, is neither seen nor heard tell of in the repositories. How am
      I to believe a’ this?”

  Stephen. I dinna ken, your honour; but there is a bit memorandum
      note of the very coins, for, God help me! I had to borrow out of twenty
      purses; and I am sure that ilka man there set down will take his grit oath
      for what purpose I borrowed the money.

  Sir John. I have little doubt ye borrowed the money,
      Steenie. It is the payment that I want to have proof of.

  Stephen. The siller maun be about the house, Sir John. And since
      your honour never got it, and his honour that was canna have ta’en it wi’ 
      him, maybe some of the family may hae seen it.

  Sir John. We will examine the servants, Stephen; that is but
      reasonable.

 But lackey and lass, and page and groom, all denied stoutly that they had
      ever seen such a bag of money as my gudesire described. What saw waur, he
      had unluckily not mentioned to any living soul of them his purpose of
      paying his rent. Ae quean had noticed something under his arm, but she
      took it for the pipes.

 Sir John Redgauntlet ordered the servants out of the room and then said to
      my gudesire, “Now, Steenie, ye see ye have fair play; and, as I have
      little doubt ye ken better where to find the siller than ony other body, I
      beg in fair terms, and for your own sake, that you will end this fasherie;
      for, Stephen, ye maun pay or flit.”

 “The Lord forgie your opinion,” said Stephen, driven almost to his wits’ 
      end—“I am an honest man.”

 “So am I, Stephen,” said his honour; “and so are all the folks in the
      house, I hope. But if there be a knave among us, it must be he that tells
      the story he cannot prove.” He paused, and then added, mair sternly: “If I
      understand your trick, sir, you want to take advantage of some malicious
      reports concerning things in this family, and particularly respecting my
      father’s sudden death, thereby to cheat me out of the money, and perhaps
      take away my character by insinuating that I have received the rent I am
      demanding. Where do you suppose the money to be? I insist upon knowing.”

 My gudesire saw everything look so muckle against him that he grew nearly
      desperate. However, he shifted from one foot to another, looked to every
      corner of the room, and made no answer.

 “Speak out, sirrah,” said the laird, assuming a look of his father’s, a
      very particular ane, which he had when he was angry—it seemed as if
      the wrinkles of his frown made that selfsame fearful shape of a horse’s
      shoe in the middle of his brow; “speak out, sir! I will know your
      thoughts; do you suppose that I have this money?”

 “Far be it frae me to say so,” said Stephen.

 “Do you charge any of my people with having taken it?”

 “I wad be laith to charge them that may be innocent,” said my gudesire;
      “and if there be any one that is guilty, I have nae proof.”

 “Somewhere the money must be, if there is a word of truth in your story,”
       said Sir John; “I ask where you think it is—and demand a correct
      answer!”

 “In hell, if you will have my thoughts of it,” said my gudesire,
      driven to extremity—“in hell! with your father, his jackanape, and
      his silver whistle.”

 Down the stairs he ran (for the parlour was nae place for him after such a
      word), and he heard the laird swearing blood and wounds behind him, as
      fast as ever did Sir Robert, and roaring for the bailie and the
      baron-officer.

 Away rode my gudesire to his chief creditor (him they caa’d Laurie
      Lapraik), to try if he could make onything out of him; but when he tauld
      his story, he got the worst word in his wame—thief, beggar, and
      dyvour were the saftest terms; and to the boot of these hard terms, Laurie
      brought up the auld story of dipping his hand in the blood of God’s
      saunts, just as if a tenant could have helped riding with the laird, and
      that a laird like Sir Robert Redgauntlet. My gudesire was, by this time,
      far beyond the bounds of patience, and, while he and Laurie were at deil
      speed the liars, he was wanchancie aneugh to abuse Lapraik’s doctrine as
      weel as the man, and said things that garr’d folks’ flesh grue that heard
      them—he wasna just himsell, and he had lived wi’ a wild set in his
      day.

 At last they parted, and my gudesire was to ride hame through the wood of
      Pitmurkie, that is a’ fou of black firs, as they say. I ken the wood, but
      the firs may be black or white for what I can tell. At the entry of the
      wood there is a wild common, and on the edge of the common a little lonely
      change-house, that was keepit then by an hostler wife,—they suld hae
      caa’d her Tibbie Faw,—and there puir Steenie cried for a mutchkin of
      brandy, for he had had no refreshment the haill day. Tibbie was earnest
      wi’ him to take a bite of meat, but he couldna think o’ ‘t, nor would he
      take his foot out of the stirrup, and took off the brandy, wholely at twa
      draughts, and named a toast at each. The first was, the memory of Sir
      Robert Redgauntlet, and may he never lie quiet in his grave till he had
      righted his poor bond-tenant; and the second was, a health to Man’s Enemy,
      if he would but get him back the pock of siller, or tell him what came o’ 
      ‘t, for he saw the haill world was like to regard him as a thief and a
      cheat, and he took that waur than even the ruin of his house and hauld.

 On he rode, little caring where. It was a dark night turned, and the trees
      made it yet darker, and he let the beast take its ain road through the
      wood; when all of a sudden, from tired and wearied that it was before, the
      nag began to spring and flee and stend, that my gudesire could hardly keep
      the saddle. Upon the whilk, a horseman, suddenly riding up beside him,
      said, “That’s a mettle beast of yours, freend; will you sell him?” So
      saying, he touched the horse’s neck with his riding-wand, and it fell into
      its auld heigh-ho of a stumbling trot. “But his spunk’s soon out of him, I
      think,” continued the stranger, “and that is like mony a man’s courage,
      that thinks he wad do great things.”

 My gudesire scarce listened to this, but spurred his horse, with
      “Gude-e’en to you, freend.”

 But it’s like the stranger was ane that doesna lightly yield his point;
      for, ride as Steenie liked, he was aye beside him at the selfsame pace. At
      last my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, grew half angry, and, to say the
      truth, half feard.

 “What is it that you want with me, freend?” he said. “If ye be a robber, I
      have nae money; if ye be a leal man, wanting company, I have nae heart to
      mirth or speaking; and if ye want to ken the road, I scarce ken it
      mysell.”

 “If you will tell me your grief,” said the stranger, “I am one that,
      though I have been sair miscaa’d in the world, am the only hand for
      helping my freends.”

 So my gudesire, to ease his ain heart, mair than from any hope of help,
      told him the story from beginning to end.

 “It’s a hard pinch,” said the stranger; “but I think I can help you.”

 “If you could lend me the money, sir, and take a lang day—I ken nae
      other help on earth,” said my gudesire.

 “But there may be some under the earth,” said the stranger. “Come, I’ll be
      frank wi’ you; I could lend you the money on bond, but you would maybe
      scruple my terms. Now I can tell you that your auld laird is disturbed in
      his grave by your curses and the wailing of your family, and if ye daur
      venture to go to see him, he will give you the receipt.”

 My gudesire’s hair stood on end at this proposal, but he thought his
      companion might be some humoursome chield that was trying to frighten him,
      and might end with lending him the money. Besides, he was bauld wi’ 
      brandy, and desperate wi’ distress; and he said he had courage to go to
      the gate of hell, and a step farther, for that receipt. The stranger
      laughed.

 Weel, they rode on through the thickest of the wood, when, all of a
      sudden, the horse stopped at the door of a great house; and, but that he
      knew the place was ten miles off, my father would have thought he was at
      Redgauntlet Castle. They rode into the outer courtyard, through the muckle
      faulding yetts, and aneath the auld portcullis; and the whole front of the
      house was lighted, and there were pipes and fiddles, and as much dancing
      and deray within as used to be at Sir Robert’s house at Pace and Yule, and
      such high seasons. They lap off, and my gudesire, as seemed to him,
      fastened his horse to the very ring he had tied him to that morning when
      he gaed to wait on the young Sir John.

 “God!” said my gudesire, “if Sir Robert’s death be but a dream!”

 He knocked at the ha’ door just as he was wont, and his auld acquaintance,
      Dougal MacCallum—just after his wont, too—came to open the
      door, and said, “Piper Steenie, are ye there lad? Sir Robert has been
      crying for you.”

 My gudesire was like a man in a dream—he looked for the stranger,
      but he was gane for the time. At last he just tried to say, “Ha! Dougal
      Driveower, are you living? I thought ye had been dead.”

 “Never fash yoursell wi’ me,” said Dougal, “but look to yoursell; and see
      ye tak’ naething frae onybody here, neither meat, drink, or siller, except
      the receipt that is your ain.”

 So saying, he led the way out through the halls and trances that were weel
      kend to my gudesire, and into the auld oak parlour; and there was as much
      singing of profane sangs, and birling of red wine, and blasphemy and
      sculduddery, as had ever been in Redgauntlet Castle when it was at the
      blythest.

 But Lord take us in keeping! What a set of ghastly revellers there were
      that sat around that table! My gudesire kend mony that had long before
      gane to their place, for often had he piped to the most part in the hall
      of Redgauntlet. There was the fierce Middleton, and the dissolute Rothes,
      and the crafty Lauderdale; and Dalyell, with his bald head and a beard to
      his girdle; and Earlshall, with Cameron’s blude on his hand; and wild
      Bonshaw, that tied blessed Mr. Cargill’s limbs till the blude sprung; and
      Dumbarton Douglas, the twice turned traitor baith to country and king.
      There was the Bludy Advocate MacKenyie, who, for his worldly wit and
      wisdom, had been to the rest as a god. And there was Claverhouse, as
      beautiful as when he lived, with his long, dark, curled locks streaming
      down over his laced buff-coat, and with his left hand always on his right
      spule-blade, to hide the wound that the silver bullet had made. He sat
      apart from them all, and looked at them with a melancholy, haughty
      countenance; while the rest hallooed and sang and laughed, that the room
      rang. But their smiles were fearfully contorted from time to time; and
      their laughter passed into such wild sounds as made my gudesire’s very
      nails grow blue, and chilled the marrow in his banes.

 They that waited at the table were just the wicked serving-men and
      troopers that had done their work and cruel bidding on earth. There was
      the Lang Lad of the Nethertown, that helped to take Argyle; and the
      bishop’s summoner, that they called the Deil’s Rattlebag; and the wicked
      guardsmen in their laced coats; and the savage Highland Amorites, that
      shed blood like water; and mony a proud serving-man, haughty of heart and
      bloody of hand, cringing to the rich, and making them wickeder than they
      would be; grinding the poor to powder when the rich had broken them to
      fragments. And mony, mony mair were coming and ganging, a’ as busy in
      their vocation as if they had been alive.

 Sir Robert Redgauntlet, in the midst of a’ this fearful riot, cried, wi’ a
      voice like thunder, on Steenie Piper to come to the board-head where he
      was sitting, his legs stretched out before him, and swathed up with
      flannel, with his holster pistols aside him, while the great broadsword
      rested against his chair, just as my gudesire had seen him the last time
      upon earth; the very cushion for the jackanape was close to him, but the
      creature itsell was not there—it wasna its hour, it’s likely; for he
      heard them say, as he came forward, “Is not the major come yet?” And
      another answered, “The jackanape will be here betimes the morn.” And when
      my gudesire came forward, Sir Robert or his ghaist, or the deevil in his
      likeness, said, “Weel, piper, hae ye settled wi’ my son for the year’s
      rent?”

 With much ado my father gat breath to say that Sir John would not settle
      without his honour’s receipt.

 “Ye shall hae that for a tune of the pipes, Steenie,” said the appearance
      of Sir Robert—“play us up ‘Weel Hoddled, Luckie.’”

 Now this was a tune my gudesire learned frae a warlock, that heard it when
      they were worshipping Satan at their meetings; and my gudesire had
      sometimes played it at the ranting suppers in Redgauntlet Castle, but
      never very willingly; and now he grew cauld at the very name of it, and
      said, for excuse, he hadna his pipes wi’ him.

 “MacCallum, ye limb of Beelzebub,” said the fearfu’ Sir Robert, “bring
      Steenie the pipes that I am keeping for him!”

 MacCallum brought a pair of pipes might have served the piper of Donald of
      the Isles. But he gave my gudesire a nudge as he offered them; and looking
      secretly and closely, Steenie saw that the chanter was of steel, and
      heated to a white heat; so he had fair warning not to trust his fingers
      with it. So he excused himsell again, and said he was faint and
      frightened, and had not wind aneugh to fill the bag.

 “Then ye maun eat and drink, Steenie,” said the figure; “for we do little
      else here; and it’s ill speaking between a fou man and a fasting.” Now
      these were the very words that the bloody Earl of Douglas said to keep the
      king’s messenger in hand while he cut the head off MacLellan of Bombie, at
      the Threave Castle; and put Steenie mair and mair on his guard. So he
      spoke up like a man, and said he came neither to eat nor drink, nor make
      minstrelsy; but simply for his ain—to ken what was come o’ the money
      he had paid, and to get a discharge for it; and he was so stout-hearted by
      this time that he charged Sir Robert for conscience’s sake (he had no
      power to say the holy name), and as he hoped for peace and rest, to spread
      no snares for him, but just to give him his ain.

 The appearance gnashed its teeth and laughed, but it took from a large
      pocket-book the receipt, and handed it to Steenie. “There is your receipt,
      ye pitiful cur; and for the money, my dog-whelp of a son may go look for
      it in the Cat’s Cradle.”

 My gudesire uttered mony thanks, and was about to retire, when Sir Robert
      roared aloud, “Stop, though, thou sack-doudling son of a —! I am not
      done with thee. HERE we do nothing for nothing; and you must return on
      this very day twelvemonth to pay your master the homage that you owe me
      for my protection.”

 My father’s tongue was loosed of a suddenty, and he said aloud, “I refer
      myself to God’s pleasure, and not to yours.”

 He had no sooner uttered the word than all was dark around him; and he
      sank on the earth with such a sudden shock that he lost both breath and
      sense.

 How lang Steenie lay there he could not tell; but when he came to himsell
      he was lying in the auld kirkyard of Redgauntlet parochine, just at the
      door of the family aisle, and the scutcheon of the auld knight, Sir
      Robert, hanging over his head. There was a deep morning fog on grass and
      gravestane around him, and his horse was feeding quietly beside the
      minister’s twa cows. Steenie would have thought the whole was a dream, but
      he had the receipt in his hand fairly written and signed by the auld
      laird; only the last letters of his name were a little disorderly, written
      like one seized with sudden pain.

 Sorely troubled in his mind, he left that dreary place, rode through the
      mist to Redgauntlet Castle, and with much ado he got speech of the laird.

 “Well, you dyvour bankrupt,” was the first word, “have you brought me my
      rent?”

 “No,” answered my gudesire, “I have not; but I have brought your honour
      Sir Robert’s receipt for it.”

 “How, sirrah? Sir Robert’s receipt! You told me he had not given you one.”

 “Will your honour please to see if that bit line is right?”

 Sir John looked at every line, and at every letter, with much attention;
      and at last at the date, which my gudesire had not observed—“From my
      appointed place,” he read, “this twenty-fifth of November.”

 “What! That is yesterday! Villain, thou must have gone to hell for this!”

 “I got it from your honour’s father; whether he be in heaven or hell, I
      know not,” said Steenie.

 “I will debate you for a warlock to the Privy Council!” said Sir John. “I
      will send you to your master, the devil, with the help of a tar-barrel and
      a torch!”

 “I intend to debate mysell to the Presbytery,” said Steenie, “and tell
      them all I have seen last night, whilk are things fitter for them to judge
      of than a borrel man like me.”

 Sir John paused, composed himsell, and desired to hear the full history;
      and my gudesire told it him from point to point, as I have told it you—neither
      more nor less.

 Sir John was silent again for a long time, and at last he said, very
      composedly: “Steenie, this story of yours concerns the honour of many a
      noble family besides mine; and if it be a leasing-making, to keep yourself
      out of my danger, the least you can expect is to have a red-hot iron
      driven through your tongue, and that will be as bad as scaulding your
      fingers wi’ a red-hot chanter. But yet it may be true, Steenie; and if the
      money cast up, I shall not know what to think of it. But where shall we
      find the Cat’s Cradle? There are cats enough about the old house, but I
      think they kitten without the ceremony of bed or cradle.”

 “We were best ask Hutcheon,” said my gudesire; “he kens a’ the odd corners
      about as weel as—another serving-man that is now gane, and that I
      wad not like to name.”

 Aweel, Hutcheon, when he was asked, told them that a ruinous turret lang
      disused, next to the clock-house, only accessible by a ladder, for the
      opening was on the outside, above the battlements, was called of old the
      Cat’s Cradle.

 “There will I go immediately,” said Sir John; and he took—with what
      purpose Heaven kens—one of his father’s pistols from the hall table,
      where they had lain since the night he died, and hastened to the
      battlements.

 It was a dangerous place to climb, for the ladder was auld and frail, and
      wanted ane or twa rounds. However, up got Sir John, and entered at the
      turret door, where his body stopped the only little light that was in the
      bit turret. Something flees at him wi’ a vengeance, maist dang him back
      ower—bang! gaed the knight’s pistol, and Hutcheon, that held the
      ladder, and my gudesire, that stood beside him, hears a loud skelloch. A
      minute after, Sir John flings the body of the jackanape down to them, and
      cries that the siller is fund, and that they should come up and help him.
      And there was the bag of siller sure aneaugh, and mony orra thing besides,
      that had been missing for mony a day. And Sir John, when he had riped the
      turret weel, led my gudesire into the dining-parlour, and took him by the
      hand, and spoke kindly to him, and said he was sorry he should have
      doubted his word, and that he would hereafter be a good master to him, to
      make amends.

 “And now, Steenie,” said Sir John, “although this vision of yours tends,
      on the whole, to my father’s credit as an honest man, that he should, even
      after his death, desire to see justice done to a poor man like you, yet
      you are sensible that ill-dispositioned men might make bad constructions
      upon it concerning his soul’s health. So, I think, we had better lay the
      haill dirdum on that ill-deedie creature, Major Weir, and say naething
      about your dream in the wood of Pitmurkie. You had taen ower-muckle brandy
      to be very certain about onything; and, Steenie, this receipt”—his
      hand shook while he held it out—“it’s but a queer kind of document,
      and we will do best, I think, to put it quietly in the fire.”

 “Od, but for as queer as it is, it’s a’ the voucher I have for my rent,”
       said my gudesire, who was afraid, it may be, of losing the benefit of Sir
      Robert’s discharge.

 “I will bear the contents to your credit in the rental-book, and give you
      a discharge under my own hand,” said Sir John, “and that on the spot. And,
      Steenie, if you can hold your tongue about this matter, you shall sit,
      from this time downward, at an easier rent.”

 “Mony thanks to your honour,” said Steenie, who saw easily in what corner
      the wind was; “doubtless I will be conformable to all your honour’s
      commands; only I would willingly speak wi’ some powerful minister on the
      subject, for I do not like the sort of soumons of appointment whilk your
      honour’s father—”

 “Do not call the phantom my father!” said Sir John, interrupting him.

 “Well then, the thing that was so like him,” said my gudesire; “he spoke
      of my coming back to see him this time twelvemonth, and it’s a weight on
      my conscience.”

 “Aweel then,” said Sir John, “if you be so much distressed in mind, you
      may speak to our minister of the parish; he is a douce man, regards the
      honour of our family, and the mair that he may look for some patronage
      from me.”

 Wi’ that, my father readily agreed that the receipt should be burnt; and
      the laird threw it into the chimney with his ain hand. Burn it would not
      for them, though; but away it flew up the lum, wi’ a lang train of sparks
      at its tail, and a hissing noise like a squib.

 My gudesire gaed down to the manse, and the minister, when he had heard
      the story, said it was his real opinion that, though my gudesire had gane
      very far in tampering with dangerous matters, yet as he had refused the
      devil’s arles (for such was the offer of meat and drink), and had refused
      to do homage by piping at his bidding, he hoped that, if he held a
      circumspect walk hereafter, Satan could take little advantage by what was
      come and gane. And, indeed, my gudesire, of his ain accord, lang forswore
      baith the pipes and the brandy—it was not even till the year was
      out, and the fatal day past, that he would so much as take the fiddle or
      drink usquebaugh or tippenny.

 Sir John made up his story about the jackanape as he liked himsell; and
      some believe till this day there was no more in the matter than the
      filching nature of the brute. Indeed, ye ‘ll no hinder some to thread that
      it was nane o’ the auld Enemy that Dougal and Hutcheon saw in the laird’s
      room, but only that wanchancie creature the major, capering on the coffin;
      and that, as to the blawing on the laird’s whistle that was heard after he
      was dead, the filthy brute could do that as weel as the laird himsell, if
      no better. But Heaven kens the truth, whilk first came out by the
      minister’s wife, after Sir John and her ain gudeman were baith in the
      moulds. And then my gudesire, wha was failed in his limbs, but not in his
      judgment or memory,—at least nothing to speak of,—was obliged
      to tell the real narrative to his freends, for the credit of his good
      name. He might else have been charged for a warlock.

 The shades of evening were growing thicker around us as my conductor
      finished his long narrative with this moral: “You see, birkie, it is nae
      chancy thing to tak’ a stranger traveller for a guide when you are in an
      uncouth land.”

 “I should not have made that inference,” said I. “Your grandfather’s
      adventure was fortunate for himself, whom it saves from ruin and distress;
      and fortunate for his landlord.”

 “Ay, but they had baith to sup the sauce o’ ‘t sooner or later,” said
      Wandering Willie; “what was fristed wasna forgiven. Sir John died before
      he was much over threescore; and it was just like a moment’s illness. And
      for my gudesire, though he departed in fulness of life, yet there was my
      father, a yauld man of forty-five, fell down betwixt the stilts of his
      plough, and rase never again, and left nae bairn but me, a puir,
      sightless, fatherless, motherless creature, could neither work nor want.
      Things gaed weel aneugh at first; for Sir Regwald Redgauntlet, the only
      son of Sir John, and the oye of auld Sir Robert, and, wae’s me! the last
      of the honourable house, took the farm aff our hands, and brought me into
      his household to have care of me. My head never settled since I lost him;
      and if I say another word about it, deil a bar will I have the heart to
      play the night. Look out, my gentle chap,” he resumed, in a different
      tone; “ye should see the lights at Brokenburn Glen by this time.”