A FOREST BETROTHAL By Erckmann-Chatrian

 One day in the month of June, 1845, Master Zacharias’ fishing-basket
      was so full of salmon-trout, about three o’clock in the afternoon,
      that the good man was loath to take any more; for, as Pathfinder says:
      “We must leave some for to-morrow!” After having washed his in
      a stream and carefully covered them with field-sorrel and rowell, to keep
      them fresh; after having wound up his line and bathed his hands and face;
      a sense of drowsiness tempted him to take a nap in the heather. The heat
      was so excessive that he preferred to wait until the shadows lengthened
      before reclimbing the steep ascent of Bigelberg.

 Breaking his crust of bread and wetting his lips with a draught of
      Rikevir, he climbed down fifteen or twenty steps from the path and
      stretched himself on the moss-covered ground, under the shade of the
      pine-trees; his eyelids heavy with sleep.

 A thousand animate creatures had lived their long life of an hour, when
      the judge was wakened by the whistle of a bird, which sounded strange to
      him. He sat up to look around, and judge his surprise; the so-called bird
      was a young girl of seventeen or eighteen years of age; fresh, with rosy
      cheeks and vermilion lips, brown hair, which hung in two long tresses
      behind her. A short poppy-colored skirt, with a tightly-laced bodice,
      completed her costume. She was a young peasant, who was rapidly descending
      the sandy path down the side of Bigelberg, a basket poised on her head,
      and her arms a little sunburned, but plump, were gracefully resting on her
      hips.

 “Oh, what a charming bird; but she whistles well and her pretty
      chin, round like a peach, is sweet to look upon.”

 Mr. Zacharias was all emotion—a rush of hot blood, which made his
      heart beat, as it did at twenty, coursed through his veins. Blushing, he
      arose to his feet.

 “Good-day, my pretty one!” he said.

 The young girl stopped short—opened her big eyes and recognized him
      (for who did not know the dear old Judge Zacharias in that part of the
      country?).

 “Ah!” she said, with a bright smile, “it is Mr.
      Zacharias Seiler!”

 The old man approached her—he tried to speak—but all he could
      do was to stammer a few unintelligible words, just like a very young man—his
      embarrassment was so great that he completely disconcerted the young girl.
      At last he managed to say:

 “Where are you going through the forest at this hour, my dear child?”

 She stretched out her hand and showed him, way at the end of the valley, a
      forester’s house.

 “I am returning to my father’s house, the Corporal Yeri
      Foerster. You know him, without doubt, Monsieur le Juge.”

 “What, are you our brave Yeri’s daughter? Ah, do I know him? A
      very worthy man. Then you are little Charlotte of whom he has often spoken
      to me when he came with his official reports?”

 “Yes, Monsieur; I have just come from the town and am returning
      home.”

 “That is a very pretty bunch of Alpine berries you have,’”
      exclaimed the old man.

 She detached the bouquet from her belt and tendered it to him.

 “If it would please you, Monsieur Seiler.”

 Zacharias was touched.

 “Yes, indeed,” he said, “I will accept it, and I will
      accompany you home. I am anxious to see this brave Foerster again. He must
      be getting old by now.”

 “He is about your age, Monsieur le Juge,” said Charlotte
      innocently, “between fifty-five and sixty years of age.”

 This simple speech recalled the good man to his senses, and as he walked
      beside her be became pensive.

 What was he thinking of? Nobody could tell; but how many times, how many
      times has it happened that a brave and worthy man, thinking that he had
      fulfilled all his duties, finds that he has neglected the greatest, the
      most sacred, the most beautiful of all—that of love. And what it
      costs him to think of it when it is too late.

 Soon Mr. Zacharias and Charlotte came to the turn of the valley where the
      path spanned a little pond by means of a rustic bridge, and led straight
      to the corporal’s house. They could now see Yeri Foerster, his large
      felt hat decorated with a twig of heather, his calm eyes, his brown cheeks
      and grayish hair, seated on the stone bench near his doorway; two
      beautiful hunting dogs, with reddish-brown coats, lay at his feet, and the
      high vine arbor behind him rose to the peak of the gable roof.

 The shadows on Romelstein were lengthening and the setting sun spread its
      purple fringe behind the high fir-trees on Alpnach.

 The old corporal, whose eyes were as piercing as an eagle’s,
      recognized Monsieur Zacharias and his daughter from afar. He came toward
      them, lifting his felt hat respectfully.

 “Welcome, Monsieur le Juge,” he said in the frank and cordial
      voice of a mountaineer; “what happy circumstance has procured me the
      honor of a visit?”

 “Master Yeri,” replied the good man, “I am belated in
      your mountains. Have you a vacant corner at your table and a bed at the
      disposition of a friend?”

 “Ah!” cried the corporal, “if there were but one bed in
      the house, should it not be at the service of the best, the most honored
      of our ex-magistrates of Stantz? Monsieur Seiler, what an honor you confer
      on Yeri Foerster’s humble home.”

 “Christine, Christine! Monsieur le Juge Zacharias Seiler wishes to
      sleep under our roof to-night.”

 Then a little old woman, her face wrinkled like a vine leaf, but still
      fresh and laughing, her head crowned by a cap with wide black ribbons,
      appeared on the threshold and disappeared again, murmuring:

 “What? Is it possible? Monsieur le Juge!”

 “My good people,” said Mr. Zacharias, “truly you do me
      too much honor—I hope—”

 “Monsieur le Juge, if you forget the favors you have done to others,
      they remember them.”

 Charlotte placed her basket on the table, feeling very proud at having
      been the means of bringing so distinguished a visitor to the house. She
      took out the sugar, the coffee and all the little odds and ends of
      household provisions which she had purchased in the town. And Zacharias,
      gazing at her pretty profile, felt himself agitated once more, his poor
      old heart beat more quickly in his bosom and seemed to say to him: “This
      is love, Zacharias! This is love! This is love!”

 To tell you the truth, my dear friends, Mr. Seiler spent the evening with
      the Head Forester, Yeri Foerster, perfectly oblivious to the fact of
      Therese’s uneasiness, to his promise to return before seven o’clock,
      to all his old habits of order and submission.

 Picture to yourself the large room, the time-browned rafters of the
      ceiling, the windows opened on the silent valley, the round table in the
      middle of the room, covered with a white cloth, with red stripes running
      through it; the light from the lamp, bringing out more clearly the grave
      faces of Zacharias and Yeri, the rosy, laughing features of Charlotte, and
      Dame Christine’s little cap, with long fluttering streamers. Picture
      to yourself the soup-tureen, with gayly-flowered bowl, from which arose an
      appetising odor, the dish of trout garnished with parsley, the plates
      filled with fruits and little meal cakes as yellow as gold; then worthy
      Father Zacharias, handing first one and then the other of the plates of
      fruit and cakes to Charlotte, who lowered her eyes, frightened at the old
      man’s compliments and tender speeches.

 Yeri was quite puffed up at his praise, but Dame Christine said: “Ah,
      Monsieur le Juge! You are too good. You do not know how much trouble this
      little girl gives us, or how headstrong she is when she wants anything.
      You will spoil her with so many compliments.”

 To which speech Mr. Zacharias made reply:

 “Dame Christine, you possess a treasure! Mademoiselle Charlotte
      merits all the good I have said of her.”

 Then Master Yeri, raising his glass, cried out: “Let us drink to the
      health of our good and venerated Judge Zacharias Seiler!”

 The toast was drunk with a will.

 Just then the clock, in its hoarse voice, struck the hour of eleven. Out
      of doors there was the great silence of the forest, the grasshopper’s
      last cry, the vague murmur of the river. As the hour sounded, they rose,
      preparatory to retiring. How fresh and agile he felt! With what ardor, had
      he dared, would he not have pressed a kiss upon Charlotte’s little
      hand! Oh, but he must not think of that now! Later on, perhaps!

 “Come, Master Yeri,” he said, “it is bedtime.
      Good-night, and many thanks for your hospitality.”

 “At what hour do you wish to rise, Monsieur?” asked Christine.

 “Oh!” he replied gazing at Charlotte, “I am an early
      bird. I do not feel my age, though perhaps you might not think so. I rise
      at five o’clock.”

 “Like me, Monsieur Seiler,” cried the Head Forester. I rise
      before daybreak; but I must confess it is tiresome all the same—we
      are no longer young. Ha! Ha!”

 “Bah! I have never had anything ail me, Master Forester; I have
      never been more vigorous or more nimble.”

 And suiting his actions to his words, he ran briskly up the steep steps of
      the staircase. Really Mr. Zacharias was no more than twenty; but his
      twenty years lasted about twenty minutes, and once nestled in the large
      canopied bed, with the covers drawn up to his chin and his handkerchief
      tied around his head, in lieu of a nightcap, he said to himself:

 “Sleep Zacharias! Sleep! You have great need of rest; you are very
      tired.”

 And the good man slept until nine o’clock. The forester returning
      from his rounds, uneasy at his non-appearance, went up to his room and
      wished him good morning. Then seeing the sun high in the heavens, hearing
      the birds warbling in the foliage, the Judge, ashamed of his boastfulness
      of the previous night, arose, alleging as an excuse for his prolonged
      slumbers, the fatigue of fishing and the length of the supper of the
      evening before.

 “Ah, Monsieur Seiler,” said the forester, “it is
      perfectly natural; I would love dearly myself to sleep in the mornings,
      but I must always be on the go. What I want is a son-in-law, a strong
      youth to replace me; I would voluntarily give him my gun and my hunting
      pouch.”

 Zacharias could not restrain a feeling of great uneasiness at these words.
      Being dressed, he descended in silence. Christine was waiting with his
      breakfast; Charlotte had gone to the hay field.

 The breakfast was short, and Mr. Seiler having thanked these good people
      for their hospitality, turned his face toward Stantz; he became pensive,
      as he thought of the worry to which Mademoiselle Therèse had been
      subjected; yet he was not able to tear his hopes from his heart, nor the
      thousand charming illusions, which came to him like a latecomer in a nest
      of warblers.

 By Autumn he had fallen so into the habit of going to the forester’s
      house that he was oftener there than at his own; and the Head Forester,
      not knowing to what love of fishing to attribute these visits, often found
      himself embarrassed at being obliged to refuse the multiplicity of
      presents which the worthy ex-magistrate (he himself being very much at
      home) begged of him to accept in compensation for his daily hospitality.

 Besides, Mr. Seiler wished to share all his occupations, following him in
      his rounds in the Grinderwald and Entilbach.

 Yeri Foerster often shook his head, saying: “I never knew a more
      honest or better judge than Mr. Zacharias Seiler. When I used to bring my
      reports to him, formerly, he always praised me, and it is to him that I
      owe my raise to the rank of Head Forester. But,” he added to his
      wife, “I am afraid the poor man is a little out of his head. Did he
      not help Charlotte in the hay field, to the infinite enjoyment of the
      peasants? Truly, Christine, it is not right; but then I dare not say so to
      him, he is so much above us. Now he wants me to accept a pension—and
      such a pension—one hundred florins a month. And that silk dress he
      gave Charlotte on her birthday. Do young girls wear silk dresses in our
      valley? Is a silk dress the thing for a forester’s daughter?”

 “Leave him alone,” said the wife. “He is contented with
      a little milk and meal. He likes to be with us; it is a change from his
      lonesome city life, with no one to talk to but his old governess; whilst
      here the little one looks after him. He likes to talk to her. Who knows
      but he may end by adopting her and leave her something in his will?”

 The Head Forester, not knowing what to say, shrugged his shoulders; his
      good judgment told him there was some mystery, but he never dreamed of
      suspecting the good man’s whole folly.

 One fine morning a wagon slowly wended its way down the sides of Bigelberg
      loaded with three casks of old Rikevir wine. Of all the presents that
      could be given to him this was the most acceptable, for Yeri Foerster
      loved, above everything else, a good glass of wine.

 “That warms one up,” he would say, laughing. And when he had
      tasted this wine he could not help saying:

 “Mr. Zacharias is really the best man in the world. Has he not
      filled my cellar for me? Charlotte, go and gather the prettiest flowers in
      the garden; cut all the roses and the jasmine, make them into a bouquet,
      and when he comes you will present them to him yourself. Charlotte!
      Charlotte! Hurry up, here he comes with his long pole.”

 At this moment the old man appeared descending the hillside in the shade
      of the pines with a brisk step.

 As far off as Yeri could make himself heard, he called out, his glass in
      his hand:

 “Here is to the best man I know! Here is to our benefactor.”

 And Zacharias smiled. Dame Christine had already commenced preparations
      for dinner; a rabbit was turning at the spit and the savory odor of the
      soup whetted Mr. Seiler’s appetite.

 The old Judge’s eyes brightened when he saw Charlotte in her short
      poppy-colored skirt, her arms bare to the elbow, running here and there in
      the garden paths gathering the flowers, and when he saw her approaching
      him with her huge bouquet, which she humbly presented to him with downcast
      eyes.

 “Monsieur le Juge, will you deign to accept this bouquet from your
      little friend Charlotte?”

 A sudden blush overspread his venerable cheeks, and as she stooped to kiss
      his hand, he said:

 “No, no, my dear child; accept rather from your old friend, your
      best friend, a more tender embrace.”

 He kissed both her burning cheeks. The Head Forester laughing heartily,
      cried out:

 “Monsieur Seiler, come and sit down under the acacia tree and drink
      some of your own wine. Ah, my wife is right when she calls you our
      benefactor.”

 Mr. Zacharias seated himself at the little round table, placing his pole
      behind him; Charlotte sat facing him, Yeri Foerster was on his right; then
      dinner was served and Mr. Seiler started to speak of his plans for the
      future.

 He was wealthy and had inherited a fine fortune from his parents. He
      wished to buy some few hundred acres of forest land in the valley, and
      build in the midst a forester’s lodge. “We would always be
      together,” he said turning to Yeri Foerster, “sometimes you at
      my house, sometimes I at yours.”

 Christine gave her advice, and they chatted, planning now one thing, then
      another. Charlotte seemed perfectly contented, and Zacharias imagined that
      these simple people understood him.

 Thus the time passed, and when night had fallen and they had had a surfeit
      of Rikevir, of rabbit and of Dame Christine’s “koechten”
      sprinkled with cinnamon. Mr. Seiler, happy and contented, full of joyous
      hope, ascended to his room, putting off until to-morrow his declaration,
      not doubting for a moment but that it would be accepted.

 About this time of the year the mountaineers from Harberg, Kusnacht and
      the surrounding hamlets descend from their mountains about one o’clock
      in the morning and commence to mow the high grass in the valleys. One can
      hear their monotonous songs in the middle of the night keeping time to the
      circular movement of the scythes, the jingle of the cattle bells, and the
      young men’s and girls’ voices laughing afar in the silence of
      the night. It is a strange harmony, especially when the night is clear and
      there is a bright moon, and the heavy dew falling makes a pitter-patter on
      the leaves of the great forest trees.

 Mr. Zacharias heard nothing of all this, for he was sleeping soundly; but
      the noise of a handful of peas being thrown against the window waked him
      suddenly. He listened and heard outside at the bottom of the wall, a
      “scit! scit!” so softly whispered that you might almost think
      it the cry of some bird. Nevertheless, the good man’s heart
      fluttered.

 “What is that?” he cried.

 After a few seconds’ silence a soft voice replied:

 “Charlotte, Charlotte—it is I!”

 Zacharias trembled; and as he listened with ears on the alert for each
      sound, the foliage on the trellis struck against the window and a figure
      climbed up quietly—oh so quietly—then stopped and stared into
      the room.

 The old man being indignant at this, rose and opened the window, upon
      which the stranger climbed through noiselessly.

 “Do not be frightened, Charlotte,” he said, “I have come
      to tell you some good news. My father will be here tomorrow.”

 He received no response, for the reason that Zacharias was trying to light
      the lamp.

 “Where are you, Charlotte?”

 “Here I am,” cried the old man turning with a livid face and
      gazing fiercely at his rival.

 The young man who stood before him was tall and slender, with large,
      frank, black eyes, brown cheeks, rosy lips, just covered with a little
      moustache, and a large brown, felt hat, tilted a little to one side.

 The apparition of Zacharias stunned him to immovability. But as the Judge
      was about to cry out, he exclaimed:

 “In the name of Heaven, do not call. I am no robber—I love
      Charlotte!”

 “And—she—she?” stammered Zacharias.

 “She loves me also! Oh, you need have no fear if you are one of her
      relations. We were betrothed at the Kusnacht feast. The fiancés of the
      Grinderwald and the Entilbach have the right to visit in the night. It is
      a custom of Unterwald. All the Swiss know that.”

 “Yeri Foerster—Yeri, Charlotte’s father, never told me.”

 “No, he does not know of our betrothal yet,” said the other,
      in a lower tone of voice; “when I asked his permission last year he
      told me to wait—that his daughter was too young yet—we were
      betrothed secretly. Only as I had not the Forester’s consent, I did
      not come in the night-time. This is the first time. I saw Charlotte in the
      town; but the time seemed so long to us both that I ended by confessing
      all to my father, and he has promised to see Yeri tomorrow. Ah, Monsieur,
      I knew it would give such pleasure to Charlotte that I could not help
      coming to announce my good news.”

 The poor old man fell back in his chair and covered his face with his
      hands. Oh, how he suffered! What bitter thoughts passed through his brain;
      what a sad awakening after so many sweet and joyous dreams.

 And the young mountaineer was not a whit more comfortable, as he stood
      leaning against a corner of the wall, his arms crossed over his breast,
      and the following thoughts running through his head:

 “If old Foerster, who does not know of our betrothal, finds me here,
      he will kill me without listening to one word of explanation. That is
      certain.”

 And he gazed anxiously at the door, his ear on the alert for the least
      sound.

 A few moments afterward, Zacharias lifting his head, as though awakening
      from a dream, asked him:

 “What is your name?”

 “Karl Imnant, Monsieur.”

 “What is your business?”

 “My father hopes to obtain the position of a forester in the
      Grinderwald for me.”

 There was a long silence and Zacharias looked at the young man with an
      envious eye.

 “And she loves you?” he asked in a broken voice.

 “Oh, yes, Monsieur; we love each other devotedly.”

 And Zacharias, letting his eyes fall on his thin legs and his hands
      wrinkled and veined, murmured:

 “Yes, she ought to love him; he is young and handsome.”

 And his head fell on his breast again. All at once he arose, trembling in
      every limb, and opened the window.

 “Young man, you have done very wrong; you will never know how much
      wrong you have really done. You must obtain Mr. Foerster’s consent—but
      go—go—you will hear from me soon.”

 The young mountaineer did not wait for a second invitation; with one bound
      he jumped to the path below and disappeared behind the grand old trees.

 “Poor, poor Zacharias,” the old Judge murmured, “all
      your illusions are fled.”

 At seven o’clock, having regained his usual calmness of demeanor, he
      descended to the room below, where Charlotte, Dame Christine and Yeri were
      already waiting breakfast for him. The old man, turning his eyes from the
      young girl, advanced to the Head Forester, saying:

 “My friend, I have a favor to ask of you. You know the son of the
      forester of the Grinderwald, do you not?”

 “Karl Imnant, why yes, sir!”

 “He is a worthy young man, and well behaved, I believe.”

 “I think so, Monsieur.”

 “Is he capable of succeeding his father?”

 “Yes, he is twenty-one years old; he knows all about tree-clipping,
      which is the most necessary thing of all—he knows how to read and
      how to write; but that is not all; he must have influence.”

 “Well, Master Yeri, I still have some influence in the Department of
      Forests and Rivers. This day fortnight, or three weeks at the latest, Karl
      Imnant shall be Assistant Forester of the Grinderwald, and I ask the hand
      of your daughter Charlotte for this brave young man.”

 At this request, Charlotte, who had blushed and trembled with fear,
      uttered a cry and fell back into her mother’s arms.

 Her father looking at her severely, said: “What is the matter,
      Charlotte? Do you refuse?”

 “Oh, no, no, father—no!”

 “That is as it should be! As for myself, I should never have refused
      any request of Mr. Zacharias Seiler’s! Come here and embrace your
      benefactor.”

 Charlotte ran toward him and the old man pressed her to his heart, gazing
      long and earnestly at her, with eyes filled with tears. Then pleading
      business he started home, with only a crust of bread in his basket for
      breakfast.

 Fifteen days afterward, Karl Imnant received the appointment of forester,
      taking his father’s place. Eight days later, he and Charlotte were
      married.

 The guests drank the rich Rikevir wine, so highly esteemed by Yeri
      Foerster, and which seemed to him to have arrived so opportunely for the
      feast.

 Mr. Zacharias Seiler was not present that day at the wedding, being ill at
      home. Since then he rarely goes fishing—and then, always to the
      Brünnen—toward the lake—on the other side of the mountain.