A LEAF IN THE STORM, By Ouida
    

      The Berceau de Dieu was a little village in the valley of the Seine. As a
      lark drops its nest among the grasses, so a few peasant people had dropped
      their little farms and cottages amid the great green woods on the winding
      river. It was a pretty place, with one steep, stony street, shady with
      poplars and with elms; quaint houses, about whose thatch a cloud of white
      and gray pigeons fluttered all day long; a little aged chapel with a
      conical red roof; and great barns covered with ivy and thick creepers, red
      and purple, and lichens that were yellow in the sun. All around it were
      the broad, flowering meadows, with the sleek cattle of Normandy fattening
      in them, and the sweet dim forests where the young men and maidens went on
      every holy day and feast-day in the summer-time to seek for wood-anemones,
      and lilies of the pools, and the wild campanula, and the fresh dog-rose,
      and all the boughs and grasses that made their house-doors like garden
      bowers, and seemed to take the cushat’s note and the linnet’s song into
      their little temple of God.
    

      The Berceau de Dieu was very old indeed. Men said that the hamlet had been
      there in the day of the Virgin of Orleans; and a stone cross of the
      twelfth century still stood by the great pond of water at the bottom of
      the street under the chestnut-tree, where the villagers gathered to gossip
      at sunset when their work was done. It had no city near it, and no town
      nearer than four leagues. It was in the green care of a pastoral district,
      thickly wooded and intersected with orchards. Its produce of wheat and
      oats and cheese and fruit and eggs was more than sufficient for its simple
      prosperity. Its people were hardy, kindly, laborious, happy; living round
      the little gray chapel in amity and good-fellowship. Nothing troubled it.
      War and rumours of war, revolutions and counter-revolutions, empires and
      insurrections, military and political questions—these all were for
      it things unknown and unheard of, mighty winds that arose and blew and
      swept the lands around it, but never came near enough to harm it, lying
      there, as it did in its loneliness like any lark’s nest. Even in the great
      days of the Revolution it had been quiet. It had had a lord whom it loved
      in the old castle on the hill at whose feet it nestled; it had never tried
      to harm him, and it had wept bitterly when he had fallen at Jemmapes, and
      left no heir, and the chateau had crumbled into ivy-hung ruins. The
      thunder-heats of that dread time had scarcely scorched it. It had seen a
      few of its best youth march away to the chant of the Marseillaise to fight
      on the plains of Champagne; and it had been visited by some patriots in bonnets
      rouges and soldiers in blue uniforms, who had given it tricoloured
      cockades and bade it wear them in the holy name of the Republic one and
      indivisible. But it had not known what these meant, and its harvests had
      been reaped without the sound of a shot in its fields or any gleam of
      steel by its innocent hearths; so that the terrors and the tidings of
      those noble and ghastly years had left no impress on its generations.
    

      Reine Allix, indeed, the oldest woman among them all, numbering more than
      ninety years, remembered when she was a child hearing her father and his
      neighbours talk in low, awe-stricken tones one bitter wintry night of how
      a king had been slain to save the people; and she remembered likewise—remembered
      it well, because it had been her betrothal night and the sixteenth
      birthday of her life—how a horseman had flashed through the startled
      street like a comet, and had called aloud, in a voice of fire, “Gloire!
      gloire! gloire!—Marengo! Marengo! Marengo!” and how the village
      had dimly understood that something marvellous for France had happened
      afar off, and how her brothers and her cousins and her betrothed, and she
      with them, had all gone up to the high slope over the river, and had piled
      up a great pyramid of pine wood and straw and dried mosses, and had set
      flame to it, till it had glowed in its scarlet triumph all through that
      wondrous night of the sultry summer of victory.
    

      These and the like memories she would sometimes relate to the children at
      evening when they gathered round her begging for a story. Otherwise, no
      memories of the Revolution or the Empire disturbed the tranquility of the
      Berceau; and even she, after she had told them, would add, “I am not sure
      now what Marengo was. A battle, no doubt, but I am not sure where nor why.
      But we heard later that little Claudis, my aunt’s youngest-born, a
      volunteer not nineteen, died at it. If we had known, we should not have
      gone up and lit the bonfire.”
     

      This woman, who had been born in that time of famine and flame, was the
      happiest creature in the whole hamlet of the Berceau. “I am old; yes, I am
      very old,” she would say, looking up from her spinning-wheel in her
      house-door, and shading her eyes from the sun, “very old—ninety-two
      last summer. But when one has a roof over one’s head, and a pot of soup
      always, and a grandson like mine, and when one has lived all one’s life in
      the Berceau de Dieu, then it is well to be so old. Ah, yes, my little
      ones,—yes, though you doubt it, you little birds that have just
      tried your wings,—it is well to be so old. One has time to think,
      and thank the good God, which one never seemed to have a minute to do in
      that work, work, work when one was young.”
     

      Reine Allix was a tall and strong woman, very withered and very bent and
      very brown, yet with sweet, dark, flashing eyes that had still light in
      them, and a face that was still noble, though nearly a century had bronzed
      it with its harvest suns and blown on it with its winter winds. She wore
      always the same garb of homely dark-blue serge, always the same tall white
      head-gear, always the same pure silver ear-rings that had been at once an
      heirloom and a nuptial gift. She was always shod in her wooden sabots, and
      she always walked abroad with a staff of ash. She had been born in the
      Berceau de Dieu; had lived there and wedded there; had toiled there all
      her life, and never left it for a greater distance than a league, or for a
      longer time than a day. She loved it with an intense love. The world
      beyond it was nothing to her; she scarcely believed in it as existing. She
      could neither read nor write. She told the truth, reared her offspring in
      honesty, and praised God always—had praised Him when starving in a
      bitter winter after her husband’s death, when there had been no field
      work, and she had had five children to feed and clothe; and praised Him
      now that her sons were all dead before her, and all she had living of her
      blood was her grandson Bernadou.
    

      Her life had been a hard one. Her parents had been hideously poor. Her
      marriage had scarcely bettered her condition. She had laboured in the
      fields always, hoeing and weeding and reaping and carrying wood and
      driving mules, and continually rising with the first streak of daybreak.
      She had known fever and famine and all manner of earthly ills. But now in
      her old age she had peace. Two of her dead sons, who had sought their
      fortunes in the other hemisphere, had left her a little money, and she had
      a little cottage and a plot of ground, and a pig, and a small orchard. She
      was well-to-do, and could leave it all to Bernadou; and for ten years she
      had been happy, perfectly happy, in the coolness and the sweetness and the
      old familiar ways and habits of the Berceau.
    

      Bernadou was very good to her. The lad, as she called him, was five and
      twenty years old, tall and straight and clean-limbed, with the blue eyes
      of the North, and a gentle, frank face. He worked early and late in the
      plot of ground that gave him his livelihood. He lived with his
      grandmother, and tended her with a gracious courtesy and veneration that
      never altered. He was not very wise; he also could neither read nor write;
      he believed in his priest and his homestead, and loved the ground that he
      had trodden ever since his first steps from the cradle had been guided by
      Reine Allix. He had never been drawn for the conscription, because he was
      the only support of a woman of ninety; he likewise had never been half a
      dozen kilometres from his birthplace. When he was bidden to vote, and he
      asked what his vote of assent would pledge him to do, they told him, “It
      will bind you to honour your grandmother so long as she shall live, and to
      get up with the lark, and to go to mass every Sunday, and to be a loyal
      son to your country. Nothing more.” And thereat he had smiled and
      straightened his stalwart frame, and gone right willingly to the
      voting-urn.
    

      He was very stupid in these things; and Reine Allix, though clear-headed
      and shrewd, was hardly more learned in them than he.
    

      “Look you,” she had said to him oftentimes, “in my babyhood there was the
      old white flag upon the chateau. Well, they pulled that down and put up a
      red one. That toppled and fell, and there was one of three colours. Then
      somebody with a knot of white lilies in his hand came one day and set up
      the old white one afresh; and before the day was done that was down again
      and the tricolour again up where it is. Now, some I know fretted
      themselves greatly because of all these changes of the flags; but as for
      me, I could not see that any one of them mattered: bread was just as dear
      and sleep was just as sweet whichever of the three was uppermost.”
     

      Bernadou, who had never known but the flag of three colours, believed her,
      as indeed he believed every word that those kindly and resolute old lips
      ever uttered to him.
    

      He had never been in a city, and only once, on the day of his first
      communion, in the town four leagues away. He knew nothing more than this
      simple, cleanly, honest life that he led. With what men did outside his
      little world of meadow-land and woodland he had no care nor any concern.
      Once a man had come through the village of the Berceau, a travelling
      hawker of cheap prints,—a man with a wild eye and a restless brain,—who
      told Bernadou that he was a downtrodden slave, a clod, a beast like a
      mule, who fetched and carried that the rich might fatten, a dolt, an
      idiot, who cared nothing for the rights of man and the wrongs of the poor.
      Bernadou had listened with a perplexed face; then with a smile, that had
      cleared it like sunlight, he had answered, in his country dialect, “I do
      not know of what you speak. Rights? Wrongs? I cannot tell, But I have
      never owned a sou; I have never told a lie; I am strong enough to hold my
      own with any man that flouts me; and I am content where I am. That is
      enough for me.”
     

      The peddler had called him a poor-spirited beast of burden, but had said
      so out of reach of his arm, and by night had slunk away from the Berceau
      de Dieu, and had been no more seen there to vex the quiet contentment of
      its peaceful and peace-loving ways.
    

      At night, indeed, sometimes, the little wine-shop of the village would be
      frequented by some half-dozen of the peasant proprietors of the place, who
      talked communism after their manner, not a very clear one, in excited
      tones and with the feverish glances of conspirators. But it meant little,
      and came to less. The weather and the price of wheat were dearer matters
      to them; and in the end they usually drank their red wine in amity, and
      went up the village street arm in arm, singing patriotic songs until their
      angry wives flung open their lattices and thrust their white head-gear out
      into the moonlight, and called to them shrewishly to get to bed and not
      make fools of themselves in that fashion; which usually silenced and
      sobered them all instantly; so that the revolutions of the Berceau de
      Dieu, if not quenched in a wine-pot, were always smothered in a nightcap,
      and never by any chance disturbed its repose.
    

      But of these noisy patriots Bernadou was never one. He had the instinctive
      conservatism of the French peasant, which is in such direct and tough
      antagonism with the feverish socialism of the French artisan. His love was
      for the soil—a love deep-rooted as the oaks that grew in it. Of
      Paris he had a dim, vague dread, as of a superb beast continually draining
      and devouring. Of all forms of government he was alike ignorant. So long
      as he tilled his little angle of land in peace, so long as the sun ripened
      his fruits and corn, so long as famine was away from his door and his
      neighbours dwelt in good-fellowship with him, so long he was happy, and
      cared not whether he was thus happy under a monarchy, an empire, or a
      republic. This wisdom, which the peddler called apathy and cursed, the
      young man had imbibed from nature and the teachings of Reine Allix. “Look
      at home and mind thy word,” she had said always to him. “It is labour
      enough for a man to keep his own life clean and his own hands honest. Be
      not thou at any time as they are who are for ever telling the good God how
      He might have made the world on a better plan, while the rats gnaw at
      their hay-stacks and the children cry over an empty platter.”
     

      And he had taken heed to her words, so that in all the country-side there
      was not any lad truer, gentler, braver, or more patient at labour than was
      Bernadou; and though some thought him mild even to foolishness, and meek
      even to stupidity, he was no fool; and he had a certain rough skill at
      music, and a rare gift at the culture of plants, and made his little home
      bright within the winter-time with melody, and in the summer gay without
      as a king’s parterre.
    

      At any rate, Reine Allix and he had been happy together for a quarter of a
      century under the old gray thatch of the wayside cottage, where it stood
      at the foot of the village street, with its great sycamores spread above
      it. Nor were they less happy when in mid-April, in the six and twentieth
      year of his age, Bernadou had come in with a bunch of primroses in his
      hand, and had bent down to her and saluted her with a respectful
      tenderness, and said softly and a little shyly, “Gran’mere, would
      it suit you if I were ever—to marry?”
     

      Reine Allix was silent a minute and more, cherishing the primroses and
      placing them in a little brown cupful of water. Then she looked at him
      steadily with her clear, dark eyes. “Who is it, my child?” He was always a
      child to her, this last-born of the numerous brood that had once dwelt
      with her under the spreading branches of the sycamores, and had now all
      perished off the face of the earth, leaving himself and her alone.
    

      Bernadou’s eyes met hers frankly. “It is Margot Dal. Does that please you,
      gran’mere, or no?”
     

      “It pleases me well,” she said, simply. But there was a little quiver
      about her firm-set mouth, and her aged head was bent over the primroses.
      She had foreseen it; she was glad of it; and yet for the instant it was a
      pang to her.
    

      “I am very thankful,” said Bernadou, with a flash of joy on his face. He
      was independent of his grandmother; he could make enough to marry upon by
      his daily toil, and he had a little store of gold and silver in his bank
      in the thatch, put by for a rainy day; but he would have no more thought
      of going against her will than he would have thought of lifting his hand
      against her. In the primitive homesteads of the Berceau de Dieu filial
      reverence was still accounted the first of virtues, yet the simplest and
      the most imperative.
    

      “I will go see Margot this evening,” said Reine Allix, after a little
      pause. “She is a good girl and a brave, and of pure heart and fair name.
      You have chosen well, my grandson.”
     

      Bernadou stooped his tall, fair, curly head, and she laid her hands on him
      and blessed him.
    

      That evening, as the sun set, Reine Allix kept her word, and went to the
      young maiden who had allured the eyes and heart of Bernadou. Margot was an
      orphan; she had not a penny to her dower; she had been brought up on
      charity, and she dwelt now in the family of the largest landowner of the
      place, a miller with numerous offspring, and several head of cattle, and
      many stretches of pasture and of orchard. Margot worked for a hard master,
      living indeed as one of the family, but sharply driven all day long at all
      manner of housework and field work. Reine Allix had kept her glance on
      her, through some instinctive sense of the way that Bernadou’s thoughts
      were turning, and she had seen much to praise, nothing to chide, in the
      young girl’s modest, industrious, cheerful, uncomplaining life. Margot was
      very pretty, too, with the brown oval face and the great black soft eyes
      and the beautiful form of the Southern blood that had run in the veins of
      her father, who had been a sailor of Marseilles, while her mother had been
      a native of the Provencal country. Altogether, Reine Allix knew that her
      beloved one could not have done better or more wisely, if choose at all he
      must. “Some people, indeed,” she said to herself as she climbed the street
      whose sharp-set flints had been trodden by her wooden shoes for ninety
      years—“Some people would mourn and scold because there is no store
      of linen, no piece of silver plate, no little round sum in money with the
      poor child. But what does it matter? We have enough for three. It is
      wicked indeed for parents to live so that they leave their daughter
      portionless, but it is no fault of the child’s. Let them say what they
      like, it is a reason the more that she should want a roof over her head
      and a husband to care for her good.”
     

      So she climbed the steep way and the slanting road round the hill, and
      went in by the door of the mill-house, and found Margot busy in washing
      some spring lettuces and other green things in a bowl of bright water.
      Reine Allix, in the fashion of her country and her breeding, was about to
      confer with the master and mistress ere saying a word to the girl, but
      there was that in Margot’s face and in her timid greeting that lured
      speech out of her. She looked long and keenly into the child’s downcast
      countenance, then touched her with a tender smile. “Petite Margot, the
      birds told me a little secret to-day. Canst guess what it is? Say?”
     

      Margot coloured and then grew pale. True, Bernadou had never really spoken
      to her, but still, when one is seventeen, and has danced a few times with
      the same person, and has plucked the leaves of a daisy away to learn one’s
      fortune, spoken words are not very much wanted.
    

      At sight of her the eyes of the old woman moistened and grew dimmer than
      age had made them; she smiled still, but the smile had the sweetness of a
      blessing in it, and no longer the kindly banter of humour. “You love him,
      my little one?” she said, in a soft, hushed voice.
    

      “Ah, madame!” Margot could not say more. She covered her face with her
      hands, and turned to the wall, and wept with a passion of joy.
    

      Down in the Berceau there were gossips who would have said, with wise
      shakes of their heads, “Tut, tut! how easy it is to make believe in a
      little love when one is a serving-maid, and has not a sou, nor a roof, nor
      a friend in the world, and a comely youth well-to-do is willing to marry
      us!”
     

      But Reine Allix knew better. She had not lived ninety years in the world
      not to be able to discern between true feeling and counterfeit. She was
      touched, and drew the trembling frame of Margot into her arms, and kissed
      her twice on the closed, blue-veined lids of her black eyes. “Make him
      happy, only make him happy,” she murmured; “for I am very old, Margot, and
      he is alone, all alone.”
     

      And the child crept to her, sobbing for very rapture that she, friendless,
      homeless, and penniless, should be thus elected for so fair a fate, and
      whispered through her tears, “I will.”
     

      Reine Allix spoke in all form to the miller and his wife, and with as much
      earnestness in her demand as though she had been seeking the hand of rich
      Yacobe, the tavern-keeper’s only daughter. The people assented; they had
      no pretext to oppose; and Reine Allix wrapped her cloak about her and
      descended the hill and the street just as the twilight closed in and the
      little lights began to glimmer through the lattices and the shutters and
      the green mantle of the boughs, while the red fires of the smithy forge
      glowed brightly in the gloom, and a white horse waited to be shod, a boy
      in a blue blouse seated on its back and switching away with a branch of
      budding hazel the first gray gnats of the early year.
    

      “It is well done, it is well done,” she said to herself, looking at the
      low rosy clouds and the pale gold of the waning sky. “A year or two, and I
      shall be in my grave. I shall leave him easier if I know he has some
      creature to care for him, and I shall be quiet in my coffin, knowing that
      his children’s children will live on and on and on in the Berceau, and
      sometimes perhaps think a little of me when the nights are long and they
      sit round the fire.”
     

      She went in out of the dewy air, into the little low, square room of her
      cottage, and went up to Bernadou and laid her hands on his shoulders.
    

      “Be it well with thee, my grandson, and with thy sons’ sons after thee,”
       she said solemnly. “Margot will be thy wife. May thy days and hers be long
      in thy birthplace!”
     

      A month later they were married. It was then May. The green nest of the
      Berceau seemed to overflow with the singing of birds and the blossoming of
      flowers. The corn-lands promised a rare harvest, and the apple orchards
      were weighed down with their red and white blossoms. The little brown
      streams in the woods brimmed over in the grass, and the air was full of
      sweet mellow sunlight, a cool fragrant breeze, a continual music of
      humming bees and soaring larks and mule-bells ringing on the roads, and
      childish laughter echoing from the fields.
    

      In this glad springtime Bernadou and Margot were wedded, going with their
      friends one sunny morning up the winding hill-path to the little gray
      chapel whose walls were hidden in ivy, and whose sorrowful Christ looked
      down through the open porch across the blue and hazy width of the river.
      Georges, the baker, whose fiddle made merry melody at all the village
      dances, played before them tunefully; little children, with their hands
      full of wood-flowers, ran before them; his old blind poodle smelt its way
      faithfully by their footsteps; their priest led the way upward with the
      cross held erect against the light; Reine Allix walked beside them, nearly
      as firmly as she had trodden the same road seventy years before in her own
      bridal hour. In the hollow below lay the Berceau de Dieu, with its red
      gables and its thatched roofs hidden beneath leaves, and its peaceful
      pastures smiling under the serene blue skies of France.
    

      They were happy—ah, heaven, so happy!—and all their little
      world rejoiced with them.
    

      They came home and their neighbours entered with them, and ate and drank,
      and gave them good wishes and gay songs, and the old priest blessed them
      with a father’s tenderness upon their threshold; and the fiddle of Georges
      sent gladdest dance-music flying through the open casements, across the
      road, up the hill, far away to the clouds and the river.
    

      At night, when the guests had departed and all was quite still within and
      without, Reine Allix sat alone at her window in the roof, thinking of
      their future and of her past, and watching the stars come out, one by
      another, above the woods. From her lattice in the eaves she saw straight
      up the village street; saw the dwellings of her lifelong neighbours, the
      slopes of the rich fields, the gleam of the broad gray water, the
      whiteness of the crucifix against the darkened skies. She saw it all—all
      so familiar, with that intimate association only possible to the peasant
      who has dwelt on one spot from birth to age. In that faint light, in those
      deep shadows, she could trace all the scene as though the brightness of
      the moon shone on it; it was all, in its homeliness and simplicity,
      intensely dear to her. In the playtime of her childhood, in the courtship
      of her youth, in the joys and woes of her wifehood and widowhood, the
      bitter pains and sweet ecstasies of her maternity, the hunger and
      privation of struggling desolate years, the contentment and serenity of
      old age—in all these her eyes had rested only on this small, quaint,
      leafy street, with its dwellings close and low, like bee-hives in a
      garden, and its pasture-lands and corn-lands, wood-girt and water-fed,
      stretching as far as the sight could reach. Every inch of its soil, every
      turn of its paths, was hallowed to her with innumerable memories; all her
      beloved dead were garnered there where the white Christ watched them; when
      her time should come, she thought, she would rest with them nothing loath.
      As she looked, the tears of thanksgiving rolled down her withered cheeks,
      and she bent her feeble limbs and knelt down in the moonlight, praising
      God that He had given her to live and die in this cherished home, and
      beseeching Him for her children that they likewise might dwell in honesty,
      and with length of days abide beneath that roof.
    

      “God is good,” she murmured, as she stretched herself to sleep beneath the
      eaves,—“God is good. Maybe, when He takes me to Himself, if I be
      worthy, He will tell His holy saints to give me a little corner in His
      kingdom, that He shall fashion for me in the likeness of the Berceau.” For
      it seemed to her that, than the Berceau, heaven itself could hold no
      sweeter or fairer nook of Paradise.
    

      The year rolled on, and the cottage under the sycamores was but the
      happier for its new inmate. Bernadou was serious of temper, though so
      gentle, and the arch, gay humour of his young wife was like perpetual
      sunlight in the house. Margot, too, was so docile, so eager, so bright,
      and so imbued with devotional reverence for her husband and his home, that
      Reine Allix day by day blessed the fate that had brought to her this
      fatherless and penniless child. Bernadou himself spoke little; words were
      not in his way; but his blue, frank eyes shone with an unclouded radiance
      that never changed, and his voice, when he did speak, had a mellow
      softness in it that made his slightest speech to the two women with him
      tender as a caress.
    

      “Thou art a happy woman, my sister,” said the priest, who was well-nigh as
      old as herself.
    

      Reine Allix bowed her head and made the sign of the cross. “I am, praise
      be to God!”
     

      And being happy, she went to the hovel of poor Madelon Dreux, the
      cobbler’s widow, and nursed her and her children through a malignant
      fever, sitting early and late, and leaving her own peaceful hearth for the
      desolate hut with the delirious ravings and heartrending moans of the
      fever-stricken. “How ought one to dare to be happy if one is not of use?”
       she would say to those who sought to dissuade her from running such peril.
    

      Madelon Dreux and her family recovered, owing to her their lives; and she
      was happier than before, thinking of them when she sat on the settle
      before the wood fire roasting chestnuts and spinning flax on the wheel,
      and ever and again watching the flame reflected on the fair head of
      Bernadou or in the dark, smiling eyes of Margot.
    

      Another spring passed and another year went by, and the little home under
      the sycamores was still no less honest in its labours or bright in its
      rest. It was one among a million of such homes in France, where a sunny
      temper made mirth with a meal of herbs, and filial love touched to poetry
      the prose of daily household tasks.
    

      A child was born to Margot in the springtime with the violets and daisies,
      and Reine Allix was proud of the fourth generation, and, as she caressed
      the boy’s healthy, fair limbs, thought that God was indeed good to her,
      and that her race would live long in the place of her birth. The child
      resembled Bernadou, and had his clear, candid eyes. It soon learned to
      know the voice of “gran’mere,” and would turn from its young
      mother’s bosom to stretch its arms to Reine Allix. It grew fair and
      strong, and all the ensuing winter passed its hours curled like a dormouse
      or playing like a puppy at her feet in the chimney-corner. Another spring
      and summer came, and the boy was more than a year old, with curls of gold,
      and cheeks like apples, and a mouth that always smiled. He could talk a
      little, and tumbled like a young rabbit among the flowering grasses. Reine
      Allix watched him, and her eyes filled. “God is too good,” she thought.
      She feared that she should scarce be so willing to go to her last sleep
      under the trees on the hillside as she used to be. She could not help a
      desire to see this child, this second Bernadou, grow up to youth and
      manhood; and of this she knew it was wild to dream.
    

      It was ripe midsummer. The fields were all russet and amber with an
      abundance of corn. The little gardens had seldom yielded so rich a
      produce. The cattle and the flocks were in excellent health. There had
      never been a season of greater promise and prosperity for the little
      traffic that the village and its farms drove in sending milk and sheep and
      vegetable wealth to that great city which was to it as a dim, wonderful,
      mystic name without meaning.
    

      One evening in this gracious and golden time the people sat out as usual
      when the day was done, talking from door to door, the old women knitting
      or spinning, the younger ones mending their husbands’ or brothers’ blouses
      or the little blue shirts of their infants, the children playing with the
      dogs on the sward that edged the stones of the street, and above all the
      great calm heavens and the glow of the sun that had set.
    

      Reine Allix, like the others, sat before the door, for once doing nothing,
      but with folded hands and bended head dreamily taking pleasure in the
      coolness that had come with evening, and the smell of the limes that were
      in blossom, and the blithe chatter of Margot with the neighbours. Bernadou
      was close beside them, watering and weeding those flowers that were at
      once his pride and his recreation, making the face of his dwelling bright
      and the air around it full of fragrance.
    

      The little street was quiet in the evening light, only the laughter of the
      children and the gay gossip of their mothers breaking the pleasant
      stillness; it had been thus at evening with the Berceau centuries before
      their time; they thought that it would thus likewise be when the centuries
      should have seen the youngest-born there in his grave.
    

      Suddenly came along the road between the trees an old man and a mule; it
      was Mathurin, the miller, who had been that day to a little town four
      leagues off, which was the trade-mart and the corn-exchange of the
      district. He paused before the cottage of Reine Allix; he was dusty,
      travel-stained, and sad. Margot ceased laughing among her flowers as she
      saw her old master. None of them knew why, yet the sight of him made the
      air seem cold and the night seem near.
    

      “There is terrible news,” he said, drawing a sheet of printed words from
      his coat-pocket—“terrible news! We are to go to war.”
     

      “War!” The whole village clustered round him. They had heard of war,
      far-off wars in Africa and Mexico, and some of their sons had been taken
      off like young wheat mown before its time; but it still remained to them a
      thing remote, impersonal, inconceivable, with which they had nothing to
      do, nor ever would have anything.
    

      “Read!” said the old man, stretching out his sheet. The only one there who
      could do so, Picot, the tailor, took it and spelled the news out to their
      wondering ears. It was the declaration of France against Prussia.
    

      There arose a great wail from the mothers whose sons were conscripts. The
      rest asked in trembling, “Will it touch us?”
     

      “Us!” echoed Picot, the tailor, in contempt. “How should it touch us? Our
      braves will be in Berlin with another fortnight. The paper says so.”
     

      The people were silent; they were not sure what he meant by Berlin, and
      they were afraid to ask.
    

      “My boy! my boy!” wailed one woman, smiting her breast. Her son was in the
      army.
    

      “Marengo!” murmured Reine Allix, thinking of that far-off time in her dim
      youth when the horseman had flown through the dusky street and the bonfire
      had blazed on the highest hill above the river.
    

      “Bread will be dear,” muttered Mathurin, the miller, going onward with his
      foot-weary mule. Bernadou stood silent, with his roses dry and thirsty
      round him.
    

      “Why art thou sad?” whispered Margot, with wistful eyes. “Thou art exempt
      from war service, my love?”
     

      Bernadou shook his head. “The poor will suffer somehow,” was all he
      answered.
    

      Yet to him, as to all the Berceau, the news was not very terrible, because
      it was so vague and distant—an evil so far off and shapeless.
    

      Monsieur Picot, the tailor, who alone could read, ran from house to house,
      from group to group, breathless, gay, and triumphant, telling them all
      that in two weeks more their brethren would sup in the king’s palace at
      Berlin; and the people believed and laughed and chattered, and, standing
      outside their doors in the cool nights, thought that some good had come to
      them and theirs.
    

      Only Reine Allix looked up to the hill above the river and murmured, “When
      we lit the bonfire there, Claudis lay dead;” and Bernadou, standing musing
      among his roses, said, with a smile that was very grave, “Margot, see
      here! When Picot shouted, ‘A Berlin!’ he trod on my Gloire de Dijon
      rose and killed it.”
     

      The sultry heats and cloudless nights of the wondrous and awful summer of
      the year 1870 passed by, and to the Berceau de Dieu it was a summer of
      fair promise and noble harvest, and never had the land brought forth in
      richer profusion for man and beast. Some of the youngest and ablest-bodied
      labourers were indeed drawn away to join those swift trains that hurried
      thousands and tens of thousands to the frontier by the Rhine. But most of
      the male population were married, and were the fathers of young children;
      and the village was only moved to a thrill of love and of honest pride to
      think how its young Louis and Jean and Andre and Valentin were gone full
      of high hope and high spirit, to come back, maybe,—who could say
      not?—with epaulets and ribbons of honour. Why they were gone they
      knew not very clearly, but their superiors affirmed that they were gone to
      make greater the greatness of France; and the folk of the Berceau believed
      it, having in a corner of their quiet hearts a certain vague, dormant, yet
      deep-rooted love, on which was written the name of their country.
    

      News came slowly and seldom to the Berceau. Unless some one of the men
      rode his mule to the little town, which was but very rarely, or unless
      some peddler came through the village with a news-sheet or so in his pack
      or rumours and tidings on his lips, nothing that was done beyond its
      fields and woods came to it. And the truth of what it heard it had no
      means of measuring or sifting. It believed what it was told, without
      questioning; and as it reaped the harvests in the rich hot sun of August,
      its peasants laboured cheerily in the simple and firm belief that mighty
      things were being done for them and theirs in the far eastern provinces by
      their great army, and that Louis and Jean and Andre and Valentin and the
      rest—though indeed no tidings had been heard of them—were safe
      and well and glorious somewhere, away where the sun rose, in the sacked
      palaces of the German king. Reine Allix alone of them was serious and
      sorrowful, she whose memories stretched back over the wide space of near a
      century.
    

      “Why art thou anxious, gran’mere?” they said to her. “There is no
      cause. Our army is victorious everywhere; and they say our lads will send
      us all the Prussians’ corn and cattle, so that the very beggars will have
      their stomachs full.”
     

      But Reine Allix shook her head, sitting knitting in the sun. “My children,
      I remember the days of my youth. Our army was victorious then; at least,
      they said so. Well, all I know is that little Claudis and the boys with
      him never came back; and as for bread, you could not get it for love or
      money, and the people lay dead of famine out on the public roads.”
     

      “But that is so long ago, gran’mere!” they urged.
    

      Reine Allix nodded. “Yes, it is long ago, my dears. But I do not think
      that things change very much.”
     

      They were silent out of respect for her, but among themselves they said,
      “She is very old. Nothing is as it was in her time.”
     

      One evening, when the sun was setting red over the reapen fields, two
      riders on trembling and sinking horses went through the village using whip
      and spur, and scarcely drew rein as they shouted to the cottagers to know
      whether they had seen go by a man running for his life. The people replied
      that they had seen nothing of the kind, and the horsemen pressed on,
      jamming their spurs into their poor beasts’ steaming flanks. “If you see
      him, catch and hang him,” they shouted, as they scoured away; “he is a
      Prussian spy!”
     

      “A Prussian!” the villagers echoed, with a stupid stare—“a Prussian
      in France!”
     

      One of the riders looked over his shoulder for a moment. “You fools! do
      you not know? We are beaten,—beaten everywhere,—and the
      Prussian pigs march on Paris.”
     

      The spy was not seen in the Berceau, but the news brought by his pursuers
      scared sleep from the eyes of every grown man that night in the little
      village. “It is the accursed Empire!” screamed the patriots of the
      wine-shop. But the rest of the people were too terrified and down-stricken
      to take heed of empires or patriots; they only thought of Louis and Jean
      and Andre and Valentin; and they collected round Reine Allix, who said to
      them, “My children, for love of money all our fairest fruits and flowers—yea,
      even to the best blossoms of our maidenhood—were sent to be bought
      and sold in Paris. We sinned therein, and this is the will of God.”
     

      This was all for a time that they heard. It was a place lowly and obscure
      enough to be left in peace. The law pounced down on it once or twice and
      carried off a few more of its men for army service, and arms were sent to
      it from its neighbouring town, and an old soldier of the First Empire
      tried to instruct its remaining sons in their use. But he had no apt pupil
      except Bernadou, who soon learned to handle a musket with skill and with
      precision, and who carried his straight form gallantly and well, though
      his words were seldom heard and his eyes were always sad.
    

      “You will not be called till the last, Bernadou,” said the old soldier;
      “you are married, and maintain your grandam and wife and child. But a
      strong, muscular, well-built youth like you should not wait to be called;
      you should volunteer to serve France.”
     

      “I will serve France when my time comes,” said Bernadou, simply, in
      answer. But he would not leave his fields barren, and his orchard uncared
      for, and his wife to sicken and starve, and his grandmother to perish
      alone in her ninety-third year. They jeered and flouted and upbraided him,
      those patriots who screamed against the fallen Empire in the wine-shop;
      but he looked them straight in the eyes, and held his peace, and did his
      daily work.
    

      “If he is called, he will not be found wanting,” said Reine Allix, who
      knew him better than did even the young wife whom he loved.
    

      Bernadou clung to his home with a dogged devotion. He would not go from it
      to fight unless compelled, but for it he would have fought like a lion.
      His love for his country was only an indefinite, shadowy existence that
      was not clear to him; he could not save a land that he had never seen, a
      capital that was only to him as an empty name; nor could he comprehend the
      danger that his nation ran, nor could he desire to go forth and spend his
      life-blood in defence of things unknown to him. He was only a peasant, and
      he could not read nor greatly understand. But affection for his birthplace
      was a passion with him, mute indeed, but deep-seated as an oak. For his
      birthplace he would have struggled as a man can only struggle when supreme
      love as well as duty nerves his arm. Neither he nor Reine Allix could see
      that a man’s duty might lie from home, but in that home both were alike
      ready to dare anything and to suffer everything. It was a narrow form of
      patriotism, yet it had nobleness, endurance, and patience in it; in song
      it has been oftentimes deified as heroism, but in modern warfare it is
      punished as the blackest crime.
    

      So Bernadou tarried in his cottage till he should be called, keeping watch
      by night over the safety of his village, and by day doing all he could to
      aid the deserted wives and mothers of the place by the tilling of their
      ground for them and the tending of such poor cattle as were left in their
      desolate fields. He and Margot and Reine Allix, between them, fed many
      mouths that would otherwise have been closed in death by famine, and
      denied themselves all except the barest and most meagre subsistence, that
      they might give away the little they possessed.
    

      And all this while the war went on, but seemed far from them, so seldom
      did any tidings of it pierce the seclusion in which they dwelt. By-and-by,
      as the autumn went on, they learned a little more. Fugitives coming to the
      smithy for a horse’s shoe; women fleeing to their old village homes from
      their base, gay life in the city; mandates from the government of defence
      sent to every hamlet in the country; stray news-sheets brought in by
      carriers or hawkers and hucksters—all these by degrees told them of
      the peril of their country, vaguely indeed, and seldom truthfully, but so
      that by mutilated rumours they came at last to know the awful facts of the
      fate of Sedan, the fall of the Empire, the siege of Paris. It did not
      alter their daily lives; it was still too far off and too impalpable. But
      a foreboding, a dread, an unspeakable woe settled down on them. Already
      their lands and cattle had been harassed to yield provision for the army
      and large towns; already their best horses had been taken for the
      siege-trains and the forage-waggons; already their ploughshares were
      perforce idle, and their children cried because of the scarcity of
      nourishment; already the iron of war had entered their souls.
    

      The little street at evening was mournful and very silent; the few who
      talked spoke in whispers, lest a spy should hear them, and the young ones
      had no strength to play—they wanted food.
    

      “It is as it was in my youth,” said Reine Allix, eating her piece of black
      bread and putting aside the better food prepared for her, that she might
      save it, unseen, for the “child.”
     

      It was horrible to her and to all of them to live in that continual terror
      of an unknown foe, that perpetual expectation of some ghastly, shapeless
      misery. They were quiet,—so quiet!—but by all they heard they
      knew that any night, as they went to their beds, the thunder of cannon
      might awaken them; any morning, as they looked on their beloved fields,
      they knew that ere sunset the flames of war might have devoured them. They
      knew so little too; all they were told was so indefinite and garbled that
      sometimes they thought the whole was some horrid dream—thought so,
      at least, until they looked at their empty stables, their untilled land,
      their children who cried from hunger, their mothers who wept for the
      conscripts.
    

      But as yet it was not so very much worse than it had been in times of bad
      harvest and of dire distress; and the storm which raged over the land had
      as yet spared this little green nest among the woods on the Seine.
    

      November came. “It is a cold night, Bernadou; put on some more wood,” said
      Reine Allix. Fuel at the least was plentiful in that district, and
      Bernadou obeyed.
    

      He sat at the table, working at a new churn for his wife; he had some
      skill at turnery and at invention in such matters. The child slept soundly
      in its cradle by the hearth, smiling while it dreamed. Margot spun at her
      wheel. Reine Allix sat by the fire, seldom lifting her head from her long
      knitting-needles, except to cast a look on her grandson or at the sleeping
      child. The little wooden shutter of the house was closed. Some winter
      roses bloomed in a pot beneath the little crucifix. Bernadou’s flute lay
      on a shelf; he had not had heart enough to play it since the news of the
      war had come.
    

      Suddenly a great sobbing cry rose without—the cry of many voices,
      all raised in woe together. Bernadou rose, took his musket in his hand,
      undid his door, and looked out. All the people were turned out into the
      street, and the women, loudly lamenting, beat their breasts and strained
      their children to their bosoms. There was a sullen red light in the sky to
      the eastward, and on the wind a low, hollow roar stole to them.
    

      “What is it?” he asked.
    

      “The Prussians are on us!” answered twenty voices in one accord. “That red
      glare is the town burning.”
     

      Then they were all still—a stillness that was more horrible than
      their lamentations.
    

      Reine Allix came and stood by her grandson. “If we must die, let us die here,”
       she said, in a voice that was low and soft and grave.
    

      He took her hand and kissed it. She was content with his answer.
    

      Margot stole forth too, and crouched behind them, holding her child to her
      breast. “What can they do to us?” she asked, trembling, with the rich
      colours of her face blanched white.
    

      Bernadou smiled on her. “I do not know, my dear. I think even they can
      hardly bring death upon women and children.”
     

      “They can, and they will,” said a voice from the crowd.
    

      None answered. The street was very quiet in the darkness. Far away in the
      east the red glare glowed. On the wind was still that faint, distant,
      ravening roar, like the roar of famished wolves; it was the roar of fire
      and of war.
    

      In the silence Reine Allix spoke: “God is good. Shall we not trust in
      Him?”
     

      With one great choking sob the people answered; their hearts were
      breaking. All night long they watched in the street—they who had
      done no more to bring this curse upon them than the flower-roots that
      slept beneath the snow. They dared not go to their beds; they knew not
      when the enemy might be upon them. They dared not flee; even in their own
      woods the foe might lurk for them. One man indeed did cry aloud, “Shall we
      stay here in our houses to be smoked out like bees from their hives? Let
      us fly!”
     

      But the calm, firm voice of Reine Allix rebuked him: “Let who will, run
      like a hare from the hounds. For me and mine, we abide by our homestead.”
     

      And they were ashamed to be outdone by a woman, and a woman of ninety
      years old, and no man spoke any more of flight. All the night long they
      watched in the cold and the wind, the children shivering beneath their
      mothers’ skirts, the men sullenly watching the light of the flames in the
      dark, starless sky. All night long they were left alone, though far off
      they heard the dropping shots of scattered firing, and in the leafless
      woods around them the swift flight of woodland beasts startled from their
      sleep, and the hurrying feet of sheep terrified from their folds in the
      outlying fields.
    

      The daybreak came, gray, cheerless, very cold. A dense fog, white and raw,
      hung over the river; in the east, where the sun, they knew, was rising,
      they could only see the livid light of the still towering flames and
      pillars of black smoke against the leaden clouds.
    

      “We will let them come and go in peace if they will,” murmured old
      Mathurin. “What can we do? We have no arms, no powder hardly, no soldiers,
      no defence.”
     

      Bernadou said nothing, but he straightened his tall limbs, and in his
      grave blue eyes a light gleamed.
    

      Reine Allix looked at him as she sat in the doorway of her house. “Thy
      hands are honest, thy heart pure, thy conscience clear. Be not afraid to
      die if need there be,” she said to him.
    

      He looked down and smiled on her. Margot clung to him in a passion of
      weeping. He clasped her close and kissed her softly, but the woman who
      read his heart was the woman who had held him at his birth.
    

      By degrees the women crept timidly back into their houses, hiding their
      eyes so that they should not see that horrid light against the sky, while
      the starving children clung to their breasts or to their skirts, wailing
      aloud in terror. The few men there were left, for the most part of them
      very old or else mere striplings, gathered together in a hurried council.
      Old Mathurin, the miller, and the patriots of the wine-shop were agreed
      that there should be no resistance, whatever might befall them; that it
      would be best to hide such weapons as they had and any provisions that
      still remained to them, and yield up themselves and their homes with
      humble grace to the dire foe. “If we do otherwise,” they said, “the
      soldiers will surely slay us, and what can a miserable little hamlet like
      this achieve against cannon and steel and fire?”
     

      Bernadou alone raised his voice in opposition. His eye kindled, his cheek
      flushed, his words for once sprang from his lips like fire. “What!” he
      said to them, “shall we yield up our homes and our wives and our infants
      without a single blow? Shall we be so vile as to truckle to the enemies of
      France and show that we can fear them? It were a shame, a foul shame; we
      were not worthy of the name of men. Let us prove to them that there are
      people in France who are not afraid to die. Let us hold our own so long as
      we can. Our muskets are good, our walls strong, our woods in this weather
      morasses that will suck in and swallow them if only we have tact to drive
      them there. Let us do what we can. The camp of the francs-tireurs is but
      three leagues form us. They will be certain to come to our aid. At any
      rate, let us die bravely. We can do little, that may be; but if every man
      in France does that little that he can, that little will be great enough
      to drive the invaders off the soil.”
     

      Mathurin and the others screamed at him and hooted. “You are a fool!” they
      shouted. “You will be the undoing of us all. Do you not know that one shot
      fired, nay, only one musket found, and the enemy puts a torch to the whole
      place?”
     

      “I know,” said Bernadou, with a dark radiance in his azure eyes. “But then
      it is a choice between disgrace and the flames; let us only take heed to
      be clear of the first—the last must rage as God wills.”
     

      But they screamed and mouthed and hissed at him: “Oh yes! fine talk, fine
      talk! See your own roof in flames if you will; you shall not ruin ours. Do
      what you will with your own neck; keep it erect or hang by it, as you
      choose. But you have no right to give your neighbours over to death,
      whether they will or no.”
     

      He strove, he pleaded, he conjured, he struggled with them half the night,
      with the salt tears running down his cheeks, and all his gentle blood
      burning with righteous wrath and loathing shame, stirred for the first
      time in all his life to a rude, simple, passionate eloquence. But they
      were not persuaded. Their few gold pieces hidden in the rafters, their few
      feeble sheep starving in the folds, their own miserable lives, all hungry,
      woe-begone, and spent in daily terrors—these were still dear to
      them, and they would not imperil them. They called him a madman; they
      denounced him as one who would be their murderer; they threw themselves on
      him and demanded his musket, to bury it with the rest under the altar in
      the old chapel on the hill.
    

      Bernadou’s eyes flashed fire; his breast heaved; his nerves quivered; he
      shook them off and strode a step forward. “As you live,” he muttered, “I
      have a mind to fire on you, rather than let you live to shame yourselves
      and me!”
     

      Reine Allix, who stood by him silent all the while, laid her hand on his
      shoulder. “My boy,” she said in his ear, “you are right, and they are
      wrong. Yet let not dissension between brethren open the door for the enemy
      to enter thereby into your homes. Do what you will with your own life,
      Bernadou,—it is yours,—but leave them to do as they will with
      theirs. You cannot make sheep into lions, and let not the first blood shed
      here be a brother’s.”
     

      Bernadou’s head dropped on his breast. “Do as you will,” he muttered to
      his neighbours. They took his musket from him, and in the darkness of the
      night stole silently up the wooded chapel hill and buried it, with all
      their other arms, under the altar where the white Christ hung. “We are
      safe now,” said Mathurin, the miller, to the patriots of the tavern. “Had
      that madman had his way, he had destroyed us all.”
     

      Reine Allix softly led her grandson across his own threshold, and drew his
      head down to hers, and kissed him between the eyes. “You did what you
      could, Bernadou,” she said to him; “let the rest come as it will.”
     

      Then she turned from him, and flung her cloak over her head, and sank
      down, weeping bitterly; for she had lived through ninety-three years only
      to see this agony at the last.
    

      Bernadou, now that all means of defence was gone from him, and the only
      thing left to him to deal with was his own life, had become quiet and
      silent and passionless, as was his habit. He would have fought like a
      mastiff for his home, but this they had forbidden him to do, and he was
      passive and without hope. He shut to his door, and sat down with his hand
      in that of Reine Allix and his arm around his wife. “There is nothing to
      do but to wait,” he said, sadly. The day seemed very long in coming.
    

      The firing ceased for a while; then its roll commenced afresh, and grew
      nearer to the village. Then again all was still.
    

      At noon a shepherd staggered into the place, pale, bleeding, bruised,
      covered with mire. The Prussians, he told them, had forced him to be their
      guide, had knotted him tight to a trooper’s saddle, and had dragged him
      with them until he was half dead with fatigue and pain. At night he had
      broken from them and had fled. They were close at hand, he said, and had
      burned the town from end to end because a man had fired at them from a
      housetop. That was all he knew. Bernadou, who had gone out to hear his
      news, returned into the house and sat down and hid his face within his
      hands. “If I resist you are all lost,” he muttered. “And yet to yield like
      a cur!” It was a piteous question, whether to follow the instinct in him
      and see his birthplace in flames and his family slaughtered for his act,
      or to crush out the manhood in him and live, loathing himself as a coward
      for evermore.
    

      Reine Allix looked at him, and laid her hand on his bowed head, and her
      voice was strong and tender as music: “Fret not thyself, my beloved. When
      the moment comes, then do as thine own heart and the whisper of God in it
      bid thee.”
     

      A great sob answered her; it was the first since his earliest infancy that
      she had ever heard from Bernadou.
    

      It grew dark. The autumn day died. The sullen clouds dropped scattered
      rain. The red leaves were blown in millions by the wind. The little houses
      on either side the road were dark, for the dwellers in them dared not show
      any light that might be a star to allure to them the footsteps of their
      foes. Bernadou sat with his arms on the table, and his head resting on
      them. Margot nursed her son. Reine Allix prayed.
    

      Suddenly in the street without there was the sound of many feet of horses
      and of men, the shouting of angry voices, the splashing of quick steps in
      the watery ways, the screams of women, the flash of steel through the
      gloom. Bernadou sprang to his feet, his face pale, his blue eyes dark as
      night. “They are come!” he said, under his breath. It was not fear that he
      felt, nor horror; it was rather a passion of love for his birthplace and
      his nation—a passion of longing to struggle and to die for both. And
      he had no weapon!
    

      He drew his house-door open with a steady hand, and stood on his own
      threshold and faced these his enemies. The street was full of them, some
      mounted, some on foot; crowds of them swarmed in the woods and on the
      roads. They had settled on the village as vultures on a dead lamb’s body.
      It was a little, lowly place; it might well have been left in peace. It
      had had no more share in the war than a child still unborn, but it came in
      the victors’ way, and their mailed heel crushed it as they passed. They
      had heard that arms were hidden and francs-tireurs sheltered there, and
      they had swooped down on it and held it hard and fast. Some were told off
      to search the chapel; some to ransack the dwellings; some to seize such
      food and bring such cattle as there might be left; some to seek out the
      devious paths that crossed and recrossed the fields; and yet there
      remained in the little street hundreds of armed men, force enough to awe a
      citadel or storm a breach.
    

      The people did not attempt to resist. They stood passive, dry-eyed in
      misery, looking on while the little treasures of their household lives
      were swept away for ever, and ignorant what fate by fire or iron might be
      their portion ere the night was done. They saw the corn that was their
      winter store to save their offspring from famine poured out like
      ditch-water. They saw oats and wheat flung down to be trodden into a
      slough of mud and filth. They saw the walnut presses in their kitchens
      broken open, and their old heirlooms of silver, centuries old, borne away
      as booty. They saw the oak cupboards in their wives’ bed-chambers
      ransacked, and the homespun linen and the quaint bits of plate that had
      formed their nuptial dowers cast aside in derision or trampled into a
      battered heap. They saw the pet lamb of their infants, the silver
      ear-rings of their brides, the brave tankards they had drunk their
      marriage wine in, the tame bird that flew to their whistle, all seized for
      food or seized for spoil. They saw all this, and had to stand by with mute
      tongues and passive hands, lest any glance of wrath or gesture of revenge
      should bring the leaden bullet in their children’s throats or the yellow
      flame amid their homesteads. Greater agony the world cannot hold.
    

      Under the porch of the cottage, by the sycamores, one group stood and
      looked, silent and very still: Bernadou, erect, pale, calm, with a fierce
      scorn burning in his eyes; Margot, quiet because he wished her so, holding
      to her the rosy and golden beauty of her son; Reine Allix, with a patient
      horror on her face, her figure drawn to its full height, and her hands
      holding to her breast the crucifix. They stood thus, waiting they knew not
      what, only resolute to show no cowardice and meet no shame.
    

      Behind them was the dull, waning glow of the wood fire on the hearth which
      had been the centre of all their hopes and joys; before them the dim, dark
      country, and the woe-stricken faces of their neighbours, and the moving
      soldiery with their torches, and the quivering forms of the half-dying
      horses.
    

      Suddenly a voice arose from the armed mass: “Bring me the peasant hither.”
     

      Bernadou was seized by several hands and forced and dragged from his door
      out to the place where the leader of the uhlans sat on a white charger
      that shook and snorted blood in its exhaustion. Bernadou cast off the
      alien grasp that held him, and stood erect before his foes. He was no
      longer pale, and his eyes were clear and steadfast.
    

      “You look less a fool than the rest,” said the Prussian commander. “You
      know this country well?”
     

      “Well!” The country in whose fields and woodlands he had wandered from his
      infancy, and whose every meadow-path and wayside tree and flower-sown
      brook he knew by heart as a lover knows the lines of his mistress’s face!
    

      “You have arms here?” pursued the German.
    

      “We had.”
     

      “What have you done with them?”
     

      “If I had had my way, you would not need ask. You would have felt them.”
     

      The Prussian looked at him keenly, doing homage to the boldness of the
      answer. “Will you confess where they are?”
     

      “No.”
     

      “You know the penalty for concealment of arms is death?”
     

      “You have made it so.”
     

      “We have, and Prussian will is French law. You are a bold man; you merit
      death. But still, you know the country well?”
     

      Bernadou smiled, as a mother might smile were any foolish enough to ask
      her if she remembered the look her dead child’s face had worn.
    

      “If you know it well,” pursued the Prussian, “I will give you a chance.
      Lay hold of my stirrup-leather and be lashed to it, and show me straight
      as the crow flies to where the weapons are hidden. If you do, I will leave
      you your life. If you do not—”
     

      “If I do not?”
     

      “You will be shot.”
     

      Bernadou was silent; his eyes glanced through the mass of soldiers to the
      little cottage under the trees opposite. The two there were straining to
      behold him, but the soldiers pushed them back, so that in the flare of the
      torches they could not see, nor in the tumult hear. He thanked God for it.
    

      “Your choice?” asked the uhlan, impatiently, after a moment’s pause.
    

      Bernadou’s lips were white, but they did not tremble as he answered, “I am
      no traitor.” And his eyes, as he spoke, went softly to the little porch
      where the light glowed from that hearth beside which he would never again
      sit with the creatures he loved around him.
    

      The German looked at him. “Is that a boast, or a fact?”
     

      “I am no traitor,” Bernadou answered, simply, once more.
    

      The Prussian gave a sign to his troopers. There was the sharp report of a
      double shot, and Bernadou fell dead. One bullet had pierced his brain, the
      other was bedded in his lungs. The soldiers kicked aside the warm and
      quivering body. It was only a peasant killed!
    

      With a shriek that rose above the roar of the wind, and cut like steel to
      every human heart that beat there, Reine Allix forced her way through the
      throng, and fell on her knees beside him, and caught him in her arms, and
      laid his head upon her breast, where he had used to sleep his softest
      sleep in infancy and childhood. “It is God’s will! it is God’s will!” she
      muttered; and then she laughed—a laugh so terrible that the blood of
      the boldest there ran cold.
    

      Margot followed her and looked, and stood dry-eyed and silent; then flung
      herself and the child she carried in her arms beneath the hoof of the
      white charger. “End your work!” she shrieked to them. “You have killed him—kill
      us. Have you not mercy enough for that?”
     

      The horse, terrified and snorting blood, plunged and trampled the ground;
      his fore foot struck the child’s golden head and stamped its face out of
      all human likeness. Some peasants pulled Margot from the lashing hoofs;
      she was quite dead, though neither wound nor bruise was on her.
    

      Reine Allix neither looked nor paused. With all her strength she had begun
      to drag the body of Bernadou across the threshold of his house. “He shall
      lie at home, he shall lie at home,” she muttered. She would not believe
      that already he was dead. With all the force of her earliest womanhood she
      lifted him, and half drew, half bore him into the house that he had loved,
      and laid him down upon the hearth, and knelt by him, caressing him as
      though he were once more a child, and saying softly, “Hush!”—for her
      mind was gone, and she fancied that he only slept.
    

      Without, the tumult of the soldiery increased. They found the arms hidden
      under the altar on the hill; they seized five peasants to slay them for
      the dire offence. The men struggled, and would not go as the sheep to the
      shambles. They were shot down in the street, before the eyes of their
      children. Then the order was given to fire the place in punishment, and
      leave it to its fate. The torches were flung with a laugh on the dry
      thatched roofs; brands snatched from the house fires on the hearths were
      tossed among the dwelling-houses and the barns. The straw and timber
      flared alight like tow.
    

      An old man, her nearest neighbour, rushed to the cottage of Reine Allix
      and seized her by the arm. “They fire the Berceau,” he screamed. “Quick!
      quick! or you will be burned alive!”
     

      Reine Allix looked up with a smile. “Be quiet! Do you not see! He sleeps.”
     

      The old man shook her, implored her, strove to drag her away; in
      desperation pointed to the roof above, which was already in flames.
    

      Reine Allix looked. At that sight her mind cleared, and regained
      consciousness; she remembered all, she understood all; she knew that he
      was dead. “Go in peace and save yourself,” she said, in the old, sweet,
      strong tone of an earlier day. “As for me, I am very old. I and my dead
      will stay together at home.”
     

      The man fled, and left her to her choice.
    

      The great curled flames and the livid vapours closed around her; she never
      moved. The death was fierce, but swift, and even in death she and the one
      whom she had loved and reared were not divided. The end soon came. From
      hill to hill the Berceau de Dieu broke into flames. The village was a lake
      of fire, into which the statue of the Christ, burning and reeling, fell.
      Some few peasants, with their wives and children, fled to the woods, and
      there escaped one torture to perish more slowly of cold and famine. All
      other things perished. The rapid stream of the flame licked up all there
      was in its path. The bare trees raised their leafless branches, on fire at
      a thousand points. The stores of corn and fruit were lapped by millions of
      crimson tongues. The pigeons flew screaming from their roosts, and sank
      into the smoke. The dogs were suffocated on the thresholds they had
      guarded all their lives. The sheep ran bleating with the wool burning on
      their living bodies. The little caged birds fluttered helpless, and then
      dropped, scorched to cinders. The aged and the sick were stifled in their
      beds. All things perished.
    

      The Berceau de Dieu was as one vast furnace, in which every living
      creature was caught and consumed and changed to ashes. The tide of war has
      rolled on, and left it a blackened waste, a smoking ruin, wherein not so
      much as a mouse may creep or a bird may nestle. It is gone, and its place
      can know it nevermore.
    

      Nevermore. But who is there to care? It was but as a leaf which the great
      storm swept away as it passed.
    







      THE TRAVELLER’S STORY OF A TERRIBLY STRANGE BED, By Wilkie Collins
    







      PROLOGUE TO THE FIRST STORY
    

      Before I begin, by the aid of my wife’s patient attention and ready pen,
      to relate any of the stories which I have heard at various times from
      persons whose likenesses I have been employed to take, it will not be
      amiss if I try to secure the reader’s interest in the following pages by
      briefly explaining how I became possessed of the narrative matter which
      they contain.
    

      Of myself I have nothing to say, but that I have followed the profession
      of a travelling portrait-painter for the last fifteen years. The pursuit
      of my calling has not only led me all through England, but has taken me
      twice to Scotland and once to Ireland. In moving from district to
      district, I am never guided beforehand by any settled plan. Sometimes the
      letters of recommendation which I get from persons who are satisfied with
      the work I have done for them determine the direction in which I travel.
      Sometimes I hear of a new neighbourhood in which there is no resident
      artist of ability, and remove thither on speculation. Sometimes my friends
      among the picture-dealers say a good word on my behalf to their rich
      customers, and so pave the way for me in the large towns. Sometimes my
      prosperous and famous brother artists, hearing of small commissions which
      it is not worth their while to accept, mention my name, and procure me
      introductions to pleasant country houses. Thus I get on, now in one way
      and now in another, not winning a reputation or making a fortune, but
      happier, perhaps, on the whole, than many men who have got both the one
      and the other. So, at least, I try to think now, though I started in my
      youth with as high an ambition as the best of them. Thank God, it is not
      my business here to speak of past times and their disappointments. A
      twinge of the old hopeless heartache comes over me sometimes still, when I
      think of my student days.
    

      One peculiarity of my present way of life is, that it brings me into
      contact with all sorts of characters. I almost feel, by this time, as if I
      had painted every civilised variety of the human race. Upon the whole, my
      experience of the world, rough as it has been, has not taught me to think
      unkindly of my fellow-creatures. I have certainly received such treatment
      at the hands of some of my sitters as I could not describe without
      saddening and shocking any kind-hearted reader; but, taking one year and
      one place with another, I have cause to remember with gratitude and
      respect, sometimes even with friendship and affection, a very large
      proportion of the numerous persons who have employed me.
    

      Some of the results of my experience are curious in a moral point of view.
      For example, I have found women almost uniformly less delicate in asking
      me about my terms, and less generous in remunerating me for my services,
      than men. On the other hand, men, within my knowledge, are decidedly
      vainer of their personal attractions, and more vexatiously anxious to have
      them done full justice to on canvas, than women. Taking both sexes
      together, I have found young people, for the most part, more gentle, more
      reasonable, and more considerate than old. And, summing up, in a general
      way, my experience of different ranks (which extends, let me premise, all
      the way down from peers to publicans), I have met with most of my formal
      and ungracious receptions among rich people of uncertain social standing;
      the highest classes and the lowest among my employers almost always
      contrive—in widely different ways, of course—to make me feel
      at home as soon as I enter their houses.
    

      The one great obstacle that I have to contend against in the practice of
      my profession is not, as some persons may imagine, the difficulty of
      making my sitters keep their heads still while I paint them, but the
      difficulty of getting them to preserve the natural look and the every-day
      peculiarities of dress and manner. People will assume an expression, will
      brush up their hair, will correct any little characteristic carelessness
      in their apparel—will, in short, when they want to have their
      likenesses taken, look as if they were sitting for their pictures. If I
      paint them under these artificial circumstances, I fail, of course, to
      present them in their habitual aspect; and my portrait, as a necessary
      consequence, disappoints everybody, the sitter always included. When we
      wish to judge of a man’s character by his handwriting, we want his
      customary scrawl dashed off with his common workaday pen, not his best
      small text traced laboriously with the finest procurable crow-quill point.
      So it is with portrait-painting, which is, after all, nothing but a right
      reading of the externals of character recognisably presented to the view
      of others.
    

      Experience, after repeated trials, has proved to me that the only way of
      getting sitters who persist in assuming a set look to resume their
      habitual expression is to lead them into talking about some subject in
      which they are greatly interested. If I can only beguile them into
      speaking earnestly, no matter on what topic, I am sure of recovering their
      natural expression; sure of seeing all the little precious every-day
      peculiarities of the man or woman peep out, one after another, quite
      unawares. The long maundering stories about nothing, the wearisome
      recitals of petty grievances, the local anecdotes unrelieved by the
      faintest suspicion of anything like general interest, which I have been
      condemned to hear, as a consequence of thawing the ice off the features of
      formal sitters by the method just described, would fill hundreds of
      volumes and promote the repose of thousands of readers. On the other hand,
      if I have suffered under the tediousness of the many, I have not been
      without my compensating gains from the wisdom and experience of the few.
      To some of my sitters I have been indebted for information which has
      enlarged my mind, to some for advice which has lightened my heart, to some
      for narratives of strange adventure which riveted my attention at the
      time, which have served to interest and amuse my fireside circle for many
      years past, and which are now, I would fain hope, destined to make kind
      friends for me among a wider audience than any that I have yet addressed.
    

      Singularly enough, almost all the best stories that I have heard from my
      sitters have been told by accident. I only remember two cases in which a
      story was volunteered to me; and, although I have often tried the
      experiment, I cannot call to mind even a single instance in which leading
      questions (as lawyers call them) on my part, addressed to a sitter, ever
      produced any result worth recording. Over and over again I have been
      disastrously successful in encouraging dull people to weary me. But the
      clever people who have something interesting to say seem, so far as I have
      observed them, to acknowledge no other stimulant than chance. For every
      story, excepting one, I have been indebted, in the first instance, to the
      capricious influence of the same chance. Something my sitter has seen
      about me, something I have remarked in my sitter, or in the room in which
      I take the likeness, or in the neighbourhood through which I pass on my
      way to work, has suggested the necessary association, or has started the
      right train of recollections, and then the story appeared to begin of its
      own accord. Occasionally the most casual notice, on my part, of some very
      unpromising object has smoothed the way for the relation of a long and
      interesting narrative. I first heard one of the most dramatic stories
      merely through being carelessly inquisitive to know the history of a
      stuffed poodle-dog.
    

      It is thus not without reason that I lay some stress on the desirableness
      of prefacing the following narrative by a brief account of the curious
      manner in which I became possessed of it. As to my capacity for repeating
      the story correctly, I can answer for it that my memory may be trusted. I
      may claim it as a merit, because it is, after all, a mechanical one, that
      I forget nothing, and that I can call long-past conversations and events
      as readily to my recollection as if they had happened but a few weeks ago.
      Of two things at least I feel tolerably certain before-hand, in meditating
      over its contents: first, that I can repeat correctly all that I have
      heard; and, secondly, that I have never missed anything worth hearing when
      my sitters were addressing me on an interesting subject. Although I cannot
      take the lead in talking while I am engaged in painting, I can listen
      while others speak, and work all the better for it.
    

      So much in the way of general preface to the pages for which I am about to
      ask the reader’s attention. Let me now advance to particulars, and
      describe how I came to hear the story. I begin with it because it is the
      story that I have oftenest “rehearsed,” to borrow a phrase from the stage.
      Wherever I go, I am sooner or later sure to tell it. Only last night I was
      persuaded into repeating it once more by the inhabitants of the farm-house
      in which I am now staying.
    

      Not many years ago, on returning from a short holiday visit to a friend
      settled in Paris, I found professional letters awaiting me at my agent’s
      in London, which required my immediate presence in Liverpool. Without
      stopping to unpack, I proceeded by the first conveyance to my new
      destination; and, calling at the picture-dealer’s shop where
      portrait-painting engagements were received for me, found to my great
      satisfaction that I had remunerative employment in prospect, in and about
      Liverpool, for at least two months to come. I was putting up my letters in
      high spirits, and was just leaving the picture-dealer’s shop to look out
      for comfortable lodgings, when I was met at the door by the landlord of
      one of the largest hotels in Liverpool—an old acquaintance whom I
      had known as manager of a tavern in London in my student days.
    

      “Mr. Kerby!” he exclaimed, in great astonishment. “What an unexpected
      meeting! the last man in the world whom I expected to see, and yet the
      very man whose services I want to make use of!”
     

      “What! more work for me?” said I. “Are all the people in Liverpool going
      to have their portraits painted?”
     

      “I only know of one,” replied the landlord, “a gentleman staying at my
      hotel, who wants a chalk drawing done of him. I was on my way here to
      inquire for any artist whom our picture-dealing friend could recommend.
      How glad I am that I met you before I had committed myself to employing a
      stranger!”
     

      “Is this likeness wanted at once?” I asked, thinking of the number of
      engagements that I had already got in my pocket.
    

      “Immediately—to-day—this very hour, if possible,” said the
      landlord. “Mr. Faulkner, the gentleman I am speaking of, was to have
      sailed yesterday for the Brazils from this place; but the wind shifted
      last night to the wrong quarter, and he came ashore again this morning. He
      may, of course, be detained here for some time; but he may also be called
      on board ship at half an hour’s notice, if the wind shifts back again in
      the right direction. This uncertainty makes it a matter of importance that
      the likeness should be begun immediately. Undertake it if you possibly
      can, for Mr. Faulkner is a liberal gentleman, who is sure to give you your
      own terms.”
     

      I reflected for a minute or two. The portrait was only wanted in chalk,
      and would not take long; besides, I might finish it in the evening, if my
      other engagements pressed hard upon me in the daytime. Why not leave my
      luggage at the picture-dealer’s, put off looking for lodgings till night,
      and secure the new commission boldly by going back at once with the
      landlord to the hotel? I decided on following this course almost as soon
      as the idea occurred to me; put my chalks in my pocket, and a sheet of
      drawing-paper in the first of my portfolios that came to hand; and so
      presented myself before Mr. Faulkner, ready to take his likeness,
      literally at five minutes’ notice.
    

      I found him a very pleasant, intelligent man, young and handsome. He had
      been a great traveller, had visited all the wonders of the East, and was
      now about to explore the wilds of the vast South American continent. Thus
      much he told me good-humouredly and unconstrainedly while I was preparing
      my drawing materials.
    

      As soon as I had put him in the right light and position, and had seated
      myself opposite to him, he changed the subject of conversation, and asked
      me, a little confusedly as I thought, if it was not a customary practice
      among portrait-painters to gloss over the faults in their sitters’ faces,
      and to make as much as possible of any good points which their features
      might possess.
    

      “Certainly,” I answered. “You have described the whole art and mystery of
      successful portrait-painting in a few words.”
     

      “May I beg, then,” said he, “that you will depart from the usual practice
      in my case, and draw me with all my defects, exactly as I am? The fact
      is,” he went on, after a moment’s pause, “the likeness you are now
      preparing to take is intended for my mother; my roving disposition makes
      me a great anxiety to her, and she parted from me this last time very
      sadly and unwillingly. I don’t know how the idea came into my head, but it
      struck me this morning that I could not better employ the time while I was
      delayed here on shore than by getting my likeness done to send to her as a
      keepsake. She has no portrait of me since I was a child, and she is sure
      to value a drawing of me more than anything else I could send to her. I
      only trouble you with this explanation to prove that I am really sincere
      in my wish to be drawn unflatteringly, exactly as I am.”
     

      Secretly respecting and admiring him for what he had just said, I promised
      that his directions should be implicitly followed, and began to work
      immediately. Before I had pursued my occupation for ten minutes, the
      conversation began to flag, and the usual obstacle to my success with a
      sitter gradually set itself up between us. Quite unconsciously, of course,
      Mr. Faulkner stiffened his neck, shut his mouth, and contracted his
      eyebrows—evidently under the impression that he was facilitating the
      process of taking his portrait by making his face as like a lifeless mask
      as possible. All traces of his natural animated expression were fast
      disappearing, and he was beginning to change into a heavy and rather
      melancholy-looking man.
    

      This complete alteration was of no great consequence so long as I was only
      engaged in drawing the outline of his face and the general form of his
      features. I accordingly worked on doggedly for more than an hour; then
      left off to point my chalks again, and to give my sitter a few minutes’ 
      rest. Thus far the likeness had not suffered through Mr. Faulkner’s
      unfortunate notion of the right way of sitting for his portrait; but the
      time of difficulty, as I well knew, was to come. It was impossible for me
      to think of putting any expression into the drawing unless I could
      contrive some means, when he resumed his chair, of making him look like
      himself again. “I will talk to him about foreign parts,” thought I, “and
      try if I can’t make him forget that he is sitting for his picture in that
      way.”
     

      While I was pointing my chalks, Mr. Faulkner was walking up and down the
      room. He chanced to see the portfolio I had brought with me leaning
      against the wall, and asked if there were any sketches in it. I told him
      there were a few which I had made during my recent stay in Paris. “In
      Paris?” he repeated, with a look of interest; “may I see them?”
     

      I gave him the permission he asked as a matter of course. Sitting down, he
      took the portfolio on his knee, and began to look through it. He turned
      over the first five sketches rapidly enough; but when he came to the sixth
      I saw his face flush directly, and observed that he took the drawing out
      of the portfolio, carried it to the window, and remained silently absorbed
      in the contemplation of it for full five minutes. After that he turned
      round to me, and asked very anxiously if I had any objection to parting
      with that sketch.
    

      It was the least interesting drawing of the collection—merely a view
      in one of the streets running by the backs of the houses in the Palais
      Royal. Some four or five of these houses were comprised in the view, which
      was of no particular use to me in any way, and which was too valueless, as
      a work of art, for me to think of selling it. I begged his acceptance of
      it at once. He thanked me quite warmly; and then, seeing that I looked a
      little surprised at the odd selection he had made from my sketches,
      laughingly asked me if I could guess why he had been so anxious to become
      possessed of the view which I had given him.
    

      “Probably,” I answered, “there is some remarkable historical association
      connected with that street at the back of the Palais Royal, of which I am
      ignorant.”
     

      “No,” said Mr. Faulkner; “at least none that I know of. The only
      association connected with the place in my mind is a purely
      personal association. Look at this house in your drawing—the house
      with the water-pipe running down it from top to bottom. I once passed a
      night there—a night I shall never forget to the day of my death. I
      have had some awkward travelling adventures in my time; but that
      adventure! Well, never mind, suppose we begin the sitting. I make but a
      bad return for your kindness in giving me the sketch by thus wasting your
      time in mere talk.”
     

      “Come! come!” thought I, as he went back to the sitter’s chair, “I shall
      see your natural expression on your face if I can only get you to talk
      about that adventure.” It was easy enough to lead him in the right
      direction. At the first hint from me, he returned to the subject of the
      house in the back street. Without, I hope, showing any undue curiosity, I
      contrived to let him see that I felt a deep interest in everything he now
      said. After two or three preliminary hesitations, he at last, to my great
      joy, fairly started on the narrative of his adventure. In the interest of
      his subject he soon completely forgot that he was sitting for his
      portrait,—the very expression that I wanted came over his face,—and
      my drawing proceeded toward completion, in the right direction, and to the
      best purpose. At every fresh touch I felt more and more certain that I was
      now getting the better of my grand difficulty; and I enjoyed the
      additional gratification of having my work lightened by the recital of a
      true story, which possessed, in my estimation, all the excitement of the
      most exciting romance.
    

      This, as I recollect it, is how Mr. Faulkner told me his adventure.
    







      THE TRAVELLER’S STORY OF A TERRIBLY STRANGE BED
    

      Shortly after my education at college was finished, I happened to be
      staying at Paris with an English friend. We were both young men then, and
      lived, I am afraid, rather a wild life, in the delightful city of our
      sojourn. One night we were idling about the neighbourhood of the Palais
      Royal, doubtful to what amusement we should next betake ourselves. My
      friend proposed a visit to Frascati’s; but his suggestion was not to my
      taste. I knew Frascati’s, as the French saying is, by heart; had lost and
      won plenty of five-franc pieces there, merely for amusement’s sake, until
      it was amusement no longer, and was thoroughly tired, in fact, of all the
      ghastly respectabilities of such a social anomaly as a respectable
      gambling-house. “For Heaven’s sake,” said I to my friend, “let us go
      somewhere where we can see a little genuine, blackguard, poverty-stricken
      gaming with no false gingerbread glitter thrown over it all. Let us get
      away from fashionable Frascati’s, to a house where they don’t mind letting
      in a man with a ragged coat, or a man with no coat, ragged or otherwise.”
       “Very well,” said my friend, “we needn’t go out of the Palais Royal to
      find the sort of company you want. Here’s the place just before us; as
      blackguard a place, by all report, as you could possibly wish to see.” In
      another minute we arrived at the door and entered the house, the back of
      which you have drawn in your sketch.
    

      When we got upstairs, and had left our hats and sticks with the
      doorkeeper, we were admitted into the chief gambling-room. We did not find
      many people assembled there. But, few as the men were who looked up at us
      on our entrance, they were all types—lamentably true types—of
      their respective classes.
    

      We had come to see blackguards; but these men were something worse. There
      is a comic side, more or less appreciable, in all blackguardism—here
      there was nothing but tragedy—mute, weird tragedy. The quiet in the
      room was horrible. The thin, haggard, long-haired young man, whose sunken
      eyes fiercely watched the turning up of the cards, never spoke; the
      flabby, fat-faced, pimply player, who pricked his piece of pasteboard
      perseveringly, to register how often black won, and how often red—never
      spoke; the dirty, wrinkled old man, with the vulture eyes and the darned
      great-coat, who had lost his last sou, and still looked on desperately,
      after he could play no longer—never spoke. Even the voice of the
      croupier sounded as if it were strangely dulled and thickened in the
      atmosphere of the room. I had entered the place to laugh, but the
      spectacle before me was something to weep over. I soon found it necessary
      to take refuge in excitement from the depression of spirits which was fast
      stealing on me. Unfortunately I sought the nearest excitement, by going to
      the table and beginning to play. Still more unfortunately, as the event
      will show, I won—won prodigiously; won incredibly; won at such a
      rate that the regular players at the table crowded round me; and staring
      at my stakes with hungry, superstitious eyes, whispered to one another
      that the English stranger was going to break the bank.
    

      The game was Rouge et Noir. I had played at it in every city in Europe,
      without, however, the care or the wish to study the Theory of Chances—that
      philosopher’s stone of all gamblers! And a gambler, in the strict sense of
      the word, I had never been. I was heart-whole from the corroding passion
      for play. My gaming was a mere idle amusement. I never resorted to it by
      necessity, because I never knew what it was to want money. I never
      practised it so incessantly as to lose more than I could afford, or to
      gain more than I could coolly pocket without being thrown off my balance
      by my good luck. In short, I had hitherto frequented gambling-tables—just
      as I frequented ball-rooms and opera-houses—because they amused me,
      and because I had nothing better to do with my leisure hours.
    

      But on this occasion it was very different—now, for the first time
      in my life, I felt what the passion for play really was. My success first
      bewildered, and then, in the most literal meaning of the word, intoxicated
      me. Incredible as it may appear, it is nevertheless true, that I only lost
      when I attempted to estimate chances, and played according to previous
      calculation. If I left everything to luck, and staked without any care or
      consideration, I was sure to win—to win in the face of every
      recognized probability in favour of the bank. At first some of the men
      present ventured their money safely enough on my colour; but I speedily
      increased my stakes to sums which they dared not risk. One after another
      they left off playing, and breathlessly looked on at my game.
    

      Still, time after time, I staked higher and higher, and still won. The
      excitement in the room rose to fever pitch. The silence was interrupted by
      a deep-muttered chorus of oaths and exclamations in different languages,
      every time the gold was shovelled across to my side of the table—even
      the imperturbable croupier dashed his rake on the floor in a (French) fury
      of astonishment at my success. But one man present preserved his
      self-possession, and that man was my friend. He came to my side, and
      whispering in English, begged me to leave the place, satisfied with what I
      had already gained. I must do him the justice to say that he repeated his
      warnings and entreaties several times, and only left me and went away
      after I had rejected his advice (I was to all intents and purposes
      gambling drunk) in terms which rendered it impossible for him to address
      me again that night.
    

      Shortly after he had gone, a hoarse voice behind me cried: “Permit me, my
      dear sir—permit me to restore to their proper place two napoleons
      which you have dropped. Wonderful luck, sir! I pledge you my word of
      honour, as an old soldier, in the course of my long experience in this
      sort of thing, I never saw such luck as yours—never! Go on, sir—Sacre
      mille bombes! Go on boldly, and break the bank!”
     

      I turned round and saw, nodding and smiling at me with inveterate
      civility, a tall man, dressed in a frogged and braided surtout. If I had
      been in my senses, I should have considered him, personally, as being
      rather a suspicious specimen of an old soldier. He had goggling bloodshot
      eyes, mangy moustaches, and a broken nose. His voice betrayed a
      barrack-room intonation of the worst order, and he had the dirtiest pair
      of hands I ever saw—even in France. These little personal
      peculiarities exercised, however, no repelling influence on me. In the mad
      excitement, the reckless triumph of that moment, I was ready to
      “fraternize” with anybody who encouraged me in my game. I accepted the old
      soldier’s offered pinch of snuff; clapped him on the back, and swore he
      was the honestest fellow in the world—the most glorious relic of the
      Grand Army that I had ever met with. “Go on!” cried my military friend,
      snapping his fingers in ecstasy—“Go on, and win! Break the bank—Mille
      tonnerres! my gallant English comrade, break the bank!”
     

      And I did go on—went on at such a rate, that in another
      quarter of an hour the croupier called out, “Gentlemen, the bank has
      discontinued for to-night.” All the notes, and all the gold in that “bank”
       now lay in a heap under my hands; the whole floating capital of the
      gambling-house was waiting to pour into my pockets!
    

      “Tie up the money in your pocket-handkerchief, my worthy sir,” said the
      old soldier, as I wildly plunged my hands into my heap of gold. “Tie it
      up, as we used to tie up a bit of dinner in the Grand Army; your winnings
      are too heavy for any breeches-pockets that ever were sewed. There! that’s
      it—shovel them in, notes and all! Credie! what luck! Stop!
      another napoleon on the floor! Ah! sacre petit polisson de Napoleon!
      have I found thee at last? Now then, sir—two tight double knots each
      way with your honourable permission, and the money’s safe. Feel it! feel
      it, fortunate sir! hard and round as a cannon-ball—Ah, bah!
      if they had only fired such cannon-balls at us at Austerlitz—nom
      d’une pipe! if they only had! And now, as an ancient grenadier, as an
      ex-brave of the French army, what remains for me to do? I ask what? Simply
      this: to entreat my valued English friend to drink a bottle of champagne
      with me, and toast the goddess Fortune in foaming goblets before we part!”
     

      “Excellent ex-brave! Convivial ancient grenadier! Champagne by all means!
      An English cheer for an old soldier! Hurrah! hurrah! Another English cheer
      for the goddess Fortune! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!”
     

      “Bravo! the Englishman; the amiable, gracious Englishman, in whose veins
      circulates the vivacious blood of France! Another glass? Ah, bah!—the
      bottle is empty! Never mind! Vive le vin! I, the old soldier, order
      another bottle, and half a pound of bonbons with it!”
     

      “No, no, ex-brave; never—ancient grenadier! Your bottle last
      time; my bottle this. Behold it! Toast away! The French Army! the great
      Napoleon! the present company! the croupier! the honest croupier’s wife
      and daughters—if he has any! the Ladies generally! everybody in the
      world!”
     

      By the time the second bottle of champagne was emptied, I felt as if I had
      been drinking liquid fire—my brain seemed all aflame. No excess in
      wine had ever had this effect on me before in my life. Was it the result
      of a stimulant acting upon my system when I was in a highly excited state?
      Was my stomach in a particularly disordered condition? Or was the
      champagne amazingly strong?
    

      “Ex-brave of the French Army!” cried I, in a mad state of exhilaration, “I
      am on fire! how are you? You have set me on fire. Do you hear, my hero of
      Austerlitz? Let us have a third bottle of champagne to put the flame out!”
     

      The old soldier wagged his head, rolled his goggle-eyes, until I expected
      to see them slip out of their sockets; placed his dirty forefinger by the
      side of his broken nose; solemnly ejaculated “Coffee!” and immediately ran
      off into an inner room.
    

      The word pronounced by the eccentric veteran seemed to have a magical
      effect on the rest of the company present. With one accord they all rose
      to depart. Probably they had expected to profit by my intoxication; but
      finding that my new friend was benevolently bent on preventing me from
      getting dead drunk, had now abandoned all hope of thriving pleasantly on
      my winnings. Whatever their motive might be, at any rate they went away in
      a body. When the old soldier returned, and sat down again opposite to me
      at the table, we had the room to ourselves. I could see the croupier, in a
      sort of vestibule which opened out of it, eating his supper in solitude.
      The silence was now deeper than ever.
    

      A sudden change, too, had come over the “ex-brave”. He assumed a
      portentously solemn look; and when he spoke to me again, his speech was
      ornamented by no oaths, enforced by no finger-snapping, enlivened by no
      apostrophes or exclamations.
    

      “Listen, my dear sir,” said he, in mysteriously confidential tones—“listen
      to an old soldier’s advice. I have been to the mistress of the house (a
      very charming woman, with a genius for cookery!) to impress on her the
      necessity of making us some particularly strong and good coffee. You must
      drink this coffee in order to get rid of your little amiable exaltation of
      spirits before you think of going home—you must, my good and
      gracious friend! With all that money to take home to-night, it is a sacred
      duty to yourself to have your wits about you. You are known to be a winner
      to an enormous extent by several gentlemen present to-night, who, in a
      certain point of view, are very worthy and excellent fellows; but they are
      mortal men, my dear sir, and they have their amiable weaknesses. Need I
      say more? Ah, no, no! you understand me! Now, this is what you must do—send
      for a cabriolet when you feel quite well again—draw up all the
      windows when you get into it—and tell the driver to take you home
      only through the large and well-lighted thoroughfares. Do this; and you
      and your money will be safe. Do this; and to-morrow you will thank an old
      soldier for giving you a word of honest advice.”
     

      Just as the ex-brave ended his oration in very lachrymose tones, the
      coffee came in, ready poured out in two cups. My attentive friend handed
      me one of the cups with a bow. I was parched with thirst, and drank it off
      at a draught. Almost instantly afterwards, I was seized with a fit of
      giddiness, and felt more completely intoxicated than ever. The room
      whirled round and round furiously; the old soldier seemed to be regularly
      bobbing up and down before me like the piston of a steam-engine. I was
      half deafened by a violent singing in my ears; a feeling of utter
      bewilderment, helplessness, idiocy, overcame me. I rose from my chair,
      holding on by the table to keep my balance; and stammered out that I felt
      dreadfully unwell—so unwell that I did not know how I was to get
      home.
    

      “My dear friend,” answered the old soldier—and even his voice seemed
      to be bobbing up and down as he spoke—“my dear friend, it would be
      madness to go home in your state; you would be sure to lose your
      money; you might be robbed and murdered with the greatest ease. I
      am going to sleep here; do you sleep here, too—they make up capital
      beds in this house—take one; sleep off the effects of the wine, and
      go home safely with your winnings to-morrow—to-morrow, in broad
      daylight.”
     

      I had but two ideas left: one, that I must never let go hold of my
      handkerchief full of money; the other, that I must lie down somewhere
      immediately, and fall off into a comfortable sleep. So I agreed to the
      proposal about the bed, and took the offered arm of the old soldier,
      carrying my money with my disengaged hand. Preceded by the croupier, we
      passed along some passages and up a flight of stairs into the bedroom
      which I was to occupy. The ex-brave shook me warmly by the hand, proposed
      that we should breakfast together, and then, followed by the croupier,
      left me for the night.
    

      I ran to the wash-hand stand; drank some of the water in my jug; poured
      the rest out, and plunged my face into it; then sat down in a chair and
      tried to compose myself. I soon felt better. The change for my lungs, from
      the fetid atmosphere of the gambling-room to the cool air of the apartment
      I now occupied, the almost equally refreshing change for my eyes, from the
      glaring gaslights of the “salon” to the dim, quiet flicker of one bedroom
      candle, aided wonderfully the restorative effects of cold water. The
      giddiness left me, and I began to feel a little like a reasonable being
      again. My first thought was of the risk of sleeping all night in a
      gambling-house; my second, of the still greater risk of trying to get out
      after the house was closed, and of going home alone at night through the
      streets of Paris with a large sum of money about me. I had slept in worse
      places than this on my travels; so I determined to lock, bolt, and
      barricade my door, and take my chance till the next morning.
    

      Accordingly, I secured myself against all intrusion; looked under the bed,
      and into the cupboard; tried the fastening of the window; and then,
      satisfied that I had taken every proper precaution, pulled off my upper
      clothing, put my light, which was a dim one, on the hearth among a
      feathery litter of wood-ashes, and got into bed, with the handkerchief
      full of money under my pillow.
    

      I soon felt not only that I could not go to sleep, but that I could not
      even close my eyes. I was wide awake, and in a high fever. Every nerve in
      my body trembled—every one of my senses seemed to be preternaturally
      sharpened. I tossed and rolled, and tried every kind of position, and
      perseveringly sought out the cold corners of the bed, and all to no
      purpose. Now I thrust my arms over the clothes; now I poked them under the
      clothes; now I violently shot my legs straight out down to the bottom of
      the bed; now I convulsively coiled them up as near my chin as they would
      go; now I shook out my crumpled pillow, changed it to the cool side,
      patted it flat, and lay down quietly on my back; now I fiercely doubled it
      in two, set it up on end, thrust it against the board of the bed, and
      tried a sitting posture. Every effort was in vain; I groaned with vexation
      as I felt that I was in for a sleepless night.
    

      What could I do? I had no book to read. And yet, unless I found out some
      method of diverting my mind, I felt certain that I was in the condition to
      imagine all sorts of horrors; to rack my brain with forebodings of every
      possible and impossible danger; in short, to pass the night in suffering
      all conceivable varieties of nervous terror.
    

      I raised myself on my elbow, and looked about the room—which was
      brightened by a lovely moonlight pouring straight through the window—to
      see if it contained any pictures or ornaments that I could at all clearly
      distinguish. While my eyes wandered from wall to wall, a remembrance of Le
      Maistre’s delightful little book, “Voyage autour de ma Chambre,” occurred
      to me. I resolved to imitate the French author, and find occupation and
      amusement enough to relieve the tedium of my wakefulness, by making a
      mental inventory of every article of furniture I could see, and by
      following up to their sources the multitude of associations which even a
      chair, a table, or a wash-hand stand may be made to call forth.
    

      In the nervous unsettled state of my mind at that moment, I found it much
      easier to make my inventory than to make my reflections, and thereupon
      soon gave up all hope of thinking in Le Maistre’s fanciful track—or,
      indeed, of thinking at all. I looked about the room at the different
      articles of furniture, and did nothing more.
    

      There was, first, the bed I was lying in; a four-post bed, of all things
      in the world to meet with in Paris—yes, a thoroughly clumsy British
      four-poster, with the regular top lined with chintz—the regular
      fringed valance all round—the regular stifling, unwholesome
      curtains, which I remembered having mechanically drawn back against the
      posts without particularly noticing the bed when I first got into the
      room. Then there was the marble-topped wash-hand stand, from which the
      water I had spilled, in my hurry to pour it out, was still dripping,
      slowly and more slowly, on to the brick floor. Then two small chairs, with
      my coat, waistcoat, and trousers flung on them. Then a large elbow-chair
      covered with dirty-white dimity, with my cravat and shirt collar thrown
      over the back. Then a chest of drawers with two of the brass handles off,
      and a tawdry, broken china inkstand placed on it by way of ornament for
      the top. Then the dressing-table, adorned by a very small looking-glass,
      and a very large pincushion. Then the window—an unusually large
      window. Then a dark old picture, which the feeble candle dimly showed me.
      It was a picture of a fellow in a high Spanish hat, crowned with a plume
      of towering feathers. A swarthy, sinister ruffian, looking upward, shading
      his eyes with his hand, and looking intently upward—it might be at
      some tall gallows at which he was going to be hanged. At any rate, he had
      the appearance of thoroughly deserving it.
    

      This picture put a kind of constraint upon me to look upward too—at
      the top of the bed. It was a gloomy and not an interesting object, and I
      looked back at the picture. I counted the feathers in the man’s hat—they
      stood out in relief—three white, two green. I observed the crown of
      his hat, which was of conical shape, according to the fashion supposed to
      have been favoured by Guido Fawkes. I wondered what he was looking up at.
      It couldn’t be at the stars; such a desperado was neither astrologer nor
      astronomer. It must be at the high gallows, and he was going to be hanged
      presently. Would the executioner come into possession of his conical
      crowned hat and plume of feathers? I counted the feathers again—three
      white, two green.
    

      While I still lingered over this very improving and intellectual
      employment, my thoughts insensibly began to wander. The moonlight shining
      into the room reminded me of a certain moonlight night in England—the
      night after a picnic party in a Welsh valley. Every incident of the drive
      homeward, through lovely scenery, which the moonlight made lovelier than
      ever, came back to my remembrance, though I had never given the picnic a
      thought for years; though, if I had tried to recollect it, I could
      certainly have recalled little or nothing of that scene long past. Of all
      the wonderful faculties that help to tell us we are immortal, which speaks
      the sublime truth more eloquently than memory? Here was I, in a strange
      house of the most suspicious character, in a situation of uncertainty, and
      even of peril, which might seem to make the cool exercise of my
      recollection almost out of the question; nevertheless, remembering, quite
      involuntarily, places, people, conversations, minute circumstances of
      every kind, which I had thought forgotten for ever; which I could not
      possibly have recalled at will, even under the most favourable auspices.
      And what cause had produced in a moment the whole of this strange,
      complicated, mysterious effect? Nothing but some rays of moonlight shining
      in at my bedroom window.
    

      I was still thinking of the picnic—of our merriment on the drive
      home—of the sentimental young lady who would quote “Childe
      Harold” because it was moonlight. I was absorbed by these past scenes and
      past amusements, when, in an instant, the thread on which my memories hung
      snapped asunder; my attention immediately came back to present things more
      vividly than ever, and I found myself, I neither knew why nor wherefore,
      looking hard at the picture again.
    

      Looking for what?
    

      Good God! the man had pulled his hat down on his brows! No! the hat itself
      was gone! Where was the conical crown? Where the feathers—three
      white, two green? Not there! In place of the hat and feathers, what dusky
      object was it that now hid his forehead, his eyes, his shading hand?
    

      Was the bed moving?
    

      I turned on my back and looked up. Was I mad? drunk? dreaming? giddy
      again? or was the top of the bed really moving down—sinking slowly,
      regularly, silently, horribly, right down throughout the whole of its
      length and breadth—right down upon me, as I lay underneath?
    

      My blood seemed to stand still. A deadly paralysing coldness stole all
      over me as I turned my head round on the pillow and determined to test
      whether the bedtop was really moving or not, by keeping my eye on the man
      in the picture.
    

      The next look in that direction was enough. The dull, black, frowzy
      outline of the valance above me was within an inch of being parallel with
      his waist. I still looked breathlessly. And steadily and slowly—very
      slowly—I saw the figure, and the line of frame below the figure,
      vanish, as the valance moved down before it.
    

      I am, constitutionally, anything but timid. I have been on more than one
      occasion in peril of my life, and have not lost my self-possession for an
      instant; but when the conviction first settled on my mind that the bed-top
      was really moving, was steadily and continuously sinking down upon me, I
      looked up shuddering, helpless, panic-stricken, beneath the hideous
      machinery for murder, which was advancing closer and closer to suffocate
      me where I lay.
    

      I looked up, motionless, speechless, breathless. The candle, fully spent,
      went out; but the moonlight still brightened the room. Down and down,
      without pausing and without sounding, came the bedtop, and still my panic
      terror seemed to bind me faster and faster to the mattress on which I lay—down
      and down it sank, till the dusty odour from the lining of the canopy came
      stealing into my nostrils.
    

      At that final moment the instinct of self-preservation startled me out of
      my trance, and I moved at last. There was just room for me to roll myself
      sideways off the bed. As I dropped noiselessly to the floor, the edge of
      the murderous canopy touched me on the shoulder.
    

      Without stopping to draw my breath, without wiping the cold sweat from my
      face, I rose instantly on my knees to watch the bedtop. I was literally
      spellbound by it. If I had heard footsteps behind me, I could not have
      turned round; if a means of escape had been miraculously provided for me,
      I could not have moved to take advantage of it. The whole life in me was,
      at that moment, concentrated in my eyes.
    

      It descended—the whole canopy, with the fringe round it, came down—down—close
      down; so close that there was not room now to squeeze my finger between
      the bedtop and the bed. I felt at the sides, and discovered that what had
      appeared to me from beneath to be the ordinary light canopy of a four-post
      bed was in reality a thick, broad mattress, the substance of which was
      concealed by the valance and its fringe. I looked up and saw the four
      posts rising hideously bare. In the middle of the bedtop was a huge wooden
      screw that had evidently worked it down through a hole in the ceiling,
      just as ordinary presses are worked down on the substance selected for
      compression. The frightful apparatus moved without making the faintest
      noise. There had been no creaking as it came down; there was now not the
      faintest sound from the room above. Amid a dead and awful silence I beheld
      before me—in the nineteenth century, and in the civilized capital of
      France—such a machine for secret murder by suffocation as might have
      existed in the worst days of the Inquisition, in the lonely inns among the
      Harz Mountains, in the mysterious tribunals of Westphalia! Still, as I
      looked on it, I could not move, I could hardly breathe, but I began to
      recover the power of thinking, and in a moment I discovered the murderous
      conspiracy framed against me in all its horror.
    

      My cup of coffee had been drugged, and drugged too strongly. I had been
      saved from being smothered by having taken an overdose of some narcotic.
      How I had chafed and fretted at the fever-fit which had preserved my life
      by keeping me awake! How recklessly I had confided myself to the two
      wretches who had led me into this room, determined, for the sake of my
      winnings, to kill me in my sleep by the surest and most horrible
      contrivance for secretly accomplishing my destruction! How many men,
      winners like me, had slept, as I had proposed to sleep, in that bed, and
      had never been seen or heard of more! I shuddered at the bare idea of it.
    

      But, ere long, all thought was again suspended by the sight of the
      murderous canopy moving once more. After it had remained on the bed—as
      nearly as I could guess—about ten minutes, it began to move up
      again. The villains who worked it from above evidently believed that their
      purpose was now accomplished. Slowly and silently, as it had descended,
      that horrible bedtop rose towards its former place. When it reached the
      upper extremities of the four posts, it reached the ceiling, too. Neither
      hole nor screw could be seen; the bed became in appearance an ordinary bed
      again—the canopy an ordinary canopy—even to the most
      suspicious eyes.
    

      Now, for the first time, I was able to move—to rise from my knees—to
      dress myself in my upper clothing—and to consider of how I should
      escape. If I betrayed by the smallest noise that the attempt to suffocate
      me had failed, I was certain to be murdered. Had I made any noise already?
      I listened intently, looking towards the door.
    

      No! no footsteps in the passage outside—no sound of a tread, light
      or heavy, in the room above—absolute silence everywhere. Besides
      locking and bolting my door, I had moved an old wooden chest against it,
      which I had found under the bed. To remove this chest (my blood ran cold
      as I thought of what its contents might be!) without making some
      disturbance was impossible; and, moreover, to think of escaping through
      the house, now barred up for the night, was sheer insanity. Only one
      chance was left me—the window. I stole to it on tiptoe.
    

      My bedroom was on the first floor, above an entresol, and looked into a
      back street. I raised my hand to open the window, knowing that on that
      action hung, by the merest hairbreadth, my chance of safety. They keep
      vigilant watch in a house of murder. If any part of the frame cracked, if
      the hinge creaked, I was a lost man! It must have occupied me at least
      five minutes, reckoning by time—five hours, reckoning by
      suspense—to open that window. I succeeded in doing it silently—in
      doing it with all the dexterity of a house-breaker—and then looked
      down into the street. To leap the distance beneath me would be almost
      certain destruction! Next, I looked round at the sides of the house. Down
      the left side ran a thick water-pipe—it passed close by the outer
      edge of the window. The moment I saw the pipe I knew I was saved. My
      breath came and went freely for the first time since I had seen the canopy
      of the bed moving down upon me!
    

      To some men the means of escape which I had discovered might have seemed
      difficult and dangerous enough—to me the prospect of slipping
      down the pipe into the street did not suggest even a thought of peril. I
      had always been accustomed, by the practice of gymnastics, to keep up my
      school-boy powers as a daring and expert climber; and knew that my head,
      hands, and feet would serve me faithfully in any hazards of ascent or
      descent. I had already got one leg over the window-sill, when I remembered
      the handkerchief filled with money under my pillow. I could well have
      afforded to leave it behind me, but I was revengefully determined that the
      miscreants of the gambling-house should miss their plunder as well as
      their victim. So I went back to the bed and tied the heavy handkerchief at
      my back by my cravat.
    

      Just as I had made it tight and fixed it in a comfortable place, I thought
      I heard a sound of breathing outside the door. The chill feeling of horror
      ran through me again as I listened. No! dead silence still in the passage—I
      had only heard the night air blowing softly into the room. The next moment
      I was on the window-sill, and the next I had a firm grip on the water-pipe
      with my hands and knees.
    

      I slid down into the street easily and quietly, as I thought I should, and
      immediately set off at the top of my speed to a branch “prefecture” of
      Police, which I knew was situated in the immediate neighbourhood. A
      “subprefect,” and several picked men among his subordinates, happened to
      be up, maturing, I believe, some scheme for discovering the perpetrator of
      a mysterious murder which all Paris was talking of just then. When I began
      my story, in a breathless hurry and in very bad French, I could see that
      the subprefect suspected me of being a drunken Englishman who had robbed
      somebody; but he soon altered his opinion as I went on, and before I had
      anything like concluded, he shoved all the papers before him into a
      drawer, put on his hat, supplied me with another (for I was bareheaded),
      ordered a file of soldiers, desired his expert followers to get ready all
      sorts of tools for breaking open doors and ripping up brick flooring, and
      took my arm, in the most friendly and familiar manner possible, to lead me
      with him out of the house. I will venture to say that when the subprefect
      was a little boy, and was taken for the first time to the play, he was not
      half as much pleased as he was now at the job in prospect for him at the
      gambling-house!
    

      Away we went through the streets, the subprefect cross-examining and
      congratulating me in the same breath as we marched at the head of our
      formidable posse comitatus. Sentinels were placed at the back and front of
      the house the moment we got to it; a tremendous battery of knocks was
      directed against the door; a light appeared at a window; I was told to
      conceal myself behind the police; then came more knocks and a cry of “Open
      in the name of the law!” At that terrible summons bolts and locks gave way
      before an invisible hand, and the moment after the subprefect was in the
      passage, confronting a waiter half dressed and ghastly pale. This was the
      short dialogue which immediately took place:
    

      “We want to see the Englishman who is sleeping in this house.”
     

      “He went away hours ago.”
     

      “He did no such thing. His friend went away; he remained. Show us
      to his bedroom!”
     

      “I swear to you, Monsieur le Sous-prefet, he is not here! he—”
     

      “I swear to you, Monsieur le Garcon, he is. He slept here; he didn’t find
      your bed comfortable; he came to us to complain of it; here he is among my
      men; and here am I ready to look for a flea or two in his bedstead.
      Renaudin!” (calling to one of the subordinates, and pointing to the
      waiter), “collar that man, and tie his hands behind him. Now then,
      gentlemen, let us walk upstairs!”
     

      Every man and woman in the house was secured—the “old soldier” the
      first. Then I identified the bed in which I had slept, and then we went
      into the room above.
    

      No object that was at all extraordinary appeared in any part of it. The
      subprefect looked round the place, commanded everybody to be silent,
      stamped twice on the floor, called for a candle, looked attentively at the
      spot he had stamped on, and ordered the flooring there to be carefully
      taken up. This was done in no time. Lights were produced, and we saw a
      deep raftered cavity between the floor of this room and the ceiling of the
      room beneath. Through this cavity there ran perpendicularly a sort of case
      of iron, thickly greased; and inside the case appeared the screw, which
      communicated with the bedtop below. Extra lengths of screw, freshly oiled;
      levers covered with felt; all the complete upper works of a heavy press—constructed
      with infernal ingenuity so as to join the fixtures below, and when taken
      to pieces again to go into the smallest possible compass—were next
      discovered and pulled out on the floor. After some little difficulty the
      subprefect succeeded in putting the machinery together, and, leaving his
      men to work it, descended with me to the bedroom. The smothering canopy
      was then lowered, but not so noiselessly as I had seen it lowered. When I
      mentioned this to the subprefect, his answer, simple as it was, had a
      terrible significance. “My men,” said he, “are working down the bedtop for
      the first time; the men whose money you won were in better practice.”
     

      We left the house in the sole possession of two police agents, every one
      of the inmates being removed to prison on the spot. The subprefect, after
      taking down my proces verbal in his office, returned with me to my
      hotel to get my passport. “Do you think,” I asked, as I gave it to him,
      “that any men have really been smothered in that bed, as they tried to
      smother me?”
     

      “I have seen dozens of drowned men laid out at the morgue,” answered the
      subprefect, “in whose pocket-books were found letters stating that they
      had committed suicide in the Seine, because they had lost everything at
      the gaming-table. Do I know how many of those men entered the same
      gambling-house that you entered? won as you won? took that
      bed as you took it? slept in it? were smothered in it? and were
      privately thrown into the river, with a letter of explanation written by
      the murderers and placed in their pocket-books? No man can say how many or
      how few have suffered the fate from which you have escaped. The people of
      the gambling-house kept their bedstead machinery a secret from us—even
      from the police! The dead kept the rest of the secret for them.
      Good-night, or rather good-morning, Monsieur Faulkner! Be at my office
      again at nine o’clock; in the meantime, au revoir!”
     

      The rest of my story is soon told. I was examined and reexamined; the
      gambling-house was strictly searched all through from top to bottom; the
      prisoners were separately interrogated, and two of the less guilty among
      them made a confession. I discovered that the old soldier was master of
      the gambling-house—justice discovered that he had been
      drummed out of the army as a vagabond years ago; that he had been guilty
      of all sorts of villainies since; that he was in possession of stolen
      property, which the owners identified; and that he, the croupier, another
      accomplice, and the woman who had made my cup of coffee were all in the
      secret of the bedstead. There appeared some reason to doubt whether the
      inferior persons attached to the house knew anything of the suffocating
      machinery; and they received the benefit of that doubt, by being treated
      simply as thieves and vagabonds. As for the old soldier and his two head
      myrmidons, they went to the galleys; the woman who had drugged my coffee
      was imprisoned for I forget how many years; the regular attendants at the
      gambling-house were considered “suspicious,” and placed under
      “surveillance”; and I became, for one whole week (which is a long time),
      the head “lion” in Parisian society. My adventure was dramatised by three
      illustrious play-makers, but never saw theatrical daylight; for the
      censorship forbade the introduction on the stage of a correct copy of the
      gambling-house bedstead.
    

      One good result was produced by my adventure, which any censorship must
      have approved: it cured me of ever again trying rouge-et-noir as an
      amusement. The sight of a green cloth, with packs of cards and heaps of
      money on it, will henceforth be for ever associated in my mind with the
      sight of a bed canopy descending to suffocate me in the silence and
      darkness of the night.
    

      Just as Mr. Faulkner pronounced these words he started in his chair, and
      resumed his stiff, dignified position in a great hurry. “Bless my soul!”
       cried he, with a comic look of astonishment and vexation, “while I have
      been telling you what is the real secret of my interest in the sketch you
      have so kindly given to me, I have altogether forgotten that I came here
      to sit for my portrait. For the last hour or more I must have been the
      worst model you ever had to draw from!”
     

      “On the contrary, you have been the best,” said I. “I have been trying to
      catch your likeness; and, while telling your story, you have unconsciously
      shown me the natural expression I wanted to insure my success.”
     

      NOTE BY MRS. KERBY
    

      I cannot let this story end without mentioning what the chance saying was
      which caused it to be told at the farmhouse the other night. Our friend
      the young sailor, among his other quaint objections to sleeping on shore,
      declared that he particularly hated four-post beds, because he never slept
      in one without doubting whether the top might not come down in the night
      and suffocate him. I thought this chance reference to the distinguishing
      feature of William’s narrative curious enough, and my husband agreed with
      me. But he says it is scarcely worth while to mention such a trifle in
      anything so important as a book. I cannot venture, after this, to do more
      than slip these lines in modestly at the end of the story. If the printer
      should notice my few last words, perhaps he may not mind the trouble of
      putting them into some out-of-the-way corner, in very small type.
    

      L. K. 





      MICHEL LORIO’S CROSS, By Hesba Stretton
    

      In the southwest point of Normandy, separated from Brittany only by a
      narrow and straight river, like the formal canals of Holland, stands the
      curious granite rock which is called Mont St. Michel. It is an isolated
      peak, rising abruptly out of a vast plain of sand to the height of nearly
      four hundred feet, and so precipitous toward the west that scarcely a root
      of grass finds soil enough in its weather-beaten clefts. At the very
      summit is built that wonderful church, the rich architecture and flying
      buttresses of which strike the eye leagues and leagues away, either on the
      sea or the mainland. Below the church, and supporting it by a solid
      masonry, is a vast pile formerly a fortress, castle, and prison; with
      caverns and dungeons hewn out of the living rock, and vaulted halls and
      solemn crypts; all desolate and solitary now, except when a party of
      pilgrims or tourists pass through them, ushered by a guide. Still lower
      down the rock, along its eastern and southern face, there winds a dark and
      narrow street, with odd, antique houses on either side. The only
      conveyance that can pass along it is the water-cart which supplies the
      town with fresh water from the mainland. The whole place is guarded by a
      strong and high rampart, with bastions and battlemented walls; and the
      only entrance is through three gateways, one immediately behind the other,
      with a small court between. The second of these strong gateways is
      protected by two old cannon, taken from the English in 1423, and still
      pointed out to visitors with inextinguishable pride by the natives of
      Mont. St. Michel.
    

      A great plain of sand stretches around the Mont for miles every way—of
      sand or sea, for the water covers it at flood-tides, beating up against
      the foot of the granite rocks and the granite walls of the ramparts. But
      at neap tides and eaux mortes, as the French say, there is nothing
      but a desert of brown, bare sand, with ripple-marks lying across it, and
      with shallow, ankle-deep pools of salt water here and there. Afar off on
      the western sky-line a silver fringe of foam, glistening in the sunshine,
      marks the distant boundary to which the sea has retreated. On every other
      side of the horizon rises a belt of low cliffs, bending into a semicircle,
      with sweeping outlines of curves miles in length, drawn distinctly against
      the clear sky.
    

      The only way to approach the Mont is across the sands. Each time the tide
      recedes a fresh track must be made, like the track along snowy roads; and
      every traveller, whether on foot or in carriage, must direct his steps by
      this scarcely beaten path. Now and then he passes a high, strong post,
      placed where there is any dangerous spot upon the plain; for there are
      perilous quicksands, imperceptible to any eye, lurking in sullen and
      patient treachery for any unwary footstep. The river itself, which creeps
      sluggishly in a straight black line across the brown desert, has its banks
      marked out by rows of these high stakes, with a bush of leafless twigs at
      the top of each. A dreary, desolate, and barren scene it is, with no life
      in it except the isolated life upon the Mont.
    

      This little family of human beings, separated from the great tide of life
      like one of the shallow pools which the ebbing sea has left upon its
      sands, numbers scarcely a hundred and a half. The men are fishers, for
      there is no other occupation to be followed on the sterile rock. Every day
      also the level sweep of sands is wandered over by the women and children,
      who seek for cockles in the little pools; the babble of whose voices
      echoes far through the quiet air, and whose shadows fall long and unbroken
      on the brown wilderness. Now and then the black-robed figure of a priest,
      or of one of the brothers dwelling in the monument on the top of the rock,
      may be seen slowly pacing along the same dead level, and skirting the
      quicksands where the warning posts are erected. In the summer months bands
      of pilgrims are also to be seen marching in a long file like travellers
      across the desert; but in winter these visits cease almost wholly, and the
      inhabitants of the Mont are left to themselves.
    

      Having so little intercourse with the outer world, and living on a rock
      singled out by supernatural visitants, the people remain more
      superstitious than even the superstitious Germans and Bretons who are
      their neighbours. Few of them can read or write. The new thoughts,
      opinions, and creeds of the present century do not reach them. They are
      contented with the old faith, bound up for them in the history of their
      patron, the archangel St. Michel, and with the minute interest taken in
      every native of the rock. Each person knows the history of every other
      inhabitant, but knows little else.
    

      From Pontorson to the Mont the road lies along the old Bay of St. Michel,
      with low hedge-rows of feathery tamarind-trees on each side as far as the
      beach. It is not at all a solitary road, for hundreds of long, heavy
      carts, resembling artillery waggons, encumber it, loaded with a gray shaly
      deposit dug out of the bay: a busy scene of men and women digging in the
      heavy sand, while the shaggy horses stand by, hanging their heads
      patiently under the blue-stained sheepskins about their necks.
    

      Two or three persons are at work at every cart; one of them, often a
      woman, standing on the rising pile, and beating it flat with a spade,
      while a cheerful clatter of voices is heard on every hand.
    

      But at one time a man might have been seen there working alone, quite
      alone. Even a space was left about him, as if an invisible circle were
      drawn, within which no person would venture. If a word were flung at him
      across this imaginary cordon, it was nothing but a taunt or a curse, and
      it was invariably spoken by a man. No woman so much as glanced at him. He
      toiled on doggedly, and in silence, with a weary-looking face, until his
      task was ended, and the waggon driven off by the owner, who had employed
      him at a lower rate than his comrades. Then he would throw his blue blouse
      over his shoulders, and tramp away with heavy tread along the faintly
      marked trail leading across the beach to Mont St. Michel.
    

      Neither was there any voice to greet him as he gained the gateway, where
      the men of the Mont congregated, as they always congregate about the
      entrance to a walled town. Rather, the scornful silence which had
      surrounded him at his work was here deepened into a personal hatred.
      Within the gate the women, who were chattering over their nets of cockles,
      shrank away from him, or broke into a contemptuous laugh. Along the narrow
      street the children fled at the sight of him, and hid behind their
      mothers, from whose protection they could shout after him. If the cure met
      him, he would turn aside into the first house rather than come in contact
      with him. He was under a ban which no one dared to defy.
    

      The only voice that spoke to him was the fretful, querulous voice of an
      old, bedridden woman as he lifted the latch and opened the door of a poor
      house upon the ramparts, which had no entrance into the street; and where
      he lived alone with his mother, cut off from all accidental intercourse
      with his neighbours.
    

      “Michel! Michel! how late thou art!” she exclaimed; “if thou hadst been a
      good son thou wouldst have returned before the hour it is.”
     

      “I returned as soon as my work was finished,” he answered, in a patient
      voice; “I have not lost a minute by the way.”
     

      “Bah! because no one will ask thee to turn in with them anywhere!” she
      continued. “If thou wert like everybody else thou wouldst have many a
      friend to pass thy time with. It is hard for me, thy mother, to have
      brought thee into the world that all the world should despise and hate
      thee, as they do this day. Monsieur le Cure says there is no hope for thee
      if thou art so obstinate; thou must go to hell, though I named thee after
      our great archangel St. Michel, and brought thee up as a good Christian.
      Quel malheur! How hard it is for me to lie in bed all day, and
      think of my son in the flames of hell!”
     

      Very quietly, as if he had heard such complainings hundreds of times
      before, did Michel set about kindling a few sticks upon the open hearth.
      This was so common a welcome home that he scarcely heard it, and had
      ceased to heed it. The room, as the flickering light fell upon it, was one
      of the cheerless and comfortless chambers to be seen in any peasant’s
      house: a pile of wood in one corner, a single table with a chair or two, a
      shelf with a few pieces of brown crockery, and the bed on which the
      paralytic woman was lying, her hands crossed over her breast, and her
      bright black eyes glistening in the gloom. Michel brought her the soup he
      had made, and fed her carefully and tenderly, before thinking of
      satisfying his own hunger.
    

      “It is of no good, Michel,” she said, when he laid her down again upon the
      pillow he had made smooth for her; “it is of no good. Thou mayest as well
      leave me to perish; it will not weigh for thee. Monsieur le Cure says if
      thou hadst been born a heretic perhaps the good God might have taken it
      into account. But thou wert born a Christian, as good a Christian as all
      the world, and thou hast sold thy birthright to the devil. Leave me then,
      and take thy pleasure in this life, for thou wilt have nothing but misery
      in the next.”
     

      “I will not leave thee—never!” he answered, briefly. “I have no fear
      of the next world.”
     

      He was a man of few words evidently. Perhaps the silence maintained around
      him had partly frozen his power of speech. Even to his mother he spoke but
      little, though her complaining went on without ceasing, until he
      extinguished both fire and lamp, and climbed the rude ladder into the loft
      overhead, where her voice never failed to rouse him from his sleep, if she
      only called “Michel!” He could not clearly explain his position even to
      himself. He had gone to Paris many years before, where he came across some
      Protestants, who had taught him to read the Testament, and instructed him
      in their religion. The new faith had taken hold of him, and thrust deep
      roots into his simple and constant nature; though he had no words at
      command to express the change to others, and scarcely to himself. So long
      as he had been in Paris there had been no need of this.
    

      But now his father’s death had compelled him to return to his native
      place, and to the little knot of people who knew him as old Pierre Lorio’s
      son, a fisherman like themselves, with no more right to read or think than
      they had. The fierceness of the persecution he encountered filled him with
      dismay, though it had not shaken his fidelity to his new faith. But often
      a dumb, inarticulate longing possessed him to make known to his old
      neighbours the reason of the change in him, but speech failed him. He
      could only stammer out his confession, “I am no longer a Catholic, I am a
      Protestant, I cannot pray to the saints, not even to the archangel St.
      Michel or the Blessed Virgin. I pray only to God.” For anything else, for
      explanation, and for all argument, he had no more language than the mute,
      wistful language one sees in the eyes of dumb creatures, when they gaze
      fully at us.
    

      Perhaps there is nothing more pitiful than the painful want of words to
      express that which lies deepest within us; a want common to us all, but
      greatest in those who have had no training in thus shaping and expressing
      their inmost thoughts.
    

      There was not much to fear from a man like this. Michel Lorio was a living
      lesson against apostasy. As he went up and down the street, and in and out
      of the gate, his loneliness and dejection spoke more eloquently for the
      old faith than any banishment could have done. Michel was suffered to
      remain under a ban, not formal and ceremonial, but a tacit ban, which
      quite as effectively set him apart, and made his life more solitary than
      if he had been dwelling alone on a desert rock out at sea.
    

      Michel accepted his lot without complaint and without bitterness. He never
      passed Monsieur le Cure without a salutation. When he went daily for water
      to the great cistern of the monastery, he was always ready to carry the
      brimful pails too heavy for the arms of the old women and children. If he
      had leisure he mounted the long flights of grass-grown steps three or four
      times for his neighbours, depositing his burden at their doors, without a
      word of thanks for his help being vouchsafed to him. Now and then he
      overheard a sneer at his usefulness; and his mother taunted him often for
      his patience and forbearance. But he went on his way silently with deeper
      yearning for human love and sympathy than he could make known.
    

      If it had not been that, when he was kneeling at the rude dormer-window of
      his loft and gazing dreamily across the wide sweep of sand, with the moon
      shining across it and the solemn stars lighting up the sky, he was at
      times vaguely conscious of an influence, almost a presence, as of a hand
      that touched him and a voice that spoke to him, he must have sunk under
      this intense longing for love and fellowship. Had he been a Catholic
      still, he would have believed that the archangel St. Michel was near and
      about to manifest himself as in former times in his splendid shrine upon
      the Mont. The new faith had not cast out all the old superstitious nature;
      yet it was this vague spiritual presence which supported him under the
      crushing and unnatural conditions of his social life. He endured, as
      seeing one who is invisible.
    

      Yet at other times he could not keep his feet away from the little street
      where all the life there was might be found. At night he would creep
      cautiously along the ramparts and descend by a quiet staircase into an
      angle of the walls, where he could look on unseen upon the gathering of
      townsfolk in the inn where he had often gone with his father in earlier
      days. The landlord, Nicolas, was a most bitter enemy now. There was the
      familiar room filled with bright light from an oil-lamp and the brighter
      flicker of a wood fire where the landlord’s wife was cooking. A deep, low
      recess in the corner, with a crimson valance stretched across it, held a
      bed with snow-white pillows, upon one of which rested a child’s curly head
      with eyes fast sealed against the glare of the lamp. At a table close by
      sat the landlord and three or four of the wealthier men of the Mont busily
      and seriously eating the omelets and fried fish served to them from the
      pan over the fire.
    

      The copper and brass cooking utensils glittered in the light from the
      walls where they hung. It was a cheery scene, and Michel would stand in
      his cold, dark corner, watching it until all was over and the guests ready
      to depart.
    

      “Thou art Michel le diable!” said a childish voice to him one
      evening, and he felt a small, warm hand laid for an instant upon his own.
      It was Delphine, Nicolas’s eldest girl, a daring child, full of spirit and
      courage; yet even she shrank back a step or two after touching him, and
      stood as if ready to take flight.
    

      “I am Michel Lorio,” he answered, in a quiet, pleasant voice, which won
      her back to his side. “Why dost thou call me Michel le diable?”
     

      “All the world calls thee that,” answered Delphine; “thou art a heretic.
      See, I am a good Christian. I say my ave and paternoster every night; if
      thou wilt do the same thing, no one will call thee Michel le diable.”
     

      “Thou art not afraid of me?” he asked, for the child put her hand again on
      his.
    

      “No, no! thou art not the real devil!” she said, “and maman has put
      my name on the register of the monument; so the great archangel St. Michel
      will deliver me from all evil. What canst thou do? Canst thou turn
      children into cats? or canst thou walk across the sea without being
      drowned? or canst thou stand on the highest pinnacle of the church, where
      the golden image of St. Michel used to be, and cast thyself down without
      killing thyself? I will go back with thee to thy house and see what thou
      canst do.”
     

      “I can do none of these things,” answered Michel, “not one; but thou shalt
      come home with me if thou wilt.”
     

      “Carry me,” she said, “that I may feel how strong thou art.”
     

      He lifted her easily into his arms, for he was strong and accustomed to
      bear heavier burdens. His heart beat fast as the child’s hand stole round
      his neck and her soft cheek touched his own. Delphine had never been upon
      the ramparts before when the stars were out and the distant circle of the
      cliffs hidden by the night, and several times he was compelled to stop and
      answer her eager questions; but she would not go into the house when they
      reached the door.
    

      “Carry me back again, Michel,” she demanded. “I do not like thy mother.
      Thou shalt bring me again along the ramparts to-morrow night. I will
      always come to thee, always when I see thee standing in the dark corner by
      our house. I love thee much, Michel le diable.”
     

      It was a strange friendship carried on stealthily. Michel could not put
      away from himself this one little tie of human love and fellowship. As for
      Delphine, she was as silent about her new friend as children often are of
      such things which affect them deeply. There was a mingling of
      superstitious feeling in her affection for Michel—a half-dread that
      gave their secret meetings a greater charm to the daring spirit of the
      child. The evening was a busy time at the inn, and if Delphine had been
      missed, but little wonder and no anxiety would have been aroused at her
      absence. The ramparts were deserted after dark, and no one guessed that
      the two dark figures sauntering to and fro were Michel and Delphine. When
      the nights were too cold they took refuge in a little overhanging turret
      projecting from one of the angles of the massive walls—a darksome
      niche with nothing but the sky to be seen through a narrow embrasure in
      the shape of a cross. In these haunts Michel talked in his simple untaught
      way of his thoughts and of his new faith, pouring into the child’s ear
      what he could never tell to any other. By day Delphine never seemed to see
      him; never cast a look toward him as he passed by amid the undisguised ill
      will of the town. She ceased to speak of him even, with the unconscious
      and natural dissimulation by which children screen themselves from
      criticism and censure.
    

      The people of the Mont St. Michel are very poor, and the women and
      children are compelled to seek some means of earning money as well as the
      men. As long as the summer lasts the crowds of pilgrims and tourists,
      flocking to the wonderful fortress and shrine upon the summit, bring
      employment and gain to some portion of them; but in the winter there is
      little to do except when the weather is fine enough to search for
      shell-fish about the sands, and sell them in the villages of the mainland.
      As the tide goes down, bands of women and children follow it out for
      miles, taking care to retrace their steps before the sea rises again. From
      Michel’s cottage on the ramparts the whole plain toward Avranches was
      visible, and he could hear the busy hum of voices coming to his ear from
      afar through the quiet air. But on the western side of the Mont, where the
      black line of the river crosses the sands, they are more dangerous; and in
      this direction only the more venturesome seekers go—boys who love
      any risk, and widows who are the more anxious to fill their nets because
      they have no man to help them in getting their daily bread.
    

      The early part of the winter is not cold in Normandy, especially by the
      sea. As long as the westerly winds sweep across the Atlantic, the air is
      soft though damp, with fine mists hanging in it, which shine with rainbow
      tints in the sunlight. Sometimes Christmas and the New Year find the air
      still genial, in spite of the short days and the long rainy nights. Strong
      gales may blow, but so long as they do not come from the dry east or
      frosty north there is no real severity of weather.
    

      It was such a Christmas week that year. Not one of the women or children
      had yet been forced to stay away from the sands on account of the cold.
      Upon Christmas eve there was a good day, though, a short one, before them,
      for it was low water about noon, and the high tide would not be in before
      six. All the daylight would be theirs. It was a chance not to be missed,
      for as the tides grew later in the day their time for fishing would be cut
      shorter. Almost every woman and child turned out through the gate with
      their nets in their hands. By midday the plain was dotted over by them,
      and the wintry sun shone pleasantly down, and the quiet rock caught the
      echo of their voices. Farther away, out of sight and hearing, the men also
      were busy, Michel among them, casting nets upon the sea. As the low sun
      went down in the southern sky, the scattered groups came home by twos and
      threes, anxious to bring in their day’s fishing in time for the men to
      carry them across to the mainland before the Mont should be shut in by the
      tide.
    

      A busy scene was that in the gateway.
    

      All the town was there; some coming in from the sands, and those who had
      been left at home with babies or old folks running down from their houses.
      There was chaffing and bartering; exchanges agreed upon, and commissions
      innumerable to be intrusted to the men about to set out for Pontorson, the
      nearest town. Michel Lorio was going to sell his own fish, for who would
      carry it for him? Yet though he was the first who was ready to start, not
      a soul charged him with a single commission. He lingered wistfully and
      loitered just outside the gateway; but neither man, woman, nor child said,
      “Michel, bring me what I want from the town.”
     

      He was treading slowly down the rough causeway under the walls of the
      town, when a woman’s shrill voice startled him. It was not far from
      sunset, and the sun was sinking round and red behind a bank of fog. A thin
      gray mist was creeping up from the sea. The latest band of stragglers, a
      cluster of mere children, were running across the sand to the gate. Michel
      turned round and saw Nicolas’s wife, a dark, stern-looking woman,
      beckoning vehemently to these children. He paused for a moment to look at
      his little Delphine. “Not there!” he said to himself, and was passing on,
      when the shrill voice again caught his attention.
    

      “Where is Phine?” called the mother.
    

      What was it the children said? What answer had they shouted back? Michel
      stood motionless, as if all strength had failed him suddenly. The children
      rushed past him in a troop. He lifted up his eyes, looking fearfully
      toward the sea hidden behind the deepening fog. Was it possible that he
      had heard them say that Delphine was lost?
    

      “Where is Phine?” asked the mother; but though her voice was lower now,
      Michel heard every syllable loudly. It seemed as if he could have heard a
      whisper, though the chattering in the gateway was like the clamour of a
      fair. The eldest girl in the little band spoke in a hurried and frightened
      tone.
    

      “Phine is so naughty, madame,” she said, “we could not keep her near us.
      She would go on and on to the sea. We could not wait for her. We heard her
      calling, but it was so far, we dared not go back. But she cannot be far
      behind us, for we shouted as we came along. She will be here soon,
      madame.”
     

      “Mon Dieu!” cried the mother, sinking down on one of the great
      stones, either rolled up by the tide, or left by the masons who built the
      ramparts. “Call her father to me.”
     

      It was Michel Lorio who found Nicolas, his greatest enemy. Nicolas had a
      number of errands to be done in the town, and he was busy impressing them
      on the memory of his messenger, who, like every one else, could neither
      read nor write. When Michel caught his arm in a sharp, fast grip, he
      turned round with a scowl, and tried, but in vain, to shake off his grasp.
    

      “Come to thy wife,” said Michel, dragging him toward the gate; “Delphine,
      thy little one, is lost on the sands.”
     

      The whole crowd heard the words, for Michel’s voice was pitched in a high,
      shrill key, which rang above the clamour and the babel. There was an
      instant hush, every one listening to Michel, and every eye fastened upon
      him. Nicolas stared blankly at him, as if unable to understand him, yet
      growing passive under his sense of bewilderment.
    

      “The children who went out with Delphine this morning are come back,”
       continued Michel, in the same forced tone; “they are come back without
      her. She is lost on the sands. The night is falling, and there is a fog. I
      tell you the little one is alone, quite alone, upon the sands; and it will
      be high water at six o’clock. Delphine is alone and lost upon the sands!”
     

      The momentary hush of the crowd was at an end. The children began crying,
      and the women calling loudly upon St. Michel and the Holy Virgin. The men
      gathered about Nicolas and Michel, and went down in a compact group to the
      causeway beyond the gate. There the lurid sun, shining dimly through the
      fog, made the most sanguine look grave and shake their heads hopelessly
      behind the father and mother. The latter sat motionless, looking out with
      straining eyes to see if Delphine were not coming through the thickening
      mist.
    

      “Mais que faire! que faire!” cried Nicolas, catching at somebody’s
      shoulder for support without seeing whose it was. It was Michel’s, who had
      not stirred from his side since he had first clasped his arm. Michel’s
      face was as white as the mother’s; but there was a resolute light in his
      eyes that was not to be seen in hers.
    

      “Nothing can be done,” answered one of the oldest men in answer to
      Nicolas’s cry, “nothing, nothing! We do not know where the child is lost.
      See! there are leagues and leagues of sand; and one might wander miles
      away from where the poor little creature is at this instant. The great
      archangel St. Michel protect her!”
     

      “I will go,” said the mother, lifting herself up; and, raising her voice,
      she called loudly, with a cry that rang and echoed against the walls,
      “Phine! Phine! my little Phine, come back to thy poor mother!” But there
      was no answer, except the sobs and prayers of the women and children
      clustering behind her.
    

      “Thou canst not go!” exclaimed Nicolas; “there are our other little ones
      to think of; nor can I leave thee and them. My God! is there then no one
      who will go and seek my little Delphine?”
     

      “I will go,” answered Michel, standing out from among the crowd, and
      facing it with his white face and resolute eyes; “there is only one among
      you all upon the Mont who will miss me. I leave my mother to your care.
      There is no time for me to bid her adieu. If I come back alive, well! if I
      perish, that will be well also!”
     

      Even then there was no cordiality of response on the hearts of his old
      friends and neighbours. The superstition and prejudice of long years could
      not be broken down in one moment and by one act of self-sacrifice. They
      watched Michel as he laid his full creel down from his shoulders, and
      threw across them the strong square net with which he fished in the ebbing
      tide. His silence was no less expressive than theirs. Without a sound he
      passed away barefooted down the rude causeway. His face, as the sun shone
      on it, was set and resolute with a determination to face the end, whatever
      the end might be. He might have so trodden the path to Calvary.
    

      He longed to speak to them, to say adieu to them; but he waited in vain
      for one voice to break the silence. He turned round before he was too far
      away, and saw them still clustered without the gate; every one of them
      known to him from his boyhood, the story of whose lives had been bound up
      with his own and formed a part of his history. They were all there, except
      his mother, who would soon hear what peril of the sea and peril of the
      night he was about to face. Tears dimmed his eyes, and made the group grow
      indistinct, as though the mist had already gathered between him and them.
      Then he quickened his steps, and the people of Mont St. Michel lost sight
      of him behind a great buttress of the ramparts.
    

      But for a time Michel could still see the Mont as he hurried along its
      base, going westward, where the most treacherous sands lie. His home was
      on the eastern side, and he could see nothing of it. But the great rock
      rose up precipitously above him, and the noble architecture upon its
      highest point glowed with a ruddy tint in the setting light. As he
      trampled along no sound could be heard but the distant sigh of the sea,
      and the low, sad sough of the sand as his bare feet trod it. The fog
      before him was not dense, only a light haze, deceptive and beguiling; for
      here and there he turned aside, fancying he could see Delphine, but as he
      drew nearer to the spot he discovered nothing but a post driven into the
      sand. There was no fear that he should lose himself upon the bewildering
      level, for he knew his way as well as if the sand had been laid out in
      well-defined tracks. His dread was lest he should not find Delphine soon
      enough to escape from the tide, which would surely overwhelm them both.
    

      He scarcely knew how the time sped by, but the sun had sunk below the
      horizon, and he had quite lost the Mont in the fog. The brown sand and the
      gray dank mist were all that he could see, yet still he plodded on
      westward, toward the sea, calling into the growing darkness. At last he
      caught the sound of a child’s sobs and crying, which ceased for a moment
      when he turned in that direction and shouted, “Phine!” Calling to one
      another, it was not long before he saw the child wandering forlornly and
      desolately in the mist. She ran sobbing into his open arms, and Michel
      lifted her up and held her to his heart with a strange rapture.
    

      “It is thou that hast found me,” she said, clinging closely to him. “Carry
      me back to my mother. I am safe now, quite safe. Did the archangel St.
      Michel send thee?”
     

      There was not a moment to be lost; Michel knew that full well. The moan of
      the sea was growing louder every minute, though he could not see its
      advancing line. There was no spot upon the sand that would not be covered
      before another hour was gone, and there was barely time, if enough, to get
      back to the Mont. He could not waste time or breath in talking to the
      child he held fast in his arms. A pale gleam of moonlight shone through
      the vapour, but of little use to him save to throw a ghostly glimmer
      across the sands. He strode hurriedly along, breathing hardly through his
      teeth and clasping Delphine so fast that she grew frightened at his
      silence and haste.
    

      “Where art thou taking me, Michel le diable?” she said, beginning
      to struggle in his arms. “Let me down; let me down, I tell thee! Maman
      has said I must never look at thee. Thou shalt not carry me any farther.”
     

      There was strength enough in the child and her vehement struggles to free
      herself to hinder Michel in his desperate haste. He was obliged to stand
      still for a minute or two to pacify her, speaking in his quiet, patient
      voice, which she knew so well.
    

      “Be tranquil, my little Phine,” he said. “I am come to save thee. As the
      Lord Jesus came to seek and to save those who are lost, so am I come to
      seek thee and carry thee back to thy mother. It is dark here, my child,
      and the sea is rising quickly, quickly. But thou shalt be safe. Be
      tranquil, and let me make haste back to the Mont.”
     

      “Did the Lord save thee in this manner?” asked Delphine, eagerly.
    

      “Yes, He saved me like this,” answered Michel. “He laid down His life for
      mine. Now thou must let me save thee.”
     

      “I will be good and wise,” said the child, putting her arms again about
      his neck, while he strode on, striving if possible to regain the few
      moments that had been lost. But it was not possible. He knew that before
      he had gone another kilometre, when through the mist there rose before him
      the dark, colossal form of the Mont, but too far away still for them both
      to reach it in safety. Thirty minutes were essential for him to reach the
      gates with his burden, but in little more than twenty the sea would be
      dashing round the walls. The tide was yet out of sight and the sands were
      dry, but it would rush in before many minutes, and the swiftest runner
      with no weight to carry could not outrun it. Both could not be saved;
      could either of them? He had foreseen this danger and provided for it.
    

      “My little Phine,” he said, “thou wilt not be afraid if I place thee where
      thou wilt be quite safe from the sea? See, here is my net! I will put thee
      within it, and hang it on one of these strong stakes, and I will stand
      below thee. Thou wilt be brave and good. Let us be quick, very quick. It
      will be like a swing for thee, and thou wilt not be afraid so long as I
      stand below thee.”
     

      Even while he spoke he was busy fastening the corners of his net securely
      over the stake, hanging it above the reach of the last tide-mark. Delphine
      watched him laughing. It seemed only another pleasant adventure, like
      wandering with him upon the ramparts, or taking shelter in the turret. The
      net held her comfortably, and by stooping down she could touch with her
      outstretched hand the head of Michel. He stood below her, his arms fast
      locked about the stake, and his face uplifted to her in the faint light.
    

      “Phine,” he said, “thou must not be afraid when the water lies below thee,
      even if I do not speak. Thou art safe.”
     

      “Art thou safe also, Michel?” she asked.
    

      “Yes, I am quite safe also,” he answered; “but I shall be very quiet. I
      shall not speak to thee. Yes; the Lord Christ is caring for me, as I for
      thee. He bound Himself to the cross as I bind myself here. This is my
      cross, Delphine. I understand it better now. He loved us and gave Himself
      for us. Tell them to-morrow what I say to thee. I am as safe as thou art,
      tranquil and happy.”
     

      “We shall not be drowned!” said Delphine, half in confidence and half in
      dread of the sea, which was surging louder and louder through the
      darkness.
    

      “Not thou!” he answered, cheerily. “But, Phine, tell them to-morrow that I
      shall nevermore be solitary and sad. I leave thee now, and then I shall be
      with Christ. I wish I could have spoken to them, but my heart and tongue
      were heavy. Hark! there is the bell ringing.”
     

      The bell which is tolled at night, when travellers are crossing the sands,
      to guide them to the Mont, flung its clear, sharp notes down from the
      great indistinct rock, looming through the dusk.
    

      “It is like a voice to me, the voice of a friend; but it is too late!”
       murmured Michel. “Art thou happy, Delphine, my little one? When I cease to
      speak to thee wilt thou not be afraid? I shall be asleep, perhaps. Say thy
      paternoster now, for it is growing late with me.”
     

      The bell was still toiling, but with a quick, hurried movement, as if
      those who rang it were fevered with impatience. The roaring of the tide,
      as it now poured in rapidly over the plain, almost drowned its clang.
    

      “Touch me with thy little hand, touch me quickly!” cried Michel. “Remember
      to tell them to-morrow that I loved them all always, and I would have
      given myself for them as I do for thee. Adieu, my little Phine. Come
      quickly, Lord Jesus!”
     

      The child told afterward that the water rose so fast that she dared not
      look at it, but shut her eyes as it spread, white and shimmering, in the
      moonlight all around her. She began to repeat her paternoster, but she
      forgot how the words came. But she heard Michel, in a loud clear voice,
      saying “Our Father”; only he also seemed to forget the words, for he did
      not say more than “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive—.” Then
      he became quite silent, and when she spoke to him, after a long while, he
      did not answer her. She supposed he had fallen asleep, as he had said, but
      she could not help crying and calling to him again and again. The
      sea-gulls flew past her screaming, but there was no sound of any voice to
      speak to her. In spite of what he had said to her beforehand she grew
      frightened, and thought it was because she had been unkind to Michel le
      diable that she was left there alone, with the sea swirling to and fro
      beneath her.
    

      It was not for more than two or three hours that Delphine hung cradled in
      Michel’s net, for the tide does not lie long round the Mont St. Michel,
      and flows out again as swiftly as it comes in. The people followed it out,
      scattering over the sands in the forlorn hope of finding the dead bodies
      of Michel Lorio and the child, for they had no expectation of meeting with
      either of them alive. At last two or three of them heard the voice of
      Delphine, who saw the glimmer of their lanterns upon the sands, and called
      shrilly and loudly for succour.
    

      They found her swinging safely in her net, untouched by the water. But
      Michel had sunk down upon his knees, though his arms were still fastened
      about the stake. His head had fallen forward upon his breast, and his
      thick wet hair covered his face. They lifted him without a word spoken. He
      had saved Delphine’s life at the cost of his own.
    

      All the townspeople were down at the gate, waiting for the return of those
      who had gone out to seek for the dead. The moon had risen above the fog,
      and shone clearly down upon them. Delphine’s mother, with her younger
      children about her, sat on the stone where she had been sitting when
      Michel set out on his perilous quest. She and the other women could see a
      crowd of the men coming back, carrying some burden among them. But as they
      drew near to the gate, Delphine sprang forward from among them and ran and
      threw herself into her mother’s arms. “A miracle!” cried some voices amid
      the crowd; a miracle wrought by their patron St. Michel. If Michel Lorio
      were safe, surely he would become again a good Christian, and return to
      his ancient faith. But Michel Lorio was dead, and all that could be done
      for him was to carry his dead body home to his paralytic mother, and lay
      it upon his bed in the little loft where he had spent so many hours of
      sorrowful loneliness.
    

      It was a perplexing problem to the simple people. Some said that Michel
      had been permitted to save the child by a diabolic agency which had failed
      him when he sought to save himself. Others maintained that it was no other
      than the great archangel St. Michel who had securely fastened the net upon
      the stake and so preserved Delphine, while the heretic was left to perish.
      A few thought secretly, and whispered it in fear, that Michel had done a
      noble deed, and won heaven thereby. The cure, who came to look upon the
      calm dead face, opened his lips after long and profound thought:
    

      “If this man had been a Christian,” he said, “he would have been a saint
      and a martyr.”