A LITTLE GREY GLOVE

 By George Egerton (Mary Chavelita [Dunne] Bright)

 ( Keynotes , London: Elkin Mathews and John Lane, Vigo Street, 1893)

 Early-Spring, 1893

  The book of life begins with a man and woman in a garden and ends—with
      Revelations. 

 OSCAR WILDE

 Yes, most fellows' book of life may be said to begin at the chapter where
      woman comes in; mine did. She came in years ago, when I was a raw
      undergraduate. With the sober thought of retrospective analysis, I may say
      she was not all my fancy painted her; indeed now that I come to think of
      it there was no fancy about the vermeil of her cheeks, rather an
      artificial reality; she had her bower in the bar of the Golden Boar, and I
      was madly in love with her, seriously intent on lawful wedlock. Luckily
      for me she threw me over for a neighbouring pork butcher, but at the time
      I took it hardly, and it made me sex-shy. I was a very poor man in those
      days. One feels one's griefs more keenly then, one hasn't the wherewithal
      to buy distraction. Besides, ladies snubbed me rather, on the rare
      occasions I met them. Later I fell in for a legacy, the forerunner of
      several; indeed, I may say I am beastly rich. My tastes are simple too,
      and I haven't any poor relations. I believe they are of great assistance
      in getting rid of superfluous capital, wish I had some! It was after the
      legacy that women discovered my attractions. They found that there was
      something superb in my plainness (before, they said ugliness), something
      after the style of the late Victor Emanuel, something infinitely more
      striking than mere ordinary beauty. At least so Harding told me his sister
      said, and she had the reputation of being a clever girl. Being an only
      child, I never had the opportunity other fellows had of studying the
      undress side of women through familiar intercourse, say with sisters.
      Their most ordinary belongings were sacred to me. I had, I used to be
      told, ridiculous high-flown notions about them (by the way I modified
      those considerably on closer acquaintance). I ought to study them, nothing
      like a woman for developing a fellow. So I laid in a stock of books in
      different languages, mostly novels, in which women played title roles, in
      order to get up some definite data before venturing amongst them. I can't
      say I derived much benefit from this course. There seemed to be as great a
      diversity of opinion about the female species as, let us say, about the
      salmonidae.

 My friend Ponsonby Smith, who is one of the oldest fly-fishers in the
      three kingdoms, said to me once: Take my word for it, there are only four
      true salmo; the salar, the trutta, the fario, the ferox; all the rest are
      just varieties, subgenuses of the above; stick to that. Some writing
      fellow divided all the women into good-uns and bad-uns. But as a
      conscientious stickler for truth, I must say that both in trout as in
      women, I have found myself faced with most puzzling varieties, that were a
      tantalizing blending of several qualities. I then resolved to study them
      on my own account. I pursued the Eternal Feminine in a spirit of purely
      scientific investigation. I knew you'd laugh sceptically at that, but it's
      a fact. I was impartial in my selection of subjects for observation—French,
      German, Spanish, as well as the home product. Nothing in petticoats
      escaped me. I devoted myself to the freshest ingenue as well as the
      experienced widow of three departed; and I may as well confess that the
      more I saw of her, the less I understood her. But I think they understood
      me. They refused to take me au srieux . When they weren't fleecing
      me, they were interested in the state of my soul (I preferred the former),
      but all humbugged me equally, so I gave them up. I took to rod and gun
      instead, pro salute animae ; it's decidedly safer. I have scoured
      every country in the globe; indeed I can say that I have shot and fished
      in woods and waters where no other white man, perhaps ever dropped a beast
      or played a fish before. There is no life like the life of a free
      wanderer, and no lore like the lore one gleans in the great book of
      nature. But one must have freed one's spirit from the taint of the town
      before one can even read the alphabet of its mystic meaning.

 What has this to do with the glove? True, not much, and yet it has a
      connection—it accounts for me.

 Well, for twelve years I have followed the impulses of the wandering
      spirit that dwells in me. I have seen the sun rise in Finland and gild the
      Devil's Knuckles as he sank behind the Drachensberg. I have caught the
      barba and the gamer yellow fish in the Vaal river, taken muskelunge and
      black-bass in Canada, thrown a fly over guapote and cavallo in Central American lakes, and choked the monster eels of the Mauritius
      with a cunningly faked-up duckling. But I have been shy as a chub at the
      shadow of a woman.

 Well, it happened last year I came back on business—another
      confounded legacy; end of June too, just as I was off to Finland. But
      Messrs. Thimble and Rigg, the highly respectable firm who look after my
      affairs, represented that I owed it to others, whom I kept out of their
      share of the legacy, to stay near town till affairs were wound up. They
      told me, with a view to reconcile me perhaps, of a trout stream with a
      decent inn near it; an unknown stream in Kent. It seems a junior member of
      the firm is an angler, at least he sometimes catches pike or perch in the
      Medway some way from the stream where the trout rise in audacious security
      from artificial lures. I stipulated for a clerk to come down with any
      papers to be signed, and started at once for Victoria. I decline to tell
      the name of my find, firstly because the trout are the gamest little fish
      that ever rose to fly and run to a good two pounds. Secondly, I have paid
      for all the rooms in the inn for the next year, and I want it to myself.
      The glove is lying on the table next me as I write. If it isn't in my
      breast-pocket or under my pillow, it is in some place where I can see it.
      It has a delicate grey body (sude, I think they call it) with a whipping
      of silver round the top, and a darker grey silk tag to fasten it. It is
      marked 5-3/4 inside, and has a delicious scent about it, to keep off
      moths, I suppose; naphthaline is better. It reminds me of a 'silver-sedge'
      tied on a ten hook. I startled the good landlady of the little inn (there
      is no village fortunately) when I arrived with the only porter of the tiny
      station laden with traps. She hesitated about a private sitting-room, but
      eventually we compromised matters, as I was willing to share it with the
      other visitor. I got into knickerbockers at once, collared a boy to get me
      worms and minnow for the morrow, and as I felt too lazy to unpack tackle,
      just sat in the shiny armchair (made comfortable by the successive sitting
      of former occupants) at the open window and looked out. The river, not the
      trout stream, winds to the right, and the trees cast trembling shadows
      into its clear depths. The red tiles of a farm roof show between the
      beeches, and break the monotony of blue sky background. A dusty waggoner
      is slaking his thirst with a tankard of ale. I am conscious of the strange
      lonely feeling that a visit to England always gives me. Away in strange
      lands, even in solitary places, one doesn't feel it somehow. One is filled
      with the hunter's lust, bent on a 'kill', but at home in the quiet
      country, with the smoke curling up from some fireside, the mowers busy
      laying the hay in swaths, the children tumbling under the trees in the
      orchards, and a girl singing as she spreads the clothes on the sweetbriar
      hedge, amidst a scene quick with home sights and sounds, a strange lack
      creeps in and makes itself felt in a dull, aching way. Oddly enough, too,
      I had a sense of uneasiness, a 'something going to happen'. I had often
      experienced it when out alone in a great forest, or on an unknown lake,
      and it always meant 'ware danger' of some kind. But why should I feel it
      here? Yet I did, and I couldn't shake it off. I took to examining the
      room. It was a commonplace one of the usual type. But there was a
      work-basket on the table, a dainty thing, lined with blue satin. There was
      a bit of lace stretched over shiny blue linen, with the needle sticking in
      it; such fairy work, like cobwebs seen from below, spun from a branch
      against a background of sky. A gold thimble, too, with initials, not the
      landlady's, I know. What pretty things, too, in the basket! A scissors, a
      capital shape for fly-making; a little file, and some floss silk and
      tinsel, the identical colour I want for a new fly I have in my head, one
      that will be a demon to kill. The northern devil I mean to call him. Some
      one looks in behind me, and a light step passes upstairs. I drop the
      basket, I don't know why. There are some reviews near it. I take up one,
      and am soon buried in an article on Tasmanian fauna. It is strange, but
      whenever I do know anything about a subject, I always find these writing
      fellows either entirely ignorant or damned wrong.

 After supper, I took a stroll to see the river. It was a silver grey
      evening, with just the last lemon and pink streaks of the sunset staining
      the sky. There had been a shower, and somehow the smell of the dust after
      rain mingled with the mignonette in the garden brought back vanished
      scenes of small-boyhood, when I caught minnows in a bottle, and dreamt of
      a shilling rod as happiness unattainable. I turned aside from the road in
      accordance with directions, and walked towards the stream. Holloa! someone
      before me, what a bore! The angler is hidden by an elder-bush, but I can
      see the fly drop delicately, artistically on the water. Fishing upstream,
      too! There is a bit of broken water there, and the midges dance in
      myriads; a silver gleam, and the line spins out, and the fly falls just in
      the right place. It is growing dusk, but the fellow is an adept at quick,
      fine casting—I wonder what fly he has on—why, he's going to
      try downstream now? I hurry forward, and as I near him, I swerve to the
      left out of the way. S-s-s-s! a sudden sting in the lobe of my ear. Hey! I
      cry as I find I am caught; the tail fly is fast in it. A slight, grey-clad
      woman holding the rod lays it carefully down and comes towards me through
      the gathering dusk. My first impulse is to snap the gut and take to my
      heels, but I am held by something less tangible but far more powerful than
      the grip of the Limerick hook in my ear.

 'I am very sorry!' she says in a voice that matched the evening, it was so
      quiet and soft; 'but it was exceedingly stupid of you to come behind like
      that.'

 'I didn't think you threw such a long line; I thought I was safe,' I
      stammered.

 'Hold this!' she says, giving me a diminutive fly-book, out of which she
      has taken a scissors. I obey meekly. She snips the gut.

 'Have you a sharp knife? If I strip the hook you can push it through; it
      is lucky it isn't in the cartilage.'

 I suppose I am an awful idiot, but I only handed her the knife, and she
      proceeded as calmly as if stripping a hook in a man's ear were an everyday
      occurrence. Her gown is of some soft grey stuff, and her grey leather belt
      is silver clasped. Her hands are soft and cool and steady, but there is a
      rarely disturbing thrill in their gentle touch. The thought flashed
      through my mind that I had just missed that, a woman's voluntary tender
      touch, not a paid caress, all my life.

 'Now you can push it through yourself. I hope it won't hurt much.' Taking
      the hook, I push it through, and a drop of blood follows it. 'Oh!' she
      cries, but I assure her it is nothing, and stick the hook surreptitiously
      in my coat sleeve. Then we both laugh, and I look at her for the first
      time. She has a very white forehead, with little tendrils of hair blowing
      round it under her grey cap, her eyes are grey. I didn't see that then, I
      only saw they were steady, smiling eyes that matched her mouth. Such a
      mouth, the most maddening mouth a man ever longed to kiss, above a
      too-pointed chin, soft as a child's; indeed, the whole face looks soft in
      the misty light.

 'I am sorry I spoilt your sport!' I say.

 'Oh, that don't matter, it's time to stop. I got two brace, one a beauty.'

 She is winding in her line, and I look in her basket; they are beauties, one two-pounder, the rest running from a half to a pound.

 'What fly?'

 'Yellow dun took that one, but your assailant was a partridge spider.' I
      sling her basket over my shoulder; she takes it as a matter of course, and
      we retrace our steps. I feel curiously happy as we walk towards the road;
      there is a novel delight in her nearness; the feel of woman works subtly
      and strangely in me; the rustle of her skirt as it brushes the black-heads
      in the meadow-grass, and the delicate perfume, partly violets, partly
      herself, that comes to me with each of her movements is a rare pleasure. I
      am hardly surprised when she turns into the garden of the inn, I think I
      knew from the first that she would.

 'Better bathe that ear of yours, and put a few drops of carbolic in the
      water.' She takes the basket as she says it, and goes into the kitchen. I
      hurry over this, and go into the little sitting-room. There is a tray with
      a glass of milk and some oaten cakes upon the table. I am too disturbed to
      sit down; I stand at the window and watch the bats flitter in the
      gathering moonlight, and listen with quivering nerves for her step—perhaps
      she will send for the tray, and not come after all. What a fool I am to be
      disturbed by a grey-clad witch with a tantalizing mouth! That comes of
      loafing about doing nothing. I mentally darn the old fool who saved her
      money instead of spending it. Why the devil should I be bothered? I don't
      want it anyhow. She comes in as I fume, and I forget everything at her
      entrance. I push the armchair towards the table, and she sinks quietly
      into it, pulling the tray nearer. She has a wedding ring on, but somehow
      it never strikes me to wonder if she is married or a widow or who she may
      be. I am content to watch her break her biscuits. She has the prettiest
      hands, and a trick of separating her last fingers when she takes hold of
      anything. They remind me of white orchids I saw somewhere. She led me to
      talk; about Africa, I think. I liked to watch her eyes glow deeply in the
      shadow and then catch light as she bent forward to say something in her
      quick responsive way.

 'Long ago when I was a girl,' she said once.

 'Long ago?' I echo incredulously, 'surely not?'

 'Ah, but yes, you haven't seen me in the daylight,' with a soft little
      laugh. 'Do you know what the gipsies say? "Never judge a woman or a ribbon
      by candle-light." They might have said moonlight equally well.'

 She rises as she speaks, and I feel an overpowering wish to have her put
      out her hand. But she does not, she only takes the work-basket and a book,
      and says good night with an inclination of her little head.

 I go over and stand next to her chair; I don't like to sit in it, but I
      like to put my hand where her head leant, and fancy, if she were there,
      how she would look up.

 I woke next morning with a curious sense of pleasurable excitement. I
      whistled from very lightness of heart as I dressed. When I got down I
      found the landlady clearing away her breakfast things. I felt disappointed
      and resolved to be down earlier in future. I didn't feel inclined to try
      the minnow. I put them in a tub in the yard and tried to read and listen
      for her step. I dined alone. The day dragged terribly. I did not like to
      ask about her, I had a notion she might not like it. I spent the evening
      on the river. I might have filled a good basket, but I let the beggars
      rest. After all, I had caught fish enough to stock all the rivers in Great
      Britain. There are other things than trout in the world. I sit and smoke a
      pipe where she caught me last night. If I half close my eyes I can see
      hers, and her mouth, in the smoke. That is one of the curious charms of
      baccy, it helps to reproduce brain pictures. After a bit, I think 'perhaps
      she has left'. I get quite feverish at the thought and hasten back. I must
      ask. I look up at the window as I pass; there is surely a gleam of white.
      I throw down my traps and hasten up. She is leaning with her arms on the
      window-ledge staring out into the gloom. I could swear I caught a
      suppressed sob as I entered. I cough, and she turns quickly and bows
      slightly. A bonnet and gloves and lace affair and a lot of papers are
      lying on the table. I am awfully afraid she is going. I say—

 'Please don't let me drive you away, it is so early yet. I half expected
      to see you on the river.'

 'Nothing so pleasant; I have been up in town (the tears have certainly got
      into her voice) all day; it was so hot and dusty, I am tired out.'

 The little servant brings in the lamp and a tray with a bottle of
      lemonade.

 'Mistress hasn't any lemons, 'm, will this do?'

 'Yes,' she says wearily, she is shading her eyes with her hand; 'anything;
      I am fearfully thirsty.'

 'Let me concoct you a drink instead. I have lemons and ice and things. My
      man sent me down supplies today; I leave him in town. I am rather a dab at
      drinks; I learnt it from the Yankees; about the only thing I did learn
      from them I care to remember. Susan!' The little maid helps me to get the
      materials, and she watches me quietly. When I give it to her she
      takes it with a smile (she has been crying). That is an ample thank
      you. She looks quite old. Something more than tiredness called up those
      lines in her face.

  Well, ten days passed, sometimes we met at breakfast, sometimes at supper,
      sometimes we fished together or sat in the straggling orchard and talked;
      she neither avoided me nor sought me. She is the most charming mixture of
      child and woman I ever met. She is a dual creature. Now I never met that
      in a man. When she is here without getting a letter in the morning or
      going to town, she seems like a girl. She runs about in her grey gown and
      little cap and laughs, and seems to throw off all thought like an
      irresponsible child. She is eager to fish, or pick gooseberries and eat
      them daintily, or sit under the trees and talk. But when she goes to town—I
      notice she always goes when she gets a lawyer's letter, there is no
      mistaking the envelope—she comes home tired and haggard-looking, an
      old woman of thirty-five. I wonder why. It takes her, even with her
      elasticity of temperament, nearly a day to get young again. I hate her to
      go to town; it is extraordinary how I miss her; I can't recall, when she
      is absent, her saying anything very wonderful, but she converses all the
      time. She has a gracious way of filling the place with herself, there is
      an entertaining quality in her very presence. We had one rainy afternoon;
      she tied me some flies (I shan't use any of them); I watched the lights in
      her hair as she moved, it is quite golden in some places, and she has a
      tiny mole near her left ear and another on her left wrist. On the eleventh
      day she got a letter but she didn't go to town, she stayed up in her room
      all day; twenty times I felt inclined to send her a line, but I had no
      excuse. I heard the landlady say as I passed the kitchen window: 'Poor
      dear! I'm sorry to lose her!' Lose her? I should think not. It has come to
      this with me that I don't care to face any future without her; and yet I
      know nothing about her, not even if she is a free woman. I shall find that
      out the next time I see her. In the evening I catch a glimpse of her gown
      in the orchard, and I follow her. We sit down near the river. Her left
      hand is lying gloveless next to me in the grass.

 'Do you think from what you have seen of me, that I would ask a question
      out of any mere impertinent curiosity?'

 She starts. 'No, I do not!'

 I take up her hand and touch the ring. 'Tell me, does this bind you to any
      one?'

 I am conscious of a buzzing in my ears and a dancing blurr of water and
      sky and trees, as I wait (it seems to me an hour) for her reply. I felt
      the same sensation once before, when I got drawn into some rapids and had
      an awfully narrow shave, but of that another time.

 The voice is shaking.

 'I am not legally bound to anyone, at least; but why do you ask?' she
      looks me square in the face as she speaks, with a touch of haughtiness I
      never saw in her before.

 Perhaps the great relief I feel, the sense of joy at knowing she is free,
      speaks out of my face, for hers flushes and she drops her eyes, her lips
      tremble. I don't look at her again, but I can see her all the same. After
      a while she says—

 'I half intended to tell you something about myself this evening, now I must .
      Let us go in. I shall come down to the sitting-room after your supper.'
      She takes a long look at the river and the inn, as if fixing the place in
      her memory; it strikes me with a chill that there is a goodbye in her
      gaze. Her eyes rest on me a moment as they come back, there is a sad look
      in their grey clearness. She swings her little grey gloves in her hand as
      we walk back. I can hear her walking up and down overhead; how tired she
      will be, and how slowly the time goes. I am standing at one side of the
      window when she enters; she stands at the other, leaning her head against
      the shutter with her hands clasped before her. I can hear my own heart
      beating, and, I fancy, hers through the stillness. The suspense is
      fearful. At length she says—

 'You have been a long time out of England; you don't read the papers?'

 'No.' A pause. I believe my heart is beating inside my head.

 'You asked me if I was a free woman. I don't pretend to misunderstand why
      you asked me. I am not a beautiful woman, I never was. But there must be
      something about me, there is in some women, "essential femininity"
      perhaps, that appeals to all men. What I read in your eyes I have seen in
      many men's before, but before God I never tried to rouse it. Today (with a
      sob), I can say I am free, yesterday morning I could not. Yesterday my
      husband gained his case and divorced me!' she closes her eyes and draws in
      her under-lip to stop its quivering. I want to take her in my arms, but I
      am afraid to.

 'I did not ask you any more than if you were free!'

 'No, but I am afraid you don't quite take in the meaning. I did not
      divorce my husband, he divorced me , he got a decree nisi ; do
      you understand now? (she is speaking with difficulty), do you know what
      that implies?'

 I can't stand her face any longer. I take her hands, they are icy cold,
      and hold them tightly.

 'Yes, I know what it implies, that is, I know the legal and social
      conclusion to be drawn from it—if that is what you mean. But I never
      asked you for that information. I have nothing to do with your past. You
      did not exist for me before the day we met on the river. I take you from
      that day and I ask you to marry me.'

 I feel her tremble and her hands get suddenly warm. She turns her head and
      looks at me long and searchingly, then she says—

 'Sit down, I want to say something!'

 I obey, and she comes and stands next the chair. I can't help it, I reach
      up my arm, but she puts it gently down.

 'No, you must listen without touching me, I shall go back to the window. I
      don't want to influence you a bit by any personal magnetism I possess. I
      want you to listen—I have told you he divorced me, the co-respondent
      was an old friend, a friend of my childhood, of my girlhood. He died just
      after the first application was made, luckily for me. He would have
      considered my honour before my happiness. I did not defend the
      case, it wasn't likely—ah, if you knew all? He proved his case;
      given clever counsel, willing witnesses to whom you make it worth while,
      and no defence, divorce is always attainable even in England. But
      remember: I figure as an adulteress in every English-speaking paper. If
      you buy last week's evening papers—do you remember the day I was in
      town?'—I nod—'you will see a sketch of me in that day's;
      someone, perhaps he, must have given it; it was from an old photograph. I
      bought one at Victoria as I came out; it is funny (with an hysterical
      laugh) to buy a caricature of one's own poor face at a news-stall. Yet in
      spite of that I have felt glad. The point for you is that I made no
      defence to the world, and (with a lifting of her head) I will make no
      apology, no explanation, no denial to you, now nor ever. I am very
      desolate and your attention came very warm to me, but I don't love you.
      Perhaps I could learn to (with a rush of colour), for what you have said
      tonight, and it is because of that I tell you to weigh what this means.
      Later, when your care for me will grow into habit, you may chafe at my
      past. It is from that I would save you.'

 I hold out my hands and she comes and puts them aside and takes me by the
      beard and turns up my face and scans it earnestly. She must have been
      deceived a good deal. I let her do as she pleases, it is the wisest way
      with women, and it is good to have her touch me in that way. She seems
      satisfied. She stands leaning against the arm of the chair and says—

 'I must learn first to think of myself as a free woman again, it almost
      seems wrong today to talk like this; can you understand that feeling?'

 I nod assent.

 'Next time I must be sure, and you must be sure,' she lays her fingers on
      my mouth as I am about to protest, 'S-sh! You shall have a year to think.
      If you repeat then what you have said today, I shall give you your answer.
      You must not try to find me. I have money. If I am living, I will come
      here to you. If I am dead, you will be told of it. In the year between I
      shall look upon myself as belonging to you, and render an account if you
      wish of every hour. You will not be influenced by me in any way, and you
      will be able to reason it out calmly. If you think better of it, don't
      come.'

 I feel there would be no use trying to move her, I simply kiss her hands
      and say:

 'As you will, dear woman, I shall be here.'

 We don't say any more; she sits down on a footstool with her head against
      my knee, and I just smooth it. When the clocks strike ten through the
      house, she rises and I stand up. I see that she has been crying quietly,
      poor lonely little soul. I lift her off her feet and kiss her, and stammer
      out my sorrow at losing her, and she is gone. Next morning the little maid
      brought me an envelope from the lady, who left by the first train. It held
      a little grey glove; that is why I carry it always, and why I haunt the
      inn and never leave it for longer than a week; why I sit and dream in the
      old chair that has a ghost of her presence always; dream of the spring to
      come with the May-fly on the wing, and the young summer when midges dance,
      and the trout are growing fastidious; when she will come to me across the
      meadow grass, through the silver haze, as she did before; come with her
      grey eyes shining to exchange herself for her little grey glove.