A LODGING FOR THE NIGHT, By Robert Louis Stevenson

 It was late in November, 1456. The snow fell over Paris with rigorous,
      relentless persistence; sometimes the wind made a sally and scattered it
      in flying vortices; sometimes there was a lull, and flake after flake
      descended out of the black night air, silent, circuitous, interminable. To
      poor people, looking up under moist eyebrows, it seemed a wonder where it
      all came from. Master Francis Villon had propounded an alternative that
      afternoon, at a tavern window: was it only pagan Jupiter plucking geese
      upon Olympus? or were the holy angels moulting? He was only a poor Master
      of Arts, he went on; and as the question somewhat touched upon divinity,
      he durst not venture to conclude. A silly old priest from Montargis, who
      was among the company, treated the young rascal to a bottle of wine in
      honour of the jest and grimaces with which it was accompanied, and swore
      on his own white beard that he had been just such another irreverent dog
      when he was Villon’s age.

 The air was raw and pointed, but not far below freezing; and the flakes
      were large, damp, and adhesive. The whole city was sheeted up. An army
      might have marched from end to end and not a footfall given the alarm. If
      there were any belated birds in heaven, they saw the island like a large
      white patch, and the bridges like slim white spars on the black ground of
      the river. High up overhead the snow settled among the tracery of the
      cathedral towers. Many a niche was drifted full; many a statue wore a long
      white bonnet on its grotesque or sainted head. The gargoyles had been
      transformed into great false noses, drooping toward the point. The
      crockets were like upright pillows swollen on one side. In the intervals
      of the wind there was a dull sound dripping about the precincts of the
      church.

 The cemetery of St. John had taken its own share of the snow. All the
      graves were decently covered; tall white housetops stood around in grave
      array; worthy burghers were long ago in bed, be-nightcapped like their
      domiciles; there was no light in all the neighbourhood but a little peep
      from a lamp that hung swinging in the church choir, and tossed the shadows
      to and fro in time to its oscillations. The clock was hard on ten when the
      patrol went by with halberds and a lantern, beating their hands; and they
      saw nothing suspicious about the cemetery of St. John.

 Yet there was a small house, backed up against the cemetery wall, which
      was still awake, and awake to evil purpose, in that snoring district.
      There was not much to betray it from without; only a stream of warm vapour
      from the chimney-top, a patch where the snow melted on the roof, and a few
      half-obliterated footprints at the door. But within, behind the shuttered
      windows, Master Francis Villon, the poet, and some of the thievish crew
      with whom he consorted, were keeping the night alive and passing round the
      bottle.

 A great pile of living embers diffused a strong and ruddy glow from the
      arched chimney. Before this straddled Dom Nicolas, the Picardy monk, with
      his skirts picked up and his fat legs bared to the comfortable warmth. His
      dilated shadow cut the room in half; and the firelight only escaped on
      either side of his broad person, and in a little pool between his
      outspread feet. His face had the beery, bruised appearance of the
      continual drinker’s; it was covered with a network of congested veins,
      purple in ordinary circumstances, but now pale violet, for even with his
      back to the fire the cold pinched him on the other side. His cowl had half
      fallen back, and made a strange excrescence on either side of his
      bull-neck. So he straddled, grumbling, and cut the room in half with the
      shadow of his portly frame.

 On the right, Villon and Guy Tabary were huddled together over a scrap of
      parchment; Villon making a ballade which he was to call the “Ballade of
      Roast Fish,” and Tabary sputtering admiration at his shoulder. The poet
      was a rag of a man, dark, little, and lean, with hollow cheeks and thin
      black locks. He carried his four and twenty years with feverish animation.
      Greed had made folds about his eyes, evil smiles had puckered his mouth.
      The wolf and pig struggled together in his face. It was an eloquent,
      sharp, ugly, earthly countenance. His hands were small and prehensile,
      with fingers knotted like a cord; and they were continually flickering in
      front of him in violent and expressive pantomime. As for Tabary, a broad,
      complacent, admiring imbecility breathed from his squash nose and
      slobbering lips; he had become a thief, just as he might have become the
      most decent of burgesses, by the imperious chance that rules the lives of
      human geese and human donkeys.

 At the monk’s other hand, Montigny and Thevenin Pensete played a game of
      chance. About the first there clung some flavour of good birth and
      training, as about a fallen angel; something long, lithe, and courtly in
      the person; something aquiline and darkling in the face. Thevenin, poor
      soul, was in great feather; he had done a good stroke of knavery that
      afternoon in the Faubourg St. Jacques, and all night he had been gaining
      from Montigny. A flat smile illuminated his face; his bald head shone
      rosily in a garland of red curls; his little protuberant stomach shook
      with silent chucklings as he swept in his gains.

 “Doubles or quits?” said Thevenin.

 Montigny nodded grimly.

 “Some may prefer to dine in state,” wrote Villon, “on bread and cheese on
      silver plate. Or, or—help me out, Guido!”

 Tabary giggled.

 “Or parsley on a golden dish,” scribbled the poet.

 The wind was freshening without; it drove the snow before it, and
      sometimes raised its voice in a victorious whoop, and made sepulchral
      grumblings in the chimney. The cold was growing sharper as the night went
      on. Villon, protruding his lips, imitated the gust with something between
      a whistle and a groan. It was an eerie, uncomfortable talent of the
      poet’s, much detested by the Picardy monk.

 “Can’t you hear it rattle in the gibbet?” said Villon. “They are all
      dancing the devil’s jig on nothing, up there. You may dance, my gallants;
      you’ll be none the warmer. Whew, what a gust! Down went somebody just now!
      A medlar the fewer on the three-legged medlar-tree! I say, Dom Nicolas,
      it’ll be cold to-night on the St. Denis Road?” he asked.

 Dom Nicholas winked both his big eyes, and seemed to choke upon his Adam’s
      apple. Montfaucon, the great, grisly Paris gibbet, stood hard by the St.
      Denis Road, and the pleasantry touched him on the raw. As for Tabary, he
      laughed immoderately over the medlars; he had never heard anything more
      light-hearted; and he held his sides and crowed. Villon fetched him a
      fillip on the nose, which turned his mirth into an attack of coughing.

 “Oh, stop that row,” said Villon, “and think of rhymes to ‘fish’!”

 “Doubles or quits? Said Montigny, doggedly.

 “With all my heart,” quoth Thevenin.

 “Is there any more in that bottle?” asked the monk.

 “Open another,” said Villon. “How do you ever hope to fill that big
      hogshead, your body, with little things like bottles? And how do you
      expect to get to heaven? How many angels, do you fancy, can be spared to
      carry up a single monk from Picardy? Or do you think yourself another
      Elias—and they’ll send the coach for you?”

 “ Hominibus impossible,” replied the monk, as he filled his glass.

 Tabary was in ecstasies.

 Villon filliped his nose again.

 “Laugh at my jokes, if you like,” he said.

 Villon made a face at him. “Think of rhymes to ‘fish,’ “ he said. “What
      have you to do with Latin? You’ll wish you knew none of it at the great
      assizes, when the devil calls for Guido Tabary, clericus —the
      devil with the humpback and red-hot fingernails. Talking of the devil,” he
      added, in a whisper, “look at Montigny!”

 All three peered covertly at the gamester. He did not seem to be enjoying
      his luck. His mouth was a little to a side; one nostril nearly shut, and
      the other much inflated. The black dog was on his back, as people say, in
      terrifying nursery metaphor; and he breathed hard under the gruesome
      burden.

 “He looks as if he could knife him,” whispered Tabary, with round eyes.

 The monk shuddered, and turned his face and spread his open hands to the
      red embers. It was the cold that thus affected Dom Nicolas, and not any
      excess of moral sensibility.

 “Come now,” said Villon—“about this ballade. How does it run so
      far?” And beating time with his hand, he read it aloud to Tabary.

 They were interrupted at the fourth rhyme by a brief and fatal movement
      among the gamesters. The round was completed, and Thevenin was just
      opening his mouth to claim another victory, when Montigny leaped up, swift
      as an adder, and stabbed him to the heart. The blow took effect before he
      had time to utter a cry, before he had time to move. A tremor or two
      convulsed his frame; his hands opened and shut, his heels rattled on the
      floor; then his head rolled backward over one shoulder, with eyes wide
      open; and Thevenin Pensete’s spirit had returned to Him who made it.

 Every one sprang to his feet; but the business was over in two twos. The
      four living fellows looked at each other in rather a ghastly fashion, the
      dead man contemplating a corner of the roof with a singular and ugly leer.

 “My God!” said Tabary, and he began to pray in Latin.

 Villon broke out into hysterical laughter. He came a step forward and
      ducked a ridiculous bow at Thevenin, and laughed still louder. Then he sat
      down suddenly, all of a heap, upon a stool, and continued laughing
      bitterly, as though he would shake himself to pieces.

 Montigny recovered his composure first.

 “Let’s see what he has about him,” he remarked; and he picked the dead
      man’s pockets with a practised hand, and divided the money into four equal
      portions on the table. “There’s for you,” he said.

 The monk received his share with a deep sigh, and a single stealthy glance
      at the dead Thevenin, who was beginning to sink into himself and topple
      sideways off the chair.

 “We’re all in for it,” cried Villon, swallowing his mirth. “It’s a hanging
      job for every man Jack of us that’s here—not to speak of those who
      aren’t.” He made a shocking gesture in the air with his raised right hand,
      and put out his tongue and threw his head on one side, so as to
      counterfeit the appearance of one who has been hanged. Then he pocketed
      his share of the spoil, and executed a shuffle with his feet as if to
      restore the circulation.

 Tabary was the last to help himself; he made a dash at the money, and
      retired to the other end of the apartment.

 Montigny stuck Thevenin upright in the chair, and drew out the dagger,
      which was followed by a jet of blood.

 “You fellows had better be moving,” he said, as he wiped the blade on his
      victim’s doublet.

 “I think we had,” returned Villon, with a gulp. “Damn his fat head!” he
      broke out. “It sticks in my throat like phlegm. What right has a man to
      have red hair when he is dead?” And he fell all of a heap again upon the
      stool, and fairly covered his face with his hands.

 Montigny and Dom Nicolas laughed aloud, even Tabary feebly chiming in.

 “Cry-baby!” said the monk.

 “I always said he was a woman,” added Montigny, with a sneer. “Sit up,
      can’t you?” he went on, giving another shake to the murdered body. “Tread
      out that fire, Nick!”

 But Nick was better employed; he was quietly taking Villon’s purse, as the
      poet sat, limp and trembling, on the stool where he had been making a
      ballade not three minutes before. Montigny and Tabary dumbly demanded a
      share of the booty, which the monk silently promised as he passed the
      little bag into the bosom of his gown. In many ways an artistic nature
      unfits a man for practical existence.

 No sooner had the theft been accomplished than Villon shook himself,
      jumped to his feet, and began helping to scatter and extinguish the
      embers. Meanwhile Montigny opened the door and cautiously peered into the
      street. The coast was clear; there was no meddlesome patrol in sight.
      Still it was judged wiser to slip out severally; and as Villon was himself
      in a hurry to escape from the neighbourhood of the dead Thevenin, and the
      rest were in a still greater hurry to get rid of him before he should
      discover the loss of his money, he was the first by general consent to
      issue forth into the street.

 The wind had triumphed and swept all the clouds from heaven. Only a few
      vapours, as thin as moonlight, fleeted rapidly across the stars. It was
      bitter cold; and, by a common optical effect, things seemed almost more
      definite than in the broadest daylight. The sleeping city was absolutely
      still; a company of white hoods, a field full of little alps, below the
      twinkling stars. Villon cursed his fortune. Would it were still snowing!
      Now, wherever he went, he left an indelible trail behind him on the
      glittering streets; wherever he went, he was still tethered to the house
      by the cemetery of St. John; wherever he went, he must weave, with his own
      plodding feet, the rope that bound him to the crime and would bind him to
      the gallows. The leer of the dead man came back to him with new
      significance. He snapped his fingers as if to pluck up his own spirits,
      and, choosing a street at random, stepped boldly forward in the snow.

 Two things preoccupied him as he went: the aspect of the gallows at
      Montfaucon in this bright, windy phase of the night’s existence, for one;
      and for another, the look of the dead man with his bald head and garland
      of red curls. Both struck cold upon his heart, and he kept quickening his
      pace as if he could escape from unpleasant thoughts by mere fleetness of
      foot. Sometimes he looked back over his shoulder with a sudden nervous
      jerk; but he was the only moving thing in the white streets, except when
      the wind swooped round a corner and threw up the snow, which was beginning
      to freeze, in spouts of glittering dust.

 Suddenly he saw, a long way before him, a black clump and a couple of
      lanterns. The clump was in motion, and the lanterns swung as though
      carried by men walking. It was a patrol. And though it was merely crossing
      his line of march he judged it wiser to get out of eyeshot as speedily as
      he could. He was not in the humour to be challenged, and he was conscious
      of making a very conspicuous mark upon the snow. Just on his left hand
      there stood a great hotel, with some turrets and a large porch before the
      door; it was half ruinous, he remembered, and had long stood empty; and so
      he made three steps of it, and jumped into the shelter of the porch. It
      was pretty dark inside, after the glimmer of the snowy streets, and he was
      groping forward with outspread hands, when he stumbled over some substance
      which offered an indescribable mixture of resistances, hard and soft, firm
      and loose. His heart gave a leap, and he sprang two steps back and stared
      dreadfully at the obstacle. Then he gave a little laugh of relief. It was
      only a woman, and she dead. He knelt beside her to make sure upon this
      latter point. She was freezing cold, and rigid like a stick. A little
      ragged finery fluttered in the wind about her hair, and her cheeks had
      been heavily rouged that same afternoon. Her pockets were quite empty; but
      in her stocking, underneath the garter, Villon found two of the small
      coins that went by the name of whites. It was little enough, but it was
      always something; and the poet was moved with a deep sense of pathos that
      she should have died before she had spent her money. That seemed to him a
      dark and pitiable mystery; and he looked from the coins in his hand to the
      dead woman, and back again to the coins, shaking his head over the riddle
      of man’s life. Henry V. of England, dying at Vincennes just after he had
      conquered France, and this poor jade cut off by a cold draught in a great
      man’s doorway before she had time to spend her couple of whites—it
      seemed a cruel way to carry on the world. Two whites would have taken such
      a little while to squander; and yet it would have been one more good taste
      in the mouth, one more smack of the lips, before the devil got the soul,
      and the body was left to birds and vermin. He would like to use all his
      tallow before the light was blown out and the lantern broken.

 While these thoughts were passing through his mind, he was feeling, half
      mechanically, for his purse. Suddenly his heart stopped beating; a feeling
      of cold scales passed up the back of his legs, and a cold blow seemed to
      fall upon his scalp. He stood petrified for a moment; then he felt again
      with one feverish movement; then his loss burst upon him, and he was
      covered at once with perspiration. To spendthrifts money is so living and
      actual—it is such a thin veil between them and their pleasures!
      There is only one limit to their fortune—that of time; and a
      spendthrift with only a few crowns is the Emperor of Rome until they are
      spent. For such a person to lose his money is to suffer the most shocking
      reverse, and fall from heaven to hell, from all to nothing, in a breath.
      And all the more if he has put his head in the halter for it; if he may be
      hanged to-morrow for that same purse, so dearly earned, so foolishly
      departed! Villon stood and cursed; he threw the two whites into the
      street; he shook his fist at heaven; he stamped, and was not horrified to
      find himself trampling the poor corpse. Then he began rapidly to retrace
      his steps toward the house beside the cemetery. He had forgotten all fear
      of the patrol, which was long gone by at any rate, and had no idea but
      that of his lost purse. It was in vain that he looked right and left upon
      the snow; nothing was to be seen. He had not dropped it in the streets.
      Had it fallen in the house? He would have liked dearly to go in and see;
      but the idea of the grisly occupant unmanned him. And he saw besides, as
      he drew near, that their efforts to put out the fire had been
      unsuccessful; on the contrary, it had broken into a blaze, and a changeful
      light played in the chinks of door and window, and revived his terror for
      the authorities and Paris gibbet.

 He returned to the hotel with the porch, and groped about upon the snow
      for the money he had thrown away in his childish passion. But he could
      only find one white; the other had probably struck sideways and sunk
      deeply in. With a single white in his pocket, all his projects for a
      rousing night in some wild tavern vanished utterly away. And it was not
      only pleasure that fled laughing from his grasp; positive discomfort,
      positive pain, attacked him as he stood ruefully before the porch. His
      perspiration had dried upon him; and although the wind had now fallen, a
      binding frost was setting in stronger with every hour, and he felt
      benumbed and sick at heart. What was to be done? Late as was the hour,
      improbable as was his success, he would try the house of his adopted
      father, the chaplain of St. Benoit.

 He ran all the way, and knocked timidly. There was no answer. He knocked
      again and again, taking heart with every stroke; and at last steps were
      heard approaching from within. A barred wicket fell open in the
      iron-studded door, and emitted a gush of yellow light.

 “Hold up your face to the wicket,” said the chaplain from within.

 “It’s only me,” whimpered Villon.

 “Oh, it’s only you, is it?” returned the chaplain; and he cursed him with
      foul, unpriestly oaths for disturbing him at such an hour, and bade him be
      off to hell, where he came from.

 “My hands are blue to the wrist,” pleaded Villon; “my feet are dead and
      full of twinges; my nose aches with the sharp air; the cold lies at my
      heart. I may be dead before morning. Only this once, father, and, before
      God, I will never ask again!”

 “You should have come earlier,” said the ecclesiastic, coolly. “Young men
      require a lesson now and then.” He shut the wicket and retired
      deliberately into the interior of the house.

 Villon was beside himself; he beat upon the door with his hands and feet,
      and shouted hoarsely after the chaplain.

 “Wormy old fox!” he cried. “If I had my hand under your twist, I would
      send you flying headlong into the bottomless pit.”

 A door shut in the interior, faintly audible to the poet down long
      passages. He passed his hand over his mouth with an oath. And then the
      humour of the situation struck him, and he laughed and looked lightly up
      to heaven, where the stars seemed to be winking over his discomfiture.

 What was to be done? It looked very like a night in the frosty streets.
      The idea of the dead woman popped into his imagination, and gave him a
      hearty fright; what had happened to her in the early night might very well
      happen to him before morning. And he so young! And with such immense
      possibilities of disorderly amusement before him! He felt quite pathetic
      over the notion of his own fate, as if it had been some one else’s, and
      made a little imaginative vignette of the scene in the morning when they
      should find his body.

 He passed all his chances under review, turning the white between his
      thumb and forefinger. Unfortunately he was on bad terms with some old
      friends who would once have taken pity on him in such a plight. He had
      lampooned them in verses; he had beaten and cheated them; and yet now,
      when he was in so close a pinch, he thought there was at least one who
      might perhaps relent. It was a chance. It was worth trying at least, and
      he would go and see.

 On the way, two little accidents happened to him which coloured his
      musings in a very different manner. For, first, he fell in with the track
      of a patrol, and walked in it for some hundred yards, although it lay out
      of his direction. And this spirited him up; at least he had confused his
      trail; for he was still possessed with the idea of people tracking him all
      about Paris over the snow, and collaring him next morning before he was
      awake. The other matter affected him quite differently. He passed a
      street-corner where, not so long before, a woman and her child had been
      devoured by wolves. This was just the kind of weather, he reflected, when
      wolves might take it into their heads to enter Paris again; and a lone man
      in these deserted streets would run the chance of something worse than a
      mere scare. He stopped and looked upon the place with an unpleasant
      interest—it was a centre where several lanes intersected each other;
      and he looked down them all, one after another, and held his breath to
      listen, lest he should detect some galloping black things on the snow or
      hear the sound of howling between him and the river. He remembered his
      mother telling him the story and pointing out the spot, while he was yet a
      child. His mother! If he only knew where she lived, he might make sure at
      least of shelter. He determined he would inquire upon the morrow; nay, he
      would go and see her, too, poor old girl! So thinking, he arrived at his
      destination—his last hope for the night.

 The house was quite dark, like its neighbours; and yet after a few taps he
      heard a movement overhead, a door opening, and a cautious voice asking who
      was there. The poet named himself in a loud whisper, and waited, not
      without some trepidation, the result. Nor had he to wait long. A window
      was suddenly opened, and a pailful of slops splashed down upon the
      door-step. Villon had not been unprepared for something of the sort, and
      had put himself as much in shelter as the nature of the porch admitted;
      but for all that he was deplorably drenched below the waist. His hose
      began to freeze almost at once. Death from cold and exposure stared him in
      the face; he remembered he was of phthisical tendency, and began coughing
      tentatively. But the gravity of the danger steadied his nerves. He stopped
      a few hundred yards from the door where he had been so rudely used, and
      reflected with his finger to his nose. He could only see one way of
      getting a lodging, and that was to take it. He had noticed a house not far
      away, which looked as if it might be easily broken into; and thither he
      betook himself promptly, entertaining himself on the way with the idea of
      a room still hot, with a table still loaded with the remains of supper,
      where he might pass the rest of the black hours, and whence he should
      issue, on the morrow, with an armful of valuable plate. He even considered
      on what viands and what wines he should prefer; and as he was calling the
      roll of his favourite dainties, roast fish presented itself to his mind
      with an odd mixture of amusement and horror.

 “I shall never finish that ballade,” he thought to himself; and then, with
      another shudder at the recollection, “Oh, damn his fat head!” he repeated,
      fervently, and spat upon the snow.

 The house in question looked dark at first sight; but as Villon made a
      preliminary inspection in search of the handiest point of attack, a little
      twinkle of light caught his eye from behind a curtained window.

 “The devil!” he thought. “People awake! Some student or some saint,
      confound the crew! Can’t they get drunk and lie in bed snoring like their
      neighbours? What’s the good of curfew, and poor devils of bell-ringers
      jumping at a rope’s end in bell-towers? What’s the use of day, if people
      sit up all night? The gripes to them!” He grinned as he saw where his
      logic was leading him. “Every man to his business, after all,” added he,
      “and if they’re awake, by the Lord, I may come by a supper honestly for
      once, and cheat the devil.”

 He went boldly to the door and knocked with an assured hand. On both
      previous occasions he had knocked timidly and with some dread of
      attracting notice; but now when he had just discarded the thought of a
      burglarious entry, knocking at a door seemed a mighty simple and innocent
      proceeding. The sound of his blows echoed through the house with thin,
      phantasmal reverberations, as though it were quite empty; but these had
      scarcely died away before a measured tread drew near, a couple of bolts
      were withdrawn, and one wing was opened broadly, as though no guile or
      fear of guile were known to those within. A tall figure of a man, muscular
      and spare, but a little bent, confronted Villon. The head was massive in
      bulk, but finely sculptured; the nose blunt at the bottom, but refining
      upward to where it joined a pair of strong and honest eyebrows; the mouth
      and eyes surrounded with delicate markings; and the whole face based upon
      a thick white beard, boldly and squarely trimmed. Seen as it was by the
      light of a flickering hand-lamp, it looked perhaps nobler than it had a
      right to do; but it was a fine face, honourable rather than intelligent,
      strong, simple, and righteous.

 “You knock late, sir,” said the old man, in resonant, courteous tones.

 Villon cringed, and brought up many servile words of apology; at a crisis
      of this sort, the beggar was uppermost in him, and the man of genius hid
      his head with confusion.

 “You are cold,” repeated the old man, “and hungry? Well, step in.” And he
      ordered him into the house with a noble enough gesture.

 “Some great seigneur,” thought Villon, as his host, setting down the lamp
      on the flagged pavement of the entry, shot the bolts once more into their
      places.

 “You will pardon me if I go in front,” he said, when this was done; and he
      preceded the poet upstairs into a large apartment, warmed with a pan of
      charcoal and lit by a great lamp hanging from the roof. It was very bare
      of furniture; only some gold plate on a sideboard, some folios, and a
      stand of armour between the windows. Some smart tapestry hung upon the
      walls, representing the crucifixion of our Lord in one piece, and in
      another a scene of shepherds and shepherdesses by a running stream. Over
      the chimney was a shield of arms.

 “Will you seat yourself,” said the old man, “and forgive me if I leave
      you? I am alone in my house to-night, and if you are to eat I must forage
      for you myself.”

 No sooner was his host gone than Villon leaped from the chair on which he
      had just seated himself, and began examining the room with the stealth and
      passion of a cat. He weighed the gold flagons in his hand, opened all the
      folios, and investigated the arms upon the shield, and the stuff with
      which the seats were lined. He raised the window curtains, and saw that
      the windows were set with rich stained glass in figures, so far as he
      could see, of martial import. Then he stood in the middle of the room,
      drew a long breath, and retaining it with puffed cheeks, looked round and
      round him, turning on his heels, as if to impress every feature of the
      apartment on his memory.

 “Seven pieces of plate,” he said. “If there had been ten, I would have
      risked it. A fine house, and a fine old master, so help me all the
      saints!”

 And just then, hearing the old man’s tread returning along the corridor,
      he stole back to his chair, and began humbly toasting his wet legs before
      the charcoal pan.

 His entertainer had a plate of meat in one hand and a jug of wine in the
      other. He set down the plate upon the table, motioning Villon to draw in
      his chair, and going to the sideboard, brought back two goblets, which he
      filled.

 “I drink your better fortune,” he said gravely, touching Villon’s cup with
      his own.

 “To our better acquaintance,” said the poet, growing bold. A mere man of
      the people would have been awed by the courtesy of the old seigneur, but
      Villon was hardened in that matter; he had made mirth for great lords
      before now, and found them as black rascals as himself. And so he devoted
      himself to the viands with a ravenous gusto, while the old man, leaning
      backward, watched him with steady, curious eyes.

 “You have blood on your shoulder, my man,” he said.

 Montigny must have laid his wet right hand upon him as he left the house.
      He cursed Montigny in his heart.

 “It was none of my shedding,” he stammered.

 “I had not supposed so,” returned his host, quietly. “A brawl?”

 “Well, something of that sort,” Villon admitted, with a quaver.

 “Perhaps a fellow murdered?”

 “Oh no, not murdered,” said the poet, more and more confused. “It was all
      fair play—murdered by accident. I had no hand in it, God strike me
      dead!” he added, fervently.

 “One rogue the fewer, I dare say,” observed the master of the house.

 “You may dare to say that,” agreed Villon, infinitely relieved. “As big a
      rogue as there is between here and Jerusalem. He turned up his toes like a
      lamb. But it was a nasty thing to look at. I dare say you’ve seen dead men
      in your time, my lord?” he added, glancing at the armour.

 “Many,” said the old man. “I have followed the wars, as you imagine.”

 Villon laid down his knife and fork, which he had just taken up again.

 “Were any of them bald?” he asked.

 “Oh yes, and with hair as white as mine.”

 “I don’t think I should mind the white so much,” said Villon. “His was
      red.” And he had a return of his shuddering and tendency to laughter,
      which he drowned with a great draught of wine. “I’m a little put out when
      I think of it,” he went on. “I knew him—damn him! And then the cold
      gives a man fancies—or the fancies give a man cold, I don’t know
      which.”

 “Have you any money?” asked the old man.

 “I have one white,” returned the poet, laughing. “I got it out of a dead
      jade’s stocking in a porch. She was as dead as Caesar, poor wench, and as
      cold as a church, with bits of ribbon sticking in her hair. This is a hard
      winter for wolves and wenches and poor rogues like me.”

 “I,” said the old man, “am Enguerrand de la Feuillee, seigneur de
      Brisetout, bailie du Patatrac. Who and what may you be?”

 Villon rose and made a suitable reverence. “I am called Francis Villon,”
       he said, “a poor Master of Arts of this university. I know some Latin, and
      a deal of vice. I can make Chansons, ballades, lais, virelais, and
      roundels, and I am very fond of wine. I was born in a garret, and I shall
      not improbably die upon the gallows. I may add, my lord, that from this
      night forward I am your lordship’s very obsequious servant to command.”

 “No servant of mine,” said the knight. “My guest for this evening, and no
      more.”

 “A very grateful guest,” said Villon, politely, and he drank in dumb show
      to his entertainer.

 “You are shrewd,” began the old man, tapping his forehead, “very shrewd;
      you have learning; you are a clerk; and yet you take a small piece of
      money off a dead woman in the street. Is it not a kind of theft?”

 “It is a kind of theft much practised in the wars, my lord.”

 “The wars are the field of honour,” returned the old man, proudly. “There
      a man plays his life upon the cast; he fights in the name of his lord the
      king, his Lord God, and all their lordships the holy saints and angels.”

 “Put it,” said Villon, “that I were really a thief, should I not play my
      life also, and against heavier odds?”

 “For gain, but not for honour.”

 “Gain?” repeated Villon, with a shrug. “Gain! The poor fellow wants
      supper, and takes it. So does the soldier in a campaign. Why, what are all
      these requisitions we hear so much about? If they are not gain to those
      who take them, they are loss enough to the others. The men-at-arms drink
      by a good fire, while the burgher bites his nails to buy them wine and
      wood. I have seen a good many ploughmen swinging on trees about the
      country; ay, I have seen thirty on one elm, and a very poor figure they
      made; and when I asked some one how all these came to be hanged, I was
      told it was because they could not scrape together enough crowns to
      satisfy the men-at-arms.”

 “These things are a necessity of war, which the low-born must endure with
      constancy. It is true that some captains drive overhard; there are spirits
      in every rank not easily moved by pity; and indeed many follow arms who
      are no better than brigands.”

 “You see,” said the poet, “you cannot separate the soldier from the
      brigand; and what is a thief but an isolated brigand with circumspect
      manners? I steal a couple of mutton-chops, without so much as disturbing
      people’s sleep; the farmer grumbles a bit, but sups none the less
      wholesomely on what remains. You come up blowing gloriously on a trumpet,
      take away the whole sheep, and beat the farmer pitifully into the bargain.
      I have no trumpet; I am only Tom, Dick, or Harry; I am a rogue and a dog,
      and hanging’s too good for me—with all my heart; but just ask the
      farmer which of us he prefers, just find out which of us he lies awake to
      curse on cold nights.”

 “Look at us two,” said his lordship. “I am old, strong, and honoured. If I
      were turned from my house to-morrow, hundreds would be proud to shelter
      me. Poor people would go out and pass the night in the streets with their
      children, if I merely hinted that I wished to be alone. And I find you up,
      wandering homeless, and picking farthings off dead women by the wayside! I
      fear no man and nothing; I have seen you tremble and lose countenance at a
      word. I wait God’s summons contentedly in my own house, or, if it please
      the king to call me out again, upon the field of battle. You look for the
      gallows; a rough, swift death, without hope or honour. Is there no
      difference between these two?”

 “As far as to the moon,” Villon acquiesced. “But if I had been born lord
      of Brisetout, and you had been the poor scholar Francis, would the
      difference have been any the less? Should not I have been warming my knees
      at this charcoal pan, and would not you have been groping for farthings in
      the snow? Should not I have been the soldier, and you the thief?”

 “A thief?” cried the old man. “I a thief! If you understood your words,
      you would repent them.”

 Villon turned out his hands with a gesture of inimitable impudence. “If
      your lordship had done me the honour to follow my argument!” he said.

 “I do you too much honour in submitting to your presence,” said the
      knight. “Learn to curb your tongue when you speak with old and honourable
      men, or some one hastier than I may reprove you in a sharper fashion.” And
      he rose and paced the lower end of the apartment, struggling with anger
      and antipathy. Villon surreptitiously refilled his cup, and settled
      himself more comfortably in the chair, crossing his knees and leaning his
      head upon one hand and the elbow against the back of the chair. He was now
      replete and warm; and he was in no wise frightened for his host, having
      gauged him as justly as was possible between two such different
      characters. The night was far spent, and in a very comfortable fashion
      after all; and he felt morally certain of a safe departure on the morrow.

 “Tell me one thing,” said the old man, pausing in his walk. “Are you
      really a thief?”

 “I claim the sacred rights of hospitality,” returned the poet. “My lord, I
      am.”

 “You are very young,” the knight continued.

 “I should never have been so old,” replied Villon, showing his fingers,
      “if I had not helped myself with these ten talents. They have been my
      nursing mothers and my nursing fathers.”

 “You may still repent and change.”

 “I repent daily,” said the poet. “There are few people more given to
      repentance than poor Francis. As for change, let somebody change my
      circumstances. A man must continue to eat, if it were only that he may
      continue to repent.”

 “The change must begin in the heart,” returned the old man, solemnly.

 “My dear lord,” answered Villon, “do you really fancy that I steal for
      pleasure? I hate stealing, like any other piece of work or of danger. My
      teeth chatter when I see a gallows. But I must eat, I must drink; I must
      mix in society of some sort. What the devil! Man is not a solitary animal— cui
      Deus foeminam tradit . Make me king’s pantler, make me Abbot of St.
      Denis, make me bailie of the Patatrac, and then I shall be changed indeed.
      But as long as you leave me the poor scholar Francis Villon, without a
      farthing, why, of course, I remain the same.”

 “The grace of God is all powerful.”

 “I should be a heretic to question it,” said Francis. “It has made you
      lord of Brisetout and bailie of the Patatrac; it has given me nothing but
      the quick wits under my hat and these ten toes upon my hands. May I help
      myself to wine? I thank you respectfully. By God’s grace, you have a very
      superior vintage.”

 The lord of Brisetout walked to and fro with his hands behind his back.
      Perhaps he was not yet quite settled in his mind about the parallel
      between thieves and soldiers; perhaps Villon had interested him by some
      cross-thread of sympathy; perhaps his wits were simply muddled by so much
      unfamiliar reasoning; but whatever the cause, he somehow yearned to
      convert the young man to a better way of thinking, and could not make up
      his mind to drive him forth again into the street.

 “There is something more than I can understand in this,” he said at
      length. “Your mouth is full of subtleties, and the devil has led you very
      far astray; but the devil is only a very weak spirit before God’s truth,
      and all his subtleties vanish at a word of true honour, like darkness at
      morning. Listen to me once more. I learned long ago that a gentleman
      should live chivalrously and lovingly to God and the king and his lady;
      and though I have seen many strange things done, I have still striven to
      command my ways upon that rule. It is not only written in all noble
      histories, but in every man’s heart, if he will take care to read. You
      speak of food and wine, and I know very well that hunger is a difficult
      trial to endure; but you do not speak of other wants; you say nothing of
      honour, of faith to God and other men, of courtesy, of love without
      reproach. It may be that I am not very wise,—and yet I think I am,—but
      you seem to me like one who has lost his way and made a great error in
      life. You are attending to the little wants, and you have totally
      forgotten the great and only real ones, like a man who should be doctoring
      toothache on the judgment day. For such things as honour and love and
      faith are not only nobler than food and drink, but indeed I think we
      desire them more, and suffer more sharply for their absence. I speak to
      you as I think you will most easily understand me. Are you not, while
      careful to fill your belly, disregarding another appetite in your heart,
      which spoils the pleasure of your life and keeps you continually
      wretched?”

 Villon was sensibly nettled under all this sermonising. “You think I have
      no sense of honour!” he cried. “I’m poor enough, God knows! It’s hard to
      see rich people with their gloves, and you blowing in your hands. An empty
      belly is a bitter thing, although you speak so lightly of it. If you had
      had as many as I, perhaps you would change your tune. Anyway, I’m a thief,—make
      the most of that,—but I’m not a devil from hell, God strike me dead!
      I would have you to know I’ve an honour of my own, as good as yours,
      though I don’t prate about it all day long, as if it was a God’s miracle
      to have any. It seems quite natural to me; I keep it in its box till it’s
      wanted. Why, now, look you here, how long have I been in this room with
      you? Did you not tell me you were alone in the house? Look at your gold
      plate! You’re strong, if you like, but you’re old and unarmed, and I have
      my knife. What did I want but a jerk of the elbow and here would have been
      you with the cold steel in your bowels, and there would have been me,
      linking in the streets, with an armful of golden cups! Did you suppose I
      hadn’t wit enough to see that? and I scorned the action. There are your
      damned goblets, as safe as in a church; there are you, with your heart
      ticking as good as new; and here am I, ready to go out again as poor as I
      came in, with my one white that you threw in my teeth! And you think I
      have no sense of honour—God strike me dead!”

 The old man stretched out his right arm. “I will tell you what you are,”
       he said. “You are a rogue, my man, an impudent and black-hearted rogue and
      vagabond. I have passed an hour with you. Oh, believe me, I feel myself
      disgraced! And you have eaten and drunk at my table. But now I am sick at
      your presence; the day has come, and the night-bird should be off to his
      roost. Will you go before, or after?”

 “Which you please,” returned the poet, rising. “I believe you to be
      strictly honourable.” He thoughtfully emptied his cup. “I wish I could add
      you were intelligent,” he went on, knocking on his head with his knuckles.
      “Age! age! the brains stiff and rheumatic.”

 The old man preceded him from a point of self-respect; Villon followed,
      whistling, with his thumbs in his girdle.

 “God pity you,” said the lord of Brisetout at the door.

 “Good-bye, papa,” returned Villon, with a yawn. “Many thanks for the cold
      mutton.”

 The door closed behind him. The dawn was breaking over the white roofs. A
      chill, uncomfortable morning ushered in the day. Villon stood and heartily
      stretched himself in the middle of the road.

 “A very dull old gentleman,” he thought. “I wonder what his goblets may be
      worth?”