A PERILOUS AMOUR, By S. J. Weyman

 AN EPISODE ADAPTED FROM THE MEMOIRS OF MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE, DUKE OF
      SULLY

 Such in brief were the reasons which would have led me, had I followed the
      promptings of my own sagacity, to oppose the return of the Jesuits. It
      remains for me only to add that these arguments lost all their weight when
      set in the balance against the safety of my beloved master. To this plea
      the king himself for once condescended, and found those who were most
      strenuous to dissuade him the least able to refute it; since the more a
      man abhorred the Jesuits, the more ready he was to allow that the king’s
      life could not be safe from their practices while the edict against them
      remained in force. The support which I gave to the king on this occasion
      exposed me to the utmost odium of my co-religionists, and was in later
      times ill-requited by the order. But a remarkable incident that occurred
      while the matter was still under debate, and which I now for the first
      time make public, proved beyond question the wisdom of my conduct.

 Fontainebleau being at this time in the hands of the builders, the king
      had gone to spend his Easter at Chantilly, whither Mademoiselle
      d’Entragues had also repaired. During his absence from Paris I was seated
      one morning in my library at the Arsenal, when I was informed that Father
      Cotton, the same who at Metz had presented a petition from the Jesuits,
      and who was now in Paris pursuing that business under a safe-conduct,
      craved leave to pay his respects to me. I was not surprised, for I had
      been a little before this of some service to him. The pages of the court,
      while loitering outside the Louvre, had raised a tumult in the streets,
      and grievously insulted the father by shouting after him, “Old Wool! Old
      Cotton!” in imitation of the Paris street cry. For this the king, at my
      instigation, had caused them to be soundly whipped, and I supposed that
      the Jesuit now desired to thank me for advice—given, in truth,
      rather out of regard to discipline than to him. So I bade them admit him.

 His first words, uttered before my secretaries could retire, indicated
      that this was indeed his errand; and for a few moments I listened to such
      statements from him and made such answers myself as became our several
      positions. Then, as he did not go, I began to conceive the notion that he
      had come with a further purpose; and his manner, which seemed on this
      occasion to lack ease, though he was well gifted with skill and address,
      confirmed the notion. I waited, therefore, with patience, and presently he
      named his Majesty with many expressions of devotion to his person. “I
      trust,” said he, “that the air of Fontainebleau agrees with him, M. de
      Rosny?”

 “You mean, good father, of Chantilly?” I answered.

 “Ah, to be sure!” he rejoined, hastily. “He is, of course, at Chantilly.”

 After that he rose to depart, but was delayed by the raptures into which
      he fell at sight of the fire, which, the weather being cold for the time
      of year, I had caused to be lit. “It burns so brightly,” said he, “that it
      must be of boxwood, M. de Rosny.”

 “Of boxwood?” I exclaimed, in surprise.

 “Ay, is it not of boxwood?” quoth he, looking at me with much simplicity.

 “Certainly not!” I made answer, rather peevishly. “Who ever heard of
      people burning boxwood in Paris, father?”

 He apologised for his ignorance—which was indeed matter of wonder—on
      the ground of his southern birth, and took his departure, leaving me in
      much doubt as to the real purport of his visit. I was indeed more troubled
      by the uncertainty I felt than another less conversant with the methods of
      the Jesuits might have been, for I knew that it was their habit to let
      drop a word where they dared not speak plainly, and I felt myself put on
      my mettle to interpret the father’s hint. My perplexities were increased
      by the belief that he would not have intervened in any matter of small
      moment, and by the conviction, which grew upon me apace, that while I
      stood idle before the hearth my dearest interests and those of France were
      at stake.

 “Michel,” I said at last, addressing the doyen of my secretaries,
      who chanced to be a Provencal, “have you ever seen a boxwood fire?”

 He replied respectfully, but with some show of surprise, that he had not,
      adding that that wood was rendered so valuable to the turner by its
      hardness that few people would be extravagant enough to use it for fuel. I
      assented, and felt the more certain that the Jesuit’s remark contained a
      hidden meaning. The only other clue I had consisted in the apparent
      mistake the father had made as to the king’s residence, and this might
      have been dropped from him in pure inadvertence. Yet I was inclined to
      think it intentional, and construed it as implying that the matter
      concerned the king personally. Which the more alarmed me.

 I passed the day in great anxiety, but toward evening, acting on a sudden
      inspiration, I sent La Trape, my valet, a trusty fellow who had saved my
      life at Cahors, to the Three Pigeons, a large inn in the suburbs, at which
      such travellers from North to South as did not wish to enter the city were
      accustomed to change horses and sometimes to sleep. Acquitting himself of
      the commission I had given him with his usual adroitness, he quickly
      returned with the news that a traveller of rank had passed through three
      days before, having sent in advance to order relays there and at Essonnes.
      La Trape reported that the gentleman had remained in his coach, and that
      none of the inn servants had seen his face.

 “And he had companions?” I said. My mind had not failed already to
      conceive a natural suspicion.

 “Only one, your Grace. The rest were servants.”

 “And that one?”

 “A man in the yard fancied that he recognised M. de la Varenne.”

 “Ah!” I said no more. My agitation was indeed such that, before giving
      reins to it, I bade La Trape withdraw. I could scarcely believe that,
      perfectly acquainted as the king was with the plots which Spain and the
      Catholics were daily weaving for his life, and possessing such unavowed
      but powerful enemies among the great lords as Tremouille and Bouillon, to
      say nothing of Mademoiselle d’Entragues’s half-brother, the Count of
      Auvergne—I could hardly believe that with this knowledge his Majesty
      had been so foolhardy as to travel without guards or attendance to
      Fontainebleau. And yet I now felt an absolute certainty that this was the
      case. The presence of La Varenne also, the confidant of his intrigues,
      informed me of the cause of this wild journey, convincing me that his
      Majesty had given way to the sole weakness of his nature, and was bent on
      one of those adventures of gallantry which had been more becoming in the
      Prince of Bearn than in the king of France. Neither was I at a loss to
      guess the object of his pursuit. It had been lately whispered in the court
      that the king had seen and fallen in love with his mistress’s younger
      sister, Susette d’Entragues, whose home at Malesherbes lay but three
      leagues from Fontainebleau, on the edge of the forest. This placed the
      king’s imprudence in a stronger light, for he had scarcely in France a
      more dangerous enemy than her brother Auvergne; nor had the immense sums
      which he had settled on the elder sister satisfied the mean avarice or
      conciliated the brutish hostility of her father.

 Apprised of all this, I saw that Father Cotton had desired to communicate
      it to me. But his motive I found it less easy to divine. It might have
      been a wish to balk this new passion through my interference, and at the
      same time to expose me to the risk of his Majesty’s anger. Or it might
      simply have been a desire to avert danger from the king’s person. At any
      rate, constant to my rule of ever preferring my master’s interest to his
      favour, I sent for Maignan, my equerry, and bade him have an equipage
      ready at dawn.

 Accordingly at that hour next morning, attended only by La Trape, with a
      groom, a page, and four Swiss, I started, giving out that I was bound for
      Sully to inspect that demesne, which had formerly been the property of my
      family, and of which the refusal had just been offered to me. Under cover
      of this destination I was enabled to reach La Ferte Alais unsuspected.
      There, pretending that the motion of the coach fatigued me, I mounted the
      led horse, without which I never travelled, and bidding La Trape accompany
      me, gave orders to the others to follow at their leisure to Pethiviers,
      where I proposed to stay the night.

 La Ferte Alais, on the borders of the forest, is some five leagues
      westward of Fontainebleau, and as far north of Malesherbes, with which
      last it is connected by a highroad. Having disclosed my intentions to La
      Trape, however, I presently left this road and struck into a path which
      promised to conduct us in the right direction. But the denseness of the
      undergrowth, and the huge piles of gray rocks which lie everywhere strewn
      about the forest, made it difficult to keep for any time in a straight
      line. After being two hours in the saddle we concluded that we had lost
      our way, and were confirmed in this on reaching a clearing, and seeing
      before us a small inn, which La Trape recognised as standing about a
      league and a half on the forest side of Malesherbes.

 We still had ample time to reach Fontainebleau by nightfall, but before
      proceeding it was absolutely necessary that our horses should have rest.
      Dismounting, therefore, I bade La Trape see the sorrel well baited.
      Observing that the inn was a poor place, and no one coming to wait upon
      me, I entered it of my own motion, and found myself at once in a large
      room better furnished with company than accommodation. Three men, who had
      the appearance of such reckless swaggering blades as are generally to be
      found drinking in the inns on the outskirts of Paris, and who come not
      unfrequently to their ends at Montfaucon, were tippling and playing cards
      at a table near the door. They looked up sullenly at my entrance, but
      refrained from saluting me, which, as I was plainly dressed and much
      stained by travel, was in some degree pardonable. By the fire, partaking
      of a coarse meal, was a fourth man of so singular an appearance that I
      must needs describe him. He was of great height and extreme leanness. His
      face matched his form, for it was long and thin, terminating in a small
      peaked beard which, like his hair and mustachios, was as white as snow.
      With all this, his eyes glowed with much of the fire of youth, and his
      brown complexion and sinewy hands seemed still to indicate robust health.
      He was dressed in garments which had once been fashionable, but now bore
      marks of long and rough usage, and I remarked that the point of his sword,
      which, as he sat, trailed on the stones behind him, had worn its way
      through the scabbard. Notwithstanding these signs of poverty, he saluted
      me with the ease and politeness of a gentleman, and bade me with much
      courtesy to share his table and the fire. Accordingly I drew up, and
      called for a bottle of the best wine, being minded to divert myself with
      him.

 I was little prepared, however, for the turn his conversation took, and
      the furious tirade into which he presently broke, the object of which
      proved to be no other than myself! I do not know that I have ever cut so
      whimsical a figure as while hearing my name loaded with reproaches; but,
      being certain that he did not know me, I waited patiently, and soon
      learned both who he was, and the grievance which he was on his way to lay
      before the king. His name was Boisrose, and he had been the leader in that
      gallant capture of Fecamp, which took place while I was in Normandy as the
      king’s representative. His grievance was that, notwithstanding promises in
      my letters, he had been deprived of the government of the place.

 “He leads the king by the ear!” he declaimed loudly, in an accent which
      marked him for a Gascon. “That villain of a De Rosny! But I will show him
      up! I will trounce him!” With that he drew the hilt of his long rapier to
      the front with a gesture so truculent that the three bullies, who had
      stopped to laugh at him, resumed their game in disorder.

 Notwithstanding his hatred for me, I was pleased to meet with a man of so
      singular a temper, whom I also knew to be truly courageous; and I was
      willing to amuse myself further with him. “But,” I said, modestly, “I have
      had some affairs with M. de Rosny, and I have never found him cheat me.”

 “Do not deceive yourself!” he roared, slapping the table. “He is a
      rascal!”

 “Yet,” I ventured to reply, “I have heard that in many respects he is not
      a bad minister.”

 “He is a villain!” he repeated, so loudly as to drown what I would have
      added. “Do not tell me otherwise. But rest assured! be happy, sir! I will
      make the king see him in his true colours! Rest content, sir! I will
      trounce him! He has to do with Armand de Boisrose!”

 Seeing that he was not open to argument,—for, indeed, being opposed,
      he grew exceedingly warm,—I asked him by what channel he intended to
      approach the king, and learned that here he felt a difficulty, since he
      had neither a friend at court nor money to buy one. Being assured that he
      was an honest fellow, and knowing that the narrative of our rencontre and
      its sequel would vastly amuse his Majesty, who loved a jest of this kind,
      I advised Boisrose to go boldly to the king, which, thanking me as
      profusely as he had before reproached me, he agreed to do. With that I
      rose to depart.

 At the last moment it occurred to me to try upon him the shibboleth which
      in Father Cotton’s mouth had so mystified me.

 “This fire burns brightly,” I said, kicking the logs together with my
      riding-boot. “It must be of boxwood.”

 “Of what, sir?” quoth he, politely.

 “Of boxwood, to be sure,” I replied, in a louder tone.

 “My certes!” he exclaimed. “They do not burn boxwood in this country.
      Those are larch trimmings—neither more nor less!”

 While he wondered at my ignorance, I was pleased to discover his, and so
      far I had lost my pains. But it did not escape me that the three gamesters
      had ceased to play and were listening intently to our conversation.
      Moreover, as I moved to the door, they followed me with their eyes; and
      when I turned, after riding a hundred yards, I found that they had come to
      the door and were still gazing after us.

 This prevented me at once remarking that a hound which had which had been
      lying before the fire had accompanied us, and was now running in front,
      now gambolling round us, as the manner of dogs is. When, however, after
      riding about two thirds of a league, we came to a place where the roads
      forked, I had occasion particularly to notice the hound, for, choosing one
      of the paths, it stood in the mouth of it, wagging its tail, and inviting
      us to take that road; and this so pertinaciously that, though the
      directions we had received at the inn would have led us to prefer the
      other, we determined to follow the dog as the more trustworthy guide.

 We had proceeded about four hundred paces when La Trape pointed out that
      the path was growing more narrow and showed few signs of being used. So
      certain did it seem—though the dog still ran confidently ahead—that
      we were again astray, that I was about to draw rein and return, when I
      discovered with some emotion that the undergrowth on the right of the path
      had assumed the character of a thick hedge of box. Though less prone than
      most men to put faith in omens, I accepted this as one, and,
      notwithstanding that it wanted but an hour of sunset, I rode on steadily,
      remarking that, with each turn in the woodland path, the scrub on my left
      also gave place to the sturdy tree which had been in my mind all day.
      Finally we found ourselves passing through an alley of box,—which,
      no long time before, had been clipped and dressed,—until a final
      turn brought me into a cul-de-sac, a kind of arbor, carpeted with grass,
      and so thickly set about as to afford no exit save by the entrance. Here
      the dog placidly stood and wagged its tail, looking up at us.

 I must confess that this termination of the adventure seemed so
      surprising, and the evening light shining on the walls of green round us
      was so full of a solemn quiet, that I was not surprised to hear La Trape
      mutter a short prayer. For my part, assured that something more than
      chance had brought me hither, I dismounted, and spoke encouragement to the
      hound; but it only leaped upon me. Then I walked round the enclosure, and
      presently remarked, close to the hedge, three small patches where the
      grass was slightly trodden down. Another glance told me much, for I saw
      that at these places the hedge, about three feet from the ground, bore
      traces of the axe. Choosing the nearest spot, I stooped, until my eyes
      were level with the hole thus made, and discovered that I was looking
      through a funnel skilfully cut in the wall of box. At my end the opening
      was rather larger than a man’s face; at the other end about as large as
      the palm of the hand. The funnel rose gradually, so that I took the
      further extremity of it to be about seven feet from the ground, and here
      it disclosed a feather dangling on a spray. From the light falling
      strongly on this, I judged it to be not in the hedge, but a pace or two
      from it on the hither side of another fence of box. On examining the
      remaining loopholes I discovered that they bore upon the same feather.

 My own mind was at once made up, but I bade my valet go through the same
      investigation, and then asked him whether he had ever seen an ambush of
      this kind laid for game. He replied at once that the shot would pass over
      the tallest stag; and, fortified by this, I mounted without saying more,
      and we retraced our steps. The hound presently slipped away, and without
      further adventure we reached Fontainebleau a little after sunset.

 I expected to be received by the king with coldness and displeasure, but
      it chanced that a catarrh had kept him within doors all day, and, unable
      to hunt or to visit his new flame, he had been at leisure in this palace
      without a court to consider the imprudence he was committing. He received
      me, therefore, with the hearty laugh of a school-boy detected in a petty
      fault; and as I hastened to relate to him some of the things which M. de
      Boisrose had said of the Baron de Rosny, I soon had the gratification of
      perceiving that my presence was not taken amiss. His Majesty gave orders
      that bedding should be furnished for my pavilion, and that his household
      should wait on me, and himself sent me from his table a couple of chickens
      and a fine melon, bidding me at the same time to come to him when I had
      supped.

 I did so, and found him alone in his closet, awaiting me with impatience,
      for he had already divined that I had not made this journey merely to
      reproach him. Before informing him, however, of my suspicions, I craved
      leave to ask him one or two questions, and, in particular, whether he had
      been in the habit of going to Malesherbes daily.

 “Daily,” he admitted, with a grimace. “What more, grand master?”

 “By what road, sire?”

 “I have commonly hunted in the morning and visited Malesherbes at midday.
      I have returned as a rule by the bridle-path, which crosses the Rock of
      the Serpents.”

 “Patience, sir, one moment,” I said. “Does that path run anywhere through
      a plantation of box?”

 “To be sure,” he answered, without hesitation. “About half a mile on this
      side of the rock it skirts Madame Catherine’s maze.”

 Thereon I told the king without reserve all that had happened. He listened
      with the air of apparent carelessness which he always assumed when the
      many plots against his life were under discussion; but at the end he
      embraced me again and again with tears in his eyes.

 “France is beholden to you,” he said. “I have never had, nor shall have,
      such another servant as you, Rosny! The three ruffians at the inn,” he
      continued, “are the tools, of course, and the hound has been in the habit
      of accompanying them to the spot. Yesterday, I remember, I walked by that
      place with the bridle on my arm.”

 “By a special providence, sire,” I said, gravely.

 “It is true,” he answered, crossing himself, a thing I had never yet known
      him to do in private. “But now, who is the craftsman who has contrived
      this pretty plot? Tell me that, grand master.”

 On this point, however, though I had my suspicions, I begged leave to be
      excused speaking until I had slept upon it. “Heaven forbid,” I said, “that
      I should expose any man to your Majesty’s resentment without cause. The
      wrath of kings is the forerunner of death.”

 “I have not heard,” the king answered, drily, “that the Duke of Bouillon
      has called in a leech yet.”

 Before retiring I learned that his Majesty had with him a score of light
      horse, whom La Varenne had requisitioned from Melun, and that some of
      these had each day awaited him at Malesherbes, and returned with him.
      Further, that Henry had been in the habit of wearing, when riding back in
      the evening, a purple cloak over his hunting-suit; a fact well known, I
      felt sure, to the assassins, who, unseen and in perfect safety, could fire
      at the exact moment when the cloak obscured the feather, and could then
      make their escape, secured by the stout wall of box, from immediate
      pursuit.

 I was aroused in the morning by La Varenne coming to my bedside and
      bidding me hasten to the king. I did so, and found his Majesty already in
      his boots and walking on the terrace with Coquet, his master of the
      household, Vitry, La Varenne, and a gentleman unknown to me. On seeing me
      he dismissed them, and, while I was still a great way off, called out,
      chiding me for my laziness; then taking me by the hand in the most
      obliging manner, he made me walk up and down with him, while he told me
      what further thoughts he had of this affair; and, hiding nothing from me,
      even as he bade me speak to him whatever I thought without reserve, he
      required to know whether I suspected that the Entragues family were
      cognizant of this.

 “I cannot say, sire,” I answered, prudently.

 “But you suspect?”

 “In your Majesty’s cause I suspect all,” I replied.

 He sighed, and seeing that my eyes wandered to the group of gentlemen who
      had betaken themselves to the terrace steps, and were thence watching us,
      he asked me if I would answer for them. “For Vitry, who sleeps at my feet
      when I lie alone? For Coquet?”

 “For three of them I will, sire,” I answered, firmly. “The fourth I do not
      know.”

 “He is M. Louis d’Entragues.”

 “Ah! the count of Auvergne’s half-brother?” I muttered. “And lately
      returned from service in Savoy? I do not know him, your Majesty. I will
      answer to-morrow.”

 “And to-day?” the king asked, with impatience.

 Thereupon I begged him to act as he had done each day since his arrival at
      Fontainebleau—to hunt in the morning, to take his midday meal at
      Malesherbes, to talk to all as if he had no suspicion; only on his return
      to take any road save that which passed the Rock of the Serpents.

 The king turning to rejoin the others, I found that their attention was no
      longer directed to us, but to a singular figure which had made its
      appearance on the skirts of the group, and was seemingly prevented from
      joining it outright only by the evident merriment with which three of the
      four courtiers regarded it. The fourth, M. d’Entragues, did not seem to be
      equally diverted with the stranger’s quaint appearance, nor did I fail to
      notice, being at the moment quick to perceive the slightest point in his
      conduct, that, while the others were nudging one another, his countenance,
      darkened by an Italian sun, gloomed on the new-comer with an aspect of
      angry discomfiture. On his side, M. de Boisrose—for he it was, the
      aged fashion of his dress more conspicuous than ever—stood eyeing
      the group in mingled pride and resentment, until, aware of his Majesty’s
      approach, and seeing me in intimate converse with him, he joyfully stepped
      forward, a look of relief taking place of all others on his countenance.

 “Ha, well met!” quoth the king in my ear. “It is your friend of yesterday.
      Now we will have some sport.”

 Accordingly, the old soldier approaching with many low bows, the king
      spoke to him graciously, and bade him say what he sought. It happened then
      as I had expected. Boisrose, after telling the king his name, turned to me
      and humbly begged that I would explain his complaint, which I consented to
      do, and did as follows:

 “This, sire,” I said, gravely, “is an old and brave soldier, who formerly
      served your Majesty to good purpose in Normandy; but he has been cheated
      out of the recompense which he there earned by the trickery and chicanery
      of one of your Majesty’s counsellors, the Baron de Rosny.”

 I could not continue, for the courtiers, on hearing this from my mouth,
      and on discovering that the stranger’s odd appearance was but a prelude to
      the real diversion, could not restrain their mirth. The king, concealing
      his own amusement, turned to them with an angry air, and bade them be
      silent; and the Gascon, encouraged by this, and by the bold manner in
      which I had stated his grievance, scowled at them gloriously.

 “He alleges, sire,” I continued, with the same gravity, “that the Baron de
      Rosny, after promising him the government of Fecamp, bestowed it on
      another, being bribed to do so, and has besides been guilty of many base
      acts which make him unworthy of your Majesty’s confidence. That, I think,
      is your complaint, M. de Boisrose?” I concluded, turning to the soldier,
      whom my deep seriousness so misled that he took up the story, and, pouring
      out his wrongs, did not fail to threaten to trounce me, or to add that I
      was a villain!

 He might have said more, but at this the courtiers, perceiving that the
      king broke into a smile, lost all control over themselves, and, giving
      vent suddenly to loud peals of laughter, clasped one another by the
      shoulders, and reeled to and fro in an ecstasy of enjoyment. This led the
      king to give way also, and he laughed heartily, clapping me again and
      again on the back; so that, in fine, there were only two serious persons
      present—the poor Boisrose, who took all for lunatics, and myself,
      who began to think that perhaps the jest had been carried far enough.

 My master presently saw this, and, collecting himself, turned to the
      amazed Gascon.

 “Your complaint is one,” he said, “which should not be lightly made. Do
      you know the Baron de Rosny?”

 Boisrose, by this time vastly mystified, said he did not.

 “Then,” said the king, “I will give you an opportunity of becoming
      acquainted with him. I shall refer your complaint to him, and he will
      decide upon it. More,” he continued, raising his hand for silence as
      Boisrose, starting forward, would have appealed to him, “I will introduce
      you to him now. This is the Baron de Rosny.”

 The old soldier glared at me for a moment with starting eyeballs, and a
      dreadful despair seemed to settle on his face. He threw himself on his
      knees before the king.

 “Then, sire,” said he, in a heartrending voice, “am I ruined! My six
      children must starve, and my young wife die by the roadside!”

 “That,” answered the king, gravely, “must be for the Baron de Rosny to
      decide. I leave you to your audience.”

 He made a sign to the others, and, followed by them, walked slowly along
      the terrace; the while Boisrose, who had risen to his feet, stood looking
      after him like one demented, shaking, and muttering that it was a cruel
      jest, and that he had bled for the king, and the king made sport of him.

 Presently I touched him on the arm.

 “Come, have you nothing to say to me, M. de Boisrose?” I asked, quietly.
      “You are a brave soldier, and have done France service; why then need you
      fear? The Baron de Rosny is one man, the king’s minister is another. It is
      the latter who speaks to you now. The office of lieutenant-general of the
      ordnance in Normandy is empty. It is worth twelve thousand livres by the
      year. I appoint you to it.”

 He answered that I mocked him, and that he was going mad, so that it was
      long before I could persuade him that I was in earnest. When I at last
      succeeded, his gratitude knew no bounds, and he thanked me again and again
      with the tears running down his face.

 “What I have done for you,” I said, modestly, “is the reward of your
      bravery. I ask only that you will not another time think that they who
      rule kingdoms are as those gay popinjays yonder.”

 In a transport of delight he reiterated his offers of service, and,
      feeling sure that I had now gained him completely, I asked him on a sudden
      where he had seen Louis d’Entragues before. In two words the truth came
      out. He had observed him on the previous day in conference at the forest
      inn with the three bullies whom I had remarked there. I was not surprised
      at this; D’Entragues’s near kinship to the Count of Auvergne, and the
      mingled feelings with which I knew that the family regarded Henry,
      preparing me to expect treachery in that quarter. Moreover, the nature of
      the ambush was proof that its author resided in the neighbourhood and was
      intimately acquainted with the forest. I should have carried this
      information at once to my master, but I learned that he had already
      started, and thus baffled, and believing that his affection for
      Mademoiselle d’Entragues, if not for her sister, would lead him to act
      with undue leniency, I conceived and arranged a plan of my own.

 About noon, therefore, I set out as if for a ride, attended by La Trape
      only, but at some distance from the palace we were joined by Boisrose,
      whom I had bidden to be at that point well armed and mounted. Thus
      reinforced, for the Gascon was still strong, and in courage a Grillon, I
      proceeded to Malesherbes by a circuitous route which brought me within
      sight of the gates about the middle of the afternoon. I then halted under
      cover of the trees, and waited until I saw the king, attended by several
      ladies and gentlemen, and followed by eight troopers, issue from the
      chateau. His Majesty was walking, his horse being led behind him; and
      seeing this I rode out and approached the party as if I had that moment
      arrived to meet the king.

 It would not ill become me on this occasion to make some reflections on
      the hollowness of court life, which has seldom been better exemplified
      than in the scene before me. The sun was low, but its warm beams, falling
      aslant on the gaily dressed group at the gates and on the flowered
      terraces and gray walls behind them, seemed to present a picture at once
      peaceful and joyous. Yet I knew that treachery and death were lurking in
      the midst, and it was only by an effort that, as I rode up, I could make
      answer to the thousand obliging things with which I was greeted, and of
      which not the least polite were said by M. d’Entragues and his son. I took
      pains to observe Mademoiselle Susette, a beautiful girl not out of her
      teens, but noways comparable, as it seemed to me, in expression and
      vivacity, with her famous sister. She was walking beside the king, her
      hands full of flowers, and her face flushed with excitement and timidity,
      and I came quickly to the conclusion that she knew nothing of what was
      intended by her family, who, having made the one sister the means of
      gratifying their avarice, were now baiting the trap of their revenge with
      the other.

 Henry parted from her at length, and mounted his horse amid a ripple of
      laughter and compliments, D’Entragues holding the stirrup and his son the
      cloak. I observed that the latter, as I had expected, was prepared to
      accompany us, which rendered my plan more feasible. Our road lay for a
      league in the direction of the Rock of the Serpents, the track which
      passed the latter presently diverging from it. For some distance we rode
      along in easy talk, but, on approaching the point of separation, the king
      looked at me with a whimsical air, as though he would lay on me the burden
      of finding an excuse for avoiding the shorter way home. I had foreseen
      this, and looked round to ascertain the position of our company. I found
      that La Varenne and D’Entragues were close behind us, while the troopers,
      with La Trape and Boisrose, were a hundred paces farther to the rear, and
      Vitry and Coquet had dropped out of sight. This being so, I suddenly
      reined in my horse so as to back it into that of D’Entragues, and then
      wheeled round on the latter, taking care to be between him and the king.

 “M. Louis d’Entragues,” I said, dropping the mask and addressing him with
      all the scorn and detestation which I felt, and which he deserved, “your
      plot is discovered! If you would save your life confess to his Majesty
      here and now all you know, and throw yourself on his mercy!”

 I confess that I had failed to take into account the pitch to which his
      nerves would be strung at such a time, and had expected to produce a
      greater effect than followed my words. His hand went indeed to his breast,
      but it was hard to say which was the more discomposed, La Varenne or he.
      And the manner in which, with scorn and defiance, he flung back my
      accusation in my teeth, lacked neither vigour nor the semblance of
      innocence. While Henry was puzzled, La Varenne was appalled. I saw that I
      had gone too far, or not far enough, and at once calling into my face and
      form all the sternness in my power, I bade the traitor remain where he
      was, then turning to his Majesty I craved leave to speak to him apart.

 He hesitated, looking from me to D’Entragues with an air of displeasure
      which embraced us both, but in the end, without permitting M. Louis to
      speak, he complied, and, going aside with me, bade me, with coldness,
      speak out.

 As soon, however, as I had repeated to him Boisrose’s words, his face
      underwent a change, for he, too, had remarked the discomfiture which the
      latter’s appearance had caused D’Entragues in the morning.

 “Ha! the villain!” he said. “I do not now think you precipitate. Arrest
      him at once, but do him no harm!”

 “If he resist, sire?” I asked.

 “He will not,” the king answered. “And in no case harm him! You understand
      me?”

 I bowed, having my own thoughts on the subject, and the king, without
      looking again at D’Entragues, rode quickly away. M. Louis tried to follow,
      and cried loudly after him, but I thrust my horse in the way, and bade him
      consider himself a prisoner; at the same time requesting La Varenne, with
      Vitry and Coquet, who had come up and were looking on like men
      thunderstruck, to take four of the guards and follow the king.

 “Then, sir, what do you intend to do with me?” D’Entragues asked, the air
      of fierceness with which he looked from me to the six men who remained
      barely disguising his apprehensions.

 “That depends, M. Louis,” I replied, recurring to my usual tone of
      politeness, “on your answers to three questions.”

 He shrugged his shoulders. “Ask them,” he said, curtly.

 “Do you deny that you have laid an ambush for the king on the road which
      passes the Rock of the Serpents?”

 “Absolutely.”

 “Or that you were yesterday at an inn near here in converse with three
      men?”

 “Absolutely.”

 “Do you deny that there is such an ambush laid?”

 “Absolutely,” he repeated, with scorn. “It is an old wives’ story. I would
      stake my life on it.”

 “Enough,” I answered, slowly. “You have been your own judge. The evening
      grows cold, and as you are my prisoner I must have a care of you. Kindly
      put on this cloak and precede me, M. d’Entragues. We return to
      Fontainebleau by the Rock of the Serpents.”

 His eyes meeting mine, it seemed to me that for a second he held his
      breath and hesitated, while a cold shadow fell and dwelt upon his sallow
      face. But the stern, gloomy countenances of La Trape and Boisrose, who had
      ridden up to his rein, and were awaiting his answer with their swords
      drawn, determined him. With a loud laugh he took the cloak. “It is new, I
      hope?” he said, lightly, as he threw it over his shoulders.

 It was not, and I apologised, adding, however, that no one but the king
      had worn it. On this he settled it about him; and having heard me strictly
      charge the two guards who followed with their arquebuses ready, to fire on
      him should he try to escape, he turned his horse’s head into the path and
      rode slowly along it, while we followed a few paces behind in double file.

 The sun had set, and such light as remained fell cold and gray between the
      trees. The crackling of a stick under a horse’s hoof, or the ring of a
      spur against a scabbard, were the only sounds which broke the stillness of
      the wood as we proceeded. We had gone some little way when M. Louis
      halted, and, turning in his saddle, called to me.

 “M. de Rosny,” he said,—the light had so far failed that I could
      scarcely see his face,—“I have a meeting with the Viscount de Caylus
      on Saturday about a little matter of a lady’s glove. Should anything
      prevent my appearance—”

 “I will see that a proper explanation is given,” I answered, bowing.

 “Or if M. d’Entragues will permit me,” eagerly exclaimed the Gascon, who
      was riding by my side, “M. de Boisrose of St. Palais, gently born, through
      before unknown to him, I will appear in his place and make the Viscount de
      Caylus swallow the glove.”

 “You will?” said M. Louis, with politeness. “You are a gentleman. I am
      obliged to you.”

 He waved his hand with a gesture which I afterward well remembered, and,
      giving his horse the rein, went forward along the path at a brisk walk. We
      followed, and I had just remarked that a plant of box was beginning here
      and there to take the place of the usual undergrowth, when a sheet of
      flame seemed to leap out through the dusk to meet him, and, his horse
      rearing wildly, he fell headlong from the saddle without word or cry. My
      men would have sprung forward before the noise of the report had died
      away, and might possibly have overtaken one or more of the assassins; but
      I restrained them. When La Trape dismounted and raised the fallen man, the
      latter was dead.

 Such were the circumstances, now for the first time made public, which
      attended the discovery of this, the least known, yet one of the most
      dangerous, of the many plots which were directed against the life of my
      master. The course which I adopted may be blamed by some, but it is enough
      for me that after the lapse of years it is approved by my conscience and
      by the course of events. For it was ever the misfortune of that great king
      to treat those with leniency whom no indulgence could win; and I bear with
      me to this day the bitter assurance that, had the fate which overtook
      Louis d’Entragues embraced the whole of that family, the blow which ten
      years later cut short Henry’s career would never have been struck.

  

 



 End of Project Gutenberg’s Stories By English Authors: France, by Various