A few years ago, the "Hon." John Whimpery Brass, of Georgia, one of
the "thoughtful patriots" of the period, who now and then found
time to lay aside the cares of statecraft to nurse little private
jobs of his own, allured by the seductive offers of "Wogan & Co."
of New York City, wrote to that somewhat mythical concern proposing
to become their agent for the circulation of the "queer."  Even
after receiving the first installment of their wares, the honorable
gentleman did not comprehend that the firm dealt exclusively in
sawdust, not in currency.  He wrote again, complaining that, after
a journey of sixty miles over a rough road to the nearest reliable
express office, he found nothing but a worthless package, marked
"C. O. D.," awaiting him.  Did Wogan & Co. distrust either his
parts or fidelity?  He ventured to assert that no man in the State
could serve them so effectually.  He had just run for Congress, and
though beaten at the polls by "fraud," intended to contest the seat
with the chances of success in his favor.  The mountaineers among
whom he lived did not care whether the money in their pockets was
good or bad so long as it circulated.  He could put thousands of
counterfeits afloat without the slightest fear of detection.  His
constituency believed in him and would stand by him.  Currency was
very scarce in that congressional district, and it would really be
doing his people a great favor to give them more.  After setting
forth the mutual benefits to accrue from trusting him, he appealed
to Wogan & Co. with the vehemence and energy of the sewing-machine
man, or life-insurance agent, to send on the goods without further
delay.  They should never regret dealing with him, his character
and standing being a sufficient guaranty that he could not play
false.  He was acting in good faith, and expected like treatment in
return.

Unfortunately for the political aspirations of "Hon." John Whimpery
Brass, the authorities not long after made a descent upon the den
of Wogan & Co., finding a great many letters from credulous fools,
and a large supply of sawdust--their only stock in trade.  The
missives of the prospective congressman were published, thus
gaining much more extensive currency than he proposed to give to
the imitation greenbacks.  It was supposed that the noisy fellow
would slink away to some cave in his native mountains, and never
show his brazen face among honest people again.  But the impudence
of "Hon." John Whimpery Brass rose to the level of the emergency.
Instead of hiding or hanging himself, he published a card
representing that he embarked in the scheme for the purpose of
entrapping Wogan & Co. and bringing them to justice.

Pathetic was the spectacle, showing the confidence of an ingenuous
soul in its own prowess, of the volunteer detective, digging
parallels on the southern spurs of the Blue Ridge for the capture
of the wily swindler a thousand miles away!  Armed with a kernel of
corn, the doughty gosling sets forth to catch the wicked fox that
is preying on the flock!  If the bold mountaineers, the
constituency of "Hon." John Whimpery Brass, cannot commend the
discretion displayed by the projector of the enterprise, they must
certainly admire his pluck.  In face of the odds, few goslings
would volunteer.

Perhaps the card might have been accepted by the more trustful
class of adherents as a satisfactory explanation of the letters,
had not the aspiring statesman in course of time fallen under the
ban of the law for defrauding widows of their pensions, the
campaign against Wogan & Co. having so completely exhausted the
virtue of the amateur who planned it as to leave no residue to
fructify in subsequent operations.