AN IDYL OF LONDON, By Beatrice Harraden
    

      It was one o’clock, and many of the students in the National Gallery had
      left off work and were refreshing themselves with lunch and conversation.
      There was one old worker who had not stirred from his place, but he had
      put down his brush, and had taken from his pocket a small book, which was
      like its owner—thin and shabby of covering. He seemed to find
      pleasure in reading it, for he turned over its pages with all the
      tenderness characteristic of one who loves what he reads. Now and again he
      glanced at his unfinished copy of the beautiful portrait of Andrea del
      Sarto, and once his eyes rested on another copy next to his, better and
      truer than his, and once he stopped to pick up a girl’s prune-coloured
      tie, which had fallen from the neighbouring easel. After this he seemed to
      become unconscious of his surroundings, as unconscious, indeed, as any one
      of the pictures near him. Any one might have been justified in mistaking
      him for the portrait of a man, but that his lips moved; for it was his
      custom to read softly to himself.
    

      The students passed back to their places, not troubling to notice him,
      because they knew from experience that he never noticed them, and that all
      greetings were wasted on him and all words were wanton expenditure of
      breath. They had come to regard him very much in the same way as many of
      us regard the wonders of nature, without astonishment, without any
      questionings, and often without any interest. One girl, a new-comer, did
      chance to say to her companion:
    

      “How ill that old man looks!”
     

      “Oh, he always looks like that,” was the answer. “You will soon get
      accustomed to him. Come along! I must finish my ‘Blind Beggar’ this
      afternoon.”
     

      In a few minutes most of the workers were busy again, although there were
      some who continued to chat quietly, and several young men who seemed
      reluctant to leave their girl friends, and who were by no means encouraged
      to go! One young man came to claim his book and pipe, which he had left in
      the charge of a bright-eyed girl, who was copying Sir Joshua’s “Angels.”
       She gave him his treasures, and received in exchange a dark-red rose,
      which she fastened in her belt; and then he returned to his portrait of
      Mrs. Siddons. But there was something in his disconsolate manner which
      made one suspect that he thought less of Mrs. Siddons’s beauty than of the
      beauty of the girl who was wearing the dark-red rose! The strangers,
      strolling through the rooms, stopped now and again to peer curiously at
      the students’ work. They were stared at indignantly by the students
      themselves, but they made no attempt to move away, and even ventured
      sometimes to pass criticisms of no tender character on some of the copies.
      The fierce-looking man who was copying “The Horse Fair” deliberately put
      down his brushes, folded his arms, and waited defiantly until they had
      gone by; but others, wiser in their generation, went on painting calmly.
      Several workers were painting the new Raphael; one of them was a
      white-haired old gentlewoman, whose hand was trembling, and yet skilful
      still. More than once she turned to give a few hints to the young girl
      near her, who looked in some distress and doubt. Just the needful help was
      given, and then the girl plied her brush merrily, smiling the while with
      pleasure and gratitude. There seemed to be a genial, kindly influence at
      work, a certain homeliness too, which must needs assert itself where many
      are gathered together, working side by side. All made a harmony; the
      wonderful pictures, collected from many lands and many centuries, each
      with its meaning and its message from the past; the ever-present memories
      of the painters themselves, who had worked and striven and conquered; and
      the living human beings, each with his wealth of earnest endeavour and
      hope.
    

      Meanwhile the old man read on uninterruptedly until two hands were put
      over his book and a gentle voice said:
    

      “Mr. Lindall, you have had no lunch again. Do you know, I begin to hate
      Lucretius. He always makes you forget your food.”
     

      The old man looked up, and something like a smile passed over his joyless
      face when he saw Helen Stanley bending over him.
    

      “Ah,” he answered, “you must not hate Lucretius. I have had more pleasant
      hours with him than with any living person.”
     

      He rose and came forward to examine her copy of Andrea del Sarto’s
      portrait.
    

      “Yours is better than mine,” he said, critically; “in fact, mine is a
      failure. I think I shall only get a small price for mine; indeed, I doubt
      whether I shall get sufficient to pay for my funeral.”
     

      “You speak dismally,” she answered, smiling.
    

      “I missed you yesterday,” he continued, half dreamily. “I left my work,
      and I wandered through the rooms, and I did not even read Lucretius.
      Something seemed to have gone from my life. At first I thought it must be
      my favourite Raphael, or the Murillo; but it was neither the one nor the
      other; it was you. That was strange, wasn’t it? But you know we get
      accustomed to anything, and perhaps I should have missed you less the
      second day, and by the end of a week I should not have missed you at all.
      Mercifully, we have in us the power of forgetting.”
     

      “I do not wish to plead for myself,” she said, “but I do not believe that
      you or any one could really forget. That which outsiders call
      forgetfulness might be called by the better name of resignation.”
     

      “I don’t care about talking any more now,” he said, suddenly, and he went
      to his easel and worked silently at his picture; and Helen Stanley glanced
      at him, and thought she had never seen her old companion look so forlorn
      and desolate as he did to-day. He looked as if no gentle hand had ever
      been placed on him in kindliness and affection, and that seemed to her a
      terrible thing; for she was one of those prehistorically minded persons
      who persist in believing that affection is as needful to human life as
      rain to flower life. When first she came to work at the gallery—some
      twelve months ago—she had noticed this old man, and had wished for
      his companionship; she was herself lonely and sorrowful, and, although
      young, had to fight her own battles, and had learned something of the
      difficulties of fighting, and this had given her an experience beyond her
      years. She was not more than twenty-four years of age, but she looked
      rather older, and, though she had beautiful eyes, full of meaning and
      kindness, her features were decidedly plain as well as unattractive. There
      were some in the gallery who said among themselves that, as Mr. Lindall
      had waited so many years before talking to any one, he might have chosen
      some one better worth the waiting for! But they soon became accustomed to
      seeing Helen Stanley and Mr. Lindall together, and they laughed less than
      before; and meanwhile the acquaintance ripened into a sort of friendship,
      half sulky on his part and wholly kind on her part. He told her nothing
      about himself, and he asked nothing about herself; for weeks he never even
      knew her name. Sometimes he did not speak at all, and the two friends
      would work silently side by side until it was time to go; and then he
      waited until she was ready, and walked with her across Trafalgar Square,
      where they parted and went their own ways.
    

      But occasionally, when she least expected it, he would speak with glowing
      enthusiasm on art; then his eyes seemed to become bright, and his bent
      figure more erect, and his whole bearing proud and dignified. There were
      times, too, when he would speak on other subjects: on the morality of free
      thought—on Bruno, of blessed memory, on him, and scores of others
      too. He would speak of the different schools of philosophy; he would laugh
      at himself, and at all who, having given time and thought to the study of
      life’s complicated problems, had not reached one step further than the
      Old-World thinkers. Perhaps he would quote one of his favourite
      philosophers, and then suddenly relapse into silence, returning to his
      wonted abstraction and to his indifference to his surroundings. Helen
      Stanley had learned to understand his ways and to appreciate his mind,
      and, without intruding on him in any manner, had put herself gently into
      his life as his quiet champion and his friend. No one in her presence
      dared speak slightingly of the old man, or to make fun of his tumble-down
      appearance, or of his worn-out silk hat with a crack in the side, or of
      his rag of a black tie, which, together with his overcoat, had “seen
      better days.” Once she brought her needle and thread, and darned the torn
      sleeve during her lunch-time; and, though he never knew it, it was a
      satisfaction to her to have helped him.
    

      To-day she noticed that he was painting badly, and that he seemed to take
      no interest in his work; but she went on busily with her own picture, and
      was so engrossed in it that she did not at first observe that he had
      packed up his brushes and was preparing to go home.
    

      “Three more strokes,” he said, quietly, “and you will have finished your
      picture. I shall never finish mine; perhaps you will be good enough to set
      it right for me. I am not coming here again. I don’t seem to have caught
      the true expression; what do you think? But I am not going to let it worry
      me, for I am sure you will promise to do your best for me. See, I will
      hand over these colours and these brushes to you, and no doubt you will
      accept the palette as well. I have no further use for it.”
     

      Helen Stanley took the palette which he held out toward her, and looked at
      him as though she would wish to question him.
    

      “It is very hot here,” he continued, “and I am going out. I am tired of
      work.”
     

      He hesitated, and then added, “I should like you to come with me, if you
      can spare the time.”
     

      She packed up her things at once, and the two friends moved slowly away,
      he gazing absently at the pictures, and she wondering in her mind as to
      the meaning of his strange mood.
    

      When they were on the steps inside the building, he turned to Helen
      Stanley and said:
    

      “I should like to go back to the pictures once more. I feel as if I must
      stand among them just a little longer. They have been my companions for so
      long that they are almost part of myself. I can close my eyes and recall
      them faithfully. But I want to take a last look at them; I want to feel
      once more the presence of the great masters, and to refresh my mind with
      their genius. When I look at their work I think of their life, and can
      only wonder at their death. It was so strange that they should die.”
     

      They went back together, and he took her to his favourite pictures, but
      remained speechless before them, and she did not disturb his thoughts. At
      last he said:
    

      “I am ready to go. I have said farewell to them all. I know nothing more
      wonderful than being among a number of fine pictures. It is almost
      overwhelming. Once expects nature to be grand, but one does not expect man
      to be grand.”
     

      “You know we don’t agree there,” she answered. “I expect everything
      grand and great from man.”
     

      They went out of the gallery, and into Trafalgar Square. It was a
      scorching afternoon in August, but there was some cooling comfort in
      seeing the dancing water of the fountains sparkling so brightly in the
      sunshine.
    

      “Do you mind stopping here a few minutes?” he said. “I should like to sit
      down and watch. There is so much to see.”
     

      She led the way to a seat, one end of which was occupied by a workman, who
      was sleeping soundly, and snoring too, his arms folded tightly together.
      He had a little clay pipe in the corner of his mouth; it seemed to be
      tucked in so snugly that there was not much danger of its falling to the
      ground. At last Helen spoke to her companion.
    

      “What do you mean by saying that you will not be able to finish your
      picture? Perhaps you are not well. Indeed, you don’t look well. You make
      me anxious, for I have a great regard for you.”
     

      “I am ill and suffering,” he answered, quietly. “I thought I should have
      died yesterday; but I made up my mind to live until I saw you again, and I
      thought I would ask you to spend the afternoon with me, and go with me to
      Westminster Abbey, and sit with me in the cloisters. I do not feel able to
      go by myself, and I know of no one to ask except you; and I believed you
      would not refuse me, for you have been very kind to me. I do not quite
      understand why you have been kind to me, but I am wonderfully grateful to
      you. Today I heard some one in the gallery say that you were plain. I
      turned round and I said, ‘I beg your pardon; I think she is very
      beautiful.’ I think they laughed, and that puzzled me; for you have always
      seemed to me a very beautiful person.”
     

      At that moment the little clay pipe fell from the workman’s mouth and was
      broken into bits. He awoke with a start, gazed stupidly at the old man and
      his companion, and at the broken clay pipe.
    

      “Curse my luck!” he said, yawning. “I was fond of that damned little
      pipe.”
     

      The old man drew his own pipe and his own tobacco-pouch from his pocket.
    

      “Take these, stranger,” he said. “I don’t want them. And good luck to
      you.”
     

      The man’s face brightened up as he took the pipe and pouch.
    

      “You’re uncommon kind,” he said. “Can you spare them?” he added, holding
      them out half reluctantly.
    

      “Yes,” answered the old man; “I shall not smoke again. You may as well
      have these matches too.”
     

      The labourer put them in his pocket, smiled his thanks, and walked some
      little distance off; and Helen watched him examine his new pipe, and then
      fill it with tobacco and light it.
    

      Mr. Lindall proposed that they should be getting on their way to
      Westminster, and they soon found themselves in the abbey. They sat
      together in the Poets’ Corner; a smile of quiet happiness broke over the
      old man’s tired face as he looked around and took in all the solemn beauty
      and grandeur of the resting-place of the great.
    

      “You know,” he said, half to himself, half to his companion, “I have no
      belief of any kind, and no hopes and no fears; but all through my life it
      has been a comfort to me to sit quietly in a church or a cathedral. The
      graceful arches, the sun shining through the stained windows, the vaulted
      roof, the noble columns, have helped me to understand the mystery which
      all our books of philosophy cannot make clear, though we bend over them
      year after year, and grow old over them, old in age and in spirit. Though
      I myself have never been outwardly a worshipper, I have never sat in a
      place of worship but that, for the time being, I have felt a better man.
      But directly the voice of doctrine or dogma was raised the spell was
      broken for me, and that which I hoped was being made clear had no further
      meaning for me. There was only one voice which ever helped me, the voice
      of the organ, arousing me, thrilling me, filling me with strange longing,
      with welcome sadness, with solemn gladness. I have always thought that
      music can give an answer when everything else is of no avail. I do not
      know what you believe.”
     

      “I am so young to have found out,” she said, almost pleadingly.
    

      “Don’t worry yourself,” he answered, kindly. “Be brave and strong, and let
      the rest go. I should like to live long enough to see what you will make
      of your life. I believe you will never be false to yourself or to any one.
      That is rare. I believe you will not let any lower ideal take the place of
      your high ideal of what is beautiful and noble in art, in life. I believe
      that you will never let despair get the upper hand of you. If it does you
      may as well die; yes, you may as well. And I entreat you not to lose your
      entire faith in humanity. There is nothing like that for withering up the
      very core of the heart. I tell you, humanity and nature have so much in
      common with each other that if you lose part of your pleasure in the
      latter; you will see less beauty in the trees, the flowers, and the
      fields, less grandeur in the mighty mountains and the sea. The seasons
      will come and go, and you will scarcely heed their coming and going:
      winter will settle over your soul, just as it settled over mine. And you
      see what I am.”
     

      They had now passed into the cloisters, and they sat down in one of the
      recesses of the windows, and looked out upon the rich plot of grass which
      the cloisters enclose. There was not a soul there except themselves; the
      cool and the quiet and the beauty of the spot refreshed these pilgrims,
      and they rested in calm enjoyment.
    

      Helen was the first to break the silence.
    

      “I am glad you have brought me here,” she said; “I shall never grumble now
      at not being able to afford a fortnight in the country. This is better
      than anything else.”
     

      “It has always been my summer holiday to come here,” he said. “When I
      first came I was like you, young and hopeful, and I had wonderful visions
      of what I intended to do and to be. Here it was I made a vow that I would
      become a great painter, and win for myself a resting place in this very
      abbey. There is humour in the situation, is there not?”
     

      “I don’t like to hear you say that,” she answered. “It is not always
      possible for us to fulfil all our ambitions. Still, it is better to have
      had them, and failed of them, than not to have had them at all.”
     

      “Possibly,” he replied, coldly. Then he added, “I wish you would tell me
      about yourself. You have always interested me.”
     

      “I have nothing to tell you about myself,” she answered, frankly. “I am
      alone in the world, without friends and without relations. The very name I
      use is not a real name. I was a foundling. At times I am sorry I do not
      belong to any one, and at other times I am glad. You know I am fond of
      books and of art, so my life is not altogether empty; and I find my
      pleasure in hard work. When I saw you at the gallery I wished to know you,
      and I asked one of the students who you were. He told me you were a
      misanthrope. Then I did not care so much about knowing you, until one day
      you spoke to me about my painting, and that was the beginning of our
      friendship.”
     

      “Forty years ago,” he said, sadly, “the friend of my boyhood deceived me.
      I had not thought it possible that he could be false to me. He screened
      himself behind me, and became prosperous and respected at the expense of
      my honour. I vowed I would never again make a friend. A few years later,
      when I was beginning to hold up my head, the woman whom I loved deceived
      me. Then I put from me all affection and all love. Greater natures than
      mine are better able to bear these troubles, but my heart contracted and
      withered up.”
     

      He paused for a moment, many recollections overpowering him. Then he went
      on telling her the history of his life, unfolding to her the story of his
      hopes and ambitions, describing to her the very home where he was born,
      and the dark-eyed sister whom he had loved, and with whom he had played
      over the daisied fields, and through the carpeted woods, and all among the
      richly tinted bracken. One day he was told she was dead, and that he must
      never speak her name; but he spoke it all the day and all the night,—Beryl,
      nothing but Beryl,—and he looked for her in the fields and in the
      woods and among the bracken. It seemed as if he had unlocked the casket of
      his heart, closed for so many years, and as if all the memories of the
      past and all the secrets of his life were rushing out, glad to be free
      once more, and grateful for the open air of sympathy.
    

      “Beryl was as swift as a deer!” he exclaimed. “You would have laughed to
      see her on the moor. Ah, it was hard to give up all the thoughts of
      meeting her again. They told me I should see her in heaven, but I did not
      care about heaven. I wanted Beryl on earth, as I knew her, a merry
      laughing sister. I think you are right: we don’t forget; we become
      resigned in a dead, dull kind of way.”
     

      Suddenly he said, “I don’t know why I have told you all this. And yet it
      has been such a pleasure to me. You are the only person to whom I could
      have spoken about myself, for no one else but you would have cared.”
     

      “Don’t you think,” she said gently, “that you made a mistake in letting
      your experiences embitter you? Because you had been unlucky in one or two
      instances it did not follow that all the world was against you. Perhaps
      you unconsciously put yourself against all the world, and therefore saw
      every one in an unfavourable light. It seems so easy to do that. Trouble
      comes to most people, doesn’t it? And your philosophy should have taught
      you to make the best of it. At least, that is my notion of the value of
      philosophy.”
     

      She spoke hesitatingly, as though she gave utterance to these words
      against her will.
    

      “I am sure you are right, child,” he said, eagerly.
    

      He put his hands to his eyes, but he could not keep back the tears.
    

      “I have been such a lonely old man,” he sobbed; “no one can tell what a
      lonely, loveless life mine has been. If I were not so old and so tired I
      should like to begin all over again.”
     

      He sobbed for many minutes, and she did not know what to say to him of
      comfort; but she took his hand within her own, and gently caressed it, as
      one might do to a little child in pain. He looked up and smiled through
      his tears.
    

      “You have been very good to me,” he said, “and I dare say you have thought
      me ungrateful. You mended my coat for me one morning, and not a day has
      passed but that I have looked at that darn and thought of you. I liked to
      remember that you had done it for me. But you have done far more than this
      for me: you have put some sweetness into my life. Whatever becomes of me
      hereafter, I shall never be able to think of my life on earth as anything
      but beautiful, because you thought kindly of me and acted kindly for me.
      The other night, when this terrible pain came over me, I wished you were
      near me; I wished to hear your voice. There is very beautiful music in
      your voice.”
     

      “I would have come to you gladly,” she said, smiling quietly at him. “You
      must make a promise that when you feel ill again you will send for me.
      Then you will see what a splendid nurse I am, and how soon you will become
      strong and well under my care, strong enough to paint many more pictures,
      each one better than the last. Now will you promise?”
     

      “Yes,” he said, and he raised her hand reverently to his lips.
    

      “You are not angry with me for doing that?” he asked, suddenly. “I should
      not like to vex you.”
     

      “I am not vexed,” she answered, kindly.
    

      “Then perhaps I may kiss it once more?” he asked.
    

      “Yes,” she answered; and again he raised her hand to his lips.
    

      “Thank you,” he said quietly; “that was kind of you. Do you see that
      broken sun-ray yonder? Is it not golden? I find it very pleasant to sit
      here; and I am quite happy, and almost free from pain. Lately I have been
      troubled with a dull thudding pain near my heart; but now I feel so strong
      that I believe I shall finish that Andrea del Sarto after all.”
     

      “Of course you will,” she answered, cheerily, “and I shall have to confess
      that yours is better than mine! I am quite willing to yield the palm to
      you.”
     

      “I must alter the expression of the mouth,” he replied. “That is the part
      which has worried me. I don’t think I told you that I have had a
      commission to copy Rembrandt’s ‘Old Jew.’ I must set to work on that next
      week.”
     

      “But you have given me your palette and brushes!” she laughed.
    

      “You must be generous enough to lend them to me,” he said, smiling. “By
      the way, I intend to give you my books, all of them. Some day I must show
      them to you. I especially value my philosophical books; they have been my
      faithful companions through many years. I believe you do not read Greek.
      That is a pity, because you would surely enjoy Aristotle. I think I must
      teach you Greek; it would be an agreeable legacy to leave you when I pass
      away into the Great Silence.”
     

      “I should like to learn,” she said, wondering to hear him speak so
      unreservedly. It seemed as if some vast barrier had been rolled aside, and
      as if she were getting to know him better, having been allowed to glance
      into his past life, to sympathise with his past mistakes, and with the
      failure of his ambitions, and with the deadening of his heart.
    

      “You must read AEschylus,” he continued, enthusiastically; “and, if I
      mistake not, the Agamemnon will be an epoch in your life. You will find
      that all these studies will serve to ennoble your art, and you will be
      able to put mind into your work, and not merely form and colour. Do you
      know, I feel so well that I believe I shall not only live to finish Andrea
      del Sarto, but also to smoke another pipe?”
     

      “You have been too rash to-day,” she laughed, “giving away your pipe and
      pouch, your palette and brushes, in this reckless manner! I must get you a
      new pipe to-morrow. I wonder you did not part with your venerable
      Lucretius.”
     

      “That reminds me,” he said, fumbling in his pocket; “I think I have
      dropped my Lucretius. I fancy I left it somewhere in the Poets’ Corner. It
      would grieve me to lose that book.”
     

      “Let me go and look for it,” she said, and she advanced a few steps, and
      then came back to him.
    

      “You have been saying many kind words to me,” she said, as she put her
      hand on his arm, “and I have not told you that I value your friendship,
      and am grateful to you for letting me be more than a mere stranger to you.
      I have been very lonely in my life, for I am not one to make friends
      easily, and it has been a great privilege to me to talk with you. I want
      you to know this: for if I have been anything to you, you have been a
      great deal to me. I have never met with much sympathy from those of my own
      age: I have found them narrow and unyielding, and they found me dull and
      uninteresting. They had passed through few experiences and knew nothing
      about failure or success, and some of them did not even understand the
      earnestness of endeavour, and laughed at me when I spoke of a high ideal.
      So I withdrew into myself, and should probably have grown still more
      isolated than I was before, but that I met you, and, as time went on, we
      became friends. I shall always remember your teaching, and I will try to
      keep to a high ideal of life and art and endeavour, and I will not let
      despair creep into my heart, and I will not lose my faith in humanity.”
     

      As she spoke a lingering ray of sunshine lit up her face and gently
      caressed her soft brown hair; slight though her form, sombre her clothes,
      and unlovely her features, she seemed a gracious presence because of her
      earnestness.
    

      “Now,” she said, cheerily, “you rest here until I come back with your
      Lucretius, and then I think I must be getting on my way home. But you must
      fix a time for our first Greek lesson, for we must begin to-morrow.”
     

      When she had gone he walked in the cloisters, holding his hat in his hand
      and his stick under his arm. There was a quiet smile on his face, which
      was called forth by pleasant thoughts in his mind, and he did not look
      quite so shrunken and shrivelled as usual. His eyes were fixed on the
      ground, but he raised them, and observed a white cat creeping toward him.
      It came and rubbed itself against his foot, and, purring with all its
      might, seemed determined to win some kind of notice from him. The old man
      stooped down to stroke it, and was just touching its sleek coat when he
      suddenly withdrew his hand and groaned deeply. He struggled to the recess,
      and sank back. The stick fell on the stone with a clatter, and the
      battered hat rolled down beside it, and the white cat fled away in terror;
      but realising that there was no cause for alarm, it came back and crouched
      near the silent figure of the old man, watching him intently. Then it
      stretched out its paw and played with his hand, doing its utmost to coax
      him into a little fun; but he would not be coaxed, and the cat lost all
      patience with him, and left him to himself.
    

      Meanwhile Helen Stanley was looking for the lost Lucretius in the Poets’ 
      Corner. She found it laying near Chaucer’s tomb, and was just going to
      take it to her friend when she saw the workman to whom they had spoken in
      Trafalgar Square. He recognised her at once, and came toward her.
    

      “I’ve been having a quiet half-hour here,” he said. “It does me a sight of
      good to sit in the abbey.”
     

      “You should go into the cloisters,” she said, kindly. “I have been sitting
      there with my friend. He will be interested to hear that you love this
      beautiful abbey.”
     

      “I should like to see him again,” said the workman. “He had a kind way
      about him, and that pipe he gave me is an uncommon good one. Still, I am
      sorry I smashed the little clay pipe. I’d grown used to it. I’d smoked it
      ever since my little girl died and left me alone in the world. I used to
      bring my little girl here, and now I come alone. But it isn’t the same
      thing.”
     

      “No, it could not be the same thing,” said Helen, gently. “But you find
      some comfort here?”
     

      “Some little comfort,” he answered. “One can’t expect much.”
     

      They went together into the cloisters, and as they came near the recess
      where the old man rested Helen said:
    

      “Why, he has fallen asleep! He must have been very tired. And he has
      dropped his hat and stick. Thank you. If you will put them down there, I
      will watch by his side until he wakes up. I don’t suppose he will sleep
      for long.”
     

      The workman stooped down to pick up the hat and stick, and glanced at the
      sleeper. Something in the sleeper’s countenance arrested his attention. He
      turned to the girl, and saw that she was watching him.
    

      “What is it?” she asked anxiously. “What is the matter with you?”
     

      He tried to speak, but his voice failed him, and all he could do was to
      point with trembling hand to the old man.
    

      Helen looked, and a loud cry broke from her lips. The old man was dead.