At the Gate

 By MYLA JO CLOSSER

  From the Century Magazine

. By permission of the
        Century Company and Myla J. Closser.



 A shaggy Airedale scented his way along the highroad. He had
    not been there before, but he was guided by the trail of his
    brethren who had preceded him. He had gone unwillingly upon
    this journey, yet with the perfect training of dogs he had
    accepted it without complaint. The path had been lonely, and
    his heart would have failed him, traveling as he must without
    his people, had not these traces of countless dogs before him
    promised companionship of a sort at the end of the road.

 The landscape had appeared arid at first, for the
    translation from recent agony into freedom from pain had been
    so numbing in its swiftness that it was some time before he
    could fully appreciate the pleasant dog-country through which
    he was passing. There were woods with leaves upon the ground
    through which to scurry, long grassy slopes for extended runs,
    and lakes into which he might plunge for sticks and bring them
    back to—But he did not complete his thought, for the boy
    was not with him. A little wave of homesickness possessed
    him.

 It made his mind easier to see far ahead a great gate as
    high as the heavens, wide enough for all. He understood that
    only man built such barriers and by straining his eyes he
    fancied he could discern humans passing through to whatever lay
    beyond. He broke into a run that he might the more quickly gain
    this inclosure made beautiful by men and women; but his
    thoughts outran his pace, and he remembered that he had left
    the family behind, and again this lovely new compound became
    not perfect, since it would lack the family.

 The scent of the dogs grew very strong now, and coming
    nearer, he discovered, to his astonishment that of the myriads
    of those who had arrived ahead of him thousands were still
    gathered on the outside of the portal. They sat in a wide
    circle spreading out on each side of the entrance, big, little,
    curly, handsome, mongrel, thoroughbred dogs of every age,
    complexion, and personality. All were apparently waiting for
    something, someone, and at the pad of the Airedale's feet on
    the hard road they arose and looked in his direction.

 That the interest passed as soon as they discovered the
    new-comer to be a dog puzzled him. In his former dwelling-place
    a four-footed brother was greeted with enthusiasm when he was a
    friend, with suspicious diplomacy when a stranger, and with
    sharp reproof when an enemy; but never had he been utterly
    ignored.

 He remembered something that he had read many times on great
    buildings with lofty entrances. "Dogs not admitted," the signs
    had said, and he feared this might be the reason for the
    waiting circle outside the gate. It might be that this noble
    portal stood as the dividing-line between mere dogs and humans.
    But he had been a member of the family, romping with them in
    the living-room, sitting at meals with them in the dining-room,
    going upstairs at night with them, and the thought that he was
    to be "kept out" would be unendurable.

 He despised the passive dogs. They should be treating a
    barrier after the fashion of their old country, leaping against
    it, barking, and scratching the nicely painted door. He bounded
    up the last little hill to set them an example, for he was
    still full of the rebellion of the world; but he found no door
    to leap against. He could see beyond the entrance dear masses
    of people, yet no dog crossed the threshold. They continued in
    their patient ring, their gaze upon the winding road.

 He now advanced cautiously to examine the gate. It occurred
    to him that it must be fly-time in this region, and he did not
    wish to make himself ridiculous before all these strangers by
    trying to bolt through an invisible mesh like the one that had
    baffled him when he was a little chap. Yet there were no
    screens, and despair entered his soul. What bitter punishment
    these poor beasts must have suffered before they learned to
    stay on this side the arch that led to human beings! What had
    they done on earth to merit this? Stolen bones troubled his
    conscience, runaway days, sleeping in the best chair until the
    key clicked in the lock. These were sins.

 At that moment an English bull-terrier, white, with
    liver-colored spots and a jaunty manner, approached him,
    snuffling in a friendly way. No sooner had the bull-terrier
    smelt his collar than he fell to expressing his joy at meeting
    him. The Airedale's reserve was quite thawed by this welcome,
    though he did not know just what to make of it.

 "I know you! I know you!" exclaimed the bull-terrier, adding
    inconsequently, "What's your name?"

 "Tam o'Shanter. They call me Tammy," was the answer, with a
    pardonable break in the voice.

 "I know them," said the bull-terrier. "Nice folks."

 "Best ever," said the Airedale, trying to be nonchalant, and
    scratching a flea which was not there. "I don't remember you.
    When did you know them?"

 "About fourteen tags ago, when they were first married. We
    keep track of time here by the license-tags. I had four."

 "This is my first and only one. You were before my time, I
    guess." He felt young and shy.

 "Come for a walk, and tell me all about them," was his new
    friend's invitation.

 "Aren't we allowed in there?" asked Tam, looking toward the
    gate.

 "Sure. You can go in whenever you want to. Some of us do at
    first, but we don't stay."

 "Like it better outside?"

 "No, no; it isn't that."

 "Then why are all you fellows hanging around here? Any old
    dog can see it's better beyond the arch."

 "You see, we're waiting for our folks to come."

 The Airedale grasped it at once, and nodded
    understandingly.

 "I felt that way when I came along the road. It wouldn't be
    what it's supposed to be without them. It wouldn't be the
    perfect place."

 "Not to us," said the bull-terrier.

 "Fine! I've stolen bones, but it must be that I have been
    forgiven, if I'm to see them here again. It's the great good
    place all right. But look here," he added as a new thought
    struck him, "do they wait for us?"

 The older inhabitant coughed in slight embarrassment.

 "The humans couldn't do that very well. It wouldn't be the
    thing to have them hang around outside for just a dog—not
    dignified."

 "Quite right," agreed Tam. "I'm glad they go straight to
    their mansions. I'd—I'd hate to have them missing me as I
    am missing them." He sighed. "But, then, they wouldn't have to
    wait so long."

 "Oh, well, they're getting on. Don't be discouraged,"
    comforted the terrier. "And in the meantime it's like a big
    hotel in summer—watching the new arrivals. See, there is
    something doing now."

 All the dogs were aroused to excitement by a little figure
    making its way uncertainly up the last slope. Half of them
    started to meet it, crowding about in a loving, eager pack.

 "Look out; don't scare it," cautioned the older animals,
    while word was passed to those farthest from the gate: "Quick!
    Quick! A baby's come!"

 Before they had entirely assembled, however, a gaunt yellow
    hound pushed through the crowd, gave one sniff at the small
    child, and with a yelp of joy crouched at its feet. The baby
    embraced the hound in recognition, and the two moved toward the
    gate. Just outside the hound stopped to speak to an
    aristocratic St. Bernard who had been friendly:

 "Sorry to leave you, old fellow," he said, "but I'm going in
    to watch over the kid. You see, I'm all she has up here."

 The bull-terrier looked at the Airedale for
    appreciation.

 "That's the way we do it," he said proudly.

 "Yes, but—" the Airedale put his head on one side in
    perplexity.

 "Yes, but what?" asked the guide.

 "The dogs that don't have any people—the nobodies'
    dogs?"

 "That's the best of all. Oh, everything is thought out here.
    Crouch down,—you must be tired,—and watch," said
    the bull-terrier.

 Soon they spied another small form making the turn in the
    road. He wore a Boy Scout's uniform, but he was a little
    fearful, for all that, so new was this adventure. The dogs rose
    again and snuffled, but the better groomed of the circle held
    back, and in their place a pack of odds and ends of the company
    ran down to meet him. The Boy Scout was reassured by their
    friendly attitude, and after petting them impartially, he chose
    an old-fashioned black and tan, and the two passed in.

 Tam looked questioningly.

 "They didn't know each other!" he exclaimed.

 "But they've always wanted to. That's one of the boys who
    used to beg for a dog, but his father wouldn't let him have
    one. So all our strays wait for just such little fellows to
    come along. Every boy gets a dog, and every dog gets a
    master."

 "I expect the boy's father would like to know that now,"
    commented the Airedale. "No doubt he thinks quite often, 'I
    wish I'd let him have a dog.'"

 The bull-terrier laughed.

 "You're pretty near the earth yet, aren't you?"

 Tam admitted it.

 "I've a lot of sympathy with fathers and with boys, having
    them both in the family, and a mother as well."

 The bull-terrier leaped up in astonishment.

 "You don't mean to say they keep a boy?"

 "Sure; greatest boy on earth. Ten this year."

 "Well, well, this is news! I wish they'd kept a boy when I
    was there."

 The Airedale looked at his new friend intently.

 "See here, who are you?" he demanded.

 But the other hurried on:

 "I used to run away from them just to play with a boy.
    They'd punish me, and I always wanted to tell them it was their
    fault for not getting one."

 "Who are you, anyway?" repeated Tam. "Talking all this
    interest in me, too. Whose dog were

you?"

 "You've already guessed. I see it in your quivering snout.
    I'm the old dog that had to leave them about ten years
    ago."

 "Their old dog Bully?"

 "Yes, I'm Bully." They nosed each other with deeper
    affection, then strolled about the glades shoulder to shoulder.
    Bully the more eagerly pressed for news. "Tell me, how are they
    getting along?"

 "Very well indeed; they've paid for the house."

 "I—I suppose you occupy the kennel?"

 "No. They said they couldn't stand it to see another dog in
    your old place."

 Bully stopped to howl gently.

 "That touches me. It's generous in you to tell it. To think
    they missed me!"

 For a little while they went on in silence, but as evening
    fell, and the light from the golden streets inside of the city
    gave the only glow to the scene, Bully grew nervous and
    suggested that they go back.

 "We can't see so well at night, and I like to be pretty
    close to the path, especially toward morning."

 Tam assented.

 "And I will point them out. You might not know them just at
    first."

 "Oh, we know them. Sometimes the babies have so grown up
    they're rather hazy in their recollection of how we look. They
    think we're bigger than we are; but you can't fool us
    dogs."

 "It's understood," Tam cunningly arranged, "that when he or
    she arrives you'll sort of make them feel at home while I wait
    for the boy?"

 "That's the best plan," assented Bully, kindly. "And if by
    any chance the little fellow should come first,—there's
    been a lot of them this summer—of course you'll introduce
    me?"

 "I shall be proud to do it."

 And so with muzzles sunk between their paws, and with their
    eyes straining down the pilgrims' road, they wait outside the
    gate.