AUNT DINAH'S KITCHEN

 BY HARRIET BEECHER STOWE

 Like a certain class of modern philosophers, Dinah perfectly scorned
logic and reason in every shape, and always took refuge in intuitive
certainty; and here she was perfectly impregnable. No possible amount of
talent, or authority, or explanation could ever make her believe that
any other way was better than her own, or that the course she had
pursued in the smallest matter could be in the least modified. This had
been a conceded point with her old mistress, Marie's mother; and "Miss
Marie," as Dinah always called her young mistress, even after her
marriage, found it easier to submit than contend; and so Dinah had ruled
supreme. This was the easier, in that she was perfect mistress of that
diplomatic art which unites the utmost subservience of manner with the
utmost inflexibility as to measure.

 Dinah was the mistress of the whole art and mystery of excuse-making, in
all its branches. Indeed, it was an axiom with her that the cook can do
no wrong, and a cook in a Southern kitchen finds abundance of heads and
shoulders on which to lay off every sin and frailty, so as to maintain
her own immaculateness entire. If any part of the dinner was a failure,
there were fifty indisputably good reasons for it, and it was the fault,
undeniably, of fifty other people, whom Dinah berated with unsparing
zeal.

 But it was very seldom that there was any failure in Dinah's last
results. Though her mode of doing every thing was peculiarly meandering
and circuitous, and without any sort of calculation as to time and
place,—though her kitchen generally looked as if it had been arranged
by a hurricane blowing through it, and she had about as many places for
each cooking utensil as there were days in the year,—yet, if one could
have patience to wait her own good time, up would come her dinner in
perfect order, and in a style of preparation with which an epicure could
find no fault.

 It was now the season of incipient preparation for dinner. Dinah, who
required large intervals of reflection and repose, and was studious of
ease in all her arrangements, was seated on the kitchen floor, smoking a
short, stumpy pipe, to which she was much addicted, and which she always
kindled up, as a sort of censer, whenever she felt the need of an
inspiration in her arrangements. It was Dinah's mode of invoking the
domestic Muses.

 Seated around her were various members of that rising race with which a
Southern household abounds, engaged in shelling peas, peeling potatoes,
picking pin-feathers out of fowls, and other preparatory arrangements,
Dinah every once in a while interrupting her meditations to give a poke,
or a rap on the head, to some of the young operators, with the
pudding-stick that lay by her side. In fact, Dinah ruled over the woolly
heads of the younger members with a rod of iron, and seemed to consider
them born for no earthly purpose but to "save her steps," as she phrased
it. It was the spirit of the system under which she had grown up, and
she carried it out to its full extent.

 Miss Ophelia, after passing on her reformatory tour through all the
other parts of the establishment, now entered the kitchen. Dinah had
heard, from various sources, what was going on, and resolved to stand on
defensive and conservative ground,—mentally determined to op pose and
ignore every new measure, without any actual and observable contest.

 The kitchen was a large, brick-floored apartment, with a great
old-fashioned fireplace stretching along one side of it,—an arrangement
which St. Clair had vainly tried to persuade Dinah to exchange for the
convenience of a modern cook-stove. Not she. No Pusseyite, or
conservative of any school, was ever more inflexibly attached to
time-honored inconveniences than Dinah.

 When St. Clair had first returned from the North, impressed with the
system and order of his uncle's kitchen arrangements, he had largely
provided his own with an array of cupboards, drawers, and various
apparatus, to induce systematic regulation, under the sanguine illusion
that it would be of any possible assistance to Dinah in her
arrangements. He might as well have provided them for a squirrel or a
magpie. The more drawers and closets there were, the more hiding-holes
could Dinah make for the accommodation of old rags, hair-combs, old
shoes, ribbons, cast-off artificial flowers, and other articles of vertu , wherein her soul delighted.

 When Miss Ophelia entered the kitchen, Dinah did not rise, but smoked on
in sublime tranquillity, regarding her movements obliquely out of the
corner of her eye, but apparently intent only on the operations around
her.

 Miss Ophelia commenced opening a set of drawers.

 "What is this drawer for, Dinah?" she said.

 "It's handy for 'most anything, missis," said Dinah. So it appeared to
be. From the variety it contained Miss Ophelia pulled out first a fine
damask table-cloth stained with blood, having evidently been used to
envelop some raw meat.

 "What's this, Dinah? You don't wrap up meat in your mistress's best
table-cloth?"  "Oh, Lor', missis, no; the towels was all a-missin', so I just did it. I
laid it out to wash that ar; that's why I put it thar."

 "Shir'less!" said Miss Ophelia to herself, proceeding to tumble over the
drawer, where she found a nutmeg-grater and two or three nutmegs, a
Methodist hymn-book, a couple of soiled Madras handkerchiefs, some yarn
and knitting-work, a paper of tobacco and a pipe, a few crackers, one or
two gilded china saucers with some pomade in them, one or two thin old
shoes, a piece of flannel carefully pinned up enclosing some small white
onions, several damask table-napkins, some coarse crash towels, some
twine and darning-needles, and several broken papers, from which sundry
sweet herbs were sifting into the drawer.

 "Where do you keep your nutmegs, Dinah?" said Miss Ophelia, with the air
of one who "prayed for patience."

 "Most anywhar, missis; there's some in that cracked tea-cup up there,
and there's some over in that ar cupboard."

 "Here are some in the grater," said Miss Ophelia, holding them up.

 "Laws, yes; I put 'em there this morning; I likes to keep my things
handy," said Dinah. "You Jake! what are you stopping for? You'll cotch
it! Be still, thar!" she added, with a dive of her stick at the
criminal.

 "What's this?" said Miss Ophelia, holding up the saucer of pomade.

 "Laws, it's my har-grease : I put it thar to have it handy."

 "Do you use your mistress's best saucers for that?"

 "Law! it was 'cause I was driv' and in sich a hurry. I was gwine to
change it this very day."

 "Here are two damask table-napkins."  "Them table-napkins I put thar to get 'em washed out some day."

 "Don't you have some place here on purpose for things to be washed?"

 "Well, Mas'r St. Clair got dat ar chest, he said, for dat; but I likes
to mix up biscuit and hev my things on it some days, and then it ain't
handy a-liftin' up the lid."

 "Why don't you mix your biscuits on the pastry-table, there?"

 "Law, missis, it gets sot so full of dishes, and one thing and another,
der ain't no room, noways."

 "But you should wash your dishes, and clear them away."

 "Wash my dishes!" said Dinah, in a high key, as her wrath began to rise
over her habitual respect of manner. "What does ladies know 'bout work,
I want to know? When'd mas'r ever get his dinner, if I was to spend all
my time a-washin' and a-puttin' up dishes? Miss Marie never telled me
so, nohow."

 "Well, here are these onions."

 "Laws, yes!" said Dinah; "that is whar I put 'em, now. I couldn't
'member. Them's particular onions I was a savin' for dis yer very stew.
I'd forgot they was in dat ar old flannel."

 Miss Ophelia lifted out the sifting papers of sweet herbs. "I wish
missis wouldn't touch dem ar. I likes to keep my things where I knows
whar to go to 'em," said Dinah, rather decidedly.

 "But you don't want these holes in the papers."

 "Them's handy for siftin' on't out," said Dinah.

 "But you see it spills all over the drawer."

 "Laws, yes! if missis will go a-tumblin' things all up so, it will.
Missis has spilt lots dat ar way," said Dinah, coming uneasily to the
drawers. "If missis only will go up-sta'rs till my clarin'-up time
comes, I'll have everything right; but I can't do nothin' when ladies is
'round a-henderin'. You Sam, don't you gib de baby dat ar sugar-bowl!
I'll crack ye over, if ye don't mind!"

 "I'm going through the kitchen, and going to put everything in order, once , Dinah; and then I'll expect you to keep it so."

 "Lor', now, Miss 'Phelia, dat ar ain't no way for ladies to do. I never
did see ladies doin' no sich; my old missis nor Miss Marie never did,
and I don't see no kinder need on't." And Dinah stalked indignantly
about, while Miss Ophelia piled and sorted dishes, emptied dozens of
scattering bowls of sugar into one receptacle, sorted napkins,
table-cloths, and towels, for washing; washing, wiping and arranging
with her own hands, and with a speed and alacrity which perfectly amazed
Dinah.

 "Lor', now! if dat ar de way dem Northern ladies do, dey ain't ladies
nohow," she said to some of her satellites, when at a safe
hearing-distance. "I has things as straight as anybody, when my
clarin'-up times comes; but I don't want ladies 'round a-henderin' and
gettin' my things all where I can't find 'em."

 To do Dinah justice, she had, at irregular periods, paroxysms of
reformation and arrangement, which she called "clarin'-up times," when
she would begin with great zeal and turn every drawer and closet wrong
side outward on to the floor or tables, and make the ordinary confusion
sevenfold more confounded. Then she would light her pipe and leisurely
go over her arrangements, looking things over and discoursing upon them;
making all the young fry scour most vigorously on the tin things, and
keeping up for several hours a most energetic state of confusion, which
she would explain to the satisfaction of all inquirers by the remark
that she was a "clarin'-up." "She couldn't hev things a-gwine on so as
they had been, and she was gwine to make these yer young ones keep
better order;" for Dinah herself, somehow, indulged the illusion that
she herself was the soul of order, and it was only the young uns , and
the everybody else in the house, that were the cause of anything that
fell short of perfection in this respect. When all the tins were
scoured, and the tables scrubbed snowy white, and everything that could
offend tucked out of sight in holes and corners, Dinah would dress
herself up in a smart dress, clean apron, and high, brilliant Madras
turban, and tell all marauding "young uns" to keep out of the kitchen,
for she was gwine to have things kept nice. Indeed, these periodic
seasons were often an inconvenience to the whole household, for Dinah
would contract such an immoderate attachment to her scoured tin as to
insist upon it that it shouldn't be used again for any possible
purpose,—at least till the ardor of the "clarin'-up" period abated.