BARON DE TRENCK By Clemence Robert

 Baron de Trenck already had endured a year of arbitrary imprisonment in
      the fortress of Glatz, ignorant alike of the cause of his detention or the
      length of time which he was destined to spend in captivity.

 During the early part of the month of September, Major Doo, aide to the
      governor of the prison of Glatz, entered the prisoner’s apartment
      for a domiciliary visit, accompanied by an adjutant and the officer of the
      guard.

 It was noon. The excessive heat of the dying summer had grown almost
      unsupportable in the tower chamber where Baron de Trenck was confined.
      Half empty flagons were scattered among the books which littered his
      table, but the repeated draughts in which the prisoner had sought
      refreshment had only served to add to his ever-increasing exasperation.

 The major ransacked every nook and corner of the prisoner’s chamber
      and the interior of such pieces of furniture as might afford a possible
      hiding-place. Remarking the annoyance which this investigation caused the
      baron, Doo said arrogantly:

 “The general has issued his orders, and it is a matter of little
      consequence to him whether or not they displease you. Your attempts to
      escape have greatly incensed him against you.”

 “And I,” retorted Trenck, with like hauteur, “am equally
      indifferent to your general’s displeasure. I shall continue to
      dispose of my time as may best please me.”

 “Good!” replied the major, “but in your own interests
      you would be wiser to philosophize with your books, and seek the key to
      the sciences, rather than that of the fortress.”

 “I do not need your advice, major,” the baron observed, with
      sovereign disdain.

 “You may perhaps repent later that you did not heed it. Your
      attempts to escape have angered even the king, and it is impossible to say
      just how far his severity toward you may go.”

 “But, great heavens! when I am deprived of my liberty without cause,
      have I not the right to endeavor to regain it?”

 “They do not see the matter in that light in Berlin. As a matter of
      fact this spirit of revolt against your sovereign only serves to greatly
      aggravate your crime.”

 “My crime!” Trenck exclaimed, trembling with anger.

 His glance fell upon the major’s sword and the thought came to him
      to tear it from his side and pierce his throat with it. But in the same
      instant it occurred to him that he might rather profit by the situation.
      Pale and trembling as he was, he retained sufficient self-control to
      modify the expression of his countenance and the tone of his voice, though
      his glance remained fixed upon the sword.

 “Major,” he said, “no one can be called a criminal until
      he has been so adjudged by the courts. Happily a man’s honor does
      not depend upon the inconsequent, malicious opinion of others. On the
      contrary blame should attach to him who condemns the accused without a
      hearing. No constituted power, whether that of king or judge, has yet
      convicted me of any culpable action. Apart from the courtesy which should
      be observed between officers of the same rank, you, out of simple justice,
      should refrain front such an accusation.”

 “Every one knows,” retorted Boo, “that you entered into
      relations with the enemy.”

 “I? Great God!”

 “Do you not consider the Pandours, then, as such?”

 “I visited their chief solely as a relative. A glass of wine shared
      with him in his tent can hardly be construed into a dangerous alliance!”

 “But you hoped to inherit great riches from this relative. That hope
      might well impel you to cross the frontier of Bohemia for all time.”

 “Why, what egregious folly! What more could I hope for than that
      which I already possessed in Berlin? Was I a poor adventurer seeking his
      fortune by his sword? Rich in my own right; enjoying to the full the king’s
      favor; attached to the court by all that satisfied pride could demand, as
      well as by ties of the tenderest sentiments. What more was there for me to
      covet or to seek elsewhere?”

 The major turned his head aside with an air of indifference.

 “One single fact suffices to discount everything you have said,
      Baron,” he replied dryly. “You have twice attempted to escape
      from the fortress. An innocent man awaits his trial with confidence,
      knowing that it cannot be other than favorable. The culprit alone flees.”

 Trenck, though quivering with blind rage, continued to maintain his former
      attitude, his features composed, his eyes fixed upon the major’s
      sword.

 “Sir,” he said, “in three weeks, on the twenty-fifth of
      September, I shall have been a prisoner for one year. You in your position
      may not have found the time long, but to me it has dragged interminably.
      And it has been still harder for me to bear because I have not been able
      to count the days or hours which still separate me from justice and
      liberty. If I knew the limit set to my captivity—no matter what it
      may be—I could surely find resignation and patience to await it.”

 “It is most unfortunate, then,” said the major, “that no
      one could give you that information.”

 “Say rather, would not,” replied Trenck. “Surely,
      something of the matter must be known here. You, for instance, major,
      might tell me frankly what you think to be the case.”

 “Ah!” said Doo, assuming the self-satisfied manner of a
      jailer; “it would not be proper for me to answer that.”

 “You would save me from despair and revolt,” replied Trenck
      warmly. “For I give you my word of honor that from the moment I know
      when my captivity is to terminate—no matter when that may be, or
      what my subsequent fate—I will make no further attempts to evade it
      by flight.”

 “And you want me to tell you——”

 “Yes,” interrupted Trenck, with a shudder; “yes, once
      again I ask you.”

 Doo smiled maliciously as he answered:

 “The end of your captivity? Why, a traitor can scarcely hope for
      release!”

 The heat of the day, the wine he had drunk, overwhelming anger and his
      fiery blood, all mounted to Trenck’s head. Incapable of further
      self-restraint, he flung himself upon the major, tore the coveted sword
      from his side, dashed out of the chamber, flung the two sentinels at the
      door down the stairs, took their entire length himself at a single bound
      and sprang into the midst of the assembled guards.

 Trenck fell upon them with his sword, showering blows right and left. The
      blade flashed snakelike in his powerful grasp, the soldiers falling back
      before the fierce onslaught. Having disabled four of the men, the prisoner
      succeeded in forcing his way past the remainder and raced for the first
      rampart.

 There he mounted the rampart and, never stopping to gauge its height,
      sprang down into the moat, landing upon his feet in the bottom of the dry
      ditch. Faster still, he flew to the second rampart and scaled it as he had
      done the first, clambering up by means of projecting stones and
      interstices.

 It was just past noon; the sun blazed full upon the scene and every one
      within the prison stood astounded at the miraculous flight in which Trenck
      seemed to fairly soar through the air. Those of the soldiers whom Trenck
      had not overthrown pursued, but with little hope of overtaking him. Their
      guns were unloaded so that they were unable to shoot after him. Not a
      soldier dared to risk trying to follow him by the road he had taken, over
      the ramparts and moats; for, without that passion for liberty which lent
      wings to the prisoner there was no hope of any of them scaling the walls
      without killing himself a dozen times over.

 They were, therefore, compelled to make use of the regular passages to the
      outer posterns and these latter being located at a considerable distance
      from the prisoner’s avenue of escape, he was certain, at the pace he
      was maintaining, to gain at least a half-hour’s start over his
      pursuers.

 Once beyond the walls of the prison, with the woods close by, it seemed as
      if Trenck’s escape was assured beyond doubt.

 He had now come to a narrow passageway leading to the last of the inner
      posterns which pierced the walls. Here he found a sentinel on guard and
      the soldier sprang up to confront him. But a soldier to overcome was not
      an obstacle to stop the desperate flight of the baron. He struck the man
      heavily in the face with his sword, stunning him and sending him rolling
      in the dust.

 Once through the postern there now remained only a single palisade or
      stockade—a great fence constructed of iron bars and iron
      trellis-work, which constituted the outermost barrier between the fleeing
      prisoner and liberty. Once over that iron palisade he had only to dash
      into the woods and disappear.

 But it was ordained that Trenck was not to overcome this last obstacle,
      simple as it appeared. At a fatal moment, his foot was caught between two
      bars of the palisade and he was unable to free himself.

 While he was engaged in superhuman but futile efforts to release his foot,
      the sentinel of the passage, who had picked himself up, ran through the
      postern toward the palisade, followed by another soldier from the
      garrison. Together they fell upon Trenck, overwhelming him with blows with
      the butts of their muskets and secured him.

 Bruised and bleeding he was borne back to his cell.

 Major Doo informed Trenck, after this abortive attempt to escape, that he
      had been condemned to one year’s imprisonment only. That year was
      within three weeks of expiring when the infamous major, who was an
      Italian, goaded the unfortunate young man into open defiance of his
      sovereign’s mandate. His pardon was at once annulled and his
      confinement now became most rigorous.

 Another plot, headed by three officers and several soldiers of the guard,
      who were friendly to Trenck, was discovered at the last moment—in
      time for the conspirators themselves to escape to Bohemia, but under
      circumstances which prevented Baron de Trenck from accompanying them.

 This also served to increase the hardships of the prisoner’s lot,
      and he now found himself deprived of the former companionship of his
      friends and surrounded by strangers, the one familiar face remaining being
      that of Lieutenant Bach, a Danish officer, a braggart swordsman and
      ruffler, who had always been hostile to him.

 But, despite his isolation, the energy and strength of Trenck’s
      character were only augmented by his misfortunes, and he never ceased to
      plot for his deliverance. Weeks passed without any fruitful event
      occurring in the life of the prisoner, yet help was to come to him from a
      source from which he could never have expected it. But before that
      fortuitous result was destined to take place—in fact, as preliminary
      to its achievement—he was destined to be an actor in the most
      remarkable scene that ever has been recorded in the annals of prison life,
      and in one of the strangest duels of modern times.

 One day Trenck had cast himself fully clothed upon his bed, in order to
      obtain a change of position in his cramped place of confinement.
      Lieutenant Bach was on duty as his guard.

 The young baron had retained in prison the proud and haughty demeanor
      which had formerly brought upon him so much censure at court. Lieutenant
      Bach’s countenance also bore the imprint of incarnate pride.

 The two exchanged from time to time glances of insolence; for the rest,
      they remained silently smoking, side by side.

 Trenck was the first to break the silence, for prisoners grasp every
      opportunity for conversation, and at any price.

 “It appears to me your hand is wounded, lieutenant,” Trenck
      said. “Have you found another opportunity to cross swords?”

 “Lieutenant Schell, it seemed to me, looked somewhat obliquely at
      me,” replied the Dane. “Therefore, I indulged him in a pass or
      two directed against his right arm.”

 “Such a delicate youth, and so mild-mannered! Are you not ashamed?”

 “What could I do? There was no one else at hand.”

 “Nevertheless he seems to have wounded you?”

 “Yes, accidentally though, without knowing what he did.”

 “The fact, then, of having been expelled from two regiments for your
      highhanded acts, and finally transferred to the garrison of the fortress
      of Glatz as punishment, has not cured you of your fire-eating
      propensities?”

 “When a man has the reputation of being the best swordsman in
      Prussia he values that title somewhat more than your military rank, which
      any clumsy fool can obtain.”

 “You, the best swordsman!” exclaimed Trenck, concluding his
      remark with an ironical puff of smoke.

 “I flatter myself that such is the case,” retorted Bach,
      emitting in turn a great cloud of tobacco-smoke.

 “If I were free,” said Trenck, “I might, perhaps, prove
      to you in short order that such is not the case.”

 “Do you claim to be my master at that art?”

 “I flatter myself that such is the case.”

 “That we shall soon see,” cried Bach, flushing with rage.

 “How can we? I am disarmed and a prisoner.”

 “Ah, yes, you make your claim out of sheer boastfulness, because you
      think we cannot put it to the test!”

 “Truly, lieutenant, set me at liberty and I swear to you that on the
      other side of the frontier we will put our skill to the test as freely as
      you like!”

 “Well, I am unwilling to wait for that. We will fight here, Baron
      Trenck.”

 “In this room?”

 “After your assertion, I must either humble your arrogance or lose
      my reputation.”

 “I shall be glad to know how you propose to do so?”

 “Ah, you talk of Bohemia because that country is far away. As for
      me, I prefer this one, because it affords an immediate opportunity to put
      the matter to the test.”

 “I should ask nothing better if it were not impossible.”

 “Impossible! You shall see if it be.”

 Bach sprang up. An old door, supported by a couple of benches, had been
      placed in the chamber for a table. He hammered at the worm-eaten wood and
      knocked off a strip which he split in half. One of these substitutes for
      rapiers he gave to Trenck, retaining the other himself, and both placed
      themselves on guard.

 After the first few passes, Trenck sent his adversary’s make-shift
      sword flying through space, and with his own he met the lieutenant full in
      the chest.

 “Touché!” he cried.

 “Heavens! It is true!” growled Bach. “But I’ll
      have my revenge!”

 He went out hastily. Trenck watched him in utter amazement and he was even
      more astounded when, an instant later, he saw Bach return with a couple of
      swords, which he drew out from beneath his uniform.

 “Now,” he said to Trenck, “it is for you to show what
      you can do with good steel!”

 “You risk,” returned the baron, smiling calmly, “you
      risk, over and above the danger of being wounded, losing that absolute
      superiority in matters of the sword of which you are so proud.”

 “Defend yourself, braggart!” shouted Bach. “Show your
      skill instead of talking about it.”

 He flung himself furiously upon Trenck. The latter, seeming only to trifle
      lightly with his weapon at first, parried his thrusts, and then pressed
      the attack in turn, wounding Bach severely in the arm.

 The lieutenant’s weapon clattered upon the floor. For an instant he
      paused, immovable, overcome by amazement; then an irresistible admiration—a
      supreme tenderness, invaded his soul. He flung himself, weeping, in Trenck’s
      arms, exclaiming:

 “You are my master!”

 Then, drawing away from the prisoner, he contemplated him with the same
      enthusiasm, but more reflectively, and observed:

 “Yes, baron, you far exceed me in the use of the sword; you are the
      greatest duelist of the day, and a man of your caliber must not remain
      longer in prison.”

 The baron was somewhat taken by surprise at this, but, with his usual
      presence of mind, he immediately set himself to derive such profit as he
      might from his guardian’s extravagant access of affection.

 “Yes, my dear Bach,” he replied, “yes, I should be free
      for the reason you mention, and by every right, but where is the man who
      will assist me to escape from these walls?”

 “Here, baron!” said the lieutenant. “You shall regain
      your freedom as surely as my name is Bach.”

 “Oh, I believe in you, my worthy friend,” cried Trenck;
      “you will keep your word.”

 “Wait,” resumed Bach reflectively. “You cannot leave the
      citadel without the assistance of an officer. I should compromise you at
      every step. You have just seen what a hot-tempered scatterbrain I am. But
      I have in mind one who admires you profoundly. You shall know who he is
      tonight, and together we will set you at liberty.”

 Bach did, in fact, redeem his promise. He introduced Lieutenant Schell,
      who was to be Trenck’s companion during their arduous flight into
      Bohemia, into the prisoner’s cell, and himself obtained leave of
      absence for the purpose of securing funds for his fellow conspirators. The
      plot was discovered before his return and Schell, warned of this by one of
      the governor’s adjutants, hastened the day of their flight.

 In scaling the first rampart, Schell fell and sprained his ankle so
      severely that he could not use it. But Trenck was equal to all
      emergencies. He would not abandon his companion. He placed him across his
      shoulders, and, thus burdened, climbed the outer barriers and wandered all
      night in the bitter cold, fleeing through the snow to escape his pursuers.
      In the morning, by a clever ruse, he secured two horses and, thus mounted,
      he and his companion succeeded in reaching Bohemia.

 Trenck directed his course toward Brandenburg where his sister dwelt, near
      the Prussian and Bohemian frontiers, in the Castle of Waldau, for he
      counted upon her assistance to enable him to settle in a foreign land
      where he would be safe.

 The two friends, reduced shortly to the direst poverty, parted with their
      horses and all but the most necessary wearing apparel. Even now, though in
      Bohemia, they were not free from pursuit. Impelled one night, through
      hunger and cold, to throw themselves upon the bounty of an inn-keeper,
      they found in him a loyal and true friend. The worthy host revealed to
      them the true identity of four supposed traveling merchants, who had that
      day accosted them on the road and followed them to the inn. These men
      were, in fact, emissaries from the fortress of Glatz who had attempted to
      bribe him to betray the fugitives into their hands, for they were sworn to
      capture Trenck and his companion and return them dead or alive to the
      enraged governor of the fortress.

 In the morning the four Prussians, the carriage, the driver, and the
      horses set forth and soon disappeared in the distance.

 Two hours later the fugitives, fortified by a good breakfast, took their
      departure from the Ezenstochow inn, leaving behind them a man whom they,
      at least, esteemed as the greatest honor to mankind.

 The travelers hastened toward Dankow. They chose the most direct route and
      tramped along in the open without a thought of the infamous spies who
      might already be on their track.

 They arrived at nightfall at their destination, however, without further
      hindrance.

 The next day they set out for Parsemachi, in Bohemia.

 They started early, and a day in the open, together with a night’s
      sleep, had almost obliterated the memory of their adventure at the inn.

 The cold was intense. The day was gray with heavy clouds that no longer
      promised rain, but which shrouded the country with a pall of gloom. The
      wind swirled and howled, and though the two friends struggled to keep
      their few thin garments drawn closely about them, they still searched the
      horizon hopefully, thinking of the journey’s end and the peaceful
      existence which awaited them. To their right, the aspect of the
      countryside had altered somewhat. Great wooded stretches spread away into
      the distance, while to the left all was yet free and open.

 They had gone about half a mile past the first clump of trees when they
      noticed, through the swaying branches by the roadside, a motionless object
      around which several men busied themselves. With every step they gained a
      clearer impression of the nature of this obstacle until, at last, an
      expression of half-mockery, half-anger overspread their features.

 “Now God forgive me!” exclaimed Schell finally, “but
      that is the infernal brown traveling carriage from the inn!”

 “May the devil take me!” rejoined Trenck, “if I delay or
      flee a step from those miserable rascals.”

 And they strode sturdily onward.

 As soon as they were within speaking distance, one of the Prussians, a big
      man in a furred cap, believing them to be wholly unsuspicious, called to
      them:

 “My dear sirs, in heaven’s name come help us! Our carriage has
      been overturned and it is impossible to get it out of this rut.”

 The friends had reached an angle of the road where a few withered tree
      branches alone separated them from the others. They perceived the brown
      body of the carriage, half open like a huge rat-trap, and beside it the
      forbidding faces of their would-be captors. Trenck launched these words
      through the intervening screen of branches:

 “Go to the devil, miserable scoundrels that you are, and may you
      remain there!”

 Then, swift as an arrow, he sped toward the open fields to the left of the
      highroad, feigning flight. The carriage, which had been overturned solely
      for the purpose of misleading them, was soon righted and the driver lashed
      his horses forward in pursuit of the fugitives, the four Prussians
      accompanying him with drawn pistols.

 When they were almost within reaching distance of their prey they raised
      their pistols and shouted:

 “Surrender, rascals, or you are dead men!”

 This was what Trenck desired. He wheeled about and discharged his pistol,
      sending a bullet through the first Prussian’s breast, stretching him
      dead upon the spot.

 At the same moment Schell fired, but his assailants returned the shot and
      wounded him.

 Trenck again discharged his pistol twice in succession. Then, as one of
      the Prussians, who was apparently still uninjured, took to flight across
      the plain he sped furiously after him. The pursuit continued some two or
      three hundred paces. The Prussian, as if impelled by some irresistible
      force, whirled around and Trenck caught sight of his blanched countenance
      and blood-stained linen. One of the shots had struck him!

 Instantly Trenck put an end to the half-finished task with a sword thrust.
      But the time wasted on the Prussian had cost him dear. Returning hastily
      to the field of action, he perceived Schell struggling in the grasp of the
      two remaining Prussians. Wounded as he was, he had been unable to cope
      single-handed with them, and was rapidly being borne toward the carriage.

 “Courage, Schell!” Trenck shouted. “I am coming!”

 At the sound of his friend’s voice Schell felt himself saved. By a
      supreme effort he succeeded in releasing himself from his captors.

 Frantic with rage and disappointment, the Prussians again advanced to the
      attack upon the two wretched fugitives, but Trenck’s blood was up.
      He made a furious onslaught upon them with his sword, driving them back
      step by step to their carriage, into which they finally tumbled, shouting
      to the driver in frantic haste to whip up his horses.

 As the carriage dashed away the friends drew long breaths of relief and
      wiped away the blood and powder stains from their heated brows. Careless
      of their sufferings, these iron-hearted men merely congratulated each
      other upon their victory.

 “Ah, it’s well ended, Schell,” exclaimed Trenck, “and
      I rejoice that we have had this opportunity to chastise the miserable
      traitors. But you are wounded, my poor Schell!”

 “It is nothing,” the lieutenant replied carelessly; “merely
      a wound in the throat, and, I think, another in the head.”

 This was the last attempt for a considerable time to regain possession of
      Trenck’s person. But the two friends suffered greatly from hardships
      and were made to feel more than once the cruelty of Prussian oppression.
      Even Trenck’s sister, instigated thereto by her husband, who feared
      to incur the displeasure of Frederick the Great, refused the poor
      fugitives shelter, money, or as much as a crust of bread, and this after
      Trenck had jeopardized his liberty by returning to Prussian soil in order
      to meet her.

 It was at this period, when starvation stared the exiles in the face, that
      Trenck met the Russian General Liewen, a relative of Trenck’s
      mother, who offered the baron a captaincy in the Tobolsk Dragoons, and
      furnished him with the money necessary for his equipment. Trenck and
      Schell were now compelled to part, the latter journeying to Italy to
      rejoin relatives there, the baron to go to Russia, where he was to attain
      the highest eminence of grandeur.

 Baron de Trenck, on his journey to Russia, passed through Danzig, which
      was at that time neutral territory, bordering upon the confines of
      Prussia. Here he delayed for a time in the hope of meeting with his cousin
      the Pandour. During the interim he formed an intimacy with a young
      Prussian officer named Henry, whom he assisted lavishly with money. Almost
      daily they indulged in excursions in the environs, the Prussian acting as
      guide.

 One morning, while at his toilet, Trenck’s servant, Karl, who was
      devoted to him body and soul, observed:

 “Lieutenant Henry will enjoy himself thoroughly on your excursion
      to-morrow.”

 “Why do you say that, Karl?” asked the baron.

 “Because he has planned to take your honor to Langführ at ten o’clock.”

 “At ten or eleven—the hour is not of importance.”

 “No! You must be there on the stroke of ten by the village clock.
      Langführ is on the Prussian border and under Prussian rule.”

 “Prussia!” exclaimed Trenck, shaking his head, which Karl had
      not finished powdering. “Are you quite sure?”

 “Perfectly. Eight Prussians—non-commissioned officers and
      soldiers—will be in the courtyard of the charming little inn that
      Lieutenant Henry described so well. As soon as your honor crosses the
      threshold they will fall upon you and bear you off to a carriage which
      will be in waiting.”

 “Finish dressing my hair, Karl,” said Trenck, recovering his
      wonted impassibility.

 “Oh, for that matter,” continued the valet, “they will
      have neither muskets nor pistols. They will be armed with swords only.
      That will leave them free to fall bodily upon your honor and to prevent
      you using your weapon.”

 “Is that all, Karl?”

 “No. There will be two soldiers detailed especially for my benefit,
      so that I can’t get away to give the alarm.”

 “Well, is that all!”

 “No. The carriage is to convey your honor to Lavenburg, in
      Pomerania, and you must cross a portion of the province of Danzig to get
      there. Besides the under officers at the inn who will travel with your
      honor, two others will accompany the carriage on horseback to prevent any
      outcry while you are on neutral ground.”

 “Famously planned!”

 “M. Reimer, the Prussian resident here, outlined the plot, and
      appointed Lieutenant Henry to carry it out.”

 “Afterward, Karl?”

 “That’s all—this time—and it’s enough!”

 “Yes, but I regret that it should end thus, for your account has
      greatly interested me.”

 “Your honor may take it that all I have said is absolutely correct.”

 “But when did you obtain this information?”

 “Oh, just now!”

 “And from whom?”

 “Franz, Lieutenant Henry’s valet, when we were watching the
      horses beneath the big pines, while your honors waited in that roadside
      pavilion for the shower to pass over.”

 “Is his information reliable?”

 “Of course! As no one suspected him, the whole matter was discussed
      freely before him.”

 “And he betrayed the secret?”

 “Yes, because he greatly admires your honor and wasn’t willing
      to see you treated so.”

 “Karl, give him ten ducats from my purse and tell him I will take
      him in my own service, for he has afforded me great pleasure. The outing
      to-morrow will be a hundred times more amusing than I had hoped—indeed
      more amusing than any I have ever undertaken in my life.”

 “Your honor will go to Langführ, then!”

 “Certainly, Karl. We will go together, and you shall see if I misled
      you when I promised you a delightful morning.”

 As soon as Baron de Trenck had completed his toilet, he visited M.
      Scherer, the Russian resident, spent a few moments in private with him and
      then returned to his apartments for dinner.

 Lieutenant Henry arrived soon afterward. Trenck found delight in the
      course of dissimulation to which he stood committed. He overwhelmed his
      guest with courteous attentions, pressing upon him the finest wines and
      his favorite fruits, meanwhile beaming upon him with an affection that
      overspread his whole countenance, and expatiating freely upon the delights
      of the morrow’s ride.

 Henry accepted his attentions with his accustomed dreamy manner.

 The next morning, at half past nine, when the lieutenant arrived, he found
      Trenck awaiting him.

 The two officers rode off, followed by their servants, and took the road
      to Langführ. Trenck’s audacity was terrifying. Even Karl, who was
      well aware of his master’s great ability and cleverness, was
      nevertheless uneasy, and Franz, who was less familiar with the baron’s
      character, was in a state of the greatest alarm.

 The country, beautiful with its verdant grasslands, its budding bushes and
      flowers, its rich fields of wheat, dotted with spring blossoms, revealed
      itself to their delighted eyes. In the distance glistened the tavern of
      Langführ, with its broad red and blue stripes and its tempting signboard
      that displayed a well-appointed festive table.

 The low door in the wall that enclosed the tavern courtyard was still
      closed. Inside, to the right of that door, was a little terrace, and
      against the wall was an arbor formed of running vines and ivy.

 Lieutenant Henry, pausing near a clump of trees some two hundred paces
      from the tavern, said:

 “Baron, our horses will be in the way in that little courtyard. I
      think it would be well to leave them here in the care of our servants
      until our return.”

 Trenck assented readily. He sprang from his horse and tossed his bridle to
      his valet and Henry did the same.

 The path leading to the tavern was enchanting, with its carpet of flowers
      and moss, and the two young men advanced arm in arm in the most
      affectionate manner. Karl and Franz watched them, overwhelmed with
      anxiety.

 The door in the wall had been partly opened as they approached and the
      young men saw, within the arbor on the terrace, the resident, Herr Reimer—his
      three-cornered hat on his powdered wig, his arms crossed on the top of the
      adjacent wall, as he awaited their coming.

 As soon as the officers were within ear-shot, he called out:

 “Come on, Baron de Trenck, breakfast is ready.”

 The two officers were almost at the threshold. Trenck slackened his pace
      somewhat; then he felt Henry grip his arm more closely and forcibly drag
      him toward the doorway.

 Trenck energetically freed his arm, upon observing this movement that
      spoke so eloquently of betrayal, and twice struck the lieutenant, with
      such violence that Henry was thrown to the ground.

 Reimer, the resident, realizing that Trenck knew of the plot, saw that the
      time had come to resort to armed intervention.

 “Soldiers, in the name of Prussia, I command you to arrest Baron de
      Trenck!” he shouted to the men who were posted in the courtyard.

 “Soldiers, in the name of Russia!” Trenck shouted, brandishing
      his sword, “kill these brigands who are violating the rights of the
      country.”

 At these words, six Russian dragoons emerged suddenly from a field of
      wheat and, running up, fell upon the Prussians who had rushed from the
      courtyard at the resident’s command.

 This unexpected attack took the Prussians by surprise. They defended
      themselves only half-heartedly and finally they fled in disorder, throwing
      away their weapons, and followed by the shots of the Russians.

 Lieutenant Henry and four soldiers remained in the custody of the victors.
      Trenck dashed into the arbor to seize Resident Reimer, but the only
      evidence of that personage was his wig, which remained caught in the
      foliage at an opening in the rear of the arbor through which the resident
      had made his escape. Trenck then returned to the prisoners.

 As a fitting punishment for the Prussian soldiers, he commanded his
      dragoons to give each of them fifty blows, to turn their uniforms
      wrongside out, to decorate their helmets with straw cockades, and to drive
      them thus attired across the frontier.

 While his men proceeded to execute his orders, Trenck drew his sword and
      turned to Lieutenant Henry.

 “And now, for our affair, lieutenant!” he exclaimed.

 The unfortunate Henry, under the disgrace of his position, lost his
      presence of mind. Hardly knowing what he did, he drew his sword, but
      dropped it almost immediately, begging for mercy.

 Trenck endeavored to force him to fight, without avail, then, disgusted
      with the lieutenant’s cowardice, he caught up a stick and belabored
      him heartily, crying:

 “Rogue, go tell your fellows how Trenck deals with traitors!”

 The people of the inn, attracted by the noise of the conflict, had
      gathered around the spot, and, as the baron administered the punishment,
      they added to the shame of the disgraced lieutenant by applauding the
      baron heartily.

 The punishment over and the sentence of the Prussians having been carried
      out, Trenck returned to the city with his six dragoons and the two
      servants.

 In this affair, as throughout his entire career, Trenck was simply
      faithful to the rule which he had adopted to guide him through life:

 “Always face danger rather than avoid it.”