THE COLONEL'S CLOTHES
BY CAROLINE HOWARD GILMAN
Every man has some peculiar taste or preference, and, I think, though
papa dressed with great elegance, his was a decided love of his old
clothes; his garments, like his friends, became dearer to him from their
wear and tear in his service, and they were deposited successively in
his dressing-room, though mamma thought them quite unfit for him. He
averred that he required his old hunting-suits for accidents; his summer
jackets and vests, though faded, were the coolest in the world; his
worm-eaten but warm roquelaure was admirable for riding about the
fields, etc. In vain mamma represented the economy of cutting up some
for the boys, and giving others to the servants; he would not consent,
nor part with articles in which he said he felt at home. Often did mamma
remonstrate against the dressing-room's looking like a haberdasher's
shop; often did she take down a coat, hold it up to the light, and show
him perforations that would have honored New Orleans or Waterloo; often,
while Chloe was flogging the pantaloons, which ungallantly kicked in
return, did she declare that it was a sin and a shame for her master to
have such things in the house; still the anti-cherubic shapes
accumulated on the nails and hooks, and were even considered as of
sufficient importance to be preserved from the fire at the burning of
Roseland.
Our little circle about this time was animated by a visit from a
peddler. As soon as he was perceived crossing the lawn with a large
basket on his arm, and a bundle slung across a stick on his shoulder, a
stir commenced in the house. Mamma assumed an air of importance and
responsibility; I felt a pleasurable excitement; Chloe's and Flora's
eyes twinkled with expectation; while, from different quarters, the
house servants entered, standing with eyes and mouth silently open, as
the peddler, after depositing his basket and deliberately untying his
bundle, offered his goods to our inspection. He was a stout man, with a
dark complexion, pitted with the small-pox, and spoke in a foreign
accent. I confess that I yielded myself to the pleasure of purchasing
some gewgaws, which I afterward gave to Flora, while mamma looked at the
glass and plated ware.
"Ver sheap," said the peddler, following her eye, and taking up a pair
of glass pitchers; "only two dollar—sheap as dirt. If te lady hash any
old closhes, it is petter as money."
Mamma took the pitchers in her hand with an inquisitorial air, balanced
them, knocked them with her small knuckles—they rang as clear as a
bell—examined the glass—there was not a flaw in it. Chloe went through
the same process; they looked significantly at each other, nodded, set
the pitchers on the slab, and gave a little approbatory cough.
"They are certainly very cheap," said mamma, tentatively.
"They is, for true, my mistress," said Chloe, with solemnity, "and more
handsomer than Mrs. Whitney's that she gin six dollars for at
Charleston."
"Chloe," said mamma, "were not those pantaloons you were shaking to-day
quite shrunk and worn out?"
"Yes, ma'am," said she; "and they don't fit nohow. The last time the
colonel wore them he seemed quite on-restless."
"Just step up," said her mistress, "and bring them down; but stay—what
did you say was the price of these candlesticks, sir?"
"Tish only von dollars; but tish more cheaper for te old closhes. If te
lady will get te old closhes, I will put in te pellows and te prush, and
it ish more sheaper, too."
Chloe and mamma looked at each other, and raised their eyebrows.
"I will just step up and see those pantaloons," said mamma, in a
consulting tone. "It will be a mercy to the colonel to clear out some of
that rubbish. I am confident he can never wear the pantaloons again;
they are rubbed in the knees, and require seating, and he never will
wear seated pantaloons. These things are unusually cheap, and the
colonel told me lately we were in want of a few little matters of this
sort." Thus saying, with a significant whisper to me to watch the
peddler, she disappeared with Chloe.
They soon returned, Chloe bearing a variety of garments, for mamma had
taken the important premier pas. The pantaloons were first produced.
The peddler took them in his hand, which flew up like an empty scale, to
show how light they were; he held them up to the sun, and a half
contemptuous smile crossed his lips; then shaking his head, he threw
them down beside his basket. A drab overcoat was next inspected, and was
also thrown aside with a doubtful expression.
"Mr. Peddler," said mamma, in a very soft tone, "you must allow me a
fair price; these are very excellent articles."
"Oh, ver fair," said he, "but te closhes ish not ver goot; te
closhesman is not going to give me noting for dish," and he laid a
waistcoat on the other two articles.
Mamma and Chloe had by this time reached the depths of the basket, and,
with sympathetic exclamations, arranged several articles on the slab.
"You will let me have these pitchers," said mamma, with a look of
concentrated resolution, "for that very nice pair of pantaloons."
The peddler gave a short whistle expressive of contempt, shook his head,
and said, "Tish not possibles. I will give two pishers and von prush for
te pantaloon and waistcoat."
Mamma and Chloe glanced at each other and at me; I was absorbed in my
own bargains, and said, carelessly, that the pitchers were perfect
beauties. Chloe pushed one pitcher a little forward, mamma pushed the
other on a parallel line, then poised a decanter, and again applied her
delicate knuckles for the test. That, too, rang out the musical,
unbroken sound, so dear to the housewife's ear, and, with a pair of
plated candlesticks, was deposited on the table. The peddler took up the
drab overcoat.
"Te closhesman's give noting for dish."
Mamma looked disconcerted. The expression of her face implied the fear
that the peddler would not even accept it as a gift. Chloe and she held
a whispering consultation. At this moment Binah came in with little
Patsey, who, seeing the articles on the slab, pointed with her dimpled
fingers, and said her only words,
"Pretty! pretty!"
At the same moment, Lafayette and Venus, the two little novices in
furniture-rubbing, exclaimed,
"Ki! if dem ting an't shine too much!"
These opinions made the turning-point in mamma's mind, though coming
from such insignificant sources.
"So they are pretty, my darling," said mamma to Patsey; and then,
turning to the peddler, she asked him what he would give in exchange for
the pantaloons, the waistcoat and the coat.
The peddler set aside two decanters, one pitcher, the plated
candlesticks, and a hearth-brush.
"Tish ver goot pargains for te lady," said he.
Mamma gained courage.
"I can not think of letting you have all these things without something
more. You must at least throw in that little tray," and she looked at a
small scarlet one, worth perhaps a quarter of a dollar.
The peddler hesitated, and held it up so that the morning sun shone on
its bright hues.
"I shall not make a bargain without that," said mamma, resolutely. The
peddler sighed, and laying it with the selected articles said:
"Tish ver great pargains for te lady."
Mamma smiled triumphantly, and the peddler, tying up his bundle and
slinging his stick, departed with an air of humility.
Papa's voice was soon heard, as usual, before he was seen.
"Rub down Beauty, Mark, and tell Diggory to call out the hounds."
There was a slight embarrassment in mamma's manner when he entered,
mingled with the same quantity of bravado. He nodded to her, tapped me
on the head with his riding-whip, gave Patsey a kiss as she stretched
out her arms to him, tossed her in the air, and, returning her to her
nurse, was passing on.
"Do stop, Colonel," said mamma, "and admire my bargains. See this cut
glass and plate that we have been wishing for, to save our best set."
"What, this trash?" said he, pausing a moment at the table—"blown glass
and washed brass! Who has been fooling you?"
"Colonel," said mamma, coloring highly, "how can you—"
"I can not stop a minute, now, wife," said he, "Jones and Ferguson are
for a hunt to-day! They are waiting at Drake's corner. It looks like
falling weather and my old drab will come in well to-day."
Mamma looked frightened, and he passed on up-stairs. He was one of those
gentlemen who keep a house alive, as the phrase is, whether in merriment
or the contrary, and we were always prepared to search for his hat, or
whip, or slippers, which he was confident he put in their places, but
which, by some miracle, were often in opposite directions. Our greatest
trial, however, was with mamma's and his spectacles, for they had four
pairs between them—far-sighted and near-sighted. There were, indeed,
optical delusions practiced with them; for when papa wanted his, they
were hidden behind some pickle-jar; and when mamma had carefully placed
hers in her key-basket, they were generally found in one of papa's
various pockets; when a distant object was to be seen, he was sure to
mount the near-sighted, and cry "Pshaw!" and if a splinter was to be
taken out, nothing could be found but the far-sighted ones, and he said
something worse: sometimes all four pairs were missing, and such a
scampering ensued!
We now heard a great outcry up-stairs. "Wife! Chloe! Cornelia! come and
find my drab coat!" We looked at each other in dismay, but papa was not
a man for delay, and we obeyed his summons.
"Wife," said he, beating aside the externals of man that hung about his
dressing-room, "where is my old drab coat?"
Mamma swallowed as if a dry artichoke was in her throat, as she said,
slowly, "Why, colonel, you know you had not worn that coat for months,
and as you have another one, and a roquelaure, and the coat was full
of moth-holes, I exchanged it with the peddler for cut glass and plate."
"Cut devils!" said papa, who liked to soften an oath by combinations;
"it was worth twenty dollars—yes, more, because I felt at home in it. I
hate new coats as I do—"
"But, colonel," interrupted mamma, "you did not see the scarlet tray,
and the—"
"Scarlet nonsense," shouted papa; "I believe, if they could, women would
sell their husbands to those rascally peddlers!"
Beauty and the hounds were now pronounced ready. I followed papa to the
piazza, and heard his wrath rolling off as he cantered away.

FOOTNOTES:
[1] By permission of Fox, Duffield and Company. From The
Golfer's Rubaiyat. Copyright, 1901, by Herbert S. Stone and Company.
[2] Dumb ox—a term of reproach.



HERE'S A MERRY BOOK BY A MERRY MAN

THE SUNNY SIDE OF THE STREET
By MARSHALL P. WILDER
Author of "Smiling 'Round the World".
"His book—like American conversation—is made up of anecdotes. He talks
intimately of Richard Croker, President McKinley, President Harrison,
Joseph Jefferson, Senator Depew, Henry Watterson, Gen. Horace Porter,
Augustin Daly, Henry Irving, Buffalo Bill, King Edward VII., Mrs.
Langtry, and a host of other personages, large and small, and
medium-sized. He tells many good stories. We can recommend his book as
cheerful reading."—New York Times.
"It is replete with anecdotes and observations relating to the
humorous side of life, intimate bits of interesting personalia, and
bright and witty chat concerning things in general."—Pittsburg
Leader.
"Reading the book is like listening to a humorous lecture by
Marshall P. Wilder, full of wit and brightness, and it will cheer
and comfort the most morose man or woman just to read
it."—Baltimore American.
12mo, Cloth. Humorous Pen-and-Ink Sketches by Bart Haley.
Frontispiece Portrait of Mr. Wilder. Price, $1.20.
FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers
NEW YORK and LONDON




ANOTHER ROARING FUN BOOK!
SMILING 'ROUND THE WORLD
By MARSHALL P. WILDER
Author of "The Sunny Side of the Street"
"Laugh and the world laughs with you" can be truly said of Marshall P.
Wilder, the captivating entertainer of Presidents, Kings, Princes, and
the great public. As the Hon. Chauncey M. Depew says, "His mirth is
contagious," and as the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere remarked, "He makes
melancholy fly apace." You'll find laughs bubbling all through this new
book.
SOME OPINIONS FROM THE NEWSPAPERS
"There are many cheerful, amusing incidents of travel. It is a very
readable and entertaining book."—Democrat and Chronicle,
Rochester, N.Y.
"A marvelous lot of 'sunny stuff' is to be found in Mr. Wilder's
latest book. He merrily prattles of a thousand different things and
of as many different people."—Record, Philadelphia, Pa.
"In addition to the keen enjoyment which the reader will elicit
from the undercurrent of humor running through the volume, the book
gives a vivid picture of life as it is lived in distant
lands."—Journal, Boston, Mass.
Decorated Cloth Cover. 12mo. Profusely Illustrated.
Price, $1.50
FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers
NEW YORK and LONDON




Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents in the print edition lists
John Boyle O'Reilly's work entitled "A Disappointment" as being on
page 191.  It is indeed on this page, but in Volume I, so has been
removed Volume II's Table of Contents here.