ELDER BROWN'S BACKSLIDE
    

      By Harry Stillwell Edwards (1855- )
    

      [From Harper's Magazine, August, 1885; copyright, 1885, by Harper
      & Bros.; republished in the volume, Two Runaways, and Other Stories
      (1889), by Harry Stillwell Edwards (The Century Co.).]
    

      Elder Brown told his wife good-by at the farmhouse door as mechanically as
      though his proposed trip to Macon, ten miles away, was an everyday affair,
      while, as a matter of fact, many years had elapsed since unaccompanied he
      set foot in the city. He did not kiss her. Many very good men never kiss
      their wives. But small blame attaches to the elder for his omission on
      this occasion, since his wife had long ago discouraged all amorous
      demonstrations on the part of her liege lord, and at this particular
      moment was filling the parting moments with a rattling list of directions
      concerning thread, buttons, hooks, needles, and all the many etceteras of
      an industrious housewife's basket. The elder was laboriously assorting
      these postscript commissions in his memory, well knowing that to return
      with any one of them neglected would cause trouble in the family circle.
    

      Elder Brown mounted his patient steed that stood sleepily motionless in
      the warm sunlight, with his great pointed ears displayed to the right and
      left, as though their owner had grown tired of the life burden their
      weight inflicted upon him, and was, old soldier fashion, ready to forego
      the once rigid alertness of early training for the pleasures of frequent
      rest on arms.
    

      "And, elder, don't you forgit them caliker scraps, or you'll be wantin'
      kiver soon an' no kiver will be a-comin'."
    

      Elder Brown did not turn his head, but merely let the whip hand, which had
      been checked in its backward motion, fall as he answered mechanically. The
      beast he bestrode responded with a rapid whisking of its tail and a great
      show of effort, as it ambled off down the sandy road, the rider's long
      legs seeming now and then to touch the ground.
    

      But as the zigzag panels of the rail fence crept behind him, and he felt
      the freedom of the morning beginning to act upon his well-trained blood,
      the mechanical manner of the old man's mind gave place to a mild
      exuberance. A weight seemed to be lifting from it ounce by ounce as the
      fence panels, the weedy corners, the persimmon sprouts and sassafras
      bushes crept away behind him, so that by the time a mile lay between him
      and the life partner of his joys and sorrows he was in a reasonably
      contented frame of mind, and still improving.
    

      It was a queer figure that crept along the road that cheery May morning.
      It was tall and gaunt, and had been for thirty years or more. The long
      head, bald on top, covered behind with iron-gray hair, and in front with a
      short tangled growth that curled and kinked in every direction, was
      surmounted by an old-fashioned stove-pipe hat, worn and stained, but
      eminently impressive. An old-fashioned Henry Clay cloth coat, stained and
      threadbare, divided itself impartially over the donkey's back and dangled
      on his sides. This was all that remained of the elder's wedding suit of
      forty years ago. Only constant care, and use of late years limited to
      extra occasions, had preserved it so long. The trousers had soon parted
      company with their friends. The substitutes were red jeans, which, while
      they did not well match his court costume, were better able to withstand
      the old man's abuse, for if, in addition to his frequent religious
      excursions astride his beast, there ever was a man who was fond of sitting
      down with his feet higher than his head, it was this selfsame Elder Brown.
    

      The morning expanded, and the old man expanded with it; for while a
      vigorous leader in his church, the elder at home was, it must be admitted,
      an uncomplaining slave. To the intense astonishment of the beast he rode,
      there came new vigor into the whacks which fell upon his flanks; and the
      beast allowed astonishment to surprise him into real life and decided
      motion. Somewhere in the elder's expanding soul a tune had begun to ring.
      Possibly he took up the far, faint tune that came from the straggling gang
      of negroes away off in the field, as they slowly chopped amid the
      threadlike rows of cotton plants which lined the level ground, for the
      melody he hummed softly and then sang strongly, in the quavering, catchy
      tones of a good old country churchman, was "I'm glad salvation's free."
    

      It was during the singing of this hymn that Elder Brown's regular
      motion-inspiring strokes were for the first time varied. He began to hold
      his hickory up at certain pauses in the melody, and beat the changes upon
      the sides of his astonished steed. The chorus under this arrangement was:
    

  I'm glad salvation's free,
  I'm glad salvation's free,
  I'm glad salvation's free for all,
  I'm glad salvation's free.


      Wherever there is an italic, the hickory descended. It fell about as
      regularly and after the fashion of the stick beating upon the bass drum
      during a funeral march. But the beast, although convinced that something
      serious was impending, did not consider a funeral march appropriate for
      the occasion. He protested, at first, with vigorous whiskings of his tail
      and a rapid shifting of his ears. Finding these demonstrations unavailing,
      and convinced that some urgent cause for hurry had suddenly invaded the
      elder's serenity, as it had his own, he began to cover the ground with
      frantic leaps that would have surprised his owner could he have realized
      what was going on. But Elder Brown's eyes were half closed, and he was
      singing at the top of his voice. Lost in a trance of divine exaltation,
      for he felt the effects of the invigorating motion, bent only on making
      the air ring with the lines which he dimly imagined were drawing upon him
      the eyes of the whole female congregation, he was supremely unconscious
      that his beast was hurrying.
    

      And thus the excursion proceeded, until suddenly a shote, surprised in his
      calm search for roots in a fence corner, darted into the road, and stood
      for an instant gazing upon the newcomers with that idiotic stare which
      only a pig can imitate. The sudden appearance of this unlooked-for
      apparition acted strongly upon the donkey. With one supreme effort he
      collected himself into a motionless mass of matter, bracing his front legs
      wide apart; that is to say, he stopped short. There he stood, returning
      the pig's idiotic stare with an interest which must have led to the
      presumption that never before in all his varied life had he seen such a
      singular little creature. End over end went the man of prayer, finally
      bringing up full length in the sand, striking just as he should have
      shouted "free" for the fourth time in his glorious chorus.
    

      Fully convinced that his alarm had been well founded, the shote sped out
      from under the gigantic missile hurled at him by the donkey, and scampered
      down the road, turning first one ear and then the other to detect any
      sounds of pursuit. The donkey, also convinced that the object before which
      he had halted was supernatural, started back violently upon seeing it
      apparently turn to a man. But seeing that it had turned to nothing but a
      man, he wandered up into the deserted fence corner, and began to nibble
      refreshment from a scrub oak.
    

      For a moment the elder gazed up into the sky, half impressed with the idea
      that the camp-meeting platform had given way. But the truth forced its way
      to the front in his disordered understanding at last, and with painful
      dignity he staggered into an upright position, and regained his beaver. He
      was shocked again. Never before in all the long years it had served him
      had he seen it in such shape. The truth is, Elder Brown had never before
      tried to stand on his head in it. As calmly as possible he began to
      straighten it out, caring but little for the dust upon his garments. The
      beaver was his special crown of dignity. To lose it was to be reduced to a
      level with the common woolhat herd. He did his best, pulling, pressing,
      and pushing, but the hat did not look natural when he had finished. It
      seemed to have been laid off into counties, sections, and town lots. Like
      a well-cut jewel, it had a face for him, view it from whatever point he
      chose, a quality which so impressed him that a lump gathered in his
      throat, and his eyes winked vigorously.
    

      Elder Brown was not, however, a man for tears. He was a man of action. The
      sudden vision which met his wandering gaze, the donkey calmly chewing
      scrub buds, with the green juice already oozing from the corners of his
      frothy mouth, acted upon him like magic. He was, after all, only human,
      and when he got hands upon a piece of brush he thrashed the poor beast
      until it seemed as though even its already half-tanned hide would be
      eternally ruined. Thoroughly exhausted at last, he wearily straddled his
      saddle, and with his chin upon his breast resumed the early morning tenor
      of his way.
    

      II
    

      "Good-mornin', sir."
    

      Elder Brown leaned over the little pine picket which divided the
      bookkeepers' department of a Macon warehouse from the room in general, and
      surveyed the well-dressed back of a gentleman who was busily figuring at a
      desk within. The apartment was carpetless, and the dust of a decade lay
      deep on the old books, shelves, and the familiar advertisements of guano
      and fertilizers which decorated the room. An old stove, rusty with the
      nicotine contributed by farmers during the previous season while waiting
      by its glowing sides for their cotton to be sold, stood straight up in a
      bed of sand, and festoons of cobwebs clung to the upper sashes of the
      murky windows. The lower sash of one window had been raised, and in the
      yard without, nearly an acre in extent, lay a few bales of cotton, with
      jagged holes in their ends, just as the sampler had left them. Elder Brown
      had time to notice all these familiar points, for the figure at the desk
      kept serenely at its task, and deigned no reply.
    

      "Good-mornin', sir," said Elder Brown again, in his most dignified tones.
      "Is Mr. Thomas in?"
    

      "Good-morning, sir," said the figure. "I'll wait on you in a minute." The
      minute passed, and four more joined it. Then the desk man turned.
    

      "Well, sir, what can I do for you?"
    

      The elder was not in the best of humor when he arrived, and his state of
      mind had not improved. He waited full a minute as he surveyed the man of
      business.
    

      "I thought I mout be able to make some arrangements with you to git some
      money, but I reckon I was mistaken." The warehouse man came nearer.
    

      "This is Mr. Brown, I believe. I did not recognize you at once. You are
      not in often to see us."
    

      "No; my wife usually 'tends to the town bizness, while I run the church
      and farm. Got a fall from my donkey this morning," he said, noticing a
      quizzical, interrogating look upon the face before him, "and fell squar'
      on the hat." He made a pretense of smoothing it. The man of business had
      already lost interest.
    

      "How much money will you want, Mr. Brown?"
    

      "Well, about seven hundred dollars," said the elder, replacing his hat,
      and turning a furtive look upon the warehouse man. The other was tapping
      with his pencil upon the little shelf lying across the rail.
    

      "I can get you five hundred."
    

      "But I oughter have seven."
    

      "Can't arrange for that amount. Wait till later in the season, and come
      again. Money is very tight now. How much cotton will you raise?"
    

      "Well, I count on a hundr'd bales. An' you can't git the sev'n hundr'd
      dollars?"
    

      "Like to oblige you, but can't right now; will fix it for you later on."
    

      "Well," said the elder, slowly, "fix up the papers for five, an' I'll make
      it go as far as possible."
    

      The papers were drawn. A note was made out for $552.50, for the interest
      was at one and a half per cent. for seven months, and a mortgage on ten
      mules belonging to the elder was drawn and signed. The elder then promised
      to send his cotton to the warehouse to be sold in the fall, and with a
      curt "Anything else?" and a "Thankee, that's all," the two parted.
    

      Elder Brown now made an effort to recall the supplemental commissions
      shouted to him upon his departure, intending to execute them first, and
      then take his written list item by item. His mental resolves had just
      reached this point when a new thought made itself known. Passersby were
      puzzled to see the old man suddenly snatch his headpiece off and peer with
      an intent and awestruck air into its irregular caverns. Some of them were
      shocked when he suddenly and vigorously ejaculated:
    

      "Hannah-Maria-Jemimy! goldarn an' blue blazes!"
    

      He had suddenly remembered having placed his memoranda in that hat, and as
      he studied its empty depths his mind pictured the important scrap
      fluttering along the sandy scene of his early-morning tumble. It was this
      that caused him to graze an oath with less margin that he had allowed
      himself in twenty years. What would the old lady say?
    

      Alas! Elder Brown knew too well. What she would not say was what puzzled
      him. But as he stood bareheaded in the sunlight a sense of utter
      desolation came and dwelt with him. His eye rested upon sleeping Balaam
      anchored to a post in the street, and so as he recalled the treachery that
      lay at the base of all his affliction, gloom was added to the desolation.
    

      To turn back and search for the lost paper would have been worse than
      useless. Only one course was open to him, and at it went the leader of his
      people. He called at the grocery; he invaded the recesses of the dry-goods
      establishments; he ransacked the hardware stores; and wherever he went he
      made life a burden for the clerks, overhauling show-cases and pulling down
      whole shelves of stock. Occasionally an item of his memoranda would come
      to light, and thrusting his hand into his capacious pocket, where lay the
      proceeds of his check, he would pay for it upon the spot, and insist upon
      having it rolled up. To the suggestion of the slave whom he had in charge
      for the time being that the articles be laid aside until he had finished,
      he would not listen.
    

      "Now you look here, sonny," he said, in the dry-goods store, "I'm
      conducting this revival, an' I don't need no help in my line. Just you tie
      them stockin's up an' lemme have 'em. Then I know I've got
      'em." As each purchase was promptly paid for, and change had to be
      secured, the clerk earned his salary for that day at least.
    

      So it was when, near the heat of the day, the good man arrived at the
      drugstore, the last and only unvisited division of trade, he made his
      appearance equipped with half a hundred packages, which nestled in his
      arms and bulged out about the sections of his clothing that boasted of
      pockets. As he deposited his deck-load upon the counter, great drops of
      perspiration rolled down his face and over his waterlogged collar to the
      floor.
    

      There was something exquisitely refreshing in the great glasses of foaming
      soda that a spruce young man was drawing from a marble fountain, above
      which half a dozen polar bears in an ambitious print were disporting
      themselves. There came a break in the run of customers, and the spruce
      young man, having swept the foam from the marble, dexterously lifted a
      glass from the revolving rack which had rinsed it with a fierce little
      stream of water, and asked mechanically, as he caught the intense look of
      the perspiring elder, "What syrup, sir?"
    

      Now it had not occurred to the elder to drink soda, but the suggestion,
      coming as it did in his exhausted state, was overpowering. He drew near
      awkwardly, put on his glasses, and examined the list of syrups with great
      care. The young man, being for the moment at leisure, surveyed critically
      the gaunt figure, the faded bandanna, the antique clawhammer coat, and the
      battered stove-pipe hat, with a gradually relaxing countenance. He even
      called the prescription clerk's attention by a cough and a quick jerk of
      the thumb. The prescription clerk smiled freely, and continued his
      assaults upon a piece of blue mass.
    

      "I reckon," said the elder, resting his hands upon his knees and bending
      down to the list, "you may gimme sassprilla an' a little strawberry.
      Sassprilla's good for the blood this time er year, an' strawberry's good
      any time."
    

      The spruce young man let the syrup stream into the glass as he smiled
      affably. Thinking, perhaps, to draw out the odd character, he ventured
      upon a jest himself, repeating a pun invented by the man who made the
      first soda fountain. With a sweep of his arm he cleared away the swarm of
      insects as he remarked, "People who like a fly in theirs are easily
      accommodated."
    

      It was from sheer good-nature only that Elder Brown replied, with his
      usual broad, social smile, "Well, a fly now an' then don't hurt nobody."
    

      Now if there is anybody in the world who prides himself on knowing a thing
      or two, it is the spruce young man who presides over a soda fountain. This
      particular young gentleman did not even deem a reply necessary. He
      vanished an instant, and when he returned a close observer might have seen
      that the mixture in the glass he bore had slightly changed color and
      increased in quantity. But the elder saw only the whizzing stream of water
      dart into its center, and the rosy foam rise and tremble on the glass's
      rim. The next instant he was holding his breath and sipping the cooling
      drink.
    

      As Elder Brown paid his small score he was at peace with the world. I
      firmly believe that when he had finished his trading, and the little
      blue-stringed packages had been stored away, could the poor donkey have
      made his appearance at the door, and gazed with his meek, fawnlike eyes
      into his master's, he would have obtained full and free forgiveness.
    

      Elder Brown paused at the door as he was about to leave. A rosy-cheeked
      school-girl was just lifting a creamy mixture to her lips before the
      fountain. It was a pretty picture, and he turned back, resolved to indulge
      in one more glass of the delightful beverage before beginning his long
      ride homeward.
    

      "Fix it up again, sonny," he said, renewing his broad, confiding smile, as
      the spruce young man poised a glass inquiringly. The living automaton went
      through the same motions as before, and again Elder Brown quaffed the
      fatal mixture.
    

      What a singular power is habit! Up to this time Elder Brown had been
      entirely innocent of transgression, but with the old alcoholic fire in his
      veins, twenty years dropped from his shoulders, and a feeling came over
      him familiar to every man who has been "in his cups." As a matter of fact,
      the elder would have been a confirmed drunkard twenty years before had his
      wife been less strong-minded. She took the reins into her own hands when
      she found that his business and strong drink did not mix well, worked him
      into the church, sustained his resolutions by making it difficult and
      dangerous for him to get to his toddy. She became the business head of the
      family, and he the spiritual. Only at rare intervals did he ever
      "backslide" during the twenty years of the new era, and Mrs. Brown herself
      used to say that the "sugar in his'n turned to gall before the backslide
      ended." People who knew her never doubted it.
    

      But Elder Brown's sin during the remainder of the day contained an element
      of responsibility. As he moved majestically down toward where Balaam slept
      in the sunlight, he felt no fatigue. There was a glow upon his
      cheek-bones, and a faint tinge upon his prominent nose. He nodded
      familiarly to people as he met them, and saw not the look of amusement
      which succeeded astonishment upon the various faces. When he reached the
      neighborhood of Balaam it suddenly occurred to him that he might have
      forgotten some one of his numerous commissions, and he paused to think.
      Then a brilliant idea rose in his mind. He would forestall blame and
      disarm anger with kindness—he would purchase Hannah a bonnet.
    

      What woman's heart ever failed to soften at sight of a new bonnet?
    

      As I have stated, the elder was a man of action. He entered a store near
      at hand.
    

      "Good-morning," said an affable gentleman with a Hebrew countenance,
      approaching.
    

      "Good-mornin', good-mornin'," said the elder, piling his bundles on the
      counter. "I hope you are well?" Elder Brown extended his hand fervidly.
    

      "Quite well, I thank you. What—"
    

      "And the little wife?" said Elder Brown, affectionately retaining the
      Jew's hand.
    

      "Quite well, sir."
    

      "And the little ones—quite well, I hope, too?"
    

      "Yes, sir; all well, thank you. Something I can do for you?"
    

      The affable merchant was trying to recall his customer's name.
    

      "Not now, not now, thankee. If you please to let my bundles stay untell I
      come back—"
    

      "Can't I show you something? Hat, coat—"
    

      "Not now. Be back bimeby."
    

      Was it chance or fate that brought Elder Brown in front of a bar? The
      glasses shone bright upon the shelves as the swinging door flapped back to
      let out a coatless clerk, who passed him with a rush, chewing upon a
      farewell mouthful of brown bread and bologna. Elder Brown beheld for an
      instant the familiar scene within. The screws of his resolution had been
      loosened. At sight of the glistening bar the whole moral structure of
      twenty years came tumbling down. Mechanically he entered the saloon, and
      laid a silver quarter upon the bar as he said:
    

      "A little whiskey an' sugar." The arms of the bartender worked like a
      faker's in a side show as he set out the glass with its little quota of
      "short sweetening" and a cut-glass decanter, and sent a half-tumbler of
      water spinning along from the upper end of the bar with a dime in change.
    

      "Whiskey is higher'n used to be," said Elder Brown; but the bartender was
      taking another order, and did not hear him. Elder Brown stirred away the
      sugar, and let a steady stream of red liquid flow into the glass. He
      swallowed the drink as unconcernedly as though his morning tod had never
      been suspended, and pocketed the change. "But it ain't any better than it
      was," he concluded, as he passed out. He did not even seem to realize that
      he had done anything extraordinary.
    

      There was a millinery store up the street, and thither with uncertain step
      he wended his way, feeling a little more elate, and altogether sociable. A
      pretty, black-eyed girl, struggling to keep down her mirth, came forward
      and faced him behind the counter. Elder Brown lifted his faded hat with
      the politeness, if not the grace, of a Castilian, and made a sweeping bow.
      Again he was in his element. But he did not speak. A shower of odds and
      ends, small packages, thread, needles, and buttons, released from their
      prison, rattled down about him.
    

      The girl laughed. She could not help it. And the elder, leaning his hand
      on the counter, laughed, too, until several other girls came half-way to
      the front. Then they, hiding behind counters and suspended cloaks, laughed
      and snickered until they reconvulsed the elder's vis-à-vis, who had been
      making desperate efforts to resume her demure appearance.
    

      "Let me help you, sir," she said, coming from behind the counter, upon
      seeing Elder Brown beginning to adjust his spectacles for a search. He
      waved her back majestically. "No, my dear, no; can't allow it. You mout
      sile them purty fingers. No, ma'am. No gen'l'man'll 'low er lady to do
      such a thing." The elder was gently forcing the girl back to her place.
      "Leave it to me. I've picked up bigger things 'n them. Picked myself up
      this mornin'. Balaam—you don't know Balaam; he's my donkey—he
      tumbled me over his head in the sand this mornin'." And Elder Brown had to
      resume an upright position until his paroxysm of laughter had passed. "You
      see this old hat?" extending it, half full of packages; "I fell clear
      inter it; jes' as clean inter it as them things thar fell out'n it." He
      laughed again, and so did the girls. "But, my dear, I whaled half the hide
      off'n him for it."
    

      "Oh, sir! how could you? Indeed, sir. I think you did wrong. The poor
      brute did not know what he was doing, I dare say, and probably he has been
      a faithful friend." The girl cast her mischievous eyes towards her
      companions, who snickered again. The old man was not conscious of the
      sarcasm. He only saw reproach. His face straightened, and he regarded the
      girl soberly.
    

      "Mebbe you're right, my dear; mebbe I oughtn't."
    

      "I am sure of it," said the girl. "But now don't you want to buy a bonnet
      or a cloak to carry home to your wife?"
    

      "Well, you're whistlin' now, birdie; that's my intention; set 'em all
      out." Again the elder's face shone with delight. "An' I don't want no
      one-hoss bonnet neither."
    

      "Of course not. Now here is one; pink silk, with delicate pale blue
      feathers. Just the thing for the season. We have nothing more elegant in
      stock." Elder Brown held it out, upside down, at arm's-length.
    

      "Well, now, that's suthin' like. Will it soot a sorter redheaded 'ooman?"
    

      A perfectly sober man would have said the girl's corsets must have
      undergone a terrible strain, but the elder did not notice her dumb
      convulsion. She answered, heroically:
    

      "Perfectly, sir. It is an exquisite match."
    

      "I think you're whistlin' again. Nancy's head's red, red as a woodpeck's.
      Sorrel's only half-way to the color of her top-knot, an' it do seem like
      red oughter to soot red. Nancy's red an' the hat's red; like goes with
      like, an' birds of a feather flock together." The old man laughed until
      his cheeks were wet.
    

      The girl, beginning to feel a little uneasy, and seeing a customer
      entering, rapidly fixed up the bonnet, took fifteen dollars out of a
      twenty-dollar bill, and calmly asked the elder if he wanted anything else.
      He thrust his change somewhere into his clothes, and beat a retreat. It
      had occurred to him that he was nearly drunk.
    

      Elder Brown's step began to lose its buoyancy. He found himself utterly
      unable to walk straight. There was an uncertain straddle in his gait that
      carried him from one side of the walk to the other, and caused people whom
      he met to cheerfully yield him plenty of room.
    

      Balaam saw him coming. Poor Balaam. He had made an early start that day,
      and for hours he stood in the sun awaiting relief. When he opened his
      sleepy eyes and raised his expressive ears to a position of attention, the
      old familiar coat and battered hat of the elder were before him. He lifted
      up his honest voice and cried aloud for joy.
    

      The effect was electrical for one instant. Elder Brown surveyed the beast
      with horror, but again in his understanding there rang out the trumpet
      words.
    

      "Drunk, drunk, drunk, drer-unc, -er-unc, -unc, -unc."
    

      He stooped instinctively for a missile with which to smite his accuser,
      but brought up suddenly with a jerk and a handful of sand. Straightening
      himself up with a majestic dignity, he extended his right hand
      impressively.
    

      "You're a goldarn liar, Balaam, and, blast your old buttons, you kin walk
      home by yourself, for I'm danged if you sh'll ride me er step."
    

      Surely Coriolanus never turned his back upon Rome with a grander dignity
      than sat upon the old man's form as he faced about and left the brute to
      survey with anxious eyes the new departure of his master.
    

      He saw the elder zigzag along the street, and beheld him about to turn a
      friendly corner. Once more he lifted up his mighty voice:
    

      "Drunk, drunk, drunk, drer-unc, drer-unc, -erunc, -unc, -unc."
    

      Once more the elder turned with lifted hand and shouted back:
    

      "You're a liar, Balaam, goldarn you! You're er iffamous liar." Then he
      passed from view.
    

      III
    

      Mrs. Brown stood upon the steps anxiously awaiting the return of her liege
      lord. She knew he had with him a large sum of money, or should have, and
      she knew also that he was a man without business methods. She had long
      since repented of the decision which sent him to town. When the old
      battered hat and flour-covered coat loomed up in the gloaming and
      confronted her, she stared with terror. The next instant she had seized
      him.
    

      "For the Lord sakes, Elder Brown, what ails you? As I live, if the man
      ain't drunk! Elder Brown! Elder Brown! for the life of me can't I make you
      hear? You crazy old hypocrite! you desavin' old sinner! you black-hearted
      wretch! where have you ben?"
    

      The elder made an effort to wave her off.
    

      "Woman," he said, with grand dignity, "you forgit yus-sef; shu know ware
      I've ben 'swell's I do. Ben to town, wife, an' see yer wat I've brought—the
      fines' hat, ole woman, I could git. Look't the color. Like goes 'ith like;
      it's red an' you're red, an' it's a dead match. What yer mean? Hey! hole
      on! ole woman!—you! Hannah!—you." She literally shook him into
      silence.
    

      "You miserable wretch! you low-down drunken sot! what do you mean by
      coming home and insulting your wife?" Hannah ceased shaking him from pure
      exhaustion.
    

      "Where is it, I say? where is it?"
    

      By this time she was turning his pockets wrong side out. From one she got
      pills, from another change, from another packages.
    

      "The Lord be praised, and this is better luck than I hoped! Oh, elder!
      elder! elder! what did you do it for? Why, man, where is Balaam?"
    

      Thought of the beast choked off the threatened hysterics.
    

      "Balaam? Balaam?" said the elder, groggily. "He's in town. The infernal
      ole fool 'sulted me, an' I lef' him to walk home."
    

      His wife surveyed him. Really at that moment she did think his mind was
      gone; but the leer upon the old man's face enraged her beyond endurance.
    

      "You did, did you? Well, now, I reckon you'll laugh for some cause, you
      will. Back you go, sir—straight back; an' don't you come home 'thout
      that donkey, or you'll rue it, sure as my name is Hannah Brown. Aleck!—you
      Aleck-k-k!"
    

      A black boy darted round the corner, from behind which, with several
      others, he had beheld the brief but stirring scene.
    

      "Put a saddle on er mule. The elder's gwine back to town. And don't you be
      long about it neither."
    

      "Yessum." Aleck's ivories gleamed in the darkness as he disappeared.
    

      Elder Brown was soberer at that moment than he had been for hours.
    

      "Hannah, you don't mean it?"
    

      "Yes, sir, I do. Back you go to town as sure as my name is Hannah Brown."
    

      The elder was silent. He had never known his wife to relent on any
      occasion after she had affirmed her intention, supplemented with "as sure
      as my name is Hannah Brown." It was her way of swearing. No affidavit
      would have had half the claim upon her as that simple enunciation.
    

      So back to town went Elder Brown, not in the order of the early morn, but
      silently, moodily, despairingly, surrounded by mental and actual gloom.
    

      The old man had turned a last appealing glance upon the angry woman, as he
      mounted with Aleck's assistance, and sat in the light that streamed from
      out the kitchen window. She met the glance without a waver.
    

      "She means it, as sure as my name is Elder Brown," he said, thickly. Then
      he rode on.
    

      IV
    

      To say that Elder Brown suffered on this long journey back to Macon would
      only mildly outline his experience. His early morning's fall had begun to
      make itself felt. He was sore and uncomfortable. Besides, his stomach was
      empty, and called for two meals it had missed for the first time in years.
    

      When, sore and weary, the elder entered the city, the electric lights
      shone above it like jewels in a crown. The city slept; that is, the better
      portion of it did. Here and there, however, the lower lights flashed out
      into the night. Moodily the elder pursued his journey, and as he rode, far
      off in the night there rose and quivered a plaintive cry. Elder Brown
      smiled wearily: it was Balaam's appeal, and he recognized it. The animal
      he rode also recognized it, and replied, until the silence of the city was
      destroyed. The odd clamor and confusion drew from a saloon near by a group
      of noisy youngsters, who had been making a night of it. They surrounded
      Elder Brown as he began to transfer himself to the hungry beast to whose
      motion he was more accustomed, and in the "hail fellow well met" style of
      the day began to bandy jests upon his appearance. Now Elder Brown was not
      in a jesting humor. Positively he was in the worst humor possible. The
      result was that before many minutes passed the old man was swinging
      several of the crowd by their collars, and breaking the peace of the city.
      A policeman approached, and but for the good-humored party, upon whom the
      elder's pluck had made a favorable impression, would have run the old man
      into the barracks. The crowd, however, drew him laughingly into the saloon
      and to the bar. The reaction was too much for his half-rallied senses. He
      yielded again. The reviving liquor passed his lips. Gloom vanished. He
      became one of the boys.
    

      The company into which Elder Brown had fallen was what is known as
      "first-class." To such nothing is so captivating as an adventure out of
      the common run of accidents. The gaunt countryman, with his battered hat
      and claw-hammer coat, was a prize of an extraordinary nature. They drew
      him into a rear room, whose gilded frames and polished tables betrayed the
      character and purpose of the place, and plied him with wine until ten
      thousand lights danced about him. The fun increased. One youngster made a
      political speech from the top of the table; another impersonated Hamlet;
      and finally Elder Brown was lifted into a chair, and sang a camp-meeting
      song. This was rendered by him with startling effect. He stood upright,
      with his hat jauntily knocked to one side, and his coat tails ornamented
      with a couple of show-bills, kindly pinned on by his admirers. In his left
      hand he waved the stub of a cigar, and on his back was an admirable
      representation of Balaam's head, executed by some artist with billiard
      chalk.
    

      As the elder sang his favorite hymn, "I'm glad salvation's free," his
      stentorian voice awoke the echoes. Most of the company rolled upon the
      floor in convulsions of laughter.
    

      The exhibition came to a close by the chair overturning. Again Elder Brown
      fell into his beloved hat. He arose and shouted: "Whoa, Balaam!" Again he
      seized the nearest weapon, and sought satisfaction. The young gentleman
      with political sentiments was knocked under the table, and Hamlet only
      escaped injury by beating the infuriated elder into the street.
    

      What next? Well, I hardly know. How the elder found Balaam is a mystery
      yet: not that Balaam was hard to find, but that the old man was in no
      condition to find anything. Still he did, and climbing laboriously into
      the saddle, he held on stupidly while the hungry beast struck out for
      home.
    

      V
    

      Hannah Brown did not sleep that night. Sleep would not come. Hour after
      hour passed, and her wrath refused to be quelled. She tried every
      conceivable method, but time hung heavily. It was not quite peep of day,
      however, when she laid her well-worn family Bible aside. It had been her
      mother's, and amid all the anxieties and tribulations incident to the life
      of a woman who had free negroes and a miserable husband to manage, it had
      been her mainstay and comfort. She had frequently read it in anger, page
      after page, without knowing what was contained in the lines. But
      eventually the words became intelligible and took meaning. She wrested
      consolation from it by mere force of will.
    

      And so on this occasion when she closed the book the fierce anger was
      gone.
    

      She was not a hard woman naturally. Fate had brought her conditions which
      covered up the woman heart within her, but though it lay deep, it was
      there still. As she sat with folded hands her eyes fell upon—what?
    

      The pink bonnet with the blue plume!
    

      It may appear strange to those who do not understand such natures, but to
      me her next action was perfectly natural. She burst into a convulsive
      laugh; then, seizing the queer object, bent her face upon it and sobbed
      hysterically. When the storm was over, very tenderly she laid the gift
      aside, and bare-headed passed out into the night.
    

      For a half-hour she stood at the end of the lane, and then hungry Balaam
      and his master hove in sight. Reaching out her hand, she checked the
      beast.
    

      "William," said she, very gently, "where is the mule?"
    

      The elder had been asleep. He woke and gazed upon her blankly.
    

      "What mule, Hannah?"
    

      "The mule you rode to town."
    

      For one full minute the elder studied her face. Then it burst from his
      lips:
    

      "Well, bless me! if I didn't bring Balaam and forgit the mule!"
    

      The woman laughed till her eyes ran water.
    

      "William," said she, "you're drunk."
    

      "Hannah," said he, meekly, "I know it. The truth is, Hannah, I—"
    

      "Never mind, now, William," she said, gently. "You are tired and hungry.
      Come into the house, husband."
    

      Leading Balaam, she disappeared down the lane; and when, a few minutes
      later, Hannah Brown and her husband entered through the light that
      streamed out of the open door her arms were around him, and her face
      upturned to his.