AN EVENING MUSICALE

 BY MAY ISABEL FISK

 Scene— A conventional, but rather over-decorated, drawing-room. Grand
piano drawn conspicuously to center of floor. Rows of camp-chairs. It is
ten minutes before the hour of invitation. The Hostess, a large woman,
is costumed in yellow satin, embroidered in spangles. Her diamonds are
many and of large size. She is seated on the extreme edge of a chair,
struggling with a pair of very long gloves. She looks flurried and
anxious. Poor Relative, invited as a "great treat," sits opposite. Her
expression is timid and apprehensive. They are the only occupants of the
room.  Hostess

—No such thing, Maria. You look all right. Plain black is always
very genteel. Nothing I like so well for evening, myself. Just keep your
face to the wall as much as you can, and the worn places will never
show. You can take my ecru lace scarf, if you wish, and that will cover
most of the spots. I don't mean my new scarf—the one I got two years
ago. It's a little torn, but it won't matter—for you. I think you will
find it on the top shelf of the store-room closet on the third floor. If
you put a chair on one of the trunks, you can easily reach it. Just wait
a minute, till I get these gloves on; I want you to button them. I do
hope I haven't forgotten anything. Baron von Gosheimer has promised to
come. I have told everybody. It would be terrible if he should
disappoint me.  Masculine Voice from Above

—Sarah, where the devil have you put my
shirts? Everything is upside down in my room, and I can't find them. I
pulled every blessed thing out of the chiffonier and wardrobe, and
they're not there!

 Hostess

—Oh, Henry! You must hurry—I'm going to use your room for the
gentlemen's dressing-room, and it's time now for people to come. You must hurry.

 Host

( from above, just as front door opens, admitting Baron von
Gosheimer and two women guests )—Where the devil are my shirts?

 Hostess

( unconscious of arrivals )—Under the bed in my room. Hurry!

 ( Host

, in bath gown and slippers, dashes madly into wife's room, and
dives under bed as women guests enter. Unable to escape, he crawls
farther beneath bed. His feet remain visible. Women guests discover
them. )

 Guests

( in chorus )—Burglars! burglars! Help! help!

 (Baron von Gosheimer, ascending to the next floor, hears them and
hastens to the rescue. )

 Baron

—Don't be alarmed, ladies. Has either of you a poker? No? That is
to be deplored. ( Catches Host by heels and drags him out. Tableau. )

 Hostess

(to Poor Relative, giving an extra tug at her gloves )—There,
it's all burst out on the side! That stupid saleslady said she knew they
would be too small. Oh, dear, I'm that upset! And these Louis Quinze
slippers are just murdering me. I wish it were all over.

 ( Enter Baron von Gosheimer and women guests. )

 Hostess

—Dear baron, how good of you! I was just saying, if you didn't
come I should wish my musicale in Jericho. And, now that you are here, I
don't care if any one else comes or not. ( To women guests. ) How d'ye
do? I must apologize for Mr. Smythe—he's been de tained down-town. He
just telephoned me. He'll be in later. Do sit down; it's just as cheap
as standing, I always say, and it does save your feet. You ladies can
find seats over in the corner. ( Detaining Baron.) Dear baron—( Enter
guests. )

 Guest

—So glad you have a clear evening. Now, when we gave our affair, it poured . Of course, we had a crowd, just the same. People always come to us , whether it rains or not. ( Takes a seat. Guests
begin to arrive in numbers. )

 Hostess

—So sweet of you to come!

 Guest

—So glad you have a pleasant evening. I am sure to have a bad
night whenever I entertain—

 Hostess

—( to another guest )—So delightful of you to come!

 Guest

—Such a perfect evening! I'm so glad. I said as we started out,
"Now, this time, Mrs. Smythe can't help but have plenty of people.
Whenever I entertain, it's sure to—" ( More guests. )

 ( Telegram arrives, announcing that the prima donna has a sore throat,
and will be unable to come. Time passes. )

 Male Guest

( to another )—Well, I wish to heaven, something would be
doing soon. This is the deadest affair I was ever up against.

 Omnipresent Joker

( greeting acquaintance )—Hello, old man!—going to
sing to-night?

 Acquaintance

—Oh, yes, going to sing a solo.

 Joker

—So low you can't hear it? Ha, ha! ( Guests near by groan. )

 Voice

( overheard )—Madame Cully? My dear, she always tells you that
you haven't half enough material, and makes you get yards more. Besides,
she never sends your pieces back, though I have —

 Fat Old Lady

( to neighbor )—I never was so warm in my life! I can't
imagine why people invite you, just to make you uncomfortable. Now, when
I entertain, I have the windows open for hours before any one comes.

 Joker

( aside )—That's why she always has a frost! Ha, ha!

 ( Host

 enters, showing traces of hasty toilette—face red, and a
razor-cut on chin. )

 Host

( rubbing his hands, and endeavoring to appear at ease and
facetious )—Well, how d'ye do, everybody! Sorry to be late on such an
auspicious—

 Joker

( interrupting )—Suspicious! Ha, ha!

 Host

—occasion. I hope you are all enjoying yourselves.

 Chorus of Guests

—Yes, indeed!

 Hostess

—'Sh, 'sh, 'sh! I have a great disappointment for you all. Here
is a telegram from my best singer, saying she is sick, and can't come.
Now, we will have the pleasure of listening to Miss Jackson. Miss
Jackson is a pupil of Madame Parcheesi, of Paris. ( Singer whispers to
her. ) Oh, I beg your pardon! It's Madame Mar cheesi.

 Deaf Old Gentleman

( seated by piano, talking to pretty girl )—I'd
rather listen to you than hear this caterwauling. (Old Gentleman is
dragged into corner and silenced. )

 Young Woman

( singing )—"Why do I sing? I know not, I know not! I can
not help but sing. Oh, why do I sing?"

 ( Guests moan softly and demand of one another , Why does she sing?)

 Woman Guest

( to another )—Isn't that just the way?—their relatives
are always dying, and it's sure to be wash-day or just when you expect
company to dinner, and off they go to the funeral —

 (Butler appears with trayful of punch-glasses .)

 Male Guest

( to another )—Thank the Lord! here's relief in sight. Let's
drown our troubles.

 The Other

—It's evident you haven't sampled the Smythes' punch before. I
tell you it's a crime to spoil a thirst with this stuff. Well, here's
how.

 Woman Guest

( to neighbor )—I never saw Mrs. Smythe looking quite so
hideous and atrociously vulgar before, did you?

 Neighbor

—Never! Why did we come?

 Voice

( overheard )—The one in the white-lace gown and all those
diamonds?

 Another Voice

—Yes. Well, you know it was common talk that before he
married her—

 Hostess

—'Sh, 'sh, 'sh! Signor Padrella has offered to play some of his
own compositions, but I thought you would all rather hear something
familiar by one of the real composers—Rubens or Chopin—Chopinhauer, I
think—

 (Pianist plunges wildly into something .)

 Voice

( during a lull in the music )—First, you brown an onion in the
pan, then you chop the cabbage—

 Guest

( in the dressing-room, just arriving, to another )—Yes, we are
awfully late, too, but I always say you never can be too late at one of
the Smythes' horrors.

 Thin Young Woman

( in limp pink gown and string of huge pearls, who has
come to recite )—I'm awfully nervous, and I do believe I'm getting
hoarse. Mama, you didn't forget the lemon juice and sugar? ( Drinks from
bottle. ) Now, where are my bronchial troches? Don't you think I could
stand just a little more rouge? I think it's a shame I'm not going to
have footlights. Remember, you are not to prompt me, unless I look at
you. You will get me all mixed up, if you do. ( They descend. )  Hostess

( to elocutionist )—Why, I thought you were never coming! I
wanted you to fill in while people were taking their seats. The guests
always make so much noise, and the singers hate it. Now, what did you
say you would require—an egg-beater and a turnip, wasn't it? Oh, no!
That's for the young man who is going to do the tricks. I remember. Are
you all ready?

 Elocutionist

( in a trembling voice )—Ye-es.

 Hostess

—'Sh, 'sh, 'sh!

 Elocutionist

— Aux Italiens.   "At Paris it was, at the opera there, 

 And she looked like—" 



 Guest

( to another )—Thirty cents, old chap! I tell you, there's
nothing will knock you out quicker than—

 Hostess

—'Sh, 'sh, 'sh!

 ( Young woman finishes, and retires amidst subdued applause. Reappears
immediately and gives "The Maniac." )

 Hostess

—As I have been disappointed in my best talent for this evening,
Mr. Briggs has kindly consented to do some of his parlor-magic tricks.

 (Mr. Briggs steps forward, a large, florid young man, wearing a "made"
dress-tie, the buckle of which crawls up the back of his collar. )

 Briggs

—Now, ladies and gentlemen, I shall have to ask you all to move
to the other side of the room. ( This is accomplished with muttered
uncomplimentary remarks concerning the magician. )

 Briggs

( to Hostess )—I must have the piano pushed to the further end.
I must have plenty of space. ( All the men guests are pressed into
service, and, with much difficulty the piano is moved. )

 Briggs

—Now, I want four large screens.

 Hostess

( faintly )—But I have only two!  Briggs

—Well, then, get me a clothes-horse and a couple of sheets.

 Poor Relative

—You know, Sarah, I used the last two when I made up my
bed in the children's nursery yesterday. I can easily get—

 Hostess

( hastily )—No, Maria, don't trouble. ( To guests )—Perhaps,
some of you gentlemen wouldn't mind lending us your overcoats to cover
the clothes-horse?

 Chorus

( with great lack of enthusiasm )—Of course! Delighted! ( They
go for coats. )

 Hostess

( to Poor Relative )—Maria, you get the clothes-horse. I think
it's in the laundry, or—Oh, I think it's in the cellar. Well, you look
till you find it. ( To Briggs )—I got as many of the things you asked
for as I could remember. Will you read the list over?

 Briggs

—Turnip and egg-beater—

 Hostess

—Yes.

 Briggs

—Egg, large clock, jar of gold-fish, rabbit and empty barrel.

 Hostess

—I have the egg.

 Briggs

( much annoyed )—I particularly wanted the gold-fish, the clock
and the barrel.

 ( Guests grow restless. )

 Hostess—Couldn't you do a trick while we are waiting—one with the
egg-beater and turnip?

 Briggs

—No; I don't know one.

 Hostess

—Couldn't you make up one?

 Briggs

( icily )—Certainly not.

 ( Gloom descends over the company, until the Poor Relative arrives,
staggering under the clothes-horse. )

 Chorus of Men Guests

—Let me help you!

 ( Improvised screen is finally arranged. Briggs performs "parlor
magic" for an hour. Guests, fidget, yawn and commence to drop away, one
by one. )  Guest

( to Hostess )—Really, we must tear ourselves away. Such a
delightful evening!—not a dull moment. And your punch—heavenly! Do ask
us again. Good night.

 Hostess

—Thank you so much! So good of you to come.

 Another Guest

—Yes, we must go. I've had a perfectly dear time.

 Hostess

—So sorry you must go. So good of you to come. Good night.

 IN THE DRESSING-ROOM

 Chorus of Guests

—Wasn't it awful?—Such low people!—Why did we ever
come—Parvenue!

 Elocutionist

—I was all right, wasn't I, mama? You noticed they never
clapped a bit until I'd walked the whole length of the room to my chair.
It just showed how wrought up they were. You nearly mixed me up, though,
prompting me in the wrong place; I—

 Hostess

( throwing herself on sofa as door closes on last guest )—Well,
I'm completely done up! ( To Poor Relative )—Maria, run up to my room,
and get my red worsted bed-slippers. I can't stand these satin tortures
a minute longer. Entertaining is an awful strain. It's so hard trying
not to say the wrong thing at the right place. But, then, it certainly
went off beautifully. I could tell every one had such a good time!