THE GENIAL IDIOT SUGGESTS A COMIC OPERA

 BY JOHN KENDRICK BANGS

 "There's a harvest for you," said the Idiot, as he perused a recently
published criticism of a comic opera. "There have been thirty-nine new
comic operas produced this year and four of 'em were worth seeing. It is
very evident that the Gilbert and Sullivan industry hasn't gone to the
wall whatever slumps other enterprises have suffered from."

 "That is a goodly number," said the Poet. "Thirty-nine, eh? I knew there
was a raft of them, but I had no idea there were as many as that."

 "Why don't you go in and do one, Mr. Poet?" suggested the Idiot. "They
tell me it's as easy as rolling off a log. All you've got to do is to
forget all your ideas and remember all the old jokes you ever heard.
Slap 'em together around a lot of dances, write two dozen lyrics about
some Googoo Belle, hire a composer, and there you are. Hanged if I
haven't thought of writing one myself."

 "I fancy it isn't as easy as it looks," observed the Poet. "It requires
just as much thought to be thoughtless as it does to be thoughtful."

 "Nonsense," said the Idiot. "I'd undertake the job cheerfully if some
manager would make it worth my while, and what's more, if I ever got
into the swing of the business I'll bet I could turn out a libretto a
day for three days of the week for the next two months."

 "If I had your confidence I'd try it," laughed the Poet, "but alas, in
making me Nature did not design a confidence man."

 "Nonsense again," said the Idiot. "Any man who can get the editors to
print Sonnets to Diana's Eyebrow, and little lyrics of Madison Square,
Longacre Square, Battery Place and Boston Common, the way you do, has a
right to consider himself an adept at bunco. I tell you what I'll do
with you. I'll swap off my confidence for your lyrical facility and see
what I can do. Why can't we collaborate and get up a libretto for next
season? They tell me there's large money in it."

 "There certainly is if you catch on," said the Poet. "Vastly more than
in any other kind of writing that I know. I don't know but that I would
like to collaborate with you on something of the sort. What is your
idea?"

 "Mind's a blank on the subject," sighed the Idiot. "That's the reason I
think I can turn the trick. As I said before, you don't need ideas.
Better off without 'em. Just sit down and write."

 "But you must have some kind of a story," persisted the Poet.

 "Not to begin with," said the Idiot. "Just write your choruses and
songs, slap in your jokes, fasten 'em together, and the thing is done.
First act, get your hero and heroine into trouble. Second act, get 'em
out."

 "And for the third?" queried the Poet.

 "Don't have a third," said the Idiot. "A third is always
superfluous—but if you must have it, make up some kind of a vaudeville
show and stick it in between the first and second."

 "Tush!" said the Bibliomaniac. "That would make a gay comic opera."

 "Of course it would, Mr. Bib," the Idiot agreed. "And that's what we
want. If there's anything in this world that I hate more than another
it is a sombre comic opera. I've been to a lot of 'em, and I give you my
word of honor that next to a funeral a comic opera that lacks gaiety is
one of the most depressing functions known to modern science. Some of
'em are enough to make an undertaker weep with jealous rage. I went to
one of 'em last week called 'The Skylark' with an old chum of mine, who
is a surgeon. You can imagine what sort of a thing it was when I tell
you that after the first act he suggested we leave the theater and come
back here and have some fun cutting my leg off. He vowed that if he ever
went to another opera by the same people he'd take ether beforehand."

 "I shouldn't think that would be necessary," sneered the Bibliomaniac.
"If it was as bad as all that why didn't it put you to sleep?"

 "It did," said the Idiot. "But the music kept waking us up again. There
was no escape from it except that of actual physical flight."

 "Well—about this collaboration of ours," suggested the Poet. "What do
you think we should do first?"

 "Write an opening chorus, of course," said the Idiot. "What did you
suppose? A finale? Something like this:

  "If you want to know who we are, 

 Just ask the Evening Star, 

 As he smiles on high 

 In the deep blue sky, 

 With his tralala-la-la-la. 

 We are maidens sweet 

 With tripping feet, 

 And the Googoo eyes 

 Of the Skippity-hi's, 

 And the smile of the fair Gazoo; 

 And you'll find our names 

 'Mongst the wondrous dames 

 Of the Whos Who-hoo-hoo-hoo. 

  "Get that sung with spirit by sixty-five ladies with blonde wigs and
gold slippers, otherwise dressed up in the uniform of a troop of Russian
Cavalry, and you've got your venture launched."

 "Where can you find people like that?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

 "New York's full of 'em," replied the Idiot.

 "I don't mean the people to act that sort of thing—but where would you
lay your scene?" explained the Bibliomaniac.

 "Oh, any old place in the Pacific Ocean," said the Idiot. "Make your own
geography—everybody else does. There's a million islands out there of
one kind or another, and as defenseless as a two weeks' old infant. If
you want a real one, fish it out and fire ahead. If you don't, make one
up for yourself and call it 'The Isle of Piccolo,' or something of that
sort. After you've got your chorus going, introduce your villain, who
should be a man with a deep bass voice and a piratical past. He's the
chap who rules the roost and is going to marry the heroine to-morrow.
That will make a bully song:

  "I'm a pirate bold 

 With a heart so cold 

 That it turns the biggest joys to solemn sorrow; 

 And the hero-ine, 

 With her eyes so fine, 

 I am going to-marry—to-morrow. 



 Chorus

: 



 "He is go-ing to-marry—to-morrow 

 The maid with a heart full of sorrow; 

 For her we are sorry 

 For she weds to-morry— 

 She is go-ing to-marry—to-morrow. 

  "Gee!" added the Idiot enthusiastically. "Can't you almost hear that
already?"

 "I am sorry to say," said Mr. Brief, "that I can. You ought to call your
heroine Drivelina."

 "Splendid," cried the Idiot. "Drivelina goes. Well, then on comes
Drivelina and this beast of a Pirate grabs her by the hand and makes
love to her as if he thought wooing was a game of snap the whip. She
sings a soprano solo of protest and the Pirate summons his hirelings to
cast Drivelina into a Donjuan cell when, boom! an American warship
appears on the horizon. The crew under the leadership of a man with a
squeaky tenor voice named Lieutenant Somebody or other comes ashore,
puts Drivelina under the protection of the American flag while his crew
sings the following:

  "We are Jackies, Jackies, Jackies, 

 And we smoke the best tobaccys 

 You can find from Zanzibar to Honeyloo. 

 And we fight for Uncle Sammy, 

 Yes indeed we do, for damme 

 You can bet your life that that's the thing to do—doodle-do! 

 You can bet your life that that's the thing to doodle—doodle—doodle—doodle-do. 



 "Eh! What?" demanded the Idiot.

 "Well—what yourself?" asked the Lawyer. "This is your job. What next?"

 "Well—the Pirate gets lively, tries to assassinate the Lieutenant, who
kills half the natives with his sword and is about to slay the Pirate
when he discovers that he is his long lost father," said the Idiot. "The
heroine then sings a pathetic love song about her Baboon Baby, in a
green light to the accompaniment of a lot of pink satin monkeys banging
cocoa-nut shells together. This drowsy lullaby puts the Lieutenant and
his forces to sleep and the curtain falls on their capture by the
Pirate and his followers, with the chorus singing:

  "Hooray for the Pirate bold, 

 With his pockets full of gold, 

 He's going to marry to-morrow. 

 To-morrow he'll marry, 

 Yes, by the Lord Harry, 

 He's go-ing—to-marry—to-mor-row! 

 And that's a thing to doodle-doodle-doo. 



 "There," said the Idiot, after a pause. "How is that for a first act?"

 "It's about as lucid as most of them," said the Poet, "but after all you
have got a story there, and you said you didn't need one."

 "I said you didn't need one to start with," corrected the Idiot. "And
I've proved it. I didn't have that story in mind when I started. That's
where the easiness of the thing comes in. Why, I didn't even have to
think of a name for the heroine. The inspiration for that popped right
out of Mr. Brief's mouth as smoothly as though the name Drivelina had
been written on his heart for centuries. Then the title—Isle of
Piccolo—that's a dandy and I give you my word of honor I'd never even
thought of a title for the opera until that revealed itself like a flash
from the blue; and as for the coon song, 'My Baboon Baby,' there's a
chance there for a Zanzibar act that will simply make Richard Wagner and
Reginald De Koven writhe with jealousy. Can't you imagine the lilt of
it:

  "My Bab-boon—ba-habee, 

 My Bab-boon—ba-habee— 

 I love you dee-her-lee 

 Yes dee-hee-hee-er-lee. 

 My Baboon—ba-ha-bee, 

 My Baboon—ba-ha-bee, 

 My baboon—Ba-hay-hay-hay-hay-hay-hay-bee-bee. 

  "And all those pink satin monkeys bumping their cocoanut shells together
in the green moonlight—"

 "Well, after the first act, what?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

 "The usual intermission," said the Idiot. "You don't have to write that.
The audience generally knows what to do."

 "But your second act?" asked the Poet.

 "Oh, come off," said the Idiot rising. "We were to do this thing in
collaboration. So far I've done the whole blooming business. I'll leave
the second act to you. When you collaborate, Mr. Poet, you've got to do
a little collabbing on your own account. What did you think you were to
do—collect the royalties?"

 "I'm told," said the Lawyer, "that that is sometimes the hardest thing
to do in a comic opera."

 "Well, I'll be self-sacrificing," said the Idiot, "and bear my full
share of it."

 "It seems to me," said the Bibliomaniac, "that that opera produced in
the right place might stand a chance of a run."

 "Thank you," said the Idiot. "After all, Mr. Bib, you are a man of some
penetration. How long a run?"

 "One consecutive night," said the Bibliomaniac.

 "Ah—and where?" demanded the Idiot with a smile.

 "At Bloomingdale," answered the Bibliomaniac severely.

 "That's a very good idea," said the Idiot. "When you go back there, Mr.
Bib, I wish you'd suggest it to the Superintendent."