GIDEON
    

      By Wells Hastings (1878- )
    

      [From The Century Magazine, April, 1914; copyright, 1914, by The
      Century Co.; republished by the author's permission.]
    

      "An' de next' frawg dat houn' pup seen, he pass him by wide."
    

      The house, which had hung upon every word, roared with laughter, and shook
      with a storming volley of applause. Gideon bowed to right and to left,
      low, grinning, assured comedy obeisances; but as the laughter and applause
      grew he shook his head, and signaled quietly for the drop. He had answered
      many encores, and he was an instinctive artist. It was part of the fuel of
      his vanity that his audience had never yet had enough of him. Dramatic
      judgment, as well as dramatic sense of delivery, was native to him,
      qualities which the shrewd Felix Stuhk, his manager and exultant
      discoverer, recognized and wisely trusted in. Off stage Gideon was watched
      over like a child and a delicate investment, but once behind the
      footlights he was allowed to go his own triumphant gait.
    

      It was small wonder that Stuhk deemed himself one of the cleverest
      managers in the business; that his narrow, blue-shaven face was
      continually chiseled in smiles of complacent self-congratulation. He was
      rapidly becoming rich, and there were bright prospects of even greater
      triumphs, with proportionately greater reward. He had made Gideon a
      national character, a headliner, a star of the first magnitude in the
      firmament of the vaudeville theater, and all in six short months. Or, at
      any rate, he had helped to make him all this; he had booked him well and
      given him his opportunity. To be sure, Gideon had done the rest; Stuhk was
      as ready as any one to do credit to Gideon's ability. Still, after all,
      he, Stuhk, was the discoverer, the theatrical Columbus who had had the
      courage and the vision.
    

      A now-hallowed attack of tonsilitis had driven him to Florida, where
      presently Gideon had been employed to beguile his convalescence, and guide
      him over the intricate shallows of that long lagoon known as the Indian
      River in search of various fish. On days when fish had been reluctant
      Gideon had been lured into conversation, and gradually into narrative and
      the relation of what had appeared to Gideon as humorous and entertaining;
      and finally Felix, the vague idea growing big within him, had one day
      persuaded his boatman to dance upon the boards of a long pier where they
      had made fast for lunch. There, with all the sudden glory of
      crystallization, the vague idea took definite form and became the great
      inspiration of Stuhk's career.
    

      Gideon had grown to be to vaudeville much what Uncle Remus is to
      literature: there was virtue in his very simplicity. His artistry itself
      was native and natural. He loved a good story, and he told it from his own
      sense of the gleeful morsel upon his tongue as no training could have made
      him. He always enjoyed his story and himself in the telling. Tales never
      lost their savor, no matter how often repeated; age was powerless to dim
      the humor of the thing, and as he had shouted and gurgled and laughed over
      the fun of things when all alone, or holding forth among the men and women
      and little children of his color, so he shouted and gurgled and broke from
      sonorous chuckles to musical, falsetto mirth when he fronted the sweeping
      tiers of faces across the intoxicating glare of the footlights. He had
      that rare power of transmitting something of his own enjoyments. When
      Gideon was on the stage, Stuhk used to enjoy peeping out at the intent,
      smiling faces of the audience, where men and women and children, hardened
      theater-goers and folk fresh from the country, sat with moving lips and
      faces lit with an eager interest and sympathy for the black man strutting
      in loose-footed vivacity before them.
    

      "He's simply unique," he boasted to wondering local managers—"unique,
      and it took me to find him. There he was, a little black gold-mine, and
      all of 'em passed him by until I came. Some eye? What? I guess you'll
      admit you have to hand it some to your Uncle Felix. If that coon's health
      holds out, we'll have all the money there is in the mint."
    

      That was Felix's real anxiety—"If his health holds out." Gideon's
      health was watched over as if he had been an ailing prince. His bubbling
      vivacity was the foundation upon which his charm and his success were
      built. Stuhk became a sort of vicarious neurotic, eternally searching for
      symptoms in his protégé; Gideon's tongue, Gideon's liver, Gideon's heart
      were matters to him of an unfailing and anxious interest. And of late—of
      course it might be imagination —Gideon had shown a little physical
      falling off. He ate a bit less, he had begun to move in a restless way,
      and, worst of all, he laughed less frequently.
    

      As a matter of fact, there was ground for Stuhk's apprehension. It was not
      all a matter of managerial imagination: Gideon was less himself.
      Physically there was nothing the matter with him; he could have passed his
      rigid insurance scrutiny as easily as he had done months before, when his
      life and health had been insured for a sum that made good copy for his
      press-agent. He was sound in every organ, but there was something lacking
      in general tone. Gideon felt it himself, and was certain that a "misery,"
      that embracing indisposition of his race, was creeping upon him. He had
      been fed well, too well; he was growing rich, too rich; he had all the
      praise, all the flattery that his enormous appetite for approval desired,
      and too much of it. White men sought him out and made much of him; white
      women talked to him about his career; and wherever he went, women of color—black
      girls, brown girls, yellow girls—wrote him of their admiration,
      whispered, when he would listen, of their passion and hero-worship. "City
      niggers" bowed down before him; the high gallery was always packed with
      them. Musk-scented notes scrawled upon barbaric, "high-toned" stationery
      poured in upon him. Even a few white women, to his horror and
      embarrassment, had written him of love, letters which he straightway
      destroyed. His sense of his position was strong in him; he was proud of
      it. There might be "folks outer their haids," but he had the sense to
      remember. For months he had lived in a heaven of gratified vanity, but at
      last his appetite had begun to falter. He was sated; his soul longed to
      wipe a spiritual mouth on the back of a spiritual hand, and have done. His
      face, now that the curtain was down and he was leaving the stage, was
      doleful, almost sullen.
    

      Stuhk met him anxiously in the wings, and walked with him to his
      dressing-room. He felt suddenly very weary of Stuhk.
    

      "Nothing the matter, Gideon, is there? Not feeling sick or anything?"
    

      "No, Misteh Stuhk; no, seh. Jes don' feel extry pert, that's all."
    

      "But what is it—anything bothering you?"
    

      Gideon sat gloomily before his mirror.
    

      "Misteh Stuhk," he said at last, "I been steddyin' it oveh, and I about
      come to the delusion that I needs a good po'k-chop. Seems foolish, I know,
      but it do' seem as if a good po'k-chop, fried jes right, would he'p
      consid'able to disumpate this misery feelin' that's crawlin' and creepin'
      round my sperit."
    

      Stuhk laughed.
    

      "Pork-chop, eh? Is that the best you can think of? I know what you mean,
      though. I've thought for some time that you were getting a little
      overtrained. What you need is—let me see—yes, a nice bottle of
      wine. That's the ticket; it will ease things up and won't do you any harm.
      I'll go, with you. Ever had any champagne, Gideon?"
    

      Gideon struggled for politeness.
    

      "Yes, seh, I's had champagne, and it's a nice kind of lickeh sho enough;
      but, Misteh Stuhk, seh, I don' want any of them high-tone drinks to-night,
      an' ef yo' don' mind, I'd rather amble off 'lone, or mebbe eat that
      po'k-chop with some otheh cullud man, ef I kin fin' one that ain' one of
      them no-'count Carolina niggers. Do you s'pose yo' could let me have a
      little money to-night, Misteh Stuhk?"
    

      Stuhk thought rapidly. Gideon had certainly worked hard, and he was not
      dissipated. If he wanted to roam the town by himself, there was no harm in
      it. The sullenness still showed in the black face; Heaven knew what he
      might do if he suddenly began to balk. Stuhk thought it wise to consent
      gracefully.
    

      "Good!" he said. "Fly to it. How much do you want? A hundred?"
    

      "How much is coming to me?"
    

      "About a thousand, Gideon."
    

      "Well, I'd moughty like five hun'red of it, ef that's 'greeable to yo'."
    

      Felix whistled.
    

      "Five hundred? Pork-chops must be coming high. You don't want to carry all
      that money around, do you?"
    

      Gideon did not answer; he looked very gloomy.
    

      Stuhk hastened to cheer him.
    

      "Of course you can have anything you want. Wait a minute, and I will get
      it for you.
    

      "I'll bet that coon's going to buy himself a ring or something," he
      reflected as he went in search of the local manager and Gideon's money.
    

      But Stuhk was wrong. Gideon had no intention of buying himself a ring. For
      the matter of that, he had several that were amply satisfactory. They had
      size and sparkle and luster, all the diamond brilliance that rings need to
      have; and for none of them had he paid much over five dollars. He was
      amply supplied with jewelry in which he felt perfect satisfaction. His
      present want was positive, if nebulous; he desired a fortune in his
      pocket, bulky, tangible evidence of his miraculous success. Ever since
      Stuhk had found him, life had had an unreal quality for him. His Monte
      Cristo wealth was too much like a fabulous, dream-found treasure, money
      that could not be spent without danger of awakening. And he had dropped
      into the habit of storing it about him, so that in any pocket into which
      he plunged his hand he might find a roll of crisp evidence of reality. He
      liked his bills to be of all denominations, and some so large as
      exquisitely to stagger imagination, others charming by their number and
      crispness—the dignified, orange paper of a man of assured position
      and wealth-crackling greenbacks the design of which tinged the whole with
      actuality. He was specially partial to engravings of President Lincoln,
      the particular savior and patron of his race. This five hundred dollars he
      was adding to an unreckoned sum of about two thousand, merely as extra
      fortification against a growing sense of gloom. He wished to brace his
      flagging spirits with the gay wine of possession, and he was glad, when
      the money came, that it was in an elastic-bound roll, so bulky that it was
      pleasantly uncomfortable in his pocket as he left his manager.
    

      As he turned into the brilliantly lighted street from the somber alleyway
      of the stage entrance, he paused for a moment to glance at his own name,
      in three-foot letters of red, before the doors of the theater. He could
      read, and the large block type always pleased him. "THIS WEEK: GIDEON."
      That was all. None of the fulsome praise, the superlative, necessary
      definition given to lesser performers. He had been, he remembered,
      "GIDEON, America's Foremost Native Comedian," a title that was at once
      boast and challenge. That necessity was now past, for he was a national
      character; any explanatory qualification would have been an insult to the
      public intelligence. To the world he was just "Gideon"; that was enough.
      It gave him pleasure, as he sauntered along, to see the announcement
      repeated on window cards and hoardings.
    

      Presently he came to a window before which he paused in delighted wonder.
      It was not a large window; to the casual eye of the passer-by there was
      little to draw attention. By day it lighted the fractional floor space of
      a little stationer, who supplemented a slim business by a sub-agency for
      railroad and steamship lines; but to-night this window seemed the
      framework of a marvel of coincidence. On the broad, dusty sill inside were
      propped two cards: the one on the left was his own red-lettered
      announcement for the week; the one at the right—oh, world of
      wonders!—was a photogravure of that exact stretch of the inner coast
      of Florida which Gideon knew best, which was home.
    

      There it was, the Indian River, rippling idly in full sunlight, palmettos
      leaning over the water, palmettos standing as irregular sentries along the
      low, reeflike island which stretched away out of the picture. There was
      the gigantic, lonely pine he knew well, and, yes—he could just make
      it out—there was his own ramshackle little pier, which stretched in
      undulating fashion, like a long-legged, wading caterpillar, from the
      abrupt shore-line of eroded coquina into deep water.
    

      He thought at first that this picture of his home was some new and
      delicate device put forth by his press-agent. His name on one side of a
      window, his birthplace upon the other—what could be more tastefully
      appropriate? Therefore, as he spelled out the reading-matter beneath the
      photogravure, he was sharply disappointed. It read:
    

      Spend this winter in balmy Florida.
    Come to the Land of Perpetual Sunshine.
Golf, tennis, driving, shooting, boating, fishing, all of the best.


      There was more, but he had no heart for it; he was disappointed and
      puzzled. This picture had, after all, nothing to do with him. It was a
      chance, and yet, what a strange chance! It troubled and upset him. His
      black, round-featured face took on deep wrinkles of perplexity. The
      "misery" which had hung darkly on his horizon for weeks engulfed him
      without warning. But in the very bitterness of his melancholy he knew at
      last his disease. It was not champagne or recreation that he needed, not
      even a "po'k-chop," although his desire for it had been a symptom, a
      groping for a too homeopathic remedy: he was homesick.
    

      Easy, childish tears came into his eyes, and ran over his shining cheeks.
      He shivered forlornly with a sudden sense of cold, and absently clutched
      at the lapels of his gorgeous, fur-lined ulster.
    

      Then in abrupt reaction he laughed aloud, so that the shrill, musical
      falsetto startled the passers-by, and in another moment a little
      semicircle of the curious watched spellbound as a black man, exquisitely
      appareled, danced in wild, loose grace before the dull background of a
      somewhat grimy and apparently vacant window. A newsboy recognized him.
    

      He heard his name being passed from mouth to mouth, and came partly to his
      senses. He stopped dancing, and grinned at them.
    

      "Say, you are Gideon, ain't you?" his discoverer demanded, with a sort of
      reverent audacity.
    

      "Yaas, seh," said Gideon; "that's me. Yo' shu got it right." He
      broke into a joyous peal of laughter—the laughter that had made him
      famous, and bowed deeply before him. "Gideon—posi-tive-ly his
      las' puffawmunce." Turning, he dashed for a passing trolley, and, still
      laughing, swung aboard.
    

      He was naturally honest. In a land of easy morality his friends had
      accounted him something of a paragon; nor had Stuhk ever had anything but
      praise for him. But now he crushed aside the ethics of his intent without
      a single troubled thought. Running away has always been inherent in the
      negro. He gave one regretful thought to the gorgeous wardrobe he was
      leaving behind him; but he dared not return for it. Stuhk might have taken
      it into his head to go back to their rooms. He must content himself with
      the reflection that he was at that moment wearing his best.
    

      The trolley seemed too slow for him, and, as always happened nowadays, he
      was recognized; he heard his name whispered, and was aware of the admiring
      glances of the curious. Even popularity had its drawbacks. He got down in
      front of a big hotel and chose a taxicab from the waiting rank, exhorting
      the driver to make his best speed to the station. Leaning back in the soft
      depths of the cab, he savored his independence, cheered already by the
      swaying, lurching speed. At the station he tipped the driver in lordly
      fashion, very much pleased with himself and anxious to give pleasure. Only
      the sternest prudence and an unconquerable awe of uniform had kept him
      from tossing bills to the various traffic policemen who had seemed to
      smile upon his hurry.
    

      No through train left for hours; but after the first disappointment of
      momentary check, he decided that he was more pleased than otherwise. It
      would save embarrassment. He was going South, where his color would be
      more considered than his reputation, and on the little local he chose
      there was a "Jim Crow" car—one, that is, specially set aside for
      those of his race. That it proved crowded and full of smoke did not
      trouble him at all, nor did the admiring pleasantries which the splendor
      of his apparel immediately called forth. No one knew him; indeed, he was
      naturally enough mistaken for a prosperous gambler, a not unflattering
      supposition. In the yard, after the train pulled out, he saw his private
      car under a glaring arc light, and grinned to see it left behind.
    

      He spent the night pleasantly in a noisy game of high-low-jack, and the
      next morning slept more soundly than he had slept for weeks, hunched upon
      a wooden bench in the boxlike station of a North Carolina junction. The
      express would have brought him to Jacksonville in twenty-four hours; the
      journey, as he took it, boarding any local that happened to be going
      south, and leaving it for meals or sometimes for sleep or often as the
      whim possessed him, filled five happy days. There he took a night train,
      and dozed from Jacksonville until a little north of New Smyrna.
    

      He awoke to find it broad daylight, and the car half empty. The train was
      on a siding, with news of a freight wreck ahead. Gideon stretched himself,
      and looked out of the window, and emotion seized him. For all his journey
      the South had seemed to welcome him, but here at last was the country he
      knew. He went out upon the platform and threw back his head, sniffing the
      soft breeze, heavy with the mysterious thrill of unplowed acres, the
      wondrous existence of primordial jungle, where life has rioted unceasingly
      above unceasing decay. It was dry with the fine dust of waste places, and
      wet with the warm mists of slumbering swamps; it seemed to Gideon to
      tremble with the songs of birds, the dry murmur of palm leaves, and the
      almost inaudible whisper of the gray moss that festooned the live-oaks.
    

      "Um-m-m," he murmured, apostrophizing it, "yo' 's the right kind o'
      breeze, yo' is. Yo'-all's healthy." Still sniffing, he climbed down to the
      dusty road-bed.
    

      The negroes who had ridden with him were sprawled about him on the ground;
      one of them lay sleeping, face up, in the sunlight. The train had
      evidently been there for some time, and there were no signs of an
      immediate departure. He bought some oranges of a little, bowlegged black
      boy, and sat down on a log to eat them and to give up his mind to
      enjoyment. The sun was hot upon him, and his thoughts were vague and
      drowsy. He was glad that he was alive, glad to be back once more among
      familiar scenes. Down the length of the train he saw white passengers from
      the Pullmans restlessly pacing up and down, getting into their cars and
      out of them, consulting watches, attaching themselves with gesticulatory
      expostulation to various officials; but their impatience found no echo in
      his thought. What was the hurry? There was plenty of time. It was
      sufficient to have come to his own land; the actual walls of home could
      wait. The delay was pleasant, with its opportunity for drowsy sunning, its
      relief from the grimy monotony of travel. He glanced at the orange-colored
      "Jim Crow" with distaste, and inspiration, dawning slowly upon him, swept
      all other thought before it in its great and growing glory.
    

      A brakeman passed, and Gideon leaped to his feet and pursued him.
    

      "Misteh, how long yo'-all reckon this train goin' to be?"
    

      "About an hour."
    

      The question had been a mere matter of form. Gideon had made up his mind,
      and if he had been told that they started in five minutes he would not
      have changed it. He climbed back into the car for his coat and his hat,
      and then almost furtively stole down the steps again and slipped quietly
      into the palmetto scrub.
    

      "'Most made the mistake of ma life," he chuckled, "stickin' to that ol'
      train foheveh. 'T isn't the right way at, all foh Gideon to come home."
    

      The river was not far away. He could catch the dancing blue of it from
      time to time in ragged vista, and for this beacon he steered directly. His
      coat was heavy on his arm, his thin patent-leather ties pinched and burned
      and demanded detours around swampy places, but he was happy.
    

      As he went along, his plan perfected itself. He would get into loose shoes
      again, old ones, if money could buy them, and old clothes, too. The
      bull-briers snatching at his tailored splendor suggested that.
    

      He laughed when the Florida partridge, a small quail, whirred up from
      under his feet; he paused to exchange affectionate mockery with red
      squirrels; and once, even when he was brought up suddenly to a familiar
      and ominous, dry reverberation, the small, crisp sound of the rolling
      drums of death, he did not look about him for some instrument of
      destruction, as at any other time he would have done, but instead peered
      cautiously over the log before him, and spoke in tolerant admonition:
    

      "Now, Misteh Rattlesnake, yo' jes min' yo' own business. Nobody's goin'
      step on yo', ner go triflin' roun' yo' in no way whatsomeveh. Yo' jes lay
      there in the sun an' git 's fat 's yo' please. Don' yo' tu'n yo' weeked
      li'l' eyes on Gideon. He's jes goin' 'long home, an' ain' lookin' foh no
      muss."
    

      He came presently to the water, and, as luck would have it, to a little
      group of negro cabins, where he was able to buy old clothes and, after
      much dickering, a long and somewhat leaky rowboat rigged out with a
      tattered leg-of-mutton sail. This he provisioned with a jug of water, a
      starch box full of white corn-meal, and a wide strip of lean razorback
      bacon.
    

      As he pushed out from shore and set his sail to the small breeze that blew
      down from the north, an absolute contentment possessed him. The idle
      waters of the lagoon, lying without tide or current in eternal indolence,
      rippled and sparkled in breeze and sunlight with a merry surface activity,
      and seemed to lap the leaky little boat more swiftly on its way. Mosquito
      Inlet opened broadly before him, and skirting the end of Merritt's Island
      he came at last into that longest lagoon, with which he was most familiar,
      the Indian River. Here the wind died down to a mere breath, which barely
      kept his boat in motion; but he made no attempt to row. As long as he
      moved at all, he was satisfied. He was living the fulfilment of his dreams
      in exile, lounging in the stern in the ancient clothes he had purchased,
      his feet stretched comfortably before him in their broken shoes, one foot
      upon a thwart, the other hanging overside so laxly that occasional ripples
      lapped the run-over heel. From time to time he scanned shore and river for
      familiar points of interest—some remembered snag that showed the tip
      of one gnarled branch. Or he marked a newly fallen palmetto, already
      rotting in the water, which must be added to that map of vast detail that
      he carried in his head. But for the most part his broad black face was
      turned up to the blue brilliance above him in unblinking contemplation;
      his keen eyes, brilliant despite their sun-muddied whites, reveled in the
      heights above him, swinging from horizon to horizon in the wake of an
      orderly file of little bluebill ducks, winging their way across the river,
      or brightening with interest at the rarer sight of a pair of mallards or
      redheads, lifting with the soaring circles of the great bald-headed eagle,
      or following the scattered squadron of heron—white heron, blue
      heron, young and old, trailing, sunlit, brilliant patches, clear even
      against the bright white and blue of the sky above them.
    

      Often he laughed aloud, sending a great shout of mirth across the water in
      fresh relish of those comedies best known and best enjoyed. It was as
      excruciatingly funny as it had ever been, when his boat nosed its way into
      a great flock of ducks idling upon the water, to see the mad paddling
      haste of those nearest him, the reproachful turn of their heads, or, if he
      came too near, their spattering run out of water, feet and wings pumping
      together as they rose from the surface, looking for all the world like fat
      little women, scurrying with clutched skirts across city streets. The
      pelicans, too, delighted him as they perched with pedantic solemnity upon
      wharf-piles, or sailed in hunched and huddled gravity twenty feet above
      the river's surface in swift, dignified flight, which always ended
      suddenly in an abrupt, up-ended plunge that threw dignity to the winds in
      its greedy haste, and dropped them crashing into the water.
    

      When darkness came suddenly at last, he made in toward shore, mooring to
      the warm-fretted end of a fallen and forgotten landing. A straggling
      orange-grove was here, broken lines of vanquished cultivation, struggling
      little trees swathed and choked in the festooning gray moss, still showing
      here and there the valiant golden gleam of fruit. Gideon had seen many
      such places, had seen settlers come and clear themselves a space in the
      jungle, plant their groves, and live for a while in lazy independence; and
      then for some reason or other they would go, and before they had scarcely
      turned their backs, the jungle had crept in again, patiently restoring its
      ancient sovereignty. The place was eery with the ghost of dead effort; but
      it pleased him.
    

      He made a fire and cooked supper, eating enormously and with relish. His
      conscience did not trouble him at all. Stuhk and his own career seemed
      already distant; they took small place in his thoughts, and served merely
      as a background for his present absolute content. He picked some oranges,
      and ate them in meditative enjoyment. For a while he nodded, half asleep,
      beside his fire, watching the darkened river, where the mullet, shimmering
      with phosphorescence, still leaped starkly above the surface, and fell in
      spattering brilliance. Midnight found him sprawled asleep beside his fire.
    

      Once he awoke. The moon had risen, and a little breeze waved the hanging
      moss, and whispered in the glossy foliage of orange and palmetto with a
      sound like falling rain. Gideon sat up and peered about him, rolling his
      eyes hither and thither at the menacing leap and dance of the jet shadows.
      His heart was beating thickly, his muscles twitched, and the awful terrors
      of night pulsed and shuddered over him. Nameless specters peered at him
      from every shadow, ingenerate familiars of his wild, forgotten blood. He
      groaned aloud in a delicious terror; and presently, still twitching and
      shivering, fell asleep again. It was as if something magical had happened;
      his fear remembered the fear of centuries, and yet with the warm daylight
      was absolutely forgotten.
    

      He got up a little after sunrise, and went down to the river to bathe,
      diving deep with a joyful sense of freeing himself from the last alien
      dust of travel. Once ashore again, however, he began to prepare his
      breakfast with some haste. For the first time in his journey he was
      feeling a sense of loneliness and a longing for his kind. He was still
      happy, but his laughter began to seem strange to him in the solitude. He
      tried the defiant experiment of laughing for the effect of it, an
      experiment which brought him to his feet in startled terror; for his
      laughter was echoed. As he stood peering about him, the sound came again,
      not laughter this time, but a suppressed giggle. It was human beyond a
      doubt. Gideon's face shone with relief and sympathetic amusement; he
      listened for a moment, and then strode surely forward toward a clump of
      low palms. There he paused, every sense alert. His ear caught a soft
      rustle, a little gasp of fear; the sound of a foot moved cautiously.
    

      "Missy," he said tentatively, "I reckon yo'-all's come jes 'bout 'n time
      foh breakfus. Yo' betteh have some. Ef yo' ain' too white to sit down with
      a black man."
    

      The leaves parted, and a smiling face as black as Gideon's own regarded
      him in shy amusement.
    

      "Who is yo', man?"
    

      "I mought be king of Kongo," he laughed, "but I ain't. Yo' see befo' yo'
      jes Gideon—at yo'r 'steemed sehvice." He bowed elaborately in the
      mock humility of assured importance, watching her face in pleasant
      anticipation.
    

      But neither awe nor rapture dawned there. She repeated the name, inclining
      her head coquettishly; but it evidently meant nothing to her. She was
      merely trying its sound. "Gideon, Gideon. I don' call to min' any sech
      name ez that. Yo'-all's f'om up No'th likely." He was beyond the reaches
      of fame.
    

      "No," said Gideon, hardly knowing whether he was glad or sorry—"no,
      I live south of heah. What-all's yo' name?"
    

      The girl giggled deliciously.
    

      "Man," she said, "I shu got the mos' reediculoustest name you eveh did
      heah. They call me Vashti—yo' bacon's bu'nin'." She stepped out, and
      ran past him to snatch his skillet deftly from the fire.
    

      "Vashti"—a strange and delightful name. Gideon followed her slowly.
      Her romantic coming and her romantic name pleased him; and, too, he
      thought her beautiful. She was scarcely more than a girl, slim and strong
      and almost of his own height. She was barefooted, but her blue-checked
      gingham was clean and belted smartly about a small waist. He remembered
      only one woman who ran as lithely as she did, one of the numerous "diving
      beauties" of the vaudeville stage.
    

      She cooked their breakfast, but he served her with an elaborate gallantry,
      putting forward all his new and foreign graces, garnishing his speech with
      imposing polysyllables, casting about their picnic breakfast a radiant
      aura of grandeur borrowed from the recent days of his fame. And he saw
      that he pleased her, and with her open admiration essayed still greater
      flights of polished manner.
    

      He made vague plans for delaying his journey as they sat smoking in
      pleasant conversational ease; and when an interruption came it vexed him.
    

      "Vashty! Vashty!" a woman's voice sounded thin and far away. "Vashty-y!
      Yo' heah me, chile?"
    

      Vashti rose to her feet with a sigh.
    

      "That's my ma," she said regretfully.
    

      "What do yo' care?" asked Gideon. "Let her yell awhile."
    

      The girl shook her head.
    

      "Ma's a moughty pow'ful 'oman, and she done got a club 'bout the size o'
      my wrist." She moved off a step or so, and glanced back at him.
    

      Gideon leaped to his feet.
    

      "When yo' comin' back? Yo'—yo' ain' goin' without——" He
      held out his arms to her, but she only giggled and began to walk slowly
      away. With a bound he was after her, one hand catching her lightly by the
      shoulder. He felt suddenly that he must not lose sight of her.
    

      "Let me go! Tu'n me loose, yo'!" The girl was still laughing, but
      evidently troubled. She wrenched herself away with an effort, only to be
      caught again a moment later. She screamed and struck at him as he kissed
      her; for now she was really in terror.
    

      The blow caught Gideon squarely in the mouth, and with such force that he
      staggered back, astonished, while the girl took wildly to her heels. He
      stood for a moment irresolute, for something was happening to him. For
      months he had evaded love with a gentle embarrassment; now, with the
      savage crash of that blow, he knew unreasoningly that he had found his
      woman.
    

      He leaped after her again, running as he had not run in years, in savage,
      determined pursuit, tearing through brier and scrub, tripping, falling,
      rising, never losing sight of the blue-clad figure before him until at
      last she tripped and fell, and he stood panting above her.
    

      He took a great breath or so, and leaned over and picked her up in his
      arms, where she screamed and struck and scratched at him. He laughed, for
      he felt no longer sensible to pain, and, still chuckling, picked his way
      carefully back to the shore, wading deep into the water to unmoor his
      boat. Then with a swift movement he dropped the girl into the bow, pushed
      free, and clambered actively aboard.
    

      The light, early morning breeze had freshened, and he made out well toward
      the middle of the river, never even glancing around at the sound of the
      hallooing he now heard from shore. His exertions had quickened his
      breathing, but he felt strong and joyful. Vashti lay a huddle of blue in
      the bow, crouched in fear and desolation, shaken and torn with sobbing;
      but he made no effort to comfort her. He was untroubled by any sense of
      wrong; he was simply and unreasoningly satisfied with what he had done.
      Despite all his gentle, easygoing, laughter-loving existence, he found
      nothing incongruous or unnatural in this sudden act of violence. He was
      aglow with happiness; he was taking home a wife. The blind tumult of
      capture had passed; a great tenderness possessed him.
    

      The leaky little boat was plunging and dancing in swift ecstasy of
      movement; all about them the little waves ran glittering in the sunlight,
      plashing and slapping against the boat's low side, tossing tiny crests to
      the following wind, showing rifts of white here and there, blowing
      handfuls of foam and spray. Gideon went softly about the business of
      shortening his small sail, and came quietly back to his steering-seat
      again. Soon he would have to be making for what lea the western shore
      offered; but he was holding to the middle of the river as long as he
      could, because with every mile the shores were growing more familiar,
      calling to him to make what speed he could. Vashti's sobbing had grown
      small and ceased; he wondered if she had fallen asleep.
    

      Presently, however, he saw her face raised—a face still shining with
      tears. She saw that he was watching her, and crouched low again. A dash of
      spray spattered over her, and she looked up frightened, glancing fearfully
      overside; then once more her eyes came back to him, and this time she got
      up, still small and crouching, and made her way slowly and painfully down
      the length of the boat, until at last Gideon moved aside for her, and she
      sank in the bottom beside him, hiding her eyes in her gingham sleeve.
    

      Gideon stretched out a broad hand and touched her head lightly; and with a
      tiny gasp her fingers stole up to his.
    

      "Honey," said Gideon—"Honey, yo' ain' mad, is yo'?"
    

      She shook her head, not looking at him.
    

      "Yo' ain' grievin' foh yo' ma?"
    

      Again she shook her head.
    

      "Because," said Gideon, smiling down at her, "I ain' got no beeg club like
      she has."
    

      A soft and smothered giggle answered him, and this time Vashti looked up
      and laid her head against him with a small sigh of contentment.
    

      Gideon felt very tender, very important, at peace with himself and all the
      world. He rounded a jutting point, and stretched out a black hand,
      pointing.