THE GIRL FROM MERCURY

 An Interplanetary Love Story

 Being the Interpretation of Certain Phonic Vibragraphs Recorded by the
Long's Peak Wireless Installation, Now for the First Time Made Public
Through the Courtesy of Professor Caducious, Ph.D., Sometime Secretary
of the Boulder Branch of the Association for the Advancement of
Interplanetary Communication.  BY HERMAN KNICKERBOCKER VIELÉ

 It is evident that the following logograms form part of a correspondence
between a young lady, formerly of Mercury, and her confidential friend
still resident upon the inferior planet. The translator has thought it
best to preserve, as far as possible, the spirit of the original by the
employment of mundane colloquialisms; the result, in spite of many
regrettable trivialities, will, it is believed, be of interest to
students of Cosmic Sociology.

 The First Record

 Yes, dear, it's me. I'm down here on the Earth and in our Settlement
House, safe and sound. I meant to have called you up before, but really
this is the first moment I have had to myself all day.—Yes, of course,
I said "all day." You know very well they have days and nights here,
because this restless little planet spins, or something of the sort.—I
haven't the least idea why it does so, and I don't care.—I did not
come here to make intelligent observations like a dowdy "Seeing Saturn"
tourist. So don't be Uranian. Try to exercise intuitive perception if I
say anything you can't understand.—What is that?—Please concentrate a
little harder.—Oh! Yes, I have seen a lot of human beings already, and
would you believe it? some of them seem almost possible—especially one .—But I will come to that one later. I've got so much to tell you
all at once I scarcely know where to begin.—Yes, dear, the One happens
to be a man. You would not have me discriminate, would you, when our
object is to bring whatever happiness we can to those less fortunate
than ourselves? You know success in slumming depends first of all upon
getting yourself admired, for then the others will want to be like you,
and once thoroughly dissatisfied with themselves they are almost certain
to reform. Of course I am only a visitor here, and shall not stay long
enough to take up serious work, so Ooma says I may as well proceed along
the line of least resistance.—If you remember Ooma's enthusiasm when
she ran the Board of Missions to Inferior Planets, you can fancy her now
that she has an opportunity to carry out all her theories. Oh, she's
great!

 My transmigration was disappointing as an experience. It was nothing
more than going to sleep and dreaming about circles—orange circles,
yellow circles, with a thousand others of graduated shades between, and
so on through the spectrum till you pass absolute green and get a tone
or two toward blue and strike the Earth color-note. Then with me
everything got jumbled together and seemed about to take new shapes, and
I woke up in the most commonplace manner and opened my eyes to find
myself externalized in our Earth Settlement House with Ooma laughing at
me.  "Don't stir!" she cried. "Don't lift a finger till we are sure your
specific gravity is all right." And then she pinched me to see if I was
dense enough, because the atmosphere is heavier or lighter or something
here than with us.

 I reminded her that matter everywhere must maintain an absolute
equilibrium with its environment, but she protested.

 "That's well enough in theory; you must understand that the Earth is
awfully out of tune at present, and sometimes it requires time to
readjust ourselves to its conditions."

 —I did not say so, but I fancy Ooma may have been undergoing
readjustment.—My dear, she has grown as pudgy as a Jupitan, and her
clothes—but then she always did look more like a spiral nebula than
anything else.

 (The record here becomes unintelligible by reason of the passage of a
thunderstorm above the summit of Long's Peak.)  —There must be star-dust in the ether.—I never had to concentrate so
hard before.—That's all about the Settlement House, and don't accuse me
again of slighting details. I'm sure you know the place now as well as
Ooma herself, so I can go on to tell what little I have learned about
human beings.

 It seems I am never to admit that I was not born on Earth, for, like all
provincials, the humans pride themselves on disbelieving everything
beyond their own experience, and if they understood they would be
certain to resent intrusions from another planet. I'm sure I don't blame
them altogether when I recall those patronizing Jupitans.—And I'm told
they are awfully jealous and distrustful even of one another, herding
together for protection and governed by so many funny little tribal
codes that what is right on one side of an imaginary boundary may be
wrong on the other.—Ooma considers this survival of the group-soul most
interesting, and intends to make it the subject of a paper. I mention it
only to explain why we call our Settlement a Boarding-House. A
Boarding-House, you must know, is fundamentally a hunting pack
which one can affiliate with or separate from at will.—Rather a
pale yellow idea, isn't it? Ooma thinks it necessary to conform
to it in order to be considered respectable, which is the one thing
on Earth most desired.—What, dear?—Oh, I don't know what it means
to be respectable any more than you do.—One thing more. You'll have
to draw on your imagination! Ooma is called here Mrs. Bloomer.—Her own
name was just a little too unearthly. Mrs. signifies that a woman is
married.—What?—Oh, no, no, no, nothing of the sort.—But I shall have
to leave that for another time. I'm not at all sure how it is myself.

 By the way, if any one should ask you where I am, just say I've left
the planet, and you don't know when I shall be back.—Yes, you know who
I mean.—And, dear, perhaps you might drop a hint that I detest all
foreigners, especially Jupitans.—Please don't laugh so hard; you'll get
the atmospheric molecules all woozy.—Indeed, there's not the slightest
danger here. Just fancy, if you please, beings who don't know when they
are hungry without consulting a wretched little mechanism, and who
measure their radius of conception by the length of their own feet.—Of
course I shall be on hand for the Solstice! I wouldn't miss that for an
asteroid!—Oh, did I really promise that? Well, I'll tell you about hi-m
another time.  The Second Record

 THOUGH PROBABLY THIRD COMMUNICATION

 —I really must not waste so much gray matter, dear, over unimportant
details. But I simply had to tell you all about my struggles with the
clothes. When Ooma came back, just as I had mastered them with the aid
of her diagrams, the dear thing was so much pleased she actually hugged
me, and I must confess the effect made me forget my discomfort. Really,
an Earth girl is not so much to be pitied if she has becoming dresses to
wear. As you may be sure I was anxious to compare myself with others, I
was glad enough to hear Ooma suggest going out.

 "Come on," she said, executively, "I have only a half-hour to devote to
your first walk. Keep close beside me, and remember on no account to
either dance or sing."

 "But if I see others dancing may I not join them?" I inquired.

 "You won't see anybody dancing on Broadway," she replied, a trifle
snubbily, but I resolved to escape from her as soon as possible and find
out for myself.

 I shall never forget my shock on discovering the sky blue instead of the
color it should be, but soon my eyes became accustomed to the change. In
fact, I have not since that first moment been able to conceive of the
sky as anything but blue. And the city?—Oh, my dear, my dear, I never
expected to encounter anything so much out of key with the essential
euphonies. Of course I have not traveled very much, but I should say
there is nothing in the universe like a street they call
Broadway—unless it be upon the lesser satellite of Mars, where the poor
people are so awfully cramped for space. When I suggested this to Ooma
she laughed and called me clever, for it seems there is a tradition
that a mob of meddling Martians once stopped on Earth long enough to
give the foolish humans false ideas about architecture and many other
matters. But I soon forgot everything in my interest in the people. Such
a poor puzzle-headed lot they are. One's heart goes out to them at once
as they push and jostle one another this way and that, with no
conceivable object other than to get anywhere but where they are in the
shortest time possible. One longs to help them; to call a halt upon
their senseless struggles; to reason with them and explain how all the
psychic force they waste might, if exerted in constructive thought,
bring everything they wish to pass. Mrs. Bloomer assures me they only
ridicule those who venture to interfere, and it will take at least a
Saturn century to so much as start them in the right direction. Our
settlement is their only hope, she says, and even we can help them only
indirectly.

 Not long ago, it appears, they had to choose a King or Mayor, or
whatever the creature is called who executes their silly laws, and our
people so manipulated the election that the choice fell on one of us.

 I thought this a really good idea, and supposed, of course, we must at
once have set about demonstrating how a planet should be managed. But
no! that was not our system, if you please. Instead of making proper
laws our agent misbehaved himself in every way the committee could
suggest, until at last the humans rose against him and put one of
themselves in his place, and after that things went just a little better
than before. This is the only way in which they can be taught. But, dear
me, isn't it tedious?

 Of course, I soon grew anxious for an exchange of thought with almost
any one, but it was a long while before I discovered a single person who
was not in a violent hurry. At last, however, we came upon a human
drawn apart a little from the throng, who stood with folded arms,
engaged apparently in lofty meditation. His countenance was amiable,
although a little red.

 Saying nothing to Ooma of my purpose, I slipped away from her, and
looking up into the creature's eyes inquired mentally the subject of his
thoughts; also, how he came to be so inordinately stout, and why he wore
bright metal buttons on his garment. But my only answer was a stupid
blink, for his mentality seemed absolutely incapable of receiving
suggestions not expressed in sounds. I observed farther that his aura
inclined too much toward violet for perfect equipoise.

 "G'wan out of this, and quit yer foolin'," he remarked, missing my
meaning altogether.

 Of course I spoke then, using the human speech quite glibly for a first
attempt, and hastened to assure him that though I had no idea of
fooling, I should not go on until my curiosity had been satisfied. But
just then Ooma found me.

 "My friend is a stranger," she explained to the brass-buttoned man.

 "Then why don't you put a string to her?" he asked.

 I learned later that I had been addressing one of the public jesters
employed by the community to keep Broadway from becoming intolerably
dull.

 "But you must not speak to people in the street," said Ooma, "not even
to policemen."

 "Then how am I to brighten others' lives?" I asked, more than a little
disappointed, for several humans hurrying past had turned upon me looks
indicating moods receptive of all the brightening I could give.

 I might have amused myself indefinitely, studying the rapid succession
of varying faces, had not Bloomer cau tioned me not to stare. She said
people would think me from the country, which is considered
discreditable, and as this reminded me that I had as yet seen nothing
growing, I asked to be shown the gardens and groves.

 "There is one," she said, indicating an open space not far away, where
sure enough there stood some wretched looking trees which I had not
recognized before, forgetting that, of course, leaves here must be
green. I saw no flowers growing, but presently we came upon some in a
sort of crystal bower guarded by a powerful black person. I wanted so to
ask him how he came to be black, but the memory of my last attempt at
information deterred me. Instead, I inquired if I might have some roses.

 "Walk in, Miss," he replied most civilly, and in I walked through the
door, past the sweetest little embryonic, who wore the vesture of a
young policeman.

 "Boy," I said, "have you begun to realize your soul?"

 "Nope," he replied. "I ain't in fractions yet."

 —Some stage of earthly progress, I suppose, though I did not like a
certain movement of his eyelid, and one never can tell, you know, how
hard embryonics are really striving. So I made haste to gather all the
roses I could carry, and was about to hurry after Ooma, when a person
barred my way.

 "Hold on!" he cried. "Ain't you forgetting something? Why don't you take
the whole lot?"

 "Because I have all I want for the present," I answered, rather
frightened, perceiving that his aura had grown livid, and I don't know
how I could have soothed him had not Ooma once more come to my relief. I
could see that she was annoyed with me, but she controlled herself and
placed some token in the being's hand which acted on his agitation like
a charm.

 As I told you, Bloomer had given me with the other things, a crown of
artificial roses which, now that I had real flowers to wear, I wanted to
throw away, but this she would not permit, insisting that such a
proceeding would make the humans laugh at me—though to look into their
serious faces one would not believe this possible. The thoughts of those
about me, as I divined them, seemed anything but jocular. They came to
me incoherent and inconsecutive, a jumble of conditional premises
leading to approximate conclusions expressed in symbols having no
intrinsic meaning.—Of course, it is unfair to judge too soon, but I
have already begun to doubt the existence of direct perception among
them.—What did you say, dear?—Bother direct perception?—Well, I
wonder how we should like to apprehend nothing that could not be put
into words? You, I'm sure, would have the most confused ideas about
Earthly conditions if you depended entirely upon my remarks.—Now
concentrate, and you shall hear something really interesting.

 —No, not the One yet.—He comes later.—

 We had not gone far, I carrying my roses, and Bloomer not too well
pleased, as I fancied, because so many people turned to look at us
(Bloomer has retrograded physically until she is at times almost
Uranian, probably as the result of wearing black, which appears to be
the chromatic equivalent of respectability), when suddenly I became
sensible of a familiar influence, which was quite startling because so
unexpected. Looking everywhere, I caught sight of—who do you suppose?
Our old friend Tuk.—Mr. Tuck, T-u-c-k here, if you please. He was about
to enter a—a means of transportation, and though his back was towards
me, I recognized that drab aura of his at once, and projected a
reactionary impulse which was most effective.

 In his surprise he was for the moment in danger of being trampled upon
by a rapidly moving animal.—Yes, dear, I said "animal."—I don't know
and I don't consider it at all important. I do not pretend to be
familiar with mundane zoölogy.—Tuck declared himself delighted to see
me, and so I believe he was, though he controlled his radiations in the
supercilious way he always had. But upon one point he did not leave me
long in doubt. Externally, at least, my Earthly Ego is a—

 ( Note

: The word which signifies a species of peach or nectarine
peculiar to the planet Mercury is doubtless used here in a symbolic
sense. )

 —I caught on to that most interesting fact the moment his eyes rested
on me.

 "By all that's fair to look upon!" he cried, jumping about in a manner
human people think eccentric, "are you astral or actualized?"

 "See for yourself," I said, holding out my hand, which it took him
rather longer than necessary to make sure of.

 "Well, what on Earth brings you here? Come down to paint another planet
red?" he rattled on, believing himself amusing.

 "Now haven't I as much right to light on Earth as on any other bit of
cosmic dust?" I asked, laughing and forgetting how much snubbing he
requires in the delight of seeing any one I knew.

 Then he insisted that I had a "date" with him.—A date, as I discovered
later, means something nice to eat—and hinted very broadly that Bloomer
need not wait if she had more important matters to attend to. I must
confess she did not seem at all sorry to have me taken off her hands,
for after cautioning me to beware of a number of things I did not so
much as know by name, she shot off like a respectable old aerolite with
a black trail streaming out behind. If she remains here much longer she
will be coming back upon a mission to reform us . As for Tuck, he
became insufferably patronizing at once.

 "Well, how do you like the Only Planet? and how do you like the Only
Town? and how do you like the Only Street?" he began, waving his hands
and looking about him as though there were anything here that one of us could admire. But, of course, I refused to gratify him with my
crude impressions. I simply said:

 "You appear very well pleased with them yourself."

 "And so will you be," he replied, "when you have realized their
possibilities. Remark that elderly entity across the street. I have to
but exert my will that he shall sneeze and drop his eyeglasses, and
behold, there they go."—Yes, my dear, eyeglasses. They are worn on the
nose by people who imagine they can not see very well.

 "I consider such actions cruel and unkind," I said, at the same time
willing an embryonic girl to pick the glasses up, and though the child
was rather beyond my normal circle, I was delighted to see her obey. But
I have an idea Tuck regretted an experiment which taught me something I
might not have found out, at least for a while.

 I had now been on Earth several hours, and change of atmosphere gives
one a ravenous appetite. You see, I had forgotten to ask Ooma how, and
how often, humans ate, so when Tuck suggested breakfast as a form of
entertainment I put myself in sympathy with the idea at once. Besides it
is most important to know just where to find the things you want, and
you may be sure I made a lot of mental notes when we came, as presently
we did, to a tower called Astoria.

 I understand that the upper portions of the edifice are used for study
of the Stars, but we were made welcome on the lower story by a stately
being, who conducted us to honorable seats in an inner court. There were
small trees growing here, green, of course, but rather pretty for all
that; the people, gathered under their shade in little groups, were much
more cheerful and sustaining than any I had seen so far, and an
elemental intelligence detailed to minister to our wants seemed
well-trained and docile.

 "Here you have a glimpse of High Life," announced Tuck, when he had
written something on a paper.

 "The Higher Life?" I inquired, eagerly, and I did not like the flippant
tone in which he answered:

 "No, not quite—just high enough."

 I was beginning to be so bored by his conceit and self-complacency that
I cast my eyes about and smiled at several pleasant-looking persons, who
returned the smile and nodded in a friendly fashion, till I could
perceive Tuck's aura bristle and turn greenish-brown.

 "You can't possibly see any one you know here," he protested, crossly.

 "All the better reason why I should reach out in search of affinities,"
I retorted. But after that, though I was careful to keep my eyes lowered
most of the time, I resolved to come some day to the Astoria alone and
smile at every one I liked. I don't believe I should ever know a human
if Tuck could have his way.

 Presently the elemental brought us delicious things, and while we ate
them Tuck talked about himself. It appears he has produced an opera here
which is a success. People throng to hear it and consider him a great
composer. At all of which, you may believe, I was astonished—just fancy
our Tuk posing as a genius!—but presently when he became elated by the
theme and hummed a bar or two, I understood. The wretch had simply
actualized a few essential harmonies—and done it very badly. I see now
why he likes so much being here, and understand why his associates are
almost altogether human. I don't remember ever meeting with such deceit
and effrontery before. I was so indignant that I could feel my astral
fingers tremble. I could not bear to look at him, and as by that time I
had eaten all I could, I rose and walked directly from the court without
another word. I am sure he would have pursued me had not the elemental,
divining my wish to escape, detained him forcibly.

 Once in the street again, I immediately hypnotized an old lady, willing
her to go direct to Bloomer's Boarding-House while I followed behind. It
may not have been convenient for her, I am afraid, but I knew of no
other way to get back.—Dear me, the light is growing dim, and I must be
dressing for the evening. Good-by!—By the way, I forgot to tell you
something else that happened—remind me of it next time!

 The Third Record

 —Yes, I remember, and you shall hear all about it before I describe an
evening at the Settlement, but it don't amount to much.—I told you how
cross and over-bearing Tuck was at the Astoria tower, and of the mean
way in which he restricted my observations. Well, of all the people in
the grove that day there was only one whom I could see without being
criticized, and he sat all alone and facing me, just behind Tuck's back.
Some green leaves hung between us, and whenever I moved my head to note
what he was doing he moved his, too, to look at me. He seemed so lonely
that I was sorry for him, but his atmosphere showed him to be neither
sullen nor Uranian, and I could not help it if I was just a little bit
responsive. Besides, Tuck, once on the subject of his opera, grew so
self-engrossed and dominant that one had either to assert one's own
mentality or become subjective.  —No, dear, that is not the only reason. There may be such a thing as
an isolated reason, but I have never met one—they always go in packs. I
confess to a feeling of interest in the stranger. Nobody can look at you
with round blue eyes for half an hour steadily without exercising some
attraction, either positive or negative, and I felt, too, that he was
trying to tell me something which would have been a great deal more
interesting than Tuck's opera, and I believe had I remained a little
longer we could have understood each other between the trees just as you
and I can understand each other across the intervals of space. But then
it is so easy to be mistaken.—I had to pass quite close to him in going
out, and I am not sure I did not drop a rose.

 —There may be just a weenie little bit more about the Astorian, but
that will come in its proper place. Now I must get on to the
evening.—It was not much of an occasion, merely the usual gathering of
our crowd, or rather of those of us who have no special assignment for
the time in the large Council Room I have described to you.

 The President of the Board of Control at present is Marlow, Marlow the
Great, as he is called, the painter whose pictures did so much to
elevate the Patagonians.—No, dear, I never heard of Patagonia before,
but I'm almost sure it's not a planet.—With Marlow came a Mrs. Mopes,
who is engaged in creating schools of fiction by writing stories under
different names and then reviewing them in her own seven magazines.
Next, taking the guests at random, was Baxter, a deadly person in his
human incarnation, whose business it is to make stocks fly up or tumble
down.—I don't know what stocks are, but they must be something very
easily frightened.—Then there was a Mr. Waller, nicknamed the Reverend,
whom the Council allows to speak the truth occasionally, while the rest
of the time he tells people anything they want to hear to win their
confidence. And the two Miss Dooleys who sing so badly that thousands
who can not sing at all leave off singing altogether when they once hear
them. And Mr. Flick, who misbehaves at funerals to distract mourners
from their grief, and a Mr. O'Brien, whose duty it is to fly into
violent passions in public places just to show how unbecoming temper is.

 There were many others, so many I can not begin to enumerate them. Some
had written books and were known all over the planet, and some who were
not known at all had done things because there was nobody else to do
them. And some were singers and some were actors, and some were rich and
some were poor to the outside world, but in the Council Room they met
and laughed and matched experiences and made jokes; from the one who had
built a battle ship so terrible that all the other ships were burnt on
condition that his should be also, to the ordinary helpers who applaud
stupid plays till intelligent human beings become thoroughly disgusted
with bad art.

 In the world, of course, they are all serious enough, and often know
each other only by secret signs, while every day and night and minute
our poor earth-brothers come a little nearer the light—pushed toward
it, pulled toward it, wheedled and trickled and bullied and coaxed, and
thinking all the while how immensely clever they are, and what a
wonderful progressive, glorious age they have brought about for
themselves.—At all events, this is the rather vague composite
impression I have received of the plans and purposes of the Board of
Directors, and doubtless it is wrong.

 I suppose with a little trouble I might have recognized nearly every
one, but the fancy took me to suspend in tuition just to see how Earth
girls feel, and you know when one is hearing a lot of pleasant things
one does not much care who happens to be saying them.

 I fancy Marlow thought less of me when I confessed that I am here only
for the lark, and really do not care a meteor whether the planet is ever
elevated or not. But he is a charming old fellow all the same, and the
only one of the lot who has not grown the least bit smudgy.

 Marlow announced that the evening would be spent in harmony with the
vibrations of Orion, and set us all at work to get in touch. I love
Orion light myself, for none other suits my aura quite so well, and I
was glad to find they had not taken up the Vega fad.—The light here? My
dear, it is not even filtered.—Some of us, no doubt for want of
practice, were rather slow about perfecting, but finally we all caught
on, and when O'Brien, no longer fat and florid, and the elder Miss
Dooley, no longer scrawny, moved out to start the dance, there was only
one who had not assumed an astral personality. Poor fellow, though I
pitied him, I did admire his spunk in holding back. It seems that as an
editor he took to telling falsehoods on his own account so often that
the Syndicate is packing him off as Special Correspondent to a tailless
comet.

 Tuck never came at all; either he realizes how honest people must regard
him and his opera, or else the elementals at the Astoria are still
detaining him.

 We had a lovely dance, and while we rested Marlow called on some of us
for specialties. Mrs. Mopes did a paragraph by a man named Henry James,
translated into action, which seemed quite difficult, and then a person
called Parker externalized a violin and gave the Laocoon in terms of
sound. To me his rendering of marble resembled terra-cotta until I
learned that the copy of the statue here is awfully weatherstained.
After this three pretty girls gave the Aurora Borealis by telepathic
suggestion rather well, and then I sang "Love Lives Everywhere"—just
plain so.

 —I know this must all sound dreadfully flat to you, quite like
"Pastimes for the Rainy Season in Neptune," but Bloomer says she doesn't
know what would happen if we should ever give a really characteristic
jolly party.

 We wound up with an Earth dance called the Virginia Reel, the quickest
means you ever saw for descending to a lower psychic plane. That's all I
have to tell, and quite enough, I'm sure you'll think.—What? The
Astorian? I have not seen him since.—But there is a little more, a very
little, if you are not tired.—This morning I received a gift of roses,
just like the one I dropped yesterday, brought me by the same small
embryonic I had seen in the flower shop. I asked the child in whose
intelligence the impulse had originated, and he replied:

 "A blue-eyed feller with a mustache, but he gave me a plunk not to
tell."

 I understood a plunk to be a token of confidence, and I at once
expressed displeasure at the boy's betrayal of his trust. I told him
such an act would make dark lines upon his aura which might not fade for
several days.

 "Say, ain't you got some message to send back?" he asked.

 "Boy!" said I, "don't forget your little aura."

 "All right," he answered, "I'll tell him 'Don't forget your little
aura.' I'll bet he coughs up another plunk."

 I don't know what he meant, but I am very much afraid there may be some
mistake.—Oh, yes, I am quite sure to be back in time for the
Solstice.—Or at least for the Eclipse.  The Fourth Record

 ( Note

: Between this logogram and the last the Long's Peak Receptive
Pulsator was unfortunately not in operation for the space of a
fortnight, as the electrician who took the instrument apart for
adjustment found it necessary to return to Denver for oil. )

 —Yes, dear, it's me, though if I did not know personality to be
indestructible I should begin to have my doubts. I have not made any
more mistakes, that is, not any bad ones, since I went to the Astoria
alone for lunch, and the elementals were so very disagreeable just
because I had no money. I know all about money now, except exactly how
you get it, and Tuck assures me that is really of no importance. I never
told Ooma how the blue-eyed Astorian paid my bill for me, and her
perceptive faculties have grown too dull to apprehend a thing she is not
told. Fresh roses still come regularly every day, and of course I can do
no less than express my gratitude now and then.—Oh, I don't know how
often, I don't remember.—But it is ever so much pleasanter to have some
one you like to show you the way about than to depend on hypnotizing
strangers, who may have something else to do.

 —I told you last week about the picnic, did I not? The day, I mean,
when Bloomer took me into the country, and Tuck so far forgave my
rudeness to him as to come with us to carry the basket.—Oh, yes,
indeed, I am becoming thoroughly domesticated on Earth. And, my dear,
these humans are docility itself when you once acquire the knack of
making them do exactly as you wish, which is as easy as falling off a
log.—A log is the external evidence of a pre-existent tree,
cylindrical in form, and though often sticky, not sufficiently so to be
adhesive.

 —That picnic was so pleasant—or would have been but for Bloomer's
anxiety that I should behave myself, and Tuck's anxiety that I should
not—that I determined to have another all by myself—and I have had it.

 I traveled to the same little dell I described before, and I put my feet
in the water just as I wasn't allowed to do the other day. And I built a
fire and almost cooked an egg and ate cake (an egg is the bud of a bird,
and cake is edible poetry) sitting on a fence.—Fences grow horizontally
and have no leaves.—Don't ask so many questions!

 After a while, however, I became tired of being alone, so I started off
across some beautiful green meadows toward a hillside, where I had
observed a human walking about and waving a forked wand. He proved the
strangest-looking being I have met with yet, more like those wild and
woolly space-dwellers who tumbled out when that tramp comet bumped
against our second moon. But he was a considerate person, for when he
saw me coming and divined that I should be tired, he piled up a quantity
of delicious-scented herbage for me to sit on.

 "Good morning, mister," I said, plumping myself down upon the mound he
had made, and he, being much more impressionable than you would suppose
from his Uranian appearance, replied:

 "I swan, I like your cheek."

 "It's a pleasant day," I said, because one is always expected to
announce some result of observation of the atmosphere. It shows at once
whether or not one is an idiot.

 "I call it pretty danged hot," he returned, intelligently.

 "Then why don't you get out of the sun?" I suggested, more to keep the
conversation fluid than because I cared a bit.

 "I'm a-goin' to," he answered, "just as soon as that goll-darned wagon
comes." (A "goll-darned" wagon is, I think, a wagon without springs.)  "What are you going to do then?" I asked, beginning to fear I should be
left alone again after all my trouble.

 "Goin' home to dinner," he replied, and I at once said I would go with
him.—You see, I had placed a little too much reliance on the egg.

 "I dunno about that, but I guess it will be all right," he urged,
hospitably, and presently the goll-darned wagon arrived with another
man, who turned out to be the first one's son and who looked as though
he bit.

 Together the two threw all the herbage into the wagon till it was heaped
far above their heads.

 "How am I ever to get up?" I asked, for I had no idea of walking any
farther, and I could see the man's white house ever so far away.

 "Who said you was goin' to get up at all?" inquired the biter,
disagreeably, but the other answered for me.

 "I said it, that's who, you consarned jay," he announced, reprovingly.

 When I had made them both climb up first and give me each a hand, I had
no difficulty at all in mounting, but I was very careful not to thank
the Jay, which seemed to make him more morose than ever. Then they slid
down again, and off we started.

 Once when we came to some lovely blue flowers growing in water near the
roadside I told the Jay to stop and wade in and pick them for me.

 "I'll be dogged if I do," he answered; so I said:

 "I don't know what being 'dogged' means, but if it is a reward for being
nice and kind and polite, I hope you will be."

 Whereupon he bit at me once and waded in, while the other man, whose
name, it seems, was Pop, sat down upon a stone and laughed.

 "Gosh! If this don't beat the cats," he said, slapping his knee, which
was his way of making himself laugh harder.

 I put the flowers in my hair and in my belt and wherever I could stick
them. But there was still a lot left over, and whenever we met people I
threw them some, which appeared to please Pop, but made the Jay still
more bite-y.

 Presently we came to a very narrow place and there, as luck would have
it, we met an automobile.—Thank goodness, I need not explain
automobile.—And who should be at the lever all alone but—the Astorian.

 I recognized him instantly, and he recognized me, which was, I suppose,
his reason for forgetting to stop till he had nearly run us down. In a
moment we were in the wildest tangle, though nothing need have happened
had not the Jay completely lost his temper.

 "Hang your picture!" he called out, savagely, "What do you want?—The
Earth?"

 And with that he struck the animals—the wagon was not
self-propelling—a violent blow, and they sprang forward with a lurch
which made the hay begin to slip. I tried to save myself, but there was
nothing to catch hold of, so off I slid and—oh, my dear, my dear, just
fancy it!—I landed directly in his lap.—No, not the Jay's.—Of course,
I stayed there as short a time as possible, for he was very nice about
moving up to make room for me on the seat, but I am afraid it did seem
frightfully informal just at first.

 "It was all the fault of that consarned Jay," I explained, as soon as I
had recovered my composure, "and I shall never ride in his goll-darned
wagon again."

 "I sincerely hope you will not," replied Astoria, looking at me with the
most curious expression. "It would be much better to let me take you
wherever you wish to go."

 "That's awfully kind of you," I said, "but I don't care to go anywhere
in particular this afternoon, except as far as possible from that
objectionable young man."

 The Astorian did not speak again till he had turned something in the
machine to make it back and jerk, and, once free from the upset hay, go
on again.

 "Say, Sissy, I thought you was comin' to take dinner," Pop called out
from under the wagon, where he had crawled for safety, and when I
replied as nicely as I could, "No, thank you, not to-day," he said
again, quite sadly as I thought, "Gosh blim me, if that don't beat the
cats!" and also several other things I could not hear because we were
moving away so rapidly.

 When we had gone about a hundred miles—or yards, or inches, whichever
it was—the Astorian, who had been sitting very straight, inquired if
those gentlemen—meaning Pop and Jay—were near relatives.

 I showed him plainly that I thought his question Uranian, and explained
that I had not a relative on Earth. Then I told him exactly how I had
come to be with them, and about my picnic and the egg. I am afraid I did
not take great pains to make the story very clear, for it was such fun
to perplex him. He is not at all like the Venus people, who have become
so superlatively clever that they are always bored to death.

 "Were you surprised to see me flying through the air?" I asked.

 "Oh, no," he said; "I have always thought of you as coming to Earth in
some such way from some far-distant planet."

 "Oh, then, you know!" I gasped.

 The Astorian laughed.

 "I know you are the one perfect being in the world, and that is quite
enough," he said, and I saw at once that whatever he had guessed about
me he knew nothing at all of the Settlement.  "Miss Aura," he went on,—he has called me that ever since that little
embryonic made his stupid blunder, and I have not corrected him—here it
is almost necessary to have some sort of a name—"Miss Aura, don't you
think we have been mere acquaintances long enough? I'm only human—"

 "Yes, of course," I interrupted, "but then that is not your fault—"

 "I'm glad you look upon my misfortune so charitably," he said, a trifle
more puzzled than usual, as I fancied.

 "It is my duty," I replied. "I want to elevate you; to brighten your
existence."

 "My Aura!" he whispered; and I was not quite sure whether he meant me or
not.

 We were moving rapidly along the broad road beside a river. There were
hills in the distance and the air from them was in the key of the
Pleiades. There were gardens everywhere full of sunlight translated into
flowers, and without an effort one divined the harmony of growing
things. I felt that something was about to happen; I knew it, but I did
not care to ask what it might be. Perhaps if I had tried I could not
have known; perhaps for that hour I was only an Earth girl and could
only know things as they know them, but I did not care.

 We were going faster, faster every moment.

 "Was it you who willed me to come out into the country?" I asked. "Have
you been watching for me and expecting me?"

 We were moving now as clouds that rush across a moon.

 "I think I have been watching for you all my life and willing you to
come," he said, which shows how dreadfully unjust we sometimes are to
humans.

 "While I was on another planet?" I inquired. "While we were millions
and millions of miles apart? Suppose that I had never come to Earth?"

 We were moving like the falling stars one journeys to the Dark
Hemisphere to see.

 "I should have found you all the same," he whispered, half laughing, but
his blue eyes glistened. "I do not think that space itself could
separate us."

 "Oh, do you realize that?" I asked, "and do you really know?"

 "I know I have you with me now," he said, "and that is all I care to
know."

 We were flying now, flying as comets fly to perihelion. The world about
was slipping from us, disintegrating and dissolving into cosmic thoughts
expressed in color. Only his eyes were actual, and the blue hills far
away, and the wind from them in the key of the Pleiades.

 "There shall never any more be time or space for us," he said.

 "But," I protested, "we must not overlook the fundamental facts."

 "In all the universe there is just one fact," he cried, catching my hand
in his, and then—

 ( Note

: Here a portion of the logogram becomes indecipherable, owing,
perhaps, to the passage of some large bird across the line of
projection. What follows is the last recorded vibragraph to date. )

 —Yes, dear, I know I should have been more circumspect. I should have
remembered my position, but I didn't. And that's why I'm engaged to be
married.—You have to here, when you reach a certain point—I know you
will think it a great come-down for one of us, but after all do we not
owe something to our sister planets?—

  FOOTNOTES:

 [1]

By permission of Life Publishing Company.

 [2]

From "At the Sign of the Dollar," by Wallace Irwin.
Copyright, 1905, by Fox, Duffield & Co.

 [3]

Reprinted from Mr. Owen Wister's "The Virginian."
Copyright, 1902-1904, by The Macmillan Company.

 [4]

From "Nautical Lays of a Landsman," by Wallace Irwin.
Copyright, 1904, by Dodd, Mead & Co.

 [5]

Lippincott's Magazine.

 [6]

By permission of Life Publishing Company.

 [7]

From "The Habitant and Other French Canadian Poems," by
William Henry Drummond. Copyright 1897 by G.P. Putnam's Sons.

    THE

 HEALTH-CARE

 OF THE

 BABY

 By LOUIS FISCHER, M.D.

 "THE HEALTH-CARE OF THE BABY" is a book that should be in the hands of
every mother and nurse. Every mother should be acquainted with those
ills that are common to babies. She should know what to do when a doctor
can not be had readily; while traveling, for instance. In this book Dr.
Fischer, and he has had wide experience in the treatment of children,
gives suggestions and advice for feeding the infant in health, and when
the stomach and bowels are out of order. The book also tells how to
manage a fever, and is a guide to measles, croup, skin diseases and
other ailments. It tells what to do in case of accidents, poisons, etc.
The correction of bad habits and the treatment of rashes are given
careful consideration.

 "This book will be found of great assistance to mothers generally,
dealing with a subject of great interest to the new, as well as to
the old mother. Teething is properly rid of its horrors by positive
statements that it is a normal process entirely. The chapter on
Infant Feeding is very practical and thorough. We commend the book
to all mothers."— Monthly Journal of Medicine and Surgery ,
Louisville.

 12mo, Cloth. 75 cents, net; by mail, 83 cents.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

 NEW YORK and LONDON





    The Care and Training

 OF

 CHILDREN

 By Le GRAND KERR

, M.D.

 No two children are exactly alike; not even those of the same family
with hereditary influences, environment, and economic conditions the
same. Their temperaments, their ambitions, their ideas of life, it will
be noted, are widely different. For committing a wrong act one child
needs punishment, while on a like occasion another child needs advice.
To bring up their children so that they will be vigorous, noble men and
women is the most perplexing problem that confronts mothers and fathers
to-day. Dr. Kerr, from his close association with children, is well
qualified to enlighten parents on these difficulties. In this book he
has given thorough treatment to the training of children, hygiene,
physique, mentality, and morality. After one has read the book there
seems to be no phase of the question that has not been covered. The
young parent will find it a wonderful aid; the elder parents will want
to pass it on to their children.

 12mo, Cloth. 75 cents, net; by mail, 84 cents.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

 NEW YORK and LONDON





    Child Training

 AS AN EXACT SCIENCE

 By George W. Jacoby, M.D.  Based upon Modern Psychology, 

Medicine and
Hygiene  The Parent, the Physician, the Teacher, the Nurse, will find this Book
of Immense Usefulness. Its Authority and Reliability are Unquestioned.

 Heretofore there has been no one book which stood out high above others
as a standard, scientific, and reliable popular work on the subject of
Child Training in its mental, moral and physical aspects.

 The New York Times , says:—"Study of this material will
undoubtedly increase a teacher's efficiency."

 $1.50 net; by mail $1.62.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

NEW YORK and LONDON 





    Vital Helps Toward Body-Building  HOME GYMNASTICS

 According to the Ling System

 By Prof. ANDERS WIDE, M.D.

 This system of gymnastics has been designed on strictly scientific
principles, and has been recognized by educators throughout the world as
a most valuable and practical one. Stockholm has long maintained a Royal
Gymnastic Institute, where it has been taught with ever increasing
efficiency since 1813. The system has met with great popularity and has
proved adaptable as a home-culture course. The object of this work is to
enable any one to put into practise the principles on which sound
physical health may be gained and maintained.

 "A marvelous amount of information of a most practical
character."— New York Sun.  "A practical handbook for home use."— Detroit Times.  "This little book is thoroughly commendable."— Chicago
Record-Herald.  "It is a little book of great value, and will undoubtedly be useful
in the schools and to business and professional persons."- Salt
Lake Tribune.  12mo, Cloth, 50 cents, net; by mail, 54 cents.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

 NEW YORK and LONDON





    A New Book Dedicated to All Girls Whose Ambition Is to Lead a Happy,
Healthful, Useful Life.  Health and Happiness

 A MESSAGE TO GIRLS.

 By ELIZA M. MOSHER, M.D.

 This new book consists of a dozen letters which deal in a fundamental
and very original way with habits of posture, good and bad, and their
influence upon the body; with efficiency through an understanding of the
needs of the body in relation to foods, and the removal of waste; the
care of the skin; and the offices of clothing.

 Very simply and clearly the structure and functions of the nervous
system are given as a basis for important suggestions regarding its care
from infancy to womanhood. Explicit teaching is given regarding the care
girls need to give themselves during high school and college years if
they wish to keep as well and strong as they ought to be. The story of
motherhood is told in a very interesting manner, and valuable advice is
given regarding the physical preparation for it, which the author
believes should begin in early girlhood.

 RECOMMENDED BY THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION

 "We think the book excellent and will be very glad to recommend
it."— Gertrude Felker, M.D. , Secretary, Committee for Public
Health Education Among Women, American Medical Association, Dayton,
Ohio.

 $1.00, net. Average carriage charges 8 cents.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

NEW YORK and LONDON 



    Exercises for Women

 Most women are very definitely in need of some sort of simple and
suitable exercise that can be done in the home, without apparatus, if
necessary.

 This new book by Florence Bolton, A.B., formerly Director of Women's
Gymnasium, Stanford University, outlines and pictures an excellent
series of plain, practical exercises, adapted to meet the peculiar
requirements of women.

 The combination of different exercises includes many for reducing flesh;
and others bound to result in the securing and preservation of a full,
rounded, graceful figure.

 For Every Woman Everywhere Who Desires PHYSICAL GRACE, and POWER and
the mental satisfaction consequent upon both.  The book should be useful to physicians in prescribing exercises for
their patients, to teachers of gymnastics for class and private work, to
the college woman who has left gymnasium days behind, and to EVERY
WOMAN, EVERYWHERE who desires PHYSICAL GRACE, and POWER.

 HAS DONE HER SEX GOOD SERVICE

 "Florence Bolton ... has done her sex good service in this terse,
well-arranged little volume. The directions for specific exercises,
mainly of the 'mat' order, are well detailed, and fitting
illustrations simplify their use."— The Record-Herald , Chicago,
Ill.

 12mo, Cloth. Numerous half-tones and diagrams, outlining the movements.
$1.00, net. Average carriage charges 8 cents.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

NEW YORK and LONDON