THE HIRED HAND AND "HA'NTS"
BY E.O. LAUGHLIN
The Hired Hand was Johnnie's oracle. His auguries were infallible; from
his decisions there was no appeal. The wisdom of experienced age was
his, and he always stood willing to impart it to the youngest. No
question was too trivial for him to consider, and none too abstruse for
him to answer. He did not tell Johnnie to "never mind" or wait until he
grew older, but was ever willing to pause in his work to explain things.
And his oracular qualifications were genuine. He had traveled—had even
been as far as the State Fair; he had read—from Robinson Crusoe to
Dick the Dead Shot, and, more than all, he had meditated deeply.
The Hired Hand's name was Eph. Perhaps he had another name, too, but if
so it had become obsolete. Far and wide he was known simply as Eph.
Eph was generally termed "a cur'ous feller," and this characterization
applied equally well to his peculiar appearance and his inquiring
disposition. In his confirmation nature had evidently sacrificed her
love of beauty to a temporary passion for elongation. Length seemed to
have been the central thought, the theme, as it were, upon which he had
been composed. This effect was heightened by generously broad hands and
feet and a contrastingly abbreviated chin. The latter feature caused his
countenance to wear in repose a decidedly vacant look, but it was seldom
caught reposing, usually having to bear a smirk of some sort.
Eph's position in the Winkle household was as peculiar as his
personality. Nominally he was a hired servant, but, in fact, from his
own point of view at least, he was Mr. Winkle's private secretary and
confidential adviser. He had been on the place "ever sence old Fan was a
yearlin'," which was a long while, indeed; and had come to regard
himself as indispensable. The Winkles treated him as one of the family,
and he reciprocated in truly familiar ways. He sat at the table with
them, helped entertain their guests, and often accompanied them to
church. In regulating matters on the farm Mr. Winkle proposed, but Eph
invariably disposed, in a diplomatic way, of course; and, although his
judgment might be based on false logic, the result was generally
successful and satisfactory.
With all his good qualities and her attachment to him, however, Mrs.
Winkle was not sure that Eph's moral status was quite sound, and she was
inclined to discourage Johnnie's association with him. As a matter of
fact she had overheard Johnnie utter several bad words, of which Eph was
certainly the prime source. But a mother's solicitude was of little
avail when compared with Eph's Delphian wisdom. Johnnie would steal away
to join Eph in the field at every chance, and the information he
acquired at these secret séances, was varied and valuable.
It was Eph who taught him how to tell the time of day by the sun; how to
insert a "dutchman" in the place of a lost suspender button; how to make
bird-traps; and how to "skin the cat." Eph initiated him into the
mysteries of magic and witchcraft, and showed him how to locate a
subterranean vein of water by means of a twig of witch-hazel. Eph also
confided to Johnnie that he himself could stanch the flow of blood or
stop a toothache instantly by force of a certain charm, but he could
not tell how to do this because the secret could be imparted only from
man to woman, or vice versa. Even the shadowy domain of spirits had not
been exempt from Eph's investigations, and he related many a terrifying
experience with "ha'nts."
Johnnie was first introduced to the ghost world one summer night, when
he and Eph had gone fishing together.
"If ye want to ketch the big uns, always go at night in the dark o' the
moon," said Eph, and his piscatorial knowledge was absolute.
They had fished in silence for some time, and Johnnie was nodding, when
Eph suddenly whispered:
"Let's go home, sonny, I think I see a ha'nt down yander."
Johnnie had no idea what a "ha'nt" might be, but Eph's constrained
manner betokened something dreadful.
It was not until they had come within sight of home that Johnnie
ventured to inquire:
"Say, Eph, what is a ha'nt?"
"Huh! What is ha'nts? Why, sonny, you mean to tell me you don't know
what ha'nts is?"
"Not exactly; sompin' like wildcats, ain't they?"
"Well, I'll be confounded! Wildcats! Not by a long shot;" and Eph broke
into the soft chuckle which always preceded his explanations. They
reached the orchard fence, and, seating himself squarely on the topmost
rail, Eph began impressively:
"Ha'nts is the remains of dead folks—more 'specially them that's been
assinated, er, that is, kilt—understan'? They're kind o' like sperrits,
ye know. After so long a time they take to comin' back to yarth an'
ha'ntin' the precise spot where they wuz murdered. They always come
after dark, an' the diffrunt shapes they take on is supprisin'. I have
seed ha'nts that looked like sheep, an' ha'nts that looked like human
persons; but lots of 'em ye cain't see a-tall, bein' invisible, as the
sayin' is. Now, fer all we know, they may be a ha'nt settin' right here
betwixt us, this minute!"
With this solemn declaration Johnnie shivered and began edging closer to
Eph, until restrained and appalled by the thought that he might actually
sit on the unseen spirit by such movement.
"But do they hurt people, Eph?" he asked anxiously.
Eph gave vent to another chuckle.
"Not if ye understan' the'r ways," he observed sagely. "If ye let 'em
alone an' don't go foolin' aroun' the'r ha'ntin'-groun' they'll never
harm ye. But don't ye never trifle with no ha'nt, sonny. I knowed a
feller't thought 'twuz smart to hector 'em an' said he wuzn't feared.
Onct he throwed a rock at one—"
Here Eph paused.
"What h-happened?" gasped Johnnie.
"In one year from that time," replied Eph gruesomely, "that there
feller's cow wuz hit by lightnin'; in three year his hoss kicked him an'
busted a rib; an' in seven year he wuz a corpse!"
The power of this horrible example was too much for Johnnie.
"Don't you reckon it's bedtime?" he suggested tremblingly.
Thenceforth for many months Johnnie led a haunted life. Ghosts glowered
at him from cellar and garret. Specters slunk at his heels, phantoms
flitted through the barn. Twilight teemed with horrors, and midnight,
when he awoke at that hour, made of his bedroom a veritable Brocken.
It was vain for his parents to expostulate with him. Was one not bound
to believe one's own eyes? And how about the testimony of the Hired
Hand?
The story in his reader—told in verse and graphically illustrated—of
the boy named Walter, who, being alone on a lonesome highway one dark
night, beheld a sight that made his blood run cold, acquired an abnormal
interest for Johnnie. Walter, with courage resembling madness, marched
straight up to the alleged ghost and laughed gleefully to find, "It was
a friendly guide-post, his wand'ring steps to guide."
This was all very well, as it turned out, but what if it had been a
sure-enough ghost, reflected Johnnie. What if it had reached down with
its long, snaky arms and snatched Walter up—and run off with him in the
dark—and no telling what? Or it might have swooped straight up in the
air with him, for ghosts could do that. Johnnie resolved he would not
take any chances with friendly guide-posts which might turn out to be
hostile spirits.
Then there was the similar tale of the lame goose, and the one
concerning the pillow in the swing—each intended, no doubt, to allay
foolish fears on the part of children, but exercising an opposite and
harrowing influence upon Johnnie.