HOW A MUZHIK FED TWO OFFICIALS

 BY M.Y. SALTYKOV [ N.Shchedrin ]

 Once upon a time there were two Officials. They were both empty-headed,
and so they found themselves one day suddenly transported to an
uninhabited isle, as if on a magic carpet.

 They had passed their whole life in a Government Department, where records
were kept; had been born there, bred there, grown old there, and
consequently hadn’t the least understanding for anything outside of
the Department; and the only words they knew were: “With assurances
of the highest esteem, I am your humble servant.”

 But the Department was abolished, and as the services of the two Officials
were no longer needed, they were given their freedom. So the retired
Officials migrated to Podyacheskaya Street in St. Petersburg. Each had his
own home, his own cook and his pension.

 Waking up on the uninhabited isle, they found themselves lying under the
same cover. At first, of course, they couldn’t understand what had
happened to them, and they spoke as if nothing extraordinary had taken
place.

 “What a peculiar dream I had last night, your Excellency,”
said the one Official. “It seemed to me as if I were on an
uninhabited isle.”

 Scarcely had he uttered the words, when he jumped to his feet. The other
Official also jumped up.

 “Good Lord, what does this mean! Where are we?” they cried out
in astonishment.

 They felt each other to make sure that they were no longer dreaming, and
finally convinced themselves of the sad reality.

 Before them stretched the ocean, and behind them was a little spot of
earth, beyond which the ocean stretched again. They began to cry—the
first time since their Department had been shut down.

 They looked at each other, and each noticed that the other was clad in
nothing but his night shirt with his order hanging about his neck.

 “We really should be having our coffee now,” observed the one
Official. Then he bethought himself again of the strange situation he was
in and a second time fell to weeping.

 “What are we going to do now?” he sobbed. “Even
supposing we were to draw up a report, what good would that do?”

 “You know what, your Excellency,” replied the other Official,
“you go to the east and I will go to the west. Toward evening we
will come back here again and, perhaps, we shall have found something.”

 They started to ascertain which was the east and which was the west. They
recalled that the head of their Department had once said to them, “If
you want to know where the east is, then turn your face to the north, and
the east will be on your right.” But when they tried to find out
which was the north, they turned to the right and to the left and looked
around on all sides. Having spent their whole life in the Department of
Records, their efforts were all in vain.

 “To my mind, your Excellency, the best thing to do would be for you
to go to the right and me to go to the left,” said one Official, who
had served not only in the Department of Records, but had also been
teacher of handwriting in the School for Reserves, and so was a little bit
cleverer.

 So said, so done. The one Official went to the right. He came upon trees,
bearing all sorts of fruits. Gladly would he have plucked an apple, but
they all hung so high that he would have been obliged to climb up. He
tried to climb up in vain. All he succeeded in doing was tearing his night
shirt. Then he struck upon a brook. It was swarming with fish.

 “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we had all this fish in
Podyacheskaya Street!” he thought, and his mouth watered. Then he
entered woods and found partridges, grouse and hares.

 “Good Lord, what an abundance of food!” he cried. His hunger
was going up tremendously.

 But he had to return to the appointed spot with empty hands. He found the
other Official waiting for him.

 “Well, Your Excellency, how went it? Did you find anything?”

 “Nothing but an old number of the Moscow Gazette , not another
thing.”

 The Officials lay down to sleep again, but their empty stomachs gave them
no rest They were partly robbed of their sleep by the thought of who was
now enjoying their pension, and partly by the recollection of the fruit,
fishes, partridges, grouse and hares that they had seen during the day.

 “The human pabulum in its original form flies, swims and grows on
trees. Who would have thought it your Excellency?” said the one
Official.

 “To be sure,” rejoined the other Official. “I, too, must
admit that I had imagined that our breakfast rolls, came into the world
just as they appear on the table.”

 “From which it is to be deduced that if we want to eat a pheasant,
we must catch it first, kill it, pull its feathers and roast it. But how’s
that to be done?”

 “Yes, how’s that to be done?” repeated the other
Official.

 They turned silent and tried again to fall asleep, but their hunger scared
sleep away. Before their eyes swarmed flocks of pheasants and ducks, herds
of porklings, and they were all so juicy, done so tenderly and garnished
so deliciously with olives, capers and pickles.

 “I believe I could devour my own boots now,” said the one
Official.

 “Gloves, are not bad either, especially if they have been born quite
mellow,” said the other Official.

 The two Officials stared at each other fixedly. In their glances gleamed
an evil-boding fire, their teeth chattered and a dull groaning issued from
their breasts. Slowly they crept upon each other and suddenly they burst
into a fearful frenzy. There was a yelling and groaning, the rags flew
about, and the Official who had been teacher of handwriting bit off his
colleague’s order and swallowed it. However, the sight of blood
brought them both back to their senses.

 “God help us!” they cried at the same time. “We
certainly don’t mean to eat each other up. How could we have come to
such a pass as this? What evil genius is making sport of us?”

 “We must, by all means, entertain each other to pass the time away,
otherwise there will be murder and death,” said the one Official.

 “You begin,” said the other.

 “Can you explain why it is that the sun first rises and then sets?
Why isn’t it the reverse?”

 “Aren’t you a funny man, your Excellency? You get up first,
then you go to your office and work there, and at night you lie down to
sleep.”

 “But why can’t one assume the opposite, that is, that one goes
to bed, sees all sorts of dream figures, and then gets up?”

 “Well, yes, certainly. But when I was still an Official, I always
thought this way: ‘Now it is dawn, then it will be day, then will
come supper, and finally will come the time to go to bed.’”

 The word “supper” recalled that incident in the day’s
doings, and the thought of it made both Officials melancholy, so that the
conversation came to a halt.

 “A doctor once told me that human beings can sustain themselves for
a long time on their own juices,” the one Official began again.

 “What does that mean?”

 “It is quite simple. You see, one’s own juices generate other
juices, and these in their turn still other juices, and so it goes on
until finally all the juices are consumed.”

 “And then what happens?”

 “Then food has to be taken into the system again.”

 “The devil!”

 No matter what topic the Officials chose, the conversation invariably
reverted to the subject of eating; which only increased their appetite
more and more. So they decided to give up talking altogether, and,
recollecting the Moscow Gazette that the one of them had found,
they picked it up and began to read eagerly.

 BANQUET GIVEN BY THE MAYOR

 "T

he table was set for one hundred persons. The magnificence of it
exceeded all expectations. The remotest provinces were represented at this
feast of the gods by the costliest gifts. The golden sturgeon from Sheksna
and the silver pheasant from the Caucasian woods held a rendezvous with
strawberries so seldom to be had in our latitude in winter...”

 “The devil! For God’s sake, stop reading, your Excellency.
Couldn’t you find something else to read about?” cried the
other Official in sheer desperation. He snatched the paper from his
colleague’s hands, and started to read something else.

 “Our correspondent in Tula informs us that yesterday a sturgeon was
found in the Upa (an event which even the oldest inhabitants cannot
recall, and all the more remarkable since they recognised the former
police captain in this sturgeon). This was made the occasion for giving a
banquet in the club. The prime cause of the banquet was served in a large
wooden platter garnished with vinegar pickles. A bunch of parsley stuck
out of its mouth. Doctor P—— who acted as toast-master saw to
it that everybody present got a piece of the sturgeon. The sauces to go
with it were unusually varied and delicate—”

 “Permit me, your Excellency, it seems to me you are not so careful
either in the selection of reading matter,” interrupted the first
Official, who secured the Gazette again and started to read:

 “One of the oldest inhabitants of Viatka has discovered a new and
highly original recipe for fish soup; A live codfish ( lota vulgaris )
is taken and beaten with a rod until its liver swells up with anger...”

 The Officials’ heads drooped. Whatever their eyes fell upon had
something to do with eating. Even their own thoughts were fatal. No matter
how much they tried to keep their minds off beefsteak and the like, it was
all in vain; their fancy returned invariably, with irresistible force,
back to that for which they were so painfully yearning.

 Suddenly an inspiration came to the Official who had once taught
handwriting.

 “I have it!” he cried delightedly. “What do you say to
this, your Excellency? What do you say to our finding a muzhik?”

 “A muzhik, your Excellency? What sort of a muzhik?”

 “Why a plain ordinary muzhik. A muzhik like all other muzhiks. He
would get the breakfast rolls for us right away, and he could also catch
partridges and fish for us.”

 “Hm, a muzhik. But where are we to fetch one from, if there is no
muzhik here?”

 “Why shouldn’t there be a muzhik here? There are muzhiks
everywhere. All one has to do is hunt for them. There certainly must be a
muzhik hiding here somewhere so as to get out of working.”

 This thought so cheered the Officials that they instantly jumped up to go
in search of a muzhik.

 For a long while they wandered about on the island without the desired
result, until finally a concentrated smell of black bread and old sheep
skin assailed their nostrils and guided them in the right direction. There
under a tree was a colossal muzhik lying fast asleep with his hands under
his head. It was clear that to escape his duty to work he had impudently
withdrawn to this island. The indignation of the Officials knew no bounds.

 “What, lying asleep here you lazy-bones you!” they raged at
him, “It is nothing to you that there are two Officials here who are
fairly perishing of hunger. Up, forward, march, work.”

 The Muzhik rose and looked at the two severe gentlemen standing in front
of him. His first thought was to make his escape, but the Officials held
him fast.

 He had to submit to his fate. He had to work.

 First he climbed up on a tree and plucked several dozen of the finest
apples for the Officials. He kept a rotten one for himself. Then he turned
up the earth and dug out some potatoes. Next he started a fire with two
bits of wood that he rubbed against each other. Out of his own hair he
made a snare and caught partridges. Over the fire, by this time burning
brightly, he cooked so many kinds of food that the question arose in the
Officials’ minds whether they shouldn’t give some to this
idler.

 Beholding the efforts of the Muzhik, they rejoiced in their hearts. They
had already forgotten how the day before they had nearly been perishing of
hunger, and all they thought of now was: “What a good thing it is to
be an Official. Nothing bad can ever happen to an Official.”

 “Are you satisfied, gentlemen?” the lazy Muzhik asked.

 “Yes, we appreciate your industry,” replied the Officials.

 “Then you will permit me to rest a little?”

 “Go take a little rest, but first make a good strong cord.”

 The Muzhik gathered wild hemp stalks, laid them in water, beat them and
broke them, and toward evening a good stout cord was ready. The Officials
took the cord and bound the Muzhik to a tree, so that he should not run
away. Then they laid themselves to sleep.

 Thus day after day passed, and the Muzhik became so skilful that he could
actually cook soup for the Officials in his bare hands. The Officials had
become round and well-fed and happy. It rejoiced them that here they needn’t
spend any money and that in the meanwhile their pensions were accumulating
in St. Petersburg.

 “What is your opinion, your Excellency,” one said to the other
after breakfast one day, “is the Story of the Tower of Babel true?
Don’t you think it is simply an allegory?”

 “By no means, your Excellency, I think it was something that really
happened. What other explanation is there for the existence of so many
different languages on earth?”

 “Then the Flood must really have taken place, too?”

 “Certainly, else; how would you explain the existence of
Antediluvian animals? Besides, the Moscow Gazette says——”

 They made search for the old number of the Moscow Gazette , seated
themselves in the shade, and read the whole sheet from beginning to end.
They read of festivities in Moscow, Tula, Penza and Riazan, and strangely
enough felt no discomfort at the description of the delicacies served.

 There is no saying how long this life might have lasted. Finally, however,
it began to bore the Officials. They often thought of their cooks in St.
Petersburg, and even shed a few tears in secret.

 “I wonder how it looks in Podyacheskaya Street now, your Excellency,”
one of them said to the other.

 “Oh, don’t remind me of it, your Excellency. I am pining away
with homesickness.”

 “It is very nice here. There is really no fault to be found with
this place, but the lamb longs for its mother sheep. And it is a pity,
too, for the beautiful uniforms.”

 “Yes, indeed, a uniform of the fourth class is no joke. The gold
embroidery alone is enough to make one dizzy.”

 Now they began to importune the Muzhik to find some way of getting them
back to Podyacheskaya Street, and strange to say, the Muzhik even knew
where Podyacheskaya Street was. He had once drunk beer and mead there, and
as the saying goes, everything had run down his beard, alas, but nothing
into his mouth. The Officials rejoiced and said: “We are Officials
from Podyacheskaya Street.”

 “And I am one of those men—do you remember?—who sit on a
scaffolding hung by ropes from the roofs and paint the outside walls. I am
one of those who crawl about on the roofs like flies. That is what I am,”
replied the Muzhik.

 The Muzhik now pondered long and heavily on how to give great pleasure to
his Officials, who had been so gracious to him, the lazy-bones, and had
not scorned his work. And he actually succeeded in constructing a ship. It
was not really a ship, but still it was a vessel, that would carry them
across the ocean close to Podyacheskaya Street.

 “Now, take care, you dog, that you don’t drown us,” said
the Officials, when they saw the raft rising and falling on the waves.

 “Don’t be afraid. We muzhiks are used to this,” said the
Muzhik, making all the preparations for the journey. He gathered swan’s-down
and made a couch for his two Officials, then he crossed himself and rowed
off from shore.

 How frightened the Officials were on the way, how seasick they were during
the storms, how they scolded the coarse Muzhik for his idleness, can
neither be told nor described. The Muzhik, however, just kept rowing on
and fed his Officials on herring. At last, they caught sight of dear old
Mother Neva. Soon they were in the glorious Catherine Canal, and then, oh
joy! they struck the grand Podyacheskaya Street. When the cooks saw their
Officials so well-fed, round and so happy, they rejoiced immensely. The
Officials drank coffee and rolls, then put on their uniforms and drove to
the Pension Bureau. How much money they collected there is another thing
that can neither be told nor described. Nor was the Muzhik forgotten. The
Officials sent a glass of whiskey out to him and five kopeks. Now, Muzhik,
rejoice.