JEAN MONETTE By Eugene Francois Vidocq

 At the time when I first became commissary of police, my arrondissement
      was in that part of Paris which includes the Rue St. Antoine—a
      street which has a great number of courts, alleys, and culs-de-sac issuing
      from it in all directions. The houses in these alleys and courts are, for
      the most part, inhabited by wretches wavering betwixt the last shade of
      poverty and actual starvation, ready to take part in any disturbance, or
      assist in any act of rapine or violence.

 In one of these alleys, there lived at that time a man named Jean Monette,
      who was tolerably well stricken in years, but still a hearty man. He was a
      widower, and, with an only daughter, occupied a floor, au quatrième, in
      one of the courts; people said he had been in business and grown rich, but
      that he had not the heart to spend his money, which year after year
      accumulated, and would make a splendid fortune for his daughter at his
      death. With this advantage, Emma, who was really a handsome girl, did not
      want for suitors, and thought that, being an heiress, she might wait till
      she really felt a reciprocal passion for some one, and not throw herself
      away upon the first tolerable match that presented itself. It was on a
      Sunday, the first in the month of June, that Emma had, as an especial
      treat, obtained sufficient money from her father for an excursion with
      some friends to see the fountains of Versailles.

 It was a beautiful day, and the basin was thronged around with thousands
      and thousands of persons, looking, from the variety of their dresses, more
      like the colors of a splendid rainbow than aught besides; and when, at
      four o’clock, Triton and his satellites threw up their immense
      volumes of water, all was wonder, astonishment, and delight; but none were
      more delighted than Emma, to whom the scene was quite new.

 And, then, it was so pleasant to have found a gentleman who could explain
      everything and everybody; point out the duke of this, and the count that,
      and the other lions of Paris; besides, such an agreeable and well-dressed
      man; it was really quite condescending in him to notice them! And then,
      toward evening, he would insist they should all go home together in a
      fiacre, and that he alone should pay all the expenses, and when, with a
      gentle pressure of the hand and a low whisper, he begged her to say where
      he might come and throw himself at her feet, she thought her feelings were
      different to what they had ever been before. But how could she give her
      address—tell so dashing a man that she lived in such a place? No,
      she could not do that, but she would meet him at the Jardin d’Eté
      next Sunday evening, and dance with no one else all night.

 She met him on the Sunday, and again and again, until her father began to
      suspect, from her frequent absence of an evening—which was formerly
      an unusual circumstance with her—that something must be wrong. The
      old man loved his money, but he loved his daughter more. She was the only
      link in life that kept together the chain of his affections. He had been
      passionately fond of his wife, and when she died, Emma had filled up the
      void in his heart. They were all, save his money, that he had ever loved.
      The world had cried out against him as a hard-hearted, rapacious man, and
      he, in return, despised the world.

 He was, therefore, much grieved at her conduct, and questioned Emma as to
      where her frequent visits led her, but could only obtain for answer that
      she was not aware she had been absent so much as to give him uneasiness.
      This was unsatisfactory, and so confirmed the old man in his suspicions
      that he determined to have his daughter watched.

 This he effected through the means of an ancien ami, then in the
      profession of what he called an “inspector,” though his
      enemies (and all men have such) called him a mouchard, or spy. However, by
      whatever name he called himself, or others called him, he understood his
      business, and so effectually watched the young lady that he discovered her
      frequent absences to be for the purpose of meeting a man who, after
      walking some distance with her, managed, despite the inspector’s
      boasted abilities, to give him the slip.

 This naturally puzzled him, and so it would any man in his situation.
      Fancy the feelings of one of the government’s employees in the argus
      line of business, a man renowned for his success in almost all the arduous
      and intricate affairs that had been committed to his care, to find himself
      baffled in a paltry private intrigue, and one which he had merely
      undertaken for the sake of friendship!

 For a second time, he tried the plan of fancying himself to be well paid,
      thinking this would stimulate his dormant energies, knowing well that a
      thing done for friendship’s sake is always badly done; but even here
      he failed. He watched them to a certain corner, but, before he could get
      around it, they were nowhere to be seen. This was not to be borne. It was
      setting him at defiance. Should he call in the assistance of a brother in
      the line? No, that would be to acknowledge himself beaten, and the
      disgrace he could not bear—his honor was concerned, and he would
      achieve it single handed; but, then, it was very perplexing.

 The man, to his experienced eye, seemed not, as he had done to Emma, a
      dashing gentleman, but more like a foul bird in fine feathers. Something
      must be wrong, and he must find it out—but, then, again came that
      confounded question, how?

 He would go and consult old Monette—he could, perhaps, suggest
      something; and, musing on the strangeness of the adventure, he walked
      slowly toward the house of the old man to hold a council with him on the
      situation.

 On the road, his attention was attracted by a disturbance in the street,
      and mingling with the crowd, in hope of seizing some of his enemies
      exercising their illegal functions on whom the whole weight of his
      official vengeance might fall, he for the time forgot his adventure. The
      crowd had been drawn together by a difference of opinion between two
      gentlemen of the vehicular profession, respecting some right of way, and,
      after all the usual expressions of esteem common on such occasions had
      been exhausted, one of them drove off, leaving the other at least master
      of the field, if he had not got the expected job.

 The crowd began to disperse, and with them also was going our friend, the
      detective, when, on turning round, he came in contact with Mlle. Monette,
      leaning on the arm of her mysterious lover. The light from a lamp above
      his head shone immediately on the face of Emma and her admirer, showing
      them both as clear as noonday, so that when his glance turned from the
      lady to the gentleman, and he obtained a full view of his face, he
      expressed his joy at the discovery by a loud “Whew!” which,
      though a short sound and soon pronounced, meant a great deal.

 For first, it meant that he had made a great discovery; secondly, that he
      was not now astonished because he had not succeeded before in his
      watchfulness; thirdly—but perhaps the two mentioned may be
      sufficient; for, turning sharply round, he made the greatest haste to
      reach Monette and inform him, this time, of the result of his espionage.

 After a long prelude, stating how fortunate Monette was to have such a
      friend as himself, a man who knew everybody and everything, he proceeded
      to inform him of the pleasing intelligence that his daughter was in the
      habit of meeting, and going to some place (he forgot to say where) with
      the most desperate and abandoned character in Paris—one who was so
      extremely dexterous in all his schemes that the police, though perfectly
      aware of his intentions, had not been able to fix upon him the commission
      of any one of his criminal acts, for he changed his appearance so often as
      to set at naught all the assiduous exertions of the Corps des Espions.

 The unhappy father received from his friend at parting the assurance that
      they would catch him yet, and give him an invitation to pass the rest of
      his days in the seclusion of a prison.

 On Emma’s return, he told her the information he had received,
      wisely withholding the means from which his knowledge came, saying that he
      knew she had that moment parted from a man who would lead her to the brink
      of destruction, and then cast her off like a child’s broken
      play-thing. He begged, nay, he besought her, with tears in his eyes, to
      promise she would never again see him. Emma was thunderstruck, not only at
      the accuracy of her father’s information, but at hearing such a
      character of one whom she had painted as perfection’s self; and,
      calling to her aid those never-failing woman’s arguments, a copious
      flood of tears, fell on her father’s neck and promised never again
      to see her admirer and, if possible, to banish all thoughts of him from
      her mind.

 “My child,” said the old man, “I believe you from my
      heart—I believe you. I love you, but the world says I am rich—why,
      I know not. You know I live in a dangerous neighborhood, and all my care
      will be necessary to prevent my losing either my child or my reputed
      wealth; therefore, to avoid all accidents, I will take care you do not
      leave this house for the next six months to come, and in that time your
      lover will have forgotten you, or what will amount to the same thing, you
      will have forgotten him; but I am much mistaken if the man’s
      intentions are not to rob me of my money, rather than my child.”

 The old man kept his word, and Emma was not allowed for several days to
      leave the rooms on the fourth floor.

 She tried, during the time, if it were possible to forget the object of
      her affections, and thought if she could but see him once more, to bid him
      a long and last farewell, she might in time wear out his remembrance from
      her heart; but in order to do that, she must see him once more; and having
      made up her mind that this interview would be an essential requisite to
      the desired end, she took counsel with herself how it was to be
      accomplished. There was only one great obstacle presenting itself to her
      view, which was that “she couldn’t get out.”

 Now women’s invention never fails them, when they have set their
      hearts upon any desired object; and it occurred to her, that although she
      could not get out, yet it was not quite so apparent that he could not get
      in; and this point being settled, it was no very difficult matter to
      persuade the old woman who occasionally assisted her in the household
      arrangements, to be the bearer of a short note, purporting to say that her
      father having been unwell for the last few days, usually retired early to
      rest, and that if her dear Despreau would come about eleven o’clock
      on the following evening, her father would be asleep, and she would be on
      the watch for a signal, which was to be three gentle taps on the door.

 The old woman executed her commission so well that she brought back an
      answer vowing eternal fidelity, and promising a punctual attendance at the
      rendezvous. Nor was it likely that he meant to fail—seeing it was
      the object he had had for months in view, and he reasoned with himself
      that if he once got there, he would make such good use of his time as to
      render a second visit perfectly unnecessary.

 Therefore it would be a pity to disappoint any one, and he immediately
      communicated his plans to two of his confederates, promising them a good
      share of the booty, and also the girl herself, if either of them felt that
      way inclined, as a reward for their assistance.

 His plans were very well managed, and would have gone on exceedingly well,
      but for one small accident which happened through the officious
      interference of the inspector, who, the moment he had discovered who the
      Lothario was, had taken all the steps he could to catch him, and gain the
      honor of having caught so accomplished a gentleman. He rightly judged that
      it would not be long before he would pay a visit to Monette’s rooms,
      and the letters, before their delivery by the old woman, had been read by
      him, and met with his full approbation.

 I was much pleased on being informed by the inspector that he wanted my
      assistance, one evening, to apprehend the celebrated Despreau, who had
      planned a robbery near the Rue St. Antoine, and make me acquainted with
      nearly all the circumstances. So, about half past ten o’clock, I
      posted myself with the inspector and four men where I could see Despreau
      pass, and at eleven o’clock, punctual to the moment, he and his two
      associates began to ascend the stairs.

 The two confederates were to wait some time, when he was to come to the
      door on some pretext and let them in.

 After the lapse of half an hour they were let in, when we ascended after
      them, and the inspector, having a duplicate key, we let ourselves gently
      in, standing in the passage, so as to prevent our being seen; in a few
      minutes we heard a loud shriek from Emma, and old Monette’s voice
      most vociferously crying “Murder!” and “Thieves!”
      On entering the rooms, we perceived that the poor girl was lying on the
      ground, while one of the men was endeavoring to stifle her cries by either
      gagging or suffocating her, though in the way he was doing it, the latter
      would have soon been the case.

 The old man had been dragged from his bed, and Despreau stood over him
      with a knife, swearing that unless he showed him the place where his money
      and valuables were deposited, it should be the last hour of his existence.

 Despreau, on seeing us, seemed inclined to make a most desperate
      resistance, but not being seconded by his associates, submitted to be
      pinioned, expressing his regret that we had not come half an hour later,
      when we might have been saved the trouble.

 Despreau was shortly after tried for the offense, which was too clearly
      proved to admit of any doubt. He was sentenced to the galleys for life,
      and is now at Brest, undergoing his sentence. Emma, soon afterward,
      married a respectable man, and old Monette behaved on the occasion much
      more liberally than was expected.