Lazarus

 By LEONID ANDREYEV

 TRANSLATED BY ABRAHAM YARMOLINSKY

  From Lazarus and the Gentleman from San
        Francisco

. Published by The Stratford Company. By
        permission of the publishers.



 I

 When Lazarus left the grave, where, for three days and three
    nights he had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and
    returned alive to his dwelling, for a long time no one noticed
    in him those sinister oddities, which, as time went on, made
    his very name a terror. Gladdened unspeakably by the sight of
    him who had been returned to life, those near to him caressed
    him unceasingly, and satiated their burning desire to serve
    him, in solicitude for his food and drink and garments. And
    they dressed him gorgeously, in bright colors of hope and
    laughter, and when, like to a bridegroom in his bridal
    vestures, he sat again among them at the table, and again ate
    and drank, they wept, overwhelmed with tenderness. And they
    summoned the neighbors to look at him who had risen
    miraculously from the dead. These came and shared the serene
    joy of the hosts. Strangers from far-off towns and hamlets came
    and adored the miracle in tempestuous words. Like to a beehive
    was the house of Mary and Martha.

 Whatever was found new in Lazarus' face and gestures was
    thought to be some trace of a grave illness and of the shocks
    recently experienced. Evidently, the destruction wrought by
    death on the corpse was only arrested by the miraculous power,
    but its effects were still apparent; and what death had
    succeeded in doing with Lazarus' face and body, was like an
    artist's unfinished sketch seen under thin glass. On Lazarus'
    temples, under his eyes, and in the hollows of his cheeks, lay
    a deep and cadaverous blueness; cadaverously blue also were his
    long fingers, and around his fingernails, grown long in the
    grave, the blue had become purple and dark. On his lips the
    skin, swollen in the grave, had burst in places, and thin,
    reddish cracks were formed, shining as though covered with
    transparent mica. And he had grown stout. His body, puffed up
    in the grave, retained its monstrous size and showed those
    frightful swellings, in which one sensed the presence of the
    rank liquid of decomposition. But the heavy corpse-like odor
    which penetrated Lazarus' graveclothes and, it seemed, his very
    body, soon entirely disappeared, the blue spots on his face and
    hands grew paler, and the reddish cracks closed up, although
    they never disappeared altogether. That is how Lazarus looked
    when he appeared before people, in his second life, but his
    face looked natural to those who had seen him in the
    coffin.

 In addition to the changes in his appearance, Lazarus'
    temper seemed to have undergone a transformation, but this
    circumstance startled no one and attracted no attention. Before
    his death Lazarus had always been cheerful and carefree, fond
    of laughter and a merry joke. It was because of this brightness
    and cheerfulness, with not a touch of malice and darkness, that
    the Master had grown so fond of him. But now Lazarus had grown
    grave and taciturn, he never jested, himself, nor responded
    with laughter to other people's jokes; and the words which he
    uttered, very infrequently, were the plainest, most ordinary,
    and necessary words, as deprived of depth and significance, as
    those sounds with which animals express pain and pleasure,
    thirst and hunger. They were the words that one can say all
    one's life, and yet they give no indication of what pains and
    gladdens the depths of the soul.

 Thus, with the face of a corpse which for three days had
    been under the heavy sway of death, dark and taciturn, already
    appallingly transformed, but still unrecognized by anyone in
    his new self, he was sitting at the feasting table, among
    friends and relatives, and his gorgeous nuptial garments
    glittered with yellow gold and bloody scarlet. Broad waves of
    jubilation, now soft, now tempestuously sonorous surged around
    him; warm glances of love were reaching out for his face, still
    cold with the coldness of the grave; and a friend's warm palm
    caressed his blue, heavy hand. And music played the tympanum
    and the pipe, the cithara and the harp. It was as though bees
    hummed, grasshoppers chirped and birds warbled over the happy
    house of Mary and Martha.

 II

 One of the guests incautiously lifted the veil. By a
    thoughtless word he broke the serene charm and uncovered the
    truth in all its naked ugliness. Ere the thought formed itself
    in his mind, his lips uttered with a smile:

 "Why dost thou not tell us what happened yonder?"

 And all grew silent, startled by the question. It was as if
    it occurred to them only now that for three days Lazarus had
    been dead, and they looked at him, anxiously awaiting his
    answer. But Lazarus kept silence.

 "Thou dost not wish to tell us,"—wondered the man, "is
    it so terrible yonder?"

 And again his thought came after his words. Had it been
    otherwise, he would not have asked this question, which at that
    very moment oppressed his heart with its insufferable horror.
    Uneasiness seized all present, and with a feeling of heavy
    weariness they awaited Lazarus' words, but he was silent,
    sternly and coldly, and his eyes were lowered. And as if for
    the first time, they noticed the frightful blueness of his face
    and his repulsive obesity. On the table, as though forgotten by
    Lazarus, rested his bluish-purple wrist, and to this all eyes
    turned, as if it were from it that the awaited answer was to
    come. The musicians were still playing, but now the silence
    reached them too, and even as water extinguishes scattered
    embers, so were their merry tunes extinguished in the silence.
    The pipe grew silent; the voices of the sonorous tympanum and
    the murmuring harp died away; and as if the strings had burst,
    the cithara answered with a tremulous, broken note.
    Silence.

 "Thou dost not wish to say?" repeated the guest, unable to
    check his chattering tongue. But the stillness remained
    unbroken, and the bluish-purple hand rested motionless. And
    then he stirred slightly and everyone felt relieved. He lifted
    up his eyes, and lo! straightway embracing everything in one
    heavy glance, fraught with weariness and horror, he looked at
    them,—Lazarus who had arisen from the dead.

 It was the third day since Lazarus had left the grave. Ever
    since then many had experienced the pernicious power of his
    eye, but neither those who were crushed by it forever, nor
    those who found the strength to resist in it the primordial
    sources of life,—which is as mysterious as
    death,—never could they explain the horror which lay
    motionless in the depth of his black pupils. Lazarus looked
    calmly and simply with no desire to conceal anything, but also
    with no intention to say anything; he looked coldly, as he who
    is infinitely indifferent to those alive. Many carefree people
    came close to him without noticing him, and only later did they
    learn with astonishment and fear who that calm stout man was,
    that walked slowly by, almost touching them with his gorgeous
    and dazzling garments. The sun did not cease shining, when he
    was looking, nor did the fountain hush its murmur, and the sky
    overhead remained cloudless and blue. But the man under the
    spell of his enigmatical look heard no more the fountain and
    saw not the sky overhead. Sometimes, he wept bitterly,
    sometimes he tore his hair and in frenzy called for help; but
    more often it came to pass that apathetically and quietly he
    began to die, and so he languished many years, before
    everybody's very eyes, wasted away, colorless, flabby, dull,
    like a tree, silently drying up in a stony soil. And of those
    who gazed at him, the ones who wept madly, sometimes felt again
    the stir of life; the others never.

 "So thou dost not wish to tell us what thou hast seen
    yonder?" repeated the man. But now his voice was impassive and
    dull, and deadly gray weariness showed in Lazarus' eyes. And
    deadly gray weariness covered like dust all the faces, and with
    dull amazement the guests stared at each other and did not
    understand wherefore they had gathered here and sat at the rich
    table. The talk ceased. They thought it was time to go home,
    but could not overcome the flaccid lazy weariness which glued
    their muscles, and they kept on sitting there, yet apart and
    torn away from each other, like pale fires scattered over a
    dark field.

 But the musicians were paid to play and again they took
    their instruments and again tunes full of studied mirth and
    studied sorrow began to flow and to rise. They unfolded the
    customary melody but the guests hearkened in dull amazement.
    Already they knew not wherefore is it necessary, and why is it
    well, that people should pluck strings, inflate their cheeks,
    blow in thin pipes, and produce a bizarre, many-voiced
    noise.

 "What bad music," said someone.

 The musicians took offense and left. Following them, the
    guests left one after another, for night was already come. And
    when placid darkness encircled them and they began to breathe
    with more ease, suddenly Lazarus' image loomed up before each
    one in formidable radiance: the blue face of a corpse,
    grave-clothes gorgeous and resplendent, a cold look, in the
    depths of which lay motionless an unknown horror. As though
    petrified, they were standing far apart, and darkness enveloped
    them, but in the darkness blazed brighter and brighter the
    supernatural vision of him who for three days had been under
    the enigmatical sway of death. For three days had he been dead:
    thrice had the sun risen and set, but he had been dead;
    children had played, streams murmured over pebbles, the
    wayfarer had lifted up hot dust in the highroad,—but he
    had been dead. And now he is again among them,—touches
    them,—looks at them,—looks at them! and through the
    black discs of his pupils, as through darkened glass, stares
    the unknowable Yonder.

 III

 No one was taking care of Lazarus, for no friends no
    relatives were left to him, and the great desert which
    encircled the holy city, came near the very threshold of his
    dwelling. And the desert entered his house, and stretched on
    his couch, like a wife and extinguished the fires. No one was
    taking care of Lazarus. One after the other, his
    sisters—Mary and Martha—forsook him. For a long
    while Martha was loath to abandon him, for she knew not who
    would feed him and pity him, she wept and prayed. But one
    night, when the wind was roaming in the desert and with a
    hissing sound the cypresses were bending over the roof, she
    dressed noiselessly and secretly left the house. Lazarus
    probably heard the door slam; it banged against the side-post
    under the gusts of the desert wind, but he did not rise to go
    out and to look at her that was abandoning him. All the night
    long the cypresses hissed over his head and plaintively thumped
    the door, letting in the cold, greedy desert.

 Like a leper he was shunned by everyone, and it was proposed
    to tie a bell to his neck, as is done with lepers, to warn
    people against sudden meetings. But someone remarked, growing
    frightfully pale, that it would be too horrible if by night the
    moaning of Lazarus' bell were suddenly heard under the
    windows,—and so the project was abandoned.

 And since he did not take care of himself, he would probably
    have starved to death, had not the neighbors brought him food
    in fear of something that they sensed but vaguely. The food was
    brought to him by children; they were not afraid of Lazarus,
    nor did they mock him with naive cruelty, as children are wont
    to do with the wretched and miserable. They were indifferent to
    him, and Lazarus answered them with the same coldness; he had
    no desire to caress the black little curls, and to look into
    their innocent shining eyes. Given to Time and to the Desert,
    his house was crumbling down, and long since had his famishing,
    lowing goats wandered away to the neighboring pastures. And his
    bridal garments became threadbare. Ever since that happy day,
    when the musicians played, he had worn them unaware of the
    difference of the new and the worn. The bright colors grew dull
    and faded; vicious dogs and the sharp thorn of the Desert
    turned the tender fabric into rags.

 By day, when the merciless sun slew all things alive, and
    even scorpions sought shelter under stones and writhed there in
    a mad desire to sting, he sat motionless under the sunrays, his
    blue face and the uncouth, bushy beard lifted up, bathing in
    the fiery flood.

 When people still talked to him, he was once asked:

 "Poor Lazarus, does it please thee to sit thus and to stare
    at the sun?"

 And he had answered:

 "Yes, it does."

 So strong, it seemed, was the cold of his three days' grave,
    so deep the darkness, that there was no heat on earth to warm
    Lazarus, nor a splendor that could brighten the darkness of his
    eyes. That is what came to the mind of those who spoke to
    Lazarus, and with a sigh they left him.

 And when the scarlet, flattened globe would lower, Lazarus
    would set out for the desert and walk straight toward the sun,
    as though striving to reach it. He always walked straight
    toward the sun and those who tried to follow him and to spy
    upon what he was doing at night in the desert, retained in
    their memory the black silhouette of a tall stout man against
    the red background of an enormous flattened disc. Night pursued
    them with her horrors, and so they did not learn of Lazarus'
    doings in the desert, but the vision of the black on red was
    forever branded on their brain. Just as a beast with a splinter
    in its eye furiously rubs its muzzle with its paws, so they too
    foolishly rubbed their eyes, but what Lazarus had given was
    indelible, and Death alone could efface it.

 But there were people who lived far away, who never saw
    Lazarus and knew of him only by report. With daring curiosity,
    which is stronger than fear and feeds upon it, with hidden
    mockery, they would come to Lazarus who was sitting in the sun
    and enter into conversation with him. By this time Lazarus'
    appearance had changed for the better and was not so terrible.
    The first minute they snapped their fingers and thought of how
    stupid the inhabitants of the holy city were; but when the
    short talk was over and they started homeward, their looks were
    such that the inhabitants of the holy city recognized them at
    once and said:

 "Look, there is one more fool on whom Lazarus has set his
    eye,"—and they shook their heads regretfully, and lifted
    up their arms.

 There came brave, intrepid warriors, with tinkling weapons;
    happy youths came with laughter and song; busy tradesmen,
    jingling their money, ran in for a moment, and haughty priests
    leaned their crosiers against Lazarus' door, and they were all
    strangely changed, as they came back. The same terrible shadow
    swooped down upon their souls and gave a new appearance to the
    old familiar world.

 Those who still had the desire to speak, expressed their
    feelings thus:

 "All things tangible and visible grew hollow, light, and
    transparent,—similar to lightsome shadows in the darkness
    of night;

 "for, that great darkness, which holds the whole cosmos, was
    dispersed neither by the sun or by the moon and the stars, but
    like an immense black shroud enveloped the earth and, like a
    mother, embraced it;

 "it penetrated all the bodies, iron and stone,—and the
    particles of the bodies, having lost their ties, grew lonely;
    and it penetrated into the depth of the particles, and the
    particles of particles became lonely;

 "for that great void, which encircles the cosmos, was not
    filled by things visible: neither by the sun, nor by the moon
    and the stars, but reigned unrestrained, penetrating
    everywhere, severing body from body, particle from
    particle;

 "in the void hollow trees spread hollow roots threatening a
    fantastic fall; temples, palaces, and horses loomed up and they
    were hollow; and in the void men moved about restlessly but
    they were light and hollow like shadows;

 "for, Time was no more, and the beginning of all things came
    near their end: the building was still being built, and
    builders were still hammering away, and its ruins were already
    seen and the void in its place; the man was still being born,
    but already funeral candles were burning at his head, and now
    they were extinguished, and there was the void in place of the
    man and of the funeral candles.

 "and wrapped by void and darkness the man in despair
    trembled in the face of the Horror of the Infinite."

 Thus spake the men who had still a desire to speak. But,
    surely, much more could have told those who wished not to
    speak, and died in silence.

 IV

 At that time there lived in Rome a renowned sculptor. In
    clay, marble, and bronze he wrought bodies of gods and men, and
    such was their beauty, that people called them immortal. But he
    himself was discontented and asserted that there was something
    even more beautiful, that he could not embody either in marble
    or in bronze. "I have not yet gathered the glimmers of the
    moon, nor have I my fill of sunshine," he was wont to say, "and
    there is no soul in my marble, no life in my beautiful bronze."
    And when on moonlit nights he slowly walked along the road,
    crossing the black shadows of cypresses, his white tunic
    glittering in the moonshine, those who met him would laugh in a
    friendly way and say:

 "Art thou going to gather moonshine, Aurelius? Why then
    didst thou not fetch baskets?"

 And he would answer, laughing and pointing to his eyes:

 "Here are the baskets wherein I gather the sheen of the moon
    and the glimmer of the sun."

 And so it was: the moon glimmered in his eyes and the sun
    sparkled therein. But he could not translate them into marble
    and therein lay the serene tragedy of his life.

 He was descended from an ancient patrician race, had a good
    wife and children, and suffered from no want.

 When the obscure rumor about Lazarus reached him, he
    consulted his wife and friends and undertook the far journey to
    Judea to see him who had miraculously risen from the dead. He
    was somewhat weary in those days and he hoped that the road
    would sharpen his blunted senses. What was said of Lazarus did
    not frighten him: he had pondered much over Death, did not like
    it, but he disliked also those who confused it with life.

   "In this life,—life and beauty;

 beyond,—Death, the enigmatical"—





 thought he, and there is no better thing
    for a man to do than to delight in life and in the beauty of
    all things living. He had even a vainglorious desire to
    convince Lazarus of the truth of his own view and restore his
    soul to life, as his body had been restored. This seemed so
    much easier because the rumors, shy and strange, did not render
    the whole truth about Lazarus and but vaguely warned against
    something frightful.

 Lazarus had just risen from the stone in order to follow the
    sun which was setting in the desert, when a rich Roman attended
    by an armed slave, approached him and addressed him in a
    sonorous tone of voice:

 "Lazarus!"

 And Lazarus beheld a superb face, lit with glory, and
    arrayed in fine clothes, and precious stones sparkling in the
    sun. The red light lent to the Roman's face and head the
    appearance of gleaming bronze—that also Lazarus noticed.
    He resumed obediently his place and lowered his weary eyes.

 "Yes, thou art ugly, my poor Lazarus,"—quietly said
    the Roman, playing with his golden chain; "thou art even
    horrible, my poor friend; and Death was not lazy that day when
    thou didst fall so heedlessly into his hands. But thou art
    stout, and, as the great Cæsar used to say, fat people
    are not ill-tempered; to tell the truth, I don't understand why
    men fear thee. Permit me to spend the night in thy house; the
    hour is late, and I have no shelter."

 Never had anyone asked Lazarus' hospitality.

 "I have no bed," said he.

 "I am somewhat of a soldier and I can sleep sitting," the
    Roman answered. "We shall build a fire."

 "I have no fire."

 "Then we shall have our talk in the darkness, like two
    friends. I think thou wilt find a bottle of wine."

 "I have no wine."

 The Roman laughed.

 "Now I see why thou art so somber and dislikest thy second
    life. No wine! Why, then we shall do without it: there are
    words that make the head go round better than the
    Falernian."

 By a sign he dismissed the slave, and they remained all
    alone. And again the sculptor started speaking, but it was as
    if, together with the setting sun, life had left his words; and
    they grew pale and hollow, as if they staggered on unsteady
    feet, as if they slipped and fell down, drunk with the heavy
    lees of weariness and despair. And black chasms grew up between
    the words—like far-off hints of the great void and the
    great darkness.

 "Now I am thy guest, and thou wilt not be unkind to me,
    Lazarus!"—said he. "Hospitality is the duty even of those
    who for three days were dead. Three days, I was told, thou
    didst rest in the grave. There it must be cold ... and that is
    whence comes thy ill habit of going without fire and wine. As
    to me, I like fire; it grows dark here so rapidly.... The lines
    of thy eyebrows and forehead are quite, quite interesting: they
    are like ruins of strange palaces, buried in ashes after an
    earthquake. But why dost thou wear such ugly and queer
    garments? I have seen bridegrooms in thy country, and they wear
    such clothes—are they not funny—and terrible....
    But art thou a bridegroom?"

 The sun had already disappeared, a monstrous black shadow
    came running from the east—it was as if gigantic bare
    feet began rumbling on the sand, and the wind sent a cold wave
    along the backbone.

 "In the darkness thou seemest still larger, Lazarus, as if
    thou hast grown stouter in these moments. Dost thou feed on
    darkness, Lazarus? I would fain have a little fire—at
    least a little fire, a little fire. I feel somewhat chilly,
    your nights are so barbarously cold.... Were it not so dark, I
    should say that thou wert looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems
    to me, thou art looking.... Why, thou art looking at me, I feel
    it,—but there thou art smiling."

 Night came, and filled the air with heavy blackness.

 "How well it will be, when the sun will rise to-morrow
    anew.... I am a great sculptor, thou knowest; that is how my
    friends call me. I create. Yes, that is the word ... but I need
    daylight. I give life to the cold marble, I melt sonorous
    bronze in fire, in bright hot fire.... Why didst thou touch me
    with thy hand?"

 "Come"—said Lazarus—"Thou art my guest."

 And they went to the house. And a long night enveloped the
    earth.

 The slave, seeing that his master did not come, went to seek
    him, when the sun was already high in the sky. And he beheld
    his master side by side with Lazarus: in profound silence were
    they sitting right under the dazzling and scorching sunrays and
    looking upward. The slave began to weep and cried out:

 "My master, what has befallen thee, master?"

 The very same day the sculptor left for Rome. On the way
    Aurelius was pensive and taciturn, staring attentively at
    everything—the men, the ship, the sea, as though trying
    to retain something. On the high sea a storm burst upon them,
    and all through it Aurelius stayed on the deck and eagerly
    scanned the seas looming near and sinking with a thud.

 At home his friends were frightened at the change which had
    taken place in Aurelius, but he calmed them, saying
    meaningly:

 "I have found it."

 And without changing the dusty clothes he wore on his
    journey, he fell to work, and the marble obediently resounded
    under his sonorous hammer. Long and eagerly worked he,
    admitting no one, until one morning he announced that the work
    was ready and ordered his friends to be summoned, severe
    critics and connoisseurs of art. And to meet them he put on
    bright and gorgeous garments, that glittered with yellow
    gold—and—scarlet byssus.

 "Here is my work," said he thoughtfully.

 His friends glanced and a shadow of profound sorrow covered
    their faces. It was something monstrous, deprived of all the
    lines and shapes familiar to the eye, but not without a hint at
    some new, strange image.

 On a thin, crooked twig, or rather on an ugly likeness of a
    twig rested askew a blind, ugly, shapeless, outspread mass of
    something utterly and inconceivably distorted, a mad leap of
    wild and bizarre fragments, all feebly and vainly striving to
    part from one another. And, as if by chance, beneath one of the
    wildly-rent salients a butterfly was chiseled with divine
    skill, all airy loveliness, delicacy, and beauty, with
    transparent wings, which seemed to tremble with an impotent
    desire to take flight.

 "Wherefore this wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?" said
    somebody falteringly.

 "I know not"—was the sculptor's answer.

 But it was necessary to tell the truth, and one of his
    friends who loved him best said firmly:

 "This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be destroyed. Give me
    the hammer."

 And with two strokes he broke the monstrous man into pieces,
    leaving only the infinitely delicate butterfly untouched.

 From that time on Aurelius created nothing. With profound
    indifference he looked at marble and bronze, and on his former
    divine works, where everlasting beauty rested. With the purpose
    of arousing his former fervent passion for work and, awakening
    his deadened soul, his friends took him to see other artists'
    beautiful works,—but he remained indifferent as before,
    and the smile did not warm up his tightened lips. And only
    after listening to lengthy talks about beauty, he would retort
    wearily and indolently:

 "But all this is a lie."

 And by the day, when the sun was shining, he went into his
    magnificent, skilfully built garden and having found a place
    without shadow, he exposed his bare head to the glare and heat.
    Red and white butterflies fluttered around; from the crooked
    lips of a drunken satyr, water streamed down with a splash into
    a marble cistern, but he sat motionless and silent,—like
    a pallid reflection of him who, in the far-off distance, at the
    very gates of the stony desert, sat under the fiery sun.

 V

 And now it came to pass that the great, deified Augustus
    himself summoned Lazarus. The imperial messengers dressed him
    gorgeously, in solemn nuptial clothes, as if Time had legalized
    them, and he was to remain until his very death the bridegroom
    of an unknown bride. It was as though an old, rotting coffin
    had been gilt and furnished with new, gay tassels. And men, all
    in trim and bright attire, rode after him, as if in bridal
    procession indeed, and those foremost trumpeted loudly, bidding
    people to clear the way for the emperor's messengers. But
    Lazarus' way was deserted: his native land cursed the hateful
    name of him who had miraculously risen from the dead, and
    people scattered at the very news of his appalling approach.
    The solitary voice of the brass trumpets sounded in the
    motionless air, and the wilderness alone responded with its
    languid echo.

 Then Lazarus went by sea. And his was the most magnificently
    arrayed and the most mournful ship that ever mirrored itself in
    the azure waves of the Mediterranean Sea. Many were the
    travelers aboard, but like a tomb was the ship, all silence and
    stillness, and the despairing water sobbed at the steep,
    proudly curved prow. All alone sat Lazarus exposing his head to
    the blaze of the sun, silently listening to the murmur and
    splash of the wavelets, and afar seamen and messengers were
    sitting, a vague group of weary shadows. Had the thunder burst
    and the wind attacked the red sails, the ships would probably
    have perished, for none of those aboard had either the will or
    the strength to struggle for life. With a supreme effort some
    mariners would reach the board and eagerly scan the blue,
    transparent deep, hoping to see a naiad's pink shoulder flash
    in the hollow of an azure wave, or a drunken gay centaur dash
    along and in frenzy splash the wave with his hoof. But the sea
    was like a wilderness, and the deep was dumb and deserted.

 With utter indifference did Lazarus set his feet on the
    street of the eternal city. As though all her wealth, all the
    magnificence of her palaces built by giants, all the
    resplendence, beauty, and music of her refined life were but
    the echo of the wind in the wilderness, the reflection of the
    desert quicksand. Chariots were dashing, and along the streets
    were moving crowds of strong, fair, proud builders of the
    eternal city and haughty participants in her life; a song
    sounded; fountains and women laughed a pearly laughter; drunken
    philosophers harangued, and the sober listened to them with a
    smile; hoofs struck the stone pavements. And surrounded by
    cheerful noise, a stout, heavy man was moving, a cold spot of
    silence and despair, and on his way he sowed disgust, anger,
    and vague, gnawing weariness. Who dares to be sad in Rome,
    wondered indignantly the citizens, and frowned. In two days the
    entire city already knew all about him who had miraculously
    risen from the dead, and shunned him shyly.

 But some daring people there were, who wanted to test their
    strength, and Lazarus obeyed their imprudent summons. Kept busy
    by state affairs, the emperor constantly delayed the reception,
    and seven days did he who had risen from the dead go about
    visiting others.

 And Lazarus came to a cheerful Epicurean, and the host met
    him with laughter on his lips:

 "Drink, Lazarus, drink!"—shouted he. "Would not
    Augustus laugh to see thee drunk!"

 And half-naked drunken women laughed, and rose petals fell
    on Lazarus' blue hands. But then the Epicurean looked into
    Lazarus' eyes, and his gaiety ended forever. Drunkard remained
    he for the rest of his life; never did he drink, yet forever
    was he drunk. But instead of the gay reverie which wine brings
    with it, frightful dreams began to haunt him, the sole food of
    his stricken spirit. Day and night he lived in the poisonous
    vapors of his nightmares, and death itself was not more
    frightful than her raving, monstrous forerunners.

 And Lazarus came to a youth and his beloved, who loved each
    other and were most beautiful in their passions. Proudly and
    strongly embracing his love, the youth said with serene
    regret:

 "Look at us, Lazarus, and share our joy. Is there anything
    stronger than love?"

 And Lazarus looked. And for the rest of their life they kept
    on loving each other, but their passion grew gloomy and
    joyless, like those funeral cypresses whose roots feed on the
    decay of the graves and whose black summits in a still evening
    hour seek in vain to reach the sky. Thrown by the unknown
    forces of life into each other's embraces, they mingled tears
    with kisses, voluptuous pleasures with pain, and they felt
    themselves doubly slaves, obedient slaves to life, and patient
    servants of the silent Nothingness. Ever united, ever severed,
    they blazed like sparks and like sparks lost themselves in the
    boundless Dark.

 And Lazarus came to a haughty sage, and the sage said to
    him:

 "I know all the horrors thou canst reveal to me. Is there
    anything thou canst frighten me with?"

 But before long the sage felt that the knowledge of horror
    was far from being the horror itself, and that the vision of
    Death, was not Death. And he felt that wisdom and folly are
    equal before the face of Infinity, for Infinity knows them not.
    And it vanished, the dividing-line between knowledge and
    ignorance, truth and falsehood, top and bottom, and the
    shapeless thought hung suspended in the void. Then the sage
    clutched his gray head and cried out frantically:

 "I cannot think! I cannot think!"

 Thus under the indifferent glance for him, who miraculously
    had risen from the dead, perished everything that asserts life,
    its significance and joys. And it was suggested that it was
    dangerous to let him see the emperor, that it was better to
    kill him and, having buried him secretly, to tell the emperor
    that he had disappeared no one knew whither. Already swords
    were being whetted and youths devoted to the public welfare
    prepared for the murder, when Augustus ordered Lazarus to be
    brought before him next morning, thus destroying the cruel
    plans.

 If there was no way of getting rid of Lazarus, at least it
    was possible to soften the terrible impression his face
    produced. With this in view, skillful painters, barbers, and
    artists were summoned, and all night long they were busy over
    Lazarus' head. They cropped his beard, curled it, and gave it a
    tidy, agreeable appearance. By means of paints they concealed
    the corpse-like blueness of his hands and face. Repulsive were
    the wrinkles of suffering that furrowed his old face, and they
    were puttied, painted, and smoothed; then, over the smooth
    background, wrinkles of good-tempered laughter and pleasant,
    carefree mirth were skillfully painted with fine brushes.

 Lazarus submitted indifferently to everything that was done
    to him. Soon he was turned into a becomingly stout, venerable
    old man, into a quiet and kind grandfather of numerous
    offspring. It seemed that the smile, with which only a while
    ago he was spinning funny yarns, was still lingering on his
    lips, and that in the corner of his eye serene tenderness was
    hiding, the companion of old age. But people did not dare
    change his nuptial garments, and they could not change his
    eyes, two dark and frightful glasses through which looked at
    men, the unknowable Yonder.

 VI

 Lazarus was not moved by the magnificence of the imperial
    palace. It was as though he saw no difference between the
    crumbling house, closely pressed by the desert, and the stone
    palace, solid and fair, and indifferently he passed into it.
    And the hard marble of the floors under his feet grew similar
    to the quicksand of the desert, and the multitude of richly
    dressed and haughty men became like void air under his glance.
    No one looked into his face, as Lazarus passed by, fearing to
    fall under the appalling influence of his eyes; but when the
    sound of his heavy footsteps had sufficiently died down, the
    courtiers raised their heads and with fearful curiosity
    examined the figure of a stout, tall, slightly bent old man,
    who was slowly penetrating into the very heart of the imperial
    palace. Were Death itself passing, it would be faced with no
    greater fear: for until then the dead alone knew Death, and
    those alive knew Life only—and there was no bridge
    between them. But this extraordinary man, although alive, knew
    Death, and enigmatical, appalling, was his cursed knowledge.
    "Woe," people thought, "he will take the life of our great,
    deified Augustus," and they sent curses after Lazarus, who
    meanwhile kept on advancing into the interior of the
    palace.

 Already did the emperor know who Lazarus was, and prepared
    to meet him. But the monarch was a brave man, and felt his own
    tremendous, unconquerable power, and in his fatal duel with him
    who had miraculously risen from the dead he wanted not to
    invoke human help. And so he met Lazarus face to face:

 "Lift not thine eyes upon me, Lazarus," he ordered. "I heard
    thy face is like that of Medusa and turns into stone whomsoever
    thou lookest at. Now, I wish to see thee and to have a talk
    with thee, before I turn into stone,"—added he in a tone
    of kingly jesting, not devoid of fear.

 Coming close to him, he carefully examined Lazarus' face and
    his strange festal garments. And although he had a keen eye, he
    was deceived by his appearance.

 "So. Thou dost not appear terrible, my venerable old man.
    But the worse for us, if horror assumes such a respectable and
    pleasant air. Now let us have a talk."

 Augustus sat, and questioning Lazarus with his eye as much
    as with words, started the conversation:

 "Why didst thou not greet me as thou enteredst?"

 Lazarus answered indifferent:

 "I knew not it was necessary."

 "Art thou a Christian?"

 "No."

 Augustus approvingly shook his head.

 "That is good. I do not like Christians. They shake the tree
    of life before it is covered with fruit, and disperse its
    odorous bloom to the winds. But who art thou?"

 With a visible effort Lazarus answered:

 "I was dead."

 "I had heard that. But who art thou now?"

 Lazarus was silent, but at last repeated in a tone of weary
    apathy:

 "I was dead."

 "Listen to me, stranger," said the emperor, distinctly and
    severely giving utterance to the thought that had come to him
    at the beginning, "my realm is the realm of Life, my people are
    of the living, not of the dead. Thou art here one too many. I
    know not who thou art and what thou sawest there; but, if thou
    liest, I hate thy lies, and if thou tellst the truth, I hate
    thy truth. In my bosom I feel the throb of life; I feel
    strength in my arm, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, pierce
    the space. And yonder in the shelter of my rule, under the
    protection of laws created by me, people live and toil and
    rejoice. Dost thou hear the battle-cry, the challenge men throw
    into the face of the future?"

 Augustus, as in prayer, stretched forth his arms and
    exclaimed solemnly:

 "Be blessed, O great and divine Life!"

 Lazarus was silent, and with growing sternness the emperor
    went on:

 "Thou art not wanted here, miserable remnant, snatched from
    under Death's teeth, thou inspirest weariness and disgust with
    life; like a caterpillar in the fields, thou gloatest on the
    rich ear of joy and belchest out the drivel of despair and
    sorrow. Thy truth is like a rusty sword in the hands of a
    nightly murderer,—and as a murderer thou shalt be
    executed. But before that, let me look into thine eyes.
    Perchance, only cowards are afraid of them, but in the brave
    they awake the thirst for strife and victory; then thou shalt
    be rewarded, not executed.... Now, look at me, Lazarus."

 At first it appeared to the deified Augustus that a friend
    was looking at him,—so soft, so tenderly fascinating was
    Lazarus' glance. It promised not horror, but sweet rest and the
    Infinite seemed to him a tender mistress, a compassionate
    sister, a mother. But stronger and stronger grew its embraces,
    and already the mouth, greedy of hissing kisses, interfered
    with the monarch's breathing, and already to the surface of the
    soft tissues of the body came the iron of the bones and
    tightened its merciless circle,—and unknown fangs, blunt
    and cold, touched his heart and sank into it with slow
    indolence.

 "It pains," said the deified Augustus, growing pale. "But
    look at me, Lazarus, look."

 It was as though some heavy gates, ever closed, were slowly
    moving apart, and through the growing interstice the appalling
    horror of the Infinite poured in slowly and steadily. Like two
    shadows there entered the shoreless void and the unfathomable
    darkness; they extinguished the sun, ravished the earth from
    under the feet, and the roof from over the head. No more did
    the frozen heart ache.

 "Look, look, Lazarus," ordered Augustus tottering.

 Time stood still, and the beginning of each thing grew
    frightfully near to its end. Augustus' throne just erected,
    crumbled down, and the void was already in the place of the
    throne and of Augustus. Noiselessly did Rome crumble down, and
    a new city stood on its site and it too was swallowed by the
    void. Like fantastic giants, cities, states, and countries fell
    down and vanished in the void darkness—and with uttermost
    indifference did the insatiable black womb of the Infinite
    swallow them.

 "Halt!"—ordered the emperor.

 In his voice sounded already a note of indifference, his
    hands dropped in languor, and in the vain struggle with the
    onrushing darkness his fiery eyes now blazed up, and now went
    out.

 "My life thou hast taken from me, Lazarus,"—said he in
    a spiritless, feeble voice.

 And these words of hopelessness saved him. He remembered his
    people, whose shield he was destined to be, and keen salutary
    pain pierced his deadened heart. "They are doomed to death," he
    thought wearily. "Serene shadows in the darkness of the
    Infinite," thought he, and horror grew upon him. "Frail vessels
    with living seething blood with a heart that knows sorrow and
    also great joy," said he in his heart, and tenderness pervaded
    it.

 Thus pondering and oscillating between the poles of Life and
    Death, he slowly came back to life, to find in its suffering
    and in its joys a shield against the darkness of the void and
    the horror of the Infinite.

 "No, thou hast not murdered me, Lazarus," said he firmly,
    "but I will take thy life. Be gone."

 That evening the deified Augustus partook of his meats and
    drinks with particular joy. Now and then his lifted hand
    remained suspended in the air, and a dull glimmer replaced the
    bright sheen of his fiery eye. It was the cold wave of Horror
    that surged at his feet. Defeated, but not undone, ever
    awaiting its hour, that Horror stood at the emperor's bedside,
    like a black shadow all through his life; it swayed his nights,
    but yielded the days to the sorrows and joys of life.

 The following day, the hangman with a hot iron burned out
    Lazarus' eyes. Then he was sent home. The deified Augustus
    dared not kill him.

  Lazarus returned to the desert, and the wilderness met him
    with hissing gusts of wind and the heat of the blazing sun.
    Again he was sitting on a stone, his rough, bushy beard lifted
    up; and the two black holes in place of his eyes looked at the
    sky with an expression of dull terror. Afar-off the holy city
    stirred noisily and restlessly, but around him everything was
    deserted and dumb. No one approached the place where lived he
    who had miraculously risen from the dead, and long since his
    neighbors had forsaken their houses. Driven by the hot iron
    into the depth of his skull, his cursed knowledge hid there in
    an ambush. As though leaping out from an ambush it plunged its
    thousand invisible eyes into the man,—and no one dared
    look at Lazarus.

 And in the evening, when the sun, reddening and growing
    wider, would come nearer and nearer the western horizon, the
    blind Lazarus would slowly follow it. He would stumble against
    stones and fall, stout and weak as he was; would rise heavily
    to his feet and walk on again; and on the red screen of the
    sunset his black body and outspread hands would form a
    monstrous likeness of a cross.

 And it came to pass that once he went out and did not come
    back. Thus seemingly ended the second life of him who for three
    days had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and rose
    miraculously from the dead.