LAZARUS

 BY LEONID ANDREYEV

 I

 W

hen Lazarus rose from the grave, after three days and nights in the
mysterious thraldom of death, and returned alive to his home, it was a
long time before any one noticed the evil peculiarities in him that were
later to make his very name terrible. His friends and relatives were
jubilant that he had come back to life. They surrounded him with
tenderness, they were lavish of their eager attentions, spending the
greatest care upon his food and drink and the new garments they made for
him. They clad him gorgeously in the glowing colours of hope and laughter,
and when, arrayed like a bridegroom, he sat at table with them again, ate
again, and drank again, they wept fondly and summoned the neighbours to
look upon the man miraculously raised from the dead.

 The neighbours came and were moved with joy. Strangers arrived from
distant cities and villages to worship the miracle. They burst into stormy
exclamations, and buzzed around the house of Mary and Martha, like so many
bees.

 That which was new in Lazarus’ face and gestures they explained
naturally, as the traces of his severe illness and the shock he had passed
through. It was evident that the disintegration of the body had been
halted by a miraculous power, but that the restoration had not been
complete; that death had left upon his face and body the effect of an
artist’s unfinished sketch seen through a thin glass. On his
temples, under his eyes, and in the hollow of his cheek lay a thick,
earthy blue. His fingers were blue, too, and under his nails, which had
grown long in the grave, the blue had turned livid. Here and there on his
lips and body, the skin, blistered in the grave, had burst open and left
reddish glistening cracks, as if covered with a thin, glassy slime. And he
had grown exceedingly stout. His body was horribly bloated and suggested
the fetid, damp smell of putrefaction. But the cadaverous, heavy odour
that clung to his burial garments and, as it seemed, to his very body,
soon wore off, and after some time the blue of his hands and face
softened, and the reddish cracks of his skin smoothed out, though they
never disappeared completely. Such was the aspect of Lazarus in his second
life. It looked natural only to those who had seen him buried.

 Not merely Lazarus’ face, but his very character, it seemed, had
changed; though it astonished no one and did not attract the attention it
deserved. Before his death Lazarus had been cheerful and careless, a lover
of laughter and harmless jest. It was because of his good humour, pleasant
and equable, his freedom from meanness and gloom, that he had been so
beloved by the Master. Now he was grave and silent; neither he himself
jested nor did he laugh at the jests of others; and the words he spoke
occasionally were simple, ordinary and necessary words—words as much
devoid of sense and depth as are the sounds with which an animal expresses
pain and pleasure, thirst and hunger. Such words a man may speak all his
life and no one would ever know the sorrows and joys that dwelt within
him.

 Thus it was that Lazarus sat at the festive table among his friends and
relatives—his face the face of a corpse over which, for three days,
death had reigned in darkness, his garments gorgeous and festive,
glittering with gold, bloody-red and purple; his mien heavy and silent. He
was horribly changed and strange, but as yet undiscovered. In high waves,
now mild, now stormy, the festivities went on around him. Warm glances of
love caressed his face, still cold with the touch of the grave; and a
friend’s warm hand patted his bluish, heavy hand. And the music
played joyous tunes mingled of the sounds of the tympanum, the pipe, the
zither and the dulcimer. It was as if bees were humming, locusts buzzing
and birds singing over the happy home of Mary and Martha.

 II

 S

ome one recklessly lifted the veil. By one breath of an uttered word he
destroyed the serene charm, and uncovered the truth in its ugly nakedness.
No thought was clearly defined in his mind, when his lips smilingly asked:
“Why do you not tell us, Lazarus, what was There?” And all
became silent, struck with the question. Only now it seemed to have
occurred to them that for three days Lazarus had been dead; and they
looked with curiosity, awaiting an answer. But Lazarus remained silent.

 “You will not tell us?” wondered the inquirer. “Is it so
terrible There?”

 Again his thought lagged behind his words. Had it preceded them, he would
not have asked the question, for, at the very moment he uttered it, his
heart sank with a dread fear. All grew restless; they awaited the words of
Lazarus anxiously. But he was silent, cold and severe, and his eyes were
cast down. And now, as if for the first time, they perceived the horrible
bluishness of his face and the loathsome corpulence of his body. On the
table, as if forgotten by Lazarus, lay his livid blue hand, and all eyes
were riveted upon it, as though expecting the desired answer from that
hand. The musicians still played; then silence fell upon them, too, and
the gay sounds died down, as scattered coals are extinguished by water.
The pipe became mute, and the ringing tympanum and the murmuring dulcimer;
and as though a chord were broken, as though song itself were dying, the
zither echoed a trembling broken sound. Then all was quiet.

 “You will not?” repeated the inquirer, unable to restrain his
babbling tongue. Silence reigned, and the livid blue hand lay motionless.
It moved slightly, and the company sighed with relief and raised their
eyes. Lazarus, risen from the dead, was looking straight at them,
embracing all with one glance, heavy and terrible.

 This was on the third day after Lazarus had arisen from the grave. Since
then many had felt that his gaze was the gaze of destruction, but neither
those who had been forever crushed by it, nor those who in the prime of
life (mysterious even as death) had found the will to resist his glance,
could ever explain the terror that lay immovable in the depths of his
black pupils. He looked quiet and simple. One felt that he had no
intention to hide anything, but also no intention to tell anything. His
look was cold, as of one who is entirely indifferent to all that is alive.
And many careless people who pressed around him, and did not notice him,
later learned with wonder and fear the name of this stout, quiet man who
brushed against them with his sumptuous, gaudy garments. The sun did not
stop shining when he looked, neither did the fountain cease playing, and
the Eastern sky remained cloudless and blue as always; but the man who
fell under his inscrutable gaze could no longer feel the sun, nor hear the
fountain, nor recognise his native sky. Sometimes he would cry bitterly,
sometimes tear his hair in despair and madly call for help; but generally
it happened that the men thus stricken by the gaze of Lazarus began to
fade away listlessly and quietly and pass into a slow death lasting many
long years. They died in the presence of everybody, colourless, haggard
and gloomy, like trees withering on rocky ground. Those who screamed in
madness sometimes came back to life; but the others, never.

 “So you will not tell us, Lazarus, what you saw There?” the
inquirer repeated for the third time. But now his voice was dull, and a
dead, grey weariness looked stupidly from out his eyes. The faces of all
present were also covered by the same dead grey weariness like a mist. The
guests stared at one another stupidly, not knowing why they had come
together or why they sat around this rich table. They stopped talking, and
vaguely felt it was time to leave; but they could not overcome the
lassitude that spread through their muscles. So they continued to sit
there, each one isolated, like little dim lights scattered in the darkness
of night.

 The musicians were paid to play, and they again took up the instruments,
and again played gay or mournful airs. But it was music made to order,
always the same tunes, and the guests listened wonderingly. Why was this
music necessary, they thought, why was it necessary and what good did it
do for people to pull at strings and blow their cheeks into thin pipes,
and produce varied and strange-sounding noises?

 “How badly they play!” said some one.

 The musicians were insulted and left. Then the guests departed one by one,
for it was nearing night. And when the quiet darkness enveloped them, and
it became easier to breathe, the image of Lazarus suddenly arose before
each one in stern splendour. There he stood, with the blue face of a
corpse and the raiment of a bridegroom, sumptuous and resplendent, in his
eyes that cold stare in the depths of which lurked The Horrible! They stood still as if turned into stone. The darkness surrounded them,
and in the midst of this darkness flamed up the horrible apparition, the
supernatural vision, of the one who for three days had lain under the
measureless power of death. Three days he had been dead. Thrice had the
sun risen and set—and he had lain dead. The children had played, the
water had murmured as it streamed over the rocks, the hot dust had clouded
the highway—and he had been dead. And now he was among men again—touched
them—looked at them— looked at them! And through the
black rings of his pupils, as through dark glasses, the unfathomable There gazed upon humanity.

 III

 N

o one took care of Lazarus, and no friends or kindred remained with him.
Only the great desert, enfolding the Holy City, came close to the
threshold of his abode. It entered his home, and lay down on his couch
like a spouse, and put out all the fires. No one cared for Lazarus. One
after the other went away, even his sisters, Mary and Martha. For a long
while Martha did not want to leave him, for she knew not who would nurse
him or take care of him; and she cried and prayed. But one night, when the
wind was roaming about the desert, and the rustling cypress trees were
bending over the roof, she dressed herself quietly, and quietly went away.
Lazarus probably heard how the door was slammed—it had not shut
properly and the wind kept knocking it continually against the post—but
he did not rise, did not go out, did not try to find out the reason. And
the whole night until the morning the cypress trees hissed over his head,
and the door swung to and fro, allowing the cold, greedily prowling desert
to enter his dwelling. Everybody shunned him as though he were a leper.
They wanted to put a bell on his neck to avoid meeting him. But some one,
turning pale, remarked it would be terrible if at night, under the
windows, one should happen to hear Lazarus’ bell, and all grew pale
and assented.

 Since he did nothing for himself, he would probably have starved had not
his neighbours, in trepidation, saved some food for him. Children brought
it to him. They did not fear him, neither did they laugh at him in the
innocent cruelty in which children often laugh at unfortunates. They were
indifferent to him, and Lazarus showed the same indifference to them. He
showed no desire to thank them for their services; he did not try to pat
the dark hands and look into the simple shining little eyes. Abandoned to
the ravages of time and the desert, his house was falling to ruins, and
his hungry, bleating goats had long been scattered among his neighbours.
His wedding garments had grown old. He wore them without changing them, as
he had donned them on that happy day when the musicians played. He did not
see the difference between old and new, between torn and whole. The
brilliant colours were burnt and faded; the vicious dogs of the city and
the sharp thorns of the desert had rent the fine clothes to shreds.

 During the day, when the sun beat down mercilessly upon all living things,
and even the scorpions hid under the stones, convulsed with a mad desire
to sting, he sat motionless in the burning rays, lifting high his blue
face and shaggy wild beard.

 While yet the people were unafraid to speak to him, same one had asked
him: “Poor Lazarus! Do you find it pleasant to sit so, and look at
the sun?” And he answered: “Yes, it is pleasant.”

 The thought suggested itself to people that the cold of the three days in
the grave had been so intense, its darkness so deep, that there was not in
all the earth enough heat or light to warm Lazarus and lighten the gloom
of his eyes; and inquirers turned away with a sigh.

 And when the setting sun, flat and purple-red, descended to earth, Lazarus
went into the desert and walked straight toward it, as though intending to
reach it. Always he walked directly toward the sun, and those who tried to
follow him and find out what he did at night in the desert had indelibly
imprinted upon their mind’s vision the black silhouette of a tall,
stout man against the red background of an immense disk. The horrors of
the night drove them away, and so they never found out what Lazarus did in
the desert; but the image of the black form against the red was burned
forever into their brains. Like an animal with a cinder in its eye which
furiously rubs its muzzle against its paws, they foolishly rubbed their
eyes; but the impression left by Lazarus was ineffaceable, forgotten only
in death.

 There were people living far away who never saw Lazarus and only heard of
him. With an audacious curiosity which is stronger than fear and feeds on
fear, with a secret sneer in their hearts, some of them came to him one
day as he basked in the sun, and entered into conversation with him. At
that time his appearance had changed for the better and was not so
frightful. At first the visitors snapped their fingers and thought
disapprovingly of the foolish inhabitants of the Holy City. But when the
short talk came to an end and they went home, their expression was such
that the inhabitants of the Holy City at once knew their errand and said:
“Here go some more madmen at whom Lazarus has looked.” The
speakers raised their hands in silent pity.

 Other visitors came, among them brave warriors in clinking armour, who
knew not fear, and happy youths who made merry with laughter and song.
Busy merchants, jingling their coins, ran in for awhile, and proud
attendants at the Temple placed their staffs at Lazarus’ door. But
no one returned the same as he came. A frightful shadow fell upon their
souls, and gave a new appearance to the old familiar world.

 Those who felt any desire to speak, after they had been stricken by the
gaze of Lazarus, described the change that had come over them somewhat
like this:

  All objects seen by the eye and palpable to the hand became empty,
light and transparent, as though they were light shadows in the darkness;
and this darkness enveloped the whole universe. It was dispelled neither
by the sun, nor by the moon, nor by the stars, but embraced the earth like
a mother, and clothed it in a boundless black veil .

  Into all bodies it penetrated, even into iron and stone; and the
particles of the body lost their unity and became lonely. Even to the
heart of the particles it penetrated, and the particles of the particles
became lonely .

  The vast emptiness which surrounds the universe, was not filled with
things seen, with sun or moon or stars; it stretched boundless,
penetrating everywhere, disuniting everything, body from body, particle
from particle .

  In emptiness the trees spread their roots, themselves empty; in
emptiness rose phantom temples, palaces and houses—all empty; and in
the emptiness moved restless Man, himself empty and light, like a shadow .

  There was no more a sense of time; the beginning of all things and
their end merged into one. In the very moment when a building was being
erected and one could hear the builders striking with their hammers, one
seemed already to see its ruins, and then emptiness where the ruins were .

  A man was just born, and funeral candles were already lighted at his
head, and then were extinguished; and soon there was emptiness where
before had been the man and the candles. 

  And surrounded by Darkness and Empty Waste, Man trembled hopelessly
before the dread of the Infinite .

 So spoke those who had a desire to speak. But much more could probably
have been told by those who did not want to talk, and who died in silence.

 IV

 A

t that time there lived in Rome a celebrated sculptor by the name of
Aurelius. Out of clay, marble and bronze he created forms of gods and men
of such beauty that this beauty was proclaimed immortal. But he himself
was not satisfied, and said there was a supreme beauty that he had never
succeeded in expressing in marble or bronze. “I have not yet
gathered the radiance of the moon,” he said; “I have not yet
caught the glare of the sun. There is no soul in my marble, there is no
life in my beautiful bronze.” And when by moonlight he would slowly
wander along the roads, crossing the black shadows of the cypress-trees,
his white tunic flashing in the moonlight, those he met used to laugh
good-naturedly and say: “Is it moonlight that you are gathering,
Aurelius? Why did you not bring some baskets along?”

 And he, too, would laugh and point to his eyes and say: “Here are
the baskets in which I gather the light of the moon and the radiance of
the sun.”

 And that was the truth. In his eyes shone moon and sun. But he could not
transmit the radiance to marble. Therein lay the greatest tragedy of his
life. He was a descendant of an ancient race of patricians, had a good
wife and children, and except in this one respect, lacked nothing.

 When the dark rumour about Lazarus reached him, he consulted his wife and
friends and decided to make the long voyage to Judea, in order that he
might look upon the man miraculously raised from the dead. He felt lonely
in those days and hoped on the way to renew his jaded energies. What they
told him about Lazarus did not frighten him. He had meditated much upon
death. He did not like it, nor did he like those who tried to harmonise it
with life. On this side, beautiful life; on the other, mysterious death,
he reasoned, and no better lot could befall a man than to live—to
enjoy life and the beauty of living. And he already had conceived a desire
to convince Lazarus of the truth of this view and to return his soul to
life even as his body had been returned. This task did not appear
impossible, for the reports about Lazarus, fearsome and strange as they
were, did not tell the whole truth about him, but only carried a vague
warning against something awful.

 Lazarus was getting up from a stone to follow in the path of the setting
sun, on the evening when the rich Roman, accompanied by an armed slave,
approached him, and in a ringing voice called to him: “Lazarus!”

 Lazarus saw a proud and beautiful face, made radiant by fame, and white
garments and precious jewels shining in the sunlight. The ruddy rays of
the sun lent to the head and face a likeness to dimly shining bronze—that
was what Lazarus saw. He sank back to his seat obediently, and wearily
lowered his eyes.

 “It is true you are not beautiful, my poor Lazarus,” said the
Roman quietly, playing with his gold chain. “You are even frightful,
my poor friend; and death was not lazy the day when you so carelessly fell
into its arms. But you are as fat as a barrel, and ‘Fat people are
not bad,’ as the great Cæsar said. I do not understand why people
are so afraid of you. You will permit me to stay with you over night? It
is already late, and I have no abode.”

 Nobody had ever asked Lazarus to be allowed to pass the night with him.

 “I have no bed,” said he.

 “I am somewhat of a warrior and can sleep sitting,” replied
the Roman. “We shall make a light.”

 “I have no light.”

 “Then we will converse in the darkness like two friends. I suppose
you have some wine?”

 “I have no wine.”

 The Roman laughed.

 “Now I understand why you are so gloomy and why you do not like your
second life. No wine? Well, we shall do without. You know there are words
that go to one’s head even as Falernian wine.”

 With a motion of his head he dismissed the slave, and they were alone. And
again the sculptor spoke, but it seemed as though the sinking sun had
penetrated into his words. They faded, pale and empty, as if trembling on
weak feet, as if slipping and falling, drunk with the wine of anguish and
despair. And black chasms appeared between the two men—like remote
hints of vast emptiness and vast darkness.

 “Now I am your guest and you will not ill-treat me, Lazarus!”
said the Roman. “Hospitality is binding even upon those who have
been three days dead. Three days, I am told, you were in the grave. It
must have been cold there... and it is from there that you have brought
this bad habit of doing without light and wine. I like a light. It gets
dark so quickly here. Your eyebrows and forehead have an interesting line:
even as the ruins of castles covered with the ashes of an earthquake. But
why in such strange, ugly clothes? I have seen the bridegrooms of your
country, they wear clothes like that—such ridiculous clothes—such
awful garments... Are you a bridegroom?”

 Already the sun had disappeared. A gigantic black shadow was approaching
fast from the west, as if prodigious bare feet were rustling over the
sand. And the chill breezes stole up behind.

 “In the darkness you seem even bigger, Lazarus, as though you had
grown stouter in these few minutes. Do you feed on darkness, perchance?...
And I would like a light... just a small light... just a small light. And
I am cold. The nights here are so barbarously cold... If it were not so
dark, I should say you were looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems, you are
looking. You are looking. You are looking at me! ... I feel it—now
you are smiling.”

 The night had come, and a heavy blackness filled the air.

 “How good it will be when the sun rises again to-morrow... You know
I am a great sculptor... so my friends call me. I create, yes, they say I
create, but for that daylight is necessary. I give life to cold marble. I
melt the ringing bronze in the fire, in a bright, hot fire. Why did you
touch me with your hand?”

 “Come,” said Lazarus, “you are my guest.” And they
went into the house. And the shadows of the long evening fell on the
earth...

 The slave at last grew tired waiting for his master, and when the sun
stood high he came to the house. And he saw, directly under its burning
rays, Lazarus and his master sitting close together. They looked straight
up and were silent.

 The slave wept and cried aloud: “Master, what ails you, Master!”

 The same day Aurelius left for Rome. The whole way he was thoughtful and
silent, attentively examining everything, the people, the ship, and the
sea, as though endeavouring to recall something. On the sea a great storm
overtook them, and all the while Aurelius remained on deck and gazed
eagerly at the approaching and falling waves. When he reached home his
family were shocked at the terrible change in his demeanour, but he calmed
them with the words: “I have found it!”

 In the dusty clothes which he had worn during the entire journey and had
not changed, he began his work, and the marble ringingly responded to the
resounding blows of the hammer. Long and eagerly he worked, admitting no
one. At last, one morning, he announced that the work was ready, and gave
instructions that all his friends, and the severe critics and judges of
art, be called together. Then he donned gorgeous garments, shining with
gold, glowing with the purple of the byssin.

 “Here is what I have created,” he said thoughtfully.

 His friends looked, and immediately the shadow of deep sorrow covered
their faces. It was a thing monstrous, possessing none of the forms
familiar to the eye, yet not devoid of a hint of some new unknown form. On
a thin tortuous little branch, or rather an ugly likeness of one, lay
crooked, strange, unsightly, shapeless heaps of something turned outside
in, or something turned inside out—wild fragments which seemed to be
feebly trying to get away from themselves. And, accidentally, under one of
the wild projections, they noticed a wonderfully sculptured butterfly,
with transparent wings, trembling as though with a weak longing to fly.

 “Why that wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?” timidly asked some
one.

 “I do not know,” answered the sculptor.

 The truth had to be told, and one of his friends, the one who loved
Aurelius best, said: “This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be
destroyed. Give me the hammer.” And with two blows he destroyed the
monstrous mass, leaving only the wonderfully sculptured butterfly.

 After that Aurelius created nothing. He looked with absolute indifference
at marble and at bronze and at his own divine creations, in which dwelt
immortal beauty. In the hope of breathing into him once again the old
flame of inspiration, with the idea of awakening his dead soul, his
friends led him to see the beautiful creations of others, but he remained
indifferent and no smile warmed his closed lips. And only after they spoke
to him much and long of beauty, he would reply wearily:

 “But all this is—a lie.”

 And in the daytime, when the sun was shining, he would go into his rich
and beautifully laid-out garden, and finding a place where there was no
shadow, would expose his bare head and his dull eyes to the glitter and
burning heat of the sun. Red and white butterflies fluttered around; down
into the marble cistern ran splashing water from the crooked mouth of a
blissfully drunken Satyr; but he sat motionless, like a pale shadow of
that other one who, in a far land, at the very gates of the stony desert,
also sat motionless under the fiery sun.

 V

 A

nd it came about finally that Lazarus was summoned to Rome by the great
Augustus.

 They dressed him in gorgeous garments as though it had been ordained that
he was to remain a bridegroom to an unknown bride until the very day of
his death. It was as if an old coffin, rotten and falling apart, were
regilded over and over, and gay tassels were hung on it. And solemnly they
conducted him in gala attire, as though in truth it were a bridal
procession, the runners loudly sounding the trumpet that the way be made
for the ambassadors of the Emperor. But the roads along which he passed
were deserted. His entire native land cursed the execrable name of
Lazarus, the man miraculously brought to life, and the people scattered at
the mere report of his horrible approach. The trumpeters blew lonely
blasts, and only the desert answered with a dying echo.

 Then they carried him across the sea on the saddest and most gorgeous ship
that was ever mirrored in the azure waves of the Mediterranean. There were
many people aboard, but the ship was silent and still as a coffin, and the
water seemed to moan as it parted before the short curved prow. Lazarus
sat lonely, baring his head to the sun, and listening in silence to the
splashing of the waters. Further away the seamen and the ambassadors
gathered like a crowd of distressed shadows. If a thunderstorm had
happened to burst upon them at that time or the wind had overwhelmed the
red sails, the ship would probably have perished, for none of those who
were on her had strength or desire enough to fight for life. With supreme
effort some went to the side of the ship and eagerly gazed at the blue,
transparent abyss. Perhaps they imagined they saw a naiad flashing a pink
shoulder through the waves, or an insanely joyous and drunken centaur
galloping by, splashing up the water with his hoofs. But the sea was
deserted and mute, and so was the watery abyss.

 Listlessly Lazarus set foot on the streets of the Eternal City, as though
all its riches, all the majesty of its gigantic edifices, all the lustre
and beauty and music of refined life, were simply the echo of the wind in
the desert, or the misty images of hot running sand. Chariots whirled by;
the crowd of strong, beautiful, haughty men passed on, builders of the
Eternal City and proud partakers of its life; songs rang out; fountains
laughed; pearly laughter of women filled the air, while the drunkard
philosophised and the sober ones smilingly listened; horseshoes rattled on
the pavement. And surrounded on all sides by glad sounds, a fat, heavy man
moved through the centre of the city like a cold spot of silence, sowing
in his path grief, anger and vague, carking distress. Who dared to be sad
in Rome? indignantly demanded frowning citizens; and in two days the
swift-tongued Rome knew of Lazarus, the man miraculously raised from the
grave, and timidly evaded him.

 There were many brave men ready to try their strength, and at their
senseless call Lazarus came obediently. The Emperor was so engrossed with
state affairs that he delayed receiving the visitor, and for seven days
Lazarus moved among the people.

 A jovial drunkard met him with a smile on his red lips. “Drink,
Lazarus, drink!” he cried, “Would not Augustus laugh to see
you drink!” And naked, besotted women laughed, and decked the blue
hands of Lazarus with rose-leaves. But the drunkard looked into the eyes
of Lazarus—and his joy ended forever. Thereafter he was always
drunk. He drank no more, but was drunk all the time, shadowed by fearful
dreams, instead of the joyous reveries that wine gives. Fearful dreams
became the food of his broken spirit. Fearful dreams held him day and
night in the mists of monstrous fantasy, and death itself was no more
fearful than the apparition of its fierce precursor.

 Lazarus came to a youth and his lass who loved each other and were
beautiful in their love. Proudly and strongly holding in his arms his
beloved one, the youth said, with gentle pity: “Look at us, Lazarus,
and rejoice with us. Is there anything stronger than love?”

 And Lazarus looked at them. And their whole life they continued to love
one another, but their love became mournful and gloomy, even as those
cypress trees over the tombs that feed their roots on the putrescence of
the grave, and strive in vain in the quiet evening hour to touch the sky
with their pointed tops. Hurled by fathomless life-forces into each other’s
arms, they mingled their kisses with tears, their joy with pain, and only
succeeded in realising the more vividly a sense of their slavery to the
silent Nothing. Forever united, forever parted, they flashed like sparks,
and like sparks went out in boundless darkness.

 Lazarus came to a proud sage, and the sage said to him: “I already
know all the horrors that you may tell me, Lazarus. With what else can you
terrify me?”

 Only a few moments passed before the sage realised that the knowledge of
the horrible is not the horrible, and that the sight of death is not
death. And he felt that in the eyes of the Infinite wisdom and folly are
the same, for the Infinite knows them not. And the boundaries between
knowledge and ignorance, between truth and falsehood, between top and
bottom, faded and his shapeless thought was suspended in emptiness. Then
he grasped his grey head in his hands and cried out insanely: “I
cannot think! I cannot think!”

 Thus it was that under the cool gaze of Lazarus, the man miraculously
raised from the dead, all that serves to affirm life, its sense and its
joys, perished. And people began to say it was dangerous to allow him to
see the Emperor; that it were better to kill him and bury him secretly,
and swear he had disappeared. Swords were sharpened and youths devoted to
the welfare of the people announced their readiness to become assassins,
when Augustus upset the cruel plans by demanding that Lazarus appear
before him.

 Even though Lazarus could not be kept away, it was felt that the heavy
impression conveyed by his face might be somewhat softened. With that end
in view expert painters, barbers and artists were secured who worked the
whole night on Lazarus’ head. His beard was trimmed and curled. The
disagreeable and deadly bluishness of his hands and face was covered up
with paint; his hands were whitened, his cheeks rouged. The disgusting
wrinkles of suffering that ridged his old face were patched up and
painted, and on the smooth surface, wrinkles of good-nature and laughter,
and of pleasant, good-humoured cheeriness, were laid on artistically with
fine brushes.

 Lazarus submitted indifferently to all they did with him, and soon was
transformed into a stout, nice-looking old man, for all the world a quiet
and good-humoured grandfather of numerous grandchildren. He looked as
though the smile with which he told funny stories had not left his lips,
as though a quiet tenderness still lay hidden in the corner of his eyes.
But the wedding-dress they did not dare to take off; and they could not
change his eyes—the dark, terrible eyes from out of which stared the
incomprehensible There .

 VI

 L

azarus was untouched by the magnificence of the imperial apartments. He
remained stolidly indifferent, as though he saw no contrast between his
ruined house at the edge of the desert and the solid, beautiful palace of
stone. Under his feet the hard marble of the floor took on the semblance
of the moving sands of the desert, and to his eyes the throngs of gaily
dressed, haughty men were as unreal as the emptiness of the air. They
looked not into his face as he passed by, fearing to come under the awful
bane of his eyes; but when the sound of his heavy steps announced that he
had passed, heads were lifted, and eyes examined with timid curiosity the
figure of the corpulent, tall, slightly stooping old man, as he slowly
passed into the heart of the imperial palace. If death itself had appeared
men would not have feared it so much; for hitherto death had been known to
the dead only, and life to the living only, and between these two there
had been no bridge. But this strange being knew death, and that knowledge
of his was felt to be mysterious and cursed. “He will kill our
great, divine Augustus,” men cried with horror, and they hurled
curses after him. Slowly and stolidly he passed them by, penetrating ever
deeper into the palace.

 Caesar knew already who Lazarus was, and was prepared to meet him. He was
a courageous man; he felt his power was invincible, and in the fateful
encounter with the man “wonderfully raised from the dead” he
refused to lean on other men’s weak help. Man to man, face to face,
he met Lazarus.

 “Do not fix your gaze on me, Lazarus,” he commanded. “I
have heard that your head is like the head of Medusa, and turns into stone
all upon whom you look. But I should like to have a close look at you, and
to talk to you before I turn into stone,” he added in a spirit of
playfulness that concealed his real misgivings.

 Approaching him, he examined closely Lazarus’ face and his strange
festive clothes. Though his eyes were sharp and keen, he was deceived by
the skilful counterfeit.

 “Well, your appearance is not terrible, venerable sir. But all the
worse for men, when the terrible takes on such a venerable and pleasant
appearance. Now let us talk.”

 Augustus sat down, and as much by glance as by words began the discussion.
“Why did you not salute me when you entered?”

 Lazarus answered indifferently: “I did not know it was necessary.”

 “You are a Christian?”

 “No.”

 Augustus nodded approvingly. “That is good. I do not like the
Christians. They shake the tree of life, forbidding it to bear fruit, and
they scatter to the wind its fragrant blossoms. But who are you?”

 With some effort Lazarus answered: “I was dead.”

 “I heard about that. But who are you now?”

 Lazarus’ answer came slowly. Finally he said again, listlessly and
indistinctly: “I was dead.”

 “Listen to me, stranger,” said the Emperor sharply, giving
expression to what had been in his mind before. “My empire is an
empire of the living; my people are a people of the living and not of the
dead. You are superfluous here. I do not know who you are, I do not know
what you have seen There, but if you lie, I hate your lies, and if you
tell the truth, I hate your truth. In my heart I feel the pulse of life;
in my hands I feel power, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, fly through
space. Behind my back, under the protection of my authority, under the
shadow of the laws I have created, men live and labour and rejoice. Do you
hear this divine harmony of life? Do you hear the war cry that men hurl
into the face of the future, challenging it to strife?”

 Augustus extended his arms reverently and solemnly cried out: “Blessed
art thou, Great Divine Life!”

 But Lazarus was silent, and the Emperor continued more severely: “You
are not wanted here. Pitiful remnant, half devoured of death, you fill men
with distress and aversion to life. Like a caterpillar on the fields, you
are gnawing away at the full seed of joy, exuding the slime of despair and
sorrow. Your truth is like a rusted sword in the hands of a night
assassin, and I shall condemn you to death as an assassin. But first I
want to look into your eyes. Mayhap only cowards fear them, and brave men
are spurred on to struggle and victory. Then will you merit not death but
a reward. Look at me, Lazarus.”

 At first it seemed to divine Augustus as if a friend were looking at him,
so soft, so alluring, so gently fascinating was the gaze of Lazarus. It
promised not horror but quiet rest, and the Infinite dwelt there as a fond
mistress, a compassionate sister, a mother. And ever stronger grew its
gentle embrace, until he felt, as it were, the breath of a mouth hungry
for kisses... Then it seemed as if iron bones protruded in a ravenous
grip, and closed upon him in an iron band; and cold nails touched his
heart, and slowly, slowly sank into it.

 “It pains me,” said divine Augustus, growing pale; “but
look, Lazarus, look!”

 Ponderous gates, shutting off eternity, appeared to be slowly swinging
open, and through the growing aperture poured in, coldly and calmly, the
awful horror of the Infinite. Boundless Emptiness and Boundless Gloom
entered like two shadows, extinguishing the sun, removing the ground from
under the feet, and the cover from over the head. And the pain in his icy
heart ceased.

 “Look at me, look at me, Lazarus!” commanded Augustus,
staggering...

 Time ceased and the beginning of things came perilously near to the end.
The throne of Augustus, so recently erected, fell to pieces, and emptiness
took the place of the throne and of Augustus. Rome fell silently into
ruins. A new city rose in its place, and it too was erased by emptiness.
Like phantom giants, cities, kingdoms, and countries swiftly fell and
disappeared into emptiness—swallowed up in the black maw of the
Infinite...

 “Cease,” commanded the Emperor. Already the accent of
indifference was in his voice. His arms hung powerless, and his eagle eyes
flashed and were dimmed again, struggling against overwhelming darkness.

 “You have killed me, Lazarus,” he said drowsily.

 These words of despair saved him. He thought of the people, whose shield
he was destined to be, and a sharp, redeeming pang pierced his dull heart.
He thought of them doomed to perish, and he was filled with anguish. First
they seemed bright shadows in the gloom of the Infinite.—How
terrible! Then they appeared as fragile vessels with life-agitated blood,
and hearts that knew both sorrow and great joy.—And he thought of
them with tenderness.

 And so thinking and feeling, inclining the scales now to the side of life,
now to the side of death, he slowly returned to life, to find in its
suffering and joy a refuge from the gloom, emptiness and fear of the
Infinite.

 “No, you did not kill me, Lazarus,” said he firmly. “But
I will kill you. Go!”

 Evening came and divine Augustus partook of food and drink with great joy.
But there were moments when his raised arm would remain suspended in the
air, and the light of his shining, eager eyes was dimmed. It seemed as if
an icy wave of horror washed against his feet. He was vanquished but not
killed, and coldly awaited his doom, like a black shadow. His nights were
haunted by horror, but the bright days still brought him the joys, as well
as the sorrows, of life.

 Next day, by order of the Emperor, they burned out Lazarus’ eyes
with hot irons and sent him home. Even Augustus dared not kill him.

  





   





 Lazarus returned to the desert and the desert received him with the breath
of the hissing wind and the ardour of the glowing sun. Again he sat on the
stone with matted beard uplifted; and two black holes, where the eyes had
once been, looked dull and horrible at the sky. In the distance the Holy
City surged and roared restlessly, but near him all was deserted and
still. No one approached the place where Lazarus, miraculously raised from
the dead, passed his last days, for his neighbours had long since
abandoned their homes. His cursed knowledge, driven by the hot irons from
his eyes deep into the brain, lay there in ambush; as if from ambush it
might spring out upon men with a thousand unseen eyes. No one dared to
look at Lazarus.

 And in the evening, when the sun, swollen crimson and growing larger, bent
its way toward the west, blind Lazarus slowly groped after it. He stumbled
against stones and fell; corpulent and feeble, he rose heavily and walked
on; and against the red curtain of sunset his dark form and outstretched
arms gave him the semblance of a cross.

 It happened once that he went and never returned. Thus ended the second
life of Lazarus, who for three days had been in the mysterious thraldom of
death and then was miraculously raised from the dead.