LONG ODDS, By H. Rider Haggard

 The story which is narrated in the following pages came to me from the
      lips of my old friend Allan Quatermain, or Hunter Quatermain, as we used
      to call him in South Africa. He told it to me one evening when I was
      stopping with him at the place he bought in Yorkshire. Shortly after that,
      the death of his only son so unsettled him that he immediately left
      England, accompanied by two companions, his old fellow-voyagers, Sir Henry
      Curtis and Captain Good, and has now utterly vanished into the dark heart
      of Africa. He is persuaded that a white people, of which he has heard
      rumours all his life, exists somewhere on the highlands in the vast, still
      unexplored interior, and his great ambition is to find them before he
      dies. This is the wild quest upon which he and his companions have
      departed, and from which I shrewdly suspect they never will return. One
      letter only have I received from the old gentleman, dated from a mission
      station high up the Tana, a river on the east coast, about three hundred
      miles north of Zanzibar; in it he says that they have gone through many
      hardships and adventures, but are alive and well, and have found traces
      which go far toward making him hope that the results of their wild quest
      may be a “magnificent and unexampled discovery.” I greatly fear, however,
      that all he has discovered is death; for this letter came a long while
      ago, and nobody has heard a single word of the party since. They have
      totally vanished.

 It was on the last evening of my stay at his house that he told the
      ensuing story to me and Captain Good, who was dining with him. He had
      eaten his dinner and drunk two or three glasses of old port, just to help
      Good and myself to the end of the second bottle. It was an unusual thing
      for him to do, for he was a most abstemious man, having conceived, as he
      used to say, a great horror of drink from observing its effects upon the
      class of colonists—hunters, transport-riders and others—amongst
      whom he had passed so many years of his life. Consequently the good wine
      took more effect on him than it would have done on most men, sending a
      little flush into his wrinkled cheeks, and making him talk more freely
      than usual.

 Dear old man! I can see him now, as he went limping up and down the
      vestibule, with his gray hair sticking up in scrubbing-brush fashion, his
      shrivelled yellow face, and his large dark eyes, that were as keen as any
      hawk’s, and yet soft as a buck’s. The whole room was hung with trophies of
      his numerous hunting expeditions, and he had some story about every one of
      them, if only he could be got to tell it. Generally he would not, for he
      was not very fond of narrating his own adventures, but to-night the port
      wine made him more communicative.

 “Ah, you brute!” he said, stopping beneath an unusually large skull of a
      lion, which was fixed just over the mantelpiece, beneath a long row of
      guns, its jaws distended to their utmost width. “Ah, you brute! you have
      given me a lot of trouble for the last dozen years, and will, I suppose to
      my dying day.”

 “Tell us the yarn, Quatermain,” said Good. “You have often promised to
      tell me, and you never have.”

 “You had better not ask me to,” he answered, “for it is a longish one.”

 “All right,” I said, “the evening is young, and there is some more port.”

 Thus adjured, he filled his pipe from a jar of coarse-cut Boer tobacco
      that was always standing on the mantelpiece, and still walking up and down
      the room, began:

 “It was, I think, in the March of ‘69 that I was up in Sikukuni’s country.
      It was just after old Sequati’s time, and Sikukuni had got into power—I
      forget how. Anyway, I was there. I had heard that the Bapedi people had
      brought down an enormous quantity of ivory from the interior, and so I
      started with a waggon-load of goods, and came straight away from
      Middelburg to try and trade some of it. It was a risky thing to go into
      the country so early, on account of the fever; but I knew that there were
      one or two others after that lot of ivory, so I determined to have a try
      for it, and take my chance of fever. I had become so tough from continual
      knocking about that I did not set it down at much. Well, I got on all
      right for a while. It is a wonderfully beautiful piece of bush veldt, with
      great ranges of mountains running through it, and round granite koppies
      starting up here and there, looking out like sentinels over the rolling
      waste of bush. But it is very hot,—hot as a stew-pan,—and when
      I was there that March, which, of course, is autumn in this part of
      Africa, the whole place reeked of fever. Every morning, as I trekked along
      down by the Oliphant River, I used to creep from the waggon at dawn and
      look out. But there was no river to be seen—only a long line of
      billows of what looked like the finest cotton-wool tossed up lightly with
      a pitchfork. It was the fever mist. Out from among the scrub, too, came
      little spirals of vapour, as though there were hundreds of tiny fires
      alight in it—reek rising from thousands of tons of rotting
      vegetation. It was a beautiful place, but the beauty was the beauty of
      death; and all those lines and blots of vapour wrote one great word across
      the surface of the country, and that word was ‘fever.’

 “It was a dreadful year of illness that. I came, I remember, to one little
      kraal of knobnoses, and went up to it to see if I could get some maas (curdled butter-milk) and a few mealies. As I got near I was struck with
      the silence of the place. No children began to chatter, and no dogs
      barked. Nor could I see any native sheep or cattle. The place, though it
      had evidently been recently inhabited, was as still as the bush round it,
      and some guinea-fowl got up out of the prickly pear bushes right at the
      kraal gate. I remember that I hesitated a little before going in, there
      was such an air of desolation about the spot. Nature never looks desolate
      when man has not yet laid his hand upon her breast; she is only lovely.
      But when man has been, and has passed away, then she looks desolate.

 “Well, I passed into the kraal, and went up to the principal hut. In front
      of the hut was something with an old sheepskin kaross (rug) thrown
      over it. I stooped down and drew off the rug, and then shrank back amazed,
      for under it was the body of a young woman recently dead. For a moment I
      thought of turning back, but my curiosity overcame me; so going past the
      dead woman, I went down on my hands and knees and crept into the hut. It
      was so dark that I could not see anything, though I could smell a great
      deal, so I lit a match. It was a ‘tandstickor’ match, and burnt slowly and
      dimly, and as the light gradually increased I made out what I took to be a
      family of people, men, women, and children, fast asleep. Presently it
      burnt up brightly, and I saw that they too, five of them altogether, were
      quite dead. One was a baby. I dropped the match in a hurry, and was making
      my way out of the hut as hard as I could go, when I caught sight of two
      bright eyes staring out of a corner. Thinking it was a wild cat, or some
      such animal, I redoubled my haste, when suddenly a voice near the eyes
      began first to mutter, and then to send up a succession of awful yells.
      Hastily I lit another match, and perceived that the eyes belonged to an
      old woman, wrapped up in a greasy leather garment. Taking her by the arm,
      I dragged her out, for she could not, or would not, come by herself, and
      the stench was overpowering me. Such a sight as she was—a bag of
      bones, covered over with black, shrivelled parchment. The only white thing
      about her was her wool, and she seemed to be pretty well dead except for
      her eyes and her voice. She thought that I was a devil come to take her,
      and that is why she yelled so. Well, I got her down to the waggon, and
      gave her a ‘tot’ of Cape smoke, and then, as soon as it was ready, poured
      about a pint of beef-tea down her throat, made from the flesh of a blue
      vilder-beeste I had killed the day before, and after that she brightened
      up wonderfully. She could talk Zulu,—indeed, it turned out that she
      had run away from Zululand in T’Chaka’s time,—and she told me that
      all the people whom I had seen had died of fever. When they had died the
      other inhabitants of the kraal had taken the cattle and gone away, leaving
      the poor old woman, who was helpless from age and infirmity, to perish of
      starvation or disease, as the case might be. She had been sitting there
      for three days among the bodies when I found her. I took her on to the
      next kraal, and gave the headman a blanket to look after her, promising
      him another if I found her well when I came back. I remember that he was
      much astonished at my parting with two blankets for the sake of such a
      worthless old creature. ‘Why did I not leave her in the bush?’ he asked.
      Those people carry the doctrine of the survival of the fittest to its
      extreme, you see.

 “It was the night after I had got rid of the old woman that I made my
      first acquaintance with my friend yonder,” and he nodded toward the skull
      that seemed to be grinning down at us in the shadow of the wide
      mantel-shelf. “I had trekked from dawn till eleven o’clock,—a long
      trek,—but I wanted to get on; and then had turned the oxen out to
      graze, sending the voorlooper to look after them, meaning to inspan again
      about six o’clock, and trek with the moon till ten. Then I got into the
      waggon and had a good sleep till half-past two or so in the afternoon,
      when I rose and cooked some meat, and had my dinner, washing it down with
      a pannikin of black coffee; for it was difficult to get preserved milk in
      those days. Just as I had finished, and the driver, a man called Tom, was
      washing up the things, in comes the young scoundrel of a voorlooper
      driving one ox before him.

 “‘Where are the other oxen?’ I asked.

 “‘Koos!’ he said, ‘Koos! (chief) the other oxen have gone away. I turned
      my back for a minute, and when I looked round again they were all gone
      except Kaptein, here, who was rubbing his back against a tree.’

 “‘You mean that you have been asleep, and let them stray, you villain. I
      will rub your back against a stick,’ I answered, feeling very angry, for
      it was not a pleasant prospect to be stuck up in that fever-trap for a
      week or so while we were hunting for the oxen. ‘Off you go, and you too,
      Tom, and mind you don’t come back till you have found them. They have
      trekked back along the Middelburg Road, and are a dozen miles off by now,
      I’ll be bound. Now, no words; go, both of you.’

 “Tom, the driver, swore and caught the lad a hearty kick, which he richly
      deserved, and then, having tied old Kaptein up to the disselboom with a
      riem, they took their assegais and sticks, and started. I would have gone
      too, only I knew that somebody must look after the waggon, and I did not
      like to leave either of the boys with it at night. I was in a very bad
      temper, indeed, although I was pretty well used to these sort of
      occurrences, and soothed myself by taking a rifle and going to kill
      something. For a couple of hours I poked about without seeing anything
      that I could get a shot at, but at last, just as I was again within
      seventy yards of the waggon, I put up an old Impala ram from behind a
      mimosa-thorn. He ran straight for the waggon, and it was not till he was
      passing within a few feet of it that I could get a decent shot at him.
      Then I pulled, and caught him half-way down the spine; over he went, dead
      as a door-nail, and a pretty shot it was, though I ought not to say it.
      This little incident put me into rather a better temper, especially as the
      buck had rolled right against the after part of the waggon, so I had only
      to gut him, fix a riem round his legs, and haul him up. By the time I had
      done this the sun was down, and the full moon was up, and a beautiful moon
      it was. And then there came that wonderful hush which sometimes falls over
      the African bush in the early hours of the night. No beast was moving, and
      no bird called. Not a breath of air stirred the quiet trees, and the
      shadows did not even quiver, they only grew. It was very oppressive and
      very lonely, for there was not a sign of the cattle or the boys. I was
      quite thankful for the society of old Kaptein, who was lying down
      contentedly against the disselboom, chewing the cud with a good
      conscience.

 “Presently, however, Kaptein began to get restless. First he snorted, then
      he got up and snorted again. I could not make it out, so like a fool I got
      down off the waggon-box to have a look round, thinking it might be the
      lost oxen coming.

 “Next instant I regretted it, for all of a sudden I heard a roar and saw
      something yellow flash past me and light on poor Kaptein. Then came a
      bellow of agony from the ox, and a crunch as the lion put his teeth
      through the poor brute’s neck, and I began to understand what had
      happened. My rifle was in the waggon, and my first thought was to get hold
      of it, and I turned and made a bolt for it. I got my foot on the wheel and
      flung my body forward on to the waggon, and there I stopped as if I were
      frozen, and no wonder, for as I was about to spring up I heard the lion
      behind me, and next second I felt the brute, ay, as plainly as I can feel
      this table. I felt him, I say, sniffing at my left leg that was hanging
      down.

 “My word! I did feel queer; I don’t think that I ever felt so queer
      before. I dared not move for the life of me, and the odd thing was that I
      seemed to lose power over my leg, which developed an insane sort of
      inclination to kick out of its own mere motion—just as hysterical
      people want to laugh when they ought to be particularly solemn. Well, the
      lion sniffed and sniffed, beginning at my ankle and slowly nosing away up
      to my thigh. I thought that he was going to get hold then, but he did not.
      He only growled softly, and went back to the ox. Shifting my head a little
      I got a full view of him. He was about the biggest lion I ever saw,—and
      I have seen a great many, and he had a most tremendous black mane. What
      his teeth were like you can see—look there, pretty big ones, ain’t
      they? Altogether he was a magnificent animal, and as I lay sprawling on
      the fore tongue of the waggon, it occurred to me that he would look
      uncommonly well in a cage. He stood there by the carcass of poor Kaptein,
      and deliberately disembowelled him as neatly as a butcher could have done.
      All this while I dared not move, for he kept lifting his head and keeping
      an eye on me as he licked his bloody chops. When he had cleaned Kaptein
      out he opened his mouth and roared, and I am not exaggerating when I say
      that the sound shook the waggon. Instantly there came back an answering
      roar.

 “‘Heavens!’ I thought, ‘there is his mate.’

 “Hardly was the thought out of my head when I caught sight in the
      moonlight of the lioness bounding along through the long grass, and after
      her a couple of cubs about the size of mastiffs. She stopped within a few
      feet of my head, and stood, and waved her tail, and fixed me with her
      glowing yellow eyes; but just as I thought that it was all over she turned
      and began to feed on Kaptein, and so did the cubs. There were the four of
      them within eight feet of me, growling and quarrelling, rending and
      tearing, and crunching poor Kaptein’s bones; and there I lay shaking with
      terror, and the cold perspiration pouring out of me, feeling like another
      Daniel come to judgment in a new sense of the phrase. Presently the cubs
      had eaten their fill, and began to get restless. One went round to the
      back of the waggon and pulled at the Impala buck that hung there, and the
      other came round my way and commenced the sniffing game at my leg. Indeed,
      he did more than that, for, my trouser being hitched up a little, he began
      to lick the bare skin with his rough tongue. The more he licked the more
      he liked it, to judge from his increased vigour and the loud purring noise
      he made. Then I knew that the end had come, for in another second his
      file-like tongue would have rasped through the skin of my leg—which
      was luckily pretty tough—and have drawn the blood, and then there
      would be no chance for me. So I just lay there and thought of my sins, and
      prayed to the Almighty, and thought that, after all, life was a very
      enjoyable thing.

 “And then all of a sudden I heard a crashing of bushes and the shouting
      and whistling of men, and there were the two boys coming back with the
      cattle, which they had found trekking along all together. The lions lifted
      their heads and listened, then without a sound bounded off—and I
      fainted.

 “The lions came back no more that night, and by the next morning my nerves
      had got pretty straight again; but I was full of wrath when I thought of
      all that I had gone through at the hands, or rather noses, of those four
      lions, and of the fate of my after-ox Kaptein. He was a splendid ox, and I
      was very fond of him. So wroth was I that, like a fool, I determined to
      attack the whole family of them. It was worthy of a greenhorn out on his
      first hunting-trip; but I did it nevertheless. Accordingly after
      breakfast, having rubbed some oil upon my leg, which was very sore from
      the cub’s tongue, I took the driver, Tom, who did not half like the job,
      and having armed myself with an ordinary double No. 12 smooth-bore, the
      first breech-loader I ever had, I started. I took the smooth-bore because
      it shot a bullet very well; and my experience has been that a round ball
      from a smooth-bore is quite as effective against a lion as an express
      bullet. The lion is soft, and not a difficult animal to finish if you hit
      him anywhere in the body. A buck takes far more killing.

 “Well, I started, and the first thing I set to work to do was to try to
      make out whereabouts the brutes lay up for the day. About three hundred
      yards from the waggon was the crest of a rise covered with single
      mimosa-trees, dotted about in a park-like fashion, and beyond this was a
      stretch of open plain running down to a dry pan, or water-hole, which
      covered about an acre of ground, and was densely clothed with reeds, now
      in the sear and yellow leaf. From the farther edge of this pan the ground
      sloped up again to a great cleft, or nullah, which had been cut out by the
      action of the water, and was pretty thickly sprinkled with bush, among
      which grew some large trees, I forget of what sort.

 “It at once struck me that the dry pan would be a likely place to find my
      friends in, as there is nothing a lion is fonder of than lying up in
      reeds, through which he can see things without being seen himself.
      Accordingly thither I went and prospected. Before I had got half-way round
      the pan I found the remains of a blue vilder-beeste that had evidently
      been killed within the last three or four days and partially devoured by
      lions; and from other indications about I was soon assured that if the
      family were not in the pan that day they spent a good deal of their spare
      time there. But if there, the question was how to get them out; for it was
      clearly impossible to think of going in after them unless one was quite
      determined to commit suicide. Now there was a strong wind blowing from the
      direction of the waggon, across the reedy pan toward the bush-clad kloof
      or donga, and this first gave me the idea of firing the reeds, which, as I
      think I told you, were pretty dry. Accordingly Tom took some matches and
      began starting little fires to the left, and I did the same to the right.
      But the reeds were still green at the bottom, and we should never have got
      them well alight had it not been for the wind, which grew stronger and
      stronger as the sun climbed higher, and forced the fire into them. At
      last, after half an hour’s trouble, the flames got a hold, and began to
      spread out like a fan, whereupon I went round to the farther side of the
      pan to wait for the lions, standing well out in the open, as we stood at
      the copse to-day where you shot the woodcock. It was a rather risky thing
      to do, but I used to be so sure of my shooting in those days that I did
      not so much mind the risk. Scarcely had I got round when I heard the reeds
      parting before the onward rush of some animal. ‘Now for it,’ said I. On it
      came. I could see that it was yellow, and prepared for action, when
      instead of a lion out bounded a beautiful rietbok which had been lying in
      the shelter of the pan. It must, by the way, have been a rietbok of a
      peculiarly confiding nature to lay itself down with the lion, like the
      lamb of prophecy, but I suppose the reeds were thick, and that it kept a
      long way off.

 “Well, I let the rietbok go, and it went like the wind, and kept my eyes
      fixed upon the reeds. The fire was burning like a furnace now; the flames
      crackling and roaring as they bit into the reeds, sending spouts of fire
      twenty feet and more into the air, and making the hot air dance above it
      in a way that was perfectly dazzling. But the reeds were still half green,
      and created an enormous quantity of smoke, which came rolling toward me
      like a curtain, lying very low on account of the wind. Presently, above
      the crackling of the fire, I heard a startled roar, then another and
      another. So the lions were at home.

 “I was beginning to get excited now, for, as you fellows know, there is
      nothing in experience to warm up your nerves like a lion at close
      quarters, unless it is a wounded buffalo; and I got still more so when I
      made out through the smoke that the lions were all moving about on the
      extreme edge of the reeds. Occasionally they would pop their heads out
      like rabbits from a burrow, and then, catching sight of me standing about
      fifty yards out, draw them back again. I knew that it must be getting
      pretty warm behind them, and that they could not keep the game up for
      long; and I was not mistaken, for suddenly all four of them broke cover
      together, the old black-maned lion leading by a few yards. I never saw a
      more splendid sight in all my hunting experience than those four lions
      bounding across the veldt, overshadowed by the dense pall of smoke and
      backed by the fiery furnace of the burning reeds.

 “I reckoned that they would pass, on their road to the bushy kloof, within
      about five and twenty yards of me; so, taking a long breath, I got my gun
      well on to the lion’s shoulder—the black-maned one—so as to
      allow for an inch or two of motion, and catch him through the heart. I was
      on, dead on, and my finger was just beginning to tighten on the trigger,
      when suddenly I went blind—a bit of reed-ash had drifted into my
      right eye. I danced and rubbed, and succeeded in clearing it more or less
      just in time to see the tail of the last lion vanishing round the bushes
      up the kloof.

 “If ever a man was mad I was that man. It was too bad; and such a shot in
      the open, too! However, I was not going to be beaten, so I just turned and
      marched for the kloof. Tom, the driver, begged and implored me not to go;
      but though as a general rule I never pretend to be very brave (which I am
      not), I was determined that I would either kill those lions or they should
      kill me. So I told Tom that he need not come unless he liked, but I was
      going; and being a plucky fellow, a Swazi by birth, he shrugged his
      shoulders, muttered that I was mad or bewitched, and followed doggedly in
      my tracks.

 “We soon got to the kloof, which was about three hundred yards in length
      and but sparsely wooded, and then the real fun began. There might be a
      lion behind every bush—there certainly were four lions somewhere;
      the delicate question was, where. I peeped and poked and looked in every
      possible direction, with my heart in my mouth, and was at last rewarded by
      catching a glimpse of something yellow moving behind a bush. At the same
      moment, from another bush opposite me out burst one of the cubs and
      galloped back toward the burned-out pan. I whipped round and let drive a
      snap-shot that tipped him head over heels, breaking his back within two
      inches of the root of the tail, and there he lay helpless but glaring. Tom
      afterward killed him with his assegai. I opened the breech of the gun and
      hurriedly pulled out the old case, which, to judge from what ensued, must,
      I suppose, have burst and left a portion of its fabric sticking to the
      barrel. At any rate, when I tried to get in the new case it would only
      enter half-way; and—would you believe it?—this was the moment
      that the lioness, attracted no doubt by the outcry of her cub, chose to
      put in an appearance. There she stood, twenty paces or so from me, lashing
      her tail and looking just as wicked as it is possible to conceive. Slowly
      I stepped backward, trying to push in the new case, and as I did so she
      moved on in little runs, dropping down after each run. The danger was
      imminent, and the case would not go in. At the moment I oddly enough
      thought of the cartridge-maker, whose name I will not mention, and
      earnestly hoped that if the lion got me some condign punishment would
      overtake him. It would not go in, so I tried to pull it out. It would not
      come out either, and my gun was useless if I could not shut it to use the
      other barrel. I might as well have had no gun. Meanwhile I was walking
      backward, keeping my eye on the lioness, who was creeping forward on her
      belly without a sound, but lashing her tail and keeping her eye on me; and
      in it I saw that she was coming in a few seconds more. I dashed my wrist
      and the palm of my hand against the brass rim of the cartridge till the
      blood poured from them—look, there are the scars of it to this day!”

 Here Quatermain held up his right hand to the light and showed us four or
      five white cicatrices just where the wrist is set into the hand.

 “But it was not of the slightest use,” he went on; “the cartridge would
      not move. I only hope that no other man will ever be put in such an awful
      position. The lioness gathered herself together, and I gave myself up for
      lost, when suddenly Tom shouted out from somewhere in my rear:

 “‘You are walking on to the wounded cub; turn to the right.’

 “I had the sense, dazed as I was, to take the hint, and slewing round at
      right angles, but still keeping my eyes on the lioness, I continued my
      backward walk.

 “To my intense relief, with a low growl she straightened herself, turned,
      and bounded off farther up the kloof.

 “‘Come on, inkoos,’ said Tom, ‘let’s get back to the waggon.’

 “‘All right, Tom,’ I answered. ‘I will when I have killed those three
      other lions,’ for by this time I was bent on shooting them as I never
      remember being bent on anything before or since. ‘You can go if you like,
      or you can get up a tree.’

 “He considered the position a little, and then he very wisely got up a
      tree. I wish that I had done the same.

 “Meanwhile I had found my knife, which had an extractor in it, and
      succeeded after some difficulty in hauling out the case which had so
      nearly been the cause of my death, and removing the obstruction in the
      barrel. It was very little thicker than a postage-stamp; certainly not
      thicker than a piece of writing-paper. This done, I loaded the gun, bound
      a handkerchief round my wrist and hand to staunch the flowing of the
      blood, and started on again.

 “I had noticed that the lioness went into a thick green bush, or rather
      cluster of bushes, growing near the water; for there was a little stream
      running down the kloof, about fifty yards higher up and for this I made.
      When I got there, however, I could see nothing, so I took up a big stone
      and threw it into the bushes. I believe that it hit the other cub, for out
      it came with a rush, giving me a broadside shot, of which I promptly
      availed myself, knocking it over dead. Out, too, came the lioness like a
      flash of light, but quick as she went I managed to put the other bullet
      into her ribs, so that she rolled right over three times like a shot
      rabbit. I instantly got two more cartridges into the gun, and as I did so
      the lioness rose again and came crawling toward me on her fore paws,
      roaring and groaning, and with such an expression of diabolical fury on
      her countenance as I have not often seen. I shot her again through the
      chest, and she fell over on to her side quite dead.

 “That was the first and last time that I ever killed a brace of lions
      right and left, and, what is more, I never heard of anybody else doing it.
      Naturally I was considerably pleased with myself, and having again loaded
      up, I went on to look for the black-maned beauty who had killed Kaptein.
      Slowly, and with the greatest care, I proceeded up the kloof, searching
      every bush and tuft of grass as I went. It was wonderfully exciting work,
      for I never was sure from one moment to another but that he would be on
      me. I took comfort, however, from the reflection that a lion rarely
      attacks a man,—rarely, I say; sometimes he does, as you will see,—unless
      he is cornered or wounded. I must have been nearly an hour hunting after
      that lion. Once I thought I saw something move in a clump of tambouki
      grass, but I could not be sure, and when I trod out the grass I could not
      find him.

 “At last I worked up to the head of the kloof, which made a cul-de-sac. It
      was formed of a wall of rock about fifty feet high. Down this rock
      trickled a little waterfall, and in front of it, some seventy feet from
      its face, was a great piled-up mass of boulders, in the crevices and on
      the top of which grew ferns, grasses, and stunted bushes. This mass was
      about twenty-five feet high. The sides of the kloof here were also very
      steep. Well, I came to the top of the nullah and looked all round. No
      signs of the lion. Evidently I had either overlooked him farther down or
      he had escaped right away. It was very vexatious; but still three lions
      were not a bad bag for one gun before dinner, and I was fain to be
      content. Accordingly I departed back again, making my way round the
      isolated pillar of boulders, beginning to feel, as I did so, that I was
      pretty well done up with excitement and fatigue, and should be more so
      before I had skinned those three lions. When I had got, as nearly as I
      could judge, about eighteen yards past the pillar or mass of boulders, I
      turned to have another look round. I have a pretty sharp eye, but I could
      see nothing at all.

 “Then, on a sudden, I saw something sufficiently alarming. On the top of
      the mass of boulders, opposite to me, standing out clear against the rock
      beyond, was the huge black-maned lion. He had been crouching there, and
      now arose as though by magic. There he stood lashing his tail, just like a
      living reproduction of the animal on the gateway of Northumberland House
      that I have seen a picture of. But he did not stand long. Before I could
      fire—before I could do more than get the gun to my shoulder—he
      sprang straight up and out from the rock, and driven by the impetus of
      that one mighty bound came hurtling through the air toward me.

 “Heavens! how grand he looked, and how awful! High into the air he flew,
      describing a great arch. Just as he touched the highest point of his
      spring I fired. I did not dare to wait, for I saw that he would clear the
      whole space and land right upon me. Without a sight, almost without aim, I
      fired, as one would fire a snap-shot at a snipe. The bullet told, for I
      distinctly heard its thud above the rushing sound caused by the passage of
      the lion through the air. Next second I was swept to the ground (luckily I
      fell into a low, creeper-clad bush, which broke the shock), and the lion
      was on the top of me, and the next those great white teeth of his had met
      in my thigh—I heard them grate against the bone. I yelled out in
      agony, for I did not feel in the least benumbed and happy, like Dr.
      Livingstone,—whom, by the way, I knew very well,—and gave
      myself up for dead. But suddenly, at that moment, the lion’s grip on my
      thigh loosened, and he stood over me, swaying to and fro, his huge mouth,
      from which the blood was gushing, wide opened. Then he roared, and the
      sound shook the rocks.

 “To and fro he swung, and then the great head dropped on me, knocking all
      the breath from my body, and he was dead. My bullet had entered in the
      centre of his chest and passed out on the right side of the spine about
      half way down the back.

 “The pain of my wound kept me from fainting, and as soon as I got my
      breath I managed to drag myself from under him. Thank heavens, his great
      teeth had not crushed my thigh-bone; but I was losing a great deal of
      blood, and had it not been for the timely arrival of Tom, with whose aid I
      got the handkerchief from my wrist and tied it round my leg, twisting it
      tight with a stick, I think that I should have bled to death.

 “Well, it was a just reward for my folly in trying to tackle a family of
      lions single-handed. The odds were too long. I have been lame ever since,
      and shall be to my dying day; in the month of March the wound always
      troubles me a great deal, and every three years it breaks out raw. I need
      scarcely add that I never traded the lot of ivory at Sikukuni’s. Another
      man got it—a German—and made five hundred pounds out of it
      after paying expenses. I spent the next month on the broad of my back, and
      was a cripple for six months after that. And now I’ve told you the yarn,
      so I will have a drop of Hollands and go to bed.”

  

  









 KING BEMBA’S POINT, A WEST AFRICAN STORY, By J. Landers

 We were for the most part a queer lot out on that desolate southwest
      African coast, in charge of the various trading stations that were
      scattered along the coast, from the Gaboon River, past the mouth of the
      mighty Congo, to the Portuguese city of St. Paul de Loanda. A mixture of
      all sorts, especially bad sorts: broken-down clerks, men who could not
      succeed anywhere else, sailors, youths, and some whose characters would
      not have borne any investigation; and we very nearly all drank hard, and
      those who didn’t drink hard took more than was good for them.

 I don’t know exactly what induced me to go out there. I was young for one
      thing, the country was unknown, the berth was vacant, and the conditions
      of it easy.

 Imagine a high rocky point or headland, stretching out sideways into the
      sea, and at its base a small river winding into a country that was
      seemingly a blank in regard to inhabitants or cultivation; a land
      continuing for miles and miles, as far as the eye could see, one expanse
      of long yellow grass, dotted here and there with groups of bastard palms.
      In front of the headland rolled the lonely South Atlantic; and, as if such
      conditions were not dispiriting enough to existence upon the Point, there
      was yet another feature which at times gave the place a still more ghastly
      look. A long way off the shore, the heaving surface of the ocean began, in
      anything like bad weather, to break upon the shoals of the coast. Viewed
      from the top of the rock, the sea at such times looked, for at least two
      miles out, as if it were scored over with lines of white foam; but lower
      down, near the beach, each roller could be distinctly seen, and each
      roller had a curve of many feet, and was an enormous mass of water that
      hurled itself shoreward until it curled and broke.

 When I first arrived on the Point there was, I may say, only one house
      upon it, and that belonged to Messrs. Flint Brothers, of Liverpool. It was
      occupied by one solitary man named Jackson; he had had an assistant, but
      the assistant had died of fever, and I was sent to replace him. Jackson
      was a man of fifty at least, who had been a sailor before he had become an
      African trader. His face bore testimony to the winds and weather it had
      encountered, and wore habitually a grave, if not melancholy, expression.
      He was rough but kind to me, and though strict was just, which was no
      common feature in an old African hand to one who had just arrived on the
      coast.

 He kept the factory—we called all houses on the coast factories—as
      neat and clean as if it had been a ship. He had the floor of the portion
      we dwelt in holystoned every week; and numberless little racks and shelves
      were fitted up all over the house. The outside walls glittered with paint,
      and the yard was swept clean every morning; and every Sunday, at eight
      o’clock and sunset, the ensign was hoisted and lowered, and an old cannon
      fired at the word of command. Order and rule were with Jackson observed
      from habit, and were strictly enforced by him on all the natives employed
      in the factory.

 Although I have said the country looked as if uninhabited, there were
      numerous villages hidden away in the long grass and brushwood, invisible
      at a distance, being huts of thatch or mud, and not so high as the grass
      among which they were placed. From these villages came most of our
      servants, and also the middlemen, who acted as brokers between us, the
      white men, and the negroes who brought ivory and gum and india-rubber from
      the far interior for sale. Our trade was principally in ivory, and when an
      unusually large number of elephants’ tusks arrived upon the Point for
      sale, it would be crowded with Bushmen, strange and uncouth, and hideously
      ugly, and armed, and then we would be very busy; for sometimes as many as
      two hundred tusks would be brought to us at the same time, and each of
      these had to be bargained for and paid for by exchange of cotton cloths,
      guns, knives, powder, and a host of small wares.

 For some time after my arrival our factory, along with the others on the
      coast belonging to Messrs. Flint Brothers, was very well supplied by them
      with goods for the trade; but by degrees their shipments became less
      frequent, and small when they did come. In spite of repeated letters we
      could gain no reason from the firm for this fact, nor could the other
      factories, and gradually we found ourselves with an empty storehouse, and
      nearly all our goods gone. Then followed a weary interval, during which we
      had nothing whatever to do, and day succeeded day through the long hot
      season. It was now that I began to feel that Jackson had become of late
      more silent and reserved with me than ever he had been. I noticed, too,
      that he had contracted a habit of wandering out to the extreme end of the
      Point, where he would sit for hours gazing upon the ocean before him. In
      addition to this, he grew morose and uncertain in his temper toward the
      natives, and sometimes he would fall asleep in the evenings on a sofa, and
      talk to himself at such a rate while asleep that I would grow frightened
      and wake him, when he would stare about him for a little until he gathered
      consciousness, and then he would stagger off to bed to fall asleep again
      almost immediately. Also, his hands trembled much, and he began to lose
      flesh. All this troubled me, for his own sake as well as my own, and I
      resolved to ask him to see the doctor of the next mail-steamer that came.
      With this idea I went one day to the end of the Point, and found him in
      his usual attitude, seated on the long grass, looking seaward. He did not
      hear me approach, and when I spoke he started to his feet, and demanded
      fiercely why I disturbed him. I replied, as mildly as I could, for I was
      rather afraid of the glittering look that was in his eyes, that I wished
      to ask him if he did not feel ill.

 He regarded me with a steady but softened glance for a little, and then
      said:

 “My lad, I thank you for your trouble; but I want no doctor. Do you think
      I’m looking ill?”

 “Indeed you are,” I answered, “ill and thin; and, do you know, I hear you
      talk to yourself in your sleep nearly every night.”

 “What do I say?” he asked eagerly.

 “That I cannot tell,” I replied. “It is all rambling talk; the same things
      over and over again, and nearly all about one person—Lucy.”

 “Boy!” he cried out, as if in pain, or as if something had touched him to
      the quick, “sit you down, and I’ll tell you why I think of her—she
      was my wife.”

 He moved nearer to the edge of the cliff, and we sat down, almost over the
      restless sea beneath us.

 “She lives in my memory,” he continued, speaking more to himself than to
      me, and looking far out to the horizon, beneath which the setting sun had
      begun to sink, “in spite of all I can do or think of to make her appear
      base in my eyes. For she left me to go with another man—a scoundrel.
      This was how it was,” he added, quickly: “I married her, and thought her
      as pure as a flower; but I could not take her to sea with me because I was
      only the mate of a vessel, so I left her among her own friends, in the
      village where she was born. In a little cottage by herself I settled her,
      comfortable and happy as I thought. God! how she hung round my neck and
      sobbed when I went away the first time! and yet—yet—within a
      year she left me.” And he stopped for several minutes, resting his head
      upon his hands. “At first I could get no trace of her,” he resumed. “Her
      friends knew nothing more of her than that she had left the village
      suddenly. Gradually I found out the name of the scoundrel who had seduced
      her away. He had bribed her friends so that they were silent; but I
      overbribed them with the last money I had, and I followed him and my wife
      on foot. I never found them, nor did I ever know why she had deserted me
      for him. If I had only known the reason; if I could have been told of my
      fault; if she had only written to say that she was tired of me; that I was
      too old, too rough for her soft ways,—I think I could have borne the
      heavy stroke the villain had dealt me better. The end of my search was
      that I dropped down in the streets of Liverpool, whither I thought I had
      tracked them, and was carried to the hospital with brain-fever upon me.
      Two months afterward I came out cured, and the sense of my loss was
      deadened within me, so that I could go to sea again, which I did, before
      the mast, under the name of Jackson, in a bark that traded to this coast
      here.” And the old sailor rose to his feet and turned abruptly away,
      leaving me sitting alone.

 I saw that he did not wish to be followed, so I stayed where I was and
      watched the gray twilight creep over the face of the sea, and the night
      quickly succeed to it. Not a cloud had been in the sky all day long, and
      as the darkness increased the stars came out, until the whole heavens were
      studded with glittering gems.

 Suddenly, low down, close to the sea, a point of light flickered and
      disappeared, shone again for a moment, wavered and went out, only to
      reappear and shine steadily. “A steamer’s masthead light,” I thought, and
      ran to the house to give the news; but Jackson had already seen the light,
      and pronounced that she had anchored until the morning. At daybreak there
      she was, dipping her sides to the swell of the sea as it rolled beneath
      her. It was my duty to go off to her in one of the surf-boats belonging to
      the factory; and so I scrambled down the cliff to the little strip of
      smooth beach that served us for a landing-place.

 When I arrived there I found that the white-crested breakers were heavier
      than I had thought they would be. However, there was the boat lying on the
      beach with its prow toward the waves, and round it were the boat-boys with
      their loincloths girded, ready to start; so I clambered into the stern, or
      rather—for the boat was shaped alike at stem and stern—the end
      from which the steersman, or patrao , used his long oar. With a
      shout the boys laid hold of the sides of the boat, and the next moment it
      was dancing on the spent waves next to the beach. The patrao kept its head
      steady, and the boys jumped in and seized the oars, and began pulling with
      a will, standing up to their stroke. Slowly the heavy craft gathered way,
      and approached a dark and unbroken roller that hastened toward the beach.
      Then the patrao shouted to the crew, and they lay on their oars, and the
      wave with a roar burst right in front of the boat, sending the spray of
      its crest high above our heads.

 “ Rema! rema forca! ” (“Row strongly!”) now shouted the patrao,
      speaking Portuguese, as mostly all African coast natives do; and the crew
      gave way. The next roller we had to meet in its strength; and save for the
      steady force of the patrao’s oar, I believe it would have tossed us aside
      and we would have been swept under its curving wall of water. As it was,
      the good boat gave a mighty bound as it felt its force, and its stem
      pitched high into the air as it slid down its broad back into the deep.

 Another and yet another wave were passed, and we could now see them
      breaking behind us, shutting out the beach from view. Then the last roller
      was overcome, and there was nothing but the long heave of the deep sea to
      contend against. Presently we arrived at the steamer, whose side towered
      above us—an iron wall.

 A shout came to me, pitching and lurching with the boat far below, “Come
      on board at once.” But to come on board was only to be done by watching a
      chance as the boat rose on the top of a roller. Taking such a one, I
      seized the side-ropes, swung a moment in mid-air, and the next was on the
      streamer’s clean white deck. Before me stood a tall man with black hair
      and whiskers and dark piercing eyes, who asked me if I was the agent for
      Flint Brothers. I answered that the agent was on shore, and that I was his
      assistant. Whereupon he informed me that he had been appointed by the firm
      to liquidate all their stations and businesses on the coast, and “he would
      be obliged by my getting his luggage into the boat.” This was said in a
      peremptory sort of way, as if he had spoken to a servant; and very much
      against the grain I obeyed his orders.

 That the man was new to the coast was evident, and my consolation was that
      he would be very soon sick of it and pretty well frightened before he even
      got on shore, for the weather was freshening rapidly, a fact of which he
      appeared to take no heed. Not so the boat-boys, who were anxious to be
      off. At last we started, and I soon had my revenge. As we drew near the
      shore the rollers became higher and higher, and I perceived that my
      gentleman clutched the gunwale of the boat very tightly, and when the
      first wave that showed signs of breaking overtook us, he grew very white
      in the face until it had passed.

 The next one or two breakers were small, much to his relief I could see,
      though he said nothing. Before he had well recovered his equanimity,
      however, a tremendous wave approached us somewhat suddenly. Appalled by
      its threatening aspect, he sprang from his seat and seized the arm of the
      patrao, who roughly shook him off.

 “My God!” he cried, “we are swamped!” and for the moment it really looked
      like it; but the patrao, with a dexterous sweep of his long oar, turned
      the boat’s head toward the roller. It broke just as it reached us, and
      gave us the benefit of its crest, which came in over the topsides of the
      boat as it passed by, and deluged every one of us.

 I laughed, although it was no laughing matter, at the plight the
      liquidator was now in. He was changed in a moment from the spruce and
      natty personage into a miserable and draggled being. From every part of
      him the salt water was streaming, and the curl was completely taken out of
      his whiskers. He could not speak from terror, which the boat-boys soon
      saw, for none are quicker than negroes to detect signs of fear in those
      whom they are accustomed to consider superior to themselves. Familiar with
      the surf, and full of mischievous fun, they began to shout and gesticulate
      with the settled purpose of making matters appear worse than they were,
      and of enjoying the white man’s discomfiture,—all but the patrao,
      who was an old hand, and on whom depended the safety of us all. He kept a
      steady lookout seaward, and stood upright and firm, grasping his oar with
      both hands. With him it was a point of honour to bring the white men
      intrusted to his care safely through the surf.

 We waited for more than half an hour, bow on, meeting each roller as it
      came to us; and by the end of that time the unfortunate liquidator had
      evidently given up all hope of ever reaching the shore. Luckily, the worst
      was soon to pass. After one last tremendous wave there was a lull for a
      few moments, and the patrao, who had watched for such a chance, swiftly
      turned the boat round, and giving the word to the crew, they pulled
      lustily toward the shore. In a few minutes we were again in safety. The
      boat grounded on the beach, the oars were tossed into the sea; the crew
      sprang overboard; some of them seized the new arrival; I clambered on the
      back of the patrao; a crowd of negroes, who had been waiting on the beach,
      laid hold of the tow-rope of the boat, and it and we were landed
      simultaneously on the dry sand.

 Once on shore Mr. Bransome, for that was the new man’s name, rapidly
      recovered his presence of mind and manner, and, by way of covering his
      past confusion, remarked that he supposed the surf was seldom so bad as it
      then was. I replied in an offhand way, meaning to make fun of him, that
      what he had passed through was nothing, and appealed to the patrao to
      confirm what I had said. That negro, seeing the joke, grinned all over his
      black face; and Mr. Bransome, perceiving that he was being laughed at,
      snatched a good-sized stick from a native standing near, and struck the
      patrao repeatedly over the back.

 In vain Sooka, for that was the patrao’s name, protested, and demanded to
      know what wrong thing he had done. The agent was furious, and showered his
      blows upon the black. Equally in vain I shouted that Sooka had done well
      by us, and that he, Mr. Bransome, was making an enemy of a man who would
      have him now and then in his power. At length Sooka took to his heels, and
      sure enough, when he had got a little way off, he began to threaten
      vengeance for what he had received. I sympathised with him, for I knew
      what a loss to his dignity it was to be beaten without cause before his
      fellows, and I feared that Mr. Bransome would indeed be sorry, sooner or
      later, for what he had done.

 I now suggested to him, by way of diverting his thoughts from poor Sooka,
      that standing on the beach in wet clothes was the very way to catch the
      coast-fever straight off, and he instantly suffered himself to be carried
      up the factory. There Jackson received him in a sort of “who on earth are
      you?” manner; and Mr. Bransome, clearing his throat, announced himself and
      his authority, adding that he intended to make the factory a point of
      departure to all the others on the coast; then, very abruptly, he
      requested Jackson to prepare quarters for him without delay.

 The change that came over Jackson’s face as he learned the quality of the
      stranger and his requests was great. The old salt, who had been king of
      his house and of the Point for so long a time, had evidently never even
      thought of the probability of such an intrusion as was now presented to
      him, and he was amazed at what he considered to be the unwarrantable
      assurance of the stranger. However, he recovered himself smartly, and
      asked the new man if he had any written credentials.

 “Certainly,” replied he, pulling out a document all wet with salt water.
      “Here is a letter from Messrs. Flint Brothers, of which, no doubt, you
      will have a copy in your mail-bag.”

 Jackson took the letter and opened it, and seemed to read it slowly to
      himself. All at once he started, looked at the new agent, advanced a step
      or two toward him, muttering, “Bransome, Bransome,” then stopped and asked
      him in a strange constrained voice, “Is your name Bransome?”

 “Yes,” replied the latter, astonished at the old man’s question.

 “I knew a Bransome once,” said Jackson, steadily, “and he was a
      scoundrel.”

 For a moment the two men looked at each other—Jackson with a gleam
      of hatred in his eyes, while Bransome had a curiously frightened
      expression on his face, which blanched slightly. But he quickly resumed
      his composure and peremptory way, and said, “Show me a room; I must get
      these wet things off me.”

 As, however, he addressed himself this time to me rather than to Jackson,—who,
      indeed, regarded him no longer, but stood with the letter loose in his
      hand, looking at the floor of the room, as if in deep meditation,—I
      showed him into my own room, where I ordered his trunks to be brought.
      These, of course, were wet; but he found some things in the middle of them
      that were not more than slightly damp, and with the help of a pair of old
      canvas trousers of mine he managed to make his appearance at dinner-time.

 Jackson was not at the meal. He had left the house shortly after his
      interview with the new agent, and had, I fancied, gone on one of his
      solitary rambles. At any rate he did not return until late that night.

 I thought Mr. Bransome seemed to be somewhat relieved when he saw that the
      old man was not coming; and he became more affable than I had expected him
      to be, and relinquished his arrogant style altogether when he began to
      question me about Jackson—who he was? what had he been? how long he
      had lived on the coast? To all which questions I returned cautious
      answers, remembering that I was under a promise to the old man not to
      repeat his story.

 By the next morning, to my surprise, Jackson appeared to have become
      reconciled to the fact that he had been superseded by a man who knew
      nothing of the coast, and of his own accord he offered to tell Mr.
      Bransome the clues to the letter-locks on the doors of the various
      store-rooms; for we on the coast used none but letter-locks, which are
      locks that do not require a key to open them. But Mr. Bransome expressed,
      most politely, a wish that Jackson should consider himself still in charge
      of the factory, at any rate until the whole estate of the unfortunate
      Flint Brothers could be wound up; and he trusted that his presence would
      make no difference to him.

 This was a change, on the part of both men, from the manners of the
      previous day; and yet I could not help thinking that each but ill
      concealed his aversion to the other.

 Months now slipped away, and Mr. Bransome was occupied in going up and
      down the coast in a little steamer, shutting up factory after factory,
      transferring their goods to ours, and getting himself much disliked by all
      the Europeans under him, and hated by the natives, especially by the
      boat-boys, who were a race or tribe by themselves, coming from one
      particular part of the coast. He had, of course, been obliged to order the
      dismissal of many of them, and this was one reason why they hated him; but
      the chief cause was his treatment of Sooka, the patrao. That man never
      forgave Mr. Bransome for beating him so unjustly; and the news of the deed
      had travelled very quickly, as news does in savage countries, so that I
      think nearly all of Sooka’s countrymen knew of the act and resented it.

 Mr. Bransome was quite unaware of the antipathy he had thus created toward
      himself, except so far as Sooka was concerned; and him he never employed
      when he had to go off to vessels or land from them, but always went in the
      other boat belonging to the factory, which was steered by a much younger
      negro. In addition to humbling Sooka in this way, Bransome took the
      opportunity of disgracing him whenever he could do so. Therefore, one day
      when two pieces of cloth from the cargo-room were found in the boatmen’s
      huts, it was no surprise to me that Sooka was at once fastened upon by Mr.
      Bransome as the thief who had stolen them, and that he was tied to the
      flogging-post in the middle of the yard, and sentenced to receive fifty
      lashes with the cat that was kept for such a purpose, and all without any
      inquiry being made. In vain did the unfortunate man protest his innocence.
      A swarthy Kroot-boy from Cape Coast laid the cat on his brown shoulders
      right willingly, for he also was an enemy of Sooka’s; and in a few minutes
      the poor fellow’s flesh was cut and scored as if by a knife.

 After the flogging was over Mr. Bransome amused himself by getting out his
      rifle and firing fancy shots at Sooka, still tied to the post; that is, he
      tried to put the bullets as close to the poor wretch as he could without
      actually wounding him. To a negro, with his dread of firearms, this was
      little short of absolute torture, and at each discharge Sooka writhed and
      crouched as close to the ground as he could, while his wide-opened eyes
      and mouth, and face of almost a slate colour, showed how terribly
      frightened he was. To Mr. Bransome it appeared to be fine sport, for he
      fired at least twenty shots at the man before he shouldered his rifle and
      went indoors. Jackson said nothing to this stupid exhibition of temper,
      but as soon as it was over he had Sooka released; and I knew he attended
      to his wounds himself, and poured friar’s balsam into them, and covered
      his back with a soft shirt—for all which, no doubt, the negro was
      afterward grateful. Whether Mr. Bransome got to know of this, and was
      offended at it, I do not know, but shortly afterward he ceased to live
      with us.

 There was between the factory and the sea, and a little to the right of
      the former, a small wooden cottage which had been allowed to fall into a
      dilapidated state from want of some one to live in it. This Mr. Bransome
      gave orders to the native carpenters to repair and make weather-tight; and
      when they had done so, he caused a quantity of furniture to be brought
      from St. Paul de Loanda and placed within in it. Then he transferred
      himself and his baggage to the cottage.

 Jackson displayed complete indifference to this change on the part of the
      agent. In fact, there had been, ever since the arrival of the latter upon
      the Point, and in spite of apparent friendliness, a perceptible breach,
      widening daily, between the two men. As to the reason of this I had my own
      suspicions, for I had made the discovery that Jackson had for some time
      past been drinking very heavily.

 In addition to the brandy which we white men had for our own use, I had,
      to my horror, found out that he was secretly drinking the coarse and fiery
      rum that was sold to the natives; and as I remembered the mutterings and
      moanings that had formerly alarmed me, I wondered that I had not guessed
      the cause of them at the time; but until the arrival of Mr. Bransome,
      Jackson had always kept charge of the spirits himself, and he was such a
      secret old fellow that there was no knowing what he had then taken. Now
      that I was aware of his failing, I was very sorry for the old sailor; for
      on such a coast and in such a climate there was only one end to it; and
      although I could not actually prevent him from taking the liquor, I
      resolved to watch him, and if such symptoms as I had seen before again
      appeared, to tell Mr. Bransome of them at all hazards. But I was too late
      to prevent what speedily followed my discovery. It had come about that the
      same mail-steamer that had brought out Mr. Bransome had again anchored off
      the Point, and again the weather was coarse and lowering. A stiff breeze
      had blown for some days, which made the rollers worse than they had been
      for a long while. Both Mr. Bransome and Jackson watched the weather with
      eager looks, but each was differently affected by it. Bransome appeared to
      be anxious and nervous, while Jackson was excited, and paced up and down
      the veranda, and kept, strange to say, for it was contrary to his late
      habit, a watch upon Bransome’s every movement.

 Every now and then, too, he would rub his hands together as if in eager
      expectation, and would chuckle to himself as he glanced seaward. Of his
      own accord he gave orders to Sooka to get both the surf-boats ready for
      launching, and to make the boys put on their newest loin-cloths; and then,
      when everything was in readiness, he asked Bransome if he was going off to
      the steamer.

 “I fear I must,” said Bransome; “but I—I don’t like the look of
      those cursed rollers.”

 At this Jackson laughed, and said something about “being afraid of very
      little.”

 “The beach is perfectly good,” he added; “Sooka knows, and Sooka is the
      oldest patrao on the Point.”

 And Sooka, who was standing by, made a low obeisance to the agent, and
      said that “the beach lived for well,” which was his way of expressing in
      English that the sea was not heavy.

 At that moment a gun was fired from the steamer as a signal to be quick,
      and Bransome said, “I will go, but not in that black blackguard’s boat; it
      need not come,” and he went down to the beach.

 It was one of Jackson’s rules that when a boat went through the surf there
      should be some one to watch it, so I walked to the end of the Point to see
      the agent put off. He got away safely; and I, seeing Sooka’s boat lying on
      the beach, and thinking that it would be as well to have it hauled up
      under the boat-shed, was on the point of returning to the factory to give
      the necessary order, when, to my surprise, I saw the boat’s crew rush down
      the beach to the boat and begin to push it toward the sea.

 I waved my arms as a signal to them to stop, but they paid no attention to
      me; and I saw them run the boat into the water, jump into her, and pull
      off, all singing a song to their stroke in their own language, the sound
      of which came faintly up to the top of the Point. “Stupid fellows!” I
      muttered to myself, “they might have known that the boat was not wanted;”
       and I was again about to turn away, when I was suddenly seized from
      behind, and carried to the very edge of the cliff, and then as suddenly
      released.

 I sprang to one side, and turning round saw Jackson, with a look of such
      savage fury on his face that I retreated a step or two in astonishment at
      him. He perceived my alarm, and burst out into a fit of laughter, which,
      instead of reassuring me, had the opposite effect, it was so demoniacal in
      character. “Ha! ha!” he laughed again, “are you frightened?” and advancing
      toward me, he put his face close to mine, peering into it with bloodshot
      eyes, while his breath, reeking of spirits, poured into my nostrils.

 Involuntarily I put up my arm to keep him off. He clutched it, and,
      pointing with his other hand to the sea, whispered hoarsely, “What do you
      hear of the surf? Will the breakers be heavier before sundown? See how
      they begin to curve! Listen how they already thunder, thunder, on the
      beach! I tell you they are impatient—they seek some one,” he
      shouted. “Do you know,” he continued, lowering his voice again, and
      speaking almost confidentially, “sooner or later some one is drowned upon
      that bar?” And even as he spoke a fresh line of breakers arose from the
      deep, farther out than any had been before. This much I observed, but I
      was too greatly unnerved by the strange manner of Jackson to pay further
      heed to the sea. It had flashed across my mind that he was on the verge of
      an attack of delirium tremens, from the effects of the liquor he had been
      consuming for so long, and the problem was to get him back to the house
      quietly.

 Suddenly a thought struck me. Putting my arm within his, I said, as coolly
      as I could, “Never mind the sea, Jackson; let us have a matabicho ”
       (our local expression for a “drink”). He took the bait, and came away
      quietly enough to the house. Once there, I enticed him into the
      dining-room, and shutting to the door quickly, I locked it on the outside,
      resolving to keep him there until Mr. Bransome should return; for, being
      alone, I was afraid of him.

 Then I went back to the end of the Point to look for the return of the two
      boats. When I reached it I saw that the rollers had increased in size in
      the short time that I had been absent, and that they were breaking, one
      after another, as fast as they could come shoreward; not pygmy waves, but
      great walls of water along their huge length before they fell.

 A surf such as I had never yet seen had arisen. I stood and anxiously
      watched through a glass the boats at the steamer’s side, and at length, to
      my relief, I saw one of them leave her, but as it came near I saw, to my
      surprise, that Mr. Bransome was not in the boat, and that it was not the
      one that Sooka steered. Quickly it was overtaken by the breakers, but
      escaped their power, and came inshore on the back of a majestic roller
      that did not break until it was close to the beach, where the boat was in
      safety.

 Not without vague apprehension at his imprudence, but still not
      anticipating any actual harm from it, I thought that Mr. Bransome had
      chosen to come back in Sooka’s boat, and I waited and waited to see it return, although the daylight had now so waned that I could no longer
      distinguish what was going on alongside the steamer. At last I caught
      sight of the boat, a white speck upon the waters, and, just as it entered
      upon the dangerous part of the bar, I discerned to my infinite amazement,
      that two figures were seated in the stern—a man and a woman—a
      white woman; I could see her dress fluttering in the wind, and Sooka’s
      black figure standing behind her.

 On came the boat, impelled by the swift-flowing seas, for a quarter of an
      hour it was tossed on the crests of the waves. Again and again it rose and
      sank with them as they came rolling in, but somehow, after a little
      further time, it seemed to me that it did not make such way toward the
      shore as it should have done.

 I lifted the glass to my eyes, and I saw that the boys were hardly pulling
      at all, though the boat was not close to the rocks that were near the
      cliff. Nor did Sooka seem to be conscious of a huge roller that was
      swiftly approaching him. In my excitement I was just on the point of
      shouting to warn those in the boat of their danger, although I knew that
      they could not understand what I might say, when I saw Jackson standing on
      the edge of the cliff, a little way off, dressed in his shirt and trousers
      only. He had escaped from the house! He perceived that I saw him, and came
      running up on me, and I threw myself on my guard. However, he did not
      attempt to touch me, but stopped and cried:

 “Did I not tell you that somebody would be drowned by those waves? Watch
      that boat! watch it! it is doomed; and the scoundrel, the villain, who is
      in it will never reach the shore alive!” and he hissed the last word
      through his clenched teeth.

 “Good God, Jackson!” I said, “don’t say that! Look, there is a white woman
      in the boat!”

 At the words his jaw dropped, his form, which a moment before had swayed
      with excitement, became rigid, and his eyes stared at me as if he knew,
      but comprehended not, what I had said. Then he slowly turned his face
      toward the sea, and, as he did so, the mighty breaker that had been coming
      up astern of the boat curled over it. For a moment or two it rushed
      forward, a solid body of water, carrying the boat with it; and in those
      moments I saw, to my horror, Sooka give one sweep with his oar, which
      threw the boat’s side toward the roller. I saw the boat-boys leap clear of
      the boat into the surf; I saw the agonised faces of the man and the woman
      upturned to the wave above them, and then the billow broke, and nothing
      was seen but a sheet of frothy water. The boat and those in it had
      disappeared. For the crew I had little concern—I knew they would
      come ashore safely enough; but for Mr. Bransome and the woman, whoever she
      was, there was little hope. They had not had time to throw themselves into
      the sea before the boat had capsized, and their clothing would sink them
      in such a surf, even if they had escaped being crushed by the boat.
      Besides, I feared there had been some foul play on the part of Sooka.
      Quickly as he had done it, I had seen him with his oar put the boat beyond
      the possibility of escaping from the wave, and I remembered how he had
      been treated by Bransome.

 With such thoughts I ran along the cliff to the pathway that led down to
      the beach; and as I ran, I saw Jackson running before me, not steadily or
      rightly, but heavily, and swaying from side to side as he went. Quickly I
      passed him, but he gave no sign that he knew any one was near him; and as
      I leaped down on to the first ledge of rock below me, I saw that he was
      not following me, but had disappeared among the brushwood.

 When I got down to the beach, I found that the boat’s crew had reached the
      shore in safety, but of the two passengers nothing had been seen. The
      capsized boat was sometimes visible as it lifted on the rollers, but
      through my glass I saw that no one was clinging to it. I called for Sooka,
      but Sooka was missing. Every one had seen him land, but he had disappeared
      mysteriously. In vain I questioned the other boys as to the cause of the
      disaster. The only answer I could get out of them was an appeal to look to
      the sea and judge for myself. The woman was a white woman from the big
      ship, was all they could say about her; and, negro-like, they evidently
      considered the loss of a woman or so of very little consequence.

 All I could do was to set a watch along the beach to look for the bodies
      when they should be washed ashore, and this done, I returned to the
      factory. My next desire was to find Sooka. He could hardly have gone far,
      so I sent for a runner to take a message to the native king under whose
      protection we on the Point were, and after whom the Point was called, and
      who was bound to find the missing man for me if he could, or if he had not
      been bribed to let him pass.

 In my sorrow at what had happened, and in my doubt as to the cause of it,
      I had forgotten all about Jackson; but after I had despatched my messenger
      to the king, I went to look for him. I discovered him crouching in a
      corner of his own bedroom in the dark.

 “Are they found?” he asked, in a voice so hollow and broken that I hardly
      knew it; and before I could answer him, he whispered to himself, “No, no;
      they are drowned—drowned.”

 I tried to lead him into the lighted dining-room, but he only crouched the
      closer to his corner. At length by the promise of the ever-potent
      temptation, liquor, I got him to leave the room. He could scarcely walk,
      though, now, and he trembled so violently that I was glad to give him part
      of a bottle of brandy that I had by me. He filled a tumbler half full of
      the spirits, and drank it off. This put strength into him, and for a
      little he was calm; but as he again and again applied himself to the
      bottle, he became drunk, and swore at me for my impudence in giving orders
      without his sanction. On this I tried to take the bottle from him, but he
      clutched it so firmly that I had to let it go; whereupon he immediately
      put it to his lips and swallowed the rest of the liquor that was in it.
      After which he gave a chuckle, and staggered to a couch, on which he
      tumbled, and lay with his eyes open for a long while. At last he fell
      asleep, but I was too nervous to do likewise, and sat watching him the
      most of the night; at least, when I awoke it was daylight, and it seemed
      to me that I had been asleep for a few minutes.

 Jackson was still lying on the couch, and his face was calm and peaceful
      as he softly breathed. The morning, too, was fine, and as I walked on to
      the veranda I saw the sea sparkling in the sunlight, and there was not a
      sound from it save a far-off and drowsy murmur. Not a sign remained on its
      broad surface of the wrath of the day before. It was wonderfully calm.
      Lying here and there on the veranda, rolled up in their clothes, were the
      servants of the factory, sleeping soundly on the hard planks.

 Presently, as the sun rose in the heavens and warmed the air, the place
      began to show signs of life, and one of the watch that I had set on the
      beach came running across the yard to tell me that the bodies had come
      ashore.

 Immediately upon hearing this I called the hammock-bearers together, and
      going down to the beach, I went a considerable way along it toward a dark
      spot, which I knew to be a group of natives. On coming up to the group, I
      found at least fifty negroes collected round the drowned man and woman,
      all chattering and squabbling among themselves, and probably over the
      plunder, for I saw that the bodies had been stripped to their
      underclothing. Rushing into the crowd, with the aid of a stick I dispersed
      it, so far as to make the wretches stand back. The man, of course, was
      Bransome, there was no doubt as to that, although he had received a
      terrible blow on the left temple, most likely from the pointed stem of the
      boat as it had toppled over upon him, and his face was distorted and
      twisted to one side. The woman was evidently English, young and pretty,
      although her long hair, heavy and wet, was polluted by the sand that stuck
      to it, and her half-open eyes were filled with the same. On her lips there
      lingered a slight smile. She was of middle height, of slender figure, and
      delicately nurtured, as the small bare feet and little hands showed. As I
      looked at the latter I saw a wedding-ring on her finger, and I thought,
      “It is Bransome’s wife.” I tried to take the ring away, but it would not
      come off her finger—which I might have known, because the natives
      would not have left it there had they been able to remove it. I then
      ordered the bearers to lay the bodies in the hammocks; and that done, our
      little party wended its way along the shore homeward, while the natives I
      had dispersed followed one after another in African fashion.

 Arrived at the factory, I bade the boys place the bodies side by side on a
      spare bed in an empty room, and then I sent them to dig a grave in the
      little burial-ground on the Point, where two or three worm-eaten wooden
      crosses marked the resting-places of former agents of Messrs. Flint
      Brothers.

 As quick interment was necessary in such a climate, even on that very day,
      I went to call Jackson in order that he might perform the duty that was
      his—that of reading the burial service over the dead, and of sealing
      up the desk and effects of Mr. Bransome. But Jackson was not in the
      factory. I guessed, however, where he was; and sure enough I found him in
      his accustomed haunt at the end of the Point. The moment he saw me he
      tried to hide himself among the brushwood, but I was too quick for him,
      and spied him as he crouched behind a dwarf palm.

 “I know, I know,” he cried, as I ran up to him; “I saw you come along the
      beach. Bury them, bury them out of sight.”

 “Come, Mr. Jackson,” I replied, “it isn’t fair to put all the trouble on
      to me. I am sure I have had enough of the weariness and anxiety of this
      sad business. You must take your share of it. I want you to read the
      service for the dead over them.”

 “No, no,” he almost shrieked; “bury them quick; never mind me. Put them
      out of sight.”

 “I will not,” I said, resolutely. “For your own sake you must, at any
      rate, view the bodies.”

 “They have not been murdered?” He replied. But the startled look with
      which I received the suggestion his words implied seemed to make him
      recollect himself, for he rose and took my arm without saying more. As he
      did so, I felt for the first time a sort of repugnance toward him. Up to
      that moment my feeling had been one of pity and anxiety on his account,
      but now I loathed him. This he seemed instinctively to feel, and he clung
      closely to me.

 Once at the factory I determined that there should be no more delay on his
      part, and I took him to the door of the room where the bodies had been
      laid, but at it he made a sudden halt and would not enter. Covering his
      face with his hands, he trembled violently as I pushed the door open and
      advanced to the bedside. The room, hushed and in semi-darkness; the white
      sheet, whose surface showed too plainly the forms beneath it; and the
      scared, terrified face of the man who, with brain afire, stood watching,
      with staring eyes, the bed, made a scene I have never forgotten.

 Slowly I turned down the upper part of the sheet, and Jackson, as if
      fascinated by the act, advanced a step or two into the room, but with face
      averted. Gradually he turned it toward the bodies, and for a moment his
      gaze rested upon them. The next instant he staggered forward, looked at
      the woman’s face, panted for breath once or twice, and then, with uplifted
      hands and a wild cry of “Lucy!” fell his length upon the floor. When I
      stooped over him he was in convulsions, and dark matter was oozing out of
      his mouth. The climax had come. I shouted for the servants, and they
      carried him to his own room, and placed him on his own bed.

 How I got through that day I hardly know. Alone I buried Bransome and his
      wife, and alone I returned from the hurried task to watch by Jackson’s
      bedside. None of the natives would stay near him. For two days he lay
      unconscious. At the end of that time he seemed to have some idea of the
      outside world, for his eyes met mine with intelligence in their look, and
      on bending over him I heard him whisper, “Forgive me!” Then he relapsed
      into unconsciousness again. Through the long hours his eyes remained ever
      open and restless; he could not eat, nor did he sleep, and I was afraid he
      would pass away through weakness without a sign, being an old man. On the
      third day he became delirious, and commenced chattering and talking to
      himself, and imagining that all kinds of horrid shapes and creatures were
      around and near him. I had to watch him narrowly in order to prevent him
      stealing out of his bed, which he was ready to do at any moment to avoid
      the tortures which he fearfully imagined awaited him. By these signs I
      knew that he was in the middle of an attack of delirium tremens, and I
      tried to quiet him by means of laudanum, but it had no effect upon him. I
      got him, however, to swallow a little soup, which sustained him. My own
      boy was the only negro I had been able to induce to stay in the room, and
      he would only remain in it while I was there.

 I had sent a messenger to the nearest station, where I remembered there
      was a Portuguese doctor; but he had not returned by the evening of the
      fourth day. That night, worn out with watching, I had dozed off to sleep
      on a chair placed by the sick man’s bed, when all at once I was awakened
      by a loud report, and I jumped up to find the room filled with smoke. As
      it cleared away I saw that Jackson was standing in the middle of the room
      with a revolver in his hand. As I confronted him he laughed a devilish
      laugh and cocked the weapon, crying as he did so, “It was you who tempted
      me with your smooth face and unsuspicious way, and you shall die, though I
      suffer doubly in hell for it. Hist!” and he stopped suddenly and listened.
      “Don’t you hear the breakers? Hark, how they roar! They say they are
      ready, always ready,” and staring in front of him, he advanced, as if
      following the sign of an invisible hand, to the door, unconsciously
      placing, to my infinite relief, the revolver on the top of a chest of
      drawers as he passed by it. I did not dare to move, and he opened the door
      and walked into the front room. Then I followed him. For a little he
      remained in the room, glaring vacantly about him, and muttering to
      himself; but seeing the outer door open he made a rush toward it, and
      disappeared into the darkness of the night. Calling to the boy, I ran
      after him, and easily came up to him, when he turned, and picking up a
      heavier stone than I thought he could have lifted, threw it at me. I
      dodged it and closed with him. Once in my arms I found I could hold him,
      and my servant and I carried him back into the factory. We placed him on
      the floor of the dining-room, and he was too exhausted to move for a
      while. By degrees, however, he recovered sufficiently to stand; and as
      soon as he could do so by himself, with devilish cunning he made for the
      lamp, which he struck, quick as lightning, with a stick that had been
      lying on the table. In an instant the great round globe fell to pieces,
      but luckily the chimney was not broken, and the lamp remained alight, and
      before he could strike another blow at it I had grappled with him again.
      This time he struggled violently for a few moments, and seemed to think
      that he was dealing with Bransome, for he shrieked, “What! have you come
      back from the sea? You are wet! you are wet!” and shuddering, he tried to
      free himself from my hold; and I, not liking to hurt him, let him go,
      taking care to keep myself between him and the lamp.

 “Back from me, you villain of hell!” he cried, as soon as he was free.
      “What have you done with her? what have you done with her?” And then, in a
      tone of weird and pathetic sorrow, “Where is my little one that I loved? I
      have sought her many a year; oh, why did she forsake me? Aha, Sooka! we
      were right to send him to the hell whence he came—the lying,
      false-hearted scoundrel, to steal away my white dove!”

 After which he drew from his finger a solid gold ring which he always
      wore, and threw it from him, saying, with a wild laugh, “There! that’s for
      any one that likes it; I’m a dead man.” He then staggered toward his own
      room, and I, remembering the loaded revolver which still lay on the chest
      of drawers, tried to intercept him. In his rage, for I verily believe that
      he also remembered that the weapon was there, he spat in my face, and
      struck me with all his force between the eyes; but I stuck to him, and
      with the help of the boy, who had been all this time in hiding, but who
      came forward at my call, I laid him for the last time upon his bed. There
      he lay exhausted for the remainder of the night; but there was no rest for
      me; I felt that I had to watch him now for my own safety.

 Toward morning, however, his breathing became, all at once, very heavy and
      slow, and I bent over him in alarm. As I did so, I heard him sigh faintly,
      “Lucy!” and at that moment the native boy softly placed something upon the
      bed. I took it up. It was the ring the sick man had thrown away in the
      night, and as I looked at it I saw “James, from Lucy” engraved on its
      inside surface, and I knew that the dead woman was his wife.

 As the first faint streaks of dawn stole into the room, the slow-drawn
      breathing of the dying man ceased. I listened—it came again—once—twice—and
      then all was silence. He was dead, and I realised in the sudden stillness
      that had come upon the room that I was alone. Yet he had passed away so
      quietly after his fitful fever that I could not bring myself to believe
      that he was really gone, and I stood looking at the body, fearing to
      convince myself of the truth by touching it.

 So entranced was I by that feeling of awe which comes to almost every one
      in the presence of death, that I did not hear the shouting of the
      hammock-boy outside, or the footsteps of a white man coming into the room;
      and not until he touched me on the shoulder did I turn and recognise the
      sallow face of the Portuguese doctor whom I had sent for, and who had thus
      arrived too late. However, he served to help me to bury the mortal part of
      Jackson in the little graveyard beside the body of his wife and that of
      the man who had come between them when alive. And such was without doubt
      the fact; for when the doctor had gone, and I was alone again, I collected
      and made an inventory of the dead men’s effects, and in Jackson’s desk I
      found his diary, or, as he himself would have called it, his log; and in
      that log was noted, on the very day that Bransome had arrived on the
      Point, his suspicion of the man, and later on his conviction that Bransome
      was indeed he who had injured him.

 Sooka was never found; but when the mail-steamer returned from the south
      coast, I discovered that the younger patrao had made his crew row away
      suddenly from the steamer’s side, while Mr. Bransome had been engaged
      below, and was out of sight. So it was evident that the pair had been in
      league together to insure Sooka his revenge. What share Jackson had had in
      the murder of his enemy I did not care to think of, but feared the worst.

 For myself, I had to remain on the Point for many months, until the
      factory was finally closed—for no purchaser was ever found for it;
      and doubtless, by this time, the buildings are in ruins, and long grass
      hides the graves of those who sleep upon King Bemba’s Point.