LOVE SONNETS OF AN OFFICE BOY

 BY S.E. KISER

 I

  Oh, if you only knowed how much I like 

 To stand here, when the "old man" ain't around, 

 And watch your soft, white fingers while you pound 

 Away at them there keys! Each time you strike 

 It almost seems to me as though you'd found 

 So me way, while writin' letters, how to play 

 Sweet music on that thing, because the sound 

 Is something I could listen to all day. 



 You're twenty-five or six, and I'm fourteen, 

 And you don't hardly ever notice me— 

 But when you do, you call me Willie! Gee, 

 I wisht I'd bundles of the old long green 

 And could be twenty-eight or nine or so, 

 And something happened to your other beau. 



 VI

  When you're typewritin' and that long-legged clerk 

 Tips back there on his chair and smiles at you, 

 And you look up and get to smilin', too, 

 I'd like to go and give his chair a jerk 

 And send him flyin' till his head went through 

 The door that goes out to the hall, and when 

 They picked him up he'd be all black and blue 

 And you'd be nearly busted laughin' then.





 But if I done it, maybe you would run 

 And hold his head and smooth his hair and say 

 It made you sad that he got dumped that way, 

 And I'd get h'isted out for what I done— 

 I wish that he'd get fired and you'd stay 

 And suddenly I'd be a man some day. 



 VIII

  This morning when that homely, long-legged clerk 

 Come in he had a rose he got somewhere; 

 He went and kind of leaned against her chair, 

 Instead of goin' on about his work, 

 And stood around and talked to her a while, 

 Because the boss was out,—and both took care 

 To watch the door; and when he left her there 

 He dropped the flower with a sickish smile. 



 I snuck it from the glass of water she 

 Had stuck it in, and tore it up and put 

 It on the floor and smashed it with my foot, 

 When neither him nor her was watchin' me— 

 I'd like to rub the stem acrost his nose, 

 And I wish they'd never be another rose. 



 XIII

  Last night I dreamed about her in my sleep; 

 I thought that her and me had went away 

 Out on some hill where birds sung 'round all day, 

 And I had got a job of herdin' sheep. 

 I thought that she had went along to keep 

 Me comp'ny, and we'd set around for hours 

 Just lovin', and I'd go and gather flowers 

 And pile them at her feet, all in a heap.





 It seemed to me like heaven, bein' there 

 With only her besides the sheep and birds, 

 And us not sayin' anything but words 

 About the way we loved. I wouldn't care 

 To ever wake again if I could still 

 Dream we was there forever on the hill. 



 XXVII

  It's over now; the blow has fell at last; 

 It seems as though the sun can't shine no more, 

 And nothing looks the way it did before; 

 The glad thoughts that I used to think are past. 

 Her desk's shut up to-day, the lid's locked fast; 

 The keys where she typewrote are still; her chair 

 Looks sad and lonesome standin' empty there— 

 I'd like to let the tears come if I dast. 



 This morning when the boss come in he found 

 A letter that he'd got from her, and so 

 He read it over twice and turned around 

 And said: "The little fool's got married!" Oh, 

 It seemed as if I'd sink down through the ground, 

 And never peep no more—I didn't, though.