MARKHEIM, by Robert Louis Stevenson

 “Yes,” said the dealer, “our windfalls are of various kinds. Some
      customers are ignorant, and then I touch a dividend on my superior
      knowledge. Some are dishonest,” and here he held up the candle, so that
      the light fell strongly on his visitor, “and in that case,” he continued,
      “I profit by my virtue.”

 Markheim had but just entered from the daylight streets, and his eyes had
      not yet grown familiar with the mingled shine and darkness in the shop. At
      these pointed words, and before the near presence of the flame, he blinked
      painfully and looked aside.

 The dealer chuckled. “You come to me on Christmas Day,” he resumed, “when
      you know that I am alone in my house, put up my shutters, and make a point
      of refusing business. Well, you will have to pay for that; you will have
      to pay for my loss of time, when I should be balancing my books; you will
      have to pay, besides, for a kind of manner that I remark in you to-day
      very strongly. I am the essence of discretion, and ask no awkward
      questions; but when a customer cannot look me in the eye, he has to pay
      for it.” The dealer once more chuckled; and then, changing to his usual
      business voice, though still with a note of irony, “You can give, as
      usual, a clear account of how you came into the possession of the object?”
       he continued. “Still your uncle’s cabinet? A remarkable collector, sir!”

 And the little pale, round-shouldered dealer stood almost on tip-toe,
      looking over the top of his gold spectacles, and nodding his head with
      every mark of disbelief. Markheim returned his gaze with one of infinite
      pity, and a touch of horror.

 “This time,” said he, “you are in error. I have not come to sell, but to
      buy. I have no curios to dispose of; my uncle’s cabinet is bare to the
      wainscot; even were it still intact, I have done well on the Stock
      Exchange, and should more likely add to it than otherwise, and my errand
      to-day is simplicity itself. I seek a Christmas present for a lady,” he
      continued, waxing more fluent as he struck into the speech he had
      prepared; “and certainly I owe you every excuse for thus disturbing you
      upon so small a matter. But the thing was neglected yesterday; I must
      produce my little compliment at dinner; and, as you very well know, a rich
      marriage is not a thing to be neglected.”

 There followed a pause, during which the dealer seemed to weigh this
      statement incredulously. The ticking of many clocks among the curious
      lumber of the shop, and the faint rushing of the cabs in a near
      thoroughfare, filled up the interval of silence.

 “Well, sir,” said the dealer, “be it so. You are an old customer after
      all; and if, as you say, you have the chance of a good marriage, far be it
      from me to be an obstacle. Here is a nice thing for a lady now,” he went
      on, “this hand-glass—fifteenth century, warranted; comes from a good
      collection, too; but I reserve the name, in the interests of my customer,
      who was just like yourself, my dear sir, the nephew and sole heir of a
      remarkable collector.”

 The dealer, while he thus ran on in his dry and biting voice, had stooped
      to take the object from its place; and, as he had done so, a shock had
      passed through Markheim, a start both of hand and foot, a sudden leap of
      many tumultuous passions to the face. It passed as swiftly as it came, and
      left no trace beyond a certain trembling of the hand that now received the
      glass.

 “A glass,” he said hoarsely, and then paused, and repeated it more
      clearly. “A glass? For Christmas? Surely not?”

 “And why not?” cried the dealer. “Why not a glass?”

 Markheim was looking upon him with an indefinable expression. “You ask me
      why not?” he said. “Why, look here—look in it—look at
      yourself! Do you like to see it? No! nor I—nor any man.”

 The little man had jumped back when Markheim had so suddenly confronted
      him with the mirror; but now, perceiving there was nothing worse on hand,
      he chuckled. “Your future lady, sir, must be pretty hard favoured,” said
      he.

 “I ask you,” said Markheim, “for a Christmas present, and you give me this—this
      damned reminder of years, and sins and follies—this hand-conscience!
      Did you mean it? Had you a thought in your mind? Tell me. It will be
      better for you if you do. Come, tell me about yourself. I hazard a guess
      now, that you are in secret a very charitable man.”

 The dealer looked closely at his companion. It was very odd, Markheim did
      not appear to be laughing; there was something in his face like an eager
      sparkle of hope, but nothing of mirth.

 “What are you driving at?” the dealer asked.

 “Not charitable?” returned the other, gloomily. “Not charitable; not
      pious; not scrupulous; unloving, unbeloved; a hand to get money, a safe to
      keep it. Is that all? Dear God, man, is that all?”

 “I will tell you what it is,” began the dealer, with some sharpness, and
      then broke off again into a chuckle. “But I see this is a love match of
      yours, and you have been drinking the lady’s health.”

 “Ah!” cried Markheim, with a strange curiosity. “Ah, have you been in
      love? Tell me about that.”

 “I,” cried the dealer. “I in love! I never had the time, nor have I the
      time to-day for all this nonsense. Will you take the glass?”

 “Where is the hurry?” returned Markheim. “It is very pleasant to stand
      here talking; and life is so short and insecure that I would not hurry
      away from any pleasure—no, not even from so mild a one as this. We
      should rather cling, cling to what little we can get, like a man at a
      cliff’s edge. Every second is a cliff, if you think upon it—a cliff
      a mile high—high enough, if we fall, to dash us out of every feature
      of humanity. Hence it is best to talk pleasantly. Let us talk of each
      other; why should we wear this mask? Let us be confidential. Who knows? we
      might become friends.”

 “I have just one word to say to you,” said the dealer. “Either make your
      purchase, or walk out of my shop.”

 “True, true,” said Markheim. “Enough fooling. To business. Show me
      something else.”

 The dealer stooped once more, this time to replace the glass upon the
      shelf, his thin blond hair falling over his eyes as he did so. Markheim
      moved a little nearer, with one hand in the pocket of his greatcoat; he
      drew himself up and filled his lungs; at the same time many different
      emotions were depicted together on his face—terror, horror, and
      resolve, fascination and a physical repulsion; and through a haggard lift
      of his upper lip, his teeth looked out.

 “This, perhaps, may suit,” observed the dealer. And then, as he began to
      rearise, Markheim bounded from behind upon his victim. The long,
      skewer-like dagger flashed and fell. The dealer struggled like a hen,
      striking his temple on the shelf, and then tumbled on the floor in a heap.

 Time had some score of small voices in that shop—some stately and
      slow as was becoming to their great age; others garrulous and hurried. All
      these told out the seconds in an intricate chorus of tickings. Then the
      passage of a lad’s feet, heavily running on the pavement, broke in upon
      these smaller voices and startled Markheim into the consciousness of his
      surroundings. He looked about him awfully. The candle stood on the
      counter, its flame solemnly wagging in a draught; and by that
      inconsiderable movement the whole room was filled with noiseless bustle
      and kept heaving like a sea: the tall shadows nodding, the gross blots of
      darkness swelling and dwindling as with respiration, the faces of the
      portraits and the china gods changing and wavering like images in water.
      The inner door stood ajar, and peered into that leaguer of shadows with a
      long slit of daylight like a pointing finger.

 From these fear-stricken rovings, Markheim’s eyes returned to the body of
      his victim, where it lay, both humped and sprawling, incredibly small and
      strangely meaner than in life. In these poor, miserly clothes, in that
      ungainly attitude, the dealer lay like so much sawdust. Markheim had
      feared to see it, and, lo! it was nothing. And yet, as he gazed, this
      bundle of old clothes and pool of blood began to find eloquent voices.
      There it must lie; there was none to work the cunning hinges or direct the
      miracle of locomotion; there it must lie till it was found. Found! ay, and
      then? Then would this dead flesh lift up a cry that would ring over
      England, and fill the world with the echoes of pursuit. Ay, dead or not,
      this was still the enemy. “Time was that when the brains were out,” he
      thought; and the first word struck into his mind. Time, now that the deed
      was accomplished—time, which had closed for the victim, had become
      instant and momentous for the slayer.

 The thought was yet in his mind, when, first one and then another, with
      every variety of pace and voice—one deep as the bell from a
      cathedral turret, another ringing on its treble notes the prelude of a
      waltz,—the clocks began to strike the hour of three in the
      afternoon.

 The sudden outbreak of so many tongues in that dumb chamber staggered him.
      He began to bestir himself, going to and fro with the candle, beleaguered
      by moving shadows, and startled to the soul by chance reflections. In many
      rich mirrors, some of home design, some from Venice or Amsterdam, he saw
      his face repeated and repeated, as it were an army of spies; his own eyes
      met and detected him; and the sound of his own steps, lightly as they
      fell, vexed the surrounding quiet. And still, as he continued to fill his
      pockets, his mind accused him with a sickening iteration, of the thousand
      faults of his design. He should have chosen a more quiet hour; he should
      have prepared an alibi; he should not have used a knife; he should have
      been more cautious, and only bound and gagged the dealer, and not killed
      him; he should have been more bold, and killed the servant also; he should
      have done all things otherwise. Poignant regrets, weary, incessant toiling
      of the mind to change what was unchangeable, to plan what was now useless,
      to be the architect of the irrevocable past. Meanwhile, and behind all
      this activity, brute terrors, like the scurrying of rats in a deserted
      attic, filled the more remote chambers of his brain with riot; the hand of
      the constable would fall heavy on his shoulder, and his nerves would jerk
      like a hooked fish; or he beheld, in galloping defile, the dock, the
      prison, the gallows, and the black coffin.

 Terror of the people in the street sat down before his mind like a
      besieging army. It was impossible, he thought, but that some rumour of the
      struggle must have reached their ears and set on edge their curiosity; and
      now, in all the neighbouring houses, he divined them sitting motionless
      and with uplifted ear—solitary people, condemned to spend Christmas
      dwelling alone on memories of the past, and now startingly recalled from
      that tender exercise; happy family parties struck into silence round the
      table, the mother still with raised finger—every degree and age and
      humour, but all, by their own hearths, prying and hearkening and weaving
      the rope that was to hang him. Sometimes it seemed to him he could not
      move too softly; the clink of the tall Bohemian goblets rang out loudly
      like a bell; and alarmed by the bigness of the ticking, he was tempted to
      stop the clocks. And then, again, with a swift transition of his terrors,
      the very silence of the place appeared a source of peril, and a thing to
      strike and freeze the passer-by; and he would step more boldly, and bustle
      aloud among the contents of the shop, and imitate, with elaborate bravado,
      the movements of a busy man at ease in his own house.

 But he was now so pulled about by different alarms that, while one portion
      of his mind was still alert and cunning, another trembled on the brink of
      lunacy. One hallucination in particular took a strong hold on his
      credulity. The neighbour hearkening with white face beside his window, the
      passer-by arrested by a horrible surmise on the pavement—these could
      at worst suspect, they could not know; through the brick walls and
      shuttered windows only sounds could penetrate. But here, within the house,
      was he alone? He knew he was; he had watched the servant set forth
      sweet-hearting, in her poor best, “out for the day” written in every
      ribbon and smile. Yes, he was alone, of course; and yet, in the bulk of
      empty house above him, he could surely hear a stir of delicate footing; he
      was surely conscious, inexplicably conscious of some presence. Ay, surely;
      to every room and corner of the house his imagination followed it; and now
      it was a faceless thing, and yet had eyes to see with; and again it was a
      shadow of himself; and yet again behold the image of the dead dealer,
      reinspired with cunning and hatred.

 At times, with a strong effort, he would glance at the open door which
      still seemed to repel his eyes. The house was tall, the skylight small and
      dirty, the day blind with fog; and the light that filtered down to the
      ground story was exceedingly faint, and showed dimly on the threshold of
      the shop. And yet, in that strip of doubtful brightness, did there not
      hang wavering a shadow?

 Suddenly, from the street outside, a very jovial gentleman began to beat
      with a staff on the shop door, accompanying his blows with shouts and
      railleries in which the dealer was continually called upon by name.
      Markheim, smitten into ice, glanced at the dead man. But no! he lay quite
      still; he was fled away far beyond earshot of these blows and shoutings;
      he was sunk beneath seas of silence; and his name, which would once have
      caught his notice above the howling of a storm, had become an empty sound.
      And presently the jovial gentleman desisted from his knocking and
      departed.

 Here was a broad hint to hurry what remained to be done, to get forth from
      this accusing neighbourhood, to plunge into a bath of London multitudes,
      and to reach, on the other side of day, that haven of safety and apparent
      innocence—his bed. One visitor had come; at any moment another might
      follow and be more obstinate. To have done the deed, and yet not to reap
      the profit, would be too abhorrent a failure. The money—that was now
      Markheim’s concern; and as a means to that, the keys.

 He glanced over his shoulder at the open door, where the shadow was still
      lingering and shivering; and with no conscious repugnance of the mind, yet
      with a tremor of the belly, he drew near the body of his victim. The human
      character had quite departed. Like a suit half-stuffed with bran, the
      limbs lay scattered, the trunk doubled, on the floor; and yet the thing
      repelled him. Although so dingy and inconsiderable to the eye, he feared
      it might have more significance to the touch. He took the body by the
      shoulders, and turned it on its back. It was strangely light and supple,
      and the limbs, as if they had been broken, fell into the oddest postures.
      The face was robbed of all expression; but it was as pale as wax, and
      shockingly smeared with blood about one temple. That was, for Markheim,
      the one displeasing circumstance. It carried him back, upon the instant,
      to a certain fair-day in a fishers’ village: a gray day, a piping wind, a
      crowd upon the street, the blare of brasses, the booming of drums, the
      nasal voice of a ballad singer; and a boy going to and fro, buried
      overhead in the crowd and divided between interest and fear, until, coming
      out upon the chief place of concourse, he beheld a booth and a great
      screen with pictures, dismally designed, garishly coloured—Brownrigg
      with her apprentice, the Mannings with their murdered guest, Weare in the
      death-grip of Thurtell, and a score besides of famous crimes. The thing
      was as clear as an illusion He was once again that little boy; he was
      looking once again, and with the same sense of physical revolt, at these
      vile pictures; he was still stunned by the thumping of the drums. A bar of
      that day’s music returned upon his memory; and at that, for the first
      time, a qualm came over him, a breath of nausea, a sudden weakness of the
      joints, which he must instantly resist and conquer.

 He judged it more prudent to confront than to flee from these
      considerations, looking the more hardily in the dead face, bending his
      mind to realise the nature and greatness of his crime. So little a while
      ago that face had moved with every change of sentiment, that pale mouth
      had spoken, that body had been all on fire with governable energies; and
      now, and by his act, that piece of life had been arrested, as the
      horologist, with interjected finger, arrests the beating of the clock. So
      he reasoned in vain; he could rise to no more remorseful consciousness;
      the same heart which had shuddered before the painted effigies of crime,
      looked on its reality unmoved. At best, he felt a gleam of pity for one
      who had been endowed in vain with all those faculties that can make the
      world a garden of enchantment, one who had never lived and who was now
      dead. But of penitence, no, not a tremor.

 With that, shaking himself clear of these considerations, he found the
      keys and advanced toward the open door of the shop. Outside, it had begun
      to rain smartly, and the sound of the shower upon the roof had banished
      silence. Like some dripping cavern, the chambers of the house were haunted
      by an incessant echoing, which filled the ear and mingled with the ticking
      of the clocks. And, as Markheim approached the door, he seemed to hear, in
      answer to his own cautious tread, the steps of another foot withdrawing up
      the stair. The shadow still palpitated loosely on the threshold. He threw
      a ton’s weight of resolve upon his muscles, and drew back the door.

 The faint, foggy daylight glimmered dimly on the bare floor and stairs; on
      the bright suit of armour posted, halbert in hand, upon the landing; and
      on the dark wood-carvings, and framed pictures that hung against the
      yellow panels of the wainscot. So loud was the beating of the rain through
      all the house that, in Markheim’s ears, it began to be distinguished into
      many different sounds. Footsteps and sighs, the tread of regiments
      marching in the distance, the chink of money in the counting, and the
      creaking of doors held stealthily ajar, appeared to mingle with the patter
      of the drops upon the cupola and the gushing of the water in the pipes.
      The sense that he was not alone grew upon him to the verge of madness. On
      every side he was haunted and begirt by presences. He heard them moving in
      the upper chambers; from the shop, he heard the dead man getting to his
      legs; and as he began with a great effort to mount the stairs, feet fled
      quietly before him and followed stealthily behind. If he were but deaf, he
      thought, how tranquilly he would possess his soul! And then again, and
      hearkening with ever fresh attention, he blessed himself for that
      unresting sense which held the outposts and stood a trusty sentinel upon
      his life. His head turned continually on his neck; his eyes, which seemed
      starting from their orbits, scouted on every side, and on every side were
      half rewarded as with the tail of something nameless vanishing. The four
      and twenty steps to the first floor were four and twenty agonies.

 On that first story, the doors stood ajar—three of them, like three
      ambushes, shaking his nerves like the throats of cannon. He could never
      again, he felt, be sufficiently immured and fortified from men’s observing
      eyes; he longed to be home, girt in by walls, buried among bedclothes, and
      invisible to all but God. And at that thought he wondered a little,
      recollecting tales of other murderers and the fear they were said to
      entertain of heavenly avengers. It was not so, at least, with him. He
      feared the laws of nature, lest, in their callous and immutable procedure,
      they should preserve some damning evidence of his crime. He feared tenfold
      more, with a slavish, superstitious terror, some scission in the
      continuity of man’s experience, some wilful illegality of nature. He
      played a game of skill, depending on the rules, calculating consequence
      from cause; and what if nature, as the defeated tyrant overthrew the
      chess-board, should break the mould of their succession? The like had
      befallen Napoleon (so writers said) when the winter changed the time of
      its appearance. The like might befall Markheim: the solid walls might
      become transparent and reveal his doings like those of bees in a glass
      hive; the stout planks might yield under his foot like quicksands and
      detain him in their clutch. Ay, and there were soberer accidents that
      might destroy him; if, for instance, the house should fall and imprison
      him beside the body of his victim, or the house next door should fly on
      fire, and the firemen invade him from all sides. These things he feared;
      and, in a sense, these things might be called the hands of God reached
      forth against sin. But about God himself he was at ease; his act was
      doubtless exceptional, but so were his excuses, which God knew; it was
      there, and not among men, that he felt sure of justice.

 When he had got safe into the drawing-room, and shut the door behind him,
      he was aware of a respite from alarms. The room was quite dismantled,
      uncarpeted besides, and strewn with packing-cases and incongruous
      furniture; several great pier-glasses, in which he beheld himself at
      various angles, like an actor on a stage; many pictures, framed and
      unframed, standing, with their faces to the wall; a fine Sheraton
      sideboard, a cabinet of marquetry, and a great old bed, with tapestry
      hangings. The windows opened to the floor; but by great good fortune the
      lower part of the shutters had been closed, and this concealed him from
      the neighbours. Here, then, Markheim drew in a packing-case before the
      cabinet, and began to search among the keys. It was a long business, for
      there were many; and it was irksome, besides; for, after all, there might
      be nothing in the cabinet, and time was on the wing. But the closeness of
      the occupation sobered him. With the tail of his eye he saw the door—even
      glanced at it from time to time directly, like a besieged commander
      pleased to verify the good estate of his defences. But in truth he was at
      peace. The rain falling in the street sounded natural and pleasant.
      Presently, on the other side, the notes of a piano were wakened to the
      music of a hymn, and the voices of many children took up the air and
      words. How stately, how comfortable was the melody! How fresh the youthful
      voices! Markheim gave ear to it smilingly, as he sorted out the keys; and
      his mind was thronged with answerable ideas and images: church-going
      children, and the pealing of the high organ; children afield, bathers by
      the brookside, ramblers on the brambly common, kite-flyers in the windy
      and cloud-navigated sky; and then, at another cadence of the hymn, back
      again to church, and the somnolence of summer Sundays, and the high
      genteel voice of the parson (which he smiled a little to recall) and the
      painted Jacobean tombs, and the dim lettering of the Ten Commandments in
      the chancel.

 And as he sat thus, at once busy and absent, he was startled to his feet.
      A flash of ice, a flash of fire, a bursting gush of blood, went over him,
      and then he stood transfixed and thrilling. A step mounted the stair
      slowly and steadily, and presently a hand was laid upon the knob, and the
      lock clicked, and the door opened.

 Fear held Markheim in a vice. What to expect he knew not—whether the
      dead man walking, or the official ministers of human justice, or some
      chance witness blindly stumbling in to consign him to the gallows. But
      when a face was thrust into the aperture, glanced round the room, looked
      at him, nodded and smiled as if in friendly recognition, and then withdrew
      again, and the door closed behind it, his fear broke loose from his
      control in a hoarse cry. At the sound of this the visitant returned.

 “Did you call me?” he asked, pleasantly, and with that he entered the room
      and closed the door behind him.

 Markheim stood and gazed at him with all his eyes. Perhaps there was a
      film upon his sight, but the outlines of the new comer seemed to change
      and waver like those of the idols in the wavering candle-light of the
      shop; and at times he thought he knew him; and at times he thought he bore
      a likeness to himself; and always, like a lump of living terror, there lay
      in his bosom the conviction that this thing was not of the earth and not
      of God.

 And yet the creature had a strange air of the commonplace, as he stood
      looking on Markheim with a smile; and when he added, “You are looking for
      the money, I believe?” it was in the tones of everyday politeness.

 Markheim made no answer.

 “I should warn you,” resumed the other, “that the maid has left her
      sweetheart earlier than usual and will soon be here. If Mr. Markheim be
      found in this house, I need not describe to him the consequences.”

 “You know me?” cried the murderer.

 The visitor smiled. “You have long been a favourite of mine,” he said;
      “and I have long observed and often sought to help you.”

 “What are you?” cried Markheim; “the devil?”

 “What I may be,” returned the other, “cannot affect the service I propose
      to render you.”

 “It can,” cried Markheim; “it does! Be helped by you? No, never; not by
      you! You do not know me yet; thank God, you do not know me!”

 “I know you,” replied the visitant, with a sort of kind severity or rather
      firmness. “I know you to the soul.”

 “Know me!” cried Markheim. “Who can do so? My life is but a travesty and
      slander on myself. I have lived to belie my nature. All men do; all men
      are better than this disguise that grows about and stifles them. You see
      each dragged away by life, like one whom bravos have seized and muffled in
      a cloak. If they had their own control—if you could see their faces,
      they would be altogether different, they would shine out for heroes and
      saints! I am worse than most; myself is more overlaid; my excuse is known
      to me and God. But, had I the time, I could disclose myself.”

 “To me?” inquired the visitant.

 “To you before all,” returned the murderer. “I supposed you were
      intelligent. I thought—since you exist—you would prove a
      reader of the heart. And yet you would propose to judge me by my acts!
      Think of it—my acts! I was born and I have lived in a land of
      giants; giants have dragged me by the wrists since I was born out of my
      mother—the giants of circumstance. And you would judge me by my
      acts! But can you not look within? Can you not understand that evil is
      hateful to me? Can you not see within me the clear writing of conscience,
      never blurred by any wilful sophistry, although too often disregarded? Can
      you not read me for a thing that surely must be common as humanity—the
      unwilling sinner?”

 “All this is very feelingly expressed,” was the reply, “but it regards me
      not. These points of consistency are beyond my province, and I care not in
      the least by what compulsion you may have been dragged away, so as you are
      but carried in the right direction. But time flies; the servant delays,
      looking in the faces of the crowd and at the pictures on the hoardings,
      but still she keeps moving nearer; and remember, it is as if the gallows
      itself was striding towards you through the Christmas streets! Shall I
      help you—I, who know all? Shall I tell you where to find the money?”

 “For what price?” asked Markheim.

 “I offer you the service for a Christmas gift,” returned the other.

 Markheim could not refrain from smiling with a kind of bitter triumph.
      “No,” said he, “I will take nothing at your hands; if I were dying of
      thirst, and it was your hand that put the pitcher to my lips, I should
      find the courage to refuse. It may be credulous, but I will do nothing to
      commit myself to evil.”

 “I have no objection to a death-bed repentance,” observed the visitant.

 “Because you disbelieve their efficacy!” Markheim cried.

 “I do not say so,” returned the other; “but I look on these things from a
      different side, and when the life is done my interest falls. The man has
      lived to serve me, to spread black looks under colour of religion, or to
      sow tares in the wheat-field, as you do, in a course of weak compliance
      with desire. Now that he draws so near to his deliverance, he can add but
      one act of service: to repent, to die smiling, and thus to build up in
      confidence and hope the more timorous of my surviving followers. I am not
      so hard a master. Try me; accept my help. Please yourself in life as you
      have done hitherto; please yourself more amply, spread your elbows at the
      board; and when the night begins to fall and the curtains to be drawn, I
      tell you, for your greater comfort, that you will find it even easy to
      compound your quarrel with your conscience, and to make a truckling peace
      with God. I came but now from such a death-bed, and the room was full of
      sincere mourners, listening to the man’s last words; and when I looked
      into that face, which had been set as a flint against mercy, I found it
      smiling with hope.”

 “And do you, then, suppose me such a creature?” asked Markheim. “Do you
      think I have no more generous aspirations than to sin and sin and sin and
      at last sneak into heaven? My heart rises at the thought. Is this, then,
      your experience of mankind? or is it because you find me with red hands
      that you presume such baseness? And is this crime of murder indeed so
      impious as to dry up the very springs of good?”

 “Murder is to me no special category,” replied the other. “All sins are
      murder, even as all life is war. I behold your race, like starving
      mariners on a raft, plucking crusts out of the hands of famine and feeding
      on each other’s lives. I follow sins beyond the moment of their acting; I
      find in all that the last consequence is death, and to my eyes, the pretty
      maid who thwarts her mother with such taking graces on a question of a
      ball, drips no less visibly with human gore than such a murderer as
      yourself. Do I say that I follow sins? I follow virtues also. They differ
      not by the thickness of a nail; they are both scythes for the reaping
      angel of Death. Evil, for which I live, consists not in action but in
      character. The bad man is dear to me, not the bad act, whose fruits, if we
      could follow them far enough down the hurtling cataract of the ages, might
      yet be found more blessed than those of the rarest virtues. And it is not
      because you have killed a dealer, but because you are Markheim, that I
      offer to forward your escape.”

 “I will lay my heart open to you,” answered Markheim. “This crime on which
      you find me is my last. On my way to it I have learned many lessons;
      itself is a lesson—a momentous lesson. Hitherto I have been driven
      with revolt to what I would not; I was a bond-slave to poverty, driven and
      scourged. There are robust virtues that can stand in these temptations;
      mine was not so; I had a thirst of pleasure. But to-day, and out of this
      deed, I pluck both warning and riches—both the power and a fresh
      resolve to be myself. I become in all things a free actor in the world; I
      begin to see myself all changed, these hands the agents of good, this
      heart at peace. Something comes over me out of the past—something of
      what I have dreamed on Sabbath evenings to the sound of the church organ,
      of what I forecast when I shed tears over noble books, or talked, an
      innocent child, with my mother. There lies my life; I have wandered a few
      years, but now I see once more my city of destination.”

 “You are to use this money on the Stock Exchange, I think?” remarked the
      visitor; “and there, if I mistake not, you have already lost some
      thousands?”

 “Ah,” said Markheim, “but this time I have a sure thing.”

 “This time, again, you will lose,” replied the visitor quietly.

 “Ah, but I keep back the half!” cried Markheim.

 “That also you will lose,” said the other.

 The sweat started upon Markheim’s brow. “Well then, what matter?” he
      exclaimed. “Say it be lost, say I am plunged again in poverty, shall one
      part of me, and that the worse, continue until the end to override the
      better? Evil and good run strong in me, hailing me both ways. I do not
      love the one thing; I love all. I can conceive great deeds, renunciations,
      martyrdoms; and though I be fallen to such a crime as murder, pity is no
      stranger to my thoughts. I pity the poor; who knows their trials better
      than myself? I pity and help them. I prize love; I love honest laughter;
      there is no good thing nor true thing on earth but I love it from my
      heart. And are my vices only to direct my life, and my virtues to lie
      without effect, like some passive lumber of the mind? Not so; good, also,
      is a spring of acts.”

 But the visitant raised his finger. “For six and thirty years that you
      have been in this world,” said he, “through many changes of fortune and
      varieties of humour, I have watched you steadily fall. Fifteen years ago
      you would have started at a theft. Three years back you would have
      blenched at the name of murder. Is there any crime, is there any cruelty
      or meanness, from which you still recoil? Five years from now I shall
      detect you in the fact! Downward, downward, lies your way; nor can
      anything but death avail to stop you.”

 “It is true,” Markheim said huskily, “I have in some degree complied with
      evil. But it is so with all; the very saints, in the mere exercise of
      living, grow less dainty, and take on the tone of their surroundings.”

 “I will propound to you one simple question,” said the other; “and as you
      answer I shall read to you your moral horoscope. You have grown in many
      things more lax; possibly you do right to be so; and at any account, it is
      the same with all men. But granting that, are you in any one particular,
      however trifling, more difficult to please with your own conduct, or do
      you go in all things with a looser rein?”

 “In any one?” repeated Markheim, with an anguish of consideration. “No,”
       he added, with despair; “in none! I have gone down in all.”

 “Then,” said the visitor, “content yourself with what you are, for you
      will never change; and the words of your part on this stage are
      irrevocably written down.”

 Markheim stood for a long while silent, and, indeed, it was the visitor
      who first broke the silence. “That being so,” he said, “shall I show you
      the money?”

 “And grace?” cried Markheim.

 “Have you not tried it?” returned the other. “Two or three years ago did I
      not see you on the platform of revival meetings, and was not your voice
      the loudest in the hymn?”

 “It is true,” said Markheim; “and I see clearly what remains for me by way
      of duty. I thank you for these lessons from my soul; my eyes are opened,
      and I behold myself at last for what I am.”

 At this moment, the sharp note of the door-bell rang through the house;
      and the visitant, as though this were some concerted signal for which he
      had been waiting, changed at once in his demeanour.

 “The maid!” he cried. “She has returned, as I forewarned you, and there is
      now before you one more difficult passage. Her master, you must say, is
      ill; you must let her in, with an assured but rather serious countenance;
      no smiles, no overacting, and I promise you success! Once the girl within,
      and the door closed, the same dexterity that has already rid you of the
      dealer will relieve you of this last danger in your path. Thenceforward
      you have the whole evening—the whole night, if needful—to
      ransack the treasures of the house and to make good your safety. This is
      help that comes to you with the mask of danger. Up!” he cried; “up,
      friend. Your life hangs trembling in the scales; up, and act!”

 Markheim steadily regarded his counsellor. “If I be condemned to evil
      acts,” he said, “there is still one door of freedom open: I can cease from
      action. If my life be an ill thing, I can lay it down. Though I be, as you
      say truly, at the beck of every small temptation, I can yet, by one
      decisive gesture, place myself beyond the reach of all. My love of good is
      damned to barrenness; it may, and let it be! But I have still my hatred of
      evil; and from that, to your galling disappointment, you shall see that I
      can draw both energy and courage.”

 The features of the visitor began to undergo a wonderful and lovely
      change: they brightened and softened with a tender triumph, and, even as
      they brightened, faded and dislimned. But Markheim did not pause to watch
      or understand the transformation. He opened the door and went downstairs
      very slowly, thinking to himself. His past went soberly before him; he
      beheld it as it was, ugly and strenuous like a dream, random as chance
      medley—a scene of defeat. Life, as he thus reviewed it, tempted him
      no longer; but on the further side he perceived a quiet haven for his
      bark. He paused in the passage, and looked into the shop, where the candle
      still burned by the dead body. It was strangely silent. Thoughts of the
      dealer swarmed into his mind, as he stood gazing. And then the bell once
      more broke out into impatient clamour.

 He confronted the maid upon the threshold with something like a smile.

 “You had better go for the police,” said he; “I have killed your master.”

  

  









 QUEEN TITA’S WAGER, by William Black

  

  









 I—FRANZISKA FAHLER

 It is a Christmas morning in Surrey—cold, still and gray, with a
      frail glimmer of sunshine coming through the bare trees to melt the
      hoar-frost on the lawn. The postman has just gone out, swinging the gate
      behind him. A fire burns brightly in the breakfast-room; and there is
      silence about the house, for the children have gone off to climb Box Hill
      before being marched to church.

 The small and gentle lady who presides over the household walks sedately
      in, and lifts the solitary letter that is lying on her plate. About three
      seconds suffice to let her run through its contents, and then she suddenly
      cries:

 “I knew it! I said it! I told you two months ago she was only flirting
      with him; and now she has rejected him. And oh! I am so glad of it! The
      poor boy!”

 The other person in the room, who had been meekly waiting for his
      breakfast for half an hour, ventures to point out that there is nothing to
      rejoice over in the fact of a young man having been rejected by a young
      woman.

 “If it were final, yes! If these two young folks were not certain to go
      and marry somebody else, you might congratulate them both. But you know
      they will. The poor boy will go courting again in three months’ time, and
      be vastly pleased with his condition.”

 “Oh, never, never!” she says. “He has had such a lesson! You know I warned
      him. I knew she was only flirting with him. Poor Charlie! Now I hope he
      will get on with his profession, and leave such things out of his head.
      And as for that creature—”

 “I will do you the justice to say,” observes her husband, who is still
      regarding the table with a longing eye, “that you did oppose this match,
      because you hadn’t the making of it. If you had brought these two together
      they would have been married ere this. Never mind; you can marry him to
      somebody of your own choosing now.”

 “No,” she says, with much decision; “he must not think of marriage. He
      cannot think of it. It will take the poor lad a long time to get over this
      blow.”

 “He will marry within a year.”

 “I will bet you whatever you like that he doesn’t,” she says,
      triumphantly.

 “Whatever I like! That is a big wager. If you lose, do you think you could
      pay? I should like, for example, to have my own way in my own house.”

 “If I lose you shall,” says the generous creature; and the bargain is
      concluded.

 Nothing further is said about this matter for the moment. The children
      return from Box Hill, and are rigged out for church. Two young people,
      friends of ours, and recently married, having no domestic circle of their
      own, and having promised to spend the whole Christmas Day with us,
      arrived. Then we set out, trying as much as possible to think that
      Christmas Day is different from any other day, and pleased to observe that
      the younger folk, at least, cherish the delusion.

 But just before reaching the church I say to the small lady who got the
      letter in the morning, and whom we generally call Tita:

 “When do you expect to see Charlie?”

 “I don’t know,” she answers. “After this cruel affair he won’t like to go
      about much.”

 “You remember that he promised to go with us to the Black Forest?”

 “Yes; and I am sure it will be a pleasant trip for him.”

 “Shall we go to Huferschingen?”

 “I suppose so.”

 “Franziska is a pretty girl.”

 Now you would not think that any great mischief could be done by the mere
      remark that Franziska was a pretty girl. Anybody who had seen Franziska
      Fahler, niece of the proprietor of the “Goldenen Bock” in Huferschingen,
      would admit that in a moment. But this is nevertheless true, that our
      important but diminutive Queen Tita was very thoughtful during the rest of
      our walk to this little church; and in church, too, she was thinking so
      deeply that she almost forgot to look at the effect of the decorations she
      had nailed up the day before. Yet nothing could have offended in the bare
      observation that Franziska was a pretty girl.

 At dinner in the evening we had our two guests and a few young fellows
      from London who did not happen to have their families or homes there.
      Curiously enough, there was a vast deal of talk about travelling, and also
      about Baden, and more particularly about the southern districts of Baden.
      Tita said the Black Forest was the most charming place in the world; and
      as it was Christmas Day, and as we had been listening to a sermon all
      about charity and kindness and consideration for others, nobody was rude
      enough to contradict her. But our forbearance was put to a severe test
      when, after dinner, she produced a photographic album and handed it round,
      and challenged everybody to say whether the young lady in the corner was
      not absolutely lovely. Most of them said that she was certainly very
      nice-looking; and Tita seemed a little disappointed.

 I perceived that it would no longer do to say that Franziska was a pretty
      girl. We should henceforth have to swear by everything we held dear that
      she was absolutely lovely.

  

  









 II—ZUM “GOLDENEN BOCK”

 We felt some pity for the lad when we took him abroad with us; but it must
      be confessed that at first he was not a very desirable travelling
      companion. There was a gloom about him. Despite the eight months that had
      elapsed, he professed that his old wound was still open. Tita treated him
      with the kindest maternal solicitude, which was a great mistake; tonics,
      not sweets, are required in such cases. Yet he was very grateful, and he
      said, with a blush, that, in any case, he would not rail against all women
      because of the badness of one. Indeed, you would not have fancied he had
      any great grudge against womankind. There were a great many English abroad
      that autumn, and we met whole batches of pretty girls at every station and
      at every table d’hote on our route. Did he avoid them, or glare at
      them savagely, or say hard things of them? Oh no! quite the reverse. He
      was a little shy at first; and when he saw a party of distressed damsels
      in a station, with their bewildered father in vain attempting to make
      himself understood to a porter, he would assist them in a brief and
      businesslike manner as if it were a duty, lift his cap, and then march off
      relieved. But by-and-by he began to make acquaintances in the hotel; and
      as he was a handsome, English-looking lad, who bore a certificate of
      honesty in his clear gray eyes and easy gait, he was rather made much of.
      Nor could any fault be decently found with his appetite.

 So we passed on from Konigswinter to Coblenz, and from Coblenz to
      Heidelberg, and from Heidelberg south to Freiburg, where we bade adieu to
      the last of the towns, and laid hold of a trap with a pair of ancient and
      angular horses, and plunged into the Hollenthal, the first great gorge of
      the Black Forest mountains. From one point to another we slowly urged our
      devious course, walking the most of the day, indeed, and putting the trap
      and ourselves up for the night at some quaint roadside hostelry, where we
      ate of roe-deer and drank of Affenthaler, and endeavoured to speak German
      with a pure Waldshut accent. And then, one evening, when the last rays of
      the sun were shining along the hills and touching the stems of the tall
      pines, we drove into a narrow valley and caught sight of a large brown
      building of wood, with projecting eaves and quaint windows, that stood
      close by the forest.

 “Here is my dear inn!” cried Tita, with a great glow of delight and
      affection in her face. “Here is mein gutes Thal! Ich gruss’ dich ein
      tausend Mal! And here is old Peter come out to see us; and there is
      Franziska!”

 “Oh, this is Franziska, is it?” said Charlie.

 Yes, this was Franziska. She was a well-built, handsome girl of nineteen
      or twenty, with a healthy, sunburnt complexion, and dark hair plaited into
      two long tails, which were taken up and twisted into a knot behind. That
      you could see from a distance. But on nearer approach you found that
      Franziska had really fine and intelligent features, and a pair of frank,
      clear, big brown eyes that had a very straight look about them. They were
      something of the eyes of a deer, indeed; wide apart, soft, and
      apprehensive, yet looking with a certain directness and unconsciousness
      that overcame her natural girlish timidity. Tita simply flew at her and
      kissed her heartily and asked her twenty questions at once. Franziska
      answered in very fair English, a little slow and formal, but quite
      grammatical. Then she was introduced to Charlie, and she shook hands with
      him in a simple and unembarrassed way; and then she turned to one of the
      servants and gave some directions about the luggage. Finally she begged
      Tita to go indoors and get off her travelling attire, which was done,
      leaving us two outside.

 “She’s a very pretty girl,” Charlie said, carelessly. “I suppose she’s
      sort of head cook and kitchen-maid here.”

 The impudence of these young men is something extraordinary.

 “If you wish to have your head in your hands,” I remarked to him, “just
      you repeat that remark at dinner. Why, Franziska is no end of a swell. She
      has two thousand pounds and the half of a mill. She has a sister married
      to the Geheimer-Ober-Hofbaurath of Hesse-Cassel. She had visited both
      Paris and Munich, and she has her dresses made in Freiburg.”

 “But why does such an illustrious creature bury herself in this valley,
      and in an old inn, and go about bareheaded?”

 “Because there are folks in the world without ambition, who like to live a
      quiet, decent, homely life. Every girl can’t marry a
      Geheimer-Ober-Hofbaurath. Ziska, now, is much more likely to marry the
      young doctor here.”

 “Oh, indeed! and live here all her days. She couldn’t do better. Happy
      Franziska!”

 We went indoors. It was a low, large, rambling place, with one immense
      room all hung round with roe-deers’ horns, and with one lesser room fitted
      up with a billiard-table. The inn lay a couple of hundred yards back from
      Huferschingen; but it had been made the headquarters of the keepers, and
      just outside this room there were a number of pegs for them to sling their
      guns and bags on when they came in of an evening to have a pipe and a
      chopin of white wine. Ziska’s uncle and aunt were both large, stout, and
      somnolent people, very good-natured and kind, but a trifle dull. Ziska
      really had the management of the place, and she was not slow to lend a
      hand if the servants were remiss in waiting on us. But that, it was
      understood, was done out of compliment to our small Queen Tita.

 By-and-by we sat down to dinner, and Franziska came to see that everything
      was going on straight. It was a dinner “with scenery.” You forgot to be
      particular about the soup, the venison, and the Affenthaler when from the
      window at your elbow you could look across the narrow valley and behold a
      long stretch of the Black Forest shining in the red glow of the sunset.
      The lower the sun sank the more intense became the crimson light on the
      tall stems of the pines; and then you could see the line of shadow slowly
      rising up the side of the opposite hill until only the topmost trees were
      touched with fire. Then these too lost it, and all the forest around us
      seemed to have a pale-blue mist stealing over it as the night fell and the
      twilight faded out of the sky overhead. Presently the long undulations of
      fir grew black, the stars came out, and the sound of the stream could be
      heard distantly in the hollow; and then, at Tita’s wish, we went off for a
      last stroll in among the soft moss and under the darkness of the pines,
      now and again starting some great capercailzie, and sending it flying and
      whirring down the glades.

 When we returned from that prowl into the forest, we found the inn dark.
      Such people as may have called in had gone home; but we suspected that
      Franziska had given the neighbours a hint not to overwhelm us on our first
      arrival. When we entered the big room, Franziska came in with candles;
      then she brought some matches, and also put on the table an odd little
      pack of cards, and went out. Her uncle and aunt had, even before we went
      out, come and bade us good-night formally, and shaken hands all round.
      They are early folk in the Black Forest.

 “Where has that girl gone now?” says Charlie. “Into that lonely
      billiard-room! Couldn’t you ask her to come in here? Or shall we go and
      play billiards?”

 Tita stares, and then demurely smiles; but it is with an assumed severity
      that she rebukes him for such a wicked proposal, and reminds him that he
      must start early next morning. He groans assent. Then she takes her leave.

 The big young man was silent for a moment or two, with his hands in his
      pockets and his legs stretched out. I begin to think I am in for it—the
      old story of blighted hopes and angry denunciation and hypocritical joy,
      and all the rest of it. But suddenly Charlie looks up with a businesslike
      air and says:

 “Who is that doctor fellow you were speaking about! Shall we see him
      to-morrow?”

 “You saw him to-night. It was he who passed us on the road with the two
      beagles.”

 “What! that little fellow with the bandy legs and the spectacles?” he
      cries, with a great laugh.

 “That little fellow,” I observe to him, “is a person of some importance, I
      can tell you. He—”

 “I suppose his sister married a Geheimer-Ober-under—what the dickens
      is it?” says this disrespectful young man.

 “Dr. Krumm has got the Iron Cross.”

 “That won’t make his legs any the straighter.”

 “He was at Weissenburg.”

 “I suppose he got that cast in the eye there.”

 “He can play the zither in a way that would astonish you. He has got a
      little money. Franziska and he would be able to live very comfortably
      together.”

 “Franziska and that fellow?” says Charlie; and then he rises with a sulky
      air, and proposes we should take our candles with us.

 But he is not sulky very long; for Ziska, hearing our footsteps, comes to
      the passage and bids us a friendly good-night.

 “Good-night, Miss Fahler!” he says, in rather a shamefaced way; “and I am
      so awfully sorry we have kept you up so late. We sha’n’t do it again.”

 You would have thought by his manner that it was two o’clock, whereas it
      was only half-past eleven!

  

  









 III—DR. KRUMM

 There was no particular reason why Dr. Krumm should marry Franziska
      Fahler, except that he was the most important young man in Huferschingen,
      and she was the most important young woman. People therefore thought they
      would make a good match, although Franziska certainly had the most to give
      in the way of good looks. Dr. Krumm was a short, bandy-legged, sturdy
      young man, with long, fair hair, a tanned complexion, light-blue eyes not
      quite looking the same way, spectacles, and a general air of industrious
      common sense about him, if one may use such a phrase. There was certainly
      little of the lover in his manner toward Ziska, and as little in hers
      toward him. They were very good friends, though, and he called her Ziska,
      while she gave him his nickname of Fidelio, his real name being Fidele.

 Now on this, the first morning of our stay in Huferschingen, all the
      population had turned out at an early hour to see us start for the forest;
      and as the Ober-Forster had gone away to visit his parents in Bavaria, Dr.
      Krumm was appointed to superintend the operations of the day. And when
      everybody was busy renewing acquaintance with us, gathering the straying
      dogs, examining guns and cartridge-belts, and generally aiding in the
      profound commotion of our setting out, Dr. Krumm was found to be talking
      in a very friendly and familiar manner with our pretty Franziska. Charlie
      eyed them askance. He began to say disrespectful things of Krumm: he
      thought Krumm a plain person. And then, when the bandy-legged doctor had
      got all the dogs, keepers, and beaters together, we set off along the
      road, and presently plunged into the cool shade of the forest, where the
      thick moss suddenly silenced our footsteps, and where there was a moist
      and resinous smell in the air.

 Well, the incidents of the forenoon’s shooting, picturesque as they were,
      and full of novelty to Tita’s protege, need not be described. At the end
      of the fourth drive, when we had got on nearly to luncheon-time, it
      appeared that Charlie had killed a handsome buck, and he was so pleased
      with this performance that he grew friendly with Dr. Krumm, who had,
      indeed, given him the haupt-stelle . But when, as we sat down to our
      sausages and bread and red wine, Charlie incidentally informed our
      commander-in-chief that, during one of the drives, a splendid yellow fox
      had come out of the underwood and stood and stared at him for three or
      four seconds, the doctor uttered a cry of despair.

 “I should have told you that,” he said, in English that was not quite so
      good as Ziska’s, “if I had remembered, yes! The English will not shoot the
      foxes; but they are very bad for us; they kill the young deer. We are glad
      to shoot them; and Franziska she told me she wanted a yellow fox for the
      skin to make something.”

 Charlie got very red in the face. He had missed a chance. If he had
      known that Franziska wanted a yellow fox, all the instinctive veneration
      for that animal that was in him would have gone clean out, and the fate of
      the animal—for Charlie was a smart shot—would have been
      definitely sealed.

 “Are there many of them?” said he, gloomily.

 “No; not many. But where there is one there are generally four or five. In
      the next drive we may come on them, yes! I will put you in a good place,
      sir, and you must not think of letting him go away; for Franziska, who has
      waited two, three weeks, and not one yellow fox not anywhere, and it is
      for the variety of the skin in a—a—I do not know what you call
      it.”

 “A rug, I suppose,” said Charlie.

 I subsequently heard that Charlie went to his post with a fixed
      determination to shoot anything of yellow colour that came near him. His
      station was next to that of Dr. Krumm; but of course they were invisible
      to each other. The horns of the beaters sounded a warning; the gunners
      cocked their guns and stood on the alert; in the perfect silence each one
      waited for the first glimmer of a brown hide down the long green glades of
      young fir. Then, according to Charlie’s account, by went two or three deer
      like lightning—all of them does. A buck came last, but swerved just
      as he came in sight, and backed and made straight for the line of beaters.
      Two more does, and then an absolute blank. One or two shots had been heard
      at a distance; either some of the more distant stations had been more
      fortunate, or one or other of the beaters had tried his luck. Suddenly
      there was a shot fired close to Charlie; he knew it must have been the
      doctor. In about a minute afterward he saw some pale-yellow object slowly
      worming its way through the ferns; and here, at length, he made sure he
      was going to get his yellow fox. But just as the animal came within fair
      distance, it turned over, made a struggle or two, and lay still. Charlie
      rushed along to the spot: it was, indeed, a yellow fox, shot in the head,
      and now as dead as a door-nail.

 What was he to do? Let Dr. Krumm take home this prize to Franziska, after
      he had had such a chance in the afternoon? Never! Charlie fired a barrel
      into the air, and then calmly awaited the coming up of the beaters and the
      drawing together of the sportsmen.

 Dr. Krumm, being at the next station, was the first to arrive. He found
      Charlie standing by the side of the slain fox.

 “Ha!” he said, his spectacles fairly gleaming with delight, “you have
      shotted him! You have killed him! That is very good—that is
      excellent! Now you will present the skin to Miss Franziska, if you do not
      wish to take it to England.”

 “Oh no!” said Charlie, with a lordly indifference. “I don’t care about it.
      Franziska may have it.”

 Charlie pulled me aside, and said, with a solemn wink:

 “Can you keep a secret?”

 “My wife and I can keep a secret. I am not allowed to have any for
      myself.”

 “Listen,” said the unabashed young man; “Krumm shot that fox. Mind you
      don’t say a word. I must have the skin to present to Franziska.”

 I stared at him; I had never known him guilty of a dishonest action. But
      when you do get a decent young English fellow condescending to do anything
      shabby, be sure it is a girl who is the cause. I said nothing, of course;
      and in the evening a trap came for us, and we drove back to Huferschingen.

 Tita clapped her hands with delight; for Charlie was a favourite of hers,
      and now he was returning like a hero, with a sprig of fir in his cap to
      show that he had killed a buck.

 “And here, Miss Franziska,” he said, quite gaily, “here is a yellow fox
      for you. I was told that you wanted the skin of one.”

 Franziska fairly blushed for pleasure; not that the skin of a fox was very
      valuable for her, but that the compliment was so open and marked. She came
      forward, in German fashion, and rather shyly shook hands with him in token
      of her thanks.

 When Tita was getting ready for dinner I told her about the yellow fox. A
      married man must have no secrets.

 “He is not capable of such a thing,” she says, with a grand air.

 “But he did it,” I point out. “What is more, he glories in it. What did he
      say when I remonstrated with him on the way home! ‘ Why ,’ says he, ‘ I
      will put an end to Krumm! I will abolish Krumm! I will extinguish Krumm! ’ 
      Now, madame, who is responsible for this? Who had been praising Franziska
      night and day as the sweetest, gentlest, cleverest girl in the world,
      until this young man determines to have a flirtation with her and astonish
      you?”

 “A flirtation!” says Tita, faintly. “Oh no! Oh, I never meant that.”

 “Ask him just now, and he will tell you that women deserve no better. They
      have no hearts; they are treacherous. They have beautiful eyes, but no
      conscience. And so he means to take them as they are, and have his measure
      of amusement.”

 “Oh, I am sure he never said anything so abominably wicked,” cried Tita,
      laying down the rose that Franziska had given her for her hair. “I know he
      could not say such things. But if he is so wicked—if he has said
      them—it is not too late to interfere. I will see about it.”

 She drew herself up as if Jupiter had suddenly armed her with his
      thunderbolts. If Charlie had seen her at this moment he would have
      quailed. He might by chance have told the truth, and confessed that all
      the wicked things he had been saying about woman’s affection were only a
      sort of rhetoric, and that he had no sort of intention to flirt with poor
      Franziska, nor yet to extinguish and annihilate Dr. Krumm.

 The heartbroken boy was in very good spirits at dinner. He was inclined to
      wink. Tita, on the contrary, maintained an impressive dignity of
      demeanour; and when Franziska’s name happened to be mentioned she spoke of
      the young girl as her very particular friend, as though she would dare
      Charlie to attempt a flirtation with one who held that honour. But the
      young man was either blind or reckless, or acting a part for mere
      mischief. He pointed the finger of scorn at Dr. Krumm. He asked Tita if he
      should bring her a yellow fox next day. He declared he wished he could
      spend the remainder of his life in a Black Forest Inn, with a napkin over
      his arm, serving chopins. He said he would brave the wrath of the Furst by
      shooting a capercailzie on the very first opportunity, to bring the
      shining feathers home to Franziska.

 When Tita and I went upstairs at night the small and gentle creature was
      grievously perplexed.

 “I cannot make it out,” she said. “He is quite changed. What is the matter
      with him?”

 “You behold, madam, in that young man the moral effects of vulpicide. A
      demon has entered into him. You remember, in ‘Der Freischutz,’ how—”

 “Did you say vulpicide?” she asks, with a sweet smile. “I understood that
      Charlie’s crime was that he did not kill the fox.”

 I allow her the momentary triumph. Who would grudge to a woman a little
      verbal victory of that sort? And, indeed, Tita’s satisfaction did not last
      long. Her perplexity became visible on her face once more.

 “We are to be here three weeks,” she said, almost to herself, “and he
      talks of flirting with poor Franziska. Oh, I never meant that!”

 “But what did you mean?” I ask her, with innocent wonder.

 Tita hangs down her head, and there is an end to that conversation; but
      one of us, at least, has some recollection of a Christmas wager.

  

  









 IV—CONFESSIO AMANTIS

 Charlie was not in such good spirits next morning. He was standing outside
      the inn, in the sweet, resinous-scented air, watching Franziska coming and
      going, with her bright face touched by the early sunlight, and her frank
      and honest eyes lit up by a kindly look when she passed us. His conscience
      began to smite him for claiming that fox.

 We spent the day in fishing a stream some few miles distant from
      Huferschingen, and Franziska accompanied us. What need to tell of our
      success with the trout and the grayling, or of the beautiful weather, or
      of the attentive and humble manner in which the unfortunate youth
      addressed Franziska from time to time?

 In the evening we drove back to Huferschingen. It was a still and
      beautiful evening, with the silence of the twilight falling over the
      lonely valleys and the miles upon miles of darkening pines. Charlie has
      not much of a voice, but he made an effort to sing with Tita:

 “The winds whistle cold and the stars glimmer red,
     The sheep are in fold and the cattle in shed;”

 and the fine old glee sounded fairly well as we drove through the
      gathering gloom of the forest. But Tita sang, in her low, sweet fashion,
      that Swedish bridal song that begins:

 “Oh, welcome her so fair, with bright and flowing hair;
     May Fate through life befriend her, love and smiles attend her;”

 and though she sang quietly, just as if she were singing to herself, we
      all listened with great attention, and with great gratitude too. When we
      got out of Huferschingen, the stars were out over the dark stretches of
      forest, and the windows of the quaint old inn were burning brightly.

 “And have you enjoyed the amusement of the day?” says Miss Fahler, rather
      shyly, to a certain young man who is emptying his creel of fish. He drops
      the basket to turn round and look at her face and say earnestly:

 “I have never spent so delightful a day; but it wasn’t the fishing.”

 Things were becoming serious.

 And next morning Charlie got hold of Tita, and said to her, in rather a
      shamefaced way:

 “What am I to do about that fox? It was only a joke, you know; but if Miss
      Fahler gets to hear of it, she’ll think it was rather shabby.”

 It was always Miss Fahler now; a couple of days before it was Franziska.

 “For my part,” says Tita, “I can’t understand why you did it. What honour
      is there in shooting a fox?”

 “But I wanted to give the skin to her.”

 It was “her” by this time.

 “Well, I think the best thing you can do is to go and tell her all about
      it; and also to go and apologise to Dr. Krumm.”

 Charlie started.

 “I will go and tell her, certainly; but as for apologising to Krumm, that
      is absurd!”

 “As you please,” says Tita.

 By-and-by Franziska—or rather Miss Fahler—came out of the
      small garden and round by the front of the house.

 “O Miss Fahler,” says Charlie, suddenly,—and with that she stops and
      blushes slightly,—“I’ve got something to say to you. I am going to
      make a confession. Don’t be frightened; it’s only about a fox—the
      fox that was brought home the day before yesterday; Dr. Krumm shot that.”

 “Indeed,” says Franziska, quite innocently, “I thought you shot it.”

 “Well, I let them imagine so. It was only a joke.”

 “But it is of no matter; there are many yellow foxes. Dr. Krumm can shoot
      them at another time; he is always here. Perhaps you will shoot one before
      you go.”

 With that Franziska passed into the house, carrying her fruit with her.
      Charlie was left to revolve her words in his mind. Dr. Krumm could shoot
      foxes when he chose; he was always here. He, Charlie, on the contrary, had
      to go away in little more than a fortnight. There was no Franziska in
      England; no pleasant driving through great pine woods in the gathering
      twilight; no shooting of yellow foxes, to be brought home in triumph and
      presented to a beautiful and grateful young woman. Charlie walked along
      the white road and overtook Tita, who had just sat down on a little
      camp-stool, and got out the materials for taking a water-colour sketch of
      the Huferschingen Valley. He sat down at her feet on the warm grass.

 “I suppose I sha’n’t interrupt your painting by talking to you?” he says.

 “Oh dear, no,” is the reply; and then he begins, in a somewhat hesitating
      way, to ask indirect questions and drop hints and fish for answers, just
      as if this small creature, who was busy with her sepias and olive greens,
      did not see through all this transparent cunning.

 At last she said to him, frankly:

 “You want me to tell you whether Franziska would make a good wife for you.
      She would make a good wife for any man. But then you seem to think that I
      should intermeddle and negotiate and become a go-between. How can I do
      that? My husband is always accusing me of trying to make up matches; and
      you know that isn’t true.”

 “I know it isn’t true,” says the hypocrite; “but you might only this once.
      I believe all you say about this girl; I can see it for myself; and when
      shall I ever have such a chance again?”

 “But dear me!” says Tita, putting down the white palette for a moment,
      “how can I believe you are in earnest? You have only known her three
      days.”

 “And that is quite enough,” says Charlie, boldly, “to let you find out all
      you want to know about a girl if she is of the right sort. If she isn’t
      you won’t find out in three years. Now look at Franziska; look at the
      fine, intelligent face and the honest eyes; you can have no doubt about
      her; and then I have all the guarantee of your long acquaintance with
      her.”

 “Oh,” says Tita, “that is all very well. Franziska is an excellent girl,
      as I have told you often—frank, kind, well educated, and unselfish.
      But you cannot have fallen in love with her in three days?”

 “Why not?” says this blunt-spoken young man.

 “Because it is ridiculous. If I meddle in the affair I should probably
      find you had given up the fancy in other three days; or if you did marry
      her and took her to England you would get to hate me because I alone
      should know that you had married the niece of an innkeeper.”

 “Well, I like that!” says he, with a flush in his face. “Do you think I
      should care two straws whether my friends knew I had married the niece of
      an innkeeper? I should show them Franziska. Wouldn’t that be enough? An
      innkeeper’s niece! I wish the world had more of ‘em, if they’re like
      Franziska.”

 “And besides,” says Tita, “have you any notion as to how Franziska herself
      would probably take this mad proposal?”

 “No,” says the young man, humbly. “I wanted you to try and find out what
      she thought about me; and if, in time something were said about this
      proposal, you might put in a word or two, you know, just to—to give
      her an idea, you know, that you don’t think it quite so mad, don’t you
      know?”

 “Give me your hand, Charlie,” says Tita, with a sudden burst of kindness.
      “I’ll do what I can for you; for I know she’s a good girl, and she will
      make a good wife to the man who marries her.”

 You will observe that this promise was given by a lady who never, in any
      circumstances whatsoever, seeks to make up matches, who never speculates
      on possible combinations when she invites young people to her house in
      Surrey, and who is profoundly indignant, indeed, when such a charge is
      preferred against her. Had she not, on that former Christmas morning,
      repudiated with scorn the suggestion that Charlie might marry before
      another year had passed? Had she not, in her wild confidence, staked on a
      wager that assumption of authority in her household and out of it without
      which life would be a burden to her? Yet no sooner was the name of
      Franziska mentioned, and no sooner had she been reminded that Charlie was
      going with us to Huferschingen, than the nimble little brain set to work.
      Oftentimes it has occurred to one dispassionate spectator of her ways that
      this same Tita resembled the small object which, thrown into a dish of
      some liquid chemical substance, suddenly produces a mass of crystals. The
      constituents of those beautiful combinations, you see, were there; but
      they wanted some little shock to hasten the slow process of
      crystallisation. Now in our social circle we have continually observed
      groups of young people floating about in an amorphous and chaotic fashion—good
      for nothing but dawdling through dances, and flirting, and carelessly
      separating again; but when you dropped Tita among them, then you would see
      how rapidly this jellyfish sort of existence was abolished—how the
      groups got broken up, and how the sharp, businesslike relations of
      marriage were precipitated and made permanent. But would she own to it?
      Never! She once went and married her dearest friend to a Prussian officer;
      and now she declares he was a selfish fellow to carry off the girl in that
      way, and rates him soundly because he won’t bring her to stay with us more
      than three months out of the twelve. There are some of us get quite enough
      of this Prussian occupation of our territory.

 “Well,” says Tita to this long English lad, who is lying sprawling on the
      grass, “I can safely tell you this, that Franziska likes you very well.”

 He suddenly jumps up, and there is a great blush on his face.

 “Has she said so?” he asks, eagerly.

 “Oh yes! in a way. She thinks you are good-natured. She likes the English
      generally. She asked me if that ring you wear was an engaged ring.”

 These disconnected sentences were dropped with a tantalising slowness into
      Charlie’s eager ears.

 “I must go and tell her directly that it is not,” said he; and he might
      probably have gone off at once had not Tita restrained him.

 “You must be a great deal more cautious than that if you wish to carry off
      Franziska some day or other. If you were to ask her to marry you now she
      would flatly refuse you, and very properly; for how could a girl believe
      you were in earnest? But if you like, Charlie, I will say something to her
      that will give her a hint; and if she cares for you at all before you go
      away she won’t forget you. I wish I was as sure of you as I am of her.”

 “Oh I can answer for myself,” says the young man, with a becoming
      bashfulness.

 Tita was very happy and pleased all that day. There was an air of mystery
      and importance about her. I knew what it meant; I had seen it before.

 Alas! poor Charlie!

  

  









 V—“GAB MIR EIN’ RING DABEI”

 Under the friendly instructions of Dr. Krumm, whom he no longer regarded
      as a possible rival, Charlie became a mighty hunter; and you may be sure
      that he returned of an evening with sprigs of fir in his cap for the bucks
      he had slain, Franziska was not the last to come forward and shake hands
      with him and congratulate him, as is the custom in these primitive parts.
      And then she was quite made one of the family when we sat down to dinner
      in the long, low-roofed room; and nearly every evening, indeed, Tita would
      have her to dine with us and play cards with us.

 You may suppose, if these two young folk had any regard for each other,
      those evenings in the inn must have been a pleasant time for them. There
      were never two partners at whist who were so courteous to each other, so
      charitable to each other’s blunders. Indeed, neither would ever admit that
      the other blundered. Charlie used to make some frightful mistakes
      occasionally that would have driven any other player mad; but you should
      have seen the manner in which Franziska would explain that he had no
      alternative but to take her king with his ace, that he could not know
      this, and was right in chancing that. We played three-penny points, and
      Charlie paid for himself and his partner, in spite of her entreaties. Two
      of us found the game of whist a profitable thing.

 One day a registered letter came for Charlie. He seized it, carried it to
      a window, and then called Tita to him. Why need he have any secret about
      it? It was nothing but a ring—a plain hoop with a row of rubies.

 “Do you think she would take this thing?” he said, in a low voice.

 “How can I tell?”

 The young man blushed and stammered, and said:

 “I don’t want you to ask her to take the ring, but to get to know whether
      she would accept any present from me. And I would ask her myself plainly,
      only you have been frightening me so much about being in a hurry. And what
      am I to do? Three days hence we start.”

 Tita looked down with a smile and said, rather timidly:

 “I think if I were you I would speak to her myself—but very gently.”

 We were going off that morning to a little lake some dozen miles off to
      try for a jack or two. Franziska was coming with us. She was, indeed,
      already outside, superintending the placing in the trap of our rods and
      bags. When Charlie went out she said that everything was ready; and
      presently our peasant driver cracked his whip, and away we went.

 Charlie was a little grave, and could only reply to Tita’s fun with an
      effort. Franziska was mostly anxious about the fishing, and hoped that we
      might not go so far to find nothing.

 We found few fish anyhow. The water was as still as glass, and as clear;
      the pike that would have taken our spinning bits of metal must have been
      very dull-eyed pike indeed. Tita sat at the bow of the long punt reading,
      while our boatman steadily and slowly plied his single oar. Franziska was
      for a time eagerly engaged in watching the progress of our fishing, until
      even she got tired of the excitement of rolling in an immense length of
      cord, only to find that our spinning bait had hooked a bit of floating
      wood or weed. At length Charlie proposed that he should go ashore and look
      out for a picturesque site for our picnic, and he hinted that perhaps Miss
      Franziska might also like a short walk to relieve the monotony of the
      sailing. Miss Franziska said she would be very pleased to do that. We ran
      them in among the rushes, and put them ashore, and then once more started
      on our laborious career.

 Tita laid down her book. She was a little anxious. Sometimes you could see
      Charlie and Franziska on the path by the side of the lake; at other times
      the thick trees by the water’s side hid them.

 The solitary oar dipped in the lake; the boat glided along the shores.
      Tita took up her book again. The space of time that passed may be inferred
      from the fact that, merely as an incident to it, we managed to catch a
      chub of four pounds. When the excitement over this event had passed, Tita
      said:

 “We must go back to them. What do they mean by not coming on and telling
      us? It is most silly of them.”

 We went back by the same side of the lake, and we found both Franziska and
      her companion seated on the bank at the precise spot where we had left
      them. They said it was the best place for the picnic. They asked for the
      hamper in a businesslike way. They pretended they had searched the shores
      of the lake for miles.

 And while Tita and Franziska are unpacking the things, and laying the
      white cloth smoothly on the grass, and pulling out the bottles for Charlie
      to cool in the lake, I observe that the younger of the two ladies rather
      endeavours to keep her left hand out of sight. It is a paltry piece of
      deception. Are we moles, and blinder than moles, that we should
      continually be made the dupes of these women? I say to her:

 “Franziska, what is the matter with your left hand?”

 “Leave Franziska’s left hand alone,” says Tita, severely.

 “My dear,” I reply, humbly, “I am afraid Franziska has hurt her left
      hand.”

 At this moment Charlie, having stuck the bottles among the reeds, comes
      back, and, hearing our talk, he says, in a loud and audacious way:

 “Oh, do you mean the ring? It’s a pretty little thing I had about me, and
      Franziska has been good enough to accept it. You can show it to them,
      Franziska.”

 Of course he had it about him. Young men always do carry a stock of ruby
      rings with them when they go fishing, to put in the noses of the fish. I
      have observed it frequently.

 Franziska looks timidly at Tita, and then she raises her hand, that
      trembles a little. She is about to take the ring off to show it to us when
      Charlie interposes:

 “You needn’t take it off, Franziska.”

 And with that, somehow, the girl slips away from among us, and Tita is
      with her, and we don’t get a glimpse of either of them until the solitude
      resounds with our cries for luncheon.

 In due time Charlie returned to London, and to Surrey with us in very good
      spirits. He used to come down very often to see us; and one evening at
      dinner he disclosed the fact that he was going over to the Black Forest in
      the following week, although the November nights were chill just then.

 “And how long do you remain?”

 “A month,” he says.

 “Madam,” I say to the small lady at the other end of the table, “a month
      from now will bring us to the 4th of December. You have lost the bet you
      made last Christmas morning; when will it please you to resign your
      authority?”

 “Oh, bother the bet,” says this unscrupulous person.

 “But what do you mean?” says Charlie.

 “Why,” I say to him, “she laid a wager last Christmas Day that you would
      not be married within a year. And now you say you mean to bring Franziska
      over on the 4th of December next. Isn’t it so?”

 “Oh, no!” he says; “we don’t get married till the spring.”

 You should have heard the burst of low, delightful laughter with which
      Queen Tita welcomed this announcement. She had won her wager.

  

 



 End of Project Gutenberg’s Stories By English Authors: Germany, by Various