MARY MUSGRAVE, By Anonymous

 “Nine carets ef it’s a blessed one.”

 “Scale ‘im, an’ ye’ll find he’s a half better. Clear es a bottle o’ gin,
      an’ flawless es the pope! Tommy Dartmoor, ye’re in luck, s’ welp me never
      ef ye ain’t, an’ that’s a brilliant yer can show the polis an’ not get
      time fer.”

 Tommy Dartmoor, who owed his surname to a crown establishment within the
      restraining walls of which he had once enjoyed a temporary residence,
      growled out a recommendation to “stow that,” and then added, “Boys, we’ll
      wet this. Trek to Werstein’s.”

 Forthwith a crowd of dirty, tanned diggers turned their heads in the
      direction of Gustav Werstein’s American Bar, and walked toward it as
      briskly as the heat and their weariness would admit of. The Israelite saw
      them coming, straightened himself out of the half-doze in which he had
      passed the baking afternoon, stopped down the tobacco in the porcelain
      bowl of his long-stemmed pipe with stumpy forefinger, and, twisting a cork
      off his corkscrew, stood in readiness.

 “Name yer pizons, boys, an’ get outside ‘em, wishin’ all good luck to
      R’yal Straight; R’yal Straight bein’ the name o’ this yer stone given by
      Thomas D. Hesquire, original diskiverer an’ present perprietor.”

 The orders were given,—bass at five shillings a bottle, champagne
      (nee gooseberry) at five pounds, Cape smoke at two shillings per two
      fingers,—and, at a given signal, there was an inarticulate roar from
      dusty throats, an inversion of tumblers over thirsty mouths, and a second
      inversion over the ground to show that all the contents had disappeared.

 Satan, the one cat and only domestic pet of the camp, saw that there was a
      general treat going on, and bustling up for his drink took a can of
      condensed milk at six shillings. Other diggers came trooping in as the
      news spread, and Tommy Dartmoor, who was rapidly becoming mellow, for he
      drank half a tumbler of raw whisky with every one who nodded to him, stood
      them refreshments galore, while the greasy Jew began to see visions of his
      adopted fatherland in the near distance.

 So the Kaffirs, except those who had supplies of their own, kept sober and
      peaceful, while the higher order of the human race at Big Stone Hole,
      after the manner of their kind, began to squabble. It was natural for them
      to do so, perhaps, for the weather was so hot, and the liquors, for the
      most part, more so; and under these circumstances men do not always cast
      about them long for a casus belli. One or two minor brawls opened the
      ball, and Herr Gustav, scenting battle in the air, drew from a locker a
      card, which he balanced against the bottles on a shelf above his head. It
      read thus:

 GENTS IS REKESTED TO SHOOT
     CLEAR OF THE BARR-KEP.
     BROKIN GLAS MAY BE PADE FOR
     AT COST PRISE.

 and had been written for the German by a gentleman who had had some
      experience in Forty Rod Gulch, Nevada. The action elicited a contemptuous
      laugh from one or two of the new hands, but the oldsters began shifting
      sundry articles which depended from their belts into positions from which
      they might be handled at the shortest notice; and the black cat, more wise
      than any of them, having drunk his fill, stalked solemnly out into the
      security of the darkness.

 The sun went down,—went out with a click, some one declared,—and,
      as no twilight interposed between daylight and darkness in the country
      which Big Stone Hole ornamented, Herr Gustav lit his two paraffin-lamps.
      Neither boasted more than a one-inch wick, and, as their glasses were
      extremely smoky, the illumination was not brilliant; but it sufficed to
      show the flushed, angry faces of a couple of men standing in the centre of
      the room, with all the others clustered round, watching eagerly. One was
      the Scholar. The other was a burly giant, whose missing left little finger
      caused him to be nicknamed the Cripple. About what they had originally
      fallen out was not clear to any one, to themselves least of all. As the
      case stood when the second lamp was lit, Scholar had called Cripple a
      something-or-other liar, and Cripple, who was not inventive, had retorted
      by stigmatising Scholar as another. Further recriminations followed, and
      their pistols were drawn; but as the audience had a strong objection to
      indiscriminate shooting, by which it was not likely to benefit, the
      belligerents were seized. No one was unsportsmanlike enough to wish to
      stop the fight, and Jockey Bill, giving voice to the general wish of the
      meeting, proposed that the gents be fixed up agin’ a couple o’ posts
      outside, where they might let daylight into each other without
      lead-poisoning casual spectators.

 The motion was acted on, and after rectifying a slight omission on the
      Cripple’s part—he had forgotten to put caps on the nipples of his
      revolver—the pair of them were seated upon upturned barrels some ten
      yards apart, each with a lamp at his feet, and told to begin when they saw
      fit to do so. The swarthy, bearded diggers grouped themselves on either
      side, and the cat, emerging from his retreat, scrambled on to the shoulder
      of one of them, fully as curious as the rest to “see the shootin’.” It was
      a weird sight,—dust, scorched grass, empty tins, rude hovels, piles
      of debris, African moonlight,—yet, except, perhaps, in the eyes of
      the newest comers, there was nothing strange in it. The others were too wrapped
      up in what was going to take place to see anything quaint in their
      every-day surroundings. There was no theatre in the camp. The little
      impromptu drama riveted all attention.

 But before the duel commenced, a galloping horse, which had approached
      over the grassy veldt unnoticed during the excitement, drew up with a
      crash between the two combatants, and its rider, raising his hand to
      command attention, cried:

 “Boys, there’s a white woman comin’!”

 “A white woman!” was chorused in various tones of disbelief. “What, here?
      White woman comin’ here, Dan?”

 And then some one inquired if she was a Boer.

 “Boer—no,” replied Dan; “English—English as I am; leastways
      Englisher, bein’ Amurrican-born myself. Overtook her et Hottentot Drift.
      Thort I’d spur on an’ tell yer. We’d do wi’ a clean-up, some on us.”

 Dan spoke indistinctly, as a bullet had lately disarranged some of his
      teeth; but his words had a wonderful effect.

 Each man began instinctively to tidy himself. The would-be duellists,
      forgetting their quarrel, stuck the revolvers in their belts and followed
      the general example. The Cripple hied him to the store, and after breaking
      down the door abstracted the only blacking-brush in the camp,—putting
      down a sovereign on the counter in exchange for it,—and set to
      polishing his high boots as if a fortune depended on their brightness. The
      Scholar bought Herr Gustav’s white shirt for a fiver, threatening to
      murder its owner if he did not render it up. And Partridge, a good man
      from Norfolk, with a regrettable weakness for shooting other people’s
      game, induced a friend to denude him of his flowing locks by means of a
      clasp-knife and a hunk of wood, as no scissors were procurable.

 The wardrobes of Big Stone Hole were stocked more with a view to strict
      utility than variety or ornamentation, and the slender resources of the
      store utterly gave out under the sudden strain that was put upon them. In
      every direction grimy, unkempt men might be seen attempting to beautify
      themselves. Here was one enduring agonies from a razor that would scarcely
      whittle a stick; here another recalling the feel of a cake of soap; there
      a great fellow pulling faces as he struggled to get the teeth of a comb
      into his shock of hair; there another brushing the clay from his moleskin
      trousers with a tuft of stiff grass.

 It seemed to these men ages since they had last seen a woman in the flesh,—Kaffir
      women don’t count; they are not women, merely Kaffirs,—and, with the
      natural instinct of males of every species, they set about pluming their
      feathers.

 These operations, though speedy as might be, were necessarily prolonged,
      for most of the men required several buckets of water over the head before
      they felt fit for such unaccustomed exercises, and they were scarcely
      finished before the creaking of wheels and the cries of the voorlooper as
      he urged his oxen announced that the wagon was within earshot. Up it came,
      the great tilt gleaming white in the moonlight, and every eye was fixed
      expectantly on the dark chasm within. The driver, puffed up with his own
      importance, cracked his long whip and deigned not to notice the men whom
      he usually greeted with a friendly hail, and the Hottentot boy ahead,
      imitating his master, vouchsafed no explanation. With more deathly
      slowness than usual did the lumbering vehicle crawl along until the tired
      cattle pulled up before the door of the American Bar. Then there was a
      rush and a bit of a scuffle for the honour of handing the woman out. The
      Cripple was the fortunate man, and, after assisting her to the ground,
      waved his tattered hat toward the gleaming open doorway. But he did not
      speak. Words were beyond him. Indeed, the diggers, who were none of them
      particularly remarkable for taciturnity as a general thing, seemed, with
      one exception, to be stricken dumb. But the Scholar proved himself equal
      to the occasion, and with courtly phrase bade the new-comer welcome to the
      camp. He had always been a popular man among women in his palmier days,
      though openly holding rather a poor opinion of them; and as the one before
      him now was neat of speech and comely of form, he was not at all averse to
      enjoying her society and conversation.

 “I should be much obliged if you would direct me to a hotel,” she said,
      after taking a look around the cheap gaudiness of the saloon.

 “I’m sorry to say that we have no hotel here as yet, Miss—er—?”

 “Musgrave. Miss Mary Musgrave”—with a little bow. “But I heard that
      a German had started a hotel here.”

 “No; there is nothing but this. That”—pointing to Herr Gustave, who
      was regarding the newcomer with an evil eye—“that is the German.”

 Miss Musgrave appeared distressed.

 “Then where can I go?” she asked. “Are there any lodgings to be had?”

 “The lady may have my place,” chorused three eager voices, and every man
      in the room repeated the offer.

 She thanked them with a pretty smile and one comprehensive bow, and looked
      up at the Scholar for help.

 “I would offer you my hut if it were not such a wretched one. But, as it
      is, I should advise you to take this man’s”—and he pointed to Tommy
      Dartmoor.

 “Why, mine’s twenty carats better than hisn!” exclaimed the Cripple.

 “And mine better ‘n either,” growled Dan.

 “Mine’s the best of the lot.”

 “No, it isn’t; mine is,” yelled others, till there was a general roar,
      which caused Miss Musgrave to look frightened and shrink nearer to the
      Scholar, and that gentleman to raise his hand for silence.

 “Look here,” said he, “we’ll pick out the twelve best, and their owners
      can cut with one another from a pack of cards.”

 After some discussion twelve were settled upon, but the number was
      immediately raised to thirteen to prevent Jockey Bill disgracing the camp
      by shooting before a lady. A pack of cards was placed on the bar, and each
      man chose one, holding his selection face downward till all were ready.
      Then the Scholar said, “Turn,” and there were exhibited five aces, two
      kings, a queen, three knaves, and two smaller cards. This was awkward, to
      say the least of it, and, while sarcastic laughter rippled among the
      spectators, there was an instinctive movement of right hands toward the
      back of the belt on the part of each of the thirteen.

 But the Scholar’s voice, full of remonstrance, said, “Boys, you’re being
      looked at,” and there was a regretful sigh or two, but no bloodshed.

 Miss Musgrave gazed inquiringly from one to another, and the Scholar,
      laying his hand on her arm, whispered something in her ear. She smiled,
      whispered back, and was answered, and then, stripping off a pair of
      well-fitting fawn gloves, she took the cards in a pretty little white
      hand, and dealt out one to each of the competitors with charming
      clumsiness.

 “Ain’t touched a keard afore, bless her,” whispered Euchre Buck, giving
      his neighbor Dan a nudge in the ribs to call attention to this wonderful
      piece of girlish innocence. “Square a deal es George Washington mought ha’ 
      made.” Then, as the greasy pasteboards were turned up, and his neighbour
      was handed the ace of clubs, he raised his voice and yelled out, “Bully
      for you, Dan! Cut away an’ clar yer cabin out.”

 Away scampered Dan out into the darkness, with the rest of the crew at his
      heels. Their home comforts were very small, poor fellows; but each gave of
      his best, though the gifts were often incongruous enough. In half an hour
      the cabin was fitted out with a small cracked looking-glass, two combs, an
      old hair-brush,—still wet from the wash,—a pail, a frying-pan,
      three kettles, two three-legged stools, and so many blankets that some
      were requisitioned to carpet the floor. The whole crowd accompanied Miss
      Musgrave to her door and gave her a cheer by way of good-night. She bowed
      to them, smiling her thanks, and looking, as they thought, entrancingly
      lovely as she stood there, with the pale moonbeams falling full on her.

 Then she turned to go in, but as Euchre Buck stepped forward with an
      admonishing cough, she waited and looked round at him.

 “Miss,” said he, holding out a big revolver in his hard fist, “you take
      this yer gun, an’ ef any one whistles, or otherwise disturbs you, let a
      hole into him straight away, an’ we’ll see him buried decent.”

 But Miss Musgrave courteously, and with profuse thanks, refused the offer,
      and, saying that she had perfect confidence in all who were around her,
      gave Euchre Buck a bewitching smile, went inside, and closed the door
      after he.

 Then the diggers returned to Gustav Werstein’s American Bar and discussed
      the new arrival.

 “I known Noomarket an’ Hascot an’ Hepson, an’ all the places where swells
      goes in England,” said Jockey Bill, enthusiastically; “but never one come
      there as pretty as she, stop my license if ther’ did.”

 “Grand eyes, hain’t she?” said Tommy Dartmoor. “Regular fust-water ‘uns.
      Here’s to ‘em!”

 “And-a-hoof! See it peep below her gownd. S’ welp me ef it wer’ es big as
      my ‘bacca-box!”

 “An’ ‘er close, gentlemen! Made to measure, every thread on ‘em, I allow.”

 “She’s a lady, boys,” exclaimed he who had offered to see after a funeral,
      “a reg’lar slap-up, high-toned, blow-yer-eyes-don’t-touch-me lady; an’ as
      she sees fit to do the civil to this fellar”—striking himself on the
      chest—“he’s just going to drop his professional name, an’ arsk yer
      to call him Mister Samuel K. Gregson, Esquire. Play on that.”

 Next morning the inhabitants of Big Stone Hole were startled by reading
      this announcement outside the cabin which Dan had resigned to Miss
      Musgrave:

 SINGING AND MUSIC TAUGHT.
     LITERARY WORK DONE.

 It was printed on a card, which was affixed to the door by means of a
      drawing-pin, and from within came the sound of a contralto voice singing
      to a guitar accompaniment. One by one the male residents of Big Stone Hole
      drew near to that iron-roofed hut and stopped to listen; but after
      commenting on the innovation in gleeful whispers—for guitar had
      never twanged in that part of Africa before—they moved on to their
      work. No consideration could cause them to neglect that. They might
      fritter away the dull, rough gems when they had found them, but the lust
      of handling diamonds once was the strongest passion they knew. And so the
      day’s toil was not curtailed; but at the conclusion Miss Musgrave had an
      application for instruction in music from every man in the camp, with one
      exception. This one defaulter was Euchre Buck. He owned to having no ear
      for music—thereby exhibiting more honesty than many of the others—and
      confessed to knowing only two tunes, one of which was “Hail Columbia,” and
      the other—wasn’t; and so he said he wanted some “literary work
      done.” He proposed to Miss Musgrave that she should write a history of his
      life at half a guinea a page, thereby—cute Yankee that he was—thinking
      to appropriate the whole of her time.

 But embarrassed by all these calls upon her, and obviously unable to
      satisfy each of them, Miss Musgrave turned for help to the Scholar, whom
      she appeared to regard as her special adviser; and he, promising a
      solution of the difficulty in half an hour, drew off the whole crowd to
      the American Bar, where the question was thrashed out in all its points.

 It was clearly evident that Miss Musgrave could not surrender to each
      individual the whole of her evening, even if any one had been willing to
      let his neighbor monopolise it, which no one was; and therefore it was
      necessary to formulate some scheme by which her talents might be
      distributed over a larger area. But what the scheme should be was not
      settled all in a minute. One man wanted to hear her sing, another to hear
      her talk, another was willing to give five pounds an hour for the
      privilege of talking to her. After a lengthened discussion, which was
      excited throughout, and at times verged on the warlike, it was decided to
      effect a compromise—subject, of course, to Miss Musgrave’s
      inclinations; and a deputation was sent to learn her views on the subject.

 There was no assembly-room in the place, excepting Werstein’s saloon,—which,
      of course, was not available for such a purpose,—and so it was
      proposed to her, with much humility, that she should take up her position
      in the evenings on a chair outside her hut, and there discourse such vocal
      and instrumental music as she saw fit, interlarding the same with friendly
      conversation. What was she to talk about? Anything—absolutely
      anything. They didn’t mind what it was, so long as they heard her voice.
      Five shillings, the committee had decided, was to be paid by every man who
      came within earshot. And any one who wanted a free list was requested to
      argue the matter out with Euchre Buck.

 This call upon her powers seemed to take Miss Musgrave aback.

 “I have never sung in public,” she pleaded, rather nervously. “Indeed, my
      voice is not good enough for it; really it isn’t. Only I thought I could
      teach a little perhaps, and that is why I came here. You see, mother, is
      an invalid, and we were so very poor that—”

 “Miss,” broke in Jockey Bill, “call it ten bob a ‘ead, an’ just ‘um to
      us.”

 “Oh no, Mr. William, it was not the money that I thought about; indeed,
      five shillings would be far too much. But if you think that I should be
      able to amuse you at all, I would do my very best—believe me, I
      would.”

 “Miss,” growled Dan, with a clumsy endeavour to chase away her diffidence,
      “all we asks is fer you to sit near us fer a spell. Ef you sings or plays,
      we’d be proud; ef you just looks an’ talks, we’d be pleased.”

 So in the end Miss Musgrave yielded to the wishes of the community, and
      the nightly conclave in the American Bar became so much a thing of the
      past that Gustav Werstein was heard to threaten another emigration. The
      songs were to the diggers new, and yet not new. There was nothing of the
      music-hall type about them; they were nearly all old-fashioned ditties.
      She sang to them of “Barbara Allen” and “Sally in our Alley”; she gave
      them “Cheer, Boys, Cheer,” and called for a chorus; she sang “The
      Message,” “The Arrow and the Song”; and she brought back memories of other
      days when Africa was to them a mere geographical expression—of days
      when that something had not happened which had sent them away from home.

 Sunday came, the fifth day after her arrival, and it differed from the
      usual Sabbath of Big Stone Hole. Sunday had been observed before by the
      biggest drinking bout of the week, and a summary settlement of the
      previous six days’ disputes. Now, to the huge surprise of the Kaffirs, and
      to the still greater surprise of themselves, these diamond-diggers sang
      hymns at intervals during the day, and refrained from indulging in the
      orthodox carouse till after Miss Musgrave had retired for the night. It
      was a wonderful change.

 During the next week a fall of earth took place in Tommy Dartmoor’s claim.
      Two Kaffirs were killed; and when the proprietor himself was extricated
      from the debris of blue clay which held him down, he was found to have a
      broken arm, besides other serious injuries.

 “Don’t let on to her,” he managed to gasp out to his rescuers, wishing to
      spare Miss Musgrave’s nerves a shock.

 But she saw the men bearing him to his hut, joined them, and insisted on
      being installed as sole nurse forthwith.

 Twenty other men would willingly have broken an arm for such a reward; and
      the recklessness displayed during the next few days was something awful.
      But she saw that too,—little escaped those big blue eyes,—and,
      ascribing it to drink, gave a pretty strong lecture on the bibulous habits
      of Big Stone Hole, at her next concert.

 There was an earnest meeting in the American Bar that night, at which the
      following motion was put and carried unanimously: “On and after this date,
      any drunken man is liable to be shot at sight, unless his friends can
      prove that he has dug over three carats of diamonds during the day.” And
      then, like other reformers, they went on to more sweeping measures: “Only
      knife-fighting to take place in the camp. All disputes with pistols,
      unless of a very pressing nature, to be settled out of earshot of Dan’s
      house.” There were even some hints of appointing a closing-time for the
      saloon—“it would make the place so much more like home.” But the
      promoter eventually withdrew his suggestion, as it was justly felt that
      such a motion would interfere with the liberty of the subject too much.
      But a storm of cheers burst forth when it was proposed to transfer the
      diamond-safe from Werstein’s keeping to a corner of the new goddess’s
      shrine.

 Even Satan, the cat, joined in the general adoration, and, more favoured
      than the rest, enjoyed at times a chaste salute from Miss Musgrave’s
      ripe-red lips.

 Never, in so short a space of time, had a community been more changed for
      the better than was that of Big Stone Hole. Never had woman’s humanising
      influence made itself more clearly felt. The azure cloud of blasphemy that
      hung over the workings and the rest of the camp was replaced again by the
      normal dust. Each man tried to beautify the inside of his shanty to the
      best of his means and ideas, for there was no knowing when the only “she”
       would take it into her pretty, capricious head to pay a call. In this
      latter line the Scholar had a decided pull. Education had taught him
      taste; necessity, handiness; and by aid of the two he transformed his rude
      dwelling into something approaching the rooms in which he used to dawdle
      away the happy hours, time ago. It was partly drawing-room, partly
      curiosity-shop. Cups, saucers, and spoons appeared as if by magicians’ 
      call, and one blazing afternoon the news flashed round the diamond-pits
      that Miss Musgrave was “taking afternoon tea with the Scholar.” But when
      the Scholar saw the dismay his simple act had spread around him, he
      dissipated it with a kindly laugh and a few reassuring words.

 “Don’t mind me, boys. I was only doing the civil in a purely platonic
      manner. Miss Musgrave is nothing to me, nor am I anything to her. Heaven
      forbid! I’m too hard a bargain for any girl. If any one of you marries her
      I’ll act as his best man if he asks me to, and wish him every felicity
      without a thought of regret.”

 “Bully for the Scholar!” yelled the delighted crowd; and Miss Musgrave’s
      smiles were more sought after than ever.

 So things went on day after day, week after week, till Miss Musgrave
      became little short of an autocratic empress. But still she showed no
      signs of taking unto herself a consort; she kept all men at a cousinly
      distance, and those who felt intimate enough to address her as “Miss Mary”
       accounted themselves uncommonly fortunate. Thus the little machine of
      state worked perfectly harmoniously, and Big Stone Hole was as steady and
      prosperous a settlement as need be.

 Had these diggers refreshed their minds by looking back for historical
      parallels, they might have been prepared in some degree for Miss
      Musgrave’s exit from among them, but as none of them indulged in such
      retrospections the manner of it took the camp somewhat by surprise.

 It was first discovered in this wise. Work was over for the day. The
      Kaffirs had been searched and had returned to their kraal. Pipes were
      being lit after the evening meal, and a picturesque assembly was grouping
      itself in an expectant semicircle on the sun-baked turf in front of Miss
      Musgrave’s dwelling. She was usually outside to welcome the first comers,
      and her absence naturally formed the staple topic of conversation. Digger
      after digger arrived, threw himself down, and joined in the general
      wonderment as to why Miss Mary wasn’t there, and at last some one hazarded
      a suggestion that she “must be asleep.” There was a general epidemic of
      noisy coughing for a full minute, and then silence for another, but no
      sound from within the hut.

 “Perhaps she’s ill,” was the next surmise.

 After the etiquette to be followed had been strictly discussed, and a
      rigid course of procedure set down, the Scholar got up and knocked at the
      door. He received no answer, and so knocked again—knocked several
      times, in fact, and then rattled the handle vigorously, but without
      result.

 “Better open it,” said a voice.

 And he did so; and after looking inside, announced:

 “She’s not there.”

 At this moment Dan came up.

 “My ole mar’ ‘s gone,” he said; “an’ she ain’t stampeded, neither, but was
      stole. Tote-rope’s been untied, an’ saddle an’ bridle took as well.”

 There was uncomfortable silence, which the Scholar broke by a low,
      long-drawn whistle.

 “Boys,” said he, “let’s look inside the safe.”

 The three men who held the keys brought them up, the bolts were shot, and
      the massive door swung back. There was every man’s little sack with his
      name on it; but somehow or other the sacks looked limper than of yore.
      Each one was eagerly clutched and examined, and many a groan and not a few
      curses went up on the still night air as it was found that every sack save
      Dan’s had been relieved of the more valuable part of its contents.

 So much heart-breaking labour under the burning sun thrown away for
      nothing; the dreary work to commence afresh, almost from the beginning!
      Had the thief been any ordinary one, the denunciation would have been
      unbounded; but no one lifted his tongue very loudly against Mary Musgrave.
      Yet mounted men were despatched on the three trails to bring back the
      booty if possible, and the rest moved dejectedly toward their old club.
      The greasy Jew did not attempt to conceal his exultation. He served his
      customers with his wicked old face glowing with smiles, and when a
      moment’s breathing-time came he observed:

 “We all ‘az hour lettle surbrizes in dis wairld, an’ I most confaiss I am
      asdonished myself to lairn that Mess Mosgrave is a thief—” But here
      a crashing among the glassware announced that Tommy Dartmoor had begun
      shooting with his left hand, and Herr Gustave sputtered out from behind
      the fingers he held before his face, “Ach Gott! I say nozzing more!”