MY DOUBLE; AND HOW HE UNDID ME
    

      By Edward Everett Hale (1822-1909)
    

      [From The Atlantic Monthly, September, 1859. Republished in the
      volume, The Man Without a Country, and Other Tales (1868), by
      Edward Everett Hale (Little, Brown & Co.).]
    

      It is not often that I trouble the readers of The Atlantic Monthly.
      I should not trouble them now, but for the importunities of my wife, who
      "feels to insist" that a duty to society is unfulfilled, till I have told
      why I had to have a double, and how he undid me. She is sure, she says,
      that intelligent persons cannot understand that pressure upon public
      servants which alone drives any man into the employment of a double. And
      while I fear she thinks, at the bottom of her heart, that my fortunes will
      never be re-made, she has a faint hope, that, as another Rasselas, I may
      teach a lesson to future publics, from which they may profit, though we
      die. Owing to the behavior of my double, or, if you please, to that public
      pressure which compelled me to employ him, I have plenty of leisure to
      write this communication.
    

      I am, or rather was, a minister, of the Sandemanian connection. I was
      settled in the active, wide-awake town of Naguadavick, on one of the
      finest water-powers in Maine. We used to call it a Western town in the
      heart of the civilization of New England. A charming place it was and is.
      A spirited, brave young parish had I; and it seemed as if we might have
      all "the joy of eventful living" to our hearts' content.
    

      Alas! how little we knew on the day of my ordination, and in those halcyon
      moments of our first housekeeping! To be the confidential friend in a
      hundred families in the town—cutting the social trifle, as my friend
      Haliburton says, "from the top of the whipped-syllabub to the bottom of
      the sponge-cake, which is the foundation"—to keep abreast of the
      thought of the age in one's study, and to do one's best on Sunday to
      interweave that thought with the active life of an active town, and to
      inspirit both and make both infinite by glimpses of the Eternal Glory,
      seemed such an exquisite forelook into one's life! Enough to do, and all
      so real and so grand! If this vision could only have lasted.
    

      The truth is, that this vision was not in itself a delusion, nor, indeed,
      half bright enough. If one could only have been left to do his own
      business, the vision would have accomplished itself and brought out new
      paraheliacal visions, each as bright as the original. The misery was and
      is, as we found out, I and Polly, before long, that, besides the vision,
      and besides the usual human and finite failures in life (such as breaking
      the old pitcher that came over in the Mayflower, and putting into the fire
      the alpenstock with which her father climbed Mont Blanc)—besides,
      these, I say (imitating the style of Robinson Crusoe), there were
      pitchforked in on us a great rowen-heap of humbugs, handed down from some
      unknown seed-time, in which we were expected, and I chiefly, to fulfil
      certain public functions before the community, of the character of those
      fulfilled by the third row of supernumeraries who stand behind the Sepoys
      in the spectacle of the Cataract of the Ganges. They were the
      duties, in a word, which one performs as member of one or another social
      class or subdivision, wholly distinct from what one does as A. by himself
      A. What invisible power put these functions on me, it would be very hard
      to tell. But such power there was and is. And I had not been at work a
      year before I found I was living two lives, one real and one merely
      functional—for two sets of people, one my parish, whom I loved, and
      the other a vague public, for whom I did not care two straws. All this was
      in a vague notion, which everybody had and has, that this second life
      would eventually bring out some great results, unknown at present, to
      somebody somewhere.
    

      Crazed by this duality of life, I first read Dr. Wigan on the Duality
      of the Brain, hoping that I could train one side of my head to do
      these outside jobs, and the other to do my intimate and real duties. For
      Richard Greenough once told me that, in studying for the statue of
      Franklin, he found that the left side of the great man's face was
      philosophic and reflective, and the right side funny and smiling. If you
      will go and look at the bronze statue, you will find he has repeated this
      observation there for posterity. The eastern profile is the portrait of
      the statesman Franklin, the western of Poor Richard. But Dr. Wigan does
      not go into these niceties of this subject, and I failed. It was then
      that, on my wife's suggestion, I resolved to look out for a Double.
    

      I was, at first, singularly successful. We happened to be recreating at
      Stafford Springs that summer. We rode out one day, for one of the
      relaxations of that watering-place, to the great Monsonpon House. We were
      passing through one of the large halls, when my destiny was fulfilled! I
      saw my man!
    

      He was not shaven. He had on no spectacles. He was dressed in a green
      baize roundabout and faded blue overalls, worn sadly at the knee. But I
      saw at once that he was of my height, five feet four and a half. He had
      black hair, worn off by his hat. So have and have not I. He stooped in
      walking. So do I. His hands were large, and mine. And—choicest gift
      of Fate in all—he had, not "a strawberry-mark on his left arm," but
      a cut from a juvenile brickbat over his right eye, slightly affecting the
      play of that eyebrow. Reader, so have I!—My fate was sealed!
    

      A word with Mr. Holley, one of the inspectors, settled the whole thing. It
      proved that this Dennis Shea was a harmless, amiable fellow, of the class
      known as shiftless, who had sealed his fate by marrying a dumb wife, who
      was at that moment ironing in the laundry. Before I left Stafford, I had
      hired both for five years. We had applied to Judge Pynchon, then the
      probate judge at Springfield, to change the name of Dennis Shea to
      Frederic Ingham. We had explained to the Judge, what was the precise
      truth, that an eccentric gentleman wished to adopt Dennis under this new
      name into his family. It never occurred to him that Dennis might be more
      than fourteen years old. And thus, to shorten this preface, when we
      returned at night to my parsonage at Naguadavick, there entered Mrs.
      Ingham, her new dumb laundress, myself, who am Mr. Frederic Ingham, and my
      double, who was Mr. Frederic Ingham by as good right as I.
    

      Oh, the fun we had the next morning in shaving his beard to my pattern,
      cutting his hair to match mine, and teaching him how to wear and how to
      take off gold-bowed spectacles! Really, they were electroplate, and the
      glass was plain (for the poor fellow's eyes were excellent). Then in four
      successive afternoons I taught him four speeches. I had found these would
      be quite enough for the supernumerary-Sepoy line of life, and it was well
      for me they were. For though he was good-natured, he was very shiftless,
      and it was, as our national proverb says, "like pulling teeth" to teach
      him. But at the end of the next week he could say, with quite my easy and
      frisky air:
    

      1. "Very well, thank you. And you?" This for an answer to casual
      salutations.
    

      2. "I am very glad you liked it."
    

      3. "There has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that I
      will not occupy the time."
    

      4. "I agree, in general, with my friend on the other side of the room."
    

      At first I had a feeling that I was going to be at great cost for clothing
      him. But it proved, of course, at once, that, whenever he was out, I
      should be at home. And I went, during the bright period of his success, to
      so few of those awful pageants which require a black dress-coat and what
      the ungodly call, after Mr. Dickens, a white choker, that in the happy
      retreat of my own dressing-gowns and jackets my days went by as happily
      and cheaply as those of another Thalaba. And Polly declares there was
      never a year when the tailoring cost so little. He lived (Dennis, not
      Thalaba) in his wife's room over the kitchen. He had orders never to show
      himself at that window. When he appeared in the front of the house, I
      retired to my sanctissimum and my dressing-gown. In short, the Dutchman
      and, his wife, in the old weather-box, had not less to do with, each other
      than he and I. He made the furnace-fire and split the wood before
      daylight; then he went to sleep again, and slept late; then came for
      orders, with a red silk bandanna tied round his head, with his overalls
      on, and his dress-coat and spectacles off. If we happened to be
      interrupted, no one guessed that he was Frederic Ingham as well as I; and,
      in the neighborhood, there grew up an impression that the minister's
      Irishman worked day-times in the factory village at New Coventry. After I
      had given him his orders, I never saw him till the next day.
    

      I launched him by sending him to a meeting of the Enlightenment Board. The
      Enlightenment Board consists of seventy-four members, of whom sixty-seven
      are necessary to form a quorum. One becomes a member under the regulations
      laid down in old Judge Dudley's will. I became one by being ordained
      pastor of a church in Naguadavick. You see you cannot help yourself, if
      you would. At this particular time we had had four successive meetings,
      averaging four hours each—wholly occupied in whipping in a quorum.
      At the first only eleven men were present; at the next, by force of three
      circulars, twenty-seven; at the third, thanks to two days' canvassing by
      Auchmuty and myself, begging men to come, we had sixty. Half the others
      were in Europe. But without a quorum we could do nothing. All the rest of
      us waited grimly for our four hours, and adjourned without any action. At
      the fourth meeting we had flagged, and only got fifty-nine together. But
      on the first appearance of my double—whom I sent on this fatal
      Monday to the fifth meeting—he was the sixty-seventh man who
      entered the room. He was greeted with a storm of applause! The poor fellow
      had missed his way—read the street signs ill through his spectacles
      (very ill, in fact, without them)—and had not dared to inquire. He
      entered the room—finding the president and secretary holding to
      their chairs two judges of the Supreme Court, who were also members ex
      officio, and were begging leave to go away. On his entrance all was
      changed. Presto, the by-laws were amended, and the Western property
      was given away. Nobody stopped to converse with him. He voted, as I had
      charged him to do, in every instance, with the minority. I won new laurels
      as a man of sense, though a little unpunctual—and Dennis, alias
      Ingham, returned to the parsonage, astonished to see with how little
      wisdom the world is governed. He cut a few of my parishioners in the
      street; but he had his glasses off, and I am known to be nearsighted.
      Eventually he recognized them more readily than I.
    

      I "set him again" at the exhibition of the New Coventry Academy; and here
      he undertook a "speaking part"—as, in my boyish, worldly days, I
      remember the bills used to say of Mlle. Celeste. We are all trustees of
      the New Coventry Academy; and there has lately been "a good deal of
      feeling" because the Sandemanian trustees did not regularly attend the
      exhibitions. It has been intimated, indeed, that the Sandemanians are
      leaning towards Free-Will, and that we have, therefore, neglected these
      semi-annual exhibitions, while there is no doubt that Auchmuty last year
      went to Commencement at Waterville. Now the head master at New Coventry is
      a real good fellow, who knows a Sanskrit root when he sees it, and often
      cracks etymologies with me—so that, in strictness, I ought to go to
      their exhibitions. But think, reader, of sitting through three long July
      days in that Academy chapel, following the program from
    

  Tuesday Morning. English Composition. Sunshine. Miss Jones,


      round to
    

  Trio on Three Pianos. Duel from opera of Midshipman Easy. Marryatt.


      coming in at nine, Thursday evening! Think of this, reader, for men who
      know the world is trying to go backward, and who would give their lives if
      they could help it on! Well! The double had succeeded so well at the
      Board, that I sent him to the Academy. (Shade of Plato, pardon!) He
      arrived early on Tuesday, when, indeed, few but mothers and clergymen are
      generally expected, and returned in the evening to us, covered with
      honors. He had dined at the right hand of the chairman, and he spoke in
      high terms of the repast. The chairman had expressed his interest in the
      French conversation. "I am very glad you liked it," said Dennis; and the
      poor chairman, abashed, supposed the accent had been wrong. At the end of
      the day, the gentlemen present had been called upon for speeches—the
      Rev. Frederic Ingham first, as it happened; upon which Dennis had risen,
      and had said, "There has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well
      said, that I will not occupy the time." The girls were delighted, because
      Dr. Dabney, the year before, had given them at this occasion a scolding on
      impropriety of behavior at lyceum lectures. They all declared Mr. Ingham
      was a love—and so handsome! (Dennis is good-looking.) Three
      of them, with arms behind the others' waists, followed him up to the wagon
      he rode home in; and a little girl with a blue sash had been sent to give
      him a rosebud. After this debut in speaking, he went to the exhibition for
      two days more, to the mutual satisfaction of all concerned. Indeed, Polly
      reported that he had pronounced the trustees' dinners of a higher grade
      than those of the parsonage. When the next term began, I found six of the
      Academy girls had obtained permission to come across the river and attend
      our church. But this arrangement did not long continue.
    

      After this he went to several Commencements for me, and ate the dinners
      provided; he sat through three of our Quarterly Conventions for me—always
      voting judiciously, by the simple rule mentioned above, of siding with the
      minority. And I, meanwhile, who had before been losing caste among my
      friends, as holding myself aloof from the associations of the body, began
      to rise in everybody's favor. "Ingham's a good fellow—always on
      hand"; "never talks much—but does the right thing at the right
      time"; "is not as unpunctual as he used to be—he comes early, and
      sits through to the end." "He has got over his old talkative habit, too. I
      spoke to a friend of his about it once; and I think Ingham took it
      kindly," etc., etc.
    

      This voting power of Dennis was particularly valuable at the quarterly
      meetings of the Proprietors of the Naguadavick Ferry. My wife inherited
      from her father some shares in that enterprise, which is not yet fully
      developed, though it doubtless will become a very valuable property. The
      law of Maine then forbade stockholders to appear by proxy at such
      meetings. Polly disliked to go, not being, in fact, a "hens'-rights hen,"
      and transferred her stock to me. I, after going once, disliked it more
      than she. But Dennis went to the next meeting, and liked it very much. He
      said the armchairs were good, the collation good, and the free rides to
      stockholders pleasant. He was a little frightened when they first took him
      upon one of the ferry-boats, but after two or three quarterly meetings he
      became quite brave.
    

      Thus far I never had any difficulty with him. Indeed, being of that type
      which is called shiftless, he was only too happy to be told daily what to
      do, and to be charged not to be forthputting or in any way original in his
      discharge of that duty. He learned, however, to discriminate between the
      lines of his life, and very much preferred these stockholders' meetings
      and trustees' dinners and commencement collations to another set of
      occasions, from which he used to beg off most piteously. Our excellent
      brother, Dr. Fillmore, had taken a notion at this time that our
      Sandemanian churches needed more expression of mutual sympathy. He
      insisted upon it that we were remiss. He said, that, if the Bishop came to
      preach at Naguadavick, all the Episcopal clergy of the neighborhood were
      present; if Dr. Pond came, all the Congregational clergymen turned out to
      hear him; if Dr. Nichols, all the Unitarians; and he thought we owed it to
      each other that, whenever there was an occasional service at a Sandemanian
      church, the other brethren should all, if possible, attend. "It looked
      well," if nothing more. Now this really meant that I had not been to hear
      one of Dr. Fillmore's lectures on the Ethnology of Religion. He forgot
      that he did not hear one of my course on the Sandemanianism of Anselm. But
      I felt badly when he said it; and afterwards I always made Dennis go to
      hear all the brethren preach, when I was not preaching myself. This was
      what he took exceptions to—the only thing, as I said, which he ever
      did except to. Now came the advantage of his long morning-nap, and of the
      green tea with which Polly supplied the kitchen. But he would plead, so
      humbly, to be let off, only from one or two! I never excepted him,
      however. I knew the lectures were of value, and I thought it best he
      should be able to keep the connection.
    

      Polly is more rash than I am, as the reader has observed in the outset of
      this memoir. She risked Dennis one night under the eyes of her own sex.
      Governor Gorges had always been very kind to us; and when he gave his
      great annual party to the town, asked us. I confess I hated to go. I was
      deep in the new volume of Pfeiffer's Mystics, which Haliburton had
      just sent me from Boston. "But how rude," said Polly, "not to return the
      Governor's civility and Mrs. Gorges's, when they will be sure to ask why
      you are away!" Still I demurred, and at last she, with the wit of Eve and
      of Semiramis conjoined, let me off by saying that, if I would go in with
      her, and sustain the initial conversations with the Governor and the
      ladies staying there, she would risk Dennis for the rest of the evening.
      And that was just what we did. She took Dennis in training all that
      afternoon, instructed him in fashionable conversation, cautioned him
      against the temptations of the supper-table—and at nine in the
      evening he drove us all down in the carryall. I made the grand star-entrée
      with Polly and the pretty Walton girls, who were staying with us. We had
      put Dennis into a great rough top-coat, without his glasses—and the
      girls never dreamed, in the darkness, of looking at him. He sat in the
      carriage, at the door, while we entered. I did the agreeable to Mrs.
      Gorges, was introduced to her niece. Miss Fernanda—I complimented
      Judge Jeffries on his decision in the great case of D'Aulnay vs.
      Laconia Mining Co.—I stepped into the dressing-room for a moment—stepped
      out for another—walked home, after a nod with Dennis, and tying the
      horse to a pump—and while I walked home, Mr. Frederic Ingham, my
      double, stepped in through the library into the Gorges's grand saloon.
    

      Oh! Polly died of laughing as she told me of it at midnight! And even
      here, where I have to teach my hands to hew the beech for stakes to fence
      our cave, she dies of laughing as she recalls it—and says that
      single occasion was worth all we have paid for it. Gallant Eve that she
      is! She joined Dennis at the library door, and in an instant presented him
      to Dr. Ochterlong, from Baltimore, who was on a visit in town, and was
      talking with her, as Dennis came in. "Mr. Ingham would like to hear what
      you were telling us about your success among the German population." And
      Dennis bowed and said, in spite of a scowl from Polly, "I'm very glad you
      liked it." But Dr. Ochterlong did not observe, and plunged into the tide
      of explanation, Dennis listening like a prime-minister, and bowing like a
      mandarin—which is, I suppose, the same thing. Polly declared it was
      just like Haliburton's Latin conversation with the Hungarian minister, of
      which he is very fond of telling. "Quoene sit historia Reformationis in
      Ungariâ?" quoth Haliburton, after some thought. And his confrère
      replied gallantly, "In seculo decimo tertio," etc., etc., etc.; and
      from decimo tertio [Which means, "In the thirteenth century," my
      dear little bell-and-coral reader. You have rightly guessed that the
      question means, "What is the history of the Reformation in Hungary?"] to
      the nineteenth century and a half lasted till the oysters came. So was it
      that before Dr. Ochterlong came to the "success," or near it, Governor
      Gorges came to Dennis and asked him to hand Mrs. Jeffries down to supper,
      a request which he heard with great joy.
    

      Polly was skipping round the room, I guess, gay as a lark. Auchmuty came
      to her "in pity for poor Ingham," who was so bored by the stupid pundit—and
      Auchmuty could not understand why I stood it so long. But when Dennis took
      Mrs. Jeffries down, Polly could not resist standing near them. He was a
      little flustered, till the sight of the eatables and drinkables gave him
      the same Mercian courage which it gave Diggory. A little excited then, he
      attempted one or two of his speeches to the Judge's lady. But little he
      knew how hard it was to get in even a promptu there edgewise. "Very
      well, I thank you," said he, after the eating elements were adjusted; "and
      you?" And then did not he have to hear about the mumps, and the measles,
      and arnica, and belladonna, and chamomile-flower, and dodecathem, till she
      changed oysters for salad—and then about the old practice and the
      new, and what her sister said, and what her sister's friend said, and what
      the physician to her sister's friend said, and then what was said by the
      brother of the sister of the physician of the friend of her sister,
      exactly as if it had been in Ollendorff? There was a moment's pause, as
      she declined champagne. "I am very glad you liked it," said Dennis again,
      which he never should have said, but to one who complimented a sermon.
      "Oh! you are so sharp, Mr. Ingham! No! I never drink any wine at all—except
      sometimes in summer a little currant spirits—from our own currants,
      you know. My own mother—that is, I call her my own mother, because,
      you know, I do not remember," etc., etc., etc.; till they came to the
      candied orange at the end of the feast—when Dennis, rather confused,
      thought he must say something, and tried No. 4—"I agree, in general,
      with my friend the other side of the room"—which he never should
      have said but at a public meeting. But Mrs. Jeffries, who never listens
      expecting to understand, caught him up instantly with, "Well, I'm sure my
      husband returns the compliment; he always agrees with you—though we
      do worship with the Methodists—but you know, Mr. Ingham," etc.,
      etc., etc., till the move was made upstairs; and as Dennis led her through
      the hall, he was scarcely understood by any but Polly, as he said, "There
      has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that I will not
      occupy the time."
    

      His great resource the rest of the evening was standing in the library,
      carrying on animated conversations with one and another in much the same
      way. Polly had initiated him in the mysteries of a discovery of mine, that
      it is not necessary to finish your sentence in a crowd, but by a sort of
      mumble, omitting sibilants and dentals. This, indeed, if your words fail
      you, answers even in public extempore speech—but better where other
      talking is going on. Thus: "We missed you at the Natural History Society,
      Ingham." Ingham replies: "I am very gligloglum, that is, that you were
      m-m-m-m-m." By gradually dropping the voice, the interlocutor is compelled
      to supply the answer. "Mrs. Ingham, I hope your friend Augusta is better."
      Augusta has not been ill. Polly cannot think of explaining, however, and
      answers: "Thank you, ma'am; she is very rearason wewahwewob," in lower and
      lower tones. And Mrs. Throckmorton, who forgot the subject of which she
      spoke, as soon as she asked the question, is quite satisfied. Dennis could
      see into the card-room, and came to Polly to ask if he might not go and
      play all-fours. But, of course, she sternly refused. At midnight they came
      home delightedly: Polly, as I said, wild to tell me the story of victory;
      only both the pretty Walton girls said: "Cousin Frederic, you did not come
      near me all the evening."
    

      We always called him Dennis at home, for convenience, though his real name
      was Frederic Ingham, as I have explained. When the election day came
      round, however, I found that by some accident there was only one Frederic
      Ingham's name on the voting-list; and, as I was quite busy that day in
      writing some foreign letters to Halle, I thought I would forego my
      privilege of suffrage, and stay quietly at home, telling Dennis that he
      might use the record on the voting-list and vote. I gave him a ticket,
      which I told him he might use, if he liked to. That was that very sharp
      election in Maine which the readers of The Atlantic so well
      remember, and it had been intimated in public that the ministers would do
      well not to appear at the polls. Of course, after that, we had to appear
      by self or proxy. Still, Naguadavick was not then a city, and this
      standing in a double queue at townmeeting several hours to vote was a bore
      of the first water; and so, when I found that there was but one Frederic
      Ingham on the list, and that one of us must give up, I stayed at home and
      finished the letters (which, indeed, procured for Fothergill his coveted
      appointment of Professor of Astronomy at Leavenworth), and I gave Dennis,
      as we called him, the chance. Something in the matter gave a good deal of
      popularity to the Frederic Ingham name; and at the adjourned election,
      next week, Frederic Ingham was chosen to the legislature. Whether this was
      I or Dennis, I never really knew. My friends seemed to think it was I; but
      I felt, that, as Dennis had done the popular thing, he was entitled to the
      honor; so I sent him to Augusta when the time came, and he took the oaths.
      And a very valuable member he made. They appointed him on the Committee on
      Parishes; but I wrote a letter for him, resigning, on the ground that he
      took an interest in our claim to the stumpage in the minister's sixteenths
      of Gore A, next No. 7, in the 10th Range. He never made any speeches, and
      always voted with the minority, which was what he was sent to do. He made
      me and himself a great many good friends, some of whom I did not
      afterwards recognize as quickly as Dennis did my parishioners. On one or
      two occasions, when there was wood to saw at home, I kept him at home; but
      I took those occasions to go to Augusta myself. Finding myself often in
      his vacant seat at these times, I watched the proceedings with a good deal
      of care; and once was so much excited that I delivered my somewhat
      celebrated speech on the Central School District question, a speech of
      which the State of Maine printed some extra copies. I believe there is no
      formal rule permitting strangers to speak; but no one objected.
    

      Dennis himself, as I said, never spoke at all. But our experience this
      session led me to think, that if, by some such "general understanding" as
      the reports speak of in legislation daily, every member of Congress might
      leave a double to sit through those deadly sessions and answer to
      roll-calls and do the legitimate party-voting, which appears stereotyped
      in the regular list of Ashe, Bocock, Black, etc., we should gain decidedly
      in working power. As things stand, the saddest state prison I ever visit
      is that Representatives' Chamber in Washington. If a man leaves for an
      hour, twenty "correspondents" may be howling, "Where was Mr. Prendergast
      when the Oregon bill passed?" And if poor Prendergast stays there!
      Certainly, the worst use you can make of a man is to put him in prison!
    

      I know, indeed, that public men of the highest rank have resorted to this
      expedient long ago. Dumas's novel of The Iron Mask turns on the
      brutal imprisonment of Louis the Fourteenth's double. There seems little
      doubt, in our own history, that it was the real General Pierce who shed
      tears when the delegate from Lawrence explained to him the sufferings of
      the people there—and only General Pierce's double who had given the
      orders for the assault on that town, which was invaded the next day. My
      charming friend, George Withers, has, I am almost sure, a double, who
      preaches his afternoon sermons for him. This is the reason that the
      theology often varies so from that of the forenoon. But that double is
      almost as charming as the original. Some of the most well-defined men, who
      stand out most prominently on the background of history, are in this way
      stereoscopic men; who owe their distinct relief to the slight differences
      between the doubles. All this I know. My present suggestion is simply the
      great extension of the system, so that all public machine-work may be done
      by it.
    

      But I see I loiter on my story, which is rushing to the plunge. Let me
      stop an instant more, however, to recall, were it only to myself, that
      charming year while all was yet well. After the double had become a matter
      of course, for nearly twelve months before he undid me, what a year it
      was! Full of active life, full of happy love, of the hardest work, of the
      sweetest sleep, and the fulfilment of so many of the fresh aspirations and
      dreams of boyhood! Dennis went to every school-committee meeting, and sat
      through all those late wranglings which used to keep me up till midnight
      and awake till morning. He attended all the lectures to which foreign
      exiles sent me tickets begging me to come for the love of Heaven and of
      Bohemia. He accepted and used all the tickets for charity concerts which
      were sent to me. He appeared everywhere where it was specially desirable
      that "our denomination," or "our party," or "our class," or "our family,"
      or "our street," or "our town," or "our country," or "our state," should
      be fully represented. And I fell back to that charming life which in
      boyhood one dreams of, when he supposes he shall do his own duty and make
      his own sacrifices, without being tied up with those of other people. My
      rusty Sanskrit, Arabic, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish,
      German and English began to take polish. Heavens! how little I had done
      with them while I attended to my public duties! My calls on my
      parishioners became the friendly, frequent, homelike sociabilities they
      were meant to be, instead of the hard work of a man goaded to desperation
      by the sight of his lists of arrears. And preaching! what a luxury
      preaching was when I had on Sunday the whole result of an individual,
      personal week, from which to speak to a people whom all that week I had
      been meeting as hand-to-hand friend! I never tired on Sunday, and was in
      condition to leave the sermon at home, if I chose, and preach it
      extempore, as all men should do always. Indeed, I wonder, when I think
      that a sensible people like ours—really more attached to their
      clergy than they were in the lost days, when the Mathers and Nortons were
      noblemen—should choose to neutralize so much of their ministers'
      lives, and destroy so much of their early training, by this undefined
      passion for seeing them in public. It springs from our balancing of sects.
      If a spirited Episcopalian takes an interest in the almshouse, and is put
      on the Poor Board, every other denomination must have a minister there,
      lest the poorhouse be changed into St. Paul's Cathedral. If a Sandemanian
      is chosen president of the Young Men's Library, there must be a Methodist
      vice-president and a Baptist secretary. And if a Universalist
      Sunday-School Convention collects five hundred delegates, the next
      Congregationalist Sabbath-School Conference must be as large, "lest 'they'—whoever
      they may be—should think 'we'—whoever we may be—are
      going down."
    

      Freed from these necessities, that happy year, I began to know my wife by
      sight. We saw each other sometimes. In those long mornings, when Dennis
      was in the study explaining to map-peddlers that I had eleven maps of
      Jerusalem already, and to school-book agents that I would see them hanged
      before I would be bribed to introduce their textbooks into the schools—she
      and I were at work together, as in those old dreamy days—and in
      these of our log-cabin again. But all this could not last—and at
      length poor Dennis, my double, overtasked in turn, undid me.
    

      It was thus it happened. There is an excellent fellow—once a
      minister—I will call him Isaacs—who deserves well of the world
      till he dies, and after—because he once, in a real exigency, did the
      right thing, in the right way, at the right time, as no other man could do
      it. In the world's great football match, the ball by chance found him
      loitering on the outside of the field; he closed with it, "camped" it,
      charged, it home—yes, right through the other side—not
      disturbed, not frightened by his own success—and breathless found
      himself a great man—as the Great Delta rang applause. But he did not
      find himself a rich man; and the football has never come in his way again.
      From that moment to this moment he has been of no use, that one can see,
      at all. Still, for that great act we speak of Isaacs gratefully and
      remember him kindly; and he forges on, hoping to meet the football
      somewhere again. In that vague hope, he had arranged a "movement" for a
      general organization of the human family into Debating Clubs, County
      Societies, State Unions, etc., etc., with a view of inducing all children
      to take hold of the handles of their knives and forks, instead of the
      metal. Children have bad habits in that way. The movement, of course, was
      absurd; but we all did our best to forward, not it, but him. It came time
      for the annual county-meeting on this subject to be held at Naguadavick.
      Isaacs came round, good fellow! to arrange for it—got the townhall,
      got the Governor to preside (the saint!—he ought to have triplet
      doubles provided him by law), and then came to get me to speak. "No," I
      said, "I would not speak, if ten Governors presided. I do not believe in
      the enterprise. If I spoke, it should be to say children should take hold
      of the prongs of the forks and the blades of the knives. I would subscribe
      ten dollars, but I would not speak a mill." So poor Isaacs went his way,
      sadly, to coax Auchmuty to speak, and Delafield. I went out. Not long
      after, he came back, and told Polly that they had promised to speak—the
      Governor would speak—and he himself would close with the quarterly
      report, and some interesting anecdotes regarding. Miss Biffin's way of
      handling her knife and Mr. Nellis's way of footing his fork. "Now if Mr.
      Ingham will only come and sit on the platform, he need not say one word;
      but it will show well in the paper—it will show that the
      Sandemanians take as much interest in the movement as the Armenians or the
      Mesopotamians, and will be a great favor to me." Polly, good soul! was
      tempted, and she promised. She knew Mrs. Isaacs was starving, and the
      babies—she knew Dennis was at home—and she promised! Night
      came, and I returned. I heard her story. I was sorry. I doubted. But Polly
      had promised to beg me, and I dared all! I told Dennis to hold his peace,
      under all circumstances, and sent him down.
    

      It was not half an hour more before he returned, wild with excitement—in
      a perfect Irish fury—which it was long before I understood. But I
      knew at once that he had undone me!
    

      What happened was this: The audience got together, attracted by Governor
      Gorges's name. There were a thousand people. Poor Gorges was late from
      Augusta. They became impatient. He came in direct from the train at last,
      really ignorant of the object of the meeting. He opened it in the fewest
      possible words, and said other gentlemen were present who would entertain
      them better than he. The audience were disappointed, but waited. The
      Governor, prompted by Isaacs, said, "The Honorable Mr. Delafield will
      address you." Delafield had forgotten the knives and forks, and was
      playing the Ruy Lopez opening at the chess club. "The Rev. Mr. Auchmuty
      will address you." Auchmuty had promised to speak late, and was at the
      school committee. "I see Dr. Stearns in the hall; perhaps he will say a
      word." Dr. Stearns said he had come to listen and not to speak. The
      Governor and Isaacs whispered. The Governor looked at Dennis, who was
      resplendent on the platform; but Isaacs, to give him his due, shook his
      head. But the look was enough. A miserable lad, ill-bred, who had once
      been in Boston, thought it would sound well to call for me, and peeped
      out, "Ingham!" A few more wretches cried, "Ingham! Ingham!" Still Isaacs
      was firm; but the Governor, anxious, indeed, to prevent a row, knew I
      would say something, and said, "Our friend Mr. Ingham is always prepared—and
      though we had not relied upon him, he will say a word, perhaps." Applause
      followed, which turned Dennis's head. He rose, flattered, and tried No. 3:
      "There has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that I will
      not longer occupy the time!" and sat down, looking for his hat; for things
      seemed squally. But the people cried, "Go on! go on!" and some applauded.
      Dennis, still confused, but flattered by the applause, to which neither he
      nor I are used, rose again, and this time tried No. 2: "I am very glad you
      liked it!" in a sonorous, clear delivery. My best friends stared. All the
      people who did not know me personally yelled with delight at the aspect of
      the evening; the Governor was beside himself, and poor Isaacs thought he
      was undone! Alas, it was I! A boy in the gallery cried in a loud tone,
      "It's all an infernal humbug," just as Dennis, waving his hand, commanded
      silence, and tried No. 4: "I agree, in general, with my friend the other
      side of the room." The poor Governor doubted his senses, and crossed to
      stop him—not in time, however. The same gallery-boy shouted, "How's
      your mother?"—and Dennis, now completely lost, tried, as his last
      shot, No. 1, vainly: "Very well, thank you; and you?"
    

      I think I must have been undone already. But Dennis, like another Lockhard
      chose "to make sicker." The audience rose in a whirl of amazement, rage,
      and sorrow. Some other impertinence, aimed at Dennis, broke all restraint,
      and, in pure Irish, he delivered himself of an address to the gallery,
      inviting any person who wished to fight to come down and do so—stating,
      that they were all dogs and cowards—that he would take any five of
      them single-handed, "Shure, I have said all his Riverence and the
      Misthress bade me say," cried he, in defiance; and, seizing the Governor's
      cane from his hand, brandished it, quarter-staff fashion, above his head.
      He was, indeed, got from the hall only with the greatest difficulty by the
      Governor, the City Marshal, who had been called in, and the Superintendent
      of my Sunday School.
    

      The universal impression, of course, was, that the Rev. Frederic Ingham
      had lost all command of himself in some of those haunts of intoxication
      which for fifteen years I have been laboring to destroy. Till this moment,
      indeed, that is the impression in Naguadavick. This number of The
      Atlantic will relieve from it a hundred friends of mine who have been
      sadly wounded by that notion now for years—but I shall not be likely
      ever to show my head there again.
    

      No! My double has undone me.
    

      We left town at seven the next morning. I came to No. 9, in the Third
      Range, and settled on the Minister's Lot, In the new towns in Maine, the
      first settled minister has a gift of a hundred acres of land. I am the
      first settled minister in No. 9. My wife and little Paulina are my parish.
      We raise corn enough to live on in summer. We kill bear's meat enough to
      carbonize it in winter. I work on steadily on my Traces of
      Sandemanianism in the Sixth and Seventh Centuries, which I hope to
      persuade Phillips, Sampson & Co. to publish next year. We are very
      happy, but the world thinks we are undone.
    











      A VISIT TO THE ASYLUM FOR AGED AND DECAYED PUNSTERS
    

      By Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-1894)
    

      [From The Atlantic Monthly, January, 1861. Republished in Soundings
      from the Atlantic (1864), by Oliver Wendell Holmes, whose authorized
      publishers are the Houghton Mifflin Company.]
    

      Having just returned from a visit to this admirable Institution in company
      with a friend who is one of the Directors, we propose giving a short
      account of what we saw and heard. The great success of the Asylum for
      Idiots and Feeble-minded Youth, several of the scholars from which have
      reached considerable distinction, one of them being connected with a
      leading Daily Paper in this city, and others having served in the State
      and National Legislatures, was the motive which led to the foundation of
      this excellent charity. Our late distinguished townsman, Noah Dow,
      Esquire, as is well known, bequeathed a large portion of his fortune to
      this establishment— "being thereto moved," as his will expressed it,
      "by the desire of N. Dowing some public Institution for the benefit
      of Mankind." Being consulted as to the Rules of the Institution and the
      selection of a Superintendent, he replied, that "all Boards must construct
      their own Platforms of operation. Let them select anyhow and he
      should be pleased." N.E. Howe, Esq., was chosen in compliance with this
      delicate suggestion.
    

      The Charter provides for the support of "One hundred aged and decayed
      Gentlemen-Punsters." On inquiry if there way no provision for females,
      my friend called my attention to this remarkable psychological fact,
      namely:
    

      THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS A FEMALE PUNSTER.
    

      This remark struck me forcibly, and on reflection I found that I never
      knew nor heard of one, though I have once or twice heard a woman make
      a single detached pun, as I have known a hen to crow.
    

      On arriving at the south gate of the Asylum grounds, I was about to ring,
      but my friend held my arm and begged me to rap with my stick, which I did.
      An old man with a very comical face presently opened the gate and put out
      his head.
    

      "So you prefer Cane to A bell, do you?" he said—and
      began chuckling and coughing at a great rate.
    

      My friend winked at me.
    

      "You're here still, Old Joe, I see," he said to the old man.
    

      "Yes, yes—and it's very odd, considering how often I've bolted,
      nights."
    

      He then threw open the double gates for us to ride through.
    

      "Now," said the old man, as he pulled the gates after us, "you've had a
      long journey."
    

      "Why, how is that, Old Joe?" said my friend.
    

      "Don't you see?" he answered; "there's the East hinges on the one
      side of the gate, and there's the West hinges on t'other side—haw!
      haw! haw!"
    

      We had no sooner got into the yard than a feeble little gentleman, with a
      remarkably bright eye, came up to us, looking very serious, as if
      something had happened.
    

      "The town has entered a complaint against the Asylum as a gambling
      establishment," he said to my friend, the Director.
    

      "What do you mean?" said my friend.
    

      "Why, they complain that there's a lot o' rye on the premises," he
      answered, pointing to a field of that grain—and hobbled away, his
      shoulders shaking with laughter, as he went.
    

      On entering the main building, we saw the Rules and Regulations for the
      Asylum conspicuously posted up. I made a few extracts which may be
      interesting:
    

      SECT. I. OF VERBAL EXERCISES.
    

      5. Each Inmate shall be permitted to make Puns freely from eight in the
      morning until ten at night, except during Service in the Chapel and Grace
      before Meals.
    

      6. At ten o'clock the gas will be turned off, and no further Puns,
      Conundrums, or other play on words will be allowed to be uttered, or to be
      uttered aloud.
    

      9. Inmates who have lost their faculties and cannot any longer make Puns
      shall be permitted to repeat such as may be selected for them by the
      Chaplain out of the work of Mr. Joseph Miller.
    

      10. Violent and unmanageable Punsters, who interrupt others when engaged
      in conversation, with Puns or attempts at the same, shall be deprived of
      their Joseph Millers, and, if necessary, placed in solitary
      confinement.
    

      SECT. III. OF DEPORTMENT AT MEALS.
    

      4. No Inmate shall make any Pun, or attempt at the same, until the
      Blessing has been asked and the company are decently seated.
    

      7. Certain Puns having been placed on the Index Expurgatorius of
      the Institution, no Inmate shall be allowed to utter them, on pain of
      being debarred the perusal of Punch and Vanity Fair, and, if
      repeated, deprived of his Joseph Miller.
    

      Among these are the following:
    

      Allusions to Attic salt, when asked to pass the salt-cellar.
    

      Remarks on the Inmates being mustered, etc., etc.
    

      Associating baked beans with the bene-factors of the Institution.
    

      Saying that beef-eating is befitting, etc., etc.
    

      The following are also prohibited, excepting to such Inmates as may have
      lost their faculties and cannot any longer make Puns of their own:
    

      "——your own hair or a wig"; "it will be long enough,"
      etc., etc.; "little of its age," etc., etc.; also, playing upon the
      following words: hospital; mayor; pun; pitied;
      bread; sauce, etc., etc., etc. See INDEX
      EXPURGATORIUS, printed for use of Inmates.
    

      The subjoined Conundrum is not allowed: Why is Hasty Pudding like the
      Prince? Because it comes attended by its sweet; nor this variation
      to it, to wit: Because the 'lasses runs after it.
    

      The Superintendent, who went round with us, had been a noted punster in
      his time, and well known in the business world, but lost his customers by
      making too free with their names—as in the famous story he set
      afloat in '29 of four Jerries attaching to the names of a noted
      Judge, an eminent Lawyer, the Secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions,
      and the well-known Landlord at Springfield. One of the four Jerries,
      he added, was of gigantic magnitude. The play on words was brought out by
      an accidental remark of Solomons, the well-known Banker. "Capital
      punishment!" the Jew was overheard saying, with reference to the
      guilty parties. He was understood, as saying, A capital pun is meant,
      which led to an investigation and the relief of the greatly excited public
      mind.
    

      The Superintendent showed some of his old tendencies, as he went round
      with us.
    

      "Do you know"—he broke out all at once—"why they don't take
      steppes in Tartary for establishing Insane Hospitals?"
    

      We both confessed ignorance.
    

      "Because there are nomad people to be found there," he said, with a
      dignified smile.
    

      He proceeded to introduce us to different Inmates. The first was a
      middle-aged, scholarly man, who was seated at a table with a Webster's
      Dictionary and a sheet of paper before him.
    

      "Well, what luck to-day, Mr. Mowzer?" said the Superintendent.
    

      "Three or four only," said Mr. Mowzer. "Will you hear 'em now—now
      I'm here?"
    

      We all nodded.
    

      "Don't you see Webster ers in the words center and theater?
    

      "If he spells leather lether, and feather fether, isn't
      there danger that he'll give us a bad spell of weather?
    

      "Besides, Webster is a resurrectionist; he does not allow u to rest
      quietly in the mould.
    

      "And again, because Mr. Worcester inserts an illustration in his text, is
      that any reason why Mr. Webster's publishers should hitch one on in their
      appendix? It's what I call a Connect-a-cut trick.
    

      "Why is his way of spelling like the floor of an oven? Because it is under
      bread."
    

      "Mowzer!" said the Superintendent, "that word is on the Index!"
    

      "I forgot," said Mr. Mowzer; "please don't deprive me of Vanity Fair
      this one time, sir."
    

      "These are all, this morning. Good day, gentlemen." Then to the
      Superintendent: "Add you, sir!"
    

      The next Inmate was a semi-idiotic-looking old man. He had a heap of
      block-letters before him, and, as we came up, he pointed, without saying a
      word, to the arrangements he had made with them on the table. They were
      evidently anagrams, and had the merit of transposing the letters of the
      words employed without addition or subtraction. Here are a few of them:
    

    TIMES.          SMITE!
    POST.           STOP!

    TRIBUNE.        TRUE NIB.
    WORLD.          DR. OWL.

    ADVERTISER.  {  RES VERI DAT.
                 {  IS TRUE. READ!

    ALLOPATHY.      ALL O' TH' PAY.
    HOMOEOPATHY.    O, THE ——! O! O, MY! PAH!


      The mention of several New York papers led to two or three questions.
      Thus: Whether the Editor of The Tribune was H.G. really? If
      the complexion of his politics were not accounted for by his being an
      eager person himself? Whether Wendell Fillips were not a
      reduced copy of John Knocks? Whether a New York Feuilletoniste
      is not the same thing as a Fellow down East?
    

      At this time a plausible-looking, bald-headed man joined us, evidently
      waiting to take a part in the conversation.
    

      "Good morning, Mr. Riggles," said the Superintendent, "Anything fresh this
      morning? Any Conundrum?"
    

      "I haven't looked at the cattle," he answered, dryly.
    

      "Cattle? Why cattle?"
    

      "Why, to see if there's any corn under 'em!" he said; and
      immediately asked, "Why is Douglas like the earth?"
    

      We tried, but couldn't guess.
    

      "Because he was flattened out at the polls!" said Mr. Riggles.
    

      "A famous politician, formerly," said the Superintendent. "His grandfather
      was a seize-Hessian-ist in the Revolutionary War. By the way, I
      hear the freeze-oil doctrines don't go down at New Bedford."
    

      The next Inmate looked as if he might have been a sailor formerly.
    

      "Ask him what his calling was," said the Superintendent.
    

      "Followed the sea," he replied to the question put by one of us. "Went as
      mate in a fishing-schooner."
    

      "Why did you give it up?"
    

      "Because I didn't like working for two mast-ers," he replied.
    

      Presently we came upon a group of elderly persons, gathered about a
      venerable gentleman with flowing locks, who was propounding questions to a
      row of Inmates.
    

      "Can any Inmate give me a motto for M. Berger?" he said.
    

      Nobody responded for two or three minutes. At last one old man, whom I at
      once recognized as a Graduate of our University (Anno 1800) held up his
      hand.
    

      "Rem a cue tetigit."
    

      "Go to the head of the class, Josselyn," said the venerable patriarch.
    

      The successful Inmate did as he was told, but in a very rough way, pushing
      against two or three of the Class.
    

      "How is this?" said the Patriarch.
    

      "You told me to go up jostlin'," he replied.
    

      The old gentlemen who had been shoved about enjoyed the pun too much to be
      angry.
    

      Presently the Patriarch asked again:
    

      "Why was M. Berger authorized to go to the dances given to the Prince?"
    

      The Class had to give up this, and he answered it himself:
    

      "Because every one of his carroms was a tick-it to the ball."
    

      "Who collects the money to defray the expenses of the last campaign in
      Italy?" asked the Patriarch.
    

      Here again the Class failed.
    

      "The war-cloud's rolling Dun," he answered.
    

      "And what is mulled wine made with?"
    

      Three or four voices exclaimed at once:
    

      "Sizzle-y Madeira!"
    

      Here a servant entered, and said, "Luncheon-time." The old gentlemen, who
      have excellent appetites, dispersed at once, one of them politely asking
      us if we would not stop and have a bit of bread and a little mite of
      cheese.
    

      "There is one thing I have forgotten to show you," said the
      Superintendent, "the cell for the confinement of violent and unmanageable
      Punsters."
    

      We were very curious to see it, particularly with reference to the alleged
      absence of every object upon which a play of words could possibly be made.
    

      The Superintendent led us up some dark stairs to a corridor, then along a
      narrow passage, then down a broad flight of steps into another passageway,
      and opened a large door which looked out on the main entrance.
    

      "We have not seen the cell for the confinement of 'violent and
      unmanageable' Punsters," we both exclaimed.
    

      "This is the sell!" he exclaimed, pointing to the outside prospect.
    

      My friend, the Director, looked me in the face so good-naturedly that I
      had to laugh.
    

      "We like to humor the Inmates," he said. "It has a bad effect, we find, on
      their health and spirits to disappoint them of their little pleasantries.
      Some of the jests to which we have listened are not new to me, though I
      dare say you may not have heard them often before. The same thing happens
      in general society, with this additional disadvantage, that there is no
      punishment provided for 'violent and unmanageable' Punsters, as in our
      Institution."
    

      We made our bow to the Superintendent and walked to the place where our
      carriage was waiting for us. On our way, an exceedingly decrepit old man
      moved slowly toward us, with a perfectly blank look on his face, but still
      appearing as if he wished to speak.
    

      "Look!" said the Director—"that is our Centenarian."
    

      The ancient man crawled toward us, cocked one eye, with which he seemed to
      see a little, up at us, and said:
    

      "Sarvant, young Gentlemen. Why is a—a—a—like a—a—a—?
      Give it up? Because it's a—a—a—a—."
    

      He smiled a pleasant smile, as if it were all plain enough.
    

      "One hundred and seven last Christmas," said the Director. "Of late years
      he puts his whole Conundrums in blank—but they please him just as
      well."
    

      We took our departure, much gratified and instructed by our visit, hoping
      to have some future opportunity of inspecting the Records of this
      excellent Charity and making extracts for the benefit of our Readers.