THE RETORT

 BY GEORGE P. MORRIS

  Old Nick, who taught the village school, 

 Wedded a maid of homespun habit; 

 He was stubborn as a mule, 

 She was playful as a rabbit. 



 Poor Jane had scarce become a wife, 

 Before her husband sought to make her 

 The pink of country polished life, 

 And prim and formal as a Quaker. 



 One day the tutor went abroad, 

 And simple Jenny sadly missed him; 

 When he returned, behind her lord 

 She slyly stole, and fondly kissed him. 



 The husband's anger arose—and red 

 And white his face alternate grew. 

 "Less freedom, ma'am!"—Jane sighed and said, 

 "Oh dear! I didn't know 'twas you!" 



  FOOTNOTES:

 [1]

Copyright, 1904, by Leslie's Magazine.

 [2]

From "Nautical Lays of a Landsman," by Wallace Irwin.
Copyright, 1904, by Dodd, Mead & Co.

 [3]

From Little Citizens ; reprinted by permission of McClure,
Phillips & Company.

Copyright 1903 by the S.S. McClure Company.

Copyright 1904 by McClure, Phillips & Company.

 [4]

From "At the Sign of the Dollar," by Wallace Irwin.
Copyright, 1905, by Fox, Duffield & Co.

 [5]

Lippincott's Magazine.

    A Book about Indians, Animals, and the Woods  Kuloskap, the Master

 And Other Algonkin Legends and Poems

 By Charles Godfrey Leland, F.R.S.L., and John Dyneley Prince, Ph.D.

 In the first four cantos are told the legends of the Indian god,
Kuloskap, narrating how he created the Indians' world, cared for the
interests of his children, dealt with the animal kingdom, and punished
the sorcerers. Following these cantos will be found the witchcraft lore,
lyrics, and miscellany. The stories take the reader into the heart of
nature. In the innermost recesses of the forest he follows the strange
doings of wizards, goblins, and witches, and revels in such exquisite
lyrics as those that tell of "The Scarlet Tanager and the Leaf," "The
Story of Nipon the Summer," "Lox, the Indian Devil," "The Song of the
Stars," and others.

 Dan Beard says: "It is the American Indian's 'King Arthur's Round
Table,' 'Robin Hood,' and 'The Arabian Nights.'"

 Ernest Thompson-Seton says: "... Priceless, unique,
irreplaceable."

 San Francisco Bulletin : "It is a valuable contribution to the
folk-lore of the world, and of intense interest."

 The Independent : "... Dainty in its woodsy freshness ... has the
same beauty as the Norse myths."

 12mo, Cloth, 359 pp., Ornamental Cover, Profusely Illustrated with
Half-tones by F. Berkeley Smith, Ten Birchbark Tracings by Mr. Leland
after Indian Designs, and a Frontispiece in Color by Edwin Willard
Deming. $2.00, post-paid.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers 

NEW YORK and LONDON 





    A Charming Book  My Musical Memories

 By REV. H.R. HAWEIS, A.M.,

 Author of "American Humorists," Etc., Etc.  A volume of personal reminiscences, dealing with early Life and
Recollections, Hearing Music, Old Violins, Paganini, Liszt, Wagner,
"Parsifal," and other kindred subjects, in a manner both artistic and
pleasing, which shows the author to be a person of great critical
ability in the realm of music. He is an enthusiast, for music hath
charms, so hath its memories; but his enthusiasm never carries him
beyond the bounds of good sense and fair judgment.

 "Of all Mr. Haweis' contributions to musical literature none is
richer or more readable than 'My Musical Memories'; in short, it is
a treasury of musical intelligence such as only a critical taste
and an almost infallible instinct could have gathered."— The
Musical Herald, Boston.  "Those who know the charm and clearness of Mr. Haweis' style in
descriptive musical essays will need no commendation of these
'Memories,' which are not only vivid but critical."— The Public
Ledger, Phila.  12mo, Cloth. Price, $1, Post-paid.  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers, 

NEW YORK and LONDON