THE STRIKE AT HINMAN'S

 BY ROBERT J. BURDETTE

 Away back in the fifties, "Hinman's" was not only the best school in
Peoria, but it was the greatest school in the world. I sincerely thought
so then, and as I was a very lively part of it, I should know. Mr.
Hinman was the Faculty, and he was sufficiently numerous to demonstrate
cube root with one hand and maintain discipline with the other. Dear old
man; boys and girls with grandchildren love him to-day, and think of him
among their blessings. He was superintendent of public instruction,
board of education, school trustee, county superintendent, principal of
the high school and janitor. He had a pleasant smile, a genius for
mathematics, and a West Point idea of obedience and discipline. He
carried upon his person a grip that would make the imported malady which
mocks that name in these degenerate days, call itself Slack, in very
terror at having assumed the wrong title.

 We used to have "General Exercises" on Friday afternoon. The most
exciting feature of this weekly frivolity consisted of a free-for-all
exercise in mental arithmetic. Mr. Hinman gave out lists of numbers,
beginning with easy ones and speaking slowly; each succeeding list he
dictated more rapidly and with ever-increasing complications of
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, until at last he was
giving them out faster than he could talk. One by one the pupils dropped
out of the race with despairing faces, but always at the closing
peremptory:

 "Answer?"

 At least a dozen hands shot into the air and as many voices shouted the
correct result. We didn't have many books, and the curriculum of an
Illinois school in those days was not academic; but two things the
children could do, they could spell as well as the dictionary and they
could handle figures. Some of the fellows fairly wallowed in them. I
didn't. I simply drowned in the shallowest pond of numbers that ever
spread itself on the page. As even unto this day I do the same.

 Well, one year the Teacher introduced an innovation; "compositions" by
the girls and "speakin' pieces" by the boys. It was easy enough for the
girls, who had only to read the beautiful thought that "spring is the
pleasantest season of the year." Now and then a new girl, from the east,
awfully precise, would begin her essay—"spring is the most pleasant
season of the year," and her would we call down with derisive laughter,
whereat she walked to her seat, very stiffly, with a proud dry-eyed look
in her face, only to lay her head upon her desk when she reached it, and
weep silently until school closed. But "speakin' pieces" did not meet
with favor from the boys, save one or two good boys who were in training
by their parents for congressmen or presidents.

 The rest of us, who were just boys, with no desire ever to be anything
else, endured the tyranny of compulsory oratory about a month, and then
resolved to abolish the whole business by a general revolt. Big and
little, we agreed to stand by each other, break up the new exercise, and
get back to the old order of things—the hurdle races in mental
arithmetic and the geographical chants which we could run and intone
together.  Was I a mutineer? Well, say, son, your Pa was a constituent conspirator.
He was in the color guard. You see, the first boy called on for a
declamation was to announce the strike, and as my name stood very
high—in the alphabetical roll of pupils—I had an excellent chance of
leading the assaulting column, a distinction for which I was not at all
ambitious, being a stripling of tender years, ruddy countenance, and
sensitive feelings. However, I stiffened the sinews of my soul, girded
on my armor by slipping an atlas back under my jacket and was ready for
the fray, feeling a little terrified shiver of delight as I thought that
the first lick Mr. Hinman gave me would make him think he had broken my
back.

 The hour for "speakin' pieces," an hour big with fate, arrived on time.
A boy named Aby Abbott was called up ahead of me, but he happened to be
one of the presidential aspirants (he was mate on an Illinois river
steamboat, stern-wheeler at that, the last I knew of him), and of course
he flunked and "said" his piece—a sadly prophetic selection—"Mr.
President, it is natural for man to indulge in the illusions of hope."
We made such suggestive and threatening gestures at him, however, when
Mr. Hinman wasn't looking, that he forgot half his "piece," broke down
and cried. He also cried after school, a little more bitterly, and with
far better reason.

 Then, after an awful pause, in which the conspirators could hear the
beating of each other's hearts, my name was called.

 I sat still at my desk and said:

 "I ain't goin' to speak no piece."

 Mr. Hinman looked gently surprised and asked:

 "Why not, Robert?"

 I replied:  "Because there ain't goin' to be any more speakin' pieces."

 The teacher's eyes grew round and big as he inquired:

 "Who says there will not?"

 I said, in slightly firmer tones, as I realized that the moment had come
for dragging the rest of the rebels into court:

 "All of us boys!"

 But Mr. Hinman smiled, and said quietly that he guessed there would be
"a little more speaking before the close of the session." Then laying
his hand on my shoulder, with most punctilious but chilling courtesy, he
invited me to the rostrum. The "rostrum" was twenty-five feet distant,
but I arrived there on schedule time and only touched my feet to the
floor twice on my way.

 And then and there, under Mr. Hinman's judicious coaching, before the
assembled school, with feelings, nay, emotions which I now shudder to
recall, I did my first "song and dance." Many times before had I stepped
off a solo-cachuca to the staccato pleasing of a fragment of slate
frame, upon which my tutor was a gifted performer, but never until that
day did I accompany myself with words. Boy like, I had chosen for my
"piece" a poem sweetly expressive of those peaceful virtues which I most
heartily despised. So that my performance, at the inauguration of the
strike, as Mr. Hinman conducted the overture, ran something like this—

  "Oh, not for me (whack) is the rolling (whack) drum, 

 Or the (whack, whack) trumpet's wild (whack) appeal! (Boo-hoo!) 

 Or the cry (swish—whack) of (boo-hoo-hoo!) war when the (whack) foe is come (ouch!) 

 Or the (ow—wow!) brightly (whack) flashing (whack-whack) steel! (wah-hoo, wah-hoo!)" 



 Words and symbols can not convey to the most gifted imagination the
gestures with which I illustrated the seven stanzas of this beautiful
poem. I had really selected it to please my mother, whom I had invited
to be present, when I supposed I would deliver it. But the fact that she
attended a missionary meeting in the Baptist church that afternoon made
me a friend of missions forever. Suffice it to say, then, that my
pantomime kept pace and time with Mr. Hinman's system of punctuation
until the last line was sobbed and whacked out. I groped my bewildered
way to my seat through a mist of tears and sat down gingerly and
sideways, inly wondering why an inscrutable providence had given to the
rugged rhinoceros the hide which the eternal fitness of things had
plainly prepared for the school-boy.

 But I quickly forgot my own sorrow and dried my tears with laughter in
the enjoyment of the subsequent acts of the opera, as the chorus
developed the plot and action. Mr. Hinman, who had been somewhat gentle
with me, dealt firmly with the larger boy who followed, and there was a
scene of revelry for the next twenty minutes. The old man shook Bill
Morrison until his teeth rattled so you couldn't hear him cry. He hit
Mickey McCann, the tough boy from, the Lower Prairie, and Mickey ran out
and lay down in the snow to cool off. He hit Jake Bailey across the legs
with a slate frame, and it hurt so that Jake couldn't howl—he just
opened his mouth wide, held up his hands, gasped, and forgot his own
name. He pushed Bill Haskell into a seat and the bench broke.

 He ran across the room and reached out for Lem Harkins, and Lem had a
fit before the old man touched him. He shook Dan Stevenson for two
minutes, and when he let him go, Dan walked around his own desk five
times before he could find it, and then he couldn't sit down without
holding on. He whipped the two Knowltons with a skate-strap in each hand
at the same time; the Greenwood family, five boys and a big girl, he
whipped all at once with a girl's skipping rope, and they raised such a
united wail that the clock stopped.

 He took a twist in Bill Rodecker's front hair, and Bill slept with his
eyes open for a week. He kept the atmosphere of that school-room full of
dust, and splinters, and lint, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth,
until he reached the end of the alphabet and all hearts ached and
wearied of the inhuman strife and wicked contention. Then he stood up
before us, a sickening tangle of slate frame, strap, ebony ferule and
skipping rope, a smile on his kind old face, and asked, in clear,
triumphant tones:

 "WHO says there isn't going to be any more speaking pieces?"

 And every last boy in that school sprang to his feet; standing there as
one human being with one great mouth, we shrieked in concerted anguish:

 "NOBODY DON'T!"

 And your Pa, my son, who led that strike, has been "speakin' pieces"
ever since.