THE HIRED BABY, By Marie Corelli
    

      A dark, desolate December night, a night that clung to the metropolis like
      a wet black shroud, a night in which the heavy, low-hanging vapours melted
      every now and then into a slow, reluctant rain, cold as icicle-drops in a
      rock cavern. People passed and repassed in the streets like ghosts in a
      bad dream; the twinkling gas-light showed them at one moment rising out of
      the fog, and then disappearing from view as though suddenly engulfed in a
      vaporous ebon sea. With muffled, angry shrieks, the metropolitan trains
      deposited their shoals of shivering, coughing travelers at the several
      stations, where sleepy officials, rendered vicious by the weather,
      snatched the tickets from their hands with offensive haste and roughness.
      Omnibus conductors grew ill-tempered and abusive without any seemingly
      adequate reason; shopkeepers became flippant, disobliging, and careless of
      custom; cabmen shouted derisive or denunciatory language after their
      rapidly retreating fares; in short, everybody was in a discontented,
      almost spiteful humour, with the exception of those few aggressively
      cheerful persons who are in the habit of always making the best of
      everything, even bad weather. Down the long wide vista of the Cromwell
      Road, Kensington, the fog had it all its own way; it swept on steadily,
      like thick smoke from a huge fire, choking the throats and blinding the
      eyes of foot-passengers, stealing through the crannies of the houses, and
      chilling the blood of even those luxurious individuals who, seated in
      elegant drawing-rooms before blazing fires, easily forgot that there were
      such bitter things as cold and poverty in that outside world against which
      they had barred their windows. At one house in particular—a house
      with gaudy glass doors and somewhat spoiled yellow silk curtains at the
      windows, a house that plainly said to itself, “Done up for show!” to all
      who cared to examine its exterior—there stood a closed brougham,
      drawn by a prancing pair of fat horses. A coachman of distinguished
      appearance sat on the box; a footman of irreproachable figure stood
      waiting on the pavement, his yellow-gloved hand resting elegantly on the
      polished silver knob of the carriage door. Both these gentlemen were
      resolute and inflexible of face; they looked as if they had determined on
      some great deed that should move the world to wild applause; but, truth to
      tell, they had only just finished a highly satisfactory “meat-tea,” and
      before this grave silence had fallen upon them, they had been discussing
      the advisability of broiled steak and onions for supper. The coachman had
      inclined to plain mutton-chops as being easier of digestion; the footman
      had earnestly asseverated his belief in the superior succulence and
      sweetness of the steak and onions, and in the end he had gained his point.
      This weighty question being settled, they had gradually grown reflective
      on the past, present, and future joys of eating at some one else’s
      expense, and in this bland and pleasing state of meditation they were
      still absorbed. The horses were impatient, and pawed the muddy ground with
      many a toss of their long manes and tails, the steam from their glossy
      coats mingling with the ever-thickening density of the fog. On the white
      stone steps of the residence before which they waited was an almost
      invisible bundle, apparently shapeless and immovable. Neither of the two
      gorgeous personages in livery observed it; it was too far back in a dim
      corner, too unobtrusive, for the casual regard of their lofty eyes.
      Suddenly the glass doors before mentioned were thrown apart with a
      clattering noise, a warmth and radiance from the entrance-hall thus
      displayed streamed into the foggy street, and at the same instant the
      footman, still with grave and imperturbable countenance, opened the
      brougham. An elderly lady, richly dressed, with diamonds sparkling in her
      gray hair, came rustling down the steps, bringing with her faint odours of
      patchouly and violet-powder. She was followed by a girl of doll-like
      prettiness, with a snub nose and petulant little mouth, who held up her
      satin-and-lace skirts with a sort of fastidious disdain, as though she
      scorned to set foot on earth that was not carpeted with the best velvet
      pile. As they approached their carriage the inert dark bundle, crouched in
      the corner, started into life—a woman, with wild hair and wilder
      eyes, whose pale lips quivered with suppressed weeping as her piteous
      voice broke into sudden clamour:
    

      “Oh, lady!” she cried, “for the love of God, a trifle! Oh, lady, lady!”
     

      But the “lady,” with a contemptuous sniff and a shake of her scented
      garments, passed her before she could continue her appeal, and she turned
      with a sort of faint hope to the softer face of the girl.
    

      “Oh, my dear, do have pity! Just the smallest little thing, and God will
      bless you! You are rich and happy—and I am starving! Only a penny!
      For the baby—the poor little baby!” And she made as though she would
      open her tattered shawl and reveal some treasure hidden therein, but
      shrunk back, repelled by the cold, merciless gaze that fell upon her from
      those eyes, in which youth dwelt without tenderness.
    

      “You have no business on our door step,” said the girl, harshly. “Go away
      directly, or I shall tell my servant to call a policeman.”
     

      Then, as she entered the brougham after her mother, she addressed the
      respectable footman angrily, giving him the benefit of a strong nasal
      intonation.
    

      “Howard, why do you let such dirty beggars come near the carriage? What
      are you paid for, I should like to know? It is perfectly disgraceful to
      the house!”
     

      “Very sorry, miss!” said the footman, gravely. “I didn’t see the—the
      person before.” Then shutting the brougham door, he turned with a
      dignified air to the unfortunate creature, who still lingered near, and,
      with a sweeping gesture of his gold-embroidered coat-sleeve, said
      majestically:
    

      “Do you ‘ear? Be hoff!”
     

      Then, having thus performed his duty, he mounted the box beside his friend
      the coachman, and the equipage rattled quickly away, its gleaming lights
      soon lost in the smoke-laden vapours that drooped downward like funeral
      hangings from the invisible sky to the scarcely visible ground. Left to
      herself, the woman who had vainly sought charity from those in whom no
      charity existed, looked up despairingly, as one distraught, and seemed as
      though she would have given vent to some fierce exclamation, when a feeble
      wail came pitifully forth from the sheltering folds of her shawl. She
      restrained herself instantly, and walked on at a rapid pace, scarcely
      heeding whither she went, till she reached the Catholic church known as
      the “Oratory.” Its unfinished facade loomed darkly out of the fog; there
      was nothing picturesque or inviting about it, yet there were people
      passing softly in and out, and through the swinging to and fro of the red
      baize-covered doors there came a comforting warm glimmer of light. The
      woman paused, hesitated, and then, having apparently made up her mind,
      ascended the broad steps, looked in, and finally entered. The place was
      strange to her; she knew nothing of its religious meaning, and its cold,
      uncompleted appearance oppressed her. There were only some half-dozen
      persons scattered about, like black specks, in its vast white interior,
      and the fog hung heavily in the vaulted dome and dark little chapels. One
      corner alone blazed with brilliancy and colour; this was the altar of the
      Virgin. Toward it the tired vagrant made her way, and on reaching it sank
      on the nearest chair as though exhausted. She did not raise her eyes to
      the marble splendours of the shrine—one of the masterpieces of old
      Italian art; she had been merely attracted to the spot by the glitter of
      the lamps and candles, and took no thought as to the reason of their being
      lighted, though she was sensible of a certain comfort in the soft lustre
      shed around her. She seemed still young; her face, rendered haggard by
      long and bitter privation, showed traces of past beauty, and her eyes,
      full of feverish trouble, were large, dark, and still lustrous. Her mouth
      alone—that sensitive betrayer of the life’s good and bad actions—revealed
      that all had not been well with her; its lines were hard and vicious, and
      the resentful curve of the upper lip spoke of foolish pride, not unmixed
      with reckless sensuality. She sat for a moment or two motionless; then,
      with exceeding care and tenderness, she began to unfold her thin, torn
      shawl by gentle degrees, looking down with anxious solicitude at the
      object concealed within. Only a baby—and withal a baby so tiny and
      white and frail that it seemed as though it must melt like a snowflake
      beneath the lightest touch. As its wrappings were loosened it opened a
      pair of large, solemn blue eyes, and gazed at the woman’s face with a
      strange, pitiful wistfulness. It lay quiet, without moan, a pinched, pale
      miniature of suffering humanity—an infant with sorrow’s mark
      painfully impressed upon its drawn, small features. Presently it stretched
      forth a puny hand and feebly caressed its protectress, and this, too, with
      the faintest glimmer of a smile. The woman responded to its affection with
      a sort of rapture; she caught it fondly to her breast and covered it with
      kisses, rocking it to and fro with broken words of endearment. “My little
      darling!” she whispered, softly. “My little pet! Yes, yes, I know! So
      tired, so cold and hungry! Never mind, baby, never mind! We will rest here
      a little; then we will sing a song presently, and get some money to take
      us home. Sleep awhile longer, deary! There! now we are warm and cosey
      again.”
     

      So saying, she rearranged her shawl in closer and tighter folds, so as to
      protect the child more thoroughly. While she was engaged in this operation
      a lady in deep mourning passed close by her, and, advancing to the very
      steps of the altar, knelt down, hiding her face with her clasped hands.
      The tired wayfarer’s attention was attracted by this; she gazed with a
      sort of dull wonder at the kneeling figure robed in rich rustling silk and
      crape, and gradually her eyes wandered upward, upward, till they rested on
      the gravely sweet and serenely smiling marble image of the Virgin and
      Child. She looked and looked again—surprised—incredulous; then
      suddenly rose to her feet and made her way to the altar railing. There she
      paused, staring vaguely at a basket of flowers, white and odorous, that
      had been left there by some reverent worshipper. She glanced doubtfully at
      the swinging silver lamps, the twinkling candles; she was conscious, too,
      of a subtle, strange fragrance in the air, as though a basket full of
      spring violets and daffodils had just been carried by; then, as her
      wandering gaze came back to the solitary woman in black, who still knelt
      motionless near her, a sort of choking sensation came into her throat and
      a stinging moisture struggled in her eyes. She strove to turn this
      hysterical sensation to a low laugh of disdain.
    

      “Lord, Lord!” she muttered beneath her breath, “what sort of place is
      this, where they pray to a woman and a baby?”
     

      At that moment the woman in black rose; she was young, with a proud, fair,
      but weary face. Her eyes lighted on her soiled and poverty-stricken
      sister, and she paused with a pitying look. The street wanderer made use
      of the opportunity thus offered, and in an urgent whisper implored
      charity. The lady drew out a purse, then hesitated, looking wistfully at
      the bundle in the shawl.
    

      “You have a child there?” she asked, in gentle accents. “May I see it?”
     

      “Yes, lady,” and the wrapper was turned down sufficiently to disclose the
      tiny white face, now more infinitely touching than ever in the pathos of
      sleep.
    

      “I lost my little one a week ago,” said the lady, simply, as she looked at
      it. “He was all I had.” Her voice trembled; she opened her purse, and
      placed a half-crown in the hand of her astonished supplicant. “You are
      happier than I am; perhaps you will pray for me. I am very lonely!”
     

      Then dropping her long crape veil so that it completely hid her features,
      she bent her head and moved softly away. The woman watched her till her
      graceful figure was completely lost in the gloom of the great church, and
      then turned again vaguely to the altar.
    

      “Pray for her!” she thought. “I! As if I could pray!” And she smiled
      bitterly. Again she looked at the statue in the shrine; it had no meaning
      at all for her. She had never heard of Christianity save through the
      medium of a tract, whose consoling title had been “Stop! You are Going to
      Hell!” Religion of every sort was mocked at by those among whom her lot
      was cast, the name of Christ was only used as a convenience to swear by,
      and therefore this mysterious, smiling, gently inviting marble figure was
      incomprehensible to her mind.
    

      “As if I could pray!” she repeated, with a sort of derision. Then she
      looked at the broad silver coin in her hand and the sleeping baby in her
      arms. With a sudden impulse she dropped on her knees.
    

      “Whoever you are,” she muttered, addressing the statue above her, “it
      seems you’ve got a child of your own; perhaps you’ll help me to take care
      of this one. It isn’t mine; I wish it was! Anyway, I love it more than its
      own mother does. I dare say you won’t listen to the likes of me, but if
      there was God anywhere about I’d ask Him to bless that good soul that’s
      lost her baby. I bless her with all my heart, but my blessing ain’t good
      for much. Ah!” and she surveyed anew the Virgin’s serene white
      countenance, “you just look as if you understood me; but I don’t believe
      you do. Never mind, I’ve said all I wanted to say this time.”
     

      Her strange petition, or rather discourse, concluded, she rose and walked
      away. The great doors of the church swung heavily behind her as she
      stepped out and stood once more in the muddy street. It was raining
      steadily—a fine, cold, penetrating rain. But the coin she held was a
      talisman against outer discomforts, and she continued to walk on till she
      came to a clean-looking dairy, where for a couple of pence she was able to
      replenish the infant’s long ago emptied feeding bottle; but she purchased
      nothing for herself. She had starved all day, and was now too faint to
      eat. Soon she entered an omnibus, and was driven to Charing Cross, and
      alighting at the great station, brilliant with its electric light, she
      paced up and down outside it, accosting several of the passers-by and
      imploring their pity. One man gave her a penny; another, young and
      handsome, with a flushed, intemperate face, and a look of his fast-fading
      boyhood still about him, put his hand in his pocket and drew out all the
      loose coppers it contained, amounting to three pennies and an odd
      farthing, and, dropping them into her outstretched palm, said, half gaily,
      half boldly: “You ought to do better than that with those big eyes of
      yours!” She drew back and shuddered; he broke into a coarse laugh, and
      went his way. Standing where he had left her, she seemed for a time lost
      in wretched reflections; the fretful, wailing cry of the child she carried
      roused her, and hushing it softly, she murmured, “Yes, yes, darling, it is
      too wet and cold for you; we had better go.” And acting suddenly on her
      resolve, she hailed another omnibus, this time bound for Tottenham Court
      Road, and was, after some dreary jolting, set down at her final
      destination—a dirty alley in the worst part of Seven Dials. Entering
      it, she was hailed with a shout of derisive laughter from some
      rough-looking men and women, who were standing grouped round a low
      gin-shop at the corner.
    

      “Here’s Liz!” cried one. “Here’s Liz and the bloomin’ kid!”
     

      “Now, old gel, fork out! How much ‘ave you got, Liz? Treat us to a drop
      all round!”
     

      Liz waked past them steadily; the conspicuous curve of her upper lip came
      into full play, and her eyes flashed disdainfully, but she said nothing.
      Her silence exasperated a tangle-haired, cat-faced girl of seventeen
      years, who, more than half drunk, sat on the ground, clasping her knees
      with both arms and rocking herself lazily to and fro.
    

      “Mother Mawks!” cried she, “Mother Mawks! You’re wanted! Here’s Liz come
      back with your babby!”
     

      As if her words had been a powerful incantation to summon forth an evil
      spirit, a door in one of the miserable houses was thrown open, and a stout
      woman, nearly naked to the waist, with a swollen, blotched, and most
      hideous countenance, rushed out furiously, and darting at Liz, shook her
      violently by the arm.
    

      “Where’s my shullin’?” she yelled, “where’s my gin? Out with it! Out with
      my shullin’ an’ fourpence! None of yer sneakin’ ways with me; a bargain’s
      a bargain all the world over! Yer’re making a fortin’ with my babby—yer
      know y’ are; pays yer a good deal better than yer old trade! Don’t say it
      don’t—yer know it do. Yer’ll not find such a sickly kid anywheres,
      an’ it’s the sickly kids wot pays an’ moves the ‘arts of the kyind ladies
      an’ good gentlemen”—this with an imitative whine that excited the
      laughter and applause of her hearers. “Yer’ve got it cheap, I kin tell
      yer, an’ if yer don’t pay up reg’lar, there’s others that’ll take the
      chance, an’ thankful too!”
     

      She stopped for lack of breath, and Liz spoke quietly:
    

      “It’s all right, Mother Mawks,” she said, with an attempt at a smile;
      “here’s your shilling, here’s the four pennies for the gin. I don’t owe
      you anything for the child now.” She stopped and hesitated, looking down
      tenderly at the frail creature in her arms; then added, almost pleadingly,
      “It’s asleep now. May I take it with me to-night?”
     

      Mother Mawks, who had been testing the coins Liz had given her by biting
      them ferociously with her large yellow teeth, broke into a loud laugh.
    

      “Take it with yer! I like that! Wot imperence! Take it with yer!” Then,
      with her huge red arms akimbo, she added, with a grin, “Tell yer wot, if
      yer likes to pay me ‘arf a crown, yer can ‘ave it to cuddle, an’ welcome!”
     

      Another shout of approving merriment burst from the drink-sodden
      spectators of the little scene, and the girl crouched on the ground
      removed her encircling hands from her knees to clap them loudly, as she
      exclaimed:
    

      “Well done, Mother Mawks! One doesn’t let out kids at night for nothing!
      ‘T ought to be more expensive than daytime!”
     

      The face of Liz had grown white and rigid.
    

      “You know I can’t give you that money,” she said, slowly. “I have not
      tasted bit or drop all day. I must live, though it doesn’t seem worth
      while. The child”—and her voice softened involuntarily—“is
      fast asleep; it’s a pity to wake it, that’s all. It will cry and fret all
      night, and—and I will make it warm and comfortable if you’d let me.”
       She raised her eyes hopefully and anxiously. “Will you?”
     

      Mother Mawks was evidently a lady of an excitable disposition. The simple
      request seemed to drive her nearly frantic. She raised her voice to an
      absolute scream, thrusting her dirty hands through her still dirtier hair
      as the proper accompanying gesture to her vituperative oratory.
    

      “Will I! Will I!” she screeched. “Will I let out my hown babby for the
      night for nuthin’? Will I? No, I won’t! I’ll see yer blowed into the
      middle of next week fust! Lor’ ‘a’ mussey! ‘ow ‘igh an’ mighty we are
      gittin’, to be sure! The babby’ll be quiet with you, Miss Liz, will it,
      hindeed! An’ it will cry an’ fret with its hown mother, will it, hindeed!”
       And at every sentence she approached Liz more nearly, increasing in fury
      as she advanced. “Yer low hussy! D’ye think I’d let ye ‘ave my babby for a
      hour unless yer paid for ‘it? As it is, yer pays far too little. I’m an
      honest woman as works for my livin’ an’ wot drinks reasonable, better than
      you by a long sight, with yer stuck-up airs! A pretty drab you are! Gi’ me
      the babby; ye ‘a’n’t no business to keep it a minit longer.” And she made
      a grab at Liz’s sheltering shawl.
    

      “Oh, don’t hurt it!” pleaded Liz, tremblingly. “Such a little thing—don’t
      hurt it!”
     

      Mother Mawks stared so wildly that her blood-shot eyes seemed protruding
      from her head.
    

      “‘Urt it! Hain’t I a right to do wot I likes with my hown babby? ‘Urt it!
      Well, I never! Look ‘ere!”—and she turned round on the assembled
      neighbours—“hain’t she a reg’lar one? She don’t care for the law,
      not she! She’s keepin’ back a child from its hown mother!” And with that
      she made a fierce attack on the shawl, and succeeded in dragging the
      infant from Liz’s reluctant arms. Wakened thus roughly from its slumbers,
      the poor mite set up a feeble wailing; its mother, enraged at the sound,
      shook it violently till it gasped for breath.
    

      “Drat the little beast!” she cried. “Why don’t it choke an’ ‘ave done with
      it!”
     

      And, without heeding the terrified remonstrances of Liz, she flung the
      child roughly, as though it were a ball, through the open door of her
      lodgings, where it fell on a heap of dirty clothes, and lay motionless;
      its wailing had ceased.
    

      “Oh, baby, baby!” exclaimed Liz, in accents of poignant distress. “Oh, you
      have killed it, I am sure! Oh, you are cruel, cruel! Oh, baby, baby!”
     

      And she broke into a tempestuous passion of sobs and tears. The bystanders
      looked on in unmoved silence. Mother Mawks gathered her torn garments
      round her with a gesture of defiance, and sniffed the air as though she
      said, “Any one who wants to meddle with me will get the worst of it.”
       There was a brief pause; suddenly a man staggered out of the gin-shop,
      smearing the back of his hand across his mouth as he came—a
      massively built, ill-favoured brute, with a shock of uncombed red hair and
      small ferret-like eyes. He stared stupidly at the weeping Liz, then at
      Mother Mawks, finally from one to the other of the loafers who stood by.
      “Wot’s the row?” he demanded, quickly. “Wot’s up? ‘Ave it out fair! Joe
      Mawks ‘ll stand by and see fair game. Fire away, my hearties! fire, fire
      away!” And, with a chuckling idiot laugh, he dived into the pocket of his
      torn corduroy trousers and produced a pipe. Filling this leisurely from a
      greasy pouch, with such unsteady fingers that the tobacco dropped all over
      him, he lighted it, repeating, with increased thickness of utterance,
      “Wot’s the row! ‘Ave it out fair!”
     

      “It’s about your babby, Joe!” cried the girl before mentioned, jumping up
      from her seat on the ground with such force that her hair came tumbling
      all about her in a dark, dank mist, through which her thin, eager face
      spitefully peered. “Liz has gone crazy! She wants your babby to cuddle!”
       And she screamed with sudden laughter. “Eh, eh, fancy! Wants a babby to
      cuddle!”
     

      The stupefied Joe blinked drowsily and sucked the stem of his pipe with
      apparent relish. Then, as if he had been engaged in deep meditation on the
      subject, he removed his smoky consoler from his mouth, and said, “W’y not?
      Wants a babby to cuddle? All right! Let ‘er ‘ave it—w’y not?”
     

      At these words Liz looked up hopefully through her tears, but Mother Mawks
      darted forward in raving indignation.
    

      “Yer great drunken fool!” she yelled to her besotted spouse, “aren’t yer
      ashamed of yerself? Wot! let out babby for a whole night for nuthin’? It’s
      lucky I’ve my wits about me, an’ I say Liz sha’n’t ‘ave it! There, now!”
     

      The man looked at her, and a dogged resolution darkened his repulsive
      countenance. He raised his big fist, clinched it, and hit straight out,
      giving his infuriated wife a black eye in much less than a minute. “An’ I
      say she shall ‘ave it. Where are ye now?”
     

      In answer to the query Mother Mawks might have said that she was “all
      there,” for she returned her husband’s blow with interest and force, and
      in a couple of seconds the happy pair were engaged in a “stand-up” fight,
      to the intense admiration and excitement of all the inhabitants of the
      little alley. Every one in the place thronged to watch the combatants, and
      to hear the blasphemous oaths and curses with which the battle was
      accompanied.
    

      In the midst of the affray a wizened, bent old man, who had been sitting
      at his door sorting rags in a basket, and apparently taking no heed of the
      clamour around him, made a sign to Liz.
    

      “Take the kid now,” he whispered. “Nobody’ll notice. I’ll see they don’t
      cry arter ye.”
     

      Liz thanked him mutely by a look, and rushing to the house where the child
      still lay, seemingly inanimate, on the floor among the soiled clothes, she
      caught it up eagerly, and hurried away to her own poor garret in a
      tumble-down tenement at the farthest end of the alley. The infant had been
      stunned by its fall, but under her tender care, and rocked in the warmth
      of her caressing arms, it soon recovered, though when its blue eyes opened
      they were full of a bewildered pain, such as may be seen in the eyes of a
      shot bird.
    

      “My pet! my poor little darling!” she murmured over and over again,
      kissing its wee white face and soft hands; “I wish I was your mother—Lord
      knows I do! As it is, you’re all I’ve got to care for. And you do love me,
      baby, don’t you? just a little, little bit!” And as she renewed her
      fondling embraces, the tiny, sad-visaged creature uttered a low, crooning
      sound of baby satisfaction in response to her endearments—a sound
      more sweet to her ears than the most exquisite music, and which brought a
      smile to her mouth and a pathos to her dark eyes, rendering her face for
      the moment almost beautiful. Holding the child closely to her breast, she
      looked cautiously out of her narrow window, and perceived that the
      connubial fight was over. From the shouts of laughter and plaudits that
      reached her ears, Joe Mawks had evidently won the day; his wife had
      disappeared from the field. She saw the little crowd dispersing, most of
      those who composed it entered the gin-shop, and very soon the alley was
      comparatively quiet and deserted. By-and-bye she heard her name called in
      a low voice: “Liz! Liz!”
     

      She looked down and saw the old man who had promised her his protection in
      case Mother Mawks should persecute her. “Is that you, Jim? Come upstairs;
      it’s better than talking out there.” He obeyed, and stood before her in
      the wretched room, looking curiously both at her and the baby. A wiry,
      wolfish-faced being was Jim Duds, as he was familiarly called, though his
      own name was the aristocratic and singularly inappropriate one of James
      Douglas. He was more like an animal than a human creature, with his
      straggling gray hair, bushy beard, and sharp teeth protruding like fangs
      from beneath his upper lip. His profession was that of an area thief, and
      he considered it a sufficiently respectable calling.
    

      “Mother Mawks has got it this time,” he said, with a grin which was more
      like a snarl. “Joe’s blood was up, and he pounded her nigh into a jelly.
      She’ll leave ye quiet now; so long as ye pay the hire reg’lar ye’ll have
      Joe on yer side. If so be as there’s a bad day, ye’d better not come home
      at all.”
     

      “I know,” said Liz; “but she’s always had the money for the child, and
      surely it wasn’t much to ask her to let me keep it warm on such a cold
      night as this.”
     

      Jim Duds looked meditative. “Wot makes yer care for that babby so much?”
       he asked. “‘T ain’t yourn.”
     

      Liz sighed.
    

      “No,” she said, sadly. “That’s true. But it seems something to hold on to,
      like. See what my life has been!” She stopped, and a wave of colour
      flushed her pallid features. “From a little girl, nothing but the streets—the
      long, cruel streets! and I just a bit of dirt on the pavement—no
      more; flung here, flung there, and at last swept into the gutter. All dark—all
      useless!” She laughed a little. “Fancy, Jim! I’ve never seen the country!”
     

      “Nor I,” said Jim, biting a piece of straw reflectively. “It must be
      powerful fine, with naught but green trees an’ posies a-blowin’ an’ a
      growin’ everywheres. There ain’t many kitching areas there, though, I’m
      told.”
     

      Liz went on, scarcely heeding him: “The baby seems to me like what the
      country must be—all harmless and sweet and quiet; when I hold it so,
      my heart gets peaceful somehow—I don’t know why.”
     

      Again Jim looked speculative. He waved his bitten straw expressively.
    

      “Ye’ve had ‘sperience, Liz. Hain’t ye met no man like wot ye could care
      fur?”
     

      Liz trembled, and her eyes grew wild..
    

      “Men!” she cried, with bitterest scorn—“no men have come my way,
      only brutes!”
     

      Jim stared, but was silent; he had no fit answer ready. Presently Liz
      spoke again, more softly:
    

      “Jim, do you know I went into a great church to-day?”
     

      “Worse luck!” said Jim, sententiously. “Church ain’t no use nohow as far
      as I can see.”
     

      “There was a figure there, Jim,” went on Liz, earnestly, “of a Woman
      holding up a Baby, and people knelt down before it. What do you s’pose it
      was?”
     

      “Can’t say!” replied the puzzled Jim. “Are ye sure ‘t was a church? Most
      like ‘t was a mooseum.”
     

      “No, no!” said Liz. “‘T was a church for certain; there were folks praying
      in it.”
     

      “Ah, well,” growled Jim, gruffly, “much good it may do ‘em! I’m not of the
      prayin’ sort. A woman an’ a babby, did ye say? Don’t ye get such cranky
      notions into yer head, Liz! Women an’ babbies are common enough—too
      common, by a long chalk; an’ as for prayin’ to ‘em—” Jim’s utter
      contempt and incredulity were too great for further expression, and he
      turned away, wishing her a curt “Good-night!”
     

      “Good-night!” said Liz, softly; and long after he had left her she still
      sat silent, thinking, thinking, with the baby asleep in her arms,
      listening to the rain as it dripped, dripped heavily, like clods falling
      on a coffin lid. She was not a good woman—far from it. Her very
      motive in hiring the infant at so much a day was entirely inexcusable; it
      was simply to gain money upon false pretences—by exciting more pity
      than would otherwise have been bestowed on her had she begged for herself
      alone, without a child in her arms. At first she had carried the baby
      about to serve as a mere trick of her trade, but the warm feel of its
      little helpless body against her bosom day after day had softened her
      heart toward its innocence and pitiful weakness, and at last she had grown
      to love it with a strange, intense passion—so much that she would
      willingly have sacrificed her life for its sake. She knew that its own
      parents cared nothing for it, except for the money it brought them through
      her hands; and often wild plans would form in her poor tired brain—plans
      of running away with it altogether from the roaring, devouring city, to
      some sweet, humble country village, there to obtain work and devote
      herself to making this little child happy. Poor Liz! Poor, bewildered,
      heart-broken Liz! Ignorant London heathen as she was, there was one
      fragrant flower blossoming in the desert of her soiled and wasted
      existence—the flower of a pure and guileless love for one of those
      “little ones,” of whom it hath been said by an all-pitying Divinity
      unknown to her, “Suffer them to come unto Me, and forbid them not: for of
      such is the kingdom of heaven.”
     

      The dreary winter days crept on apace, and, as they drew near Christmas,
      dwellers in the streets leading off the Strand grew accustomed of nights
      to hear the plaintive voice of a woman, singing in a peculiarly thrilling
      and pathetic manner some of the old songs and ballads familiar and dear to
      the heart of every Englishman—“The Banks of Allan Water,” “The
      Bailiff’s Daughter,” “Sally in our Alley,” “The Last Rose of Summer.” All
      these well-loved ditties she sang one after the other, and, though her
      notes were neither fresh nor powerful, they were true and often tender,
      more particularly in the hackneyed, but still captivating, melody of
      “Home, Sweet Home.” Windows were opened, and pennies freely showered on
      the street vocalist, who was accompanied in all her wanderings by a
      fragile infant, which she seemed to carry with especial care and
      tenderness. Sometimes, too, in the bleak afternoons, she would be seen
      wending her way through mud and mire, setting her weary face against the
      bitter east wind, and patiently singing on; and motherly women, coming
      from the gay shops and stores, where they had been purchasing Christmas
      toys for their own children, would often stop to look at the baby’s
      pinched, white features with pity, and would say, while giving their spare
      pennies, “Poor little thing! Is it not very ill?” And Liz, her heart
      freezing with sudden terror, would exclaim, hurriedly, “Oh, no, no! It is
      always pale; it is just a little bit weak, that’s all!” And the kindly
      questioners, touched by the large despair of her dark eyes, would pass on
      and say no more. And Christmas came—the birthday of the Child Christ—a
      feast the sacred meaning of which was unknown to Liz; she only recognized
      it as a sort of large and somewhat dull bank-holiday, when all London
      devoted itself to church-going and the eating of roast beef and
      plum-pudding. The whole thing was incomprehensible to her mind, but even
      her sad countenance was brighter than usual on Christmas eve, and she felt
      almost gay, for had she not, by means of a little extra starvation on her
      own part, been able to buy a wondrous gold-and-crimson worsted bird
      suspended from an elastic string, a bird which bobbed up and down to
      command in the most lively and artistic manner? And had not her hired baby
      actually laughed at the clumsy toy—laughed an elfish and weird
      laugh, the first it had ever indulged in? And Liz had laughed too, for
      pure gladness in the child’s mirth, and the worsted bird became a sort of
      uncouth charm to make them both merry.
    

      But after Christmas had come and gone, and the melancholy days, the last
      beating of the failing pulse of the Old Year, throbbed slowly and heavily
      away, the baby took upon its wan visage a strange expression—the
      solemn expression of worn-out and suffering age. Its blue eyes grew more
      solemnly speculative and dreamy, and after a while it seemed to lose all
      taste for the petty things of this world and the low desires of mere
      humanity. It lay very quiet in Liz’s arms; it never cried, and was no
      longer fretful, and it seemed to listen with a sort of mild approval to
      the tones of her voice as they rang out in the dreary streets, through
      which, by day and night, she patiently wandered. By-and-by the worsted
      bird, too, fell out of favour; it jumped and glittered in vain; the baby
      surveyed it with an unmoved air of superior wisdom, just as if it had
      suddenly found out what real birds were like, and was not to be deceived
      into accepting so poor an imitation of nature. Liz grew uneasy, but she
      had no one in whom to confide her fears. She had been very regular in her
      payments to Mother Mawks, and that irate lady, kept in order by her
      bull-dog of a husband, had been of late very contented to let her have the
      child without further interference. Liz knew well enough that no one in
      the miserable alley where she dwelt would care whether the baby were ill
      or not. They would tell her, “The more sickly the better for your trade.”
       Besides, she was jealous; she could not endure the idea of any one tending
      it or touching it but herself. Children were often ailing, she thought,
      and if left to themselves without doctor’s stuff they recovered sometimes
      more quickly than they had sickened. Thus soothing her inward tremors as
      best she might, she took more care than ever of her frail charge, stinting
      herself than she might nourish it, though the baby seemed to care less and
      less for mundane necessities, and only submitted to be fed, as it were,
      under patient and silent protest.
    

      And so the sands in Time’s hour-glass ran slowly but surely away, and it
      was New-Year’s eve. Liz had wandered about all day, singing her little
      repertoire of ballads in the teeth of a cruel, snow-laden wind—so
      cruel that people otherwise charitably disposed had shut close their doors
      and windows, and had not even heard her voice. Thus the last span of the
      Old Year had proved most unprofitable and dreary; she had gained no more
      than sixpence; how could she return with only that humble amount to face
      Mother Mawks and her vituperative fury? Her throat ached; she was very
      tired, and, as the night darkened from pale to deep and starless shadows,
      she strolled mechanically from the Strand to the Embankment, and after
      walking some little distance she sat down in a corner close to Cleopatra’s
      Needle—that mocking obelisk that has looked upon the decay of
      empires, itself impassive, and that still appears to say, “Pass on, ye
      puny generations! I, a mere carven block of stone, shall outlive you all!”
       For the first time in all her experience the child in her arms seemed a
      heavy burden. She put aside her shawl and surveyed it tenderly; it was
      fast asleep, a small, peaceful smile on its thin, quiet face. Thoroughly
      worn out herself, she leaned her head against the damp stone wall behind
      her, and clasping the infant tightly to her breast, she also slept—the
      heavy, dreamless sleep of utter fatigue and physical exhaustion. The
      solemn night moved on, a night of black vapours; the pageant of the Old
      Year’s deathbed was unbrightened by so much as a single star. None of the
      hurrying passers-by perceived the weary woman where she slept in that
      obscure corner, and for a long while she rested there undisturbed.
      Suddenly a vivid glare of light dazzled her eyes; she started to her feet
      half asleep, but still instinctively retaining the infant in her close
      embrace. A dark form, buttoned to the throat and holding a brilliant
      bull’s-eye lantern, stood before her.
    

      “Come now,” said this personage, “this won’t do! Move on!”
     

      Liz smiled faintly and apologetically.
    

      “All right!” she answered, striving to speak cheerfully, and raising her
      eyes to the policeman’s good-natured countenance. “I didn’t mean to fall
      asleep here. I don’t know how I came to do it. I must go home, of course.”
     

      “Of course,” said the policeman, somewhat mollified by her evident
      humility, and touched in spite of himself by the pathos of her eyes. Then
      turning his lamp more fully upon her, he continued, “Is that a baby you’ve
      got there?”
     

      “Yes,” said Liz, half proudly, half tenderly. “Poor little dear! it’s been
      ailing sadly—but I think it’s better now than it was.”
     

      And, encouraged by his friendly tone, she opened the folds of her shawl to
      show him her one treasure. The bulls-eye came into still closer
      requisition as the kindly guardian of the peace peered inquiringly at the
      tiny bundle. He had scarcely looked when he started back with an
      exclamation:
    

      “God bless my soul!” he cried, “it’s dead!”
     

      “Dead!” shrieked Liz; “oh, no, no! Not dead! Don’t say so, oh, don’t,
      don’t say so! Oh, you can’t mean it! Oh, for God’s love, say you didn’t
      mean it! It can’t be dead, not really dead!—no, no, indeed! Oh,
      baby, baby! You are not dead, my pet my angel, not dead, oh no!”
     

      And breathless, frantic with fear, she felt the little thing’s hands and
      feet and face, kissed it wildly, and called it by a thousand endearing
      names, in vain—in vain! Its tiny body was already stiff and rigid;
      it had been a corpse more than two hours.
    

      The policeman coughed, and brushed his thick gauntlet glove across his
      eyes. He was an emissary of the law, but he had a heart. He thought of his
      bright-eyed wife at home, and of the soft-cheeked, cuddling little
      creature that clung to her bosom and crowed with rapture whenever he came
      near.
    

      “Look here,” he said, very gently, laying one hand on the woman’s shoulder
      as she crouched shivering against the wall, and staring piteously at the
      motionless waxen form in her arms; “it’s no use fretting about it.” He
      paused; there was an uncomfortable lump in his throat, and he had to cough
      again to get it down. “The poor little creature’s gone—there’s no
      help for it. The next world’s a better place than this, you know! There,
      there, don’t take on so about it”—this as Liz shuddered and sighed;
      a sigh of such complete despair that it went straight to his honest soul,
      and showed him how futile were his efforts at consolation. But he had his
      duty to attend to, and he went on in firmer tones: “Now, like a good
      woman, you just move off from here and go home. If I leave you here by
      yourself a bit, will you promise me to go straight home? I mustn’t find
      you here when I come back on this beat, d’ ye understand?” Liz nodded.
      “That’s right!” he resumed, cheerily. “I’ll give you just ten minutes; you
      just go straight home.”
     

      And with a “Good-night,” uttered in accents meant to be comforting, he
      turned away and paced on, his measured tread echoing on the silence at
      first loudly, then fainter and fainter, till it altogether died away, as
      his bulky figure disappeared in the distance. Left to herself, Liz rose
      from her crouching posture; rocking the dead child in her arms, she
      smiled.
    

      “Go straight home!” she murmured, half aloud. “Home, sweet home! Yes,
      baby; yes, my darling, we will go home together!”
     

      And creeping cautiously along in the shadows, she reached a flight of the
      broad stone steps leading down to the river. She descended them, one by
      one; the black water lapped against them heavily, heavily; the tide was
      full up. She paused; a sonorous, deep-toned iron voice rang through the
      air with reverberating, solemn melody. It was the great bell of St. Paul’s
      tolling midnight—the Old Year was dead.
    

      “Straight home!” she repeated, with a beautiful, expectant look in her
      wild, weary eyes. “My little darling! Yes, we are both tired; we will go
      home! Home, sweet home! We will go!”
     

      Kissing the cold face of the baby corpse she held, she threw herself
      forward; there followed a sullen, deep splash—a slight struggle—and
      all was over! The water lapped against the steps heavily, heavily, as
      before; the policeman passed once more, and saw to his satisfaction that
      the coast was clear; through the dark veil of the sky one star looked out
      and twinkled for a brief instant, then disappeared again. A clash and
      clamour of bells startled the brooding night, here and there a window was
      opened, and figures appeared in balconies to listen. They were ringing in
      the New Year—the festival of hope, the birthday of the world! But
      what were New Years to her, who, with white, upturned face, and arms that
      embraced an infant in the tenacious grip of death, went drifting, drifting
      solemnly down the dark river, unseen, unpitied by all those who awoke to
      new hopes and aspirations on that first morning of another life-probation!
      Liz had gone; gone to make her peace with God—perhaps through the
      aid of her “hired” baby, the little sinless soul she had so fondly
      cherished; gone to that sweetest “home” we dream of and pray for, where
      the lost and bewildered wanderers of this earth shall find true welcome
      and rest from grief and exile; gone to that fair, far glory-world where
      reigns the divine Master, whose words still ring above the tumult of ages:
      “See that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
      that their angels do always behold the face of My Father who is in
      heaven.”