The Mass of Shadows

 By ANATOLE FRANCE

  From Mother of Pearl

, by Anatole France.
        Copyright by John Lane Company. By permission of the
        publishers.



 This tale the sacristan of the church of St. Eulalie at
    Neuville d'Aumont told me, as we sat under the arbor of the
    White Horse, one fine summer evening, drinking a bottle of old
    wine to the health of the dead man, now very much at his ease,
    whom that very morning he had borne to the grave with full
    honors, beneath a pall powdered with smart silver tears.

 "My poor father who is dead" (it is the sacristan who is
    speaking,) "was in his lifetime a grave-digger. He was of an
    agreeable disposition, the result, no doubt, of the calling he
    followed, for it has often been pointed out that people who
    work in cemeteries are of a jovial turn. Death has no terrors
    for them; they never give it a thought. I, for instance,
    monsieur, enter a cemetery at night as little perturbed as
    though it were the arbor of the White Horse. And if by chance I
    meet with a ghost, I don't disturb myself in the least about
    it, for I reflect that he may just as likely have business of
    his own to attend to as I. I know the habits of the dead, and I
    know their character. Indeed, so far as that goes, I know
    things of which the priests themselves are ignorant. If I were
    to tell you all I have seen, you would be astounded. But a
    still tongue makes a wise head, and my father, who, all the
    same, delighted in spinning a yarn, did not disclose a
    twentieth part of what he knew. To make up for this he often
    repeated the same stories, and to my knowledge he told the
    story of Catherine Fontaine at least a hundred times.

 "Catherine Fontaine was an old maid whom he well remembered
    having seen when he was a mere child. I should not be surprised
    if there were still, perhaps, three old fellows in the district
    who could remember having heard folks speak of her, for she was
    very well known and of excellent reputation, though poor
    enough. She lived at the corner of the Rue aux Nonnes, in the
    turret which is still to be seen there, and which formed part
    of an old half-ruined mansion looking on to the garden of the
    Ursuline nuns. On that turret can still be traced certain
    figures and half-obliterated inscriptions. The late curé
    of St. Eulalie, Monsieur Levasseur, asserted that there are the
    words in Latin, Love is stronger than death

, 'which is
    to be understood,' so he would add, 'of divine love.'

 "Catherine Fontaine lived by herself in this tiny apartment.
    She was a lace-maker. You know, of course, that the lace made
    in our part of the world was formerly held in high esteem. No
    one knew anything of her relatives or friends. It was reported
    that when she was eighteen years of age she had loved the young
    Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry, and had been secretly
    affianced to him. But decent folk didn't believe a word of it,
    and said it was nothing but a tale concocted because Catherine
    Fontaine's demeanor was that of a lady rather than that of a
    working woman, and because, moreover, she possessed beneath her
    white locks the remains of great beauty. Her expression was
    sorrowful, and on one finger she wore one of those rings
    fashioned by the goldsmith into the semblance of two tiny hands
    clasped together. In former days folks were accustomed to
    exchange such rings at their betrothal ceremony. I am sure you
    know the sort of thing I mean.

 "Catherine Fontaine lived a saintly life. She spent a great
    deal of time in churches, and every morning, whatever might be
    the weather, she went to assist at the six o'clock Mass at St.
    Eulalie.

 "Now one December night, whilst she was in her little
    chamber, she was awakened by the sound of bells, and nothing
    doubting that they were ringing for the first Mass, the pious
    woman dressed herself, and came downstairs and out into the
    street. The night was so obscure that not even the walls of the
    houses were visible, and not a ray of light shone from the
    murky sky. And such was the silence amid this black darkness,
    that there was not even the sound of a distant dog barking, and
    a feeling of aloofness from every living creature was
    perceptible. But Catherine Fontaine knew well every single
    stone she stepped on, and, as she could have found her way to
    the church with her eyes shut, she reached without difficulty
    the corner of the Rue aux Nonnes and the Rue de la Paroisse,
    where the timbered house stands with the tree of Jesse carved
    on one of its massive beams. When she reached this spot she
    perceived that the church doors were open, and that a great
    light was streaming out from the wax tapers. She resumed her
    journey, and when she had passed through the porch she found
    herself in the midst of a vast congregation which entirely
    filled the church. But she did not recognize any of the
    worshipers and was surprised to observe that all of these
    people were dressed in velvets and brocades, with feathers in
    their hats, and that they wore swords in the fashion of days
    gone by. Here were gentlemen who carried tall canes with gold
    knobs, and ladies with lace caps fastened with coronet-shaped
    combs. Chevaliers of the Order of St. Louis extended their
    hands to these ladies, who concealed behind their fans painted
    faces, of which only the powdered brow and the patch at the
    corner of the eye were visible! All of them proceeded to take
    their places without the slightest sound, and as they moved
    neither the sound of their footsteps on the pavement, nor the
    rustle of their garments could be heard. The lower places were
    filled with a crowd of young artisans in brown jackets, dimity
    breeches, and blue stockings, with their arms round the waists
    of pretty blushing girls who lowered their eyes. Near the holy
    water stoups peasant women, in scarlet petticoats and laced
    bodices, sat upon the ground as immovable as domestic animals,
    whilst young lads, standing up behind them, stared out from
    wide-open eyes and twirled their hats round and round on their
    fingers, and all these sorrowful countenances seemed centred
    irremovably on one and the same thought, at once sweet and
    sorrowful. On her knees, in her accustomed place, Catherine
    Fontaine saw the priest advance toward the altar, preceded by
    two servers. She recognized neither priest nor clerks. The Mass
    began. It was a silent Mass, during which neither the sound of
    the moving lips nor the tinkle of the bell was audible.
    Catherine Fontaine felt that she was under the observation and
    the influence also of her mysterious neighbor, and when,
    scarcely turning her head, she stole a glance at him, she
    recognized the young Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry, who had
    once loved her, and who had been dead for five and forty years.
    She recognized him by a small mark which he had over the left
    ear, and above all by the shadow which his long black eyelashes
    cast upon his cheeks. He was dressed in his hunting clothes,
    scarlet with gold lace, the very clothes he wore that day when
    he met her in St. Leonard's Wood, begged of her a drink, and
    stole a kiss. He had preserved his youth and good looks. When
    he smiled, he still displayed magnificent teeth. Catherine said
    to him in an undertone:

 "'Monseigneur, you who were my friend, and to whom in days
    gone by I gave all that a girl holds most dear, may God keep
    you in His grace! O, that He would at length inspire me with
    regret for the sin I committed in yielding to you; for it is a
    fact that, though my hair is white and I approach my end, I
    have not yet repented of having loved you. But, dear dead
    friend and noble seigneur, tell me, who are these folk, habited
    after the antique fashion, who are here assisting at this
    silent Mass?'

 "The Chevalier d'Aumont-Cléry replied in a voice
    feebler than a breath, but none the less crystal clear:

 "'Catherine, these men and women are souls from purgatory
    who have grieved God by sinning as we ourselves sinned through
    love of the creature, but who are not on that account cast off
    by God, inasmuch as their sin, like ours, was not
    deliberate.

 "'Whilst separated from those whom they loved upon earth,
    they are purified in the cleansing fires of purgatory, they
    suffer the pangs of absence, which is for them the most cruel
    of tortures. They are so unhappy that an angel from heaven
    takes pity upon their love-torment. By the permission of the
    Most High, for one hour in the night, he reunites each year
    lover to loved in their parish church, where they are permitted
    to assist at the Mass of Shadows, hand clasped in hand. These
    are the facts. If it has been granted to me to see thee before
    thy death, Catherine, it is a boon which is bestowed by God's
    special permission.'

 "And Catherine Fontaine answered him:

 "'I would die gladly enough, dear, dead lord, if I might
    recover the beauty that was mine when I gave you to drink in
    the forest.'

 "Whilst they thus conversed under their breath, a very old
    canon was taking the collection and proffering to the
    worshipers a great copper dish, wherein they let fall, each in
    his turn, ancient coins which have long since ceased to pass
    current: écus of six livres, florins, ducats and
    ducatoons, jacobuses and rose-nobles, and the pieces fell
    silently into the dish. When at length it was placed before the
    Chevalier, he dropped into it a louis which made no more sound
    than had the other pieces of gold and silver.

 "Then the old canon stopped before Catherine Fontaine, who
    fumbled in her pocket without being able to find a farthing.
    Then, being unwilling to allow the dish to pass without an
    offering from herself, she slipped from her finger the ring
    which the Chevalier had given her the day before his death, and
    cast it into the copper bowl. As the golden ring fell, a sound
    like the heavy clang of a bell rang out, and on the stroke of
    this reverberation the Chevalier, the canon, the celebrant, the
    servers, the ladies and their cavaliers, the whole assembly
    vanished utterly; the candles guttered out, and Catherine
    Fontaine was left alone in the darkness."

 Having concluded his narrative after this fashion, the
    sacristan drank a long draught of wine, remained pensive for a
    moment, and then resumed his talk in these words:

 "I have told you this tale exactly as my father has told it
    to me over and over again, and I believe that it is authentic,
    because it agrees in all respects with what I have observed of
    the manners and customs peculiar to those who have passed away.
    I have associated a good deal with the dead ever since my
    childhood, and I know that they are accustomed to return to
    what they have loved.

 "It is on this account that the miserly dead wander at night
    in the neighborhood of the treasures they conceal during their
    life time. They keep a strict watch over their gold; but the
    trouble they give themselves, far from being of service to
    them, turns to their disadvantage; and it is not a rare thing
    at all to come upon money buried in the ground on digging in a
    place haunted by a ghost. In the same way deceased husbands
    come by night to harass their wives who have made a second
    matrimonial venture, and I could easily name several who have
    kept a better watch over their wives since death than they ever
    did while living.

 "That sort of thing is blameworthy, for in all fairness the
    dead have no business to stir up jealousies. Still I do but
    tell you what I have observed myself. It is a matter to take
    into account if one marries a widow. Besides, the tale I have
    told you is vouchsafed for in the manner following:

 "The morning after that extraordinary night Catherine
    Fontaine was discovered dead in her chamber. And the beadle
    attached to St. Eulalie found in the copper bowl used for the
    collection a gold ring with two clasped hands. Besides, I'm not
    the kind of man to make jokes. Suppose we order another bottle
    of wine?..."