THE DUPLICITY OF HARGRAVES

 By O. Henry (1862-1910)

 [From The Junior Munsey , February, 1902. Republished in the volume, Sixes and Sevens (1911), by O. Henry; copyright, 1911, by
      Doubleday, Page & Co.; reprinted by their permission.]

 When Major Pendleton Talbot, of Mobile, sir, and his daughter, Miss Lydia
      Talbot, came to Washington to reside, they selected for a boarding place a
      house that stood fifty yards back from one of the quietest avenues. It was
      an old-fashioned brick building, with a portico upheld by tall white
      pillars. The yard was shaded by stately locusts and elms, and a catalpa
      tree in season rained its pink and white blossoms upon the grass. Rows of
      high box bushes lined the fence and walks. It was the Southern style and
      aspect of the place that pleased the eyes of the Talbots.

 In this pleasant private boarding house they engaged rooms, including a
      study for Major Talbot, who was adding the finishing chapters to his book, Anecdotes and Reminiscences of the Alabama Army, Bench, and Bar .

 Major Talbot was of the old, old South. The present day had little
      interest or excellence in his eyes. His mind lived in that period before
      the Civil War when the Talbots owned thousands of acres of fine cotton
      land and the slaves to till them; when the family mansion was the scene of
      princely hospitality, and drew its guests from the aristocracy of the
      South. Out of that period he had brought all its old pride and scruples of
      honor, an antiquated and punctilious politeness, and (you would think) its
      wardrobe.

 Such clothes were surely never made within fifty years. The Major was
      tall, but whenever he made that wonderful, archaic genuflexion he called a
      bow, the corners of his frock coat swept the floor. That garment was a
      surprise even to Washington, which has long ago ceased to shy at the
      frocks and broad-brimmed hats of Southern Congressmen. One of the boarders
      christened it a "Father Hubbard," and it certainly was high in the waist
      and full in the skirt.

 But the Major, with all his queer clothes, his immense area of plaited,
      raveling shirt bosom, and the little black string tie with the bow always
      slipping on one side, both was smiled at and liked in Mrs. Vardeman's
      select boarding house. Some of the young department clerks would often
      "string him," as they called it, getting him started upon the subject
      dearest to him—the traditions and history of his beloved Southland.
      During his talks he would quote freely from the Anecdotes and
      Reminiscences . But they were very careful not to let him see their
      designs, for in spite of his sixty-eight years he could make the boldest
      of them uncomfortable under the steady regard of his piercing gray eyes.

 Miss Lydia was a plump, little old maid of thirty-five, with smoothly
      drawn, tightly twisted hair that made her look still older. Old-fashioned,
      too, she was; but antebellum glory did not radiate from her as it did from
      the Major. She possessed a thrifty common sense, and it was she who
      handled the finances of the family, and met all comers when there were
      bills to pay. The Major regarded board bills and wash bills as
      contemptible nuisances. They kept coming in so persistently and so often.
      Why, the Major wanted to know, could they not be filed and paid in a lump
      sum at some convenient period—say when the Anecdotes and
      Reminiscences had been published and paid for? Miss Lydia would calmly
      go on with her sewing and say, "We'll pay as we go as long as the money
      lasts, and then perhaps they'll have to lump it."

 Most of Mrs. Vardeman's boarders were away during the day, being nearly
      all department clerks and business men; but there was one of them who was
      about the house a great deal from morning to night. This was a young man
      named Henry Hopkins Hargraves—every one in the house addressed him
      by his full name—who was engaged at one of the popular vaudeville
      theaters. Vaudeville has risen to such a respectable plane in the last few
      years, and Mr. Hargraves was such a modest and well-mannered person, that
      Mrs. Vardeman could find no objection to enrolling him upon her list of
      boarders.

 At the theater Hargraves was known as an all-round dialect comedian,
      having a large repertoire of German, Irish, Swede, and black-face
      specialties. But Mr. Hargraves was ambitious, and often spoke of his great
      desire to succeed in legitimate comedy.

 This young man appeared to conceive a strong fancy for Major Talbot.
      Whenever that gentleman would begin his Southern reminiscences, or repeat
      some of the liveliest of the anecdotes, Hargraves could always be found,
      the most attentive among his listeners.

 For a time the Major showed an inclination to discourage the advances of
      the "play actor," as he privately termed him; but soon the young man's
      agreeable manner and indubitable appreciation of the old gentleman's
      stories completely won him over.

 It was not long before the two were like old chums. The Major set apart
      each afternoon to read to him the manuscript of his book. During the
      anecdotes Hargraves never failed to laugh at exactly the right point. The
      Major was moved to declare to Miss Lydia one day that young Hargraves
      possessed remarkable perception and a gratifying respect for the old
      rgime. And when it came to talking of those old days—if Major
      Talbot liked to talk, Mr. Hargraves was entranced to listen.

 Like almost all old people who talk of the past, the Major loved to linger
      over details. In describing the splendid, almost royal, days of the old
      planters, he would hesitate until he had recalled the name of the negro
      who held his horse, or the exact date of certain minor happenings, or the
      number of bales of cotton raised in such a year; but Hargraves never grew
      impatient or lost interest. On the contrary, he would advance questions on
      a variety of subjects connected with the life of that time, and he never
      failed to extract ready replies.

 The fox hunts, the 'possum suppers, the hoe-downs and jubilees in the
      negro quarters, the banquets in the plantation-house hall, when
      invitations went for fifty miles around; the occasional feuds with the
      neighboring gentry; the Major's duel with Rathbone Culbertson about Kitty
      Chalmers, who afterward married a Thwaite of South Carolina; and private
      yacht races for fabulous sums on Mobile Bay; the quaint beliefs,
      improvident habits, and loyal virtues of the old slaves—all these
      were subjects that held both the Major and Hargraves absorbed for hours at
      a time.

 Sometimes, at night, when the young man would be coming upstairs to his
      room after his turn at the theater was over, the Major would appear at the
      door of his study and beckon archly to him. Going in, Hargraves would find
      a little table set with a decanter, sugar bowl, fruit, and a big bunch of
      fresh green mint.

 "It occurred to me," the Major would begin—he was always ceremonious—"that
      perhaps you might have found your duties at the—at your place of
      occupation—sufficiently arduous to enable you, Mr. Hargraves, to
      appreciate what the poet might well have had in his mind when he wrote,
      'tired Nature's sweet restorer'—one of our Southern juleps."

 It was a fascination to Hargraves to watch him make it. He took rank among
      artists when he began, and he never varied the process. With what delicacy
      he bruised the mint; with what exquisite nicety he estimated the
      ingredients; with what solicitous care he capped the compound with the
      scarlet fruit glowing against the dark green fringe! And then the
      hospitality and grace with which he offered it, after the selected oat
      straws had been plunged into its tinkling depths!

 After about four months in Washington, Miss Lydia discovered one morning
      that they were almost without money. The Anecdotes and Reminiscences was completed, but publishers had not jumped at the collected gems of
      Alabama sense and wit. The rental of a small house which they still owned
      in Mobile was two months in arrears. Their board money for the month would
      be due in three days. Miss Lydia called her father to a consultation.

 "No money?" said he with a surprised look. "It is quite annoying to be
      called on so frequently for these petty sums, Really, I—"

 The Major searched his pockets. He found only a two-dollar bill, which he
      returned to his vest pocket.

 "I must attend to this at once, Lydia," he said. "Kindly get me my
      umbrella and I will go downtown immediately. The congressman from our
      district, General Fulghum, assured me some days ago that he would use his
      influence to get my book published at an early date. I will go to his
      hotel at once and see what arrangement has been made."

 With a sad little smile Miss Lydia watched him button his "Father Hubbard"
      and depart, pausing at the door, as he always did, to bow profoundly.

 That evening, at dark, he returned. It seemed that Congressman Fulghum had
      seen the publisher who had the Major's manuscript for reading. That person
      had said that if the anecdotes, etc., were carefully pruned down about
      one-half, in order to eliminate the sectional and class prejudice with
      which the book was dyed from end to end, he might consider its
      publication.

 The Major was in a white heat of anger, but regained his equanimity,
      according to his code of manners, as soon as he was in Miss Lydia's
      presence.

 "We must have money," said Miss Lydia, with a little wrinkle above her
      nose. "Give me the two dollars, and I will telegraph to Uncle Ralph for
      some to-night."

 The Major drew a small envelope from his upper vest pocket and tossed it
      on the table.

 "Perhaps it was injudicious," he said mildly, "but the sum was so merely
      nominal that I bought tickets to the theater to-night. It's a new war
      drama, Lydia. I thought you would be pleased to witness its first
      production in Washington. I am told that the South has very fair treatment
      in the play. I confess I should like to see the performance myself."

 Miss Lydia threw up her hands in silent despair.

 Still, as the tickets were bought, they might as well be used. So that
      evening, as they sat in the theater listening to the lively overture, even
      Miss Lydia was minded to relegate their troubles, for the hour, to second
      place. The Major, in spotless linen, with his extraordinary coat showing
      only where it was closely buttoned, and his white hair smoothly roached,
      looked really fine and distinguished. The curtain went up on the first act
      of A Magnolia Flower , revealing a typical Southern plantation
      scene. Major Talbot betrayed some interest.

 "Oh, see!" exclaimed Miss Lydia, nudging his arm, and pointing to her
      program.

 The Major put on his glasses and read the line in the cast of characters
      that her fingers indicated.

 Col. Webster Calhoun .... Mr. Hopkins Hargraves.

 "It's our Mr. Hargraves," said Miss Lydia. "It must be his first
      appearance in what he calls 'the legitimate.' I'm so glad for him."

 Not until the second act did Col. Webster Calhoun appear upon the stage.
      When he made his entry Major Talbot gave an audible sniff, glared at him,
      and seemed to freeze solid. Miss Lydia uttered a little, ambiguous squeak
      and crumpled her program in her hand. For Colonel Calhoun was made up as
      nearly resembling Major Talbot as one pea does another. The long, thin
      white hair, curly at the ends, the aristocratic beak of a nose, the
      crumpled, wide, raveling shirt front, the string tie, with the bow nearly
      under one ear, were almost exactly duplicated. And then, to clinch the
      imitation, he wore the twin to the Major's supposed to be unparalleled
      coat. High-collared, baggy, empire-waisted, ample-skirted, hanging a foot
      lower in front than behind, the garment could have been designed from no
      other pattern. From then on, the Major and Miss Lydia sat bewitched, and
      saw the counterfeit presentment of a haughty Talbot "dragged," as the
      Major afterward expressed it, "through the slanderous mire of a corrupt
      stage."

 Mr. Hargraves had used his opportunities well. He had caught the Major's
      little idiosyncrasies of speech, accent, and intonation and his pompous
      courtliness to perfection—exaggerating all to the purpose of the
      stage. When he performed that marvelous bow that the Major fondly imagined
      to be the pink of all salutations, the audience sent forth a sudden round
      of hearty applause.

 Miss Lydia sat immovable, not daring to glance toward her father.
      Sometimes her hand next to him would be laid against her cheek, as if to
      conceal the smile which, in spite of her disapproval, she could not
      entirely suppress.

 The culmination of Hargraves audacious imitation took place in the third
      act. The scene is where Colonel Calhoun entertains a few of the
      neighboring planters in his "den."

 Standing at a table in the center of the stage, with his friends grouped
      about him, he delivers that inimitable, rambling character monologue so
      famous in A Magnolia Flower , at the same time that he deftly makes
      juleps for the party.

 Major Talbot, sitting quietly, but white with indignation, heard his best
      stories retold, his pet theories and hobbies advanced and expanded, and
      the dream of the Anecdotes and Reminiscences served, exaggerated
      and garbled. His favorite narrative—that of his duel with Rathbone
      Culbertson—was not omitted, and it was delivered with more fire,
      egotism, and gusto than the Major himself put into it.

 The monologue concluded with a quaint, delicious, witty little lecture on
      the art of concocting a julep, illustrated by the act. Here Major Talbot's
      delicate but showy science was reproduced to a hair's breadth—from
      his dainty handling of the fragrant weed—"the one-thousandth part of
      a grain too much pressure, gentlemen, and you extract the bitterness,
      instead of the aroma, of this heaven-bestowed plant"—to his
      solicitous selection of the oaten straws.

 At the close of the scene the audience raised a tumultuous roar of
      appreciation. The portrayal of the type was so exact, so sure and
      thorough, that the leading characters in the play were forgotten. After
      repeated calls, Hargraves came before the curtain and bowed, his rather
      boyish face bright and flushed with the knowledge of success.

 At last Miss Lydia turned and looked at the Major. His thin nostrils were
      working like the gills of a fish. He laid both shaking hands upon the arms
      of his chair to rise.

 "We will go, Lydia," he said chokingly. "This is an abominable—desecration."

 Before he could rise, she pulled him back into his seat.

 "We will stay it out," she declared. "Do you want to advertise the copy by
      exhibiting the original coat?" So they remained to the end.

 Hargraves's success must have kept him up late that night, for neither at
      the breakfast nor at the dinner table did he appear.

 About three in the afternoon he tapped at the door of Major Talbot's
      study. The Major opened it, and Hargraves walked in with his hands full of
      the morning papers—too full of his triumph to notice anything
      unusual in the Major's demeanor.

 "I put it all over 'em last night, Major," he began exultantly. "I had my
      inning, and, I think, scored. Here's what The Post says:

 "'His conception and portrayal of the old-time Southern colonel, with his
      absurd grandiloquence, his eccentric garb, his quaint idioms and phrases,
      his motheaten pride of family, and his really kind heart, fastidious sense
      of honor, and lovable simplicity, is the best delineation of a character
      role on the boards to-day. The coat worn by Colonel Calhoun is itself
      nothing less than an evolution of genius. Mr. Hargraves has captured his
      public.'

 "How does that sound, Major, for a first-nighter?"

 "I had the honor"—the Major's voice sounded ominously frigid—"of
      witnessing your very remarkable performance, sir, last night."

 Hargraves looked disconcerted.

 "You were there? I didn't know you ever—I didn't know you cared for
      the theater. Oh, I say, Major Talbot," he exclaimed frankly, "don't you be
      offended. I admit I did get a lot of pointers from you that helped out
      wonderfully in the part. But it's a type, you know—not individual.
      The way the audience caught on shows that. Half the patrons of that
      theater are Southerners. They recognized it."

 "Mr. Hargraves," said the Major, who had remained standing, "you have put
      upon me an unpardonable insult. You have burlesqued my person, grossly
      betrayed my confidence, and misused my hospitality. If I thought you
      possessed the faintest conception of what is the sign manual of a
      gentleman, or what is due one, I would call you out, sir, old as I am. I
      will ask you to leave the room, sir."

 The actor appeared to be slightly bewildered, and seemed hardly to take in
      the full meaning of the old gentleman's words.

 "I am truly sorry you took offense," he said regretfully. "Up here we
      don't look at things just as you people do. I know men who would buy out
      half the house to have their personality put on the stage so the public
      would recognize it."

 "They are not from Alabama, sir," said the Major haughtily.

 "Perhaps not. I have a pretty good memory, Major; let me quote a few lines
      from your book. In response to a toast at a banquet given in—Milledgeville,
      I believe—you uttered, and intend to have printed, these words:

 "'The Northern man is utterly without sentiment or warmth except in so far
      as the feelings may be turned to his own commercial profit. He will suffer
      without resentment any imputation cast upon the honor of himself or his
      loved ones that does not bear with it the consequence of pecuniary loss.
      In his charity, he gives with a liberal hand; but it must be heralded with
      the trumpet and chronicled in brass.'

 "Do you think that picture is fairer than the one you saw of Colonel
      Calhoun last night?"

 "The description," said the Major, frowning, "is—not without
      grounds. Some exag—latitude must be allowed in public speaking."

 "And in public acting," replied Hargraves.

 "That is not the point," persisted the Major, unrelenting. "It was a
      personal caricature. I positively decline to overlook it, sir."

 "Major Talbot," said Hargraves, with a winning smile, "I wish you would
      understand me. I want you to know that I never dreamed of insulting you.
      In my profession, all life belongs to me. I take what I want, and what I
      can, and return it over the footlights. Now, if you will, let's let it go
      at that. I came in to see you about something else. We've been pretty good
      friends for some months, and I'm going to take the risk of offending you
      again. I know you are hard up for money—never mind how I found out,
      a boarding house is no place to keep such matters secret—and I want
      you to let me help you out of the pinch. I've been there often enough
      myself. I've been getting a fair salary all the season, and I've saved
      some money. You're welcome to a couple hundred—or even more—until
      you get——"

 "Stop!" commanded the Major, with his arm outstretched. "It seems that my
      book didn't lie, after all. You think your money salve will heal all the
      hurts of honor. Under no circumstances would I accept a loan from a casual
      acquaintance; and as to you, sir, I would starve before I would consider
      your insulting offer of a financial adjustment of the circumstances we
      have discussed. I beg to repeat my request relative to your quitting the
      apartment."

 Hargraves took his departure without another word. He also left the house
      the same day, moving, as Mrs. Vardeman explained at the supper table,
      nearer the vicinity of the downtown theater, where A Magnolia Flower was booked for a week's run.

 Critical was the situation with Major Talbot and Miss Lydia. There was no
      one in Washington to whom the Major's scruples allowed him to apply for a
      loan. Miss Lydia wrote a letter to Uncle Ralph, but it was doubtful
      whether that relative's constricted affairs would permit him to furnish
      help. The Major was forced to make an apologetic address to Mrs. Vardeman
      regarding the delayed payment for board, referring to "delinquent rentals"
      and "delayed remittances" in a rather confused strain.

 Deliverance came from an entirely unexpected source.

 Late one afternoon the door maid came up and announced an old colored man
      who wanted to see Major Talbot. The Major asked that he be sent up to his
      study. Soon an old darkey appeared in the doorway, with his hat in hand,
      bowing, and scraping with one clumsy foot. He was quite decently dressed
      in a baggy suit of black. His big, coarse shoes shone with a metallic
      luster suggestive of stove polish. His bushy wool was gray—almost
      white. After middle life, it is difficult to estimate the age of a negro.
      This one might have seen as many years as had Major Talbot.

 "I be bound you don't know me, Mars' Pendleton," were his first words.

 The Major rose and came forward at the old, familiar style of address. It
      was one of the old plantation darkeys without a doubt; but they had been
      widely scattered, and he could not recall the voice or face.

 "I don't believe I do," he said kindly—"unless you will assist my
      memory."

 "Don't you 'member Cindy's Mose, Mars' Pendleton, what 'migrated
      'mediately after de war?"

 "Wait a moment," said the Major, rubbing his forehead with the tips of his
      fingers. He loved to recall everything connected with those beloved days.
      "Cindy's Mose," he reflected. "You worked among the horses—breaking
      the colts. Yes, I remember now. After the surrender, you took the name of—don't
      prompt me—Mitchell, and went to the West—to Nebraska."

 "Yassir, yassir,"—the old man's face stretched with a delighted grin—"dat's
      him, dat's it. Newbraska. Dat's me—Mose Mitchell. Old Uncle Mose
      Mitchell, dey calls me now. Old mars', your pa, gimme a pah of dem mule
      colts when I lef' fur to staht me goin' with. You 'member dem colts, Mars'
      Pendleton?"

 "I don't seem to recall the colts," said the Major. "You know. I was
      married the first year of the war and living at the old Follinsbee place.
      But sit down, sit down, Uncle Mose. I'm glad to see you. I hope you have
      prospered."

 Uncle Mose took a chair and laid his hat carefully on the floor beside it.

 "Yessir; of late I done mouty famous. When I first got to Newbraska, dey
      folks come all roun' me to see dem mule colts. Dey ain't see no mules like
      dem in Newbraska. I sold dem mules for three hundred dollars. Yessir—three
      hundred.

 "Den I open a blacksmith shop, suh, and made some money and bought some
      lan'. Me and my old 'oman done raised up seb'm chillun, and all doin' well
      'cept two of 'em what died. Fo' year ago a railroad come along and staht a
      town slam ag'inst my lan', and, suh, Mars' Pendleton, Uncle Mose am worth
      leb'm thousand dollars in money, property, and lan'."

 "I'm glad to hear it," said the Major heartily. "Glad to hear it."

 "And dat little baby of yo'n, Mars' Pendleton—one what you name Miss
      Lyddy—I be bound dat little tad done growed up tell nobody wouldn't
      know her."

 The Major stepped to the door and called: "Lydie, dear, will you come?"

 Miss Lydia, looking quite grown up and a little worried, came in from her
      room.

 "Dar, now! What'd I tell you? I knowed dat baby done be plum growed up.
      You don't 'member Uncle Mose, child?"

 "This is Aunt Cindy's Mose, Lydia," explained the Major. "He left
      Sunnymead for the West when you were two years old."

 "Well," said Miss Lydia, "I can hardly be expected to remember you, Uncle
      Mose, at that age. And, as you say, I'm 'plum growed up,' and was a
      blessed long time ago. But I'm glad to see you, even if I can't remember
      you."

 And she was. And so was the Major. Something alive and tangible had come
      to link them with the happy past. The three sat and talked over the olden
      times, the Major and Uncle Mose correcting or prompting each other as they
      reviewed the plantation scenes and days.

 The Major inquired what the old man was doing so far from his home.

 "Uncle Mose am a delicate," he explained, "to de grand Baptis' convention
      in dis city. I never preached none, but bein' a residin' elder in de
      church, and able fur to pay my own expenses, dey sent me along."

 "And how did you know we were in Washington?" inquired Miss Lydia.

 "Dey's a cullud man works in de hotel whar I stops, what comes from
      Mobile. He told me he seen Mars' Pendleton comin' outen dish here house
      one mawnin'.

 "What I come fur," continued Uncle Mose, reaching into his pocket—"besides
      de sight of home folks—was to pay Mars' Pendleton what I owes him.

 "Yessir—three hundred dollars." He handed the Major a roll of bills.
      "When I lef' old mars' says: 'Take dem mule colts, Mose, and, if it be so
      you gits able, pay fur 'em.' Yessir—dem was his words. De war had
      done lef' old mars' po' hisself. Old mars' bein' long ago dead, de debt
      descends to Mars' Pendleton. Three hundred dollars. Uncle Mose is plenty
      able to pay now. When dat railroad buy my lan' I laid off to pay fur dem
      mules. Count de money, Mars' Pendleton. Dat's what I sold dem mules fur.
      Yessir."

 Tears were in Major Talbot's eyes. He took Uncle Mose's hand and laid his
      other upon his shoulder.

 "Dear, faithful, old servitor," he said in an unsteady voice, "I don't
      mind saying to you that 'Mars' Pendleton spent his last dollar in the
      world a week ago. We will accept this money, Uncle Mose, since, in a way,
      it is a sort of payment, as well as a token of the loyalty and devotion of
      the old rgime. Lydia, my dear, take the money. You are better fitted than
      I to manage its expenditure."

 "Take it, honey," said Uncle Mose. "Hit belongs to you. Hit's Talbot
      money."

 After Uncle Mose had gone, Miss Lydia had a good cry—-for joy; and
      the Major turned his face to a corner, and smoked his clay pipe
      volcanically.

 The succeeding days saw the Talbots restored to peace and ease. Miss
      Lydia's face lost its worried look. The major appeared in a new frock
      coat, in which he looked like a wax figure personifying the memory of his
      golden age. Another publisher who read the manuscript of the Anecdotes
      and Reminiscences thought that, with a little retouching and toning
      down of the high lights, he could make a really bright and salable volume
      of it. Altogether, the situation was comfortable, and not without the
      touch of hope that is often sweeter than arrived blessings.

 One day, about a week after their piece of good luck, a maid brought a
      letter for Miss Lydia to her room. The postmark showed that it was from
      New York. Not knowing any one there, Miss Lydia, in a mild flutter of
      wonder, sat down by her table and opened the letter with her scissors.
      This was what she read:

 DEAR MISS TALBOT:

 I thought you might be glad to learn of my good fortune. I have received
      and accepted an offer of two hundred dollars per week by a New York stock
      company to play Colonel Calhoun in A Magnolia Flower .

 There is something else I wanted you to know. I guess you'd better not
      tell Major Talbot. I was anxious to make him some amends for the great
      help he was to me in studying the part, and for the bad humor he was in
      about it. He refused to let me, so I did it anyhow. I could easily spare
      the three hundred.

 Sincerely yours, H. HOPKINS HARGRAVES.

 P.S. How did I play Uncle Mose?

 Major Talbot, passing through the hall, saw Miss Lydia's door open and
      stopped.

 "Any mail for us this morning, Lydia, dear?" he asked.

 Miss Lydia slid the letter beneath a fold of her dress.

 " The Mobile Chronicle came," she said promptly. "It's on the table
      in your study."