The Beast with Five Fingers
By W. F. HARVEY

From The New Decameron, by Various Hands.
        Copyright, 1919, by Robert M. McBride and Company. By
        permission of the publishers.

When I was a little boy I once went with my father to call
    on Adrian Borlsover. I played on the floor with a black spaniel
    while my father appealed for a subscription. Just before we
    left my father said, "Mr. Borlsover, may my son here shake
    hands with you? It will be a thing to look back upon with pride
    when he grows to be a man."
I came up to the bed on which the old man was lying and put
    my hand in his, awed by the still beauty of his face. He spoke
    to me kindly, and hoped that I should always try to please my
    father. Then he placed his right hand on my head and asked for
    a blessing to rest upon me. "Amen!" said my father, and I
    followed him out of the room, feeling as if I wanted to cry.
    But my father was in excellent spirits.
"That old gentleman, Jim," said he, "is the most wonderful
    man in the whole town. For ten years he has been quite
    blind."
"But I saw his eyes," I said. "They were ever so black and
    shiny; they weren't shut up like Nora's puppies. Can't he see
    at all?"
And so I learnt for the first time that a man might have
    eyes that looked dark and beautiful and shining without being
    able to see.
"Just like Mrs. Tomlinson has big ears," I said, "and can't
    hear at all except when Mr. Tomlinson shouts."
"Jim," said my father, "it's not right to talk about a
    lady's ears. Remember what Mr. Borlsover said about pleasing me
    and being a good boy."
That was the only time I saw Adrian Borlsover. I soon forgot
    about him and the hand which he laid in blessing on my head.
    But for a week I prayed that those dark tender eyes might
    see.
"His spaniel may have puppies," I said in my prayers, "and
    he will never be able to know how funny they look with their
    eyes all closed up. Please let old Mr. Borlsover see."

Adrian Borlsover, as my father had said, was a wonderful
    man. He came of an eccentric family. Borlsovers' sons, for some
    reason, always seemed to marry very ordinary women, which
    perhaps accounted for the fact that no Borlsover had been a
    genius, and only one Borlsover had been mad. But they were
    great champions of little causes, generous patrons of odd
    sciences, founders of querulous sects, trustworthy guides to
    the bypath meadows of erudition.
Adrian was an authority on the fertilization of orchids. He
    had held at one time the family living at Borlsover Conyers,
    until a congenital weakness of the lungs obliged him to seek a
    less rigorous climate in the sunny south coast watering-place
    where I had seen him. Occasionally he would relieve one or
    other of the local clergy. My father described him as a fine
    preacher, who gave long and inspiring sermons from what many
    men would have considered unprofitable texts. "An excellent
    proof," he would add, "of the truth of the doctrine of direct
    verbal inspiration."
Adrian Borlsover was exceedingly clever with his hands. His
    penmanship was exquisite. He illustrated all his scientific
    papers, made his own woodcuts, and carved the reredos that is
    at present the chief feature of interest in the church at
    Borlsover Conyers. He had an exceedingly clever knack in
    cutting silhouettes for young ladies and paper pigs and cows
    for little children, and made more than one complicated wind
    instrument of his own devising.
When he was fifty years old Adrian Borlsover lost his sight.
    In a wonderfully short time he had adapted himself to the new
    conditions of life. He quickly learned to read Braille. So
    marvelous indeed was his sense of touch that he was still able
    to maintain his interest in botany. The mere passing of his
    long supple fingers over a flower was sufficient means for its
    identification, though occasionally he would use his lips. I
    have found several letters of his among my father's
    correspondence. In no case was there anything to show that he
    was afflicted with blindness and this in spite of the fact that
    he exercised undue economy in the spacing of lines. Towards the
    close of his life the old man was credited with powers of touch
    that seemed almost uncanny: it has been said that he could tell
    at once the color of a ribbon placed between his fingers. My
    father would neither confirm nor deny the story.
I
Adrian Borlsover was a bachelor. His elder brother George
    had married late in life, leaving one son, Eustace, who lived
    in the gloomy Georgian mansion at Borlsover Conyers, where he
    could work undisturbed in collecting material for his great
    book on heredity.
Like his uncle, he was a remarkable man. The Borlsovers had
    always been born naturalists, but Eustace possessed in a
    special degree the power of systematizing his knowledge. He had
    received his university education in Germany, and then, after
    post-graduate work in Vienna and Naples, had traveled for four
    years in South America and the East, getting together a huge
    store of material for a new study into the processes of
    variation.
He lived alone at Borlsover Conyers with Saunders his
    secretary, a man who bore a somewhat dubious reputation in the
    district, but whose powers as a mathematician, combined with
    his business abilities, were invaluable to Eustace.
Uncle and nephew saw little of each other. The visits of
    Eustace were confined to a week in the summer or autumn: long
    weeks, that dragged almost as slowly as the bath-chair in which
    the old man was drawn along the sunny sea front. In their way
    the two men were fond of each other, though their intimacy
    would doubtless have been greater had they shared the same
    religious views. Adrian held to the old-fashioned evangelical
    dogmas of his early manhood; his nephew for many years had been
    thinking of embracing Buddhism. Both men possessed, too, the
    reticence the Borlsovers had always shown, and which their
    enemies sometimes called hypocrisy. With Adrian it was a
    reticence as to the things he had left undone; but with Eustace
    it seemed that the curtain which he was so careful to leave
    undrawn hid something more than a half-empty chamber.

Two years before his death Adrian Borlsover developed,
    unknown to himself, the not uncommon power of automatic
    writing. Eustace made the discovery by accident. Adrian was
    sitting reading in bed, the forefinger of his left hand tracing
    the Braille characters, when his nephew noticed that a pencil
    the old man held in his right hand was moving slowly along the
    opposite page. He left his seat in the window and sat down
    beside the bed. The right hand continued to move, and now he
    could see plainly that they were letters and words which it was
    forming.
"Adrian Borlsover," wrote the hand, "Eustace Borlsover,
    George Borlsover, Francis Borlsover Sigismund Borlsover, Adrian
    Borlsover, Eustace Borlsover, Saville Borlsover. B, for
    Borlsover. Honesty is the Best Policy. Beautiful Belinda
    Borlsover."
"What curious nonsense!" said Eustace to himself.
"King George the Third ascended the throne in 1760," wrote
    the hand. "Crowd, a noun of multitude; a collection of
    individuals—Adrian Borlsover, Eustace Borlsover."
"It seems to me," said his uncle, closing the book, "that
    you had much better make the most of the afternoon sunshine and
    take your walk now." "I think perhaps I will," Eustace answered
    as he picked up the volume. "I won't go far, and when I come
    back I can read to you those articles in Nature about
    which we were speaking."
He went along the promenade, but stopped at the first
    shelter, and seating himself in the corner best protected from
    the wind, he examined the book at leisure. Nearly every page
    was scored with a meaningless jungle of pencil marks: rows of
    capital letters, short words, long words, complete sentences,
    copy-book tags. The whole thing, in fact, had the appearance of
    a copy-book, and on a more careful scrutiny Eustace thought
    that there was ample evidence to show that the handwriting at
    the beginning of the book, good though it was was not nearly so
    good as the handwriting at the end.
He left his uncle at the end of October, with a promise to
    return early in December. It seemed to him quite clear that the
    old man's power of automatic writing was developing rapidly,
    and for the first time he looked forward to a visit that
    combined duty with interest.
But on his return he was at first disappointed. His uncle,
    he thought, looked older. He was listless too, preferring
    others to read to him and dictating nearly all his letters. Not
    until the day before he left had Eustace an opportunity of
    observing Adrian Borlsover's new-found faculty.
The old man, propped up in bed with pillows, had sunk into a
    light sleep. His two hands lay on the coverlet, his left hand
    tightly clasping his right. Eustace took an empty manuscript
    book and placed a pencil within reach of the fingers of the
    right hand. They snatched at it eagerly; then dropped the
    pencil to unloose the left hand from its restraining grasp.
"Perhaps to prevent interference I had better hold that
    hand," said Eustace to himself, as he watched the pencil.
    Almost immediately it began to write.
"Blundering Borlsovers, unnecessarily unnatural,
    extraordinarily eccentric, culpably curious."
"Who are you?" asked Eustace, in a low voice.
"Never you mind," wrote the hand of Adrian.
"Is it my uncle who is writing?"
"Oh, my prophetic soul, mine uncle."
"Is it anyone I know?"
"Silly Eustace, you'll see me very soon."
"When shall I see you?"
"When poor old Adrian's dead."
"Where shall I see you?"
"Where shall you not?"
Instead of speaking his next question, Borlsover wrote it.
    "What is the time?"
The fingers dropped the pencil and moved three or four times
    across the paper. Then, picking up the pencil, they wrote:
"Ten minutes before four. Put your book away, Eustace.
    Adrian mustn't find us working at this sort of thing. He
    doesn't know what to make of it, and I won't have poor old
    Adrian disturbed. Au revoir."
Adrian Borlsover awoke with a start.
"I've been dreaming again," he said; "such queer dreams of
    leaguered cities and forgotten towns. You were mixed up in this
    one, Eustace, though I can't remember how. Eustace, I want to
    warn you. Don't walk in doubtful paths. Choose your friends
    well. Your poor grandfather——"
A fit of coughing put an end to what he was saying, but
    Eustace saw that the hand was still writing. He managed
    unnoticed to draw the book away. "I'll light the gas," he said,
    "and ring for tea." On the other side of the bed curtain he saw
    the last sentences that had been written.
"It's too late, Adrian," he read. "We're friends already;
    aren't we, Eustace Borlsover?"
On the following day Eustace Borlsover left. He thought his
    uncle looked ill when he said good-by, and the old man spoke
    despondently of the failure his life had been.
"Nonsense, uncle!" said his nephew. "You have got over your
    difficulties in a way not one in a hundred thousand would have
    done. Every one marvels at your splendid perseverance in
    teaching your hand to take the place of your lost sight. To me
    it's been a revelation of the possibilities of education."
"Education," said his uncle dreamily, as if the word had
    started a new train of thought, "education is good so long as
    you know to whom and for what purpose you give it. But with the
    lower orders of men, the base and more sordid spirits, I have
    grave doubts as to its results. Well, good-by, Eustace, I may
    not see you again. You are a true Borlsover, with all the
    Borlsover faults. Marry, Eustace. Marry some good, sensible
    girl. And if by any chance I don't see you again, my will is at
    my solicitor's. I've not left you any legacy, because I know
    you're well provided for, but I thought you might like to have
    my books. Oh, and there's just one other thing. You know,
    before the end people often lose control over themselves and
    make absurd requests. Don't pay any attention to them, Eustace.
    Good-by!" and he held out his hand. Eustace took it. It
    remained in his a fraction of a second longer than he had
    expected, and gripped him with a virility that was surprising.
    There was, too, in its touch a subtle sense of intimacy.
"Why, uncle!" he said, "I shall see you alive and well for
    many long years to come."
Two months later Adrian Borlsover died.
II
Eustace Borlsover was in Naples at the time. He read the
    obituary notice in the Morning Post on the day
    announced for the funeral.
"Poor old fellow!" he said. "I wonder where I shall find
    room for all his books."
The question occurred to him again with greater force when
    three days later he found himself standing in the library at
    Borlsover Conyers, a huge room built for use, and not for
    beauty, in the year of Waterloo by a Borlsover who was an
    ardent admirer of the great Napoleon. It was arranged on the
    plan of many college libraries, with tall, projecting bookcases
    forming deep recesses of dusty silence, fit graves for the old
    hates of forgotten controversy, the dead passions of forgotten
    lives. At the end of the room, behind the bust of some unknown
    eighteenth-century divine, an ugly iron corkscrew stair led to
    a shelf-lined gallery. Nearly every shelf was full.
"I must talk to Saunders about it," said Eustace. "I suppose
    that it will be necessary to have the billiard-room fitted up
    with book cases."
The two men met for the first time after many weeks in the
    dining-room that evening.
"Hullo!" said Eustace, standing before the fire with his
    hands in his pockets. "How goes the world, Saunders? Why these
    dress togs?" He himself was wearing an old shooting-jacket. He
    did not believe in mourning, as he had told his uncle on his
    last visit; and though he usually went in for quiet-colored
    ties, he wore this evening one of an ugly red, in order to
    shock Morton the butler, and to make them thrash out the whole
    question of mourning for themselves in the servants' hall.
    Eustace was a true Borlsover. "The world," said Saunders, "goes
    the same as usual, confoundedly slow. The dress togs are
    accounted for by an invitation from Captain Lockwood to
    bridge."
"How are you getting there?"
"I've told your coachman to drive me in your carriage. Any
    objection?"
"Oh, dear me, no! We've had all things in common for far too
    many years for me to raise objections at this hour of the
    day."
"You'll find your correspondence in the library," went on
    Saunders. "Most of it I've seen to. There are a few private
    letters I haven't opened. There's also a box with a rat, or
    something, inside it that came by the evening post. Very likely
    it's the six-toed albino. I didn't look, because I didn't want
    to mess up my things but I should gather from the way it's
    jumping about that it's pretty hungry."
"Oh, I'll see to it," said Eustace, "while you and the
    Captain earn an honest penny."
Dinner over and Saunders gone, Eustace went into the
    library. Though the fire had been lit the room was by no means
    cheerful.
"We'll have all the lights on at any rate," he said, as he
    turned the switches. "And, Morton," he added, when the butler
    brought the coffee, "get me a screwdriver or something to undo
    this box. Whatever the animal is, he's kicking up the deuce of
    a row. What is it? Why are you dawdling?"
"If you please, sir, when the postman brought it he told me
    that they'd bored the holes in the lid at the post-office.
    There were no breathin' holes in the lid, sir, and they didn't
    want the animal to die. That is all, sir."
"It's culpably careless of the man, whoever he was," said
    Eustace, as he removed the screws, "packing an animal like this
    in a wooden box with no means of getting air. Confound it all!
    I meant to ask Morton to bring me a cage to put it in. Now I
    suppose I shall have to get one myself."
He placed a heavy book on the lid from which the screws had
    been removed, and went into the billiard-room. As he came back
    into the library with an empty cage in his hand he heard the
    sound of something falling, and then of something scuttling
    along the floor.
"Bother it! The beast's got out. How in the world am I to
    find it again in this library!"
To search for it did indeed seem hopeless. He tried to
    follow the sound of the scuttling in one of the recesses where
    the animal seemed to be running behind the books in the
    shelves, but it was impossible to locate it. Eustace resolved
    to go on quietly reading. Very likely the animal might gain
    confidence and show itself. Saunders seemed to have dealt in
    his usual methodical manner with most of the correspondence.
    There were still the private letters.
What was that? Two sharp clicks and the lights in the
    hideous candelabra that hung from the ceiling suddenly went
    out.
"I wonder if something has gone wrong with the fuse," said
    Eustace, as he went to the switches by the door. Then he
    stopped. There was a noise at the other end of the room, as if
    something was crawling up the iron corkscrew stair. "If it's
    gone into the gallery," he said, "well and good." He hastily
    turned on the lights, crossed the room, and climbed up the
    stair. But he could see nothing. His grandfather had placed a
    little gate at the top of the stair, so that children could run
    and romp in the gallery without fear of accident. This Eustace
    closed, and having considerably narrowed the circle of his
    search, returned to his desk by the fire.
How gloomy the library was! There was no sense of intimacy
    about the room. The few busts that an eighteenth-century
    Borlsover had brought back from the grand tour, might have been
    in keeping in the old library. Here they seemed out of place.
    They made the room feel cold, in spite of the heavy red damask
    curtains and great gilt cornices.
With a crash two heavy books fell from the gallery to the
    floor; then, as Borlsover looked, another and yet another.
"Very well; you'll starve for this, my beauty!" he said.
    "We'll do some little experiments on the metabolism of rats
    deprived of water. Go on! Chuck them down! I think I've got the
    upper hand." He turned once again to his correspondence. The
    letter was from the family solicitor. It spoke of his uncle's
    death and of the valuable collection of books that had been
    left to him in the will.
"There was one request," he read, "which certainly came as a
    surprise to me. As you know, Mr. Adrian Borlsover had left
    instructions that his body was to be buried in as simple a
    manner as possible at Eastbourne. He expressed a desire that
    there should be neither wreaths nor flowers of any kind, and
    hoped that his friends and relatives would not consider it
    necessary to wear mourning. The day before his death we
    received a letter canceling these instructions. He wished his
    body to be embalmed (he gave us the address of the man we were
    to employ—Pennifer, Ludgate Hill), with orders that his
    right hand was to be sent to you, stating that it was at your
    special request. The other arrangements as to the funeral
    remained unaltered."
"Good Lord!" said Eustace; "what in the world was the old
    boy driving at? And what in the name of all that's holy is
    that?"
Someone was in the gallery. Someone had pulled the cord
    attached to one of the blinds, and it had rolled up with a
    snap. Someone must be in the gallery, for a second blind did
    the same. Someone must be walking round the gallery, for one
    after the other the blinds sprang up, letting in the
    moonlight.
"I haven't got to the bottom of this yet," said Eustace,
    "but I will do before the night is very much older," and he
    hurried up the corkscrew stair. He had just got to the top when
    the lights went out a second time, and he heard again the
    scuttling along the floor. Quickly he stole on tiptoe in the
    dim moonshine in the direction of the noise, feeling as he went
    for one of the switches. His fingers touched the metal knob at
    last. He turned on the electric light.
About ten yards in front of him, crawling along the floor,
    was a man's hand. Eustace stared at it in utter astonishment.
    It was moving quickly, in the manner of a geometer caterpillar,
    the fingers humped up one moment, flattened out the next; the
    thumb appeared to give a crab-like motion to the whole. While
    he was looking, too surprised to stir, the hand disappeared
    round the corner. Eustace ran forward. He no longer saw it, but
    he could hear it as it squeezed its way behind the books on one
    of the shelves. A heavy volume had been displaced. There was a
    gap in the row of books where it had got in. In his fear lest
    it should escape him again, he seized the first book that came
    to his hand and plugged it into the hole. Then, emptying two
    shelves of their contents, he took the wooden boards and
    propped them up in front to make his barrier doubly sure.
"I wish Saunders was back," he said; "one can't tackle this
    sort of thing alone." It was after eleven, and there seemed
    little likelihood of Saunders returning before twelve. He did
    not dare to leave the shelf unwatched, even to run downstairs
    to ring the bell. Morton the butler often used to come round
    about eleven to see that the windows were fastened, but he
    might not come. Eustace was thoroughly unstrung. At last he
    heard steps down below.
"Morton!" he shouted; "Morton!"
"Sir?"
"Has Mr. Saunders got back yet?"
"Not yet, sir."
"Well, bring me some brandy, and hurry up about it. I'm up
    here in the gallery, you duffer."
"Thanks," said Eustace, as he emptied the glass. "Don't go
    to bed yet, Morton. There are a lot of books that have fallen
    down by accident; bring them up and put them back in their
    shelves."
Morton had never seen Borlsover in so talkative a mood as on
    that night. "Here," said Eustace, when the books had been put
    back and dusted, "you might hold up these boards for me,
    Morton. That beast in the box got out, and I've been chasing it
    all over the place."
"I think I can hear it chawing at the books, sir. They're
    not valuable, I hope? I think that's the carriage, sir; I'll go
    and call Mr. Saunders."
It seemed to Eustace that he was away for five minutes, but
    it could hardly have been more than one when he returned with
    Saunders. "All right, Morton, you can go now. I'm up here,
    Saunders."
"What's all the row?" asked Saunders, as he lounged forward
    with his hands in his pockets. The luck had been with him all
    the evening. He was completely satisfied, both with himself and
    with Captain Lockwood's taste in wines. "What's the matter? You
    look to me to be in an absolute blue funk."
"That old devil of an uncle of mine," began
    Eustace—"oh, I can't explain it all. It's his hand that's
    been playing old Harry all the evening. But I've got it
    cornered behind these books. You've got to help me catch
    it."
"What's up with you, Eustace? What's the game?"
"It's no game, you silly idiot! If you don't believe me take
    out one of those books and put your hand in and feel."
"All right," said Saunders; "but wait till I've rolled up my
    sleeve. The accumulated dust of centuries, eh?" He took off his
    coat, knelt down, and thrust his arm along the shelf.
"There's something there right enough," he said. "It's got a
    funny stumpy end to it, whatever it is, and nips like a crab.
    Ah, no, you don't!" He pulled his hand out in a flash. "Shove
    in a book quickly. Now it can't get out."
"What was it?" asked Eustace.
"It was something that wanted very much to get hold of me. I
    felt what seemed like a thumb and forefinger. Give me some
    brandy."
"How are we to get it out of there?"
"What about a landing net?"
"No good. It would be too smart for us. I tell you,
    Saunders, it can cover the ground far faster than I can walk.
    But I think I see how we can manage it. The two books at the
    end of the shelf are big ones that go right back against the
    wall. The others are very thin. I'll take out one at a time,
    and you slide the rest along until we have it squashed between
    the end two."
It certainly seemed to be the best plan. One by one, as they
    took out the books, the space behind grew smaller and smaller.
    There was something in it that was certainly very much alive.
    Once they caught sight of fingers pressing outward for a way of
    escape. At last they had it pressed between the two big
    books.
"There's muscle there, if there isn't flesh and blood," said
    Saunders, as he held them together. "It seems to be a hand
    right enough, too. I suppose this is a sort of infectious
    hallucination. I've read about such cases before."
"Infectious fiddlesticks!" said Eustace, his face white with
    anger; "bring the thing downstairs. We'll get it back into the
    box."
It was not altogether easy, but they were successful at
    last. "Drive in the screws," said Eustace, "we won't run any
    risks. Put the box in this old desk of mine. There's nothing in
    it that I want. Here's the key. Thank goodness, there's nothing
    wrong with the lock."
"Quite a lively evening," said Saunders. "Now let's hear
    more about your uncle."
They sat up together until early morning. Saunders had no
    desire for sleep. Eustace was trying to explain and to forget:
    to conceal from himself a fear that he had never felt
    before—the fear of walking alone down the long corridor
    to his bedroom.
III
"Whatever it was," said Eustace to Saunders on the following
    morning, "I propose that we drop the subject. There's nothing
    to keep us here for the next ten days. We'll motor up to the
    Lakes and get some climbing."
"And see nobody all day, and sit bored to death with each
    other every night. Not for me thanks. Why not run up to town?
    Run's the exact word in this case, isn't it? We're both in such
    a blessed funk. Pull yourself together Eustace, and let's have
    another look at the hand."
"As you like," said Eustace; "there's the key." They went
    into the library and opened the desk. The box was as they had
    left it on the previous night.
"What are you waiting for?" asked Eustace.
"I am waiting for you to volunteer to open the lid. However,
    since you seem to funk it, allow me. There doesn't seem to be
    the likelihood of any rumpus this morning, at all events." He
    opened the lid and picked out the hand.
"Cold?" asked Eustace.
"Tepid. A bit below blood-heat by the feel. Soft and supple
    too. If it's the embalming, it's a sort of embalming I've never
    seen before. Is it your uncle's hand?"
"Oh, yes, it's his all right," said Eustace. "I should know
    those long thin fingers anywhere. Put it back in the box,
    Saunders. Never mind about the screws. I'll lock the desk, so
    that there'll be no chance of its getting out. We'll compromise
    by motoring up to town for a week. If we get off soon after
    lunch we ought to be at Grantham or Stamford by night."
"Right," said Saunders; "and to-morrow—Oh, well, by
    to-morrow we shall have forgotten all about this beastly
    thing."
If when the morrow came they had not forgotten, it was
    certainly true that at the end of the week they were able to
    tell a very vivid ghost story at the little supper Eustace gave
    on Hallow E'en.
"You don't want us to believe that it's true, Mr. Borlsover?
    How perfectly awful!"
"I'll take my oath on it, and so would Saunders here;
    wouldn't you, old chap?"
"Any number of oaths," said Saunders. "It was a long thin
    hand, you know, and it gripped me just like that."
"Don't Mr. Saunders! Don't! How perfectly horrid! Now tell
    us another one, do. Only a really creepy one, please!"

"Here's a pretty mess!" said Eustace on the following day as
    he threw a letter across the table to Saunders. "It's your
    affair, though. Mrs. Merrit, if I understand it, gives a
    month's notice."
"Oh, that's quite absurd on Mrs. Merrit's part," Saunders
    replied. "She doesn't know what she's talking about. Let's see
    what she says."
"Dear
    Sir," he read, "this is to let you know that I must give
    you a month's notice as from Tuesday the 13th. For a long time
    I've felt the place too big for me, but when Jane Parfit, and
    Emma Laidlaw go off with scarcely as much as an 'if you
    please,' after frightening the wits out of the other girls, so
    that they can't turn out a room by themselves or walk alone
    down the stairs for fear of treading on half-frozen toads or
    hearing it run along the passages at night, all I can say is
    that it's no place for me. So I must ask you, Mr. Borlsover,
    sir, to find a new housekeeper that has no objection to large
    and lonely houses, which some people do say, not that I believe
    them for a minute, my poor mother always having been a
    Wesleyan, are haunted.
"Yours faithfully,
Elizabeth Merrit.
"P.S.—I
    should be obliged if you would give my respects to Mr.
    Saunders. I hope that he won't run no risks with his cold."
"Saunders," said Eustace, "you've always had a wonderful way
    with you in dealing with servants. You mustn't let poor old
    Merrit go."
"Of course she shan't go," said Saunders. "She's probably
    only angling for a rise in salary. I'll write to her this
    morning."
"No; there's nothing like a personal interview. We've had
    enough of town. We'll go back to-morrow, and you must work your
    cold for all it's worth. Don't forget that it's got on to the
    chest, and will require weeks of feeding up and nursing."
"All right. I think I can manage Mrs. Merrit."
But Mrs. Merrit was more obstinate than he had thought. She
    was very sorry to hear of Mr. Saunders's cold, and how he lay
    awake all night in London coughing; very sorry indeed. She'd
    change his room for him gladly, and get the south room aired.
    And wouldn't he have a basin of hot bread and milk last thing
    at night? But she was afraid that she would have to leave at
    the end of the month.
"Try her with an increase of salary," was the advice of
    Eustace.
It was no use. Mrs. Merrit was obdurate, though she knew of
    a Mrs. Handyside who had been housekeeper to Lord Gargrave, who
    might be glad to come at the salary mentioned.
"What's the matter with the servants, Morton?" asked Eustace
    that evening when he brought the coffee into the library.
    "What's all this about Mrs. Merrit wanting to leave?"
"If you please, sir, I was going to mention it myself. I
    have a confession to make, sir. When I found your note asking
    me to open that desk and take out the box with the rat, I broke
    the lock as you told me, and was glad to do it, because I could
    hear the animal in the box making a great noise, and I thought
    it wanted food. So I took out the box, sir, and got a cage, and
    was going to transfer it, when the animal got away."
"What in the world are you talking about? I never wrote any
    such note."
"Excuse me, sir, it was the note I picked up here on the
    floor on the day you and Mr. Saunders left. I have it in my
    pocket now."
It certainly seemed to be in Eustace's handwriting. It was
    written in pencil, and began somewhat abruptly.
"Get a hammer, Morton," he read, "or some other tool, and
    break open the lock in the old desk in the library. Take out
    the box that is inside. You need not do anything else. The lid
    is already open. Eustace Borlsover."
"And you opened the desk?"
"Yes, sir; and as I was getting the cage ready the animal
    hopped out."
"What animal?"
"The animal inside the box, sir."
"What did it look like?"
"Well, sir, I couldn't tell you," said Morton nervously; "my
    back was turned, and it was halfway down the room when I looked
    up."
"What was its color?" asked Saunders; "black?"
"Oh, no, sir, a grayish white. It crept along in a very
    funny way, sir. I don't think it had a tail."
"What did you do then?"
"I tried to catch it, but it was no use. So I set the
    rat-traps and kept the library shut. Then that girl Emma
    Laidlaw left the door open when she was cleaning, and I think
    it must have escaped."
"And you think it was the animal that's been frightening the
    maids?"
"Well, no, sir, not quite. They said it was—you'll
    excuse me, sir—a hand that they saw. Emma trod on it once
    at the bottom of the stairs. She thought then it was a
    half-frozen toad, only white. And then Parfit was washing up
    the dishes in the scullery. She wasn't thinking about anything
    in particular. It was close on dusk. She took her hands out of
    the water and was drying them absent-minded like on the roller
    towel, when she found that she was drying someone else's hand
    as well, only colder than hers."
"What nonsense!" exclaimed Saunders.
"Exactly, sir; that's what I told her; but we couldn't get
    her to stop."
"You don't believe all this?" said Eustace, turning suddenly
    towards the butler.
"Me, sir? Oh, no, sir! I've not seen anything."
"Nor heard anything?"
"Well, sir, if you must know, the bells do ring at odd
    times, and there's nobody there when we go; and when we go
    round to draw the blinds of a night, as often as not somebody's
    been there before us. But as I says to Mrs. Merrit, a young
    monkey might do wonderful things, and we all know that Mr.
    Borlsover has had some strange animals about the place."
"Very well, Morton, that will do."
"What do you make of it?" asked Saunders when they were
    alone. "I mean of the letter he said you wrote."
"Oh, that's simple enough," said Eustace. "See the paper
    it's written on? I stopped using that years ago, but there were
    a few odd sheets and envelopes left in the old desk. We never
    fastened up the lid of the box before locking it in. The hand
    got out, found a pencil, wrote this note, and shoved it through
    a crack on to the floor where Morton found it. That's plain as
    daylight."
"But the hand couldn't write?"
"Couldn't it? You've not seen it do the things I've seen,"
    and he told Saunders more of what had happened at
    Eastbourne.
"Well," said Saunders, "in that case we have at least an
    explanation of the legacy. It was the hand which wrote unknown
    to your uncle that letter to your solicitor, bequeathing itself
    to you. Your uncle had no more to do with that request than I.
    In fact, it would seem that he had some idea of this automatic
    writing, and feared it."
"Then if it's not my uncle, what is it?"
"I suppose some people might say that a disembodied spirit
    had got your uncle to educate and prepare a little body for it.
    Now it's got into that little body and is off on its own."
"Well, what are we to do?"
"We'll keep our eyes open," said Saunders, "and try to catch
    it. If we can't do that, we shall have to wait till the bally
    clockwork runs down. After all, if it's flesh and blood, it
    can't live for ever."
For two days nothing happened. Then Saunders saw it sliding
    down the banister in the hall. He was taken unawares, and lost
    a full second before he started in pursuit, only to find that
    the thing had escaped him. Three days later, Eustace, writing
    alone in the library at night, saw it sitting on an open book
    at the other end of the room. The fingers crept over the page,
    feeling the print as if it were reading; but before he had time
    to get up from his seat, it had taken the alarm and was pulling
    itself up the curtains. Eustace watched it grimly as it hung on
    to the cornice with three fingers, flicking thumb and
    forefinger at him in an expression of scornful derision.
"I know what I'll do," he said. "If I only get it into the
    open I'll set the dogs on to it."
He spoke to Saunders of the suggestion.
"It's jolly good idea," he said; "only we won't wait till we
    find it out of doors. We'll get the dogs. There are the two
    terriers and the under-keeper's Irish mongrel that's on to rats
    like a flash. Your spaniel has not got spirit enough for this
    sort of game." They brought the dogs into the house, and the
    keeper's Irish mongrel chewed up the slippers, and the terriers
    tripped up Morton as he waited at table; but all three were
    welcome. Even false security is better than no security at
    all.
For a fortnight nothing happened. Then the hand was caught,
    not by the dogs, but by Mrs. Merrit's gray parrot. The bird was
    in the habit of periodically removing the pins that kept its
    seed and water tins in place, and of escaping through the holes
    in the side of the cage. When once at liberty Peter would show
    no inclination to return, and would often be about the house
    for days. Now, after six consecutive weeks of captivity, Peter
    had again discovered a new means of unloosing his bolts and was
    at large, exploring the tapestried forests of the curtains and
    singing songs in praise of liberty from cornice and picture
    rail.
"It's no use your trying to catch him," said Eustace to Mrs.
    Merrit, as she came into the study one afternoon towards dusk
    with a step-ladder. "You'd much better leave Peter alone.
    Starve him into surrender, Mrs. Merrit, and don't leave bananas
    and seed about for him to peck at when he fancies he's hungry.
    You're far too softhearted."
"Well, sir, I see he's right out of reach now on that
    picture rail, so if you wouldn't mind closing the door, sir,
    when you leave the room, I'll bring his cage in to-night and
    put some meat inside it. He's that fond of meat, though it does
    make him pull out his feathers to suck the quills. They
    do say that if you cook—"
"Never mind, Mrs. Merrit," said Eustace, who was busy
    writing. "That will do; I'll keep an eye on the bird."
There was silence in the room, unbroken but for the
    continuous whisper of his pen.
"Scratch poor Peter," said the bird. "Scratch poor old
    Peter!"
"Be quiet, you beastly bird!"
"Poor old Peter! Scratch poor Peter, do."
"I'm more likely to wring your neck if I get hold of you."
    He looked up at the picture rail, and there was the hand
    holding on to a hook with three fingers, and slowly scratching
    the head of the parrot with the fourth. Eustace ran to the bell
    and pressed it hard; then across to the window, which he closed
    with a bang. Frightened by the noise the parrot shook its wings
    preparatory to flight, and as it did so the fingers of the hand
    got hold of it by the throat. There was a shrill scream from
    Peter as he fluttered across the room, wheeling round in
    circles that ever descended, borne down under the weight that
    clung to him. The bird dropped at last quite suddenly, and
    Eustace saw fingers and feathers rolled into an inextricable
    mass on the floor. The struggle abruptly ceased as finger and
    thumb squeezed the neck; the bird's eyes rolled up to show the
    whites, and there was a faint, half-choked gurgle. But before
    the fingers had time to loose their hold, Eustace had them in
    his own.
"Send Mr. Saunders here at once," he said to the maid who
    came in answer to the bell. "Tell him I want him
    immediately."
Then he went with the hand to the fire. There was a ragged
    gash across the back where the bird's beak had torn it, but no
    blood oozed from the wound. He noticed with disgust that the
    nails had grown long and discolored.
"I'll burn the beastly thing," he said. But he could not
    burn it. He tried to throw it into the flames, but his own
    hands, as if restrained by some old primitive feeling, would
    not let him. And so Saunders found him pale and irresolute,
    with the hand still clasped tightly in his fingers.
"I've got it at last," he said in a tone of triumph.
"Good; let's have a look at it."
"Not when it's loose. Get me some nails and a hammer and a
    board of some sort."
"Can you hold it all right?"
"Yes, the thing's quite limp; tired out with throttling poor
    old Peter, I should say."
"And now," said Saunders when he returned with the things,
    "what are we going to do?"
"Drive a nail through it first, so that it can't get away;
    then we can take our time over examining it."
"Do it yourself," said Saunders. "I don't mind helping you
    with guinea-pigs occasionally when there's something to be
    learned; partly because I don't fear a guinea-pig's revenge.
    This thing's different."
"All right, you miserable skunk. I won't forget the way
    you've stood by me."
He took up a nail, and before Saunders had realised what he
    was doing had driven it through the hand, deep into the
    board.
"Oh, my aunt," he giggled hysterically, "look at it now,"
    for the hand was writhing in agonized contortions, squirming
    and wriggling upon the nail like a worm upon the hook.
"Well," said Saunders, "you've done it now. I'll leave you
    to examine it."
"Don't go, in heaven's name. Cover it up, man, cover it up!
    Shove a cloth over it! Here!" and he pulled off the
    antimacassar from the back of a chair and wrapped the board in
    it. "Now get the keys from my pocket and open the safe. Chuck
    the other things out. Oh, Lord, it's getting itself into
    frightful knots! and open it quick!" He threw the thing in and
    banged the door.
"We'll keep it there till it dies," he said. "May I burn in
    hell if I ever open the door of that safe again."

Mrs. Merrit departed at the end of the month. Her successor
    certainly was more successful in the management of the
    servants. Early in her rule she declared that she would stand
    no nonsense, and gossip soon withered and died. Eustace
    Borlsover went back to his old way of life. Old habits crept
    over and covered his new experience. He was, if anything, less
    morose, and showed a greater inclination to take his natural
    part in country society.
"I shouldn't be surprised if he marries one of these days,"
    said Saunders. "Well, I'm in no hurry for such an event. I know
    Eustace far too well for the future Mrs. Borlsover to like me.
    It will be the same old story again: a long friendship slowly
    made—marriage—and a long friendship quickly
    forgotten."
IV
But Eustace Borlsover did not follow the advice of his uncle
    and marry. He was too fond of old slippers and tobacco. The
    cooking, too, under Mrs. Handyside's management was excellent,
    and she seemed, too, to have a heaven-sent faculty in knowing
    when to stop dusting.
Little by little the old life resumed its old power. Then
    came the burglary. The men, it was said, broke into the house
    by way of the conservatory. It was really little more than an
    attempt, for they only succeeded in carrying away a few pieces
    of plate from the pantry. The safe in the study was certainly
    found open and empty, but, as Mr. Borlsover informed the police
    inspector, he had kept nothing of value in it during the last
    six months.
"Then you're lucky in getting off so easily, sir," the man
    replied. "By the way they have gone about their business, I
    should say they were experienced cracksmen. They must have
    caught the alarm when they were just beginning their evening's
    work."
"Yes," said Eustace, "I suppose I am lucky."
"I've no doubt," said the inspector, "that we shall be able
    to trace the men. I've said that they must have been old hands
    at the game. The way they got in and opened the safe shows
    that. But there's one little thing that puzzles me. One of them
    was careless enough not to wear gloves, and I'm bothered if I
    know what he was trying to do. I've traced his finger-marks on
    the new varnish on the window sashes in every one of the
    downstairs rooms. They are very distinct ones too."
"Right hand or left, or both?" asked Eustace.
"Oh, right every time. That's the funny thing. He must have
    been a foolhardy fellow, and I rather think it was him that
    wrote that." He took out a slip of paper from his pocket.
    "That's what he wrote, sir. 'I've got out, Eustace Borlsover,
    but I'll be back before long.' Some gaol bird just escaped, I
    suppose. It will make it all the easier for us to trace him. Do
    you know the writing, sir?"
"No," said Eustace; "it's not the writing of anyone I
    know."
"I'm not going to stay here any longer," said Eustace to
    Saunders at luncheon. "I've got on far better during the last
    six months than ever I expected, but I'm not going to run the
    risk of seeing that thing again. I shall go up to town this
    afternoon. Get Morton to put my things together, and join me
    with the car at Brighton on the day after to-morrow. And bring
    the proofs of those two papers with you. We'll run over them
    together."
"How long are you going to be away?"
"I can't say for certain, but be prepared to stay for some
    time. We've stuck to work pretty closely through the summer,
    and I for one need a holiday. I'll engage the rooms at
    Brighton. You'll find it best to break the journey at Hitchin.
    I'll wire to you there at the Crown to tell you the Brighton
    address."
The house he chose at Brighton was in a terrace. He had been
    there before. It was kept by his old college gyp, a man of
    discreet silence, who was admirably partnered by an excellent
    cook. The rooms were on the first floor. The two bedrooms were
    at the back, and opened out of each other. "Saunders can have
    the smaller one, though it is the only one with a fireplace,"
    he said. "I'll stick to the larger of the two, since it's got a
    bathroom adjoining. I wonder what time he'll arrive with the
    car."
Saunders came about seven, cold and cross and dirty. "We'll
    light the fire in the dining-room," said Eustace, "and get
    Prince to unpack some of the things while we are at dinner.
    What were the roads like?"
"Rotten; swimming with mud, and a beastly cold wind against
    us all day. And this is July. Dear old England!"
"Yes," said Eustace, "I think we might do worse than leave
    dear old England for a few months."
They turned in soon after twelve.
"You oughtn't to feel cold, Saunders," said Eustace, "when
    you can afford to sport a great cat-skin lined coat like this.
    You do yourself very well, all things considered. Look at those
    gloves, for instance. Who could possibly feel cold when wearing
    them?"
"They are far too clumsy though for driving. Try them on and
    see," and he tossed them through the door on to Eustace's bed,
    and went on with his unpacking. A minute later he heard a
    shrill cry of terror. "Oh, Lord," he heard, "it's in the glove!
    Quick, Saunders, quick!" Then came a smacking thud. Eustace had
    thrown it from him. "I've chucked it into the bathroom," he
    gasped, "it's hit the wall and fallen into the bath. Come now
    if you want to help." Saunders, with a lighted candle in his
    hand, looked over the edge of the bath. There it was, old and
    maimed, dumb and blind, with a ragged hole in the middle,
    crawling, staggering, trying to creep up the slippery sides,
    only to fall back helpless.
"Stay there," said Saunders. "I'll empty a collar box or
    something, and we'll jam it in. It can't get out while I'm
    away."
"Yes, it can," shouted Eustace. "It's getting out now. It's
    climbing up the plug chain. No, you brute, you filthy brute,
    you don't! Come back, Saunders, it's getting away from me. I
    can't hold it; it's all slippery. Curse its claw! Shut the
    window, you idiot! The top too, as well as the bottom. You
    utter idiot! It's got out!" There was the sound of something
    dropping on to the hard flagstones below, and Eustace fell back
    fainting.

For a fortnight he was ill.
"I don't know what to make of it," the doctor said to
    Saunders. "I can only suppose that Mr. Borlsover has suffered
    some great emotional shock. You had better let me send someone
    to help you nurse him. And by all means indulge that whim of
    his never to be left alone in the dark. I would keep a light
    burning all night if I were you. But he must have more
    fresh air. It's perfectly absurd this hatred of open
    windows."
Eustace, however, would have no one with him but Saunders.
    "I don't want the other men," he said. "They'd smuggle it in
    somehow. I know they would."
"Don't worry about it, old chap. This sort of thing can't go
    on indefinitely. You know I saw it this time as well as you. It
    wasn't half so active. It won't go on living much longer,
    especially after that fall. I heard it hit the flags myself. As
    soon as you're a bit stronger we'll leave this place; not bag
    and baggage, but with only the clothes on our backs, so that it
    won't be able to hide anywhere. We'll escape it that way. We
    won't give any address, and we won't have any parcels sent
    after us. Cheer up, Eustace! You'll be well enough to leave in
    a day or two. The doctor says I can take you out in a chair
    to-morrow."
"What have I done?" asked Eustace. "Why does it come after
    me? I'm no worse than other men. I'm no worse than you,
    Saunders; you know I'm not. It was you who were at the bottom
    of that dirty business in San Diego, and that was fifteen years
    ago."
"It's not that, of course," said Saunders. "We are in the
    twentieth century, and even the parsons have dropped the idea
    of your old sins finding you out. Before you caught the hand in
    the library it was filled with pure malevolence—to you
    and all mankind. After you spiked it through with that nail it
    naturally forgot about other people, and concentrated its
    attention on you. It was shut up in the safe, you know, for
    nearly six months. That gives plenty of time for thinking of
    revenge."
Eustace Borlsover would not leave his room, but he thought
    that there might be something in Saunders's suggestion to leave
    Brighton without notice. He began rapidly to regain his
    strength.
"We'll go on the first of September," he said.

The evening of August 31st was oppressively warm. Though at
    midday the windows had been wide open, they had been shut an
    hour or so before dusk. Mrs. Prince had long since ceased to
    wonder at the strange habits of the gentlemen on the first
    floor. Soon after their arrival she had been told to take down
    the heavy window curtains in the two bedrooms, and day by day
    the rooms had seemed to grow more bare. Nothing was left lying
    about.
"Mr. Borlsover doesn't like to have any place where dirt can
    collect," Saunders had said as an excuse. "He likes to see into
    all the corners of the room."
"Couldn't I open the window just a little?" he said to
    Eustace that evening. "We're simply roasting in here, you
    know."
"No, leave well alone. We're not a couple of boarding-school
    misses fresh from a course of hygiene lectures. Get the
    chessboard out."
They sat down and played. At ten o'clock Mrs. Prince came to
    the door with a note. "I am sorry I didn't bring it before,"
    she said, "but it was left in the letter-box."
"Open it, Saunders, and see if it wants answering."
It was very brief. There was neither address nor
    signature.
"Will eleven
    o'clock to-night be suitable for our last appointment?"
"Who is it from?" asked Borlsover.
"It was meant for me," said Saunders. "There's no answer,
    Mrs. Prince," and he put the paper into his pocket. "A dunning
    letter from a tailor; I suppose he must have got wind of our
    leaving."
It was a clever lie, and Eustace asked no more questions.
    They went on with their game.
On the landing outside Saunders could hear the grandfather's
    clock whispering the seconds, blurting out the
    quarter-hours.
"Check!" said Eustace. The clock struck eleven. At the same
    time there was a gentle knocking on the door; it seemed to come
    from the bottom panel.
"Who's there?" asked Eustace.
There was no answer.
"Mrs. Prince, is that you?"
"She is up above," said Saunders; "I can hear her walking
    about the room."
"Then lock the door; bolt it too. Your move, Saunders."
While Saunders sat with his eyes on the chessboard, Eustace
    walked over to the window and examined the fastenings. He did
    the same in Saunders's room and the bathroom. There were no
    doors between the three rooms, or he would have shut and locked
    them too.
"Now, Saunders," he said, "don't stay all night over your
    move. I've had time to smoke one cigarette already. It's bad to
    keep an invalid waiting. There's only one possible thing for
    you to do. What was that?"
"The ivy blowing against the window. There, it's your move
    now, Eustace."
"It wasn't the ivy, you idiot. It was someone tapping at the
    window," and he pulled up the blind. On the outer side of the
    window, clinging to the sash, was the hand.
"What is it that it's holding?"
"It's a pocket-knife. It's going to try to open the window
    by pushing back the fastener with the blade."
"Well, let it try," said Eustace. "Those fasteners screw
    down; they can't be opened that way. Anyhow, we'll close the
    shutters. It's your move, Saunders. I've played."
But Saunders found it impossible to fix his attention on the
    game. He could not understand Eustace, who seemed all at once
    to have lost his fear. "What do you say to some wine?" he
    asked. "You seem to be taking things coolly, but I don't mind
    confessing that I'm in a blessed funk."
"You've no need to be. There's nothing supernatural about
    that hand, Saunders. I mean it seems to be governed by the laws
    of time and space. It's not the sort of thing that vanishes
    into thin air or slides through oaken doors. And since that's
    so, I defy it to get in here. We'll leave the place in the
    morning. I for one have bottomed the depths of fear. Fill your
    glass, man! The windows are all shuttered, the door is locked
    and bolted. Pledge me my uncle Adrian! Drink, man! What are you
    waiting for?"
Saunders was standing with his glass half raised. "It can
    get in," he said hoarsely; "it can get in! We've forgotten.
    There's the fireplace in my bedroom. It will come down the
    chimney."
"Quick!" said Eustace, as he rushed into the other room; "we
    haven't a minute to lose. What can we do? Light the fire,
    Saunders. Give me a match, quick!"
"They must be all in the other room. I'll get them."
"Hurry, man, for goodness' sake! Look in the bookcase! Look
    in the bathroom! Here, come and stand here; I'll look."
"Be quick!" shouted Saunders. "I can hear something!"
"Then plug a sheet from your bed up the chimney. No, here's
    a match." He had found one at last that had slipped into a
    crack in the floor.
"Is the fire laid? Good, but it may not burn. I
    know—the oil from that old reading-lamp and this
    cotton-wool. Now the match, quick! Pull the sheet away, you
    fool! We don't want it now."
There was a great roar from the grate as the flames shot up.
    Saunders had been a fraction of a second too late with the
    sheet. The oil had fallen on to it. It, too, was burning.
"The whole place will be on fire!" cried Eustace, as he
    tried to beat out the flames with a blanket. "It's no good! I
    can't manage it. You must open the door, Saunders, and get
    help."
Saunders ran to the door and fumbled with the bolts. The key
    was stiff in the lock.
"Hurry!" shouted Eustace; "the whole place is ablaze!"
The key turned in the lock at last. For half a second
    Saunders stopped to look back. Afterwards he could never be
    quite sure as to what he had seen, but at the time he thought
    that something black and charred was creeping slowly, very
    slowly, from the mass of flames towards Eustace Borlsover. For
    a moment he thought of returning to his friend, but the noise
    and the smell of the burning sent him running down the passage
    crying, "Fire! Fire!" He rushed to the telephone to summon
    help, and then back to the bathroom—he should have
    thought of that before—for water. As he burst open the
    bedroom door there came a scream of terror which ended
    suddenly, and then the sound of a heavy fall.