THE WOMAN BEATER

 By Israel Zangwill

 ( The Grey Wig/Stories and Novelettes , New York: The Macmillan
      Company, 1903)

 I

 She came 'to meet John Lefolle', but John Lefolle did not know he was to
      meet Winifred Glamorys. He did not even know he was himself the
      meeting-point of all the brilliant and beautiful persons, assembled in the
      publisher's Saturday Salon, for although a youthful minor poet, he was
      modest and lovable. Perhaps his Oxford tutorship was sobering. At any rate
      his head remained unturned by his precocious fame, and to meet these other
      young men and women—his reverend seniors on the slopes of Parnassus—gave
      him more pleasure than the receipt of 'royalties'. Not that his publisher
      afforded him much opportunity of contrasting the two pleasures. The
      profits of the Muse went to provide this room of old furniture and roses,
      this beautiful garden a-twinkle with Japanese lanterns, like gorgeous
      fire-flowers blossoming under the white crescent-moon of early June.

 Winifred Glamorys was not literary herself. She was better than a poetess,
      she was a poem. The publisher always threw in a few realities, and some
      beautiful brainless creature would generally be found the nucleus of a
      crowd, while Clio in spectacles languished in a corner. Winifred Glamorys,
      however, was reputed to have a tongue that matched her eye; paralleling
      with whimsies and epigrams its freakish fires and witcheries, and,
      assuredly, flitting in her white gown through the dark balmy garden, she
      seemed the very spirit of moonlight, the subtle incarnation of night and
      roses.

 When John Lefolle met her, Cecilia was with her, and the first
      conversation was triangular. Cecilia fired most of the shots; she was a
      bouncing, rattling beauty, chockful of confidence and high spirits, except
      when asked to do the one thing she could do—sing! Then she became—quite
      genuinely—a nervous, hesitant, pale little thing. However, the
      suppliant hostess bore her off, and presently her rich contralto notes
      passed through the garden, adding to its passion and mystery, and through
      the open French windows, John could see her standing against the wall near
      the piano, her head thrown back, her eyes half-closed, her creamy throat
      swelling in the very abandonment of artistic ecstasy.

 'What a charming creature!' he exclaimed involuntarily.

 'That is what everybody thinks, except her husband,' Winifred laughed.

 'Is he blind then?' asked John with his cloistral navet .

 'Blind? No, love is blind. Marriage is never blind.'

 The bitterness in her tone pierced John. He felt vaguely the passing of
      some icy current from unknown seas of experience. Cecilia's voice soared
      out enchantingly.

 'Then, marriage must be deaf,' he said, 'or such music as that would charm
      it.'

 She smiled sadly. Her smile was the tricksy play of moonlight among clouds
      of fary.

 'You have never been married,' she said simply.

 'Do you mean that you, too, are neglected?' something impelled him to
      exclaim.

 'Worse,' she murmured.

 'It is incredible!' he cried. 'You!'

 'Hush! My husband will hear you.'

 Her warning whisper brought him into a delicious conspiracy with her.
      'Which is your husband?' he whispered back.

 'There! Near the casement, standing gazing open-mouthed at Cecilia. He
      always opens his mouth when she sings. It is like two toys moved by the
      same wire.'

 He looked at the tall, stalwart, ruddy-haired Anglo-Saxon. 'Do you mean to
      say he—?'

 'I mean to say nothing.'

 'But you said—'

 'I said "worse".'

 'Why, what can be worse?'

 She put her hand over her face. 'I am ashamed to tell you.' How adorable
      was that half-divined blush!

 'But you must tell me everything.' He scarcely knew how he had leapt into
      this role of confessor. He only felt they were 'moved by the same wire'.

 Her head drooped on her breast. 'He—beats—me.'

 'What!' John forgot to whisper. It was the greatest shock his recluse life
      had known, compact as it was of horror at the revelation, shamed confusion
      at her candour, and delicious pleasure in her confidence.

 This fragile, exquisite creature under the rod of a brutal bully!

 Once he had gone to a wedding reception, and among the serious presents
      some grinning Philistine drew his attention to an uncouth club—'a
      wife-beater' he called it. The flippancy had jarred upon John terribly:
      this intrusive reminder of the customs of the slums. It grated like
      Billingsgate in a boudoir. Now that savage weapon recurred to him—for
      a lurid instant he saw Winifred's husband wielding it. Oh, abomination of
      his sex! And did he stand there, in his immaculate evening dress, posing
      as an English gentleman? Even so might some gentleman burglar bear through
      a salon his imperturbable swallow-tail.

 Beat a woman! Beat that essence of charm and purity, God's best gift to
      man, redeeming him from his own grossness! Could such things be? John
      Lefolle would as soon have credited the French legend that English wives
      are sold in Smithfield. No! it could not be real that this flower-like
      figure was thrashed.

 'Do you mean to say—?' he cried. The rapidity of her confidence
      alone made him feel it all of a dreamlike unreality.

 'Hush! Cecilia's singing!' she admonished him with an unexpected smile, as
      her fingers fell from her face.

 'Oh, you have been making fun of me.' He was vastly relieved. 'He beats
      you—at chess—or at lawn-tennis?'

 'Does one wear a high-necked dress to conceal the traces of chess, or
      lawn-tennis?'

 He had not noticed her dress before, save for its spiritual whiteness.
      Susceptible though he was to beautiful shoulders, Winifred's enchanting
      face had been sufficiently distracting. Now the thought of physical
      bruises gave him a second spasm of righteous horror. That delicate
      rose-leaf flesh abraded and lacerated!

 'The ruffian! Does he use a stick or a fist?'

 'Both! But as a rule he just takes me by the arms and shakes me like a
      terrier a rat. I'm all black and blue now.'

 'Poor butterfly!' he murmured poetically.

 'Why did I tell you?' she murmured back with subtler poetry.

 The poet thrilled in every vein. 'Love at first sight', of which he had
      often read and often written, was then a reality! It could be as mutual,
      too, as Romeo's and Juliet's. But how awkward that Juliet should be
      married and her husband a Bill Sykes in broad-cloth!

 II

 Mrs. Glamorys herself gave 'At Homes', every Sunday afternoon, and so, on
      the morrow, after a sleepless night mitigated by perpended sonnets, the
      love-sick young tutor presented himself by invitation at the beautiful old
      house in Hampstead. He was enchanted to find his heart's mistress set in
      an eighteenth-century frame of small-paned windows and of high
      oak-panelling, and at once began to image her dancing minuets and playing
      on virginals. Her husband was absent, but a broad band of velvet round
      Winifred's neck was a painful reminder of his possibilities. Winifred,
      however, said it was only a touch of sore throat caught in the garden. Her
      eyes added that there was nothing in the pathological dictionary which she
      would not willingly have caught for the sake of those divine, if draughty
      moments; but that, alas! it was more than a mere bodily ailment she had
      caught there.

 There were a great many visitors in the two delightfully quaint rooms,
      among whom he wandered disconsolate and admired, jealous of her scattered
      smiles, but presently he found himself seated by her side on a 'cosy
      corner' near the open folding-doors, with all the other guests huddled
      round a violinist in the inner room. How Winifred had managed it he did
      not know but she sat plausibly in the outer room, awaiting newcomers, and
      this particular niche was invisible, save to a determined eye. He took her
      unresisting hand—that dear, warm hand, with its begemmed artistic
      fingers, and held it in uneasy beatitude. How wonderful! She—the
      beautiful and adored hostess, of whose sweetness and charm he heard even
      her own guests murmur to one another—it was her actual
      flesh-and-blood hand that lay in his—thrillingly tangible. Oh,
      adventure beyond all merit, beyond all hoping!

 But every now and then, the outer door facing them would open on some
      newcomer, and John had hastily to release her soft magnetic fingers and
      sit demure, and jealously overhear her effusive welcome to those innocent
      intruders, nor did his brow clear till she had shepherded them within the
      inner fold. Fortunately, the refreshments were in this section, so that
      once therein, few of the sheep strayed back, and the jiggling wail of the
      violin was succeeded by a shrill babble of tongues and the clatter of cups
      and spoons. 'Get me an ice, please—strawberry,' she ordered John
      during one of these forced intervals in manual flirtation; and when he had
      steered laboriously to and fro, he found a young actor beside her in his
      cosy corner, and his jealous fancy almost saw their hands dispart.
      He stood over them with a sickly smile, while Winifred ate her ice. When
      he returned from depositing the empty saucer, the player-fellow was gone,
      and in remorse for his mad suspicion he stooped and reverently lifted her
      fragrant finger-tips to his lips. The door behind his back opened
      abruptly.

 'Goodbye,' she said, rising in a flash. The words had the calm
      conventional cadence, and instantly extorted from him—amid all his
      dazedness—the corresponding 'Goodbye'. When he turned and saw it was
      Mr. Glamorys who had come in, his heart leapt wildly at the nearness of
      his escape. As he passed this masked ruffian, he nodded perfunctorily and
      received a cordial smile. Yes, he was handsome and fascinating enough
      externally, this blonde savage.

 'A man may smile and smile and be a villain,' John thought. 'I wonder how
      he'd feel, if he knew I knew he beats women.'

 Already John had generalized the charge. 'I hope Cecilia will keep him at
      arm's length,' he had said to Winifred, 'if only that she may not smart
      for it some day.'

 He lingered purposely in the hall to get an impression of the brute, who
      had begun talking loudly to a friend with irritating bursts of laughter,
      speciously frank-ringing. Golf, fishing, comic operas—ah, the
      Boeotian! These were the men who monopolized the ethereal divinities.

 But this brusque separation from his particular divinity was
      disconcerting. How to see her again? He must go up to Oxford in the
      morning, he wrote her that night, but if she could possibly let him call
      during the week he would manage to run down again.

  'Oh, my dear, dreaming poet,' she wrote to Oxford, 'how could you possibly
      send me a letter to be laid on the breakfast-table beside The Times !
      With a poem in it, too. Fortunately my husband was in a hurry to get down
      to the City, and he neglected to read my correspondence. (The unchivalrous
      blackguard,' John commented. 'But what can be expected of a woman
      beater?') Never, never write to me again at the house. A letter, care of
      Mrs. Best, 8A Foley Street, W.C., will always find me. She is my maid's
      mother. And you must not come here either, my dear handsome
      head-in-the-clouds, except to my 'At Homes', and then only at judicious
      intervals. I shall be walking round the pond in Kensington Gardens at four
      next Wednesday, unless Mrs. Best brings me a letter to the contrary. And
      now thank you for your delicious poem; I do not recognize my humble self
      in the dainty lines, but I shall always be proud to think I inspired them.
      Will it be in the new volume? I have never been in print before; it will
      be a novel sensation. I cannot pay you song for song, only feeling for
      feeling. Oh, John Lefolle, why did we not meet when I had still my girlish
      dreams? Now, I have grown to distrust all men—to fear the brute
      beneath the cavalier....'

  Mrs. Best did bring her a letter, but it was not to cancel the
      appointment, only to say he was not surprised at her horror of the male
      sex, but that she must beware of false generalizations. Life was still a
      wonderful and beautiful thing— vide poem enclosed. He was
      counting the minutes till Wednesday afternoon. It was surely a popular
      mistake that only sixty went to the hour.

 This chronometrical reflection recurred to him even more poignantly in the
      hour that he circumambulated the pond in Kensington Gardens. Had she
      forgotten—had her husband locked her up? What could have happened?
      It seemed six hundred minutes, ere, at ten past five she came tripping
      daintily towards him. His brain had been reduced to insanely devising
      problems for his pupils—if a man walks two strides of one and a half
      feet a second round a lake fifty acres in area, in how many turns will he
      overtake a lady who walks half as fast and isn't there?—but the
      moment her pink parasol loomed on the horizon, all his long misery
      vanished in an ineffable peace and uplifting. He hurried, bare-headed, to
      clasp her little gloved hand. He had forgotten her unpunctuality, nor did
      she remind him of it.

 'How sweet of you to come all that way,' was all she said, and it was a
      sufficient reward for the hours in the train and the six hundred minutes
      among the nursemaids and perambulators. The elms were in their glory, the
      birds were singing briskly, the water sparkled, the sunlit sward stretched
      fresh and green—it was the loveliest, coolest moment of the
      afternoon. John instinctively turned down a leafy avenue. Nature and Love!
      What more could poet ask?

 'No, we can't have tea by the Kiosk,' Mrs. Glamorys protested. 'Of course
      I love anything that savours of Paris, but it's become so fashionable.
      There will be heaps of people who know me. I suppose you've forgotten it's
      the height of the season. I know a quiet little place in the High Street.'
      She led him, unresisting but bemused, towards the gate, and into a
      confectioner's. Conversation languished on the way.

 'Tea,' he was about to instruct the pretty attendant.

 'Strawberry ices,' Mrs. Glamorys remarked gently. 'And some of those nice
      French cakes.'

 The ice restored his spirits, it was really delicious, and he had got so
      hot and tired, pacing round the pond. Decidedly Winifred was a practical
      person and he was a dreamer. The pastry he dared not touch—being a
      genius—but he was charmed at the gaiety with which Winifred crammed
      cake after cake into her rosebud of a mouth. What an enchanting creature!
      how bravely she covered up her life's tragedy!

 The thought made him glance at her velvet band—it was broader than
      ever.

 'He has beaten you again!' he murmured furiously. Her joyous eyes
      saddened, she hung her head, and her fingers crumbled the cake. 'What is
      his pretext?' he asked, his blood burning.

 'Jealousy,' she whispered.

 His blood lost its glow, ran cold. He felt the bully's blows on his own
      skin, his romance turning suddenly sordid. But he recovered his courage.
      He, too, had muscles. 'But I thought he just missed seeing me kiss your
      hand.'

 She opened her eyes wide. 'It wasn't you, you darling old dreamer.'

 He was relieved and disturbed in one.

 'Somebody else?' he murmured. Somehow the vision of the player-fellow came
      up.

 She nodded. 'Isn't it lucky he has himself drawn a red-herring across the
      track? I didn't mind his blows— you were safe!' Then, with one
      of her adorable transitions, 'I am dreaming of another ice,' she cried
      with roguish wistfulness.

 'I was afraid to confess my own greediness,' he said, laughing. He
      beckoned the waitress. 'Two more.'

 'We haven't got any more strawberries,' was her unexpected reply. 'There's
      been such a run on them today.'

 Winifred's face grew overcast. 'Oh, nonsense!' she pouted. To John the
      moment seemed tragic.

 'Won't you have another kind?' he queried. He himself liked any kind, but
      he could scarcely eat a second ice without her.

 Winifred meditated. 'Coffee?' she queried.

 The waitress went away and returned with a face as gloomy as Winifred's.
      'It's been such a hot day,' she said deprecatingly. 'There is only one ice
      in the place and that's Neapolitan.'

 'Well, bring two Neapolitans,' John ventured.

 'I mean there is only one Neapolitan ice left.'

 'Well, bring that. I don't really want one.'

 He watched Mrs. Glamorys daintily devouring the solitary ice, and felt a
      certain pathos about the parti-coloured oblong, a something of the
      haunting sadness of 'The Last Rose of Summer'. It would make a graceful,
      serio-comic triolet, he was thinking. But at the last spoonful, his
      beautiful companion dislocated his rhymes by her sudden upspringing.

 'Goodness gracious,' she cried, 'how late it is!'

 'Oh, you're not leaving me yet!' he said. A world of things sprang to his
      brain, things that he was going to say—to arrange. They had said
      nothing—not a word of their love even; nothing but cakes and ices.

 'Poet!' she laughed. 'Have you forgotten I live at Hampstead?' She picked
      up her parasol.

 'Put me into a hansom, or my husband will be raving at his lonely
      dinner-table.'

 He was so dazed as to be surprised when the waitress blocked his departure
      with a bill. When Winifred was spirited away, he remembered she might,
      without much risk, have given him a lift to Paddington. He hailed another
      hansom and caught the next train to Oxford. But he was too late for his
      own dinner in Hall.

 III

 He was kept very busy for the next few days, and could only exchange a
      passionate letter or two with her. For some time the examination fever had
      been raging, and in every college poor patients sat with wet towels round
      their heads. Some, who had neglected their tutor all the term, now strove
      to absorb his omniscience in a sitting.

 On the Monday, John Lefolle was good-naturedly giving a special audience
      to a muscular dunce, trying to explain to him the political effects of the
      Crusades, when there was a knock at the sitting-room door, and the scout
      ushered in Mrs. Glamorys. She was bewitchingly dressed in white, and stood
      in the open doorway, smiling—an embodiment of the summer he was
      neglecting. He rose, but his tongue was paralysed. The dunce became
      suddenly important—a symbol of the decorum he had been outraging.
      His soul, torn so abruptly from history to romance, could not get up the
      right emotion. Why this imprudence of Winifred's? She had been so careful
      heretofore.

 'What a lot of boots there are on your staircase!' she said gaily.

 He laughed. The spell was broken. 'Yes, the heap to be cleaned is rather
      obtrusive,' he said, 'but I suppose it is a sort of tradition.'

 'I think I've got hold of the thing pretty well now, sir.' The dunce rose
      and smiled, and his tutor realized how little the dunce had to learn in
      some things. He felt quite grateful to him.

 'Oh, well, you'll come and see me again after lunch, won't you, if one or
      two points occur to you for elucidation,' he said, feeling vaguely a liar,
      and generally guilty. But when, on the departure of the dunce, Winifred
      held out her arms, everything fell from him but the sense of the exquisite
      moment. Their lips met for the first time, but only for an instant. He had
      scarcely time to realize that this wonderful thing had happened before the
      mobile creature had darted to his book-shelves and was examining a
      Thucydides upside down.

 'How clever to know Greek!' she exclaimed. 'And do you really talk it with
      the other dons?'

 'No, we never talk shop,' he laughed. 'But, Winifred, what made you come
      here?'

 'I had never seen Oxford. Isn't it beautiful?'

 'There's nothing beautiful here ,' he said, looking round his sober
      study.

 'No,' she admitted; 'there's nothing I care for here,' and had left
      another celestial kiss on his lips before he knew it. 'And now you must
      take me to lunch and on the river.'

 He stammered, 'I have—work.'

 She pouted. 'But I can't stay beyond tomorrow morning, and I want so much
      to see all your celebrated oarsmen practising.'

 'You are not staying over the night?' he gasped.

 'Yes, I am,' and she threw him a dazzling glance.

 His heart went pit-a-pat. 'Where?' he murmured.

 'Oh, some poky little hotel near the station. The swell hotels are full.'

 He was glad to hear she was not conspicuously quartered.

 'So many people have come down already for Commem,' he said. 'I suppose
      they are anxious to see the Generals get their degrees. But hadn't we
      better go somewhere and lunch?'

 They went down the stone staircase, past the battalion of boots, and
      across the quad. He felt that all the windows were alive with eyes, but
      she insisted on standing still and admiring their ivied picturesqueness.
      After lunch he shamefacedly borrowed the dunce's punt. The necessities of
      punting, which kept him far from her, and demanded much adroit labour,
      gradually restored his self-respect, and he was able to look the
      uncelebrated oarsmen they met in the eyes, except when they were
      accompanied by their parents and sisters, which subtly made him feel
      uncomfortable again. But Winifred, piquant under her pink parasol, was
      singularly at ease, enraptured with the changing beauty of the river,
      applauding with childish glee the wild flowers on the banks, or the
      rippling reflections in the water.

 'Look, look!' she cried once, pointing skyward. He stared upwards,
      expecting a balloon at least. But it was only 'Keats' little rosy cloud',
      she explained. It was not her fault if he did not find the excursion
      unreservedly idyllic.

 'How stupid,' she reflected, 'to keep all those nice boys cooped up
      reading dead languages in a spot made for life and love.'

 'I'm afraid they don't disturb the dead languages so much as you think,'
      he reassured her, smiling. 'And there will be plenty of love-making during
      Commem.'

 'I am so glad. I suppose there are lots of engagements that week.'

 'Oh, yes—but not one per cent come to anything.'

 'Really? Oh, how fickle men are!'

 That seemed rather question-begging, but he was so thrilled by the
      implicit revelation that she could not even imagine feminine inconstancy,
      that he forebore to draw her attention to her inadequate logic.

 So childish and thoughtless indeed was she that day that nothing would
      content her but attending a 'Viva', which he had incautiously informed her
      was public.

 'Nobody will notice us,' she urged with strange unconsciousness of her
      loveliness. 'Besides, they don't know I'm not your sister.'

 'The Oxford intellect is sceptical,' he said, laughing. 'It cultivates
      philosophical doubt.'

 But, putting a bold face on the matter, and assuming a fraternal air, he
      took her to the torture-chamber, in which candidates sat dolefully on a
      row of chairs against the wall, waiting their turn to come before the
      three grand inquisitors at the table. Fortunately, Winifred and he were
      the only spectators; but unfortunately they blundered in at the very
      moment when the poor owner of the punt was on the rack. The central
      inquisitor was trying to extract from him information about Becket, almost
      prompting him with the very words, but without penetrating through the
      duncical denseness. John Lefolle breathed more freely when the Crusades
      were broached; but, alas, it very soon became evident that the dunce had
      by no means 'got hold of the thing'. As the dunce passed out sadly,
      obviously ploughed, John Lefolle suffered more than he. So
      conscience-stricken was he that, when he had accompanied Winifred as far
      as her hotel, he refused her invitation to come in, pleading the
      compulsoriness of duty and dinner in Hall. But he could not get away
      without promising to call in during the evening.

 The prospect of this visit was with him all through dinner, at once
      tempting and terrifying. Assuredly there was a skeleton at his feast, as
      he sat at the high table, facing the Master. The venerable portraits round
      the Hall seemed to rebuke his romantic waywardness. In the common-room, he
      sipped his port uneasily, listening as in a daze to the discussion on Free
      Will, which an eminent stranger had stirred up. How academic it seemed,
      compared with the passionate realities of life. But somehow he found
      himself lingering on at the academic discussion, postponing the realities
      of life. Every now and again, he was impelled to glance at his watch; but
      suddenly murmuring, 'It is very late,' he pulled himself together, and
      took leave of his learned brethren. But in the street the sight of a
      telegraph office drew his steps to it, and almost mechanically he wrote
      out the message: 'Regret detained. Will call early in morning.'

 When he did call in the morning, he was told she had gone back to London
      the night before on receipt of a telegram. He turned away with a bitter
      pang of disappointment and regret.

 IV

 Their subsequent correspondence was only the more amorous. The reason she
      had fled from the hotel, she explained, was that she could not endure the
      night in those stuffy quarters. He consoled himself with the hope of
      seeing much of her during the Long Vacation. He did see her once at her
      own reception, but this time her husband wandered about the two rooms. The
      cosy corner was impossible, and they could only manage to gasp out a few
      mutual endearments amid the buzz and movement, and to arrange a rendezvous for the end of July. When the day came, he received a heart-broken letter,
      stating that her husband had borne her away to Goodwood. In a postscript
      she informed him that 'Quicksilver was a sure thing'. Much correspondence
      passed without another meeting being effected, and he lent her five pounds
      to pay a debt of honour incurred through her husband's 'absurd confidence
      in Quicksilver'. A week later this horsey husband of hers brought her on
      to Brighton for the races there, and hither John Lefolle flew. But her
      husband shadowed her, and he could only lift his hat to her as they passed
      each other on the Lawns. Sometimes he saw her sitting pensively on a chair
      while her lord and thrasher perused a pink sporting-paper. Such
      tantalizing proximity raised their correspondence through the Hove Post
      Office to fever heat. Life apart, they felt, was impossible, and, removed
      from the sobering influences of his cap and gown, John Lefolle dreamed of
      throwing everything to the winds. His literary reputation had opened out a
      new career. The Winifred lyrics alone had brought in a tidy sum, and
      though he had expended that and more on despatches of flowers and trifles
      to her, yet he felt this extravagance would become extinguished under
      daily companionship, and the poems provoked by her charms would go far
      towards their daily maintenance. Yes, he could throw up the University. He
      would rescue her from this bully, this gentleman bruiser. They would live
      openly and nobly in the world's eye. A poet was not even expected to be
      conventional.

 She, on her side, was no less ardent for the great step. She raged against
      the world's law, the injustice by which a husband's cruelty was not
      sufficient ground for divorce. 'But we finer souls must take the law into
      our own hands,' she wrote. 'We must teach society that the ethics of a
      barbarous age are unfitted for our century of enlightenment.' But somehow
      the actual time and place of the elopement could never get itself fixed.
      In September her husband dragged her to Scotland, in October after the
      pheasants. When the dramatic day was actually fixed, Winifred wrote by the
      next post deferring it for a week. Even the few actual preliminary
      meetings they planned for Kensington Gardens or Hampstead Heath rarely
      came off. He lived in a whirling atmosphere of express letters of excuse,
      and telegrams that transformed the situation from hour to hour. Not that
      her passion in any way abated, or her romantic resolution really altered:
      it was only that her conception of time and place and ways and means was
      dizzily mutable.

 But after nigh six months of palpitating negotiations with the adorable
      Mrs. Glamorys, the poet, in a moment of dejection, penned the prose
      apophthegm, 'It is of no use trying to change a changeable person.'

 V

 But at last she astonished him by a sketch plan of the elopement, so
      detailed, even to band-boxes and the Paris night route via Dieppe,
      that no further room for doubt was left in his intoxicated soul, and he
      was actually further astonished when, just as he was putting his hand-bag
      into the hansom, a telegram was handed to him saying: 'Gone to Homburg.
      Letter follows.'

 He stood still for a moment on the pavement in utter distraction. What did
      it mean? Had she failed him again? Or was it simply that she had changed
      the city of refuge from Paris to Homburg? He was about to name the new
      station to the cabman, but then, 'letter follows'. Surely that meant that
      he was to wait for it. Perplexed and miserable, he stood with the telegram
      crumpled up in his fist. What a ridiculous situation! He had wrought
      himself up to the point of breaking with the world and his past, and now—it
      only remained to satisfy the cabman!

 He tossed feverishly all night, seeking to soothe himself, but really
      exciting himself the more by a hundred plausible explanations. He was now
      strung up to such a pitch of uncertainty that he was astonished for the
      third time when the 'letter' did duly 'follow'.

  'Dearest,' it ran, 'as I explained in my telegram, my husband became
      suddenly ill'—('if she had only put that in the telegram,' he
      groaned)—'and was ordered to Homburg. Of course it was impossible to
      leave him in this crisis, both for practical and sentimental reasons. You
      yourself, darling, would not like me to have aggravated his illness by my
      flight just at this moment, and thus possibly have his death on my
      conscience.' ('Darling, you are always right,' he said, kissing the
      letter.) 'Let us possess our souls in patience a little longer. I need not
      tell you how vexatious it will be to find myself nursing him in Homburg—out
      of the season even—instead of the prospect to which I had looked
      forward with my whole heart and soul. But what can one do? How true is the
      French proverb, 'Nothing happens but the unexpected'! Write to me
      immediately Poste Restante , that I may at least console myself with
      your dear words.'

 The unexpected did indeed happen. Despite draughts of Elizabeth-brunnen
      and promenades on the Kurhaus terrace, the stalwart woman beater succumbed
      to his malady. The curt telegram from Winifred gave no indication of her
      emotions. He sent a reply-telegram of sympathy with her trouble. Although
      he could not pretend to grieve at this sudden providential solution of
      their life-problem, still he did sincerely sympathize with the distress
      inevitable in connection with a death, especially on foreign soil.

 He was not able to see her till her husband's body had been brought across
      the North Sea and committed to the green repose of the old Hampstead
      churchyard. He found her pathetically altered—her face wan and
      spiritualized, and all in subtle harmony with the exquisite black gown. In
      the first interview, he did not dare speak of their love at all. They
      discussed the immortality of the soul, and she quoted George Herbert. But
      with the weeks the question of their future began to force its way back to
      his lips.

 'We could not decently marry before six months,' she said, when definitely
      confronted with the problem.

 'Six months!' he gasped.

 'Well, surely you don't want to outrage everybody,' she said, pouting.

 At first he was outraged himself. What! She who had been ready to flutter
      the world with a fantastic dance was now measuring her footsteps. But on
      reflection he saw that Mrs. Glamorys was right once more. Since Providence
      had been good enough to rescue them, why should they fly in its face? A
      little patience, and a blameless happiness lay before them. Let him not
      blind himself to the immense relief he really felt at being spared social
      obloquy. After all, a poet could be unconventional in his work —he
      had no need of the practical outlet demanded for the less gifted.

 VI

 They scarcely met at all during the next six months—it had,
      naturally, in this grateful reaction against their recklessness, become a
      sacred period, even more charged with tremulous emotion than the
      engagement periods of those who have not so nearly scorched themselves.
      Even in her presence he found a certain pleasure in combining distant
      adoration with the confident expectation of proximity, and thus she was
      restored to the sanctity which she had risked by her former easiness. And
      so all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds.

 When the six months had gone by, he came to claim her hand. She was quite
      astonished. 'You promised to marry me at the end of six months,' he
      reminded her.

 'Surely it isn't six months already,' she said.

 He referred her to the calendar, recalled the date of her husband's death.

 'You are strangely literal for a poet,' she said. 'Of course I said six months, but six months doesn't mean twenty-six weeks by the clock. All
      I meant was that a decent period must intervene. But even to myself it
      seems only yesterday that poor Harold was walking beside me in the Kurhaus
      Park.' She burst into tears, and in the face of them he could not pursue
      the argument.

 Gradually, after several interviews and letters, it was agreed that they
      should wait another six months.

 'She is right,' he reflected again. 'We have waited so long, we may
      as well wait a little longer and leave malice no handle.'

 The second six months seemed to him much longer than the first. The charm
      of respectful adoration had lost its novelty, and once again his breast
      was racked by fitful fevers which could scarcely calm themselves even by
      conversion into sonnets. The one point of repose was that shining fixed
      star of marriage. Still smarting under Winifred's reproach of his unpoetic
      literality, he did not intend to force her to marry him exactly at the end
      of the twelve-month. But he was determined that she should have no later
      than this exact date for at least 'naming the day'. Not the most
      punctilious stickler for convention, he felt, could deny that Mrs.
      Grundy's claim had been paid to the last minute.

 The publication of his new volume—containing the Winifred lyrics—had
      served to colour these months of intolerable delay. Even the reaction of
      the critics against his poetry, that conventional revolt against every
      second volume, that parrot cry of over-praise from the very throats that
      had praised him, though it pained and perplexed him, was perhaps really
      helpful. At any rate, the long waiting was over at last. He felt like
      Jacob after his years of service for Rachel.

 The fateful morning dawned bright and blue, and, as the towers of Oxford
      were left behind him he recalled that distant Saturday when he had first
      gone down to meet the literary lights of London in his publisher's salon.
      How much older he was now than then—and yet how much younger! The
      nebulous melancholy of youth, the clouds of philosophy, had vanished
      before this beautiful creature of sunshine whose radiance cut out a clear
      line for his future through the confusion of life.

 At a florist's in the High Street of Hampstead he bought a costly bouquet
      of white flowers, and walked airily to the house and rang the bell
      jubilantly. He could scarcely believe his ears when the maid told him her
      mistress was not at home. How dared the girl stare at him so impassively?
      Did she not know by what appointment—on what errand—he had
      come? Had he not written to her mistress a week ago that he would present
      himself that afternoon?

 'Not at home!' he gasped. 'But when will she be home?'

 'I fancy she won't be long. She went out an hour ago, and she has an
      appointment with her dressmaker at five.'

 'Do you know in what direction she'd have gone?'

 'Oh, she generally walks on the Heath before tea.'

 The world suddenly grew rosy again. 'I will come back again,' he said.
      Yes, a walk in this glorious air—heathward—would do him good.

 As the door shut he remembered he might have left the flowers, but he
      would not ring again, and besides, it was, perhaps, better he should
      present them with his own hand, than let her find them on the hall table.
      Still, it seemed rather awkward to walk about the streets with a bouquet,
      and he was glad, accidentally to strike the old Hampstead Church, and to
      seek a momentary seclusion in passing through its avenue of quiet
      gravestones on his heathward way.

 Mounting the few steps, he paused idly a moment on the verge of this green
      'God's-acre' to read a perpendicular slab on a wall, and his face
      broadened into a smile as he followed the absurdly elaborate biography of
      a rich, self-made merchant who had taught himself to read, 'Reader, go
      thou and do likewise,' was the delicious bull at the end. As he turned
      away, the smile still lingering about his lips, he saw a dainty figure
      tripping down the stony graveyard path, and though he was somehow startled
      to find her still in black, there was no mistaking Mrs. Glamorys. She ran
      to meet him with a glad cry, which filled his eyes with happy tears.

 'How good of you to remember!' she said, as she took the bouquet from his
      unresisting hand, and turned again on her footsteps. He followed her
      wonderingly across the uneven road towards a narrow aisle of graves on the
      left. In another instant she has stooped before a shining white stone, and
      laid his bouquet reverently upon it. As he reached her side, he saw that
      his flowers were almost lost in the vast mass of floral offerings with
      which the grave of the woman beater was bestrewn.

 'How good of you to remember the anniversary,' she murmured again.

 'How could I forget it?' he stammered, astonished. 'Is not this the end of
      the terrible twelve-month?'

 The soft gratitude died out of her face. 'Oh, is that what you were
      thinking of?'

 'What else?' he murmured, pale with conflicting emotions.

 'What else! I think decency demanded that this day, at least, should be
      sacred to his memory. Oh, what brutes men are!' And she burst into tears.

 His patient breast revolted at last. 'You said he was the brute!'
      he retorted, outraged.

 'Is that your chivalry to the dead? Oh, my poor Harold, my poor Harold!'

 For once her tears could not extinguish the flame of his anger. 'But you
      told me he beat you,' he cried.

 'And if he did, I dare say I deserved it. Oh, my darling, my darling!' She
      laid her face on the stone and sobbed.

 John Lefolle stood by in silent torture. As he helplessly watched her
      white throat swell and fall with the sobs, he was suddenly struck by the
      absence of the black velvet band—the truer mourning she had worn in
      the lifetime of the so lamented. A faint scar, only perceptible to his
      conscious eye, added to his painful bewilderment.

 At last she rose and walked unsteadily forward. He followed her in mute
      misery. In a moment or two they found themselves on the outskirts of the
      deserted heath. How beautiful stretched the gorsy rolling country! The sun
      was setting in great burning furrows of gold and green—a panorama to
      take one's breath away. The beauty and peace of Nature passed into the
      poet's soul.

 'Forgive me, dearest,' he begged, taking her hand.

 She drew it away sharply. 'I cannot forgive you. You have shown yourself
      in your true colours.'

 Her unreasonableness angered him again. 'What do you mean? I only came in
      accordance with our long-standing arrangement. You have put me off long
      enough.'

 'It is fortunate I did put you off long enough to discover what you are.'

 He gasped. He thought of all the weary months of waiting, all the long
      comedy of telegrams and express letters, the far-off flirtations of the
      cosy corner, the baffled elopement to Paris. 'Then you won't marry me?'

 'I cannot marry a man I neither love nor respect.'

 'You don't love me!' Her spontaneous kiss in his sober Oxford study seemed
      to burn on his angry lips.

 'No, I never loved you.'

 He took her by the arms and turned her round roughly. 'Look me in the face
      and dare to say you have never loved me.'

 His memory was buzzing with passionate phrases from her endless letters.
      They stung like a swarm of bees. The sunset was like blood-red mist before
      his eyes.

 'I have never loved you,' she said obstinately.

 'You—!' His grasp on her arms tightened. He shook her.

 'You are bruising me,' she cried.

 His grasp fell from her arms as though they were red-hot. He had become a
      woman beater.

  













 ***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VICTORIAN SHORT STORIES***


******* This file should be named 15381-h.htm or 15381-h.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/5/3/8/15381



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.