The Shell of Sense
By OLIVIA HOWARD DUNBAR

From Harper's Magazine, December, 1908. By permission of
        Harper and Brothers and Olivia Howard Dunbar.

It was intolerably unchanged, the dim, dark-toned room. In
    an agony of recognition my glance ran from one to another of
    the comfortable, familiar things that my earthly life had been
    passed among. Incredibly distant from it all as I essentially
    was. I noted sharply that the very gaps that I myself had left
    in my bookshelves still stood unfilled; that the delicate
    fingers of the ferns that I had tended were still stretched
    futilely toward the light; that the soft agreeable chuckle of
    my own little clock, like some elderly woman with whom
    conversation has become automatic, was undiminished.
Unchanged—or so it seemed at first. But there were
    certain trivial differences that shortly smote me. The windows
    were closed too tightly; for I had always kept the house very
    cool, although I had known that Theresa preferred warm rooms.
    And my work-basket was in disorder; it was preposterous that so
    small a thing should hurt me so. Then, for this was my first
    experience of the shadow-folded transition, the odd alteration
    of my emotions bewildered me. For at one moment the place
    seemed so humanly familiar, so distinctly my own proper
    envelope, that for love of it I could have laid my cheek
    against the wall; while in the next I was miserably conscious
    of strange new shrillnesses. How could they be
    endured—and had I ever endured them?—those harsh
    influences that I now perceived at the window; light and color
    so blinding that they obscured the form of the wind, tumult so
    discordant that one could scarcely hear the roses open in the
    garden below?
But Theresa did not seem to mind any of these things.
    Disorder, it is true, the dear child had never minded. She was
    sitting all this time at my desk—at my
    desk—occupied, I could only too easily surmise how. In
    the light of my own habits of precision it was plain that that
    sombre correspondence should have been attended to before; but
    I believe that I did not really reproach Theresa, for I knew
    that her notes, when she did write them, were perhaps less
    perfunctory than mine. She finished the last one as I watched
    her, and added it to the heap of black-bordered envelopes that
    lay on the desk. Poor girl! I saw now that they had cost her
    tears. Yet, living beside her day after day, year after year, I
    had never discovered what deep tenderness my sister possessed.
    Toward each other it had been our habit to display only a
    temperate affection, and I remember having always thought it
    distinctly fortunate for Theresa, since she was denied my
    happiness, that she could live so easily and pleasantly without
    emotions of the devastating sort.... And now, for the first
    time, I was really to behold her.... Could it be Theresa, after
    all, this tangle of subdued turbulences? Let no one suppose
    that it is an easy thing to bear, the relentlessly lucid
    understanding that I then first exercised; or that, in its
    first enfranchisement, the timid vision does not yearn for its
    old screens and mists.
Suddenly, as Theresa sat there, her head, filled with its
    tender thoughts of me, held in her gentle hands, I felt Allan's
    step on the carpeted stair outside. Theresa felt it,
    too,—but how? for it was not audible. She gave a start,
    swept the black envelopes out of sight, and pretended to be
    writing in a little book. Then I forgot to watch her any longer
    in my absorption in Allan's coming. It was he, of course, that
    I was awaiting. It was for him that I had made this first
    lonely, frightened effort to return, to recover.... It was not
    that I had supposed he would allow himself to recognize my
    presence, for I had long been sufficiently familiar with his
    hard and fast denials of the invisible. He was so reasonable
    always, so sane—so blindfolded. But I had hoped that
    because of his very rejection of the ether that now contained
    me I could perhaps all the more safely, the more secretly,
    watch him, linger near him. He was near now, very
    near,—but why did Theresa, sitting there in the room that
    had never belonged to her, appropriate for herself his coming?
    It was so manifestly I who had drawn him, I whom he had come to
    seek.
The door was ajar. He knocked softly at it "Are you there,
    Theresa?" he called. He expected to find her, then, there in my
    room? I shrank back, fearing, almost, to stay.
"I shall have finished in a moment," Theresa told him, and
    he sat down to wait for her.
No spirit still unreleased can understand the pang that I
    felt with Allan sitting almost within my touch. Almost
    irresistibly the wish beset me to let him for an instant feel
    my nearness. Then I checked myself, remembering—oh,
    absurd, piteous human fears!—that my too unguarded
    closeness might alarm him. It was not so remote a time that I
    myself had known them, those blind, uncouth timidities. I came,
    therefore, somewhat nearer—but I did not touch him. I
    merely leaned toward him and with incredible softness whispered
    his name. That much I could not have forborne; the spell of
    life was still too strong in me.
But it gave him no comfort, no delight. "Theresa!" he
    called, in a voice dreadful with alarm—and in that
    instant the last veil fell, and desperately, scarce
    believingly, I beheld how it stood between them, those two.
She turned to him that gentle look of hers.
"Forgive me," came from him hoarsely. "But I had suddenly
    the most—unaccountable sensation. Can there be too many
    windows open? There is such a—chill—about."
"There are no windows open," Theresa assured him. "I took
    care to shut out the chill. You are not well, Allan!"
"Perhaps not." He embraced the suggestion. "And yet I feel
    no illness apart from this abominable sensation that
    persists—persists.... Theresa, you must tell me: do I
    fancy it, or do you, too, feel—something—strange
    here?"
"Oh, there is something very strange here," she half sobbed.
    "There always will be."
"Good heavens, child, I didn't mean that!" He rose and stood
    looking about him. "I know, of course, that you have your
    beliefs, and I respect them, but you know equally well that I
    have nothing of the sort! So—don't let us conjure up
    anything inexplicable."
I stayed impalpably, imponderably near him. Wretched and
    bereft though I was, I could not have left him while he stood
    denying me.
"What I mean," he went on, in his low, distinct voice, "is a
    special, an almost ominous sense of cold. Upon my soul,
    Theresa,"—he paused—"if I were
    superstitious, if I were a woman, I should probably
    imagine it to seem—a presence!"
He spoke the last word very faintly, but Theresa shrank from
    it nevertheless.
"Don't say that, Allan!" she cried out. "Don't
    think it, I beg of you! I've tried so hard myself not to think
    it—and you must help me. You know it is only perturbed,
    uneasy spirits that wander. With her it is quite different. She
    has always been so happy—she must still be."
I listened, stunned, to Theresa's sweet dogmatism. From what
    blind distances came her confident misapprehensions, how dense,
    both for her and for Allan, was the separating vapor!
Allan frowned. "Don't take me literally, Theresa," he
    explained; and I, who a moment before had almost touched him,
    now held myself aloof and heard him with a strange untried
    pity, new born in me. "I'm not speaking of what you
    call—spirits. It's something much more terrible." He
    allowed his head to sink heavily on his chest. "If I did not
    positively know that I had never done her any harm, I should
    suppose myself to be suffering from guilt, from remorse....
    Theresa, you know better than I, perhaps. Was she content,
    always? Did she believe in me?"
"Believe in you?—when she knew you to be so
    good!—when you adored her!"
"She thought that? She said it? Then what in Heaven's name
    ails me?—unless it is all as you believe, Theresa, and
    she knows now what she didn't know then, poor dear, and
    minds——"
"Minds what? What do you mean, Allan?"
I, who with my perhaps illegitimate advantage saw so clear,
    knew that he had not meant to tell her: I did him that justice,
    even in my first jealousy. If I had not tortured him so by
    clinging near him, he would not have told her. But the moment
    came, and overflowed, and he did tell her—passionate,
    tumultuous story that it was. During all our life together,
    Allan's and mine, he had spared me, had kept me wrapped in the
    white cloak of an unblemished loyalty. But it would have been
    kinder, I now bitterly thought, if, like many husbands, he had
    years ago found for the story he now poured forth some
    clandestine listener; I should not have known. But he was
    faithful and good, and so he waited till I, mute and chained,
    was there to hear him. So well did I know him, as I thought, so
    thoroughly had he once been mine, that I saw it in his eyes,
    heard it in his voice, before the words came. And yet, when it
    came, it lashed me with the whips of an unbearable humiliation.
    For I, his wife, had not known how greatly he could love.
And that Theresa, soft little traitor, should, in her still
    way, have cared too! Where was the iron in her, I moaned within
    my stricken spirit, where the steadfastness? From the moment he
    bade her, she turned her soft little petals up to him—and
    my last delusion was spent. It was intolerable; and none the
    less so that in another moment she had, prompted by some
    belated thought of me, renounced him. Allan was hers, yet she
    put him from her; and it was my part to watch them both.
Then in the anguish of it all I remembered, awkward,
    untutored spirit that I was, that I now had the Great Recourse.
    Whatever human things were unbearable, I had no need to bear. I
    ceased, therefore, to make the effort that kept me with them.
    The pitiless poignancy was dulled, the sounds and the light
    ceased, the lovers faded from me, and again I was mercifully
    drawn into the dim, infinite spaces.

There followed a period whose length I cannot measure and
    during which I was able to make no progress in the difficult,
    dizzying experience of release. "Earth-bound" my jealousy
    relentlessly kept me. Though my two dear ones had forsworn each
    other, I could not trust them, for theirs seemed to me an
    affectation of a more than mortal magnanimity. Without a
    ghostly sentinel to prick them with sharp fears and
    recollections, who could believe that they would keep to it? Of
    the efficacy of my own vigilance, so long as I might choose to
    exercise it, I could have no doubt, for I had by this time come
    to have a dreadful exultation in the new power that lived in
    me. Repeated delicate experiment had taught me how a touch or a
    breath, a wish or a whisper, could control Allan's acts, could
    keep him from Theresa. I could manifest myself as palely, as
    transiently, as a thought. I could produce the merest necessary
    flicker, like the shadow of a just-opened leaf, on his
    trembling, tortured consciousness. And these unrealized
    perceptions of me he interpreted, as I had known that he would,
    as his soul's inevitable penance. He had come to believe that
    he had done evil in silently loving Theresa all these years,
    and it was my vengeance to allow him to believe this, to prod
    him ever to believe it afresh.
I am conscious that this frame of mind was not continuous in
    me. For I remember, too, that when Allan and Theresa were
    safely apart and sufficiently miserable I loved them as dearly
    as I ever had, more dearly perhaps. For it was impossible that
    I should not perceive, in my new emancipation, that they were,
    each of them, something more and greater than the two beings I
    had once ignorantly pictured them. For years they had practiced
    a selflessness of which I could once scarcely have conceived,
    and which even now I could only admire without entering into
    its mystery. While I had lived solely for myself, these two
    divine creatures had lived exquisitely for me. They had granted
    me everything, themselves nothing. For my undeserving sake
    their lives had been a constant torment of renunciation—a
    torment they had not sought to alleviate by the exchange of a
    single glance of understanding. There were even marvelous
    moments when, from the depths of my newly informed heart, I
    pitied them—poor creatures, who, withheld from the
    infinite solaces that I had come to know, were still utterly
    within that


Shell of sense
So frail, so piteously contrived for pain.


Within it, yes; yet exercising qualities that so sublimely
    transcended it. Yet the shy, hesitating compassion that thus
    had birth in me was far from being able to defeat the earlier,
    earthlier emotion. The two, I recognized, were in a sort of
    conflict; and I, regarding it, assumed that the conflict would
    never end; that for years, as Allan and Theresa reckoned time,
    I should be obliged to withhold myself from the great spaces
    and linger suffering, grudging, shamed, where they
    lingered.

It can never have been explained, I suppose, what, to
    devitalized perception such as mine, the contact of mortal
    beings with each other appears to be. Once to have exercised
    this sense-freed perception is to realize that the gift of
    prophecy, although the subject of such frequent marvel, is no
    longer mysterious. The merest glance of our sensitive and
    uncloyed vision can detect the strength of the relation between
    two beings, and therefore instantly calculate its duration. If
    you see a heavy weight suspended from a slender string, you can
    know, without any wizardry, that in a few moments the string
    will snap; well, such, if you admit the analogy, is prophecy,
    is foreknowledge. And it was thus that I saw it with Theresa
    and Allan. For it was perfectly visible to me that they would
    very little longer have the strength to preserve, near each
    other, the denuded impersonal relation that they, and that I,
    behind them, insisted on; and that they would have to separate.
    It was my sister, perhaps the more sensitive, who first
    realized this. It had now become possible for me to observe
    them almost constantly, the effort necessary to visit them had
    so greatly diminished; so that I watched her, poor, anguished
    girl, prepare to leave him. I saw each reluctant movement that
    she made. I saw her eyes, worn from self-searching; I heard her
    step grown timid from inexplicable fears; I entered her very
    heart and heard its pitiful, wild beating. And still I did not
    interfere.
For at this time I had a wonderful, almost demoniacal sense
    of disposing of matters to suit my own selfish will. At any
    moment I could have checked their miseries, could have restored
    happiness and peace. Yet it gave me, and I could weep to admit
    it, a monstrous joy to know that Theresa thought she was
    leaving Allan of her own free intention, when it was I who was
    contriving, arranging, insisting.... And yet she wretchedly
    felt my presence near her; I am certain of that.
A few days before the time of her intended departure my
    sister told Allan that she must speak with him after dinner.
    Our beautiful old house branched out from a circular hall with
    great arched doors at either end; and it was through the rear
    doorway that always in summer, after dinner, we passed out into
    the garden adjoining. As usual, therefore, when the hour came,
    Theresa led the way. That dreadful daytime brilliance that in
    my present state I found so hard to endure was now becoming
    softer. A delicate, capricious twilight breeze danced
    inconsequently through languidly whispering leaves. Lovely pale
    flowers blossomed like little moons in the dusk, and over them
    the breath of mignonette hung heavily. It was a perfect
    place—and it had so long been ours, Allan's and mine. It
    made me restless and a little wicked that those two should be
    there together now.
For a little they walked about together, speaking of common,
    daily things. Then suddenly Theresa burst out:
"I am going away, Allan. I have stayed to do everything that
    needed to be done. Now your mother will be here to care for
    you, and it is time for me to go."
He stared at her and stood still. Theresa had been there so
    long, she so definitely, to his mind, belonged there. And she
    was, as I also had jealously known, so lovely there, the small,
    dark, dainty creature, in the old hall, on the wide staircases,
    in the garden.... Life there without Theresa, even the
    intentionally remote, the perpetually renounced
    Theresa—he had not dreamed of it, he could not, so
    suddenly, conceive of it.
"Sit here," he said, and drew her down beside him on a
    bench, "and tell me what it means, why you are going. Is it
    because of something that I have been—have done?"
She hesitated. I wondered if she would dare tell him. She
    looked out and away from him, and he waited long for her to
    speak.
The pale stars were sliding into their places. The
    whispering of the leaves was almost hushed. All about them it
    was still and shadowy and sweet. It was that wonderful moment
    when, for lack of a visible horizon, the not yet darkened world
    seems infinitely greater—a moment when anything can
    happen, anything be believed in. To me, watching, listening,
    hovering, there came a dreadful purpose and a dreadful courage.
    Suppose for one moment, Theresa should not only feel, but
    see me—would she dare to tell him then?
There came a brief space of terrible effort, all my
    fluttering, uncertain forces strained to the utmost. The
    instant of my struggle was endlessly long and the transition
    seemed to take place outside me—as one sitting in a
    train, motionless, sees the leagues of earth float by. And
    then, in a bright, terrible flash I knew I had achieved
    it—I had attained visibility. Shuddering,
    insubstantial, but luminously apparent, I stood there before
    them. And for the instant that I maintained the visible state I
    looked straight into Theresa's soul.
She gave a cry. And then, thing of silly, cruel impulses
    that I was, I saw what I had done. The very thing that I wished
    to avert I had precipitated. For Allan, in his sudden terror
    and pity, had bent and caught her in his arms. For the first
    time they were together; and it was I who had brought them.
Then, to his whispered urging to tell the reason of her cry,
    Theresa said:
"Frances was here. You did not see her, standing there,
    under the lilacs, with no smile on her face?"
"My dear, my dear!" was all that Allan said. I had so long
    now lived invisibly with them, he knew that she was right.
"I suppose you know what it means?" she asked him,
    calmly.
"Dear Theresa," Allan said, slowly, "if you and I should go
    away somewhere, could we not evade all this ghostliness? And
    will you come with me?"
"Distance would not banish her," my sister confidently
    asserted. And then she said, softly: "Have you thought what a
    lonely, awesome thing it must be to be so newly dead? Pity her,
    Allan. We who are warm and alive should pity her. She loves you
    still,—that is the meaning of it all, you know—and
    she wants us to understand that for that reason we must keep
    apart. Oh, it was so plain in her white face as she stood
    there. And you did not see her?"
"It was your face that I saw," Allan solemnly told
    her—oh, how different he had grown from the Allan that I
    had known!—"and yours is the only face that I shall ever
    see." And again he drew her to him.
She sprang from him. "You are defying her, Allan!" she
    cried. "And you must not. It is her right to keep us apart, if
    she wishes. It must be as she insists. I shall go, as I told
    you. And, Allan, I beg of you, leave me the courage to do as
    she demands!"
They stood facing each other in the deep dusk, and the
    wounds that I had dealt them gaped red and accusing. "We must
    pity her," Theresa had said. And as I remembered that
    extraordinary speech, and saw the agony in her face, and the
    greater agony in Allan's, there came the great irreparable
    cleavage between mortality and me. In a swift, merciful flame
    the last of my mortal emotions—gross and tenacious they
    must have been—was consumed. My cold grasp of Allan
    loosened and a new unearthly love of him bloomed in my
    heart.
I was now, however, in a difficulty with which my experience
    in the newer state was scarcely sufficient to deal. How could I
    make it plain to Allan and Theresa that I wished to bring them
    together, to heal the wounds that I had made?
Pityingly, remorsefully, I lingered near them all that night
    and the next day. And by that time had brought myself to the
    point of a great determination. In the little time that was
    left, before Theresa should be gone and Allan bereft and
    desolate, I saw the one way that lay open to me to convince
    them of my acquiescence in their destiny.
In the deepest darkness and silence of the next night I made
    a greater effort than it will ever be necessary for me to make
    again. When they think of me, Allan and Theresa, I pray now
    that they will recall what I did that night, and that my
    thousand frustrations and selfishnesses may shrivel and be
    blown from their indulgent memories.
Yet the following morning, as she had planned, Theresa
    appeared at breakfast dressed for her journey. Above in her
    room there were the sounds of departure. They spoke little
    during the brief meal, but when it was ended Allan said:
"Theresa, there is half an hour before you go. Will you come
    upstairs with me? I had a dream that I must tell you of."
"Allan!" She looked at him, frightened, but went with him.
    "It was of Frances you dreamed," she said, quietly, as they
    entered the library together.
"Did I say it was a dream? But I was awake—thoroughly
    awake. I had not been sleeping well, and I heard, twice, the
    striking of the clock. And as I lay there, looking out at the
    stars, and thinking—thinking of you, Theresa,—she
    came to me, stood there before me, in my room. It was no
    sheeted specter, you understand; it was Frances, literally she.
    In some inexplicable fashion I seemed to be aware that she
    wanted to make me know something, and I waited, watching her
    face. After a few moments it came. She did not speak,
    precisely. That is, I am sure I heard no sound. Yet the words
    that came from her were definite enough. She said: 'Don't let
    Theresa leave you. Take her and keep her.' Then she went away.
    Was that a dream?"
"I had not meant to tell you," Theresa eagerly answered,
    "but now I must. It is too wonderful. What time did your clock
    strike, Allan?"
"One, the last time."
"Yes; it was then that I awoke. And she had been with me. I
    had not seen her, but her arm had been about me and her kiss
    was on my cheek. Oh. I knew; it was unmistakable. And the sound
    of her voice was with me."
"Then she bade you, too——"
"Yes, to stay with you. I am glad we told each other." She
    smiled tearfully and began to fasten her wrap.
"But you are not going—now!" Allan cried.
    "You know that you cannot, now that she has asked you to
    stay."
"Then you believe, as I do, that it was she?" Theresa
    demanded.
"I can never understand, but I know," he answered her. "And
    now you will not go?"

I am freed. There will be no further semblance of me in my
    old home, no sound of my voice, no dimmest echo of my earthly
    self. They have no further need of me, the two that I have
    brought together. Theirs is the fullest joy that the dwellers
    in the shell of sense can know. Mine is the transcendent joy of
    the unseen spaces.

The Woman at Seven Brothers
By WILBUR DANIEL STEELE

From Land's End, by Wilbur Daniel Steele.
        Copyright, 1908, by Harper and Brothers. By permission of
        the publishers and Wilbur Daniel Steele.

I tell you sir, I was innocent. I didn't know any more about
    the world at twenty-two than some do at twelve. My uncle and
    aunt in Duxbury brought me up strict; I studied hard in high
    school, I worked hard after hours, and I went to church twice
    on Sundays, and I can't see it's right to put me in a place
    like this, with crazy people. Oh yes, I know they're
    crazy—you can't tell me. As for what they said
    in court about finding her with her husband, that's the
    Inspector's lie, sir, because he's down on me, and wants to
    make it look like my fault.
No, sir, I can't say as I thought she was handsome—not
    at first. For one thing, her lips were too thin and white, and
    her color was bad. I'll tell you a fact, sir; that first day I
    came off to the Light I was sitting on my cot in the store-room
    (that's where the assistant keeper sleeps at the Seven
    Brothers), as lonesome as I could be, away from home for the
    first time, and the water all around me, and, even though it
    was a calm day, pounding enough on the ledge to send a kind of
    a woom-woom-woom whining up through all that solid
    rock of the tower. And when old Fedderson poked his head down
    from the living-room with the sunshine above making a kind of
    bright frame around his hair and whiskers, to give me a cheery,
    "Make yourself to home, son!" I remember I said to myself:
    "He's all right. I'll get along with him. But
    his wife's enough to sour milk." That was queer, because she
    was so much under him in age—'long about twenty-eight or
    so, and him nearer fifty. But that's what I said, sir.
Of course that feeling wore off, same as any feeling will
    wear off sooner or later in a place like the Seven Brothers.
    Cooped up in a place like that you come to know folks so well
    that you forget what they do look like. There was a
    long time I never noticed her, any more than you'd notice the
    cat. We used to sit of an evening around the table, as if you
    were Fedderson there, and me here, and her somewhere back
    there, in the rocker, knitting. Fedderson would be working on
    his Jacob's-ladder, and I'd be reading. He'd been working on
    that Jacob's-ladder a year, I guess, and every time the
    Inspector came off with the tender he was so astonished to see
    how good that ladder was that the old man would go to work and
    make it better. That's all he lived for.
If I was reading, as I say, I daren't take my eyes off the
    book, or Fedderson had me. And then he'd begin—what the
    Inspector said about him. How surprised the member of the board
    had been, that time, to see everything so clean about the
    light. What the Inspector had said about Fedderson's being
    stuck here in a second-class light—best keeper on the
    coast. And so on and so on, till either he or I had to go aloft
    and have a look at the wicks.
He'd been there twenty-three years, all told, and he'd got
    used to the feeling that he was kept down unfair—so used
    to it, I guess, that he fed on it, and told himself how folks
    ashore would talk when he was dead and gone—best keeper
    on the coast—kept down unfair. Not that he said that to
    me. No, he was far too loyal and humble and respectful, doing
    his duty without complaint, as anybody could see.
And all that time, night after night, hardly ever a word out
    of the woman. As I remember it, she seemed more like a piece of
    furniture than anything else—not even a very good cook,
    nor over and above tidy. One day, when he and I were trimming
    the lamp, he passed the remark that his first wife
    used to dust the lens and take a pride in it. Not that he said
    a word against Anna, though. He never said a word against any
    living mortal; he was too upright.
I don't know how it came about; or, rather, I do
    know, but it was so sudden, and so far away from my thoughts,
    that it shocked me, like the world turned over. It was at
    prayers. That night I remember Fedderson was uncommon
    long-winded. We'd had a batch of newspapers out by the tender,
    and at such times the old man always made a long watch of it,
    getting the world straightened out. For one thing, the United
    States minister to Turkey was dead. Well, from him and his
    soul, Fedderson got on to Turkey and the Presbyterian college
    there, and from that to heathen in general. He rambled on and
    on, like the surf on the ledge, woom-woom-woom, never
    coming to an end.
You know how you'll be at prayers sometimes. My mind
    strayed. I counted the canes in the chair-seat where I was
    kneeling; I plaited a corner of the table-cloth between my
    fingers for a spell, and by and by my eyes went wandering up
    the back of the chair.
The woman, sir, was looking at me. Her chair was back to
    mine, close, and both our heads were down in the shadow under
    the edge of the table, with Fedderson clear over on the other
    side by the stove. And there were her two eyes hunting mine
    between the spindles in the shadow. You won't believe me, sir,
    but I tell you I felt like jumping to my feet and running out
    of the room—it was so queer.
I don't know what her husband was praying about after that.
    His voice didn't mean anything, no more than the seas on the
    ledge away down there. I went to work to count the canes in the
    seat again, but all my eyes were in the top of my head. It got
    so I couldn't stand it. We were at the Lord's prayer, saying it
    singsong together, when I had to look up again. And there her
    two eyes were, between the spindles, hunting mine. Just then
    all of us were saying, "Forgive us our trespasses—" I
    thought of it afterward.
When we got up she was turned the other way, but I couldn't
    help seeing her cheeks were red. It was terrible. I wondered if
    Fedderson would notice, though I might have known he
    wouldn't—not him. He was in too much of a hurry to get at
    his Jacob's-ladder, and then he had to tell me for the tenth
    time what the Inspector'd said that day about getting him
    another light—Kingdom Come, maybe, he said.
I made some excuse or other and got away. Once in the
    store-room, I sat down on my cot and stayed there a long time,
    feeling queerer than anything. I read a chapter in the Bible, I
    don't know why. After I'd got my boots off I sat with them in
    my hands for as much as an hour, I guess, staring at the
    oil-tank and its lopsided shadow on the wall. I tell you, sir,
    I was shocked. I was only twenty-two remember, and I was
    shocked and horrified.
And when I did turn in, finally, I didn't sleep at all well.
    Two or three times I came to, sitting straight up in bed. Once
    I got up and opened the outer door to have a look. The water
    was like glass, dim, without a breath of wind, and the moon
    just going down. Over on the black shore I made out two lights
    in a village, like a pair of eyes watching. Lonely? My, yes!
    Lonely and nervous. I had a horror of her, sir. The dinghy-boat
    hung on its davits just there in front of the door, and for a
    minute I had an awful hankering to climb into it, lower away,
    and row off, no matter where. It sounds foolish.
Well, it seemed foolish next morning, with the sun shining
    and everything as usual—Fedderson sucking his pen and
    wagging his head over his eternal "log," and his wife down in
    the rocker with her head in the newspaper, and her breakfast
    work still waiting. I guess that jarred it out of me more than
    anything else—sight of her slouched down there, with her
    stringy, yellow hair and her dusty apron and the pale back of
    her neck, reading the Society Notes. Society Notes!
    Think of it! For the first time since I came to Seven Brothers
    I wanted to laugh.
I guess I did laugh when I went aloft to clean the lamp and
    found everything so free and breezy, gulls flying high and
    little whitecaps making under a westerly. It was like feeling a
    big load dropped off your shoulders. Fedderson came up with his
    dust-rag and cocked his head at me.
"What's the matter, Ray?" said he.
"Nothing," said I. And then I couldn't help it. "Seems kind
    of out of place for society notes," said I, "out here at Seven
    Brothers."
He was the other side of the lens, and when he looked at me
    he had a thousand eyes, all sober. For a minute I thought he
    was going on dusting, but then he came out and sat down on a
    sill.
"Sometimes," said he, "I get to thinking it may be a mite
    dull for her out here. She's pretty young, Ray. Not much more'n
    a girl, hardly."
"Not much more'n a girl!" It gave me a turn, sir,
    as though I'd seen my aunt in short dresses.
"It's a good home for her, though," he went on slow. "I've
    seen a lot worse ashore, Ray. Of course if I could get a shore
    light——"
"Kingdom Come's a shore light."
He looked at me out of his deep-set eyes, and then he turned
    them around the light-room, where he'd been so long.
"No," said he, wagging his head. "It ain't for such as
    me."
I never saw so humble a man.
"But look here," he went on, more cheerful. "As I was
    telling her just now, a month from yesterday's our fourth
    anniversary, and I'm going to take her ashore for the day and
    give her a holiday—new hat and everything. A girl wants a
    mite of excitement now and then, Ray."
There it was again, that "girl." It gave me the fidgets,
    sir. I had to do something about it. It's close quarters for
    last names in a light, and I'd taken to calling him Uncle Matt
    soon after I came. Now, when I was at table that noon I spoke
    over to where she was standing by the stove, getting him
    another help of chowder.
"I guess I'll have some, too, Aunt Anna," said I,
    matter of fact.
She never said a word nor gave a sign—just stood there
    kind of round-shouldered, dipping the chowder. And that night
    at prayers I hitched my chair around the table, with its back
    the other way.
You get awful lazy in a lighthouse, some ways. No matter how
    much tinkering you've got, there's still a lot of time and
    there's such a thing as too much reading. The changes in
    weather get monotonous, too, by and by; the light burns the
    same on a thick night as it does on a fair one. Of course
    there's the ships, north-bound, south-bound—wind-jammers,
    freighters, passenger-boats full of people. In the watches at
    night you can see their lights go by, and wonder what they are,
    how they're laden, where they'll fetch up, and all. I used to
    do that almost every evening when it was my first watch,
    sitting out on the walk-around up there with my legs hanging
    over the edge and my chin propped on the railing—lazy.
    The Boston boat was the prettiest to see, with her three tiers
    of port-holes lit, like a string of pearls wrapped round and
    round a woman's neck—well away, too, for the ledge must
    have made a couple of hundred fathoms off the Light, like a
    white dog-tooth of a breaker, even on the darkest night.
Well, I was lolling there one night, as I say, watching the
    Boston boat go by, not thinking of anything special, when I
    heard the door on the other side of the tower open and
    footsteps coming around to me.
By and by I nodded toward the boat and passed the remark
    that she was fetching in uncommon close to-night. No answer. I
    made nothing of that, for oftentimes Fedderson wouldn't answer,
    and after I'd watched the lights crawling on through the dark a
    spell, just to make conversation I said I guessed there'd be a
    bit of weather before long.
"I've noticed," said I, "when there's weather coming on, and
    the wind in the northeast, you can hear the orchestra playing
    aboard of her just over there. I make it out now. Do you?"
"Yes. Oh—yes—! I hear it all
    right!"
You can imagine I started. It wasn't him, but her.
    And there was something in the way she said that speech,
    sir—something—well—unnatural. Like a hungry
    animal snapping at a person's hand.
I turned and looked at her sidewise. She was standing by the
    railing, leaning a little outward, the top of her from the
    waist picked out bright by the lens behind her. I didn't know
    what in the world to say, and yet I had a feeling I ought not
    to sit there mum.
"I wonder," said I, "what that captain's thinking of,
    fetching in so handy to-night. It's no way. I tell you, if
    'twasn't for this light, she'd go to work and pile up on the
    ledge some thick night——"
She turned at that and stared straight into the lens. I
    didn't like the look of her face. Somehow, with its edges cut
    hard all around and its two eyes closed down to slits, like a
    cat's, it made a kind of mask.
"And then," I went on, uneasy enough—"and then where'd
    all their music be of a sudden, and their goings-on and their
    singing——"
"And dancing!" She clipped me off so quick it took my
    breath.
"D-d-dancing?" said I.
"That's dance-music," said she. She was looking at the boat
    again.
"How do you know?" I felt I had to keep on talking.
Well, sir—she laughed. I looked at her. She had on a
    shawl of some stuff or other that shined in the light; she had
    it pulled tight around her with her two hands in front at her
    breast, and I saw her shoulders swaying in tune.
"How do I know?" she cried. Then she laughed again,
    the same kind of a laugh. It was queer, sir, to see her, and to
    hear her. She turned, as quick as that, and leaned toward me.
    "Don't you know how to dance, Ray?" said she.
"N-no," I managed, and I was going to say "Aunt
    Anna," but the thing choked in my throat.
I tell you she was looking square at me all the time with
    her two eyes and moving with the music as if she didn't know
    it. By heavens, sir, it came over me of a sudden that she
    wasn't so bad-looking, after all. I guess I must have sounded
    like a fool.
"You—you see," said I, "she's cleared the rip there
    now, and the music's gone. You—you hear?"
"Yes," said she, turning back slow. "That's where it stops
    every night—night after night—it stops just
    there—at the rip."
When she spoke again her voice was different. I never heard
    the like of it, thin and taut as a thread. It made me shiver,
    sir.
"I hate 'em!" That's what she said. "I hate 'em all. I'd
    like to see 'em dead. I'd love to see 'em torn apart on the
    rocks, night after night. I could bathe my hands in their
    blood, night after night."
And do you know, sir, I saw it with my own eyes, her hands
    moving in each other above the rail. But it was her voice,
    though. I didn't know what to do, or what to say, so I poked my
    head through the railing and looked down at the water. I don't
    think I'm a coward, sir, but it was like a
    cold—ice-cold—hand, taking hold of my beating
    heart.
When I looked up finally, she was gone. By and by I went in
    and had a look at the lamp, hardly knowing what I was about.
    Then, seeing by my watch it was time for the old man to come on
    duty, I started to go below. In the Seven Brothers, you
    understand, the stair goes down in a spiral through a well
    against the south wall and first there's the door to the
    keeper's room and then you come to another, and that's the
    living-room, and then down to the store-room. And at night, if
    you don't carry a lantern, it's as black as the pit.
Well, down I went, sliding my hand along the rail, and as
    usual I stopped to give a rap on the keeper's door, in case he
    was taking a nap after supper. Sometimes he did.
I stood there, blind as a bat, with my mind still up on the
    walk-around. There was no answer to my knock. I hadn't expected
    any. Just from habit, and with my right foot already hanging
    down for the next step, I reached out to give the door one more
    tap for luck.
Do you know, sir, my hand didn't fetch up on anything. The
    door had been there a second before, and now the door wasn't
    there. My hand just went on going through the dark, on and on,
    and I didn't seem to have sense or power enough to stop it.
    There didn't seem any air in the well to breathe, and my ears
    were drumming to the surf—that's how scared I was. And
    then my hand touched the flesh of a face, and something in the
    dark said, "Oh!" no louder than a sigh.
Next thing I knew, sir, I was down in the living-room, warm
    and yellow-lit, with Fedderson cocking his head at me across
    the table, where he was at that eternal Jacob's-ladder of
    his.
"What's the matter, Ray?" said he. "Lord's sake, Ray!"
"Nothing," said I. Then I think I told him I was sick. That
    night I wrote a letter to A.L. Peters, the grain-dealer in
    Duxbury, asking for a job—even though it wouldn't go
    ashore for a couple of weeks, just the writing of it made me
    feel better.
It's hard to tell you how those two weeks went by. I don't
    know why, but I felt like hiding in a corner all the time. I
    had to come to meals, but I didn't look at her, though, not
    once, unless it was by accident. Fedderson thought I was still
    ailing and nagged me to death with advice and so on. One thing
    I took care not to do, I can tell you, and that was to knock on
    his door till I'd made certain he wasn't below in the
    living-room—though I was tempted to.
Yes, sir; that's a queer thing, and I wouldn't tell you if I
    hadn't set out to give you the truth. Night after night,
    stopping there on the landing in that black pit, the air gone
    out of my lungs and the surf drumming in my ears and sweat
    standing cold on my neck—and one hand lifting up in the
    air—God forgive me, sir! Maybe I did wrong not to look at
    her more, drooping about her work in her gingham apron, with
    her hair stringing.
When the Inspector came off with the tender, that time, I
    told him I was through. That's when he took the dislike to me,
    I guess, for he looked at me kind of sneering and said, soft as
    I was, I'd have to put up with it till next relief. And then,
    said he, there'd be a whole house-cleaning at Seven Brothers,
    because he'd gotten Fedderson the berth at Kingdom Come. And
    with that he slapped the old man on the back.
I wish you could have seen Fedderson, sir. He sat down on my
    cot as if his knees had given 'way. Happy? You'd think he'd be
    happy, with all his dreams come true. Yes, he was happy,
    beaming all over—for a minute. Then, sir, he began to
    shrivel up. It was like seeing a man cut down in his prime
    before your eyes. He began to wag his head.
"No," said he. "No, no; it's not for such as me. I'm good
    enough for Seven Brothers, and that's all, Mr. Bayliss. That's
    all."
And for all the Inspector could say, that's what he stuck
    to. He'd figured himself a martyr so many years, nursed that
    injustice like a mother with her first-born, sir; and now in
    his old age, so to speak, they weren't to rob him of it.
    Fedderson was going to wear out his life in a second-class
    light, and folks would talk—that was his idea. I heard
    him hailing down as the tender was casting off:
"See you to-morrow, Mr. Bayliss. Yep. Coming ashore with the
    wife for a spree. Anniversary. Yep."
But he didn't sound much like a spree. They had,
    robbed him, partly, after all. I wondered what she
    thought about it. I didn't know till night. She didn't show up
    to supper, which Fedderson and I got ourselves—had a
    headache, be said. It was my early watch. I went and lit up and
    came back to read a spell. He was finishing off the
    Jacob's-ladder, and thoughtful, like a man that's lost a
    treasure. Once or twice I caught him looking about the room on
    the sly. It was pathetic, sir.
Going up the second time, I stepped out on the walk-around
    to have a look at things. She was there on the seaward side,
    wrapped in that silky thing. A fair sea was running across the
    ledge and it was coming on a little thick—not too thick.
    Off to the right the Boston boat was blowing,
    whroom-whroom! Creeping up on us, quarter-speed. There
    was another fellow behind her, and a fisherman's conch farther
    offshore.
I don't know why, but I stopped beside her and leaned on the
    rail. She didn't appear to notice me, one way or another. We
    stood and we stood, listening to the whistles, and the longer
    we stood the more it got on my nerves, her not noticing me. I
    suppose she'd been too much on my mind lately. I began to be
    put out. I scraped my feet. I coughed. By and by I said out
    loud:
"Look here, I guess I better get out the fog-horn and give
    those fellows a toot."
"Why?" said she, without moving her head—calm as
    that.
"Why?" It gave me a turn, sir. For a minute I
    stared at her. "Why? Because if she don't pick up this light
    before very many minutes she'll be too close in to
    wear—tide'll have her on the rocks—that's why!"
I couldn't see her face, but I could see one of her silk
    shoulders lift a little, like a shrug. And there I kept on
    staring at her, a dumb one, sure enough. I know what brought me
    to was hearing the Boston boat's three sharp toots as she
    picked up the light—mad as anything—and swung her
    helm a-port. I turned away from her, sweat stringing down my
    face, and walked around to the door. It was just as well, too,
    for the feed-pipe was plugged in the lamp and the wicks were
    popping. She'd have been out in another five minutes, sir.
When I'd finished, I saw that woman standing in the doorway.
    Her eyes were bright. I had a horror of her, sir, a living
    horror.
"If only the light had been out," said she, low and
    sweet.
"God forgive you," said I. "You don't know what you're
    saying."
She went down the stair into the well, winding out of sight,
    and as long as I could see her, her eyes were watching mine.
    When I went, myself, after a few minutes, she was waiting for
    me on that first landing, standing still in the dark. She took
    hold of my hand, though I tried to get it away.
"Good-by," said she in my ear.
"Good-by?" said I. I didn't understand.
"You heard what he said to-day—about Kingdom Come? Be
    it so—on his own head. I'll never come back here. Once I
    set foot ashore—I've got friends in Brightonboro,
    Ray."
I got away from her and started on down. But I stopped.
    "Brightonboro?" I whispered back. "Why do you tell
    me?" My throat was raw to the words, like a sore.
"So you'd know," said she.
Well, sir, I saw them off next morning, down that new
    Jacob's-ladder into the dinghy-boat, her in a dress of blue
    velvet and him in his best cutaway and derby—rowing away,
    smaller and smaller, the two of them. And then I went back and
    sat on my cot, leaving the door open and the ladder still
    hanging down the wall, along with the boat-falls.
I don't know whether it was relief, or what. I suppose I
    must have been worked up even more than I'd thought those past
    weeks, for now it was all over I was like a rag. I got down on
    my knees, sir, and prayed to God for the salvation of my soul,
    and when I got up and climbed to the living-room it was half
    past twelve by the clock. There was rain on the windows and the
    sea was running blue-black under the sun. I'd sat there all
    that time not knowing there was a squall.
It was funny; the glass stood high, but those black squalls
    kept coming and going all afternoon, while I was at work up in
    the light-room. And I worked hard, to keep myself busy. First
    thing I knew it was five, and no sign of the boat yet. It began
    to get dim and kind of purplish-gray over the land. The sun was
    down. I lit up, made everything snug, and got out the
    night-glasses to have another look for that boat. He'd said he
    intended to get back before five. No sign. And then, standing
    there, it came over me that of course he wouldn't be coming
    off—he'd be hunting her, poor old fool. It
    looked like I had to stand two men's watches that night.
Never mind. I felt like myself again, even if I hadn't had
    any dinner or supper. Pride came to me that night on the
    walk-around, watching the boats go by—little boats, big
    boats, the Boston boat with all her pearls and her dance-music.
    They couldn't see me; they didn't know who I was; but to the
    last of them, they depended on me. They say a man must
    be born again. Well, I was born again. I breathed deep in the
    wind.
Dawn broke hard and red as a dying coal. I put out the light
    and started to go below. Born again; yes, sir. I felt so good I
    whistled in the well, and when I came to the first door on the
    stair I reached out in the dark to give it a rap for luck. And
    then, sir, the hair prickled all over my scalp, when I found my
    hand just going on and on through the air, the same as it had
    gone once before, and all of a sudden I wanted to yell, because
    I thought I was going to touch flesh. It's funny what their
    just forgetting to close their door did to me, isn't it?
Well, I reached for the latch and pulled it to with a bang
    and ran down as if a ghost was after me. I got up some coffee
    and bread and bacon for breakfast. I drank the coffee. But
    somehow I couldn't eat, all along of that open door. The light
    in the room was blood. I got to thinking. I thought how she'd
    talked about those men, women, and children on the rocks, and
    how she'd made to bathe her hands over the rail. I almost
    jumped out of my chair then; it seemed for a wink she was there
    beside the stove watching me with that queer
    half-smile—really, I seemed to see her for a flash across
    the red table-cloth in the red light of dawn.
"Look here!" said I to myself, sharp enough; and then I gave
    myself a good laugh and went below. There I took a look out of
    the door, which was still open, with the ladder hanging down. I
    made sure to see the poor old fool come pulling around the
    point before very long now.
My boots were hurting a little, and, taking them off, I lay
    down on the cot to rest, and somehow I went to sleep. I had
    horrible dreams. I saw her again standing in that blood-red
    kitchen, and she seemed to be washing her hands, and the surf
    on the ledge was whining up the tower, louder and louder all
    the time, and what it whined was, "Night after
    night—night after night." What woke me was cold water in
    my face.
The store-room was in gloom. That scared me at first; I
    thought night had come, and remembered the light. But then I
    saw the gloom was of a storm. The floor was shining wet, and
    the water in my face was spray, flung up through the open door.
    When I ran to close it, it almost made me dizzy to see the
    gray-and-white breakers marching past. The land was gone; the
    sky shut down heavy overhead; there was a piece of wreckage on
    the back of a swell, and the Jacob's-ladder was carried clean
    away. How that sea had picked up so quick I can't think. I
    looked at my watch and it wasn't four in the afternoon yet.
When I closed the door, sir, it was almost dark in the
    store-room. I'd never been in the Light before in a gale of
    wind. I wondered why I was shivering so, till I found it was
    the floor below me shivering, and the walls and stair. Horrible
    crunchings and grindings ran away up the tower, and now and
    then there was a great thud somewhere, like a cannon-shot in a
    cave. I tell you, sir, I was alone, and I was in a mortal
    fright for a minute or so. And yet I had to get myself
    together. There was the light up there not tended to, and an
    early dark coming on and a heavy night and all, and I had to
    go. And I had to pass that door.
You'll say it's foolish, sir, and maybe it was
    foolish. Maybe it was because I hadn't eaten. But I began
    thinking of that door up there the minute I set foot on the
    stair, and all the way up through that howling dark well I
    dreaded to pass it. I told myself I wouldn't stop. I didn't
    stop. I felt the landing underfoot and I went on, four steps,
    five—and then I couldn't. I turned and went back. I put
    out my hand and it went on into nothing. That door, sir, was
    open again.
I left it be; I went on up to the light-room and set to
    work. It was Bedlam there, sir, screeching Bedlam, but I took
    no notice. I kept my eyes down. I trimmed those seven wicks,
    sir, as neat as ever they were trimmed; I polished the brass
    till it shone, and I dusted the lens. It wasn't till that was
    done that I let myself look back to see who it was standing
    there, half out of sight in the well. It was her, sir.
"Where'd you come from?" I asked. I remember my voice was
    sharp.
"Up Jacob's-ladder," said she, and hers was like the syrup
    of flowers.
I shook my head. I was savage, sir. "The ladder's carried
    away."
"I cast it off," said she, with a smile.
"Then," said I, "you must have come while I was asleep."
    Another thought came on me heavy as a ton of lead. "And where's
    he?" said I. "Where's the boat?"
"He's drowned," said she, as easy as that. "And I let the
    boat go adrift. You wouldn't hear me when I called."
"But look here," said I. "If you came through the
    store-room, why didn't you wake me up? Tell me that!" It sounds
    foolish enough, me standing like a lawyer in court, trying to
    prove she couldn't be there.
She didn't answer for a moment. I guess she sighed, though I
    couldn't hear for the gale, and her eyes grew soft, sir, so
    soft.
"I couldn't," said she. "You looked so peaceful—dear
    one."
My cheeks and neck went hot, sir, as if a warm iron was laid
    on them. I didn't know what to say. I began to stammer, "What
    do you mean—" but she was going back down the stair, out
    of sight. My God sir, and I used not to think she was
    good-looking!
I started to follow her. I wanted to know what she meant.
    Then I said to myself, "If I don't go—if I wait
    here—she'll come back." And I went to the weather side
    and stood looking out of the window. Not that there was much to
    see. It was growing dark, and the Seven Brothers looked like
    the mane of a running horse, a great, vast, white horse running
    into the wind. The air was a-welter with it. I caught one peep
    of a fisherman, lying down flat trying to weather the ledge,
    and I said, "God help them all to-night," and then I went hot
    at sound of that "God."
I was right about her, though. She was back again. I wanted
    her to speak first, before I turned, but she wouldn't. I didn't
    hear her go out; I didn't know what she was up to till I saw
    her coming outside on the walk-around, drenched wet already. I
    pounded on the glass for her to come in and not be a fool; if
    she heard she gave no sign of it.
There she stood, and there I stood watching her. Lord,
    sir—was it just that I'd never had eyes to see? Or are
    there women who bloom? Her clothes were shining on her, like a
    carving, and her hair was let down like a golden curtain
    tossing and streaming in the gale, and there she stood with her
    lips half open, drinking, and her eyes half closed, gazing
    straight away over the Seven Brothers, and her shoulders
    swaying, as if in tune with the wind and water and all the
    ruin. And when I looked at her hands over the rail, sir, they
    were moving in each other as if they bathed, and then I
    remembered, sir.
A cold horror took me. I knew now why she had come back
    again. She wasn't a woman—she was a devil. I turned my
    back on her. I said to myself: "It's time to light up. You've
    got to light up"—like that, over and over, out loud. My
    hand was shivering so I could hardly find a match; and when I
    scratched it, it only flared a second and then went out in the
    back draught from the open door. She was standing in the
    doorway, looking at me. It's queer, sir, but I felt like a
    child caught in mischief.
"I—I—was going to light up," I managed to say,
    finally.
"Why?" said she. No, I can't say it as she did.
"Why?" said I. "My God!"
She came nearer, laughing, as if with pity, low, you know.
    "Your God? And who is your God? What is God? What is anything
    on a night like this?"
I drew back from her. All I could say anything about was the
    light.
"Why not the dark?" said she. "Dark is softer than
    light—tenderer—dearer than light. From the dark up
    here, away up here in the wind and storm, we can watch the
    ships go by, you and I. And you love me so. You've loved me so
    long, Ray."
"I never have!" I struck out at her. "I don't! I don't!"
Her voice was lower than ever, but there was the same
    laughing pity in it. "Oh yes, you have." And she was near me
    again.
"I have?" I yelled. "I'll show you! I'll show you if I
    have!"
I got another match, sir, and scratched it on the brass. I
    gave it to the first wick, the little wick that's inside all
    the others. It bloomed like a yellow flower. "I have?"
    I yelled, and gave it to the next.
Then there was a shadow, and I saw she was leaning beside
    me, her two elbows on the brass, her two arms stretched out
    above the wicks, her bare forearms and wrists and hands. I gave
    a gasp:
"Take care! You'll burn them! For God's
    sake——"
She didn't move or speak. The match burned my fingers and
    went out, and all I could do was stare at those arms of hers,
    helpless. I'd never noticed her arms before. They were rounded
    and graceful and covered with a soft down, like a breath of
    gold. Then I heard her speaking close to my ear.
"Pretty arms," she said. "Pretty arms!"
I turned. Her eyes were fixed on mine. They seemed heavy, as
    if with sleep, and yet between their lids they were two wells,
    deep and deep, and as if they held all the things I'd ever
    thought or dreamed in them. I looked away from them, at her
    lips. Her lips were red as poppies, heavy with redness. They
    moved, and I heard them speaking:
"Poor boy, you love me so, and you want to kiss
    me—don't you?"
"No," said I. But I couldn't turn around. I looked at her
    hair. I'd always thought it was stringy hair. Some hair curls
    naturally with damp, they say, and perhaps that was it, for
    there were pearls of wet on it, and it was thick and shimmering
    around her face, making soft shadows by the temples. There was
    green in it, queer strands of green like braids.
"What is it?" said I.
"Nothing but weed," said she, with that slow, sleepy
    smile.
Somehow or other I felt calmer than I had any time. "Look
    here," said I. "I'm going to light this lamp." I took out a
    match, scratched it, and touched the third wick. The flame ran
    around, bigger than the other two together. But still her arms
    hung there. I bit my lip. "By God, I will!" said I to myself,
    and I lit the fourth.
It was fierce, sir, fierce! And yet those arms never
    trembled. I had to look around at her. Her eyes were still
    looking into mine, so deep and deep, and her red lips were
    still smiling with that queer, sleepy droop; the only thing was
    that tears were raining down her cheeks—big, glowing
    round, jewel tears. It wasn't human, sir. It was like a
    dream.
"Pretty arms," she sighed, and then, as if those words had
    broken something in her heart, there came a great sob bursting
    from her lips. To hear it drove me mad. I reached to drag her
    away, but she was too quick, sir; she cringed from me and
    slipped out from between my hands. It was like she faded away,
    sir, and went down in a bundle, nursing her poor arms and
    mourning over them with those terrible, broken sobs.
The sound of them took the manhood out of me—you'd
    have been the same, sir. I knelt down beside her on the floor
    and covered my face.
"Please!" I moaned. "Please! Please!" That's all I could
    say. I wanted her to forgive me. I reached out a hand, blind,
    for forgiveness, and I couldn't find her anywhere. I had hurt
    her so, and she was afraid of me, of me, sir, who
    loved her so deep it drove me crazy.
I could see her down the stair, though it was dim and my
    eyes were filled with tears. I stumbled after her, crying,
    "Please! Please!" The little wicks I'd lit were blowing in the
    wind from the door and smoking the glass beside them black. One
    went out. I pleaded with them, the same as I would plead with a
    human being. I said I'd be back in a second. I promised. And I
    went on down the stair, crying like a baby because I'd hurt
    her, and she was afraid of me—of me, sir.
She had gone into her room. The door was closed against me
    and I could hear her sobbing beyond it, broken-hearted. My
    heart was broken too. I beat on the door with my palms. I
    begged her to forgive me. I told her I loved her. And all the
    answer was that sobbing in the dark.
And then I lifted the latch and went in, groping, pleading.
    "Dearest—please! Because I love you!"
I heard her speak down near the floor. There wasn't any
    anger in her voice; nothing but sadness and despair.
"No," said she. "You don't love me, Ray. You never
    have."
"I do! I have!"
"No, no," said she, as if she was tired out.
"Where are you?" I was groping for her. I thought, and lit a
    match. She had got to the door and was standing there as if
    ready to fly. I went toward her, and she made me stop. She took
    my breath away. "I hurt your arms," said I, in a dream.
"No," said she, hardly moving her lips. She held them out to
    the match's light for me to look and there was never a scar on
    them—not even that soft, golden down was singed, sir.
    "You can't hurt my body," said she, sad as anything. "Only my
    heart, Ray; my poor heart."
I tell you again, she took my breath away. I lit another
    match. "How can you be so beautiful?" I wondered.
She answered in riddles—but oh, the sadness of her,
    sir.
"Because," said she, "I've always so wanted to be."
"How come your eyes so heavy?" said I.
"Because I've seen so many things I never dreamed of," said
    she.
"How come your hair so thick?"
"It's the seaweed makes it thick," said she smiling queer,
    queer.
"How come seaweed there?"
"Out of the bottom of the sea."
She talked in riddles, but it was like poetry to hear her,
    or a song.
"How come your lips so red?" said I.
"Because they've wanted so long to be kissed."
Fire was on me, sir. I reached out to catch her, but she was
    gone, out of the door and down the stair. I followed,
    stumbling. I must have tripped on the turn, for I remember
    going through the air and fetching up with a crash, and I
    didn't know anything for a spell—how long I can't say.
    When I came to, she was there, somewhere, bending over me,
    crooning, "My love—my love—" under her breath like,
    a song.
But then when I got up, she was not where my arms went; she
    was down the stair again, just ahead of me. I followed her. I
    was tottering and dizzy and full of pain. I tried to catch up
    with her in the dark of the store-room, but she was too quick
    for me, sir, always a little too quick for me. Oh, she was
    cruel to me, sir. I kept bumping against things, hurting myself
    still worse, and it was cold and wet and a horrible noise all
    the while, sir; and then, sir, I found the door was open, and a
    sea had parted the hinges.
I don't know how it all went, sir. I'd tell you if I could,
    but it's all so blurred—sometimes it seems more like a
    dream. I couldn't find her any more; I couldn't hear her; I
    went all over, everywhere. Once, I remember, I found myself
    hanging out of that door between the davits, looking down into
    those big black seas and crying like a baby. It's all riddles
    and blur. I can't seem to tell you much, sir. It was
    all—all—I don't know.
I was talking to somebody else—not her. It was the
    Inspector. I hardly knew it was the Inspector. His face was as
    gray as a blanket, and his eyes were bloodshot, and his lips
    were twisted. His left wrist hung down, awkward. It was broken
    coming aboard the Light in that sea. Yes, we were in the
    living-room. Yes, sir, it was daylight—gray daylight. I
    tell you, sir, the man looked crazy to me. He was waving his
    good arm toward the weather windows, and what he was saying,
    over and over, was this:
"Look what you done, damn you! Look what you
    done!"
And what I was saying was this:
"I've lost her!"
I didn't pay any attention to him, nor him to me. By and by
    he did, though. He stopped his talking all of a sudden, and his
    eyes looked like the devil's eyes. He put them up close to
    mine. He grabbed my arm with his good hand, and I cried, I was
    so weak.
"Johnson," said he, "is that it? By the living God—if
    you got a woman out here, Johnson!"
"No," said I. "I've lost her."
"What do you mean—lost her?"
"It was dark," said I—and it's funny how my head was
    clearing up—"and the door was open—the store-room
    door—and I was after her—and I guess she stumbled,
    maybe—and I lost her."
"Johnson," said he, "what do you mean? You sound
    crazy—downright crazy. Who?"
"Her," said I. "Fedderson's wife."
"Who?"
"Her," said I. And with that he gave my arm another
    jerk.
"Listen," said he, like a tiger. "Don't try that on me. It
    won't do any good—that kind of lies—not where
    you're going to. Fedderson and his wife, too—the
    both of 'em's drowned deader 'n a door-nail."
"I know," said I, nodding my head. I was so calm it made him
    wild.
"You're crazy! Crazy as a loon, Johnson!" And he was chewing
    his lip red. "I know, because it was me that found the old man
    laying on Back Water Flats yesterday morning—me!
    And she'd been with him in the boat, too, because he had a
    piece of her jacket tore off, tangled in his arm."
"I know," said I, nodding again, like that.
"You know what, you crazy, murdering
    fool?" Those were his words to me, sir.
"I know," said I, "what I know."
"And I know," said he, "what I know."
And there you are, sir. He's Inspector.
    I'm—nobody.