The Middle Toe of the Right Foot

 By AMBROSE BIERCE

  From Can Such Things Be?

by Ambrose Bierce.
        Copyright by the Neale Publishing Company. By permission of
        the publishers.



 I

 It is well known that the old Manton house is haunted. In
    all the rural district near about, and even in the town of
    Marshall, a mile away, not one person of unbiased mind
    entertains a doubt of it; incredulity is confined to those
    opinionated persons who will be called "cranks" as soon as the
    useful word shall have penetrated the intellectual demesne of
    the Marshall Advance

. The evidence that the house is
    haunted is of two kinds; the testimony of disinterested
    witnesses who have had ocular proof, and that of the house
    itself. The former may be disregarded and ruled out on any of
    the various grounds of objection which may be urged against it
    by the ingenious; but facts within the observation of all are
    material and controlling.

 In the first place the Manton house has been unoccupied by
    mortals for more than ten years, and with its outbuildings is
    slowly falling into decay—a circumstance which in itself
    the judicious will hardly venture to ignore. It stands a little
    way off the loneliest reach of the Marshall and Harriston road,
    in an opening which was once a farm and is still disfigured
    with strips of rotting fence and half covered with brambles
    overrunning a stony and sterile soil long unacquainted with the
    plow. The house itself is in tolerably good condition, though
    badly weather-stained and in dire need of attention from the
    glazier, the smaller male population of the region having
    attested in the manner of its kind its disapproval of dwelling
    without dwellers. It is two stories in height, nearly square,
    its front pierced by a single doorway flanked on each side by a
    window boarded up to the very top. Corresponding windows above,
    not protected, serve to admit light and rain to the rooms of
    the upper floor. Grass and weeds grow pretty rankly all about,
    and a few shade trees, somewhat the worse for wind, and leaning
    all in one direction, seem to be making a concerted effort to
    run away. In short, as the Marshall town humorist explained in
    the columns of the Advance

, "the proposition that the
    Manton house is badly haunted is the only logical conclusion
    from the premises." The fact that in this dwelling Mr. Manton
    thought it expedient one night some ten years ago to rise and
    cut the throats of his wife and two small children, removing at
    once to another part of the country, has no doubt done its
    share in directing public attention to the fitness of the place
    for supernatural phenomena.

 To this house, one summer evening, came four men in a wagon.
    Three of them promptly alighted, and the one who had been
    driving hitched the team to the only remaining post of what had
    been a fence. The fourth remained seated in the wagon. "Come,"
    said one of his companions, approaching him, while the others
    moved away in the direction of the dwelling—"this is the
    place."

 The man addressed did not move. "By God!" he said harshly,
    "this is a trick, and it looks to me as if you were in it."

 "Perhaps I am," the other said, looking him straight in the
    face and speaking in a tone which had something of contempt in
    it. "You will remember, however, that the choice of place was
    with your own assent left to the other side. Of course if you
    are afraid of spooks—"

 "I am afraid of nothing," the man interrupted with another
    oath, and sprang to the ground. The two then joined the others
    at the door, which one of them had already opened with some
    difficulty, caused by rust of lock and hinge. All entered.
    Inside it was dark, but the man who had unlocked the door
    produced a candle and matches and made a light. He then
    unlocked a door on their right as they stood in the passage.
    This gave them entrance to a large, square room that the candle
    but dimly lighted. The floor had a thick carpeting of dust,
    which partly muffled their footfalls. Cobwebs were in the
    angles of the walls and depended from the ceiling like strips
    of rotting lace making undulatory movements in the disturbed
    air. The room had two windows in adjoining sides, but from
    neither could anything be seen except the rough inner surfaces
    of boards a few inches from the glass. There was no fireplace,
    no furniture; there was nothing: besides the cobwebs and the
    dust, the four men were the only objects there which were not a
    part of the structure.

 Strange enough they looked in the yellow light of the
    candle. The one who had so reluctantly alighted was especially
    spectacular—he might have been called sensational. He was
    of middle age, heavily built, deep chested, and broad
    shouldered. Looking at his figure, one would have said that he
    had a giant's strength; at his features, that he would use it
    like a giant. He was clean shaven, his hair rather closely
    cropped and gray. His low forehead was seamed with wrinkles
    above the eyes, and over the nose these became vertical. The
    heavy black brows followed the same law, saved from meeting
    only by an upward turn at what would otherwise have been the
    point of contact. Deeply sunken beneath these, glowed in the
    obscure light a pair of eyes of uncertain color, but obviously
    enough too small. There was something forbidding in their
    expression, which was not bettered by the cruel mouth and wide
    jaw. The nose was well enough, as noses go; one does not expect
    much of noses. All that was sinister in the man's face seemed
    accentuated by an unnatural pallor—he appeared altogether
    bloodless.

 The appearance of the other men was sufficiently
    commonplace; they were such persons as one meets and forgets
    that he met. All were younger than the man described, between
    whom and the eldest of the others, who stood apart, there was
    apparently no kindly feeling. They avoided looking at each
    other.

 "Gentlemen," said the man holding the candle and keys, "I
    believe everything is right. Are you ready, Mr. Rosser?"

 The man standing apart from the group bowed and smiled.

 "And you, Mr. Grossmith?"

 The heavy man bowed and scowled.

 "You will be pleased to remove your outer clothing."

 Their hats, coats, waistcoats, and neckwear were soon
    removed and thrown outside the door, in the passage. The man
    with the candle now nodded, and the fourth man—he who had
    urged Grossmith to leave the wagon—produced from the
    pocket of his overcoat two long, murderous-looking
    bowie-knives, which he drew now from their leather
    scabbards.

 "They are exactly alike," he said, presenting one to each of
    the two principals—for by this time the dullest observer
    would have understood the nature of this meeting. It was to be
    a duel to the death.

 Each combatant took a knife, examined it critically near the
    candle and tested the strength of the blade and handle across
    his lifted knee. Their persons were then searched in turn, each
    by the second of the other.

 "If it is agreeable to you, Mr. Grossmith," said the man
    holding the light, "you will place yourself in that
    corner."

 He indicated the angle of the room farthest from the door,
    whither Grossmith retired, his second parting from him with a
    grasp of the hand which had nothing of cordiality in it. In the
    angle nearest the door Mr. Rosser stationed himself, and after
    a whispered consultation his second left him, joining the other
    near the door. At that moment the candle was suddenly
    extinguished, leaving all in profound darkness. This may have
    been done by a draught from the opened door; whatever the
    cause, the effect was startling.

 "Gentlemen," said a voice which sounded strangely unfamiliar
    in the altered condition affecting the relations of the
    senses—"gentlemen, you will not move until you hear the
    closing of the outer door."

 A sound of trampling ensued, then the closing of the inner
    door; and finally the outer one closed with a concussion which
    shook the entire building.

 A few minutes afterward a belated farmer's boy met a light
    wagon which was being driven furiously toward the town of
    Marshall. He declared that behind the two figures on the front
    seat stood a third, with its hands upon the bowed shoulders of
    the others, who appeared to struggle vainly to free themselves
    from its grasp. This figure, unlike the others, was clad in
    white, and had undoubtedly boarded the wagon as it passed the
    haunted house. As the lad could boast a considerable former
    experience with the supernatural thereabouts his word had the
    weight justly due to the testimony of an expert. The story (in
    connection with the next day's events) eventually appeared in
    the Advance

, with some slight literary embellishments
    and a concluding intimation that the gentlemen referred to
    would be allowed the use of the paper's columns for their
    version of the night's adventure. But the privilege remained
    without a claimant.

 II

 The events that led up to this "duel in the dark" were
    simple enough. One evening three young men of the town of
    Marshall were sitting in a quiet corner of the porch of the
    village hotel, smoking and discussing such matters as three
    educated young men of a Southern village would naturally find
    interesting. Their names were King, Sancher, and Rosser. At a
    little distance, within easy hearing, but taking no part in the
    conversation, sat a fourth. He was a stranger to the others.
    They merely knew that on his arrival by the stage-coach that
    afternoon he had written in the hotel register the name of
    Robert Grossmith. He had not been observed to speak to anyone
    except the hotel clerk. He seemed, indeed, singularly fond of
    his own company—or, as the personnel

of the Advance

expressed it, "grossly addicted to evil
    associations." But then it should be said in justice to the
    stranger that the personnel

was himself of a too
    convivial disposition fairly to judge one differently gifted,
    and had, moreover, experienced a slight rebuff in an effort at
    an "interview."

 "I hate any kind of deformity in a woman," said King,
    "whether natural or—acquired. I have a theory that any
    physical defect has its correlative mental and moral
    defect."

 "I infer, then," said Rosser, gravely, "that a lady lacking
    the moral advantage of a nose would find the struggle to become
    Mrs. King an arduous enterprise."

 "Of course you may put it that way," was the reply; "but,
    seriously, I once threw over a most charming girl on learning
    quite accidentally that she had suffered amputation of a toe.
    My conduct was brutal if you like, but if I had married that
    girl I should have been miserable for life and should have made
    her so."

 "Whereas," said Sancher, with a light laugh, "by marrying a
    gentleman of more liberal view she escaped with a parted
    throat."

 "Ah, you know to whom I refer. Yes, she married Manton, but
    I don't know about his liberality; I'm not sure but he cut her
    throat because he discovered that she lacked that excellent
    thing in woman, the middle toe of the right foot."

 "Look at that chap!" said Rosser in a low voice, his eyes
    fixed upon the stranger.

 That chap was obviously listening intently to the
    conversation.

 "Damn his impudence!" muttered King—"what ought we to
    do?"

 "That's an easy one," Rosser replied, rising. "Sir," he
    continued, addressing the stranger, "I think it would be better
    if you would remove your chair to the other end of the veranda.
    The presence of gentlemen is evidently an unfamiliar situation
    to you."

 The man sprang to his feet and strode forward with clenched
    hands, his face white with rage. All were now standing. Sancher
    stepped between the belligerents.

 "You are hasty and unjust," he said to Rosser; "this
    gentleman has done nothing to deserve such language."

 But Rosser would not withdraw a word. By the custom of the
    country and the time there could be but one outcome to the
    quarrel.

 "I demand the satisfaction due to a gentleman," said the
    stranger, who had become more calm. "I have not an acquaintance
    in this region. Perhaps you, sir," bowing to Sancher, "will be
    kind enough to represent me in this matter."

 Sancher accepted the trust—somewhat reluctantly it
    must be confessed, for the man's appearance and manner were not
    at all to his liking. King, who during the colloquy had hardly
    removed his eyes from the stranger's face and had not spoken a
    word, consented with a nod to act for Rosser, and the upshot of
    it was that, the principals having retired, a meeting was
    arranged for the next evening. The nature of the arrangements
    has been already disclosed. The duel with knives in a dark room
    was once a commoner feature of Southwestern life than it is
    likely to be again. How thin a veneering of "chivalry" covered
    the essential brutality of the code under which such encounters
    were possible we shall see.

 III

 In the blaze of a midsummer noonday the old Manton house was
    hardly true to its traditions. It was of the earth, earthy. The
    sunshine caressed it warmly and affectionately, with evident
    disregard of its bad reputation. The grass greening all the
    expanse in its front seemed to grow, not rankly, but with a
    natural and joyous exuberance, and the weeds blossomed quite
    like plants. Full of charming lights and shadows and populous
    with pleasant-voiced birds, the neglected shade trees no longer
    struggled to run away, but bent reverently beneath their
    burdens of sun and song. Even in the glassless upper windows
    was an expression of peace and contentment, due to the light
    within. Over the stony fields the visible heat danced with a
    lively tremor incompatible with the gravity which is an
    attribute of the supernatural.

 Such was the aspect under which the place presented itself
    to Sheriff Adams and two other men who had come out from
    Marshall to look at it. One of these men was Mr. King, the
    sheriff's deputy; the other, whose name was Brewer, was a
    brother of the late Mrs. Manton. Under a beneficent law of the
    State relating to property which has been for a certain period
    abandoned by an owner whose residence cannot be ascertained,
    the sheriff was legal custodian of the Manton farm and
    appurtenances thereunto belonging. His present visit was in
    mere perfunctory compliance with some order of a court in which
    Mr. Brewer had an action to get possession of the property as
    heir to his deceased sister. By a mere coincidence, the visit
    was made on the day after the night that Deputy King had
    unlocked the house for another and very different purpose. His
    presence now was not of his own choosing: he had been ordered
    to accompany his superior, and at the moment could think of
    nothing more prudent than simulated alacrity in obedience to
    the command.

 Carelessly opening the front door, which to his surprise was
    not locked, the sheriff was amazed to see, lying on the floor
    of the passage into which it opened, a confused heap of men's
    apparel. Examination showed it to consist of two hats, and the
    same number of coats, waistcoats, and scarves all in a
    remarkably good state of preservation, albeit somewhat defiled
    by the dust in which they lay. Mr. Brewer was equally
    astonished, but Mr. King's emotion is not of record. With a new
    and lively interest in his own actions the sheriff now
    unlatched and pushed open a door on the right, and the three
    entered. The room was apparently vacant—no; as their eyes
    became accustomed to the dimmer light something was visible in
    the farthest angle of the wall. It was a human
    figure—that of a man crouching close in the corner.
    Something in the attitude made the intruders halt when they had
    barely passed the threshold. The figure more and more clearly
    defined itself. The man was upon one knee, his back in the
    angle of the wall, his shoulders elevated to the level of his
    ears, his hands before his face, palms outward, the fingers
    spread and crooked like claws; the white face turned upward on
    the retracted neck had an expression of unutterable fright, the
    mouth half open, the eyes incredibly expanded. He was stone
    dead. Yet with the exception of a bowie-knife, which had
    evidently fallen from his own hand, not another object was in
    the room.

 In thick dust that covered the floor were some confused
    footprints near the door and along the wall through which it
    opened. Along one of the adjoining walls, too, past the
    boarded-up windows was the trail made by the man himself in
    reaching his corner. Instinctively in approaching the body the
    three men followed that trail. The sheriff grasped one of the
    outthrown arms; it was as rigid as iron, and the application of
    a gentle force rocked the entire body without altering the
    relation of its parts. Brewer, pale with excitement, gazed
    intently into the distorted face. "God of mercy!" he suddenly
    cried, "it is Manton!"

 "You are right," said King, with an evident attempt at
    calmness: "I knew Manton. He then wore a full beard and his
    hair long, but this is he."

 He might have added: "I recognized him when he challenged
    Rosser. I told Rosser and Sancher who he was before we played
    him this horrible trick. When Rosser left this dark room at our
    heels, forgetting his outer clothing in the excitement, and
    driving away with us in his shirt sleeves—all through the
    discreditable proceedings we knew with whom we were dealing,
    murderer and coward that he was!"

 But nothing of this did Mr. King say. With his better light
    he was trying to penetrate the mystery of the man's death. That
    he had not once moved from the corner where he had been
    stationed; that his posture was that of neither attack nor
    defense; that he had dropped his weapon; that he had obviously
    perished of sheer horror of something that he saw

—these were circumstances which Mr. King's
    disturbed intelligence could not rightly comprehend.

 Groping in intellectual darkness for a clew to his maze of
    doubt, his gaze, directed mechanically downward in the way of
    one who ponders momentous matters, fell upon something which,
    there, in the light of day and in the presence of living
    companions, affected him with terror. In the dust of years that
    lay thick upon the floor—leading from the door by which
    they had entered, straight across the room to within a yard of
    Manton's crouching corpse—were three parallel lines of
    footprints—light but definite impressions of bare feet,
    the outer ones those of small children, the inner a woman's.
    From the point at which they ended they did not return; they
    pointed all one way. Brewer, who had observed them at the same
    moment, was leaning forward in an attitude of rapt attention,
    horribly pale.

 "Look at that!" he cried, pointing with both hands at the
    nearest print of the woman's right foot, where she had
    apparently stopped and stood. "The middle toe is
    missing—it was Gertrude!"

 Gertrude was the late Mrs. Manton, sister to Mr. Brewer.