THE WOMAN AND THE CAT By Marcel Prevost

 “Yes,” said our old friend Tribourdeaux, a man of culture and
      a philosopher, which is a combination rarely found among army surgeons;
      “yes, the supernatural is everywhere; it surrounds us and hems us in
      and permeates us. If science pursues it, it takes flight and cannot be
      grasped. Our intellect resembles those ancestors of ours who cleared a few
      acres of forest; whenever they approached the limits of their clearing
      they heard low growls and saw gleaming eyes everywhere circling them
      about. I myself have had the sensation of having approached the limits of
      the unknown several times in my life, and on one occasion in particular.”

 A young lady present interrupted him:

 “Doctor, you are evidently dying to tell us a story. Come now,
      begin!”

 The doctor bowed.

 “No, I am not in the least anxious, I assure you. I tell this story
      as seldom as possible, for it disturbs those who hear it, and it disturbs
      me also. However, if you wish it, here it is:

 “In 1863 I was a young physician stationed at Orléans. In that
      patrician city, full of aristocratic old residences, it is difficult to
      find bachelor apartments; and, as I like both plenty of air and plenty of
      room, I took up my lodging on the first floor of a large building situated
      just outside the city, near Saint-Euverte. It had been originally
      constructed to serve as the warehouse and also as the dwelling of a
      manufacturer of rugs. In course of time the manufacturer had failed, and
      this big barrack that he had built, falling out of repair through lack of
      tenants, had been sold for a song with all its furnishings. The purchaser
      hoped to make a future profit out of his purchase, for the city was
      growing in that direction; and, as a matter of fact, I believe that at the
      present time the house is included within the city limits. When I took up
      my quarters there, however, the mansion stood alone on the verge of the
      open country, at the end of a straggling street on which a few stray
      houses produced at dusk the impression of a jaw from which most of the
      teeth have fallen out.

 “I leased one-half of the first floor, an apartment of four rooms.
      For my bedroom and my study I took the two that fronted on the street; in
      the third room I set up some shelves for my wardrobe, and the other room I
      left empty. This made a very comfortable lodging for me, and I had, for a
      sort of promenade, a broad balcony that ran along the entire front of the
      building, or rather one-half of the balcony, since it was divided into two
      parts (please note this carefully) by a fan of ironwork, over which,
      however, one could easily climb.

 “I had been living there for about two months when, one night in
      July on returning to my rooms, I saw with a good deal of surprise a light
      shining through the windows of the other apartment on the same floor,
      which I had supposed to be uninhabited. The effect of this light was
      extraordinary. It lit up with a pale, yet perfectly distinct, reflection,
      parts of the balcony, the street below, and a bit of the neighboring
      fields.

 “I thought to myself, ‘Aha! I have a neighbor.”

 “The idea indeed was not altogether agreeable, for I had been rather
      proud of my exclusive proprietorship. On reaching my bedroom I passed
      noiselessly out upon the balcony, but already the light had been
      extinguished. So I went back into my room, and sat down to read for an
      hour or two. From time to time I seemed to hear about me, as though within
      the walls, light footsteps; but after finishing my book I went to bed, and
      speedily fell asleep.

 “About midnight I suddenly awoke with a curious feeling that
      something was standing beside me. I raised myself in bed, lit a candle,
      and this is what I saw. In the middle of the room stood an immense cat
      gazing upon me with phosphorescent eyes, and with its back slightly
      arched. It was a magnificent Angora, with long fur and a fluffy tail, and
      of a remarkable color—exactly like that of the yellow silk that one
      sees in cocoons—so that, as the light gleamed upon its coat, the
      animal seemed to be made of gold.

 “It slowly moved toward me on its velvety paws, softly rubbing its
      sinuous body against my legs. I leaned over to stroke it, and it permitted
      my caress, purring, and finally leaping upon my knees. I noticed then that
      it was a female cat, quite young, and that she seemed disposed to permit
      me to pet her as long as ever I would. Finally, however, I put her down
      upon the floor, and tried to induce her to leave the room; but she leaped
      away from me and hid herself somewhere among the furniture, though as soon
      as I had blown out my candle, she jumped upon my bed. Being sleepy,
      however, I didn’t molest her, but dropped off into a doze, and the
      next morning when I awoke in broad daylight I could find no sign of the
      animal at all.

 “Truly, the human brain is a very delicate instrument, and one that
      is easily thrown out of gear. Before I proceed, just sum up for yourselves
      the facts that I have mentioned: a light seen and presently extinguished
      in an apartment supposed to be uninhabited; and a cat of a remarkable
      color, which appeared and disappeared in a way that was slightly
      mysterious. Now there isn’t anything very strange about that, is
      there? Very well. Imagine, now, that these unimportant facts are repeated
      day after day and under the same conditions throughout a whole week, and
      then, believe me, they become of importance enough to impress the mind of
      a man who is living all alone, and to produce in him a slight disquietude
      such as I spoke of in commencing my story, and such as is always caused
      when one approaches the sphere of the unknown. The human mind is so formed
      that it always unconsciously applies the principle of the causa
      sufficiens. For every series of facts that are identical, it demands a
      cause, a law; and a vague dismay seizes upon it when it is unable to guess
      this cause and to trace out this law.

 “I am no coward, but I have often studied the manifestation of fear
      in others, from its most puerile form in children up to its most tragic
      phase in madmen. I know that it is fed and nourished by uncertainties,
      although when one actually sets himself to investigate the cause, this
      fear is often transformed into simple curiosity.

 “I made up my mind, therefore, to ferret out the truth. I questioned
      my caretaker, and found that he knew nothing about my neighbors. Every
      morning an old woman came to look after the neighboring apartment; my
      caretaker had tried to question her, but either she was completely deaf or
      else she was unwilling to give him any information, for she had refused to
      answer a single word. Nevertheless, I was able to explain satisfactorily
      the first thing that I had noted—that is to say, the sudden
      extinction of the light at the moment when I entered the house. I had
      observed that the windows next to mine were covered only by long lace
      curtains; and as the two balconies were connected, my neighbor, whether
      man or woman, had no doubt a wish to prevent any indiscreet
      inquisitiveness on my part, and therefore had always put out the light on
      hearing me come in. To verify this supposition, I tried a very simple
      experiment, which succeeded perfectly. I had a cold supper brought in one
      day about noon by my servant, and that evening I did not go out. When
      darkness came on, I took my station near the window. Presently I saw the
      balcony shining with the light that streamed through the windows of the
      neighboring apartment. At once I slipped quietly out upon my balcony, and
      stepped softly over the ironwork that separated the two parts. Although I
      knew that I was exposing myself to a positive danger, either of falling
      and breaking my neck, or of finding myself face to face with a man, I
      experienced no perturbation. Reaching the lighted window without having
      made the slightest noise, I found it partly open; its curtains, which for
      me were quite transparent since I was on the dark side of the window, made
      me wholly invisible to any one who should look toward the window from the
      interior of the room.

 “I saw a vast chamber furnished quite elegantly, though it was
      obviously out of repair, and lighted by a lamp suspended from the ceiling.
      At the end of the room was a low sofa upon which was reclining a woman who
      seemed to me to be both young and pretty. Her loosened hair fell over her
      shoulders in a rain of gold. She was looking at herself in a hand mirror,
      patting herself, passing her arms over her lips, and twisting about her
      supple body with a curiously feline grace. Every movement that she made
      caused her long hair to ripple in glistening undulations.

 “As I gazed upon her I confess that I felt a little troubled,
      especially when all of a sudden the young girl’s eyes were fixed
      upon me—strange eyes, eyes of a phosphorescent green that gleamed
      like the flame of a lamp. I was sure that I was invisible, being on the
      dark side of a curtained window. That was simple enough, yet nevertheless
      I felt that I was seen. The girl, in fact, uttered a cry, and then turned
      and buried her face in the sofa-pillows.

 “I raised the window, rushed into the room toward the sofa, and
      leaned over the face that she was hiding. As I did so, being really very
      remorseful, I began to excuse and to accuse myself, calling myself all
      sorts of names, and begging pardon for my indiscretion. I said that I
      deserved to be driven from her presence, but begged not to be sent away
      without at least a word of pardon. For a long time I pleaded thus without
      success, but at last she slowly turned, and I saw that her fair young face
      was stirred with just the faintest suggestion of a smile. When she caught
      a glimpse of me she murmured something of which I did not then quite get
      the meaning.

 “‘It is you,’ she cried out; ‘it is you!’

 “As she said this, and as I looked at her, not knowing yet exactly
      what to answer, I was harassed by the thought: Where on earth have I
      already seen this face, this look, this very gesture? Little by little,
      however, I found my tongue, and after saying a few more words in apology
      for my unpardonable curiosity, and getting brief but not offended answers,
      I took leave of her, and, retiring through the window by which I had come,
      went back to my own room. Arriving there, I sat a long time by the window
      in the darkness, charmed by the face that I had seen, and yet singularly
      disquieted. This woman so beautiful, so amiable, living so near to me, who
      said to me, ‘It is you,’ exactly as though she had already
      known me, who spoke so little, who answered all my questions with evasion,
      excited in me a feeling of fear. She had, indeed, told me her name—Linda—and
      that was all. I tried in vain to drive away the remembrance of her
      greenish eyes, which in the darkness seemed still to gleam upon me, and of
      those glints which, like electric sparks, shone in her long hair whenever
      she stroked it with her hand. Finally, however, I retired for the night;
      but scarcely was my head upon the pillow when I felt some moving body
      descend upon my feet. The cat had appeared again. I tried to chase her
      away, but she kept returning again and again, until I ended by resigning
      myself to her presence; and, just as before, I went to sleep with this
      strange companion near me. Yet my rest was this time a troubled one, and
      broken by strange and fitful dreams.

 “Have you ever experienced the sort of mental obsession which
      gradually causes the brain to be mastered by some single absurd idea—an
      idea almost insane, and one which your reason and your will alike repel,
      but which nevertheless gradually blends itself with your thought, fastens
      itself upon your mind, and grows and grows? I suffered cruelly in this way
      on the days that followed my strange adventure. Nothing new occurred, but
      in the evening, going out upon the balcony, I found Linda standing upon
      her side of the iron fan. We chatted together for a while in the half
      darkness, and, as before, I returned to my room to find that in a few
      moments the golden cat appeared, leaped upon my bed, made a nest for
      herself there, and remained until the morning. I knew now to whom the cat
      belonged, for Linda had answered that very same evening, on my speaking of
      it, ‘Oh, yes, my cat; doesn’t she look exactly as though she
      were made of gold?’ As I said, nothing new had occurred, yet
      nevertheless a vague sort of terror began little by little to master me
      and to develop itself in my mind, at first merely as a bit of foolish
      fancy, and then as a haunting belief that dominated my entire thought, so
      that I perpetually seemed to see a thing which it was in reality quite
      impossible to see.”

 “Why, it’s easy enough to guess,” interrupted the young
      lady who had spoken at the beginning of his story.

 “Linda and the cat were the same thing.”

 Tribourdeaux smiled.

 “I should not have been quite so positive as that,” he said,
      “even then; but I cannot deny that this ridiculous fancy haunted me
      for many hours when I was endeavoring to snatch a little sleep amid the
      insomnia that a too active brain produced. Yes, there were moments when
      these two beings with greenish eyes, sinuous movements, golden hair, and
      mysterious ways, seemed to me to be blended into one, and to be merely the
      double manifestation of a single entity. As I said, I saw Linda again and
      again, but in spite of all my efforts to come upon her unexpectedly, I
      never was able to see them both at the same time. I tried to reason with
      myself, to convince myself that there was nothing really inexplicable in
      all of this, and I ridiculed myself for being afraid both of a woman and
      of a harmless cat. In truth, at the end of all my reasoning, I found that
      I was not so much afraid of the animal alone or of the woman alone, but
      rather of a sort of quality which existed in my fancy and inspired me with
      a fear of something that was incorporeal—fear of a manifestation of
      my own spirit, fear of a vague thought, which is, indeed, the very worst
      of fears.

 “I began to be mentally disturbed. After long evenings spent in
      confidential and very unconventional chats with Linda, in which little by
      little my feelings took on the color of love, I passed long days of secret
      torment, such as incipient maniacs must experience. Gradually a resolve
      began to grow up in my mind, a desire that became more and more
      importunate in demanding a solution of this unceasing and tormenting
      doubt; and the more I cared for Linda, the more it seemed absolutely
      necessary to push this resolve to its fulfilment. I decided to kill the
      cat.

 “One evening before meeting Linda on the balcony, I took out of my
      medical cabinet a jar of glycerin and a small bottle of hydrocyanic acid,
      together with one of those little pencils of glass which chemists use in
      mixing certain corrosive substances. That evening for the first time Linda
      allowed me to caress her. I held her in my arms and passed my hand over
      her long hair, which snapped and cracked under my touch in a succession of
      tiny sparks. As soon as I regained my room the golden cat, as usual,
      appeared before me. I called her to me; she rubbed herself against me with
      arched back and extended tail, purring the while with the greatest
      amiability. I took the glass pencil in my hand, moistened the point in the
      glycerin, and held it out to the animal, which licked it with her long red
      tongue. I did this three or four times, but the next time I dipped the
      pencil in the acid. The cat unhesitatingly touched it with her tongue. In
      an instant she became rigid, and a moment after, a frightful tetanic
      convulsion caused her to leap thrice into the air, and then to fall upon
      the floor with a dreadful cry—a cry that was truly human. She was
      dead!

 “With the perspiration starting from my forehead and with trembling
      hands I threw myself upon the floor beside the body that was not yet cold.
      The starting eyes had a look that froze me with horror. The blackened
      tongue was thrust out between the teeth; the limbs exhibited the most
      remarkable contortions. I mustered all my courage with a violent effort of
      will, took the animal by the paws, and left the house. Hurrying down the
      silent street, I proceeded to the quays along the banks of the Loire, and,
      on reaching them, threw my burden into the river. Until daylight I roamed
      around the city, just where I know not; and not until the sky began to
      grow pale and then to be flushed with light did I at last have the courage
      to return home. As I laid my hand upon the door, I shivered. I had a dread
      of finding there still living, as in the celebrated tale of Poe, the
      animal that I had so lately put to death. But no, my room was empty. I
      fell half-fainting upon my bed, and for the first time I slept, with a
      perfect sense of being all alone, a sleep like that of a beast or of an
      assassin, until evening came.”

 Some one here interrupted, breaking in upon the profound silence in which
      we had been listening.

 “I can guess the end. Linda disappeared at the same time as the cat.”

 “You see perfectly well,” replied Tribourdeaux, “that
      there exists between the facts of this story a curious coincidence, since
      you are able to guess so exactly their relation. Yes, Linda disappeared.
      They found in her apartment her dresses, her linen, all even to the
      night-robe that she was to have worn that night, but there was nothing
      that could give the slightest clue to her identity. The owner of the house
      had let the apartment to ‘Mademoiselle Linda, concert-singer,’
      He knew nothing more. I was summoned before the police magistrate. I had
      been seen on the night of her disappearance roaming about with a
      distracted air in the vicinity of the river. Luckily the judge knew me;
      luckily also, he was a man of no ordinary intelligence. I related to him
      privately the entire story, just as I have been telling it to you. He
      dismissed the inquiry; yet I may say that very few have ever had so
      narrow, an escape as mine from a criminal trial.”

 For several moments the silence of the company was unbroken. Finally a
      gentleman, wishing to relieve the tension, cried out:

 “Come now, doctor, confess that this is really all fiction; that you
      merely want to prevent these ladies from getting any sleep to-night.”

 Tribourdeaux bowed stiffly, his face unsmiling and a little pale.

 “You may take it as you will,” he said.