The Willows
By ALGERNON BLACKWOOD

From The Listener, by Algernon Blackwood.
        Published in America by E.P. Dutton, and in England by
        Everleigh Nash, Ltd. By permission of the publishers and
        Algernon Blackwood.

I
After leaving Vienna, and long before you come to
    Buda-Pesth, the Danube enters a region of singular loneliness
    and desolation, where its waters spread away on all sides
    regardless of a main channel, and the country becomes a swamp
    for miles upon miles, covered by a vast sea of low
    willow-bushes. On the big maps this deserted area is painted in
    a fluffy blue, growing fainter in color as it leaves the banks,
    and across it may be seen in large straggling letters the word
    Sümpfe, meaning marshes.
In high flood this great acreage of sand, shingle-beds, and
    willow-grown islands is almost topped by the water, but in
    normal seasons the bushes bend and rustle in the free winds,
    showing their silver leaves to the sunshine in an ever-moving
    plain of bewildering beauty. These willows never attain to the
    dignity of trees; they have no rigid trunks; they remain humble
    bushes, with rounded tops and soft outline, swaying on slender
    stems that answer to the least pressure of the wind; supple as
    grasses, and so continually shifting that they somehow give the
    impression that the entire plain is moving and alive.
    For the wind sends waves rising and falling over the whole
    surface, waves of leaves instead of waves of water, green
    swells like the sea, too, until the branches turn and lift, and
    then silvery white as their under-side turns to the sun.
Happy to slip beyond the control of stern banks, the Danube
    here wanders about at will among the intricate network of
    channels intersecting the islands everywhere with broad avenues
    down which the waters pour with a shouting sound; making
    whirlpools, eddies, and foaming rapids; tearing at the sandy
    banks; carrying away masses of shore and willow-clumps; and
    forming new islands innumerable which shift daily in size and
    shape and possess at best an impermanent life, since the
    flood-time obliterates their very existence.
Properly speaking, this fascinating part of the river's life
    begins soon after leaving Pressburg, and we, in our Canadian
    canoe, with gipsy tent and frying-pan on board, reached it on
    the crest of a rising flood about mid-July. That very same
    morning, when the sky was reddening before sunrise, we had
    slipped swiftly through still-sleeping Vienna, leaving it a
    couple of hours later a mere patch of smoke against the blue
    hills of the Wienerwald on the horizon; we had breakfasted
    below Fischeramend under a grove of birch trees roaring in the
    wind; and had then swept on the tearing current past Orth,
    Hainburg, Petronell (the old Roman Carnuntum of Marcus
    Aurelius), and so under the frowning heights of Theben on a
    spur of the Carpathians, where the March steals in quietly from
    the left and the frontier is crossed between Austria and
    Hungary.
Racing along at twelve kilometers an hour soon took us well
    into Hungary, and the muddy waters—sure sign of
    flood—sent us aground on many a shingle-bed, and twisted
    us like a cork in many a sudden belching whirlpool before the
    towers of Pressburg (Hungarian, Poszóny) showed against
    the sky; and then the canoe, leaping like a spirited horse,
    flew at top speed under the gray walls, negotiated safely the
    sunken chain of the Fliegende Brücke ferry, turned the
    corner sharply to the left, and plunged on yellow foam into the
    wilderness of islands, sand-banks, and swamp-land
    beyond—the land of the willows.
The change came suddenly, as when a series of bioscope
    pictures snaps down on the streets of a town and shifts without
    warning into the scenery of lake and forest. We entered the
    land of desolation on wings, and in less than half an hour
    there was neither boat nor fishing-hut nor red roof, nor any
    single sign of human habitation and civilization within sight.
    The sense of remoteness from the world of human kind, the utter
    isolation, the fascination of this singular world of willows,
    winds, and waters, instantly laid its spell upon us both, so
    that we allowed laughingly to one another that we ought by
    rights to have held some special kind of passport to admit us,
    and that we had, somewhat audaciously, come without asking
    leave into a separate little kingdom of wonder and
    magic—a kingdom that was reserved for the use of others
    who had a right to it, with everywhere unwritten warnings to
    trespassers for those who had the imagination to discover
    them.
Though still early in the afternoon, the ceaseless
    buffetings of a most tempestuous wind made us feel weary, and
    we at once began casting about for a suitable camping-ground
    for the night. But the bewildering character of the islands
    made landing difficult; the swirling flood carried us in-shore
    and then swept us out again; the willow branches tore our hands
    as we seized them to stop the canoe, and we pulled many a yard
    of sandy bank into the water before at length we shot with a
    great sideways blow from the wind into a backwater and managed
    to beach the bows in a cloud of spray. Then we lay panting and
    laughing after our exertions on hot yellow sand, sheltered from
    the wind, and in the full blaze of a scorching sun, a cloudless
    blue sky above, and an immense army of dancing, shouting willow
    bushes, closing in from all sides, shining with spray and
    clapping their thousand little hands as though to applaud the
    success of our efforts.
"What a river!" I said to my companion, thinking of all the
    way we had traveled from the source in the Black Forest, and
    how we had often been obliged to wade and push in the upper
    shallows at the beginning of June.
"Won't stand much nonsense now, will it?" he said, pulling
    the canoe a little farther into safety up the sand, and then
    composing himself for a nap.
I lay by his side, happy and peaceful in the bath of the
    elements—water, wind, sand, and the great fire of the
    sun—thinking of the long journey that lay behind us, and
    of the great stretch before us to the Black Sea, and how lucky
    I was to have such a delightful and charming traveling
    companion as my friend, the Swede.
We had made many similar journeys together, but the Danube,
    more than any other river I knew, impressed us from the very
    beginning with its aliveness. From its tiny bubbling
    entry into the world among the pinewood gardens of
    Donaueschingen, until this moment when it began to play the
    great river-game of losing itself among the deserted swamps,
    unobserved, unrestrained, it had seemed to us like following
    the growth of some living creature. Sleepy at first, but later
    developing violent desires as it became conscious of its deep
    soul, it rolled, like some huge fluid being, through all the
    countries we had passed, holding our little craft on its mighty
    shoulders, playing roughly with us sometimes, yet always
    friendly and well-meaning, till at length we had come
    inevitably to regard it as a Great Personage.
How, indeed, could it be otherwise, since it told us so much
    of its secret life? At night we heard it singing to the moon as
    we lay in our tent, uttering that odd sibilant note peculiar to
    itself and said to be caused by the rapid tearing of the
    pebbles along its bed, so great is its hurrying speed. We knew,
    too, the voice of its gurgling whirlpools, suddenly bubbling up
    on a surface previously quite calm; the roar of its shallows
    and swift rapids; its constant steady thundering below all mere
    surface sounds; and that ceaseless tearing of its icy waters at
    the banks. How it stood up and shouted when the rains fell flat
    upon its face! And how its laughter roared out when the wind
    blew upstream and tried to stop its growing speed! We knew all
    its sounds and voices, its tumblings and foamings, its
    unnecessary splashing against the bridges; that self-conscious
    chatter when there were hills to look on; the affected dignity
    of its speech when it passed through the little towns, far too
    important to laugh; and all these faint, sweet whisperings when
    the sun caught it fairly in some slow curve and poured down
    upon it till the steam rose.
It was full of tricks, too, in its early life before the
    great world knew it. There were places in the upper reaches
    among the Swabian forests, when yet the first whispers of its
    destiny had not reached it, where it elected to disappear
    through holes in the ground, to appear again on the other side
    of the porous limestone hills and start a new river with
    another name; leaving, too, so little water in its own bed that
    we had to climb out and wade and push the canoe through miles
    of shallows!
And a chief pleasure, in those early days of its
    irresponsible youth, was to lie low, like Brer Fox, just before
    the little turbulent tributaries came to join it from the Alps,
    and to refuse to acknowledge them when in, but to run for miles
    side by side, the dividing line well marked, the very levels
    different, the Danube utterly declining to recognize the
    new-comer. Below Passau, however, it gave up this particular
    trick, for there the Inn comes in with a thundering power
    impossible to ignore, and so pushes and incommodes the parent
    river that there is hardly room for them in the long twisting
    gorge that follows, and the Danube is shoved this way and that
    against the cliffs, and forced to hurry itself with great waves
    and much dashing to and fro in order to get through in time.
    And during the fight our canoe slipped down from its shoulder
    to its breast, and had the time of its life among the
    struggling waves. But the Inn taught the old river a lesson,
    and after Passau it no longer pretended to ignore new
    arrivals.
This was many days back, of course, and since then we had
    come to know other aspects of the great creature, and across
    the Bavarian wheat plain of Straubing she wandered so slowly
    under the blazing June sun that we could well imagine only the
    surface inches were water, while below there moved, concealed
    as by a silken mantle, a whole army of Undines, passing
    silently and unseen down to the sea, and very leisurely too,
    lest they be discovered.
Much, too, we forgave her because of her friendliness to the
    birds and animals that haunted the shores. Cormorants lined the
    banks in lonely places in rows like short black palings; gray
    crows crowded the shingle-beds; storks stood fishing in the
    vistas of shallower water that opened up between the islands,
    and hawks, swans, and marsh birds of all sorts filled the air
    with glinting wings and singing, petulant cries. It was
    impossible to feel annoyed with the river's vagaries after
    seeing a deer leap with a splash into the water at sunrise and
    swim past the bows of the canoe; and often we saw fawns peering
    at us from the underbrush, or looked straight into the brown
    eyes of a stag as we charged full tilt round a corner and
    entered another reach of the river. Foxes, too, everywhere
    haunted the banks, tripping daintily among the driftwood and
    disappearing so suddenly that it was impossible to see how they
    managed it.
But now, after leaving Pressburg, everything changed a
    little, and the Danube became more serious. It ceased trifling.
    It was halfway to the Black Sea, within scenting distance
    almost of other, stranger countries where no tricks would be
    permitted or understood. It became suddenly grown-up, and
    claimed our respect and even our awe. It broke out into three
    arms, for one thing, that only met again a hundred kilometers
    farther down, and for a canoe there were no indications which
    one was intended to be followed.
"If you take a side channel," said the Hungarian officer we
    met in the Pressburg shop while buying provisions, "you may
    find yourselves, when the flood subsides, forty miles from
    anywhere, high and dry, and you may easily starve. There are no
    people, no farms, no fishermen. I warn you not to continue. The
    river, too, is still rising, and this wind will increase."
The rising river did not alarm us in the least, but the
    matter of being left high and dry by a sudden subsidence of the
    waters might be serious, and we had consequently laid in an
    extra stock of provisions. For the rest, the officer's prophecy
    held true, and the wind, blowing down a perfectly clear sky,
    increased steadily till it reached the dignity of a westerly
    gale.
It was earlier than usual when we camped, for the sun was a
    good hour or two from the horizon, and leaving my friend still
    asleep on the hot sand, I wandered about in desultory
    examination of our hotel. The island, I found, was less than an
    acre in extent, a mere sandy bank standing some two or three
    feet above the level of the river. The far end, pointing into
    the sunset, was covered with flying spray which the tremendous
    wind drove off the crests of the broken waves. It was
    triangular in shape, with the apex upstream.
I stood there for several minutes, watching the impetuous
    crimson flood bearing down with a shouting roar, dashing in
    waves against the bank as though to sweep it bodily away, and
    then swirling by in two foaming streams on either side. The
    ground seemed to shake with the shock and rush while the
    furious movement of the willow bushes as the wind poured over
    them increased the curious illusion that the island itself
    actually moved. Above, for a mile or two, I could see the great
    river descending upon me: it was like looking up the slope of a
    sliding hill, white with foam, and leaping up everywhere to
    show itself to the sun.
The rest of the island was too thickly grown with willows to
    make walking pleasant, but I made the tour, nevertheless. From
    the lower end the light, of course, changed, and the river
    looked dark and angry. Only the backs of the flying waves were
    visible, streaked with foam, and pushed forcibly by the great
    puffs of wind that fell upon them from behind. For a short mile
    it was visible, pouring in and out among the islands, and then
    disappearing with a huge sweep into the willows, which closed
    about it like a herd of monstrous antediluvian creatures
    crowding down to drink. They made me think of gigantic
    sponge-like growths that sucked the river up into themselves.
    They caused it to vanish from sight. They herded there together
    in such overpowering numbers.
Altogether it was an impressive scene, with its utter
    loneliness, its bizarre suggestion; and as I gazed, long and
    curiously, a singular emotion began stir somewhere in the
    depths of me. Midway in my delight of the wild beauty, there
    crept unbidden and unexplained, a curious feeling of
    disquietude, almost of alarm.
A rising river, perhaps, always suggests something of the
    ominous: many of the little islands I saw before me would
    probably have been swept away by the morning; this resistless,
    thundering flood of water touched the sense of awe. Yet I was
    aware that my uneasiness lay deeper far than the emotions of
    awe and wonder. It was not that I felt. Nor had it directly to
    do with the power of the driving wind—this shouting
    hurricane that might almost carry up a few acres of willows
    into the air and scatter them like so much chaff over the
    landscape. The wind was simply enjoying itself, for nothing
    rose out of the flat landscape to stop it, and I was conscious
    of sharing its great game with a kind of pleasurable
    excitement. Yet this novel emotion had nothing to do with the
    wind. Indeed, so vague was the sense of distress I experienced,
    that it was impossible to trace it to its source and deal with
    it accordingly, though I was aware somehow that it had to do
    with my realization of our utter insignificance before this
    unrestrained power of the elements about me. The huge-grown
    river had something to do with it too—a vague, unpleasant
    idea that we had somehow trifled with these great elemental
    forces in whose power we lay helpless every hour of the day and
    night. For here, indeed, they were gigantically at play
    together, and the sight appealed to the imagination.
But my emotion, so far as I could understand it, seemed to
    attach itself more particularly to the willow bushes, to these
    acres and acres of willows, crowding, so thickly growing there,
    swarming everywhere the eye could reach, pressing upon the
    river as though to suffocate it, standing in dense array mile
    after mile beneath the sky, watching, waiting, listening. And,
    apart quite from the elements, the willows connected themselves
    subtly with my malaise, attacking the mind insidiously somehow
    by reason of their vast numbers, and contriving in some way or
    other to represent to the imagination a new and mighty power, a
    power, moreover, not altogether friendly to us.
Great revelations of nature, of course, never fail to
    impress in one way or another, and I was no stranger to moods
    of the kind. Mountains overawe and oceans terrify, while the
    mystery of great forests exercises a spell peculiarly its own.
    But all these, at one point or another, somewhere link on
    intimately with human life and human experience. They stir
    comprehensible, even if alarming, emotions. They tend on the
    whole to exalt.
With this multitude of willows, however, it was something
    far different, I felt. Some essence emanated from them that
    besieged the heart. A sense of awe awakened, true, but of awe
    touched somewhere by a vague terror. Their serried ranks
    growing everywhere darker about me as the shadows deepened,
    moving furiously yet softly in the wind, woke in me the curious
    and unwelcome suggestion that we had trespassed here upon the
    borders of an alien world, a world where we were intruders, a
    world where we were not wanted or invited to remain—where
    we ran grave risks perhaps!
The feeling, however, though it refused to yield its meaning
    entirely to analysis, did not at the time trouble me by passing
    into menace. Yet it never left me quite, even during the very
    practical business of putting up the tent in a hurricane of
    wind and building a fire for the stew-pot. It remained, just
    enough to bother and perplex, and to rob a most delightful
    camping-ground of a good portion of its charm. To my companion,
    however, I said nothing, for he was a man I considered devoid
    of imagination. In the first place, I could never have
    explained to him what I meant, and in the second, he would have
    laughed stupidly at me if I had.
There was a slight depression in the center of the island,
    and here we pitched the tent. The surrounding willows broke the
    wind a bit.
"A poor camp," observed the imperturbable Swede when at last
    the tent stood upright; "no stones and precious little
    firewood. I'm for moving on early to-morrow—eh? This sand
    won't hold anything."
But the experience of a collapsing tent at midnight had
    taught us many devices, and we made the cosy gipsy house as
    safe as possible, and then set about collecting a store of wood
    to last till bedtime. Willow bushes drop no branches, and
    driftwood was our only source of supply. We hunted the shores
    pretty thoroughly. Everywhere the banks were crumbling as the
    rising flood tore at them and carried away great portions with
    a splash and a gurgle.
"The island's much smaller than when we landed," said the
    accurate Swede. "It won't last long at this rate. We'd better
    drag the canoe close to the tent, and be ready to start at a
    moment's notice. I shall sleep in my clothes."
He was a little distance off, climbing along the bank, and I
    heard his rather jolly laugh as he spoke.
"By Jove!" I heard him call, a moment later, and turned to
    see what had caused his exclamation; but for the moment he was
    hidden by the willows, and I could not find him.
"What in the world's this?" I heard him cry again, and this
    time his voice had become serious.
I ran up quickly and joined him on the bank. He was looking
    over the river, pointing at something in the water.
"Good Heavens, it's a man's body!" he cried excitedly.
    "Look!"
A black thing, turning over and over in the foaming waves,
    swept rapidly past. It kept disappearing and coming up to the
    surface again. It was about twenty feet from the shore, and
    just as it was opposite to where we stood it lurched round and
    looked straight at us. We saw its eyes reflecting the sunset,
    and gleaming an odd yellow as the body turned over. Then it
    gave a swift, gulping plunge, and dived out of sight in a
    flash.
"An otter, by gad!" we exclaimed in the same breath,
    laughing.
It was an otter, alive, and out on the hunt; yet it
    had looked exactly like the body of a drowned man turning
    helplessly in the current. Far below it came to the surface
    once again, and we saw its black skin, wet and shining in the
    sunlight.
Then, too, just as we turned back, our arms full of
    driftwood, another thing happened to recall us to the river
    bank. This time it really was a man, and what was more, a man
    in a boat. Now a small boat on the Danube was an unusual sight
    at any time, but here in this deserted region, and at flood
    time, it was so unexpected as to constitute a real event. We
    stood and stared.
Whether it was due to the slanting sunlight, or the
    refraction from the wonderfully illumined water, I cannot say,
    but, whatever the cause, I found it difficult to focus my sight
    properly upon the flying apparition. It seemed, however, to be
    a man standing upright in a sort of flat-bottomed boat,
    steering with a long oar, and being carried down the opposite
    shore at a tremendous pace. He apparently was looking across in
    our direction, but the distance was too great and the light too
    uncertain for us to make out very plainly what he was about. It
    seemed to me that he was gesticulating and making signs at us.
    His voice came across the water to us shouting something
    furiously but the wind drowned it so that no single word was
    audible. There was something curious about the whole
    appearance—man, boat, signs, voice—that made an
    impression on me out of all proportion to its cause.
"He's crossing himself!" I cried. "Look, he's making the
    sign of the cross!"
"I believe you're right," the Swede said, shading his eyes
    with his hand and watching the man out of sight. He seemed to
    be gone in a moment, melting away down there into the sea of
    willows where the sun caught them in the bend of the river and
    turned them into a great crimson wall of beauty. Mist, too, had
    begun to rise, so that the air was hazy.
"But what in the world is he doing at nightfall on this
    flooded river?" I said, half to myself. "Where is he going at
    such a time, and what did he mean by his signs and shouting?
    D'you think he wished to warn us about something?"
"He saw our smoke, and thought we were spirits probably,"
    laughed my companion. "These Hungarians believe in all sorts of
    rubbish: you remember the shopwoman at Pressburg warning us
    that no one ever landed here because it belonged to some sort
    of beings outside man's world! I suppose they believe in
    fairies and elementals, possibly demons too. That peasant in
    the boat saw people on the islands for the first time in his
    life," he added, after a slight pause, "and it scared him,
    that's all." The Swede's tone of voice was not convincing, and
    his manner lacked something that was usually there. I noted the
    change instantly while he talked, though without being able to
    label it precisely.
"If they had enough imagination," I laughed loudly—I
    remember trying to make as much noise as I
    could—"they might well people a place like this with the
    old gods of antiquity. The Romans must have haunted all this
    region more or less with their shrines and sacred groves and
    elemental deities."
The subject dropped and we returned to our stew-pot, for my
    friend was not given to imaginative conversation as a rule.
    Moreover, just then I remember feeling distinctly glad that he
    was not imaginative; his stolid, practical nature suddenly
    seemed to me welcome and comforting. It was an admirable
    temperament, I felt: he could steer down rapids like a red
    Indian, shoot dangerous bridges and whirlpools better than any
    white man I ever saw in a canoe. He was a grand fellow for an
    adventurous trip, a tower of strength when untoward things
    happened. I looked at his strong face and light curly hair as
    he staggered along under his pile of driftwood (twice the size
    of mine!), and I experienced a feeling of relief. Yes, I was
    distinctly glad just then that the Swede was—what he was,
    and that he never made remarks that suggested more than they
    said.
"The river's still rising, though," he added, as if
    following out some thoughts of his own, and dropping his load
    with a gasp. "This island will be under water in two days if it
    goes on."
"I wish the wind would go down," I said. "I don't
    care a fig for the river."
The flood, indeed, had no terrors for us; we could get off
    at ten minutes' notice, and the more water the better we liked
    it. It meant an increasing current and the obliteration of the
    treacherous shingle-beds that so often threatened to tear the
    bottom out of our canoe.
Contrary to our expectations, the wind did not go down with
    the sun. It seemed to increase with the darkness, howling
    overhead and shaking the willows round us like straws. Curious
    sounds accompanied it sometimes, like the explosion of heavy
    guns, and it fell upon the water and the island in great flat
    blows of immense power. It made me think of the sounds a planet
    must make, could we only hear it, driving along through
    space.
But the sky kept wholly clear of clouds, and soon after
    supper the full moon rose up in the east and covered the river
    and the plain of shouting willows with a light like the
    day.
We lay on the sandy patch beside the fire, smoking,
    listening to the noises of the night round us, and talking
    happily of the journey we had already made, and of our plans
    ahead. The map lay spread in the door of the tent, but the high
    wind made it hard to study, and presently we lowered the
    curtain and extinguished the lantern. The firelight was enough
    to smoke and see each other's faces by, and the sparks flew
    about overhead like fireworks. A few yards beyond, the river
    gurgled and hissed, and from time to time a heavy splash
    announced the falling away of further portions of the bank.
Our talk, I noticed, had to do with the far-away scenes and
    incidents of our first camps in the Black Forest, or of other
    subjects altogether remote from the present setting, for
    neither of us spoke of the actual moment more than was
    necessary—almost as though we had agreed tacitly to avoid
    discussion of the camp and its incidents. Neither the otter nor
    the boatman, for instance, received the honor of a single
    mention, though ordinarily these would have furnished
    discussion for the greater part of the evening. They were, of
    course, distinct events in such a place.
The scarcity of wood made it a business to keep the fire
    going, for the wind, that drove the smoke in our faces wherever
    we sat, helped at the same time to make a forced draught. We
    took it in turn to make foraging expeditions into the darkness,
    and the quantity the Swede brought back always made me feel
    that he took an absurdly long time finding it; for the fact was
    I did not care much about being left alone, and yet it always
    seemed to be my turn to grub about among the bushes or scramble
    along the slippery banks in the moonlight. The long day's
    battle with wind and water—such wind and such
    water!—had tired us both, and an early bed was the
    obvious program. Yet neither of us made the move for the tent.
    We lay there, tending the fire, talking in desultory fashion,
    peering about us into the dense willow bushes, and listening to
    the thunder of wind and river. The loneliness of the place had
    entered our very bones, and silence seemed natural, for after a
    bit the sound of our voices became a trifle unreal and forced;
    whispering would have been the fitting mode of communication, I
    felt, and the human voice, always rather absurd amid the roar
    of the elements, now carried with it something almost
    illegitimate. It was like talking out loud in church, or in
    some place where it was not lawful, perhaps not quite
    safe, to be overheard.
The eeriness of this lonely island, set among a million
    willows, swept by a hurricane, and surrounded by hurrying deep
    waters, touched us both, I fancy. Untrodden by man, almost
    unknown to man, it lay there beneath the moon, remote from
    human influence, on the frontier of another world, an alien
    world, a world tenanted by willows only and the souls of
    willows. And we, in our rashness, had dared to invade it, even
    to make use of it! Something more than the power of its mystery
    stirred in me as I lay on the sand, feet to fire, and peered up
    through the leaves at the stars. For the last time I rose to
    get firewood.
"When this has burnt up," I said firmly, "I shall turn in,"
    and my companion watched me lazily as I moved off into the
    surrounding shadows.
For an unimaginative man I thought he seemed unusually
    receptive that night, unusually open to suggestion of things
    other than sensory. He too was touched by the beauty and
    loneliness of the place. I was not altogether pleased, I
    remember, to recognize this slight change in him, and instead
    of immediately collecting sticks, I made my way to the far
    point of the island where the moonlight on plain and river
    could be seen to better advantage. The desire to be alone had
    come suddenly upon me; my former dread returned in force; there
    was a vague feeling in me I wished to face and probe to the
    bottom.
When I reached the point of sand jutting out among the
    waves, the spell of the place descended upon me with a positive
    shock. No mere "scenery" could have produced such an effect.
    There was something more here, something to alarm.
I gazed across the waste of wild waters; I watched the
    whispering willows; I heard the ceaseless beating of the
    tireless wind; and, one and all, each in its own way, stirred
    in me this sensation of a strange distress. But the
    willows especially: for ever they went on chattering
    and talking among themselves, laughing a little, shrilly crying
    out, sometimes sighing—but what it was they made so much
    to-do about belonged to the secret life of the great plain they
    inhabited. And it was utterly alien to the world I knew, or to
    that of the wild yet kindly elements. They made me think of a
    host of beings from another plane of life, another evolution
    altogether, perhaps, all discussing a mystery known only to
    themselves. I watched them moving busily together, oddly
    shaking their big bushy heads, twirling their myriad leaves
    even when there was no wind. They moved of their own will as
    though alive, and they touched, by some incalculable method, my
    own keen sense of the horrible.
There they stood in the moonlight, like a vast army
    surrounding our camp, shaking their innumerable silver spears
    defiantly, formed all ready for an attack.
The psychology of places, for some imaginations at least, is
    very vivid; for the wanderer, especially, camps have their
    "note" either of welcome or rejection. At first it may not
    always be apparent, because the busy preparations of tent and
    cooking prevent, but with the first pause—after supper
    usually—it comes and announces itself. And the note of
    this willow-camp now became unmistakably plain to me: we were
    interlopers, trespassers, we were not welcomed. The sense of
    unfamiliarity grew upon me as I stood there watching. We
    touched the frontier of a region where our presence was
    resented. For a night's lodging we might perhaps be tolerated;
    but for a prolonged and inquisitive stay—No! by all the
    gods of the trees and the wilderness, no! We were the first
    human influences upon this island, and we were not wanted.
    The willows were against us.
Strange thoughts like these, bizarre fancies, borne I know
    not whence, found lodgment in my mind as I stood listening.
    What, I thought, if, after all, these crouching willows proved
    to be alive; if suddenly they should rise up, like a swarm of
    living creatures, marshaled by the gods whose territory we had
    invaded, sweep towards us off the vast swamps, booming overhead
    in the night—and then settle down! As I looked
    it was so easy to imagine they actually moved, crept nearer,
    retreated a little, huddled together in masses, hostile,
    waiting for the great wind that should finally start them
    a-running. I could have sworn their aspect changed a little,
    and their ranks deepened and pressed more closely together.
The melancholy shrill cry of a night bird sounded overhead,
    and suddenly I nearly lost my balance as the piece of bank I
    stood upon fell with a great splash into the river, undermined
    by the flood. I stepped back just in time, and went on hunting
    for firewood again, half laughing at the odd fancies that
    crowded so thickly into my mind and cast their spell upon me. I
    recall the Swede's remark about moving on next day, and I was
    just thinking that I fully agreed with him, when I turned with
    a start and saw the subject of my thoughts standing immediately
    in front of me. He was quite close. The roar of the elements
    had covered his approach.
"You've been gone so long," he shouted above the wind, "I
    thought something must have happened to you."
But there was that in his tone, and a certain look in his
    face as well, that conveyed to me more than his actual words,
    and in a flash I understood the real reason for his coming. It
    was because the spell of the place had entered his soul too,
    and he did not like being alone.
"River still rising," he cried, pointing to the flood in the
    moonlight, "and the wind's simply awful."
He always said the same things, but it was the cry for
    companionship that gave the real importance to his words.
"Lucky," I cried back, "our tent's in the hollow. I think
    it'll hold all right." I added something about the difficulty
    of finding wood, in order to explain my absence, but the wind
    caught my words and flung them across the river, so that he did
    not hear, but just looked at me through the branches, nodding
    his head.
"Lucky if we get away without disaster!" he shouted, or
    words to that effect; and I remember feeling half angry with
    him for putting the thought into words, for it was exactly what
    I felt myself. There was disaster impending somewhere, and the
    sense of presentiment lay unpleasantly upon me.
We went back to the fire and made a final blaze, poking it
    up with our feet. We took a last look round. But for the wind
    the heat would have been unpleasant. I put this thought into
    words, and I remember my friend's reply struck me oddly: that
    he would rather have the heat, the ordinary July weather, than
    this "diabolical wind."
Everything was snug for the night; the canoe lying turned
    over beside the tent, with both yellow paddles beneath her; the
    provision sack hanging from a willow stem, and the washed-up
    dishes removed to a safe distance from the fire, all ready for
    the morning meal.
We smothered the embers of the fire with sand, and then
    turned in. The flap of the tent door was up, and I saw the
    branches and the stars and the white moonlight. The shaking
    willows and the heavy buffetings of the wind against our taut
    little house were the last things I remembered as sleep came
    down and covered all with its soft and delicious
    forgetfulness.
II
Suddenly I found myself lying awake, peering from my sandy
    mattress through the door of the tent. I looked at my watch
    pinned against the canvas, and saw by the bright moonlight that
    it was past twelve o'clock—the threshold of a new
    day—and I had therefore slept a couple of hours. The
    Swede was asleep still beside me; the wind howled as before
    something plucked at my heart and made me feel afraid. There
    was a sense of disturbance in my immediate neighborhood.
I sat up quickly and looked out. The trees were swaying
    violently to and fro as the gusts smote them, but our little
    bit of green canvas lay snugly safe in the hollow, for the wind
    passed over it without meeting enough resistance to make it
    vicious. The feeling of disquietude did not pass however, and I
    crawled quietly out of the tent to see if our belongings were
    safe. I moved carefully so as not to waken my companion. A
    curious excitement was on me.
I was halfway out, kneeling on all fours, when my eye first
    took in that the tops of the bushes opposite, with their moving
    tracery of leaves, made shapes against the sky. I sat back on
    my haunches and stared. It was incredible, surely, but there,
    opposite and slightly above me, were shapes of some
    indeterminate sort among the willows, and as the branches
    swayed in the wind they seemed to group themselves about these
    shapes, forming a series of monstrous outlines that shifted
    rapidly beneath the moon. Close, about fifty feet in front of
    me, I saw these things.
My first instinct was to waken my companion that he too
    might see them, but something made me hesitate—the sudden
    realization, probably, that I should not welcome corroboration;
    and meanwhile I crouched there staring in amazement with
    smarting eyes. I was wide awake. I remember saying to myself
    that I was not dreaming.
They first became properly visible, these huge figures, just
    within the tops of the bushes—immense bronze-colored,
    moving, and wholly independent of the swaying of the branches.
    I saw them plainly and noted, now I came to examine them more
    calmly, that they were very much larger than human, and indeed
    that something in their appearance proclaimed them to be
    not human at all. Certainly they were not merely the
    moving tracery of the branches against the moonlight. They
    shifted independently. They rose upwards in a continuous stream
    from earth to sky, vanishing utterly as soon as they reached
    the dark of the sky. They were interlaced one with another,
    making a great column, and I saw their limbs and huge bodies
    melting in and out of each other, forming this serpentine line
    that bent and swayed and twisted spirally with the contortions
    of the wind-tossed trees. They were nude, fluid shapes, passing
    up the bushes, within the leaves almost—rising
    up in a living column into the heavens. Their faces I never
    could see. Unceasingly they poured upwards, swaying in great
    bending curves, with a hue of dull bronze upon their skins.
I stared, trying to force every atom of vision from my eyes.
    For a long time I thought they must every moment
    disappear and resolve themselves into the movements of the
    branches and prove to be an optical illusion. I searched
    everywhere for a proof of reality, when all the while I
    understood quite well that the standard of reality had changed.
    For the longer I looked the more certain I became that these
    figures were real and living, though perhaps not according to
    the standards that the camera and the biologist would insist
    upon.
Far from feeling fear, I was possessed with a sense of awe
    and wonder such as I have never known. I seemed to be gazing at
    the personified elemental forces of this haunted and primeval
    region. Our intrusion had stirred the powers of the place into
    activity. It was we who were the cause of the disturbance, and
    my brain filled to bursting with stories and legends of the
    spirits and deities of places that have been acknowledged and
    worshiped by men in all ages of the world's history. But,
    before I could arrive at any possible explanation, something
    impelled me to go farther out, and I crept forward on to the
    sand and stood upright. I felt the ground still warm under my
    bare feet; the wind tore at my hair and face; and the sound of
    the river burst upon my ears with a sudden roar. These things,
    I knew, were real, and proved that my senses were acting
    normally. Yet the figures still rose from earth to heaven,
    silent, majestically, in a great spiral of grace and strength
    that overwhelmed me at length with a genuine deep emotion of
    worship. I felt that I must fall down and
    worship—absolutely worship.
Perhaps in another minute I might have done so, when a gust
    of wind swept against me with such force that it blew me
    sideways, and I nearly stumbled and fell. It seemed to shake
    the dream violently out of me. At least it gave me another
    point of view somehow. The figures still remained, still
    ascended into heaven from the heart of the night, but my reason
    at last began to assert itself. It must be a subjective
    experience, I argued—none the less real for that, but
    still subjective. The moonlight and the branches combined to
    work out these pictures upon the mirror of my imagination, and
    for some reason I projected them outwards and made them appear
    objective. I knew this must be the case, of course. I was the
    subject of a vivid and interesting hallucination. I took
    courage, and began to move forward across the open patches of
    sand. By Jove, though, was it all hallucination? Was it merely
    subjective? Did not my reason argue in the old futile way from
    the little standard of the known?
I only know that great column of figures ascended darkly
    into the sky for what seemed a very long period of time, and
    with a very complete measure of reality as most men are
    accustomed to gauge reality. Then suddenly they were gone!
And, once they were gone and the immediate wonder of their
    great presence had passed, fear came down upon me with a cold
    rush. The esoteric meaning of this lonely and haunted region
    suddenly flamed up within me and I began to tremble dreadfully.
    I took a quick look round—a look of horror that came near
    to panic—calculating vainly ways of escape; and then,
    realizing how helpless I was to achieve anything really
    effective, I crept back silently into the tent and lay down
    again upon my sandy mattress, first lowering the door-curtain
    to shut out the sight of the willows in the moonlight, and then
    burying my head as deeply as possible beneath the blankets to
    deaden the sound of the terrifying wind.
III
As though further to convince me that I had not been
    dreaming, I remember that it was a long time before I fell
    again into a troubled and restless sleep; and even then only
    the upper crust of me slept, and underneath there was something
    that never quite lost consciousness, but lay alert and on the
    watch.
But this second time I jumped up with a genuine start of
    terror. It was neither the wind nor the river that woke me, but
    the slow approach of something that caused the sleeping portion
    of me to grow smaller and smaller till at last it vanished
    altogether, and I found myself sitting bolt
    upright—listening.
Outside there was a sound of multitudinous little
    patterings. They had been coming, I was aware, for a long time,
    and in my sleep they had first become audible. I sat there
    nervously wide awake as though I had not slept at all. It
    seemed to me that my breathing came with difficulty, and that
    there was a great weight upon the surface of my body. In spite
    of the hot night, I felt clammy with cold and shivered.
    Something surely was pressing steadily against the sides of the
    tent and weighing down upon it from above. Was it the body of
    the wind? Was this the pattering rain, the dripping of the
    leaves? The spray blown from the river by the wind and
    gathering in big drops? I thought quickly of a dozen
    things.
Then suddenly the explanation leaped into my mind: a bough
    from the poplar, the only large tree on the island, had fallen
    with the wind. Still half caught by the other branches, it
    would fall with the next gust and crush us, and meanwhile its
    leaves brushed and tapped upon the tight canvas surface of the
    tent. I raised the loose flap and rushed out, calling to the
    Swede to follow.
But when I got out and stood upright I saw that the tent was
    free. There was no hanging bough; there was no rain or spray;
    nothing approached.
A cold, gray light filtered down through the bushes and lay
    on the faintly gleaming sand. Stars still crowded the sky
    directly overhead, and the wind howled magnificently, but the
    fire no longer gave out any glow, and I saw the east reddening
    in streaks through the trees. Several hours must have passed
    since I stood there before, watching the ascending figures, and
    the memory of it now came back to me horribly, like an evil
    dream. Oh, how tired it made me feel, that ceaseless raging
    wind! Yet, though the deep lassitude of a sleepless night was
    on me, my nerves were tingling with the activity of an equally
    tireless apprehension, and all idea of repose was out of the
    question. The river I saw had risen further. Its thunder filled
    the air, and a fine spray made itself felt through my thin
    sleeping shirt.
Yet nowhere did I discover the slightest evidences of
    anything to cause alarm. This deep, prolonged disturbance in my
    heart remained wholly unaccounted for.
My companion had not stirred when I called him, and there
    was no need to waken him now. I looked about me carefully,
    noting everything: the turned-over canoe; the yellow
    paddles—two of them, I'm certain; the provision sack and
    the extra lantern hanging together from the tree; and, crowding
    everywhere about me, enveloping all, the willows, those
    endless, shaking willows. A bird uttered its morning cry, and a
    string of duck passed with whirring flight overhead in the
    twilight. The sand whirled, dry and stinging, about my bare
    feet in the wind.
I walked round the tent and then went out a little way into
    the bush, so that I could see across the river to the farther
    landscape, and the same profound yet indefinable emotion of
    distress seized upon me again as I saw the interminable sea of
    bushes stretching to the horizon, looking ghostly and unreal in
    the wan light of dawn. I walked softly here and there, still
    puzzling over that odd sound of infinite pattering, and of that
    pressure upon the tent that had wakened me. It must
    have been the wind, I reflected—the wind beating upon the
    loose, hot sand, driving the dry particles smartly against the
    taut canvas—the wind dropping heavily upon our fragile
    roof.
Yet all the time my nervousness and malaise increased
    appreciably.
I crossed over to the farther shore and noted how the coast
    line had altered in the night, and what masses of sand the
    river had torn away. I dipped my hands and feet into the cool
    current, and bathed my forehead. Already there was a glow of
    sunrise in the sky and the exquisite freshness of coming day.
    On my way back I passed purposely beneath the very bushes where
    I had seen the column of figures rising into the air, and
    midway among the clumps I suddenly found myself overtaken by a
    sense of vast terror. From the shadows a large figure went
    swiftly by. Some one passed me, as sure as ever man did....
It was a great staggering blow from the wind that helped me
    forward again, and once out in the more open space, the sense
    of terror diminished strangely. The winds were about and
    walking, I remember saying to myself; for the winds often move
    like great presences under the trees. And altogether the fear
    that hovered about me was such an unknown and immense kind of
    fear, so unlike anything I had ever felt before, that it woke a
    sense of awe and wonder in me that did much to counteract its
    worst effects; and when I reached a high point in the middle of
    the island from which I could see the wide stretch of river,
    crimson in the sunrise, the whole magical beauty of it all was
    so overpowering that a sort of wild yearning woke in me and
    almost brought a cry up into the throat.
But this cry found no expression, for as my eyes wandered
    from the plain beyond to the island round me and noted our
    little tent half hidden among the willows, a dreadful discovery
    leaped out at me, compared to which my terror of the walking
    winds seemed as nothing at all.
For a change, I thought, had somehow come about in the
    arrangement of the landscape. It was not that my point of
    vantage gave me a different view, but that an alteration had
    apparently been effected in the relation of the tent to the
    willows, and of the willows to the tent. Surely the bushes now
    crowded much closer—unnecessarily, unpleasantly close.
    They had moved nearer.
Creeping with silent feet over the shifting sands, drawing
    imperceptibly nearer by soft, unhurried movements, the willows
    had come closer during the night. But had the wind moved them,
    or had they moved of themselves? I recalled the sound of
    infinite small patterings and the pressure upon the tent and
    upon my own heart that caused me to wake in terror. I swayed
    for a moment in the wind like a tree, finding it hard to keep
    my upright position on the sandy hillock. There was a
    suggestion here of personal agency, of deliberate intention, of
    aggressive hostility, and it terrified me into a sort of
    rigidity.
Then the reaction followed quickly. The idea was so bizarre,
    so absurd, that I felt inclined to laugh. But the laughter came
    no more readily than the cry, for the knowledge that my mind
    was so receptive to such dangerous imaginings brought the
    additional terror that it was through our minds and not through
    our physical bodies that the attack would come, and was
    coming.
The wind buffeted me about, and, very quickly it seemed, the
    sun came up over the horizon, for it was after four o'clock,
    and I must have stood on that little pinnacle of sand longer
    than I knew, afraid to come down at close quarters with the
    willows. I returned quietly, creepily, to the tent, first
    taking another exhaustive look round and—yes, I confess
    it—making a few measurements. I paced out on the warm
    sand the distances between the willows and the tent, making a
    note of the shortest distance particularly.
I crawled stealthily into my blankets. My companion, to all
    appearances, still slept soundly, and I was glad that this was
    so. Provided my experiences were not corroborated, I could find
    strength somehow to deny them, perhaps. With the daylight I
    could persuade myself that it was all a subjective
    hallucination, a fantasy of the night, a projection of the
    excited imagination.
Nothing further came to disturb me, and I fell asleep almost
    at once, utterly exhausted, yet still in dread of hearing again
    that weird sound of multitudinous pattering, or of feeling the
    pressure upon my heart that had made it difficult to
    breathe.
IV
The sun was high in the heavens when my companion woke me
    from a heavy sleep and announced that the porridge was cooked
    and there was just time to bathe. The grateful smell of
    frizzling bacon entered the tent door.
"River still rising," he said, "and several islands out in
    midstream have disappeared altogether. Our own island's much
    smaller."
"Any wood left?" I asked sleepily.
"The wood and the island will finish to-morrow in a dead
    heat," he laughed, "but there's enough to last us till
    then."
I plunged in from the point of the island, which had indeed
    altered a lot in size and shape during the night, and was swept
    down in a moment to the landing place opposite the tent. The
    water was icy, and the banks flew by like the country from an
    express train. Bathing under such conditions was an
    exhilarating operation, and the terror of the night seemed
    cleansed out of me by a process of evaporation in the brain.
    The sun was blazing hot; not a cloud showed itself anywhere;
    the wind, however, had not abated one little jot.
Quite suddenly then the implied meaning of the Swede's words
    flashed across me, showing that he no longer wished to leave
    posthaste, and had changed his mind. "Enough to last till
    to-morrow"—he assumed we should stay on the island
    another night. It struck me as odd. The night before he was so
    positive the other way. How had the change come about?
Great crumblings of the banks occurred at breakfast, with
    heavy splashings and clouds of spray which the wind brought
    into our frying-pan, and my fellow-traveler talked incessantly
    about the difficulty the Vienna-Pesth steamers must have to
    find the channel in flood. But the state of his mind interested
    and impressed me far more than the state of the river or the
    difficulties of the steamers. He had changed somehow since the
    evening before. His manner was different—a trifle
    excited, a trifle shy, with a sort of suspicion about his voice
    and gestures. I hardly know how to describe it now in cold
    blood, but at the time I remember being quite certain of one
    thing, viz., that he had become frightened!
He ate very little breakfast, and for once omitted to smoke
    his pipe. He had the map spread open beside him, and kept
    studying its markings.
"We'd better get off sharp in an hour," I said presently,
    feeling for an opening that must bring him indirectly to a
    partial confession at any rate. And his answer puzzled me
    uncomfortably: "Rather! If they'll let us."
"Who'll let us? The elements?" I asked quickly, with
    affected indifference.
"The powers of this awful place, whoever they are," he
    replied, keeping his eyes on the map. "The gods are here, if
    they are anywhere at all in the world."
"The elements are always the true immortals," I replied,
    laughing as naturally as I could manage, yet knowing quite well
    that my face reflected my true feelings when he looked up
    gravely at me and spoke across the smoke:
"We shall be fortunate if we get away without further
    disaster."
This was exactly what I had dreaded, and I screwed myself up
    to the point of the direct question. It was like agreeing to
    allow the dentist to extract the tooth; it had to come
    anyhow in the long run, and the rest was all pretense.
"Further disaster! Why, what's happened?"
"For one thing—the steering paddle's gone," he said
    quietly.
"The steering paddle gone!" I repeated, greatly excited, for
    this was our rudder, and the Danube in flood without a rudder
    was suicide. "But what——"
"And there's a tear in the bottom of the canoe," he added,
    with a genuine little tremor in his voice.
I continued staring at him, able only to repeat the words in
    his face somewhat foolishly. There, in the heat of the sun, and
    on this burning sand, I was aware of a freezing atmosphere
    descending round us. I got up to follow him, for he merely
    nodded his head gravely and led the way towards the tent a few
    yards on the other side of the fireplace. The canoe still lay
    there as I had last seen her in the night, ribs uppermost, the
    paddles, or rather, the paddle, on the sand beside
    her.
"There's only one," he said, stooping to pick it up. "And
    here's the rent in the base-board."
It was on the tip of my tongue to tell him that I had
    clearly noticed two paddles a few hours before, but a
    second impulse made me think better of it, and I said nothing.
    I approached to see.
There was a long, finely made tear in the bottom of the
    canoe where a little slither of wood had been neatly taken
    clean out; it looked as if the tooth of a sharp rock or snag
    had eaten down her length, and investigation showed that the
    hole went through. Had we launched out in her without observing
    it we must inevitably have foundered. At first the water would
    have made the wood swell so as to close the hole, but once out
    in midstream the water must have poured in, and the canoe,
    never more than two inches above the surface, would have filled
    and sunk very rapidly.
"There, you see, an attempt to prepare a victim for the
    sacrifice," I heard him saying, more to himself than to me,
    "two victims rather," he added as he bent over and ran his
    fingers along the slit.
I began to whistle—a thing I always do unconsciously
    when utterly nonplused—and purposely paid no attention to
    his words. I was determined to consider them foolish.
"It wasn't there last night," he said presently,
    straightening up from his examination and looking anywhere but
    at me.
"We must have scratched her in landing, of course," I
    stopped whistling to say, "The stones are very
    sharp——"
I stopped abruptly, for at that moment he turned round and
    met my eye squarely. I knew just as well as he did how
    impossible my explanation was. There were no stones, to begin
    with.
"And then there's this to explain too," he added quietly,
    handing me the paddle and pointing to the blade.
A new and curious emotion spread freezingly over me as I
    took and examined it. The blade was scraped down all over,
    beautifully scraped, as though someone had sand-papered it with
    care, making it so thin that the first vigorous stroke must
    have snapped it off at the elbow.
"One of us walked in his sleep and did this thing," I said
    feebly, "or—or it has been filed by the constant stream
    of sand particles blown against it by the wind, perhaps."
"Ah," said the Swede, turning away, laughing a little, "you
    can explain everything!"
"The same wind that caught the steering paddle and flung it
    so near the bank that it fell in with the next lump that
    crumbled," I called out after him, absolutely determined to
    find an explanation for everything he showed me.
"I see," he shouted back, turning his head to look at me
    before disappearing among the willow bushes.
Once alone with these perplexing evidences of personal
    agency, I think my first thought took the form of "One of us
    must have done this thing, and it certainly was not I." But my
    second thought decided how impossible it was to suppose, under
    all the circumstances, that either of us had done it. That my
    companion, the trusted friend of a dozen similar expeditions,
    could have knowingly had a hand in it, was a suggestion not to
    be entertained for a moment. Equally absurd seemed the
    explanation that this imperturbable and densely practical
    nature had suddenly become insane and was busied with insane
    purposes.
Yet the fact remained that what disturbed me most, and kept
    my fear actively alive even in this blaze of sunshine and wild
    beauty, was the clear certainty that some curious alteration
    had come about in his mind—that he was nervous,
    timid, suspicious, aware of goings on he did not speak about,
    watching a series of secret and hitherto unmentionable
    events—waiting, in a word, for a climax that he expected,
    and, I thought, expected very soon. This grew up in my mind
    intuitively—I hardly knew how.
I made a hurried examination of the tent and its
    surroundings, but the measurements of the night remained the
    same. There were deep hollows formed in the sand, I now noticed
    for the first time, basin-shaped and of various depths and
    sizes, varying from that of a teacup to a large bowl. The wind,
    no doubt, was responsible for these miniature craters, just as
    it was for lifting the paddle and tossing it towards the water.
    The rent in the canoe was the only thing that seemed quite
    inexplicable; and, after all, it was conceivable that
    a sharp point had caught it when we landed. The examination I
    made of the shore did not assist this theory, but all the same
    I clung to it with that diminishing portion of my intelligence
    which I called my "reason." An explanation of some kind was an
    absolute necessity, just as some working explanation of the
    universe is necessary—however absurd—to the
    happiness of every individual who seeks to do his duty in the
    world and face the problems of life. The simile seemed to me at
    the time an exact parallel.
I at once set the pitch melting, and presently the Swede
    joined me at the work, though under the best conditions in the
    world the canoe could not be safe for traveling till the
    following day. I drew his attention casually to the hollows in
    the sand.
"Yes," he said, "I know. They're all over the island. But
    you can explain them, no doubt!"
"Wind, of course," I answered without hesitation. "Have you
    never watched those little whirlwinds in the street that twist
    and twirl everything into a circle? This sand's loose enough to
    yield, that's all."
He made no reply, and we worked on in silence for a bit. I
    watched him surreptitiously all the time, and I had an idea he
    was watching me. He seemed, too, to be always listening
    attentively to something I could not hear, or perhaps for
    something that he expected to hear, for he kept turning about
    and staring into the bushes, and up into the sky, and out
    across the water where it was visible through the openings
    among the willows. Sometimes he even put his hand to his ear
    and held it there for several minutes. He said nothing to me,
    however, about it, and I asked no questions. And meanwhile, as
    he mended that torn canoe with the skill and address of a red
    Indian, I was glad to notice his absorption in the work, for
    there was a vague dread in my heart that he would speak of the
    changed aspect of the willows. And, if he had noticed
    that, my imagination could no longer be held a
    sufficient explanation of it.
At length, after a long pause, he began to talk.
"Queer thing," he added in a hurried sort of voice, as
    though he wanted to say something and get it over. "Queer
    thing, I mean, about that otter last night."
I had expected something so totally different that he caught
    me with surprise, and I looked up sharply.
"Shows how lonely this place is. Otters are awfully shy
    things—"
"I don't mean that, of course," he interrupted. "I
    mean—do you think—did you think it really was an
    otter?"
"What else, in the name of Heaven, what else?"
"You know, I saw it before you did, and at first it
    seemed—so much bigger than an otter."
"The sunset as you looked upstream magnified it, or
    something," I replied.
He looked at me absently a moment, as though his mind were
    busy with other thoughts.
"It had such extraordinary yellow eyes," he went on half to
    himself.
"That was the sun too," I laughed, a trifle boisterously. "I
    suppose you'll wonder next if that fellow in the
    boat——"
I suddenly decided not to finish the sentence. He was in the
    act again of listening, turning his head to the wind, and
    something in the expression of his face made me halt. The
    subject dropped, and we went on with our caulking. Apparently
    he had not noticed my unfinished sentence. Five minutes later,
    however, he looked at me across the canoe, the smoking pitch in
    his hand, his face exceedingly grave.
"I did rather wonder, if you want to know," he said
    slowly, "what that thing in the boat was. I remember thinking
    at the time it was not a man. The whole business seemed to rise
    quite suddenly out of the water."
I laughed again boisterously in his face, but this time
    there was impatience and a strain of anger too, in my
    feeling.
"Look here now," I cried, "this place is quite queer enough
    without going out of our way to imagine things! That boat was
    an ordinary boat, and the man in it was an ordinary man, and
    they were both going downstream as fast as they could lick. And
    that otter was an otter, so don't let's play the fool
    about it!"
He looked steadily at me with the same grave expression. He
    was not in the least annoyed. I took courage from his
    silence.
"And for heaven's sake," I went on, "don't keep pretending
    you hear things, because it only gives me the jumps, and
    there's nothing to hear but the river and this cursed old
    thundering wind."
"You fool!" he answered in a low, shocked voice,
    "you utter fool. That's just the way all victims talk. As if
    you didn't understand just as well as I do!" he sneered with
    scorn in his voice, and a sort of resignation. "The best thing
    you can do is to keep quiet and try to hold your mind as firm
    as possible. This feeble attempt at self-deception only makes
    the truth harder when you're forced to meet it."
My little effort was over, and I found nothing more to say,
    for I knew quite well his words were true, and that I was the
    fool, not he. Up to a certain stage in the adventure
    he kept ahead of me easily, and I think I felt annoyed to be
    out of it, to be thus proved less psychic, less sensitive than
    himself to these extraordinary happenings, and half ignorant
    all the time of what was going on under my very nose. He
    knew from the very beginning, apparently. But at the
    moment I wholly missed the point of his words about the
    necessity of there being a victim, and that we ourselves were
    destined to satisfy the want. I dropped all pretense
    thenceforward, but thenceforward likewise my fear increased
    steadily to the climax.
"But you're quite right about one thing," he added, before
    the subject passed, "and that is that we're wiser not to talk
    about it, or even to think about it, because what one
    thinks finds expression in words, and what one
    says, happens."
That afternoon, while the canoe dried and hardened, we spent
    trying to fish, testing the leak, collecting wood, and watching
    the enormous flood of rising water. Masses of driftwood swept
    near our shores sometimes, and we fished for them with long
    willow branches. The island grew perceptibly smaller as the
    banks were torn away with great gulps and splashes. The weather
    kept brilliantly fine till about four o'clock, and then for the
    first time for three days the wind showed signs of abating.
    Clouds began to gather in the southwest, spreading thence
    slowly over the sky.
This lessening of the wind came as a great relief, for the
    incessant roaring, banging, and thundering had irritated our
    nerves. Yet the silence that came about five o'clock with its
    sudden cessation was in a manner quite as oppressive. The
    booming of the river had everything its own way then: it filled
    the air with deep murmurs, more musical than the wind noises,
    but infinitely more monotonous. The wind held many notes,
    rising, falling, always beating out some sort of great
    elemental tune; whereas the river's song lay between three
    notes at most—dull pedal notes, that held a lugubrious
    quality foreign to the wind, and somehow seemed to me, in my
    then nervous state, to sound wonderfully well the music of
    doom.
It was extraordinary, too, how the withdrawal suddenly of
    bright sunlight took everything out of the landscape that made
    for cheerfulness; and since this particular landscape had
    already managed to convey the suggestion of something sinister,
    the change of course was all the more unwelcome and noticeable.
    For me, I know, the darkening outlook became distinctly more
    alarming, and I found myself more than once calculating how
    soon after sunset the full moon would get up in the east, and
    whether the gathering clouds would greatly interfere with her
    lighting of the little island.
With this general hush of the wind—though it still
    indulged in occasional brief gusts—the river seemed to me
    to grow blacker, the willows to stand more densely together.
    The latter, too, kept up a sort of independent movement of
    their own, rustling among themselves when no wind stirred, and
    shaking oddly from the roots upwards. When common objects in
    this way become charged with the suggestion of horror, they
    stimulate the imagination far more than things of unusual
    appearance; and these bushes, crowding huddled about us,
    assumed for me in the darkness a bizarre grotesquerie
    of appearance that lent to them somehow the aspect of
    purposeful and living creatures. Their very ordinariness, I
    felt, masked what was malignant and hostile to us. The forces
    of the region drew nearer with the coming of night. They were
    focusing upon our island, and more particularly upon ourselves.
    For thus, somehow, in the terms of the imagination, did my
    really indescribable sensations in this extraordinary place
    present themselves.
I had slept a good deal in the early afternoon, and had thus
    recovered somewhat from the exhaustion of a disturbed night,
    but this only served apparently to render me more susceptible
    than before to the obsessing spell of the haunting. I fought
    against it, laughing at my feelings as absurd and childish,
    with very obvious physiological explanations, yet, in spite of
    every effort, they gained in strength upon me so that I dreaded
    the night as a child lost in a forest must dread the approach
    of darkness.
The canoe we had carefully covered with a waterproof sheet
    during the day, and the one remaining paddle had been securely
    tied by the Swede to the base of a tree, lest the wind should
    rob us of that too. From five o'clock onwards I busied myself
    with the stew-pot and preparations for dinner, it being my turn
    to cook that night. We had potatoes, onions, bits of bacon fat
    to add flavour, and a general thick residue from former stews
    at the bottom of the pot; with black bread broken up into it
    the result was most excellent, and it was followed by a stew of
    plums with sugar and a brew of strong tea with dried milk. A
    good pile of wood lay close at hand, and the absence of wind
    made my duties easy. My companion sat lazily watching me,
    dividing his attentions between cleaning his pipe and giving
    useless advice—an admitted privilege of the off-duty man.
    He had been very quiet all the afternoon, engaged in
    re-caulking the canoe, strengthening the tent ropes, and
    fishing for driftwood while I slept. No more talk about
    undesirable things had passed between us, and I think his only
    remarks had to do with the gradual destruction of the island,
    which he declared was now fully a third smaller than when we
    first landed.
The pot had just begun to bubble when I heard his voice
    calling to me from the bank, where he had wandered away without
    my noticing. I ran up.
"Come and listen," he said, "and see what you make of it."
    He held his hand cupwise to his ear, as so often before.
"Now do you hear anything?" he asked, watching me
    curiously.
We stood there, listening attentively together. At first I
    heard only the deep note of the water and the hissings rising
    from its turbulent surface. The willows, for once, were
    motionless and silent. Then a sound began to reach my ears
    faintly, a peculiar sound—something like the humming of a
    distant gong. It seemed to come across to us in the darkness
    from the waste of swamps and willows opposite. It was repeated
    at regular intervals, but it was certainly neither the sound of
    a bell nor the hooting of a distant steamer. I can liken it to
    nothing so much as to the sound of an immense gong, suspended
    far up in the sky, repeating incessantly its muffled metallic
    note, soft and musical, as it was repeatedly struck. My heart
    quickened as I listened.
"I've heard it all day," said my companion. "While you slept
    this afternoon it came all round the island. I hunted it down,
    but could never get near enough to see—to localize it
    correctly. Sometimes it was overhead, and sometimes it seemed
    under the water. Once or twice, too, I could have sworn it was
    not outside at all, but within myself—you
    know—the way a sound in the fourth dimension is supposed
    to come."
I was too much puzzled to pay much attention to his words. I
    listened carefully, striving to associate it with any known
    familiar sound I could think of, but without success. It
    changed in direction, too, coming nearer, and then sinking
    utterly away into remote distance. I cannot say that it was
    ominous in quality, because to me it seemed distinctly musical,
    yet I must admit it set going a distressing feeling that made
    me wish I had never heard it.
"The wind blowing in those sand-funnels," I said, determined
    to find an explanation, "or the bushes rubbing together after
    the storm perhaps."
"It comes off the whole swamp," my friend answered. "It
    comes from everywhere at once." He ignored my explanations. "It
    comes from the willow bushes somehow——"
"But now the wind has dropped," I objected "The willows can
    hardly make a noise by themselves, can they?"
His answer frightened me, first because I had dreaded it,
    and secondly, because I knew intuitively it was true.
"It is because the wind has dropped we now hear it.
    It was drowned before. It is the cry, I believe of
    the——"
I dashed back to my fire, warned by a sound of bubbling that
    the stew was in danger, but determined at the same time to
    escape from further conversation. I was resolute, if possible,
    to avoid the exchanging of views. I dreaded, too, that he would
    begin again about the gods, or the elemental forces, or
    something else disquieting, and I wanted to keep myself well in
    hand for what might happen later. There was another night to be
    faced before we escaped from this distressing place, and there
    was no knowing yet what it might bring forth.
"Come and cut up bread for the pot," I called to him,
    vigorously stirring the appetizing mixture. That stew-pot held
    sanity for us both, and the thought made me laugh.
He came over slowly and took the provision sack from the
    tree, fumbling in its mysterious depths, and then emptying the
    entire contents upon the ground-sheet at his feet.
"Hurry up!" I cried; "it's boiling."
The Swede burst out into a roar of laughter that startled
    me. It was forced laughter, not artificial exactly, but
    mirthless.
"There's nothing here!" he shouted, holding his sides.
"Bread, I mean."
"It's gone. There is no bread. They've taken it!"
I dropped the long spoon and ran up. Everything the sack had
    contained lay upon the ground-sheet, but there was no loaf.
The whole dead weight of my growing fear fell upon me and
    shook me. Then I burst out laughing too. It was the only thing
    to do: and the sound of my own laughter also made me understand
    his. The strain of psychical pressure caused it—this
    explosion of unnatural laughter in both of us; it was an effort
    of repressed forces to seek relief; it was a temporary safety
    valve. And with both of us it ceased quite suddenly.
"How criminally stupid of me!" I cried, still determined to
    be consistent and find an explanation. "I clean forgot to buy a
    loaf at Pressburg. That chattering woman put everything out of
    my head, and I must have left it lying on the counter
    or——"
"The oatmeal, too, is much less than it was this morning,"
    the Swede interrupted.
Why in the world need he draw attention to it? I thought
    angrily.
"There's enough for to-morrow," I said, stirring vigorously,
    "and we can get lots more at Komorn or Gran. In twenty-four
    hours we shall be miles from here."
"I hope so—to God," he muttered, putting the things
    back into the sack, "unless we're claimed first as victims for
    the sacrifice," he added with a foolish laugh. He dragged the
    sack into the tent, for safety's sake, I suppose, and I heard
    him mumbling on to himself, but so indistinctly that it seemed
    quite natural for me to ignore his words.
Our meal was beyond question a gloomy one, and we ate it
    almost in silence, avoiding one another's eyes, and keeping the
    fire bright. Then we washed up and prepared for the night, and,
    once smoking, our minds unoccupied with any definite duties,
    the apprehension I had felt all day long became more and more
    acute. It was not then active fear, I think, but the very
    vagueness of its origin distressed me far more than if I had
    been able to ticket and face it squarely. The curious sound I
    have likened to the note of a gong became now almost incessant,
    and filled the stillness of the night with a faint, continuous
    ringing rather than a series of distinct notes. At one time it
    was behind and at another time in front of us. Sometimes I
    fancied it came from the bushes on our left, and then again
    from the clumps on our right. More often it hovered directly
    overhead like the whirring of wings. It was really everywhere
    at once, behind, in front, at our sides and over our heads,
    completely surrounding us. The sound really defies description.
    But nothing within my knowledge is like that ceaseless muffled
    humming rising off the deserted world of swamps and
    willows.
We sat smoking in comparative silence, the strain growing
    every minute greater. The worst feature of the situation seemed
    to me that we did not know what to expect, and could therefore
    make no sort of preparation by way of defense. We could
    anticipate nothing. My explanations made in the sunshine,
    moreover, now came to haunt me with their foolish and wholly
    unsatisfactory nature, and it was more and more clear to me
    that some kind of plain talk with my companion was inevitable,
    whether I liked it or not. After all, we had to spend the night
    together, and to sleep in the same tent side by side. I saw
    that I could not get along much longer without the support of
    his mind, and for that, of course, plain talk was imperative.
    As long as possible, however, I postponed this little climax,
    and tried to ignore or laugh at the occasional sentences he
    flung into the emptiness.
Some of these sentences, moreover, were confoundedly
    disquieting to me, coming as they did to corroborate much that
    I felt myself: corroboration, too—which made it so much
    more convincing—from a totally different point of view.
    He composed such curious sentences, and hurled them at me in
    such an inconsequential sort of way, as though his main line of
    thought was secret to himself, and these fragments were the
    bits he found it impossible to digest. He got rid of them by
    uttering them. Speech relieved him. It was like being sick.
"There are things about us, I'm sure, that make for
    disorder, disintegration, destruction, our
    destruction," he said once, while the fire blazed between us.
    "We've strayed out of a safe line somewhere."
And another time, when the gong sounds had come nearer,
    ringing much louder than before, and directly over our heads,
    he said, as though talking to himself:
"I don't think a phonograph would show any record of that.
    The sound doesn't come to me by the ears at all. The vibrations
    reach me in another manner altogether, and seem to be within
    me, which is precisely how a fourth dimension sound might be
    supposed to make itself heard."
I purposely made no reply to this, but I sat up a little
    closer to the fire and peered about me into the darkness. The
    clouds were massed all over the sky and no trace of moonlight
    came through. Very still, too, everything was, so that the
    river and the frogs had things all their own way.
"It has that about it," he went on, "which is utterly out of
    common experience. It is unknown. Only one thing
    describes it really: it is a non-human sound; I mean a sound
    outside humanity."
Having rid himself of this indigestible morsel, he lay quiet
    for a time; but he had so admirably expressed my own feeling
    that it was a relief to have the thought out, and to have
    confined it by the limitation of words from dangerous wandering
    to and fro in the mind.
The solitude of that Danube camping-place, can I ever forget
    it? The feeling of being utterly alone on an empty planet! My
    thoughts ran incessantly upon cities and the haunts of men. I
    would have given my soul, as the saying is, for the "feel" of
    those Bavarian villages we had passed through by the score; for
    the normal, human commonplaces, peasants drinking beer, tables
    beneath the trees, hot sunshine, and a ruined castle on the
    rocks behind the red-roofed church. Even the tourists would
    have been welcome.
Yet what I felt of dread was no ordinary ghostly fear. It
    was infinitely greater, stranger, and seemed to arise from some
    dim ancestral sense of terror more profoundly disturbing than
    anything I had known or dreamed of. We had "strayed," as the
    Swede put it, into some region or some set of conditions where
    the risks were great, yet unintelligible to us; where the
    frontiers of some unknown world lay close about us. It was a
    spot held by the dwellers in some outer space, a sort of
    peephole whence they could spy upon the earth, themselves
    unseen, a point where the veil between had worn a little thin.
    As the final result of too long a sojourn here, we should be
    carried over the border and deprived of what we called "our
    lives," yet by mental, not physical, processes. In that sense,
    as he said, we should be the victims of our adventure—a
    sacrifice.
It took us in different fashion, each according to the
    measure of his sensitiveness and powers of resistance. I
    translated it vaguely into a personification of the mightily
    disturbed elements, investing them with the horror of a
    deliberate and malefic purpose, resentful of our audacious
    intrusion into their breeding-place; whereas my friend threw it
    into the unoriginal form at first of a trespass on some ancient
    shrine, some place where the old gods still held sway, where
    the emotional forces of former worshipers still clung, and the
    ancestral portion of him yielded to the old pagan spell.
At any rate, here was a place unpolluted by men, kept clean
    by the winds from coarsening human influences, a place where
    spiritual agencies were within reach and aggressive. Never,
    before or since, have I been so attacked by indescribable
    suggestions of a "beyond region," of another scheme of life,
    another evolution not parallel to the human. And in the end our
    minds would succumb under the weight of the awful spell, and we
    should be drawn across the frontier into their
    world.
Small things testified to this amazing influence of the
    place, and now in the silence round the fire they allowed
    themselves to be noted by the mind. The very atmosphere had
    proved itself a magnifying medium to distort every indication:
    the otter rolling in the current, the hurrying boatman making
    signs, the shifting willows, one and all had been robbed of its
    natural character, and revealed in something of its other
    aspect—as it existed across the border in that other
    region. And this changed aspect I felt was new not merely to
    me, but to the race. The whole experience whose verge we
    touched was unknown to humanity at all. It was a new order of
    experience, and in the true sense of the word
    unearthly.
"It's the deliberate, calculating purpose that reduces
    one's courage to zero," the Swede said suddenly, as if he had
    been actually following my thoughts. "Otherwise imagination
    might count for much. But the paddle, the canoe, the lessening
    food——"
"Haven't I explained all that once?" I interrupted
    viciously.
"You have," he answered dryly; "you have indeed."
He made other remarks too, as usual, about what he called
    the "plain determination to provide a victim"; but, having now
    arranged my thoughts better, I recognized that this was simply
    the cry of his frightened soul against the knowledge that he
    was being attacked in a vital part, and that he would be
    somehow taken or destroyed. The situation called for a courage
    and calmness of reasoning that neither of us could compass, and
    I have never before been so clearly conscious of two persons in
    me—the one that explained everything, and the other that
    laughed at such foolish explanations, yet was horribly
    afraid.
Meanwhile, in the pitchy night the fire died down and the
    woodpile grew small. Neither of us moved to replenish the
    stock, and the darkness consequently came up very close to our
    faces. A few feet beyond the circle of firelight it was inky
    black. Occasionally a stray puff of wind set the billows
    shivering about us, but apart from this not very welcome sound
    a deep and depressing silence reigned, broken only by the
    gurgling of the river and the humming in the air overhead.
We both missed, I think, the shouting company of the
    winds.
At length, at a moment when a stray puff prolonged itself as
    though the wind were about to rise again, I reached the point
    for me of saturation, the point where it was absolutely
    necessary to find relief in plain speech, or else to betray
    myself by some hysterical extravagance that must have been far
    worse in its effect upon both of us. I kicked the fire into a
    blaze, and turned to my companion abruptly. He looked up with a
    start.
"I can't disguise it any longer," I said; "I don't like this
    place, and the darkness, and the noises, and the awful feelings
    I get. There's something here that beats me utterly. I'm in a
    blue funk, and that's the plain truth. If the other shore
    was—different, I swear I'd be inclined to swim for
    it!"
The Swede's face turned very white beneath the deep tan of
    sun and wind. He stared straight at me and answered quietly,
    but his voice betrayed his huge excitement by its unnatural
    calmness. For the moment, at any rate, he was the strong man of
    the two. He was more phlegmatic, for one thing.
"It's not a physical condition we can escape from by running
    away," he replied, in the tone of a doctor diagnosing some
    grave disease; "we must sit tight and wait. There are forces
    close here that could kill a herd of elephants in a second as
    easily as you or I could squash a fly. Our only chance is to
    keep perfectly still. Our insignificance perhaps may save
    us."
I put a dozen questions into my expression of face, but
    found no words. It was precisely like listening to an accurate
    description of a disease whose symptoms had puzzled me.
"I mean that so far, although aware of our disturbing
    presence, they have not found us—not 'located'
    us, as the Americans say," he went on. "They're blundering
    about like men hunting for a leak of gas. The paddle and canoe
    and provisions prove that. I think they feel us, but
    cannot actually see us. We must keep our minds quiet—it's
    our minds they feel. We must control our thoughts, or it's all
    up with us."
"Death you mean?" I stammered, icy with the horror of his
    suggestion.
"Worse—by far," he said. "Death, according to one's
    belief, means either annihilation or release from the
    limitations of the senses, but it involves no change of
    character. You don't suddenly alter just because the
    body's gone. But this means a radical alteration, a complete
    change, a horrible loss of oneself by substitution—far
    worse than death, and not even annihilation. We happen to have
    camped in a spot where their region touches ours where the veil
    between has worn thin"—horrors! he was using my very own
    phrase, my actual words—"so that they are aware of our
    being in their neighborhood."
"But who are aware?" I asked.
I forgot the shaking of the willows in the windless calm,
    the humming overhead, everything except that I was waiting for
    an answer that I dreaded more than I can possibly explain.
He lowered his voice at once to reply, leaning forward a
    little over the fire, an indefinable change in his face that
    made me avoid his eyes and look down upon the ground.
"All my life," he said, "I have been strangely, vividly
    conscious of another region—not far removed from our own
    world in one sense, yet wholly different in kind—where
    great things go on unceasingly, where immense and terrible
    personalities hurry by, intent on vast purposes compared to
    which earthly affairs, the rise and fall of nations, the
    destinies of empires, the fate of armies and continents, are
    all as dust in the balance; vast purposes, I mean, that deal
    directly with the soul, and not indirectly with mere
    expressions of the soul—"
"I suggest just now—" I began, seeking to stop him,
    feeling as though I was face to face with a madman. But he
    instantly overbore me with his torrent that had to
    come.
"You think," he said, "it is the spirits of the elements,
    and I thought perhaps it was the old gods. But I tell you now
    it is—neither. These would be comprehensible
    entities, for they have relations with men, depending upon them
    for worship or sacrifice, whereas these beings who are now
    about us have absolutely nothing to do with mankind, and it is
    mere chance that their space happens just at this spot to touch
    our own."
The mere conception, which his words somehow made so
    convincing, as I listened to them there in the dark stillness
    of that lonely island, set me shaking a little all over. I
    found it impossible to control my movements.
"And what do you propose?" I began again.
"A sacrifice, a victim, might save us by distracting them
    until we could get away," he went on, "just as the wolves stop
    to devour the dogs and give the sleigh another start.
    But—I see no chance of any other victim now."
I stared blankly at him. The gleam in his eyes was dreadful.
    Presently he continued.
"It's the willows, of course. The willows mask the
    others, but the others are feeling about for us. If we let our
    minds betray our fear, we're lost, lost utterly." He looked at
    me with an expression so calm, so determined, so sincere, that
    I no longer had any doubts as to his sanity. He was as sane as
    any man ever was. "If we can hold out through the night," he
    added, "we may get off in the daylight unnoticed, or rather,
    undiscovered."
"But you really think a sacrifice would——"
That gong-like humming came down very close over our heads
    as I spoke, but it was my friend's scared face that really
    stopped my mouth.
"Hush!" he whispered, holding up his hand. "Do not mention
    them more than you can help. Do not refer to them by
    name. To name is to reveal: it is the inevitable clue, and
    our only hope lies in ignoring them, in order that they may
    ignore us."
"Even in thought?" He was extraordinarily agitated.
"Especially in thought. Our thoughts make spirals in their
    world. We must keep them out of our minds at all costs
    if possible."
I raked the fire together to prevent the darkness having
    everything its own way. I never longed for the sun as I longed
    for it then in the awful blackness of that summer night.
"Were you awake all last night?" he went on suddenly.
"I slept badly a little after dawn," I replied evasively,
    trying to follow his instructions, which I knew instinctively
    were true, "but the wind, of course—"
"I know. But the wind won't account for all the noises."
"Then you heard it too?"
"The multiplying countless little footsteps I heard," he
    said, adding, after a moment's hesitation, "and that other
    sound—"
"You mean above the tent, and the pressing down upon us of
    something tremendous, gigantic?"
He nodded significantly.
"It was like the beginning of a sort of inner suffocation?"
    I said.
"Partly, yes. It seemed to me that the weight of the
    atmosphere had been altered—had increased enormously, so
    that we should be crushed."
"And that," I went on, determined to have it all
    out, pointing upwards where the gong-like note hummed
    ceaselessly, rising and falling like wind. "What do you make of
    that?"
"It's their sound," he whispered gravely. "It's the
    sound of their world, the humming in their region. The division
    here is so thin that it leaks through somehow. But, if you
    listen carefully, you'll find it's not above so much as around
    us. It's in the willows. It's the willows themselves humming,
    because here the willows have been made symbols of the forces
    that are against us."
I could not follow exactly what he meant by this, yet the
    thought and idea in my mind were beyond question the thought
    and idea in his. I realized what he realized, only with less
    power of analysis than his. It was on the tip of my tongue to
    tell him at last about my hallucination of the ascending
    figures and the moving bushes, when he suddenly thrust his face
    again close into mine across the firelight and began to speak
    in a very earnest whisper. He amazed me by his calmness and
    pluck, his apparent control of the situation. This man I had
    for years deemed unimaginative, stolid!
"Now listen," he said. "The only thing for us to do is to go
    on as though nothing had happened, follow our usual habits, go
    to bed, and so forth; pretend we feel nothing and notice
    nothing. It is a question wholly of the mind, and the less we
    think about them the better our chance of escape. Above all,
    don't think, for what you think happens!"
"All right," I managed to reply, simply breathless with his
    words and the strangeness of it all; "all right, I'll try, but
    tell me one thing more first. Tell me what you make of those
    hollows in the ground all about us, those sand-funnels?"
"No!" he cried, forgetting to whisper in his excitement. "I
    dare not, simply dare not, put the thought into words. If you
    have not guessed I am glad. Don't try to. They have
    put it into my mind; try your hardest to prevent their putting
    it into yours."
He sank his voice again to a whisper before he finished, and
    I did not press him to explain. There was already just about as
    much horror in me as I could hold. The conversation came to an
    end, and we smoked our pipes busily in silence.
Then something happened, something unimportant apparently,
    as the way is when the nerves are in a very great state of
    tension, and this small thing for a brief space gave me an
    entirely different point of view. I chanced to look down at my
    sand-shoe—the sort we used for the canoe—and
    something to do with the hole at the toe suddenly recalled to
    me the London shop where I had bought them, the difficulty the
    man had in fitting me, and other details of the uninteresting
    but practical operation. At once, in its train, followed a
    wholesome view of the modern skeptical world I was accustomed
    to move in at home. I thought of roast beef and ale,
    motor-cars, policemen, brass bands, and a dozen other things
    that proclaimed the soul of ordinariness or utility. The effect
    was immediate and astonishing even to myself. Psychologically,
    I suppose, it was simply a sudden and violent reaction after
    the strain of living in an atmosphere of things that to the
    normal consciousness must seem impossible and incredible. But,
    whatever the cause, it momentarily lifted the spell from my
    heart, and left me for the short space of a minute feeling free
    and utterly unafraid. I looked up at my friend opposite.
"You damned old pagan!" I cried, laughing aloud in his face.
    "You imaginative idiot! You superstitious idolator!
    You——"
I stopped in the middle, seized anew by the old horror. I
    tried to smother the sound of my voice as something
    sacrilegious. The Swede, of course, heard it too—that
    strange cry overhead in the darkness—and that sudden drop
    in the air as though something had come nearer.
He had turned ashen white under the tan. He stood bolt
    upright in front of the fire, stiff as a rod, staring at
    me.
"After that," he said in a sort of helpless, frantic way,
    "we must go! We can't stay now; we must strike camp this very
    instant and go on—down the river."
He was talking, I saw, quite wildly, his words dictated by
    abject terror—the terror he had resisted so long, but
    which had caught him at last.
"In the dark?" I exclaimed, shaking with fear after my
    hysterical outburst, but still realizing our position better
    than he did. "Sheer madness! The river's in flood, and we've
    only got a single paddle. Besides, we only go deeper into their
    country! There's nothing ahead for fifty miles but willows,
    willows, willows!"
He sat down again in a state of semi-collapse. The
    positions, by one of those kaleidoscopic changes nature loves,
    were suddenly reversed, and the control of our forces passed
    over into my hands. His mind at last had reached the point
    where it was beginning to weaken.
"What on earth possessed you to do such a thing?" he
    whispered, with the awe of genuine terror in his voice and
    face.
I crossed round to his side of the fire. I took both his
    hands in mine, kneeling down beside him and looking straight
    into his frightened eyes.
"We'll make one more blaze," I said firmly, "and then turn
    in for the night. At sunrise we'll be off full speed for
    Komorn. Now, pull yourself together a bit, and remember your
    own advice about not thinking fear!"
He said no more, and I saw that he would agree and obey. In
    some measure, too, it was a sort of relief to get up and make
    an excursion into the darkness for more wood. We kept close
    together, almost touching, groping among the bushes and along
    the bank. The humming overhead never ceased, but seemed to me
    to grow louder as we increased our distance from the fire. It
    was shivery work!
We were grubbing away in the middle of a thickish clump of
    willows where some driftwood from a former flood had caught
    high among the branches, when my body was seized in a grip that
    made me half drop upon the sand. It was the Swede. He had
    fallen against me, and was clutching me for support. I heard
    his breath coming and going in short gasps.
"Look! By my soul!" he whispered, and for the first time in
    my experience I knew what it was to hear tears of terror in a
    human voice. He was pointing to the fire, some fifty feet away.
    I followed the direction of his finger, and I swear my heart
    missed a beat.
There, in front of the dim glow, something was
    moving.
I saw it through a veil that hung before my eyes like the
    gauze drop-curtain used at the back of a theater—hazily a
    little. It was neither a human figure nor an animal. To me it
    gave the strange impression of being as large as several
    animals grouped together, like horses, two or three, moving
    slowly. The Swede, too, got a similar result, though expressing
    it differently, for he thought it was shaped and sized like a
    clump of willow bushes, rounded at the top, and moving all over
    upon its surface—"coiling upon itself like smoke," he
    said afterwards.
"I watched it settle downwards through the bushes," he
    sobbed at me. "Look, by God! It's coming this way! Oh,
    oh!"—he gave a kind of whistling cry. "They've found
    us."
I gave one terrified glance, which just enabled me to see
    that the shadowy form was swinging towards us through the
    bushes, and then I collapsed backwards with a crash into the
    branches. These failed, of course, to support my weight, so
    that with the Swede on the top of me we fell in a struggling
    heap upon the sand. I really hardly knew what was happening. I
    was conscious only of a sort of enveloping sensation of icy
    fear that plucked the nerves out of their fleshly covering,
    twisted them this way and that, and replaced them quivering. My
    eyes were tightly shut; something in my throat choked me; a
    feeling that my consciousness was expanding, extending out into
    space, swiftly gave way to another feeling that I was losing it
    altogether, and about to die.
An acute spasm of pain passed through me, and I was aware
    that the Swede had hold of me in such a way that he hurt me
    abominably. It was the way he caught at me in falling.
But it was this pain, he declared afterwards, that saved me:
    it caused me to forget them and think of something
    else at the very instant when they were about to find me. It
    concealed my mind from them at the moment of discovery, yet
    just in time to evade their terrible seizing of me. He himself,
    he says, actually swooned at the same moment, and that was what
    saved him.
I only know that at a later time, how long or short is
    impossible to say, I found myself scrambling up out of the
    slippery network of willow branches, and saw my companion
    standing in front of me holding out a hand to assist me. I
    stared at him in a dazed way, rubbing the arm he had twisted
    for me. Nothing came to me to say, somehow.
"I lost consciousness for a moment or two," I heard him say.
    "That's what saved me. It made me stop thinking about
    them."
"You nearly broke my arm in two," I said, uttering my only
    connected thought at the moment. A numbness came over me.
"That's what saved you!" he replied. "Between us,
    we've managed to set them off on a false tack somewhere. The
    humming has ceased. It's gone—for the moment at any
    rate!"
A wave of hysterical laughter seized me again, and this time
    spread to my friend too—great healing gusts of shaking
    laughter that brought a tremendous sense of relief in their
    train. We made our way back to the fire and put the wood on so
    that it blazed at once. Then we saw that the tent had fallen
    over and lay in a tangled heap upon the ground.
We picked it up, and during the process tripped more than
    once and caught our feet in sand.
"It's those sand-funnels," exclaimed the Swede, when the
    tent was up again and the firelight lit up the ground for
    several yards about us. "And look at the size of them!"
All round the tent and about the fireplace where we had seen
    the moving shadows there were deep funnel-shaped hollows in the
    sand, exactly similar to the ones we had already found over the
    island, only far bigger and deeper, beautifully formed, and
    wide enough in some instances to admit the whole of my foot and
    leg.
Neither of us said a word. We both knew that sleep was the
    safest thing we could do, and to bed we went accordingly
    without further delay, having first thrown sand on the fire and
    taken the provision sack and the paddle inside the tent with
    us. The canoe, too, we propped in such a way at the end of the
    tent that our feet touched it, and the least motion would
    disturb and wake us.
In case of emergency, too, we again went to bed in our
    clothes, ready for a sudden start.
V
It was my firm intention to lie awake all night and watch,
    but the exhaustion of nerves and body decreed otherwise, and
    sleep after a while came over me with a welcome blanket of
    oblivion. The fact that my companion also slept quickened its
    approach. At first he fidgeted and constantly sat up, asking me
    if I "heard this" or "heard that." He tossed about on his cork
    mattress, and said the tent was moving and the river had risen
    over the point of the island; but each time I went out to look
    I returned with the report that all was well, and finally he
    grew calmer and lay still. Then at length his breathing became
    regular and I heard unmistakable sounds of snoring—the
    first and only time in my life when snoring has been a welcome
    and calming influence.
This, I remember, was the last thought in my mind before
    dozing off.
A difficulty in breathing woke me, and I found the blanket
    over my face. But something else besides the blanket was
    pressing upon me, and my first thought was that my companion
    had rolled off his mattress on to my own in his sleep. I called
    to him and sat up, and at the same moment it came to me that
    the tent was surrounded. That sound of multitudinous
    soft pattering was again audible outside, filling the night
    with horror.
I called again to him, louder than before. He did not
    answer, but I missed the sound of his snoring, and also noticed
    that the flap of the tent door was down. This was the
    unpardonable sin. I crawled out in the darkness to hook it back
    securely, and it was then for the first time I realized
    positively that the Swede was not there. He had gone.
I dashed out in a mad run, seized by a dreadful agitation,
    and the moment I was out I plunged into a sort of torrent of
    humming that surrounded me completely and came out of every
    quarter of the heavens at once. It was that same familiar
    humming—gone mad! A swarm of great invisible bees might
    have been about me in the air. The sound seemed to thicken the
    very atmosphere, and I felt that my lungs worked with
    difficulty.
But my friend was in danger, and I could not hesitate.
The dawn was just about to break, and a faint whitish light
    spread upwards over the clouds from a thin strip of clear
    horizon. No wind stirred. I could just make out the bushes and
    river beyond, and the pale sandy patches. In my excitement I
    ran frantically to and fro about the island, calling him by
    name, shouting at the top of my voice the first words that came
    into my head. But the willows smothered my voice, and the
    humming muffled it, so that the sound only traveled a few feet
    round me. I plunged among the bushes, tripping headlong,
    tumbling over roots, and scraping my face as I tore this way
    and that among the preventing branches.
Then, quite unexpectedly, I came out upon the island's point
    and saw a dark figure outlined between the water and the sky.
    It was the Swede. And already he had one foot in the river! A
    moment more and he would have taken the plunge.
I threw myself upon him, flinging my arms about his waist
    and dragging him shorewards with all my strength. Of course he
    struggled furiously, making a noise all the time just like that
    cursed humming, and using the most outlandish phrases in his
    anger about "going inside to Them," and "taking the
    way of the water and the wind," and God only knows what more
    besides, that I tried in vain to recall afterwards, but which
    turned me sick with horror and amazement as I listened. But in
    the end I managed to get him into the comparative safety of the
    tent, and flung him breathless and cursing upon the mattress,
    where I held him until the fit had passed.
I think the suddenness with which it all went and he grew
    calm, coinciding as it did with the equally abrupt cessation of
    the humming and pattering outside—I think this was almost
    the strangest part of the whole business perhaps. For he just
    opened his eyes and turned his tired face up to me so that the
    dawn threw a pale light upon it through the doorway, and said,
    for all the world just like a frightened child:
"My life, old man—it's my life I owe you. But it's all
    over now anyhow. They've found a victim in our place!"
Then he dropped back upon his blankets and went to sleep
    literally under my eyes. He simply collapsed, and began to
    snore again as healthily as though nothing had happened and he
    had never tried to offer his own life as a sacrifice by
    drowning. And when the sunlight woke him three hours
    later—hours of ceaseless vigil for me—it became so
    clear to me that he remembered absolutely nothing of what he
    had attempted to do, that I deemed it wise to hold my peace and
    ask no dangerous questions.
He woke naturally and easily, as I have said, when the sun
    was already high in a windless hot sky, and he at once got up
    and set about the preparation of the fire for breakfast. I
    followed him anxiously at bathing, but he did not attempt to
    plunge in, merely dipping his head and making some remark about
    the extra coldness of the water.
"River's falling at last," he said, "and I'm glad of
    it."
"The humming has stopped too," I said.
He looked up at me quietly with his normal expression.
    Evidently he remembered everything except his own attempt at
    suicide.
"Everything has stopped," he said,
    "because——"
He hesitated. But I knew some reference to that remark he
    had made just before he fainted was in his mind, and I was
    determined to know it.
"Because 'They've found another victim'?" I said, forcing a
    little laugh.
"Exactly," he answered, "exactly! I feel as positive of it
    as though—as though—I feel quite safe again, I
    mean," he finished.
He began to look curiously about him. The sunlight lay in
    hot patches on the sand. There was no wind. The willows were
    motionless. He slowly rose to feet.
"Come," he said; "I think if we look, we shall find it."
He started off on a run, and I followed him. He kept to the
    banks, poking with a stick among the sandy bays and caves and
    little back-waters, myself always close on his heels.
"Ah!" he exclaimed presently, "ah!"
The tone of his voice somehow brought back to me a vivid
    sense of the horror of the last twenty-four hours, and I
    hurried up to join him. He was pointing with his stick at a
    large black object that lay half in the water and half on the
    sand. It appeared to be caught by some twisted willow roots so
    that the river could not sweep it away. A few hours before the
    spot must have been under water.
"See," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escape
    possible!"
And when I peered across his shoulder I saw that his stick
    rested on the body of a man. He turned it over. It was the
    corpse of a peasant, and the face was hidden in the sand.
    Clearly the man had been drowned but a few hours before, and
    his body must have been swept down upon our island somewhere
    about the hour of the dawn—at the very time the fit
    had passed.
"We must give it a decent burial, you know."
"I suppose so," I replied. I shuddered a little in spite of
    myself, for there was something about the appearance of that
    poor drowned man that turned me cold.
The Swede glanced up sharply at me, and began clambering
    down the bank. I followed him more leisurely. The current, I
    noticed, had torn away much of the clothing from the body, so
    that the neck and part of the chest lay bare.
Halfway down the bank my companion suddenly stopped and held
    up his hand in warning; but either my foot slipped, or I had
    gained too much momentum to bring myself quickly to a halt, for
    I bumped into him and sent him forward with a sort of leap to
    save himself. We tumbled together on to the hard sand so that
    our feet splashed into the water. And, before anything could be
    done, we had collided a little heavily against the corpse.
The Swede uttered a sharp cry. And I sprang back as if I had
    been shot.
At the moment we touched the body there arose from its
    surface the loud sound of humming—the sound of several
    hummings—which passed with a vast commotion as of winged
    things in the air about us and disappeared upwards into the
    sky, growing fainter and fainter till they finally ceased in
    the distance. It was exactly as though we had disturbed some
    living yet invisible creatures at work.
My companion clutched me, and I think I clutched him, but
    before either of us had time properly to recover from the
    unexpected shock, we saw that a movement of the current was
    turning the corpse round so that it became released from the
    grip of the willow roots. A moment later it had turned
    completely over, the dead face uppermost, staring at the sky.
    It lay on the edge of the main stream. In another moment it
    would be swept away.
The Swede started to save it, shouting again something I did
    not catch about a "proper burial" and then abruptly dropped
    upon his knees on the sand and covered his eyes with his hands.
    I was beside him in an instant.
I saw what he had seen.
For just as the body swung round to the current the face and
    the exposed chest turned full towards us, and showed plainly
    how the skin and flesh were indented with small hollows,
    beautifully formed, and exactly similar in shape and kind to
    the sand-funnels that we had found all over the island.
"Their mark!" I heard my companion mutter under his breath.
    "Their awful mark!"
And when I turned my eyes again from his ghastly face to the
    river, the current had done its work, and the body had been
    swept away into midstream and was already beyond our reach and
    almost out of sight, turning over and over on the waves like an
    otter.

The Shadows on the Wall
By MARY E. WILKINS FREEMAN

From The Wind in the Rose-bush, by Mary E.
        Wilkins Freeman. Copyright by Harper and Brothers. By
        permission of the publishers and Mary E. Wilkins
        Freeman.

"Henry had words with Edward in the study the night before
    Edward died," said Caroline Glynn.
She spoke not with acrimony, but with grave severity.
    Rebecca Ann Glynn gasped by way of assent. She sat in a wide
    flounce of black silk in the corner of the sofa, and rolled
    terrified eyes from her sister Caroline to her sister Mrs.
    Stephen Brigham, who had been Emma Glynn, the one beauty of the
    family. The latter was beautiful still, with a large, splendid,
    full-blown beauty, she filled a great rocking-chair with her
    superb bulk of femininity, and swayed gently back and forth,
    her black silks whispering and her black frills fluttering.
    Even the shock of death—for her brother Edward lay dead
    in the house—could not disturb her outward serenity of
    demeanor.
But even her expression of masterly placidity changed before
    her sister Caroline's announcement and her sister Rebecca Ann's
    gasp of terror and distress in response.
"I think Henry might have controlled his temper, when poor
    Edward was so near his end," she said with an asperity which
    disturbed slightly the roseate curves of her beautiful
    mouth.
"Of course he did not know," murmured Rebecca Ann
    in a faint tone.
"Of course he did not know it," said Caroline quickly. She
    turned on her sister with a strange, sharp look of suspicion.
    Then she shrank as if from the other's possible answer.
Rebecca gasped again. The married sister, Mrs. Emma Brigham,
    was now sitting up straight in her chair; she had ceased
    rocking, and was eyeing them both intently with a sudden
    accentuation of family likeness in her face.
"What do you mean?" said she impartially to them both. Then
    she, too, seemed to shrink before a possible answer. She even
    laughed an evasive sort of laugh.
"Nobody means anything," said Caroline firmly. She rose and
    crossed the room toward the door with grim decisiveness.
"Where are you going?" asked Mrs. Brigham.
"I have something to see to," replied Caroline, and the
    others at once knew by her tone that she had some solemn and
    sad duty to perform in the chamber of death.
"Oh," said Mrs. Brigham.
After the door had closed behind Caroline, she turned to
    Rebecca.
"Did Henry have many words with him?" she asked.
"They were talking very loud," replied Rebecca
    evasively.
Mrs. Brigham looked at her. She had not resumed rocking. She
    still sat up straight, with a slight knitting of intensity on
    her fair forehead, between the pretty rippling curves of her
    auburn hair.
"Did you—ever hear anything?" she asked in a low voice
    with a glance toward the door.
"I was just across the hall in the south parlor, and that
    door was open and this door ajar," replied Rebecca with a
    slight flush.
"Then you must have——"
"I couldn't help it."
"Everything?"
"Most of it."
"What was it?"
"The old story."
"I suppose Henry was mad, as he always was, because Edward
    was living on here for nothing, when he had wasted all the
    money father left him."
Rebecca nodded, with a fearful glance at the door.
When Emma spoke again her voice was still more hushed. "I
    know how he felt," said she. "It must have looked to him as if
    Edward was living at his expense, but he wasn't."
"No, he wasn't."
"And Edward had a right here according to the terms of
    father's will, and Henry ought to have remembered it."
"Yes, he ought."
"Did he say hard things?"
"Pretty hard, from what I heard."
"What?"
"I heard him tell Edward that he had no business here at
    all, and he thought he had better go away."
"What did Edward say?"
"That he would stay here as long as he lived and afterward,
    too, if he was a mind to, and he would like to see Henry get
    him out; and then——"
"What?"
"Then he laughed."
"What did Henry say?"
"I didn't hear him say anything, but——"
"But what?"
"I saw him when he came out of this room."
"He looked mad?"
"You've seen him when he looked so."
Emma nodded. The expression of horror on her face had
    deepened.
"Do you remember that time he killed the cat because she had
    scratched him?"
"Yes. Don't!"
Then Caroline reentered the room; she went up to the stove,
    in which a wood fire was burning—it was a cold, gloomy
    day of fall—and she warmed her hands, which were reddened
    from recent washing in cold water.
Mrs. Brigham looked at her and hesitated. She glanced at the
    door, which was still ajar; it did not easily shut, being still
    swollen with the damp weather of the summer. She rose and
    pushed it together with a sharp thud, which jarred the house.
    Rebecca started painfully with a half-exclamation. Caroline
    looked at her disapprovingly.
"It is time you controlled your nerves, Rebecca," she
    said.
Mrs. Brigham, returning from the closed door, said
    imperiously that it ought to be fixed, it shut so hard.
"It will shrink enough after we have had the fire a few
    days," replied Caroline.
"I think Henry ought to be ashamed of himself for talking as
    he did to Edward," said Mrs. Brigham abruptly, but in an almost
    inaudible voice.
"Hush," said Caroline, with a glance of actual fear at the
    closed door.
"Nobody can hear with the door shut. I say again I think
    Henry ought to be ashamed of himself. I shouldn't think he'd
    ever get over it, having words with poor Edward the very night
    before he died. Edward was enough sight better disposition than
    Henry, with all his faults."
"I never heard him speak a cross word, unless he spoke cross
    to Henry that last night. I don't know but he did from what
    Rebecca overheard."
"Not so much cross, as sort of soft, and sweet, and
    aggravating," sniffed Rebecca.
"What do you really think ailed Edward?" asked Emma in
    hardly more than a whisper. She did not look at her sister.
"I know you said that he had terrible pains in his stomach,
    and had spasms, but what do you think made him have them?"
"Henry called it gastric trouble. You know Edward has always
    had dyspepsia."
Mrs. Brigham hesitated a moment. "Was there any talk of
    an—examination?" said she.
Then Caroline turned on her fiercely.
"No," said she in a terrible voice. "No."
The three sisters' souls seemed to meet on one common ground
    of terrified understanding through their eyes.
The old-fashioned latch of the door was heard to rattle, and
    a push from without made the door shake ineffectually. "It's
    Henry," Rebecca sighed rather than whispered. Mrs. Brigham
    settled herself, after a noiseless rush across the floor, into
    her rocking-chair again, and was swaying back and forth with
    her head comfortably leaning back, when the door at last
    yielded and Henry Glynn entered. He cast a covertly sharp,
    comprehensive glance at Mrs. Brigham with her elaborate calm;
    at Rebecca quietly huddled in the corner of the sofa with her
    handkerchief to her face and only one small uncovered reddened
    ear as attentive as a dog's, and at Caroline sitting with a
    strained composure in her armchair by the stove. She met his
    eyes quite firmly with a look of inscrutable fear, and defiance
    of the fear and of him.
Henry Glynn looked more like this sister than the others.
    Both had the same hard delicacy of form and aquilinity of
    feature. They confronted each other with the pitiless
    immovability of two statues in whose marble lineaments emotions
    were fixed for all eternity.
Then Henry Glynn smiled and the smile transformed his face.
    He looked suddenly years younger, and an almost boyish
    recklessness appeared in his face. He flung himself into a
    chair with a gesture which was bewildering from its incongruity
    with his general appearance. He leaned his head back, flung one
    leg over the other, and looked laughingly at Mrs. Brigham.
"I declare, Emma, you grow younger every year," he said.
She flushed a little, and her placid mouth widened at the
    corners. She was susceptible to praise.
"Our thoughts to-day ought to belong to the one of us who
    will never grow older," said Caroline in a hard
    voice.
Henry looked at her, still smiling. "Of course, we none of
    us forget that," said he, in a deep, gentle voice; "but we have
    to speak to the living, Caroline, and I have not seen Emma for
    a long time, and the living are as dear as the dead."
"Not to me," said Caroline.
She rose and went abruptly out of the room again. Rebecca
    also rose and hurried after her, sobbing loudly.
Henry looked slowly after them.
"Caroline is completely unstrung," said he.
Mrs. Brigham rocked. A confidence in him inspired by his
    manner was stealing over her. Out of that confidence she spoke
    quite easily and naturally.
"His death was very sudden," said she.
Henry's eyelids quivered slightly but his gaze was
    unswerving.
"Yes," said he, "it was very sudden. He was sick only a few
    hours."
"What did you call it?"
"Gastric."
"You did not think of an examination?"
"There was no need. I am perfectly certain as to the cause
    of his death."
Suddenly Mrs. Brigham felt a creep as of some live horror
    over her very soul. Her flesh prickled with cold, before an
    inflection of his voice. She rose, tottering on weak knees.
"Where are you going?" asked Henry in a strange, breathless
    voice.
Mrs. Brigham said something incoherent about some sewing
    which she had to do—some black for the funeral—and
    was out of the room. She went up to the front chamber which she
    occupied. Caroline was there. She went close to her and took
    her hands, and the two sisters looked at each other.
"Don't speak, don't, I won't have it!" said Caroline finally
    in an awful whisper.
"I won't," replied Emma.
That afternoon the three sisters were in the study.
Mrs. Brigham was hemming some black material. At last she
    laid her work on her lap.
"It's no use, I cannot see to sew another stitch until we
    have a light," said she.
Caroline, who was writing some letters at the table, turned
    to Rebecca, in her usual place on the sofa.
"Rebecca, you had better get a lamp," she said.
Rebecca started up; even in the dusk her face showed her
    agitation.
"It doesn't seem to me that we need a lamp quite yet," she
    said in a piteous, pleading voice like a child's.
"Yes, we do," returned Mrs. Brigham peremptorily. "I can't
    see to sew another stitch."
Rebecca rose and left the room. Presently she entered with a
    lamp. She set it on the table, an old-fashioned card-table
    which was placed against the opposite wall from the window.
    That opposite wall was taken up with three doors; the one small
    space was occupied by the table.
"What have you put that lamp over there for?" asked Mrs.
    Brigham, with more of impatience than her voice usually
    revealed. "Why didn't you set it in the hall, and have done
    with it? Neither Caroline nor I can see if it is on that
    table."
"I thought perhaps you would move," replied Rebecca
    hoarsely.
"If I do move, we can't both sit at that table. Caroline has
    her paper all spread around. Why don't you set the lamp on the
    study table in the middle of the room, then we can both
    see?"
Rebecca hesitated. Her face was very pale. She looked with
    an appeal that was fairly agonizing at her sister Caroline.
"Why don't you put the lamp on this table, as she says?"
    asked Caroline, almost fiercely. "Why do you act so,
    Rebecca?"
Rebecca took the lamp and set it on the table in the middle
    of the room without another word. Then she seated herself on
    the sofa and placed a hand over her eyes as if to shade them,
    and remained so.
"Does the light hurt your eyes, and is that the reason why
    you didn't want the lamp?" asked Mrs. Brigham kindly.
"I always like to sit in the dark," replied Rebecca
    chokingly. Then she snatched her handkerchief hastily from her
    pocket and began to weep. Caroline continued to write, Mrs.
    Brigham to sew.
Suddenly Mrs. Brigham as she sewed glanced at the opposite
    wall. The glance became a steady stare. She looked intently,
    her work suspended in her hands. Then she looked away again and
    took a few more stitches, then she looked again, and again
    turned to her task. At last she laid her work in her lap and
    stared concentratedly. She looked from the wall round the room,
    taking note of the various objects. Then she turned to her
    sisters.
"What is that?" said she.
"What?" asked Caroline harshly.
"That strange shadow on the wall," replied Mrs. Brigham.
Rebecca sat with her face hidden; Caroline dipped her pen in
    the inkstand.
"Why don't you turn around and look?" asked Mrs. Brigham in
    a wondering and somewhat aggrieved way.
"I am in a hurry to finish this letter," replied Caroline
    shortly.
Mrs. Brigham rose, her work slipping to the floor, and began
    walking round the room, moving various articles of furniture,
    with her eyes on the shadow.
Then suddenly she shrieked out:
"Look at this awful shadow! What is it? Caroline, look,
    look! Rebecca, look! What is it?"
All Mrs. Brigham's triumphant placidity was gone. Her
    handsome face was livid with horror. She stood stiffly pointing
    at the shadow.
Then after a shuddering glance at the wall Rebecca burst out
    in a wild wail.
"Oh, Caroline, there it is again, there it is again!"
"Caroline Glynn, you look!" said Mrs. Brigham. "Look! What
    is that dreadful shadow?"
Caroline rose, turned, and stood confronting the wall.
"How should I know?" she said.
"It has been there every night since he died!" cried
    Rebecca.
"Every night?"
"Yes; he died Thursday and this is Saturday; that makes
    three nights," said Caroline rigidly. She stood as if holding
    her calm with a vise of concentrated will.
"It—it looks like—like—" stammered Mrs.
    Brigham in a tone of intense horror.
"I know what it looks like well enough," said Caroline.
    "I've got eyes in my head."
"It looks like Edward," burst out Rebecca in a sort of
    frenzy of fear. "Only——"
"Yes, it does," assented Mrs. Brigham, whose horror-stricken
    tone matched her sisters', "only—Oh, it is awful! What is
    it, Caroline?"
"I ask you again, how should I know?" replied Caroline. "I
    see it there like you. How should I know any more than
    you?"
"It must be something in the room," said Mrs.
    Brigham, staring wildly around.
"We moved everything in the room the first night it came,"
    said Rebecca; "it is not anything in the room."
Caroline turned upon her with a sort of fury. "Of course it
    is something in the room," said she. "How you act! What do you
    mean talking so? Of course it is something in the room."
"Of course it is," agreed Mrs. Brigham, looking at Caroline
    suspiciously. "It must be something in the room."
"It is not anything in the room," repeated Rebecca with
    obstinate horror.
The door opened suddenly and Henry Glynn entered. He began
    to speak, then his eyes followed the direction of the others.
    He stood staring at the shadow on the wall.
"What is that?" he demanded in a strange voice.
"It must be due to something in the room," Mrs. Brigham said
    faintly.
Henry Glynn stood and stared a moment longer. His face
    showed a gamut of emotions. Horror, conviction, then furious
    incredulity. Suddenly he began hastening hither and thither
    about the room. He moved the furniture with fierce jerks,
    turning ever to see the effect upon the shadow on the wall. Not
    a line of its terrible outlines wavered.
"It must be something in the room!" he declared in a voice
    which seemed to snap like a lash.
His face changed, the inmost secrecy of his nature seemed
    evident upon his face, until one almost lost sight of his
    lineaments. Rebecca stood close to her sofa, regarding him with
    woeful, fascinated eyes. Mrs. Brigham clutched Caroline's hand.
    They both stood in a corner out of his way. For a few moments
    he raged about the room like a caged wild animal. He moved
    every piece of furniture; when the moving of a piece did not
    affect the shadow he flung it to the floor.
Then suddenly he desisted. He laughed.
"What an absurdity," he said easily. "Such a to-do about a
    shadow."
"That's so," assented Mrs. Brigham, in a scared voice which
    she tried to make natural. As she spoke she lifted a chair near
    her.
"I think you have broken the chair that Edward was fond of,"
    said Caroline.
Terror and wrath were struggling for expression on her face.
    Her mouth was set, her eyes shrinking. Henry lifted the chair
    with a show of anxiety.
"Just as good as ever," he said pleasantly. He laughed
    again, looking at his sisters. "Did I scare you?" he said. "I
    should think you might be used to me by this time. You know my
    way of wanting to leap to the bottom of a mystery, and that
    shadow does look—queer, like—and I thought if there
    was any way of accounting for it I would like to without any
    delay."
"You don't seem to have succeeded," remarked Caroline dryly,
    with a slight glance at the wall.
Henry's eyes followed hers and he quivered perceptibly.
"Oh, there is no accounting for shadows," he said, and he
    laughed again. "A man is a fool to try to account for
    shadows."
Then the supper bell rang, and they all left the room, but
    Henry kept his back to the wall—as did, indeed, the
    others.
Henry led the way with an alert motion like a boy; Rebecca
    brought up the rear. She could scarcely walk, her knees
    trembled so.
"I can't sit in that room again this evening," she whispered
    to Caroline after supper.
"Very well; we will sit in the south room," replied
    Caroline. "I think we will sit in the south parlor," she said
    aloud; "it isn't as damp as the study, and I have a cold."
So they all sat in the south room with their sewing. Henry
    read the newspaper, his chair drawn close to the lamp on the
    table. About nine o'clock he rose abruptly and crossed the hall
    to the study. The three sisters looked at one another. Mrs.
    Brigham rose, folded her rustling skirts compactly round her,
    and began tiptoeing toward the door.
"What are you going to do?" inquired Rebecca agitatedly.
"I am going to see what he is about," replied Mrs. Brigham
    cautiously.
As she spoke she pointed to the study door across the hall;
    it was ajar. Henry had striven to pull it together behind him,
    but it had somehow swollen beyond the limit with curious speed.
    It was still ajar and a streak of light showed from top to
    bottom.
Mrs. Brigham folded her skirts so tightly that her bulk with
    its swelling curves was revealed in a black silk sheath, and
    she went with a slow toddle across the hall to the study door.
    She stood there, her eye at the crack.
In the south room Rebecca stopped sewing and sat watching
    with dilated eyes. Caroline sewed steadily. What Mrs. Brigham,
    standing at the crack in the study door, saw was this:
Henry Glynn, evidently reasoning that the source of the
    strange shadow must be between the table on which the lamp
    stood and the wall, was making systematic passes and thrusts
    with an old sword which had belonged to his father all over and
    through the intervening space. Not an inch was left unpierced.
    He seemed to have divided the space into mathematical sections.
    He brandished the sword with a sort of cold fury and
    calculation; the blade gave out flashes of light, the shadow
    remained unmoved. Mrs. Brigham, watching, felt herself cold
    with horror.
Finally Henry ceased and stood with the sword in hand and
    raised as if to strike, surveying the shadow on the wall
    threateningly. Mrs. Brigham toddled back across the hall and
    shut the south room door behind her before she related what she
    had seen.
"He looked like a demon," she said again. "Have you got any
    of that old wine in the house, Caroline? I don't feel as if I
    could stand much more."
"Yes, there's plenty," said Caroline; "you can have some
    when you go to bed."
"I think we had all better take some," said Mrs. Brigham.
    "Oh, Caroline, what——"
"Don't ask; don't speak," said Caroline.
"No, I'm not going to," replied Mrs. Brigham;
    "but——"
Soon the three sisters went to their chambers and the south
    parlor was deserted. Caroline called to Henry in the study to
    put out the light before he came upstairs. They had been gone
    about an hour when he came into the room bringing the lamp
    which had stood in the study. He set it on the table, and
    waited a few minutes, pacing up and down. His face was
    terrible, his fair complexion showed livid, and his blue eyes
    seemed dark blanks of awful reflections.
Then he took up the lamp and returned to the library. He set
    the lamp on the center table and the shadow sprang out on the
    wall. Again he studied the furniture and moved it about, but
    deliberately, with none of his former frenzy. Nothing affected
    the shadow. Then he returned to the south room with the lamp
    and again waited. Again he returned to the study and placed the
    lamp on the table, and the shadow sprang out upon the wall. It
    was midnight before he went upstairs. Mrs. Brigham and the
    other sisters, who could not sleep, heard him.
The next day was the funeral. That evening the family sat in
    the south room. Some relatives were with them. Nobody entered
    the study until Henry carried a lamp in there after the others
    had retired for the night. He saw again the shadow on the wall
    leap to an awful life before the light.
The next morning at breakfast Henry Glynn announced that he
    had to go to the city for three days. The sisters looked at him
    with surprise. He very seldom left home, and just now his
    practice had been neglected on account of Edward's death.
"How can you leave your patients now?" asked Mrs. Brigham
    wonderingly.
"I don't know how to, but there is no other way," replied
    Henry easily. "I have had a telegram from Dr. Mitford."
"Consultation?" inquired Mrs. Brigham.
"I have business," replied Henry.
Doctor Mitford was an old classmate of his who lived in a
    neighboring city and who occasionally called upon him in the
    case of a consultation.
After he had gone, Mrs. Brigham said to Caroline that, after
    all, Henry had not said that he was going to consult with
    Doctor Mitford, and she thought it very strange.
"Everything is very strange," said Rebecca with a
    shudder.
"What do you mean?" inquired Caroline.
"Nothing," replied Rebecca.
Nobody entered the study that day, nor the next. The third
    day Henry was expected home, but he did not arrive and the last
    train from the city had come.
"I call it pretty queer work," said Mrs. Brigham. "The idea
    of a doctor leaving his patients at such a time as this, and
    the idea of a consultation lasting three days! There is no
    sense in it, and now he has not come. I don't
    understand it, for my part."
"I don't either," said Rebecca.
They were all in the south parlor. There was no light in the
    study; the door was ajar.
Presently Mrs. Brigham rose—she could not have told
    why; something seemed to impel her—some will outside her
    own. She went out of the room, again wrapping her rustling
    skirts round that she might pass noiselessly, and began pushing
    at the swollen door of the study.
"She has not got any lamp," said Rebecca in a shaking
    voice.
Caroline, who was writing letters, rose again, took the only
    remaining lamp in the room, and followed her sister. Rebecca
    had risen, but she stood trembling, not venturing to
    follow.
The doorbell rang, but the others did not hear it; it was on
    the south door on the other side of the house from the study.
    Rebecca, after hesitating until the bell rang the second time,
    went to the door; she remembered that the servant was out.
Caroline and her sister Emma entered the study. Caroline set
    the lamp on the table. They looked at the wall, and there were
    two shadows. The sisters stood clutching each other, staring at
    the awful things on the wall. Then Rebecca came in, staggering,
    with a telegram in her hand. "Here is—a telegram," she
    gasped. "Henry is—dead."

The Messenger
By ROBERT W. CHAMBERS


Little gray messenger,
Robed like painted Death,
Your robe is dust.
Whom do you seek
Among lilies and closed buds
At dusk?


Among lilies and closed buds
At dusk,
Whom do you seek,
Little gray messenger,
Robed in the awful panoply
Of painted Death?


R.W.C.

From The Mystery of Choice, by Robert W.
        Chambers. Published, 1897, by D. Appleton and Company.
        Copyright by Robert W. Chambers. By permission of Robert W.
        Chambers.




All-wise,
Hast thou seen all there is to see with thy two
            eyes?
Dost thou know all there is to know, and
            so,
Omniscient,
Darest thou still to say thy brother lies?


R.W.C.
I
"The bullet entered here," said Max Fortin, and he placed
    his middle finger over a smooth hole exactly in the center of
    the forehead.
I sat down upon a mound of dry seaweed and unslung my
    fowling piece.
The little chemist cautiously felt the edges of the
    shot-hole, first with his middle finger, and then with his
    thumb.
"Let me see the skull again," said I.
Max Fortin picked it up from the sod.
"It's like all the others," he repeated, wiping his glasses
    on his handkerchief. "I thought you might care to see one of
    the skulls, so I brought this over from the gravel pit. The men
    from Bannalec are digging yet. They ought to stop."
"How many skulls are there altogether?" I inquired.
"They found thirty-eight skulls; there are thirty-nine noted
    in the list. They lie piled up in the gravel pit on the edge of
    Le Bihan's wheat field. The men are at work yet. Le Bihan is
    going to stop them."
"Let's go over," said I; and I picked up my gun and started
    across the cliffs, Portin on one side, Môme on the
    other.
"Who has the list?" I asked, lighting my pipe. "You say
    there is a list?"
"The list was found rolled up in a brass cylinder," said the
    chemist. He added: "You should not smoke here. You know that if
    a single spark drifted into the wheat—"
"Ah, but I have a cover to my pipe," said I, smiling.
Fortin watched me as I closed the pepper-box arrangement
    over the glowing bowl of the pipe. Then he continued:
"The list was made out on thick yellow paper; the brass tube
    has preserved it. It is as fresh to-day as it was in 1760. You
    shall see it."
"Is that the date?"
"The list is dated 'April, 1760.' The Brigadier Durand has
    it. It is not written in French."
"Not written in French!" I exclaimed.
"No," replied Fortin solemnly, "it is written in
    Breton."
"But," I protested, "the Breton language was never written
    or printed in 1760."
"Except by priests," said the chemist.
"I have heard of but one priest who ever wrote the Breton
    language," I began.
Fortin stole a glance at my face.
"You mean—the Black Priest?" he asked.
I nodded.
Fortin opened his mouth to speak again, hesitated, and
    finally shut his teeth obstinately over the wheat stem that he
    was chewing.
"And the Black Priest?" I suggested encouragingly. But I
    knew it was useless; for it is easier to move the stars from
    their courses than to make an obstinate Breton talk. We walked
    on for a minute or two in silence.
"Where is the Brigadier Durand?" I asked, motioning
    Môme to come out of the wheat, which he was trampling as
    though it were heather. As I spoke we came in sight of the
    farther edge of the wheat field and the dark, wet mass of
    cliffs beyond.
"Durand is down there—you can see him; he stands just
    behind the mayor of St. Gildas."
"I see," said I; and we struck straight down, following a
    sun-baked cattle path across the heather.
When we reached the edge of the wheat field, Le Bihan, the
    mayor of St. Gildas, called to me, and I tucked my gun under my
    arm and skirted the wheat to where he stood.
"Thirty-eight skulls," he said in his thin, high-pitched
    voice; "there is but one more, and I am opposed to further
    search. I suppose Fortin told you?"
I shook hands with him, and returned the salute of the
    Brigadier Durand.
"I am opposed to further search," repeated Le Bihan,
    nervously picking at the mass of silver buttons which covered
    the front of his velvet and broadcloth jacket like a
    breastplate of scale armor.
Durand pursed up his lips, twisted his tremendous mustache,
    and hooked his thumbs in his saber belt.
"As for me," he said, "I am in favor of further search."
"Further search for what—for the thirty-ninth skull?"
    I asked.
Le Bihan nodded. Durand frowned at the sunlit sea, rocking
    like a bowl of molten gold from the cliffs to the horizon. I
    followed his eyes. On the dark glistening cliffs, silhouetted
    against the glare of the sea, sat a cormorant, black,
    motionless, its horrible head raised toward heaven.
"Where is that list, Durand?" I asked.
The gendarme rummaged in his despatch pouch and produced a
    brass cylinder about a foot long. Very gravely he unscrewed the
    head and dumped out a scroll of thick yellow paper closely
    covered with writing on both sides. At a nod from Le Bihan he
    handed me the scroll. But I could make nothing of the coarse
    writing, now faded to a dull brown.
"Come, come, Le Bihan," I said impatiently, "translate it,
    won't you? You and Max Fortin make a lot of mystery out of
    nothing, it seems."
Le Bihan went to the edge of the pit where the three
    Bannalec men were digging, gave an order or two in Breton, and
    turned to me.
As I came to the edge of the pit the Bannalec men were
    removing a square piece of sailcloth from what appeared to be a
    pile of cobblestones.
"Look!" said Le Bihan shrilly. I looked. The pile below was
    a heap of skulls. After a moment I clambered down the gravel
    sides of the pit and walked over to the men of Bannalec. They
    saluted me gravely, leaning on their picks and shovels, and
    wiping their sweating faces with sunburned hands.
"How many?" said I in Breton.
"Thirty-eight," they replied.
I glanced around. Beyond the heap of skulls lay two piles of
    human bones. Beside these was a mound of broken, rusted bits of
    iron and steel. Looking closer, I saw that this mound was
    composed of rusty bayonets, saber blades, scythe blades, with
    here and there a tarnished buckle attached to a bit of leather
    hard as iron.
I picked up a couple of buttons and a belt plate. The
    buttons bore the royal arms of England; the belt plate was
    emblazoned with the English arms and also with the number
    "27."
"I have heard my grandfather speak of the terrible English
    regiment, the 27th Foot, which landed and stormed the fort up
    there," said one of the Bannalec men.
"Oh!" said I; "then these are the bones of English
    soldiers?"
"Yes," said the men of Bannalec.
Le Bihan was calling to me from the edge of the pit above,
    and I handed the belt plate and buttons to the men and climbed
    the side of the excavation.
"Well," said I, trying to prevent Môme from leaping up
    and licking my face as I emerged from the pit, "I suppose you
    know what these bones are. What are you going to do with
    them?"
"There was a man," said Le Bihan angrily, "an Englishman,
    who passed here in a dog-cart on his way to Quimper about an
    hour ago, and what do you suppose he wished to do?"
"Buy the relics?" I asked, smiling.
"Exactly—the pig!" piped the mayor of St. Gildas.
    "Jean Marie Tregunc, who found the bones, was standing there
    where Max Fortin stands, and do you know what he answered? He
    spat upon the ground, and said: 'Pig of an Englishman, do you
    take me for a desecrator of graves?'"
I knew Tregunc, a sober, blue-eyed Breton, who lived from
    one year's end to the other without being able to afford a
    single bit of meat for a meal.
"How much did the Englishman offer Tregunc?" I asked.
"Two hundred francs for the skulls alone."
I thought of the relic hunters and the relic buyers on the
    battlefields of our civil war.
"Seventeen hundred and sixty is long ago," I said.
"Respect for the dead can never die," said Fortin.
"And the English soldiers came here to kill your fathers and
    burn your homes," I continued.
"They were murderers and thieves, but—they are dead,"
    said Tregunc, coming up from the beach below, his long sea rake
    balanced on his dripping jersey.
"How much do you earn every year, Jean Marie?" I asked,
    turning to shake hands with him.
"Two hundred and twenty francs, monsieur."
"Forty-five dollars a year," I said. "Bah! you are worth
    more, Jean. Will you take care of my garden for me? My wife
    wished me to ask you. I think it would be worth one hundred
    francs a month to you and to me. Come on, Le Bihan—come
    along, Fortin—and you, Durand. I want somebody to
    translate that list into French for me."
Tregunc stood gazing at me, his blue eyes dilated.
"You may begin at once," I said, smiling, "if the salary
    suits you?"
"It suits," said Tregunc, fumbling for his pipe in a silly
    way that annoyed Le Bihan.
"Then go and begin your work," cried the mayor impatiently;
    and Tregunc started across the moors toward St. Gildas, taking
    off his velvet-ribboned cap to me and gripping his sea rake
    very hard.
"You offer him more than my salary," said the mayor, after a
    moment's contemplation of his silver buttons.
"Pooh!" said I, "what do you do for your salary except play
    dominoes with Max Portin at the Groix Inn?"
Le Bihan turned red, but Durand rattled his saber and winked
    at Max Fortin, and I slipped my arm through the arm of the
    sulky magistrate, laughing.
"There's a shady spot under the cliff," I said; "come on, Le
    Bihan, and read me what is in the scroll."
In a few moments we reached the shadow of the cliff, and I
    threw myself upon the turf, chin on hand, to listen.
The gendarme, Durand, also sat down, twisting his mustache
    into needlelike points. Fortin leaned against the cliff,
    polishing his glasses and examining us with vague, near-sighted
    eyes; and Le Bihan, the mayor, planted himself in our midst,
    rolling up the scroll and tucking it under his arm.
"First of all," he began in a shrill voice, "I am going to
    light my pipe, and while lighting it I shall tell you what I
    have heard about the attack on the fort yonder. My father told
    me; his father told him."
He jerked his head in the direction of the ruined fort, a
    small, square stone structure on the sea cliff, now nothing but
    crumbling walls. Then he slowly produced a tobacco pouch, a bit
    of flint and tinder, and a long-stemmed pipe fitted with a
    microscopical bowl of baked clay. To fill such a pipe requires
    ten minutes' close attention. To smoke it to a finish takes but
    four puffs. It is very Breton, this Breton pipe. It is the
    crystallization of everything Breton.
"Go on," said I, lighting a cigarette.
"The fort," said the mayor, "was built by Louis XIV, and was
    dismantled twice by the English. Louis XV restored it in 1730.
    In 1760 it was carried by assault by the English. They came
    across from the island of Groix—three shiploads, and they
    stormed the fort and sacked St. Julien yonder, and they started
    to burn St. Gildas—you can see the marks of their bullets
    on my house yet; but the men of Bannalec and the men of Lorient
    fell upon them with pike and scythe and blunderbuss, and those
    who did not run away lie there below in the gravel pit
    now—thirty-eight of them."
"And the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked, finishing my
    cigarette.
The mayor had succeeded in filling his pipe, and now he
    began to put his tobacco pouch away.
"The thirty-ninth skull," he mumbled, holding the pipe stem
    between his defective teeth—"the thirty-ninth skull is no
    business of mine. I have told the Bannalec men to cease
    digging."
"But what is—whose is the missing skull?" I persisted
    curiously.
The mayor was busy trying to strike a spark to his tinder.
    Presently he set it aglow, applied it to his pipe, took the
    prescribed four puffs, knocked the ashes out of the bowl, and
    gravely replaced the pipe in his pocket.
"The missing skull?" he asked.
"Yes," said I, impatiently.
The mayor slowly unrolled the scroll and began to read,
    translating from the Breton into French. And this is what he
    read:

    "On the Cliffs of St. Gildas,
    April 13, 1760.
"On this day, by order of the Count of Soisic, general in
    chief of the Breton forces now lying in Kerselec Forest, the
    bodies of thirty-eight English soldiers of the 27th, 50th, and
    72d regiments of Foot were buried in this spot, together with
    their arms and equipments."
The mayor paused and glanced at me reflectively.
"Go on, Le Bihan," I said.
"With them," continued the mayor, turning the scroll and
    reading on the other side, "was buried the body of that vile
    traitor who betrayed the fort to the English. The manner of his
    death was as follows: By order of the most noble Count of
    Soisic, the traitor was first branded upon the forehead with
    the brand of an arrowhead. The iron burned through the flesh
    and was pressed heavily so that the brand should even burn into
    the bone of the skull. The traitor was then led out and bidden
    to kneel. He admitted having guided the English from the island
    of Groix. Although a priest and a Frenchman, he had violated
    his priestly office to aid him in discovering the password to
    the fort. This password he extorted during confession from a
    young Breton girl who was in the habit of rowing across from
    the island of Groix to visit her husband in the fort. When the
    fort fell, this young girl, crazed by the death of her husband,
    sought the Count of Soisic and told how the priest had forced
    her to confess to him all she knew about the fort. The priest
    was arrested at St. Gildas as he was about to cross the river
    to Lorient. When arrested he cursed the girl, Marie
    Trevec——"
"What!" I exclaimed, "Marie Trevec!"
"Marie Trevec," repeated Le Bihan; "the priest cursed Marie
    Trevec, and all her family and descendants. He was shot as he
    knelt, having a mask of leather over his face, because the
    Bretons who composed the squad of execution refused to fire at
    a priest unless his face was concealed. The priest was
    l'Abbé Sorgue, commonly known as the Black Priest on
    account of his dark face and swarthy eyebrows. He was buried
    with a stake through his heart."
Le Bihan paused, hesitated, looked at me, and handed the
    manuscript back to Durand. The gendarme took it and slipped it
    into the brass cylinder.
"So," said I, "the thirty-ninth skull is the skull of the
    Black Priest."
"Yes," said Fortin. "I hope they won't find it."
"I have forbidden them to proceed," said the mayor
    querulously. "You heard me, Max Fortin."
I rose and picked up my gun. Môme came and pushed his
    head into my hand.
"That's a fine dog," observed Durand, also rising.
"Why don't you wish to find his skull?" I asked Le Bihan.
    "It would be curious to see whether the arrow brand really
    burned into the bone."
"There is something in that scroll that I didn't read to
    you," said the mayor grimly. "Do you wish to know what it
    is?"
"Of course," I replied in surprise.
"Give me the scroll again, Durand," he said; then he read
    from the bottom: "I, l'Abbé Sorgue, forced to write the
    above by my executioners, have written it in my own blood; and
    with it I leave my curse. My curse on St. Gildas, on Marie
    Trevec, and on her descendants. I will come back to St. Gildas
    when my remains are disturbed. Woe to that Englishman whom my
    branded skull shall touch!"
"What rot!" I said. "Do you believe it was really written in
    his own blood?"
"I am going to test it," said Fortin, "at the request of
    Monsieur le Maire. I am not anxious for the job, however."
"See," said Le Bihan, holding out the scroll to me, "it is
    signed, 'L'Abbé Sorgue.'"
I glanced curiously over the paper.
"It must be the Black Priest," I said. "He was the only man
    who wrote in the Breton language. This is a wonderfully
    interesting discovery, for now, at last, the mystery of the
    Black Priest's disappearance is cleared up. You will, of
    course, send this scroll to Paris, Le Bihan?"
"No," said the mayor obstinately, "it shall be buried in the
    pit below where the rest of the Black Priest lies."
I looked at him and recognized that argument would be
    useless. But still I said, "It will be a loss to history,
    Monsieur Le Bihan."
"All the worse for history, then," said the enlightened
    Mayor of St. Gildas.
We had sauntered back to the gravel pit while speaking. The
    men of Bannalec were carrying the bones of the English soldiers
    toward the St. Gildas cemetery, on the cliffs to the east,
    where already a knot of white-coiffed women stood in attitudes
    of prayer; and I saw the somber robe of a priest among the
    crosses of the little graveyard.
"They were thieves and assassins; they are dead now,"
    muttered Max Fortin.
"Respect the dead," repeated the Mayor of St. Gildas,
    looking after the Bannalec men.
"It was written in that scroll that Marie Trevec, of Groix
    Island, was cursed by the priest—she and her
    descendants," I said, touching Le Bihan on the arm. "There was
    a Marie Trevec who married an Yves Trevec of St.
    Gildas——"
"It is the same," said Le Bihan, looking at me
    obliquely.
"Oh!" said I; "then they were ancestors of my wife."
"Do you fear the curse?" asked Le Bihan.
"What?" I laughed.
"There was the case of the Purple Emperor," said Max Fortin
    timidly.
Startled for a moment, I faced him, then shrugged my
    shoulders and kicked at a smooth bit of rock which lay near the
    edge of the pit, almost embedded in gravel.
"Do you suppose the Purple-Emperor drank himself crazy
    because he was descended from Marie Trevec?" I asked
    contemptuously.
"Of course not," said Max Fortin hastily.
"Of course not," piped the mayor. "I only—Hellow!
    what's that you're kicking?"
"What?" said I, glancing down, at the same time
    involuntarily giving another kick. The smooth bit of rock
    dislodged itself and rolled out of the loosened gravel at my
    feet.
"The thirty-ninth skull!" I exclaimed. "By jingo, it's the
    noddle of the Black Priest! See! there is the arrowhead branded
    on the front!"
The mayor stepped back. Max Fortin also retreated. There was
    a pause, during which I looked at them, and they looked
    anywhere but at me.
"I don't like it," said the mayor at last, in a husky, high
    voice. "I don't like it! The scroll says he will come back to
    St. Gildas when his remains are disturbed. I—I don't like
    it, Monsieur Darrel—"
"Bosh!" said I; "the poor wicked devil is where he can't get
    out. For Heaven's sake, Le Bihan, what is this stuff you are
    talking in the year of grace 1896?"
The mayor gave me a look.
"And he says 'Englishman.' You are an Englishman, Monsieur
    Darrel," he announced.
"You know better. You know I'm an American."
"It's all the same," said the Mayor of St. Gildas,
    obstinately.
"No, it isn't!" I answered, much exasperated, and
    deliberately pushed the skull till it rolled into the bottom of
    the gravel pit below.
"Cover it up," said I; "bury the scroll with it too, if you
    insist, but I think you ought to send it to Paris. Don't look
    so gloomy, Fortin, unless you believe in werewolves and ghosts.
    Hey! what the—what the devil's the matter with you,
    anyway? What are you staring at, Le Bihan?"
"Come, come," muttered the mayor in a low, tremulous voice,
    "it's time we got out of this. Did you see? Did you see,
    Fortin?"
"I saw," whispered Max Fortin, pallid with fright.
The two men were almost running across the sunny pasture
    now, and I hastened after them, demanding to know what was the
    matter.
"Matter!" chattered the mayor, gasping with exasperation and
    terror. "The skull is rolling up hill again," and he burst into
    a terrified gallop, Max Fortin followed close behind.
I watched them stampeding across the pasture, then turned
    toward the gravel pit, mystified, incredulous. The skull was
    lying on the edge of the pit, exactly where it had been before
    I pushed it over the edge. For a second I stared at it; a
    singular chilly feeling crept up my spinal column, and I turned
    and walked away, sweat starting from the root of every hair on
    my head. Before I had gone twenty paces the absurdity of the
    whole thing struck me. I halted, hot with shame and annoyance,
    and retraced my steps.
There lay the skull.
"I rolled a stone down instead of the skull," I muttered to
    myself. Then with the butt of my gun I pushed the skull over
    the edge of the pit and watched it roll to the bottom; and as
    it struck the bottom of the pit, Môme, my dog, suddenly
    whipped his tail between his legs, whimpered, and made off
    across the moor.
"Môme!" I shouted, angry and astonished; but the dog
    only fled the faster, and I ceased calling from sheer
    surprise.
"What the mischief is the matter with that dog!" I thought.
    He had never before played me such a trick.
Mechanically I glanced into the pit, but I could not see the
    skull. I looked down. The skull lay at my feet again, touching
    them.
"Good heavens!" I stammered, and struck at it blindly with
    my gunstock. The ghastly thing flew into the air, whirling over
    and over, and rolled again down the sides of the pit to the
    bottom. Breathlessly I stared at it, then, confused and
    scarcely comprehending, I stepped back from the pit, still
    facing it, one, ten, twenty paces, my eyes almost starting from
    my head, as though I expected to see the thing roll up from the
    bottom of the pit under my very gaze. At last I turned my back
    to the pit and strode out across the gorse-covered moorland
    toward my home. As I reached the road that winds from St.
    Gildas to St. Julien I gave one hasty glance at the pit over my
    shoulder. The sun shone hot on the sod about the excavation.
    There was something white and bare and round on the turf at the
    edge of the pit. It might have been a stone; there were plenty
    of them lying about.
II
When I entered my garden I saw Môme sprawling on the
    stone doorstep. He eyed me sideways and flopped his tail.
"Are you not mortified, you idiot dog?" I said, looking
    about the upper windows for Lys.
Môme rolled over on his back and raised one
    deprecating forepaw, as though to ward off calamity.
"Don't act as though I was in the habit of beating you to
    death," I said, disgusted. I had never in my life raised whip
    to the brute. "But you are a fool dog," I continued. "No, you
    needn't come to be babied and wept over; Lys can do that, if
    she insists, but I am ashamed of you, and you can go to the
    devil."
Môme slunk off into the house, and I followed,
    mounting directly to my wife's boudoir. It was empty.
"Where has she gone?" I said, looking hard at Môme,
    who had followed me. "Oh! I see you don't know. Don't pretend
    you do. Come off that lounge! Do you think Lys wants
    tan-colored hairs all over her lounge?"
I rang the bell for Catherine and Fine, but they didn't know
    where "madame" had gone; so I went into my room, bathed,
    exchanged my somewhat grimy shooting clothes for a suit of
    warm, soft knickerbockers, and, after lingering some extra
    moments over my toilet—for I was particular, now that I
    had married Lys—I went down to the garden and took a
    chair out under the fig-trees.
"Where can she be?" I wondered, Môme came sneaking out
    to be comforted, and I forgave him for Lys's sake, whereupon he
    frisked.
"You bounding cur," said I, "now what on earth started you
    off across the moor? If you do it again I'll push you along
    with a charge of dust shot."
As yet I had scarcely dared think about the ghastly
    hallucination of which I had been a victim, but now I faced it
    squarely, flushing a little with mortification at the thought
    of my hasty retreat from the gravel pit.
"To think," I said aloud, "that those old woman's tales of
    Max Fortin and Le Bihan should have actually made me see what
    didn't exist at all! I lost my nerve like a schoolboy in a dark
    bedroom." For I knew now that I had mistaken a round stone for
    a skull each time, and had pushed a couple of big pebbles into
    the pit instead of the skull itself.
"By jingo!" said I, "I'm nervous; my liver must be in a
    devil of a condition if I see such things when I'm awake! Lys
    will know what to give me."
I felt mortified and irritated and sulky, and thought
    disgustedly of Le Bihan and Max Fortin.
But after a while I ceased speculating, dismissed the mayor,
    the chemist, and the skull from my mind, and smoked pensively,
    watching the sun low dipping in the western ocean. As the
    twilight fell for a moment over ocean and moorland, a wistful,
    restless happiness filled my heart, the happiness that all men
    know—all men who have loved.
Slowly the purple mist crept out over the sea; the cliffs
    darkened; the forest was shrouded.
Suddenly the sky above burned with the afterglow, and the
    world was alight again.
Cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the cliffs were
    tinted with it; moor and pasture, heather and forest burned and
    pulsated with the gentle flush. I saw the gulls turning and
    tossing above the sand bar, their snowy wings tipped with pink;
    I saw the sea swallows sheering the surface of the still river,
    stained to its placid depths with warm reflections of the
    clouds. The twitter of drowsy hedge birds broke out in the
    stillness; a salmon rolled its shining side above
    tidewater.
The interminable monotone of the ocean intensified the
    silence. I sat motionless, holding my breath as one who listens
    to the first low rumor of an organ. All at once the pure
    whistle of a nightingale cut the silence, and the first
    moonbeam silvered the wastes of mist-hung waters.
I raised my head.
Lys stood before me in the garden.
When we had kissed each other, we linked arms and moved up
    and down the gravel walks, watching the moonbeams sparkle on
    the sand bar as the tide ebbed and ebbed. The broad beds of
    white pinks about us were atremble with hovering white moths;
    the October roses hung all abloom, perfuming the salt wind.
"Sweetheart," I said, "where is Yvonne? Has she promised to
    spend Christmas with us?"
"Yes, Dick; she drove me down from Plougat this afternoon.
    She sent her love to you. I am not jealous. What did you
    shoot?"
"A hare and four partridges. They are in the gun room. I
    told Catherine not to touch them until you had seen them."
Now I suppose I knew that Lys could not be particularly
    enthusiastic over game or guns; but she pretended she was, and
    always scornfully denied that it was for my sake and not for
    the pure love of sport. So she dragged me off to inspect the
    rather meager game bag, and she paid me pretty compliments, and
    gave a little cry of delight and pity as I lifted the enormous
    hare out of the sack by his ears.
"He'll eat no more of our lettuce," I said attempting to
    justify the assassination.
"Unhappy little bunny—and what a beauty! O Dick, you
    are a splendid shot, are you not?"
I evaded the question and hauled out a partridge.
"Poor little dead things'" said Lys in a whisper; "it seems
    a pity—doesn't it, Dick? But then you are so
    clever——"
"We'll have them broiled," I said guardedly, "tell
    Catherine."
Catherine came in to take away the game, and presently 'Fine
    Lelocard, Lys's maid, announced dinner, and Lys tripped away to
    her boudoir.
I stood an instant contemplating her blissfully, thinking,
    "My boy, you're the happiest fellow in the world—you're
    in love with your wife'"
I walked into the dining-room, beamed at the plates, walked
    out again; met Tregunc in the hallway, beamed on him; glanced
    into the kitchen, beamed at Catherine, and went up stairs,
    still beaming.
Before I could knock at Lys's door it opened, and Lys came
    hastily out. When she saw me she gave a little cry of relief,
    and nestled close to my breast.
"There is something peering in at my window," she said.
"What!" I cried angrily.
"A man, I think, disguised as a priest, and he has a mask
    on. He must have climbed up by the bay tree."
I was down the stairs and out of doors in no time. The
    moonlit garden was absolutely deserted. Tregunc came up, and
    together we searched the hedge and shrubbery around the house
    and out to the road.
"Jean Marie," said I at length, "loose my bulldog—he
    knows you—and take your supper on the porch where you can
    watch. My wife says the fellow is disguised as a priest, and
    wears a mask."
Tregunc showed his white teeth in a smile. "He will not care
    to venture in here again, I think, Monsieur Darrel."
I went back and found Lys seated quietly at the table.
"The soup is ready, dear," she said. "Don't worry; it was
    only some foolish lout from Bannalec. No one in St. Gildas or
    St. Julien would do such a thing."
I was too much exasperated to reply at first, but Lys
    treated it as a stupid joke, and after a while I began to look
    at it in that light.
Lys told me about Yvonne, and reminded me of my promise to
    have Herbert Stuart down to meet her.
"You wicked diplomat!" I protested. "Herbert is in Paris,
    and hard at work for the Salon."
"Don't you think he might spare a week to flirt with the
    prettiest girl in Finistere?" inquired Lys innocently.
"Prettiest girl! Not much!" I said.
"Who is, then?" urged Lys.
I laughed a trifle sheepishly.
"I suppose you mean me, Dick," said Lys, coloring up.
"Now I bore you, don't I?"
"Bore me? Ah, no, Dick."
After coffee and cigarettes were served I spoke about
    Tregunc, and Lys approved.
"Poor Jean! He will be glad, won't he? What a dear fellow
    you are!"
"Nonsense," said I; "we need a gardener; you said so
    yourself, Lys."
But Lys leaned over and kissed me, and then bent down and
    hugged Môme—who whistled through his nose in
    sentimental appreciation.
"I am a very happy woman," said Lys.
"Môme was a very bad dog to-day," I observed.
"Poor Môme!" said Lys, smiling.
When dinner was over and Môme lay snoring before the
    blaze—for the October nights are often chilly in
    Finistere—Lys curled up in the chimney corner with her
    embroidery, and gave me a swift glance from under her dropping
    lashes.
"You look like a schoolgirl, Lys," I said teasingly. "I
    don't believe you are sixteen yet."
She pushed back her heavy burnished hair thoughtfully. Her
    wrist was as white as surf foam.
"Have we been married four years? I don't believe it," I
    said.
She gave me another swift glance and touched the embroidery
    on her knee, smiling faintly.
"I see," said I, also smiling at the embroidered garment.
    "Do you think it will fit?"
"Fit?" repeated Lys. Then she laughed
"And," I persisted, "are you perfectly sure that
    you—er—we shall need it?"
"Perfectly," said Lys. A delicate color touched her cheeks
    and neck. She held up the little garment, all fluffy with misty
    lace and wrought with quaint embroidery.
"It is very gorgeous," said I; "don't use your eyes too
    much, dearest. May I smoke a pipe?"
"Of course," she said selecting a skein of pale blue
    silk.
For a while I sat and smoked in silence, watching her
    slender fingers among the tinted silks and thread of gold.
Presently she spoke: "What did you say your crest is,
    Dick?"
"My crest? Oh, something or other rampant on a something or
    other——"
"Dick!"
"Dearest?"
"Don't be flippant."
"But I really forget. It's an ordinary crest; everybody in
    New York has them. No family should be without 'em."
"You are disagreeable, Dick. Send Josephine upstairs for my
    album."
"Are you going to put that crest on
    the—the—whatever it is?"
"I am; and my own crest, too."
I thought of the Purple Emperor and wondered a little.
"You didn't know I had one, did you?" she smiled.
"What is it?" I replied evasively.
"You shall see. Ring for Josephine."
I rang, and, when 'Fine appeared, Lys gave her some orders
    in a low voice, and Josephine trotted away, bobbing her
    white-coiffed head with a "Bien, Madame!"
After a few minutes she returned, bearing a tattered, musty
    volume, from which the gold and blue had mostly
    disappeared.
I took the book in my hands and examined the ancient
    emblazoned covers.
"Lilies!" I exclaimed.
"Fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely.
"Oh!" said I, astonished, and opened the book.
"You have never before seen this book?" asked Lys, with a
    touch of malice in her eyes.
"You know I haven't. Hello! What's this? Oho! So there
    should be a de before Trevec? Lys de Trevec? Then why in the
    world did the Purple Emperor——"
"Dick!" cried Lys.
"All right," said I. "Shall I read about the Sieur de Trevec
    who rode to Saladin's tent alone to seek for medicine for St.
    Louise? Or shall I read about—what is it? Oh, here it is,
    all down in black and white—about the Marquis de Trevec
    who drowned himself before Alva's eyes rather than surrender
    the banner of the fleur-de-lis to Spain? It's all written here.
    But, dear, how about that soldier named Trevec who was killed
    in the old fort on the cliff yonder?"
"He dropped the de, and the Trevecs since then have been
    Republicans," said Lys—"all except me."
"That's quite right," said I; "it is time that we
    Republicans should agree upon some feudal system. My dear, I
    drink to the king!" and I raised my wine glass and looked at
    Lys.
"To the king," said Lys, flushing. She smoothed out the tiny
    garment on her knees; she touched the glass with her lips; her
    eyes were very sweet. I drained the glass to the king.
After a silence I said: "I will tell the king stories. His
    majesty shall be amused."
"His majesty," repeated Lys softly.
"Or hers," I laughed. "Who knows?"
"Who knows?" murmured Lys; with a gentle sigh.
"I know some stories about Jack the Giant-Killer," I
    announced. "Do you, Lys?"
"I? No, not about a giant-killer, but I know all about the
    werewolf, and Jeanne-la-Flamme, and the Man in Purple Tatters,
    and—O dear me, I know lots more."
"You are very wise," said I. "I shall teach his majesty,
    English."
"And I Breton," cried Lys jealously.
"I shall bring playthings to the king," said I—"big
    green lizards from the gorse, little gray mullets to swim in
    glass globes, baby rabbits from the forest of
    Kerselec——"
"And I," said Lys, "will bring the first primrose, the first
    branch of aubepine, the first jonquil, to the king—my
    king."
"Our king," said I; and there was peace in Finistere.
I lay back, idly turning the leaves of the curious old
    volume.
"I am looking," said I, "for the crest."
"The crest, dear? It is a priest's head with an arrow-shaped
    mark on the forehead, on a field——"
I sat up and stared at my wife.
"Dick, whatever is the matter?" she smiled. "The story is
    there in that book. Do you care to read it? No? Shall I tell it
    to you? Well, then: It happened in the third crusade. There was
    a monk whom men called the Black Priest. He turned apostate,
    and sold himself to the enemies of Christ. A Sieur de Trevec
    burst into the Saracen camp, at the head of only one hundred
    lances, and carried the Black Priest away out of the very midst
    of their army."
"So that is how you come by the crest," I said quietly; but
    I thought of the branded skull in the gravel pit, and
    wondered.
"Yes," said Lys. "The Sieur de Trevec cut the Black Priest's
    head off, but first he branded him with an arrow mark on the
    forehead. The book says it was a pious action, and the Sieur de
    Trevec got great merit by it. But I think it was cruel, the
    branding," she sighed.
"Did you ever hear of any other Black Priest?"
"Yes. There was one in the last century, here in St. Gildas.
    He cast a white shadow in the sun. He wrote in the Breton
    language. Chronicles, too, I believe. I never saw them. His
    name was the same as that of the old chronicler, and of the
    other priest, Jacques Sorgue. Some said he was a lineal
    descendant of the traitor. Of course the first Black Priest was
    bad enough for anything. But if he did have a child, it need
    not have been the ancestor of the last Jacques Sorgue. They say
    he was so good he was not allowed to die, but was caught up to
    heaven one day," added Lys, with believing eyes.
I smiled.
"But he disappeared," persisted Lys.
"I'm afraid his journey was in another direction," I said
    jestingly, and thoughtlessly told her the story of the morning.
    I had utterly forgotten the masked man at her window, but
    before I finished I remembered him fast enough, and realized
    what I had done as I saw her face whiten.
"Lys," I urged tenderly, "that was only some clumsy clown's
    trick. You said so yourself. You are not superstitious, my
    dear?"
Her eyes were on mine. She slowly drew the little gold cross
    from her bosom and kissed it. But her lips trembled as they
    pressed the symbol of faith.
III
About nine o'clock the next morning I walked into the Groix
    Inn and sat down at the long discolored oaken table, nodding
    good-day to Marianne Bruyere, who in turn bobbed her white
    coiffe at me.
"My clever Bannalec maid," said I, "what is good for a
    stirrup-cup at the Groix Inn?"
"Schist?" she inquired in Breton.
"With a dash of red wine, then," I replied.
She brought the delicious Quimperle cider, and I poured a
    little Bordeaux into it. Marianne watched me with laughing
    black eyes.
"What makes your cheeks so red, Marianne?" I asked. "Has
    Jean Marie been here?"
"We are to be married, Monsieur Darrel," she laughed.
"Ah! Since when has Jean Marie Tregunc lost his head?"
"His head? Oh, Monsieur Darrel—his heart, you
    mean!"
"So I do," said I. "Jean Marie is a practical fellow."
"It is all due to your kindness—" began the girl, but
    I raised my hand and held up the glass.
"It's due to himself. To your happiness, Marianne"; and I
    took a hearty draught of the schist. "Now," said I, "tell me
    where I can find Le Bihan and Max Fortin."
"Monsieur Le Bihan and Monsieur Fortin are above in the
    broad room. I believe they are examining the Red Admiral's
    effects."
"To send them to Paris? Oh, I know. May I go up,
    Marianne?"
"And God go with you," smiled the girl.
When I knocked at the door of the broad room above little
    Max Fortin opened it. Dust covered his spectacles and nose; his
    hat, with the tiny velvet ribbons fluttering, was all awry.
"Come in, Monsieur Darrel," he said; "the mayor and I are
    packing up the effects of the Purple Emperor and of the poor
    Red Admiral."
"The collections?" I asked, entering the room. "You must be
    very careful in packing those butterfly cases; the slightest
    jar might break wings and antennas, you know."
Le Bihan shook hands with me and pointed to the great pile
    of boxes.
"They're all cork lined," he said, "but Fortin and I are
    putting felt around each box. The Entomological Society of
    Paris pays the freight."
The combined collection of the Red Admiral and the Purple
    Emperor made a magnificent display.
I lifted and inspected case after case set with gorgeous
    butterflies and moths, each specimen carefully labelled with
    the name in Latin. There were cases filled with crimson tiger
    moths all aflame with color; cases devoted to the common yellow
    butterflies; symphonies in orange and pale yellow; cases of
    soft gray and dun-colored sphinx moths; and cases of grayish
    nettle-bed butterflies of the numerous family of Vanessa.
All alone in a great case by itself was pinned the purple
    emperor, the Apatura Iris, that fatal specimen that had given
    the Purple Emperor his name and quietus.
I remembered the butterfly, and stood looking at it with
    bent eyebrows.
Le Bihan glanced up from the floor where he was nailing down
    the lid of a box full of cases.
"It is settled, then," said he, "that madame, your wife,
    gives the Purple Emperor's entire Collection to the city of
    Paris?"
I nodded.
"Without accepting anything for it?"
"It is a gift," I said.
"Including the purple emperor there in the case? That
    butterfly is worth a great deal of money," persisted Le
    Bihan.
"You don't suppose that we would wish to sell that specimen,
    do you?" I answered a trifle sharply.
"If I were you I should destroy it," said the mayor in his
    high-pitched voice.
"That would be nonsense," said I, "like your burying the
    brass cylinder and scroll yesterday."
"It was not nonsense," said Le Bihan doggedly, "and I should
    prefer not to discuss the subject of the scroll."
I looked at Max Portin, who immediately avoided my eyes.
"You are a pair of superstitious old women," said I, digging
    my hands into my pockets; "you swallow every nursery tale that
    is invented."
"What of it?" said Le Bihan sulkily; "there's more truth
    than lies in most of 'em."
"Oh!" I sneered, "does the Mayor of St. Gildas and St.
    Julien believe in the loup-garou?"
"No, not in the loup-garou."
"In what, then—Jeanne-la-Flamme?"
"That," said Le Bihan with conviction, "is history."
"The devil it is!" said I; "and perhaps, Monsieur the mayor,
    your faith in giants is unimpaired?"
"There were giants—everybody knows it," growled Max
    Fortin.
"And you a chemist!" I observed scornfully.
"Listen, Monsieur Darrel," squeaked Le Bihan; "you know
    yourself that the Purple Emperor was a scientific man. Now
    suppose I should tell you that he always refused to include in
    his collection a Death's Messenger?"
"A what?" I exclaimed.
"You know what I mean—that moth that flies by night;
    some call it the Death's Head, but in St. Gildas we call it
    'Death's Messenger.'"
"Oh!" said I, "you mean that big sphinx moth that is
    commonly known as the 'death's-head moth.' Why the mischief
    should the people here call it death's messenger?"
"For hundreds of years it has been known as death's
    messenger in St. Gildas," said Max Fortin. "Even Froissart
    speaks of it in his commentaries on Jacques Sorgue's
    Chronicles. The book is in your library."
"Sorgue? And who was Jacques Sorgue? I never read his
    book."
"Jacques Sorgue
         was the son of some unfrocked priest—I forget. It
         was during the crusades."
"Good Heavens!" I burst out, "I've been hearing of nothing
    but crusades and priests and death and sorcery ever since I
    kicked that skull into the gravel pit, and I am tired of it, I
    tell you frankly. One would think we lived in the dark ages. Do
    you know what year of our Lord it is, Le Bihan?"
"Eighteen hundred and ninety-six," replied the mayor.
"And yet you two hulking men are afraid of a death's-head
    moth."
"I don't care to have one fly into the window," said Max
    Fortin; "it means evil to the house and the people in it."
"God alone knows why he marked one of his creatures with a
    yellow death's head on the back," observed Le Bihan piously,
    "but I take it that he meant it as a warning; and I propose to
    profit by it," he added triumphantly.
"See here, Le Bihan," I said; "by a stretch of imagination
    one can make out a skull on the thorax of a certain big sphinx
    moth. What of it?"
"It is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor wagging his
    head.
"It squeaks when handled," added Max Fortin.
"Some creatures squeak all the time," I observed, looking
    hard at Le Bihan.
"Pigs," added the mayor.
"Yes, and asses," I replied. "Listen, Le Bihan: do you mean
    to tell me that you saw that skull roll uphill yesterday?"
The mayor shut his mouth tightly and picked up his
    hammer.
"Don't be obstinate," I said; "I asked you a question."
"And I refuse to answer," snapped Le Bihan. "Fortin saw what
    I saw; let him talk about it."
I looked searchingly at the little chemist.
"I don't say that I saw it actually roll up out of the pit,
    all by itself," said Fortin with a shiver, "but—but then,
    how did it come up out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by
    itself?"
"It didn't come up at all; that was a yellow cobblestone
    that you mistook for the skull again," I replied. "You were
    nervous, Max."
"A—a very curious cobblestone, Monsieur Darrel," said
    Fortin.
"I also was a victim to the same hallucination," I
    continued, "and I regret to say that I took the trouble to roll
    two innocent cobblestones into the gravel pit, imagining each
    time that it was the skull I was rolling."
"It was," observed Le Bihan with a morose shrug.
"It just shows," said I, ignoring the mayor's remark, "how
    easy it is to fix up a train of coincidences so that the result
    seems to savor of the supernatural. Now, last night my wife
    imagined that she saw a priest in a mask peer in at her
    window——"
Fortin and Le Bihan scrambled hastily from their knees,
    dropping hammer and nails.
"W-h-a-t—what's that?" demanded the mayor.
I repeated what I had said. Max Fortin turned livid.
"My God!" muttered Le Bihan, "the Black Priest is in St.
    Gildas!"
"D-don't you—you know the old prophecy?" stammered
    Fortin; "Froissart quotes it from Jacques Sorgue:


"'When the Black Priest rises from the dead,
St. Gildas folk shall shriek in bed;
When the Black Priest rises from his grave,
May the good God St. Gildas save!'"


"Aristide Le Bihan," I said angrily, "and you, Max Fortin,
    I've got enough of this nonsense! Some foolish lout from
    Bannalec has been in St. Gildas playing tricks to frighten old
    fools like you. If you have nothing better to talk about than
    nursery legends I'll wait until you come to your senses.
    Good-morning." And I walked out, more disturbed than I cared to
    acknowledge to myself.
The day had become misty and overcast. Heavy, wet clouds
    hung in the east. I heard the surf thundering against the
    cliffs, and the gray gulls squealed as they tossed and turned
    high in the sky. The tide was creeping across the river sands,
    higher, higher, and I saw the seaweed floating on the beach,
    and the lancons springing from the foam, silvery threadlike
    flashes in the gloom. Curlew were flying up the river in twos
    and threes; the timid sea swallows skimmed across the moors
    toward some quiet, lonely pool, safe from the coming tempest.
    In every hedge field birds were gathering, huddling together,
    twittering restlessly.
When I reached the cliffs I sat down, resting my chin on my
    clenched hands. Already a vast curtain of rain, sweeping across
    the ocean miles away, hid the island of Groix. To the east,
    behind the white semaphore on the hills, black clouds crowded
    up over the horizon. After a little the thunder boomed, dull,
    distant, and slender skeins of lightning unraveled across the
    crest of the coming storm. Under the cliff at my feet the surf
    rushed foaming over the shore, and the lancons jumped and
    skipped and quivered until they seemed to be but the
    reflections of the meshed lightning.
I turned to the east. It was raining over Groix, it was
    raining at Sainte Barbe, it was raining now at the semaphore.
    High in the storm whirl a few gulls pitched; a nearer cloud
    trailed veils of rain in its wake; the sky was spattered with
    lightning; the thunder boomed.
As I rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the back of my
    hand, and another, and yet another on my face. I gave a last
    glance at the sea, where the waves were bursting into strange
    white shapes that seemed to fling out menacing arms toward me.
    Then something moved on the cliff, something black as the black
    rock it clutched—a filthy cormorant, craning its hideous
    head at the sky.
Slowly I plodded homeward across the somber moorland, where
    the gorse stems glimmered with a dull metallic green, and the
    heather, no longer violet and purple, hung drenched and
    dun-colored among the dreary rocks. The wet turf creaked under
    my heavy boots, the black-thorn scraped and grated against knee
    and elbow. Over all lay a strange light, pallid, ghastly, where
    the sea spray whirled across the landscape and drove into my
    face until it grew numb with the cold. In broad bands, rank
    after rank, billow on billow, the rain burst out across the
    endless moors, and yet there was no wind to drive it at such a
    pace.
Lys stood at the door as I turned into the garden, motioning
    me to hasten; and then for the first time I became conscious
    that I was soaked to the skin.
"However in the world did you come to stay out when such a
    storm threatened?" she said. "Oh, you are dripping! Go quickly
    and change; I have laid your warm underwear on the bed,
    Dick."
I kissed my wife, and went upstairs to change my dripping
    clothes for something more comfortable.
When I returned to the morning room there was a driftwood
    fire on the hearth, and Lys sat in the chimney corner
    embroidering.
"Catherine tells me that the fishing fleet from Lorient is
    out. Do you think they are in danger, dear?" asked Lys, raising
    her blue eyes to mine as I entered.
"There is no wind, and there will be no sea," said I,
    looking out of the window. Far across the moor I could see the
    black cliffs looming in the mist.
"How it rains!" murmured Lys; "come to the fire, Dick."
I threw myself on the fur rug, my hands in my pockets, my
    head on Lys's knees.
"Tell me a story," I said. "I feel like a boy of ten."
Lys raised a finger to her scarlet lips. I always waited for
    her to do that.
"Will you be very still, then?" she said.
"Still as death."
"Death," echoed a voice, very softly.
"Did you speak, Lys?" I asked, turning so that I could see
    her face.
"No; did you, Dick?"
"Who said 'death'?" I asked, startled.
"Death," echoed a voice, softly.
I sprang up and looked about. Lys rose too, her needles and
    embroidery falling to the floor. She seemed about to faint,
    leaning heavily on me, and I led her to the window and opened
    it a little way to give her air. As I did so the chain
    lightning split the zenith, the thunder crashed, and a sheet of
    rain swept into the room, driving with it something that
    fluttered—something that flapped, and squeaked, and beat
    upon the rug with soft, moist wings.
We bent over it together, Lys clinging to me, and we saw
    that it was a death's-head moth drenched with rain.
The dark day passed slowly as we sat beside the fire, hand
    in hand, her head against my breast, speaking of sorrow and
    mystery and death. For Lys believed that there were things on
    earth that none might understand, things that must be nameless
    forever and ever, until God rolls up the scroll of life and all
    is ended. We spoke of hope and fear and faith, and the mystery
    of the saints; we spoke of the beginning and the end, of the
    shadow of sin, of omens, and of love. The moth still lay on the
    floor quivering its somber wings in the warmth of the fire, the
    skull and ribs clearly etched upon its neck and body.
"If it is a messenger of death to this house," I said, "why
    should we fear, Lys?"
"Death should be welcome to those who love God," murmured
    Lys, and she drew the cross from her breast and kissed it.
"The moth might die if I threw it out into the storm," I
    said after a silence.
"Let it remain," sighed Lys.
Late that night my wife lay sleeping, and I sat beside her
    bed and read in the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue. I shaded the
    candle, but Lys grew restless, and finally I took the book down
    into the morning room, where the ashes of the fire rustled and
    whitened on the hearth.
The death's-head moth lay on the rug before the fire where I
    had left it. At first I thought it was dead, but when I looked
    closer I saw a lambent fire in its amber eyes. The straight
    white shadow it cast across the floor wavered as the candle
    flickered.
The pages of the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue were damp and
    sticky; the illuminated gold and blue initials left flakes of
    azure and gilt where my hand brushed them.
"It is not paper at all; it is thin parchment," I said to
    myself; and I held the discolored page close to the candle
    flame and read, translating laboriously:
"I, Jacques Sorgue, saw all these things. And I saw the
    Black Mass celebrated in the chapel of St. Gildas-on-the-Cliff.
    And it was said by the Abbé Sorgue, my kinsman: for
    which deadly sin the apostate priest was seized by the most
    noble Marquis of Plougastel and by him condemned to be burned
    with hot irons, until his seared soul quit its body and fly to
    its master the devil. But when the Black Priest lay in the
    crypt of Plougastel, his master Satan came at night and set him
    free, and carried him across land and sea to Mahmoud, which is
    Soldan or Saladin. And I, Jacques Sorgue, traveling afterward
    by sea, beheld with my own eyes my kinsman, the Black Priest of
    St. Gildas, borne along in the air upon a vast black wing,
    which was the wing of his master Satan. And this was seen also
    by two men of the crew."
I turned the page. The wings of the moth on the floor began
    to quiver. I read on and on, my eyes blurring under the
    shifting candle flame. I read of battles and of saints, and I
    learned how the Great Soldan made his pact with Satan, and then
    I came to the Sieur de Trevec, and read how he seized the Black
    Priest in the midst of Saladin's tents and carried him away and
    cut off his head first branding him on the forehead. "And
    before he suffered," said the Chronicle, "he cursed the Sieur
    de Trevec and his descendants, and he said he would surely
    return to St. Gildas. 'For the violence you do to me, I will do
    violence to you. For the evil I suffer at your hands, I will
    work evil on you and your descendants. Woe to your children,
    Sieur de Trevec!'" There was a whirr, a beating of strong
    wings, and my candle flashed up as in a sudden breeze. A
    humming filled the room; the great moth darted hither and
    thither, beating, buzzing, on ceiling and wall. I flung down my
    book and stepped forward. Now it lay fluttering upon the window
    sill, and for a moment I had it under my hand, but the thing
    squeaked and I shrank back. Then suddenly it darted across the
    candle flame; the light flared and went out, and at the same
    moment a shadow moved in the darkness outside. I raised my eyes
    to the window. A masked face was peering in at me.
Quick as thought I whipped out my revolver and fired every
    cartridge, but the face advanced beyond the window, the glass
    melting away before it like mist, and through the smoke of my
    revolver I saw something creep swiftly into the room. Then I
    tried to cry out, but the thing was at my throat, and I fell
    backward among the ashes of the hearth.

When my eyes unclosed I was lying on the hearth, my head
    among the cold ashes. Slowly I got on my knees, rose painfully,
    and groped my way to a chair. On the floor lay my revolver,
    shining in the pale light of early morning. My mind clearing by
    degrees, I looked, shuddering, at the window. The glass was
    unbroken. I stooped stiffly, picked up my revolver and opened
    the cylinder. Every cartridge had been fired. Mechanically I
    closed the cylinder and placed the revolver in my pocket. The
    book, the Chronicles of Jacques Sorgue, lay on the table beside
    me, and as I started to close it I glanced at the page. It was
    all splashed with rain, and the lettering had run, so that the
    page was merely a confused blur of gold and red and black. As I
    stumbled toward the door I cast a fearful glance over my
    shoulder. The death's-head moth crawled shivering on the
    rug.
IV
The sun was about three hours high. I must have slept, for I
    was aroused by the sudden gallop of horses under our window.
    People were shouting and calling in the road. I sprang up and
    opened the sash. Le Bihan was there, an image of helplessness,
    and Max Fortin stood beside him polishing his glasses. Some
    gendarmes had just arrived from Quimperle, and I could hear
    them around the corner of the house, stamping, and rattling
    their sabres and carbines, as they led their horses into my
    stable.
Lys sat up, murmuring half-sleepy, half-anxious
    questions.
"I don't know," I answered. "I am going out to see what it
    means."
"It is like the day they came to arrest you," Lys said,
    giving me a troubled look. But I kissed her and laughed at her
    until she smiled too. Then I flung on coat and cap and hurried
    down the stairs.
The first person I saw standing in the road was the
    Brigadier Durand.
"Hello!" said I, "have you come to arrest me again? What the
    devil is all this fuss about, anyway?"
"We were telegraphed for an hour ago," said Durand briskly,
    "and for a sufficient reason, I think. Look there, Monsieur
    Darrel!"
He pointed to the ground almost under my feet.
"Good heavens!" I cried, "where did that puddle of blood
    come from?"
"That's what I want to know, Monsieur Darrel. Max Fortin
    found it at daybreak. See, it's splashed all over the grass,
    too. A trail of it leads into your garden, across the flower
    beds to your very window, the one that opens from the morning
    room. There is another trail leading from this spot across the
    road to the cliffs, then to the gravel pit, and thence across
    the moor to the forest of Kerselec. We are going to mount in a
    minute and search the bosquets. Will you join us? Bon Dieu! but
    the fellow bled like an ox. Max Fortin says it's human blood,
    or I should not have believed it."
The little chemist of Quimperle came up at that moment,
    rubbing his glasses with a colored handkerchief.
"Yes, it is human blood," he said, "but one thing puzzles
    me: the corpuscles are yellow. I never saw any human blood
    before with yellow corpuscles. But your English Doctor Thompson
    asserts that he has——"
"Well, it's human blood, anyway—isn't it?" insisted
    Durand, impatiently.
"Ye-es," admitted Max Fortin.
"Then it's my business to trail it," said the big gendarme,
    and he called his men and gave the order to mount.
"Did you hear anything last night?" asked Durand of me.
"I heard the rain. I wonder the rain did not wash away these
    traces."
"They must have come after the rain ceased. See this thick
    splash, how it lies over and weighs down the wet grass blades.
    Pah!"
It was a heavy, evil-looking clot, and I stepped back from
    it, my throat closing in disgust.
"My theory," said the brigadier, "is this: Some of those
    Biribi fishermen, probably the Icelanders, got an extra glass
    of cognac into their hides and quarreled on the road. Some of
    them were slashed, and staggered to your house. But there is
    only one trail, and yet—and yet, how could all that blood
    come from only one person? Well, the wounded man, let us say,
    staggered first to your house and then back here, and he
    wandered off, drunk and dying, God knows where. That's my
    theory."
"A very good one," said I calmly. "And you are going to
    trail him?"
"Yes."
"When?"
"At once. Will you come?"
"Not now. I'll gallop over by-and-bye. You are going to the
    edge of the Kerselec forest?"
"Yes; you will hear us calling. Are you coming, Max Fortin?
    And you, Le Bihan? Good; take the dog-cart."
The big gendarme tramped around the corner to the stable and
    presently returned mounted on a strong gray horse, his sabre
    shone on his saddle; his pale yellow and white facings were
    spotless. The little crowd of white-coiffed women with their
    children fell back as Durand touched spurs and clattered away
    followed by his two troopers. Soon after Le Bihan and Max
    Fortin also departed in the mayor's dingy dog-cart.
"Are you coming?" piped Le Bihan shrilly.
"In a quarter of an hour," I replied, and went back to the
    house.
When I opened the door of the morning room the death's-head
    moth was beating its strong wings against the window. For a
    second I hesitated, then walked over and opened the sash. The
    creature fluttered out, whirred over the flower beds a moment,
    then darted across the moorland toward the sea. I called the
    servants together and questioned them. Josephine, Catherine,
    Jean Marie Tregunc, not one of them had heard the slightest
    disturbance during the night. Then I told Jean Marie to saddle
    my horse, and while I was speaking Lys came down.
"Dearest," I began, going to her.
"You must tell me everything you know, Dick," she
    interrupted, looking me earnestly in the face.
"But there is nothing to tell—only a drunken brawl,
    and some one wounded."
"And you are going to ride—where, Dick?"
"Well, over to the edge of Kerselec forest. Durand and the
    mayor, and Max Fortin, have gone on, following a—a
    trail."
"What trail?"
"Some blood."
"Where did they find it?"
"Out in the road there." Lys crossed herself.
"Does it come near our house?"
"Yes."
"How near?"
"It comes up to the morning room window," said I, giving
    in.
Her hand on my arm grew heavy. "I dreamed last
    night——"
"So did I—" but I thought of the empty cartridges in
    my revolver, and stopped.
"I dreamed that you were in great danger, and I could not
    move hand or foot to save you; but you had your revolver, and I
    called out to you to fire——"
"I did fire!" I cried excitedly.
"You—you fired?"
I took her in my arms. "My darling," I said "something
    strange has happened—something that I cannot understand
    as yet. But, of course, there is an explanation. Last night I
    thought I fired at the Black Priest."
"Ah!" gasped Lys.
"Is that what you dreamed?"
"Yes, yes, that was it! I begged you to
    fire——"
"And I did."
Her heart was beating against my breast. I held her close in
    silence.
"Dick," she said at length, "perhaps you killed
    the—the thing."
"If it was human I did not miss," I answered grimly. "And it
    was human," I went on, pulling myself together, ashamed of
    having so nearly gone to pieces. "Of course it was human! The
    whole affair is plain enough. Not a drunken brawl, as Durand
    thinks; it was a drunken lout's practical joke, for which he
    has suffered. I suppose I must have filled him pretty full of
    bullets, and he has crawled away to die in Kerselec forest.
    It's a terrible affair; I'm sorry I fired so hastily; but that
    idiot Le Bihan and Max Fortin have been working on my nerves
    till I am as hysterical as a schoolgirl," I ended angrily.
"You fired—but the window glass was not shattered,"
    said Lys in a low voice.
"Well, the window was open, then. And as for the—the
    rest—I've got nervous indigestion, and a doctor will
    settle the Black Priest for me, Lys."
I glanced out of the window at Tregunc waiting with my horse
    at the gate.
"Dearest, I think I had better go to join Durand and the
    others."
"I will go, too."
"Oh, no!"
"Yes, Dick."
"Don't, Lys."
"I shall suffer every moment you are away."
"The ride is too fatiguing, and we can't tell what
    unpleasant sight you may come upon. Lys, you don't really think
    there is anything supernatural in this affair?"
"Dick," she answered gently, "I am a Bretonne." With both
    arms around my neck, my wife said, "Death is the gift of God. I
    do not fear it when we are together. But alone—oh, my
    husband, I should fear a God who could take you away from
    me!"
We kissed each other soberly, simply, like two children.
    Then Lys hurried away to change her gown, and I paced up and
    down the garden waiting for her.
She came, drawing on her slender gauntlets. I swung her into
    the saddle, gave a hasty order to Jean Marie, and mounted.
Now, to quail under thoughts of terror on a morning like
    this, with Lys in the saddle beside me, no matter what had
    happened or might happen was impossible. Moreover, Môme
    came sneaking after us. I asked Tregunc to catch him, for I was
    afraid he might be brained by our horses' hoofs if he followed,
    but the wily puppy dodged and bolted after Lys, who was
    trotting along the highroad. "Never mind," I thought; "if he's
    hit he'll live, for he has no brains to lose."
Lys was waiting for me in the road beside the Shrine of Our
    Lady of St. Gildas when I joined her. She crossed herself, I
    doffed my cap, then we shook out our bridles and galloped
    toward the forest of Kerselec.
We said very little as we rode. I always loved to watch Lys
    in the saddle. Her exquisite figure and lovely face were the
    incarnation of youth and grace; her curling hair glistened like
    threaded gold.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw the spoiled puppy
    Môme come bounding cheerfully alongside, oblivious of our
    horses' heels. Our road swung close to the cliffs. A filthy
    cormorant rose from the black rocks and flapped heavily across
    our path. Lys's horse reared, but she pulled him down, and
    pointed at the bird with her riding crop.
"I see," said I; "it seems to be going our way. Curious to
    see a cormorant in a forest, isn't it?"
"It is a bad sign," said Lys. "You know the Morbihan
    proverb: 'When the cormorant turns from the sea, Death laughs
    in the forest, and wise woodsmen build boats.'"
"I wish," said I sincerely, "that there were fewer proverbs
    in Brittany."
We were in sight of the forest now; across the gorse I could
    see the sparkle of gendarmes' trappings, and the glitter of Le
    Bihan's silver-buttoned jacket. The hedge was low and we took
    it without difficulty, and trotted across the moor to where Le
    Bihan and Durand stood gesticulating.
They bowed ceremoniously to Lys as we rode up.
"The trail is horrible—it is a river," said the mayor
    in his squeaky voice. "Monsieur Darrel, I think perhaps madame
    would scarcely care to come any nearer."
Lys drew bridle and looked at me.
"It is horrible!" said Durand, walking up beside me; "it
    looks as though a bleeding regiment had passed this way. The
    trail winds and winds about here in the thickets; we lose it at
    times, but we always find it again. I can't understand how one
    man—no, nor twenty—could bleed like that!"
A halloo, answered by another, sounded from the depths of
    the forest.
"It's my men; they are following the trail," muttered the
    brigadier. "God alone knows what is at the end!"
"Shall we gallop back, Lys?" I asked.
"No; let us ride along the western edge of the woods and
    dismount. The sun is so hot now, and I should like to rest for
    a moment," she said.
"The western forest is clear of anything disagreeable," said
    Durand.
"Very well," I answered; "call me, Le Bihan, if you find
    anything."
Lys wheeled her mare, and I followed across the springy
    heather, Môme trotting cheerfully in the rear.
We entered the sunny woods about a quarter of a kilometer
    from where we left Durand. I took Lys from her horse, flung
    both bridles over a limb, and, giving my wife my arm, aided her
    to a flat mossy rock which overhung a shallow brook gurgling
    among the beech trees. Lys sat down and drew off her gauntlets.
    Môme pushed his head into her lap, received an undeserved
    caress, and came doubtfully toward me. I was weak enough to
    condone his offense, but I made him lie down at my feet,
    greatly to his disgust.
I rested my head on Lys's knees, looking up at the sky
    through the crossed branches of the trees.
"I suppose I have killed him," I said. "It shocks me
    terribly, Lys."
"You could not have known, dear. He may have been a robber,
    and—if—not—did—have you ever fired your
    revolver since that day four years ago when the Red Admiral's
    son tried to kill you? But I know you have not."
"No," said I, wondering. "It's a fact, I have not. Why?"
"And don't you remember that I asked you to let me load it
    for you the day when Yves went off, swearing to kill you and
    his father?"
"Yes, I do remember. Well?"
"Well, I—I took the cartridges first to St. Gildas
    chapel and dipped them in holy water. You must not laugh,
    Dick," said Lys gently, laying her cool hands on my lips.
"Laugh, my darling!"
Overhead the October sky was pale amethyst, and the sunlight
    burned like orange flame through the yellow leaves of beech and
    oak. Gnats and midges danced and wavered overhead; a spider
    dropped from a twig halfway to the ground and hung suspended on
    the end of his gossamer thread.
"Are you sleepy, dear?" asked Lys, bending over me.
"I am—a little; I scarcely slept two hours last
    night," I answered.
"You may sleep, if you wish," said Lys, and touched my eyes
    caressingly.
"Is my head heavy on your knees?"
"No, Dick."
I was already in a half doze; still I heard the brook
    babbling under the beeches and the humming of forest flies
    overhead. Presently even these were stilled.
The next thing I knew I was sitting bolt upright, my ears
    ringing with a scream, and I saw Lys cowering beside me,
    covering her white face with both hands.
As I sprang to my feet she cried again and clung to my
    knees. I saw my dog rush growling into a thicket, then I heard
    him whimper, and he came backing out, whining, ears flat, tail
    down. I stooped and disengaged Lys's hand.
"Don't go, Dick!" she cried. "O God, it's the Black
    Priest!"
In a moment I had leaped across the brook and pushed my way
    into the thicket. It was empty. I stared about me; I scanned
    every tree trunk, every bush. Suddenly I saw him. He was seated
    on a fallen log, his head resting in his hands, his rusty black
    robe gathered around him. For a moment my hair stirred under my
    cap; sweat started on forehead and cheek bone; then I recovered
    my reason, and understood that the man was human and was
    probably wounded to death. Ay, to death; for there at my feet,
    lay the wet trail of blood, over leaves and stones, down into
    the little hollow, across to the figure in black resting
    silently under the trees.
I saw that he could not escape even if he had the strength,
    for before him, almost at his very feet, lay a deep, shining
    swamp.
As I stepped forward my foot broke a twig. At the sound the
    figure started a little, then its head fell forward again. Its
    face was masked. Walking up to the man, I bade him tell where
    he was wounded. Durand and the others broke through the thicket
    at the same moment and hurried to my side.
"Who are you who hide a masked face in a priest's robe?"
    said the gendarme loudly.
There was no answer.
"See—see the stiff blood all over his robe," muttered
    Le Bihan to Fortin.
"He will not speak," said I.
"He may be too badly wounded," whispered Le Bihan.
"I saw him raise his head," I said, "my wife saw him creep
    up here."
Durand stepped forward and touched the figure.
"Speak!" he said.
"Speak!" quavered Fortin.
Durand waited a moment, then with a sudden upward movement
    he stripped off the mask and threw back the man's head. We were
    looking into the eye sockets of a skull. Durand stood rigid;
    the mayor shrieked. The skeleton burst out from its rotting
    robes and collapsed on the ground before us. From between the
    staring ribs and the grinning teeth spurted a torrent of black
    blood, showering the shrinking grasses; then the thing
    shuddered, and fell over into the black ooze of the bog. Little
    bubbles of iridescent air appeared from the mud; the bones were
    slowly engulfed, and, as the last fragments sank out of sight,
    up from the depths and along the bank crept a creature, shiny,
    shivering, quivering its wings.
It was a death's-head moth.

I wish I had time to tell you how Lys outgrew
    superstitions—for she never knew the truth about the
    affair, and she never will know, since she has promised not to
    read this book. I wish I might tell you about the king and his
    coronation, and how the coronation robe fitted. I wish that I
    were able to write how Yvonne and Herbert Stuart rode to a boar
    hunt in Quimperle, and how the hounds raced the quarry right
    through the town, overturning three gendarmes, the notary, and
    an old woman. But I am becoming garrulous and Lys is calling me
    to come and hear the king say that he is sleepy. And his
    highness shall not be kept waiting.
THE KING'S CRADLE SONG


Seal with a seal of gold
The scroll of a life unrolled;
Swathe him deep in his purple stole;
Ashes of diamonds, crystalled coal,
Drops of gold in each scented fold.


Crimson wings of the Little Death,
Stir his hair with your silken
            breath;
Flaming wings of sins to be,
Splendid pinions of prophecy,
Smother his eyes with hues and dyes,
While the white moon spins and the winds arise,
And the stars drip through the skies.


Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
Seal his sight and stifle his breath,
Cover his breast with the gemmed shroud
            pressed;
From north to north, from west to
            west,
Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
Till the white moon reels in the cracking skies,
And the ghosts of God arise.



Lazarus
By LEONID ANDREYEV
TRANSLATED BY ABRAHAM YARMOLINSKY

From Lazarus and the Gentleman from San
        Francisco. Published by The Stratford Company. By
        permission of the publishers.

I
When Lazarus left the grave, where, for three days and three
    nights he had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and
    returned alive to his dwelling, for a long time no one noticed
    in him those sinister oddities, which, as time went on, made
    his very name a terror. Gladdened unspeakably by the sight of
    him who had been returned to life, those near to him caressed
    him unceasingly, and satiated their burning desire to serve
    him, in solicitude for his food and drink and garments. And
    they dressed him gorgeously, in bright colors of hope and
    laughter, and when, like to a bridegroom in his bridal
    vestures, he sat again among them at the table, and again ate
    and drank, they wept, overwhelmed with tenderness. And they
    summoned the neighbors to look at him who had risen
    miraculously from the dead. These came and shared the serene
    joy of the hosts. Strangers from far-off towns and hamlets came
    and adored the miracle in tempestuous words. Like to a beehive
    was the house of Mary and Martha.
Whatever was found new in Lazarus' face and gestures was
    thought to be some trace of a grave illness and of the shocks
    recently experienced. Evidently, the destruction wrought by
    death on the corpse was only arrested by the miraculous power,
    but its effects were still apparent; and what death had
    succeeded in doing with Lazarus' face and body, was like an
    artist's unfinished sketch seen under thin glass. On Lazarus'
    temples, under his eyes, and in the hollows of his cheeks, lay
    a deep and cadaverous blueness; cadaverously blue also were his
    long fingers, and around his fingernails, grown long in the
    grave, the blue had become purple and dark. On his lips the
    skin, swollen in the grave, had burst in places, and thin,
    reddish cracks were formed, shining as though covered with
    transparent mica. And he had grown stout. His body, puffed up
    in the grave, retained its monstrous size and showed those
    frightful swellings, in which one sensed the presence of the
    rank liquid of decomposition. But the heavy corpse-like odor
    which penetrated Lazarus' graveclothes and, it seemed, his very
    body, soon entirely disappeared, the blue spots on his face and
    hands grew paler, and the reddish cracks closed up, although
    they never disappeared altogether. That is how Lazarus looked
    when he appeared before people, in his second life, but his
    face looked natural to those who had seen him in the
    coffin.
In addition to the changes in his appearance, Lazarus'
    temper seemed to have undergone a transformation, but this
    circumstance startled no one and attracted no attention. Before
    his death Lazarus had always been cheerful and carefree, fond
    of laughter and a merry joke. It was because of this brightness
    and cheerfulness, with not a touch of malice and darkness, that
    the Master had grown so fond of him. But now Lazarus had grown
    grave and taciturn, he never jested, himself, nor responded
    with laughter to other people's jokes; and the words which he
    uttered, very infrequently, were the plainest, most ordinary,
    and necessary words, as deprived of depth and significance, as
    those sounds with which animals express pain and pleasure,
    thirst and hunger. They were the words that one can say all
    one's life, and yet they give no indication of what pains and
    gladdens the depths of the soul.
Thus, with the face of a corpse which for three days had
    been under the heavy sway of death, dark and taciturn, already
    appallingly transformed, but still unrecognized by anyone in
    his new self, he was sitting at the feasting table, among
    friends and relatives, and his gorgeous nuptial garments
    glittered with yellow gold and bloody scarlet. Broad waves of
    jubilation, now soft, now tempestuously sonorous surged around
    him; warm glances of love were reaching out for his face, still
    cold with the coldness of the grave; and a friend's warm palm
    caressed his blue, heavy hand. And music played the tympanum
    and the pipe, the cithara and the harp. It was as though bees
    hummed, grasshoppers chirped and birds warbled over the happy
    house of Mary and Martha.
II
One of the guests incautiously lifted the veil. By a
    thoughtless word he broke the serene charm and uncovered the
    truth in all its naked ugliness. Ere the thought formed itself
    in his mind, his lips uttered with a smile:
"Why dost thou not tell us what happened yonder?"
And all grew silent, startled by the question. It was as if
    it occurred to them only now that for three days Lazarus had
    been dead, and they looked at him, anxiously awaiting his
    answer. But Lazarus kept silence.
"Thou dost not wish to tell us,"—wondered the man, "is
    it so terrible yonder?"
And again his thought came after his words. Had it been
    otherwise, he would not have asked this question, which at that
    very moment oppressed his heart with its insufferable horror.
    Uneasiness seized all present, and with a feeling of heavy
    weariness they awaited Lazarus' words, but he was silent,
    sternly and coldly, and his eyes were lowered. And as if for
    the first time, they noticed the frightful blueness of his face
    and his repulsive obesity. On the table, as though forgotten by
    Lazarus, rested his bluish-purple wrist, and to this all eyes
    turned, as if it were from it that the awaited answer was to
    come. The musicians were still playing, but now the silence
    reached them too, and even as water extinguishes scattered
    embers, so were their merry tunes extinguished in the silence.
    The pipe grew silent; the voices of the sonorous tympanum and
    the murmuring harp died away; and as if the strings had burst,
    the cithara answered with a tremulous, broken note.
    Silence.
"Thou dost not wish to say?" repeated the guest, unable to
    check his chattering tongue. But the stillness remained
    unbroken, and the bluish-purple hand rested motionless. And
    then he stirred slightly and everyone felt relieved. He lifted
    up his eyes, and lo! straightway embracing everything in one
    heavy glance, fraught with weariness and horror, he looked at
    them,—Lazarus who had arisen from the dead.
It was the third day since Lazarus had left the grave. Ever
    since then many had experienced the pernicious power of his
    eye, but neither those who were crushed by it forever, nor
    those who found the strength to resist in it the primordial
    sources of life,—which is as mysterious as
    death,—never could they explain the horror which lay
    motionless in the depth of his black pupils. Lazarus looked
    calmly and simply with no desire to conceal anything, but also
    with no intention to say anything; he looked coldly, as he who
    is infinitely indifferent to those alive. Many carefree people
    came close to him without noticing him, and only later did they
    learn with astonishment and fear who that calm stout man was,
    that walked slowly by, almost touching them with his gorgeous
    and dazzling garments. The sun did not cease shining, when he
    was looking, nor did the fountain hush its murmur, and the sky
    overhead remained cloudless and blue. But the man under the
    spell of his enigmatical look heard no more the fountain and
    saw not the sky overhead. Sometimes, he wept bitterly,
    sometimes he tore his hair and in frenzy called for help; but
    more often it came to pass that apathetically and quietly he
    began to die, and so he languished many years, before
    everybody's very eyes, wasted away, colorless, flabby, dull,
    like a tree, silently drying up in a stony soil. And of those
    who gazed at him, the ones who wept madly, sometimes felt again
    the stir of life; the others never.
"So thou dost not wish to tell us what thou hast seen
    yonder?" repeated the man. But now his voice was impassive and
    dull, and deadly gray weariness showed in Lazarus' eyes. And
    deadly gray weariness covered like dust all the faces, and with
    dull amazement the guests stared at each other and did not
    understand wherefore they had gathered here and sat at the rich
    table. The talk ceased. They thought it was time to go home,
    but could not overcome the flaccid lazy weariness which glued
    their muscles, and they kept on sitting there, yet apart and
    torn away from each other, like pale fires scattered over a
    dark field.
But the musicians were paid to play and again they took
    their instruments and again tunes full of studied mirth and
    studied sorrow began to flow and to rise. They unfolded the
    customary melody but the guests hearkened in dull amazement.
    Already they knew not wherefore is it necessary, and why is it
    well, that people should pluck strings, inflate their cheeks,
    blow in thin pipes, and produce a bizarre, many-voiced
    noise.
"What bad music," said someone.
The musicians took offense and left. Following them, the
    guests left one after another, for night was already come. And
    when placid darkness encircled them and they began to breathe
    with more ease, suddenly Lazarus' image loomed up before each
    one in formidable radiance: the blue face of a corpse,
    grave-clothes gorgeous and resplendent, a cold look, in the
    depths of which lay motionless an unknown horror. As though
    petrified, they were standing far apart, and darkness enveloped
    them, but in the darkness blazed brighter and brighter the
    supernatural vision of him who for three days had been under
    the enigmatical sway of death. For three days had he been dead:
    thrice had the sun risen and set, but he had been dead;
    children had played, streams murmured over pebbles, the
    wayfarer had lifted up hot dust in the highroad,—but he
    had been dead. And now he is again among them,—touches
    them,—looks at them,—looks at them! and through the
    black discs of his pupils, as through darkened glass, stares
    the unknowable Yonder.
III
No one was taking care of Lazarus, for no friends no
    relatives were left to him, and the great desert which
    encircled the holy city, came near the very threshold of his
    dwelling. And the desert entered his house, and stretched on
    his couch, like a wife and extinguished the fires. No one was
    taking care of Lazarus. One after the other, his
    sisters—Mary and Martha—forsook him. For a long
    while Martha was loath to abandon him, for she knew not who
    would feed him and pity him, she wept and prayed. But one
    night, when the wind was roaming in the desert and with a
    hissing sound the cypresses were bending over the roof, she
    dressed noiselessly and secretly left the house. Lazarus
    probably heard the door slam; it banged against the side-post
    under the gusts of the desert wind, but he did not rise to go
    out and to look at her that was abandoning him. All the night
    long the cypresses hissed over his head and plaintively thumped
    the door, letting in the cold, greedy desert.
Like a leper he was shunned by everyone, and it was proposed
    to tie a bell to his neck, as is done with lepers, to warn
    people against sudden meetings. But someone remarked, growing
    frightfully pale, that it would be too horrible if by night the
    moaning of Lazarus' bell were suddenly heard under the
    windows,—and so the project was abandoned.
And since he did not take care of himself, he would probably
    have starved to death, had not the neighbors brought him food
    in fear of something that they sensed but vaguely. The food was
    brought to him by children; they were not afraid of Lazarus,
    nor did they mock him with naive cruelty, as children are wont
    to do with the wretched and miserable. They were indifferent to
    him, and Lazarus answered them with the same coldness; he had
    no desire to caress the black little curls, and to look into
    their innocent shining eyes. Given to Time and to the Desert,
    his house was crumbling down, and long since had his famishing,
    lowing goats wandered away to the neighboring pastures. And his
    bridal garments became threadbare. Ever since that happy day,
    when the musicians played, he had worn them unaware of the
    difference of the new and the worn. The bright colors grew dull
    and faded; vicious dogs and the sharp thorn of the Desert
    turned the tender fabric into rags.
By day, when the merciless sun slew all things alive, and
    even scorpions sought shelter under stones and writhed there in
    a mad desire to sting, he sat motionless under the sunrays, his
    blue face and the uncouth, bushy beard lifted up, bathing in
    the fiery flood.
When people still talked to him, he was once asked:
"Poor Lazarus, does it please thee to sit thus and to stare
    at the sun?"
And he had answered:
"Yes, it does."
So strong, it seemed, was the cold of his three days' grave,
    so deep the darkness, that there was no heat on earth to warm
    Lazarus, nor a splendor that could brighten the darkness of his
    eyes. That is what came to the mind of those who spoke to
    Lazarus, and with a sigh they left him.
And when the scarlet, flattened globe would lower, Lazarus
    would set out for the desert and walk straight toward the sun,
    as though striving to reach it. He always walked straight
    toward the sun and those who tried to follow him and to spy
    upon what he was doing at night in the desert, retained in
    their memory the black silhouette of a tall stout man against
    the red background of an enormous flattened disc. Night pursued
    them with her horrors, and so they did not learn of Lazarus'
    doings in the desert, but the vision of the black on red was
    forever branded on their brain. Just as a beast with a splinter
    in its eye furiously rubs its muzzle with its paws, so they too
    foolishly rubbed their eyes, but what Lazarus had given was
    indelible, and Death alone could efface it.
But there were people who lived far away, who never saw
    Lazarus and knew of him only by report. With daring curiosity,
    which is stronger than fear and feeds upon it, with hidden
    mockery, they would come to Lazarus who was sitting in the sun
    and enter into conversation with him. By this time Lazarus'
    appearance had changed for the better and was not so terrible.
    The first minute they snapped their fingers and thought of how
    stupid the inhabitants of the holy city were; but when the
    short talk was over and they started homeward, their looks were
    such that the inhabitants of the holy city recognized them at
    once and said:
"Look, there is one more fool on whom Lazarus has set his
    eye,"—and they shook their heads regretfully, and lifted
    up their arms.
There came brave, intrepid warriors, with tinkling weapons;
    happy youths came with laughter and song; busy tradesmen,
    jingling their money, ran in for a moment, and haughty priests
    leaned their crosiers against Lazarus' door, and they were all
    strangely changed, as they came back. The same terrible shadow
    swooped down upon their souls and gave a new appearance to the
    old familiar world.
Those who still had the desire to speak, expressed their
    feelings thus:
"All things tangible and visible grew hollow, light, and
    transparent,—similar to lightsome shadows in the darkness
    of night;
"for, that great darkness, which holds the whole cosmos, was
    dispersed neither by the sun or by the moon and the stars, but
    like an immense black shroud enveloped the earth and, like a
    mother, embraced it;
"it penetrated all the bodies, iron and stone,—and the
    particles of the bodies, having lost their ties, grew lonely;
    and it penetrated into the depth of the particles, and the
    particles of particles became lonely;
"for that great void, which encircles the cosmos, was not
    filled by things visible: neither by the sun, nor by the moon
    and the stars, but reigned unrestrained, penetrating
    everywhere, severing body from body, particle from
    particle;
"in the void hollow trees spread hollow roots threatening a
    fantastic fall; temples, palaces, and horses loomed up and they
    were hollow; and in the void men moved about restlessly but
    they were light and hollow like shadows;
"for, Time was no more, and the beginning of all things came
    near their end: the building was still being built, and
    builders were still hammering away, and its ruins were already
    seen and the void in its place; the man was still being born,
    but already funeral candles were burning at his head, and now
    they were extinguished, and there was the void in place of the
    man and of the funeral candles.
"and wrapped by void and darkness the man in despair
    trembled in the face of the Horror of the Infinite."
Thus spake the men who had still a desire to speak. But,
    surely, much more could have told those who wished not to
    speak, and died in silence.
IV
At that time there lived in Rome a renowned sculptor. In
    clay, marble, and bronze he wrought bodies of gods and men, and
    such was their beauty, that people called them immortal. But he
    himself was discontented and asserted that there was something
    even more beautiful, that he could not embody either in marble
    or in bronze. "I have not yet gathered the glimmers of the
    moon, nor have I my fill of sunshine," he was wont to say, "and
    there is no soul in my marble, no life in my beautiful bronze."
    And when on moonlit nights he slowly walked along the road,
    crossing the black shadows of cypresses, his white tunic
    glittering in the moonshine, those who met him would laugh in a
    friendly way and say:
"Art thou going to gather moonshine, Aurelius? Why then
    didst thou not fetch baskets?"
And he would answer, laughing and pointing to his eyes:
"Here are the baskets wherein I gather the sheen of the moon
    and the glimmer of the sun."
And so it was: the moon glimmered in his eyes and the sun
    sparkled therein. But he could not translate them into marble
    and therein lay the serene tragedy of his life.
He was descended from an ancient patrician race, had a good
    wife and children, and suffered from no want.
When the obscure rumor about Lazarus reached him, he
    consulted his wife and friends and undertook the far journey to
    Judea to see him who had miraculously risen from the dead. He
    was somewhat weary in those days and he hoped that the road
    would sharpen his blunted senses. What was said of Lazarus did
    not frighten him: he had pondered much over Death, did not like
    it, but he disliked also those who confused it with life.


"In this life,—life and beauty;
beyond,—Death, the enigmatical"—


thought he, and there is no better thing
    for a man to do than to delight in life and in the beauty of
    all things living. He had even a vainglorious desire to
    convince Lazarus of the truth of his own view and restore his
    soul to life, as his body had been restored. This seemed so
    much easier because the rumors, shy and strange, did not render
    the whole truth about Lazarus and but vaguely warned against
    something frightful.
Lazarus had just risen from the stone in order to follow the
    sun which was setting in the desert, when a rich Roman attended
    by an armed slave, approached him and addressed him in a
    sonorous tone of voice:
"Lazarus!"
And Lazarus beheld a superb face, lit with glory, and
    arrayed in fine clothes, and precious stones sparkling in the
    sun. The red light lent to the Roman's face and head the
    appearance of gleaming bronze—that also Lazarus noticed.
    He resumed obediently his place and lowered his weary eyes.
"Yes, thou art ugly, my poor Lazarus,"—quietly said
    the Roman, playing with his golden chain; "thou art even
    horrible, my poor friend; and Death was not lazy that day when
    thou didst fall so heedlessly into his hands. But thou art
    stout, and, as the great Cæsar used to say, fat people
    are not ill-tempered; to tell the truth, I don't understand why
    men fear thee. Permit me to spend the night in thy house; the
    hour is late, and I have no shelter."
Never had anyone asked Lazarus' hospitality.
"I have no bed," said he.
"I am somewhat of a soldier and I can sleep sitting," the
    Roman answered. "We shall build a fire."
"I have no fire."
"Then we shall have our talk in the darkness, like two
    friends. I think thou wilt find a bottle of wine."
"I have no wine."
The Roman laughed.
"Now I see why thou art so somber and dislikest thy second
    life. No wine! Why, then we shall do without it: there are
    words that make the head go round better than the
    Falernian."
By a sign he dismissed the slave, and they remained all
    alone. And again the sculptor started speaking, but it was as
    if, together with the setting sun, life had left his words; and
    they grew pale and hollow, as if they staggered on unsteady
    feet, as if they slipped and fell down, drunk with the heavy
    lees of weariness and despair. And black chasms grew up between
    the words—like far-off hints of the great void and the
    great darkness.
"Now I am thy guest, and thou wilt not be unkind to me,
    Lazarus!"—said he. "Hospitality is the duty even of those
    who for three days were dead. Three days, I was told, thou
    didst rest in the grave. There it must be cold ... and that is
    whence comes thy ill habit of going without fire and wine. As
    to me, I like fire; it grows dark here so rapidly.... The lines
    of thy eyebrows and forehead are quite, quite interesting: they
    are like ruins of strange palaces, buried in ashes after an
    earthquake. But why dost thou wear such ugly and queer
    garments? I have seen bridegrooms in thy country, and they wear
    such clothes—are they not funny—and terrible....
    But art thou a bridegroom?"
The sun had already disappeared, a monstrous black shadow
    came running from the east—it was as if gigantic bare
    feet began rumbling on the sand, and the wind sent a cold wave
    along the backbone.
"In the darkness thou seemest still larger, Lazarus, as if
    thou hast grown stouter in these moments. Dost thou feed on
    darkness, Lazarus? I would fain have a little fire—at
    least a little fire, a little fire. I feel somewhat chilly,
    your nights are so barbarously cold.... Were it not so dark, I
    should say that thou wert looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems
    to me, thou art looking.... Why, thou art looking at me, I feel
    it,—but there thou art smiling."
Night came, and filled the air with heavy blackness.
"How well it will be, when the sun will rise to-morrow
    anew.... I am a great sculptor, thou knowest; that is how my
    friends call me. I create. Yes, that is the word ... but I need
    daylight. I give life to the cold marble, I melt sonorous
    bronze in fire, in bright hot fire.... Why didst thou touch me
    with thy hand?"
"Come"—said Lazarus—"Thou art my guest."
And they went to the house. And a long night enveloped the
    earth.
The slave, seeing that his master did not come, went to seek
    him, when the sun was already high in the sky. And he beheld
    his master side by side with Lazarus: in profound silence were
    they sitting right under the dazzling and scorching sunrays and
    looking upward. The slave began to weep and cried out:
"My master, what has befallen thee, master?"
The very same day the sculptor left for Rome. On the way
    Aurelius was pensive and taciturn, staring attentively at
    everything—the men, the ship, the sea, as though trying
    to retain something. On the high sea a storm burst upon them,
    and all through it Aurelius stayed on the deck and eagerly
    scanned the seas looming near and sinking with a thud.
At home his friends were frightened at the change which had
    taken place in Aurelius, but he calmed them, saying
    meaningly:
"I have found it."
And without changing the dusty clothes he wore on his
    journey, he fell to work, and the marble obediently resounded
    under his sonorous hammer. Long and eagerly worked he,
    admitting no one, until one morning he announced that the work
    was ready and ordered his friends to be summoned, severe
    critics and connoisseurs of art. And to meet them he put on
    bright and gorgeous garments, that glittered with yellow
    gold—and—scarlet byssus.
"Here is my work," said he thoughtfully.
His friends glanced and a shadow of profound sorrow covered
    their faces. It was something monstrous, deprived of all the
    lines and shapes familiar to the eye, but not without a hint at
    some new, strange image.
On a thin, crooked twig, or rather on an ugly likeness of a
    twig rested askew a blind, ugly, shapeless, outspread mass of
    something utterly and inconceivably distorted, a mad leap of
    wild and bizarre fragments, all feebly and vainly striving to
    part from one another. And, as if by chance, beneath one of the
    wildly-rent salients a butterfly was chiseled with divine
    skill, all airy loveliness, delicacy, and beauty, with
    transparent wings, which seemed to tremble with an impotent
    desire to take flight.
"Wherefore this wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?" said
    somebody falteringly.
"I know not"—was the sculptor's answer.
But it was necessary to tell the truth, and one of his
    friends who loved him best said firmly:
"This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be destroyed. Give me
    the hammer."
And with two strokes he broke the monstrous man into pieces,
    leaving only the infinitely delicate butterfly untouched.
From that time on Aurelius created nothing. With profound
    indifference he looked at marble and bronze, and on his former
    divine works, where everlasting beauty rested. With the purpose
    of arousing his former fervent passion for work and, awakening
    his deadened soul, his friends took him to see other artists'
    beautiful works,—but he remained indifferent as before,
    and the smile did not warm up his tightened lips. And only
    after listening to lengthy talks about beauty, he would retort
    wearily and indolently:
"But all this is a lie."
And by the day, when the sun was shining, he went into his
    magnificent, skilfully built garden and having found a place
    without shadow, he exposed his bare head to the glare and heat.
    Red and white butterflies fluttered around; from the crooked
    lips of a drunken satyr, water streamed down with a splash into
    a marble cistern, but he sat motionless and silent,—like
    a pallid reflection of him who, in the far-off distance, at the
    very gates of the stony desert, sat under the fiery sun.
V
And now it came to pass that the great, deified Augustus
    himself summoned Lazarus. The imperial messengers dressed him
    gorgeously, in solemn nuptial clothes, as if Time had legalized
    them, and he was to remain until his very death the bridegroom
    of an unknown bride. It was as though an old, rotting coffin
    had been gilt and furnished with new, gay tassels. And men, all
    in trim and bright attire, rode after him, as if in bridal
    procession indeed, and those foremost trumpeted loudly, bidding
    people to clear the way for the emperor's messengers. But
    Lazarus' way was deserted: his native land cursed the hateful
    name of him who had miraculously risen from the dead, and
    people scattered at the very news of his appalling approach.
    The solitary voice of the brass trumpets sounded in the
    motionless air, and the wilderness alone responded with its
    languid echo.
Then Lazarus went by sea. And his was the most magnificently
    arrayed and the most mournful ship that ever mirrored itself in
    the azure waves of the Mediterranean Sea. Many were the
    travelers aboard, but like a tomb was the ship, all silence and
    stillness, and the despairing water sobbed at the steep,
    proudly curved prow. All alone sat Lazarus exposing his head to
    the blaze of the sun, silently listening to the murmur and
    splash of the wavelets, and afar seamen and messengers were
    sitting, a vague group of weary shadows. Had the thunder burst
    and the wind attacked the red sails, the ships would probably
    have perished, for none of those aboard had either the will or
    the strength to struggle for life. With a supreme effort some
    mariners would reach the board and eagerly scan the blue,
    transparent deep, hoping to see a naiad's pink shoulder flash
    in the hollow of an azure wave, or a drunken gay centaur dash
    along and in frenzy splash the wave with his hoof. But the sea
    was like a wilderness, and the deep was dumb and deserted.
With utter indifference did Lazarus set his feet on the
    street of the eternal city. As though all her wealth, all the
    magnificence of her palaces built by giants, all the
    resplendence, beauty, and music of her refined life were but
    the echo of the wind in the wilderness, the reflection of the
    desert quicksand. Chariots were dashing, and along the streets
    were moving crowds of strong, fair, proud builders of the
    eternal city and haughty participants in her life; a song
    sounded; fountains and women laughed a pearly laughter; drunken
    philosophers harangued, and the sober listened to them with a
    smile; hoofs struck the stone pavements. And surrounded by
    cheerful noise, a stout, heavy man was moving, a cold spot of
    silence and despair, and on his way he sowed disgust, anger,
    and vague, gnawing weariness. Who dares to be sad in Rome,
    wondered indignantly the citizens, and frowned. In two days the
    entire city already knew all about him who had miraculously
    risen from the dead, and shunned him shyly.
But some daring people there were, who wanted to test their
    strength, and Lazarus obeyed their imprudent summons. Kept busy
    by state affairs, the emperor constantly delayed the reception,
    and seven days did he who had risen from the dead go about
    visiting others.
And Lazarus came to a cheerful Epicurean, and the host met
    him with laughter on his lips:
"Drink, Lazarus, drink!"—shouted he. "Would not
    Augustus laugh to see thee drunk!"
And half-naked drunken women laughed, and rose petals fell
    on Lazarus' blue hands. But then the Epicurean looked into
    Lazarus' eyes, and his gaiety ended forever. Drunkard remained
    he for the rest of his life; never did he drink, yet forever
    was he drunk. But instead of the gay reverie which wine brings
    with it, frightful dreams began to haunt him, the sole food of
    his stricken spirit. Day and night he lived in the poisonous
    vapors of his nightmares, and death itself was not more
    frightful than her raving, monstrous forerunners.
And Lazarus came to a youth and his beloved, who loved each
    other and were most beautiful in their passions. Proudly and
    strongly embracing his love, the youth said with serene
    regret:
"Look at us, Lazarus, and share our joy. Is there anything
    stronger than love?"
And Lazarus looked. And for the rest of their life they kept
    on loving each other, but their passion grew gloomy and
    joyless, like those funeral cypresses whose roots feed on the
    decay of the graves and whose black summits in a still evening
    hour seek in vain to reach the sky. Thrown by the unknown
    forces of life into each other's embraces, they mingled tears
    with kisses, voluptuous pleasures with pain, and they felt
    themselves doubly slaves, obedient slaves to life, and patient
    servants of the silent Nothingness. Ever united, ever severed,
    they blazed like sparks and like sparks lost themselves in the
    boundless Dark.
And Lazarus came to a haughty sage, and the sage said to
    him:
"I know all the horrors thou canst reveal to me. Is there
    anything thou canst frighten me with?"
But before long the sage felt that the knowledge of horror
    was far from being the horror itself, and that the vision of
    Death, was not Death. And he felt that wisdom and folly are
    equal before the face of Infinity, for Infinity knows them not.
    And it vanished, the dividing-line between knowledge and
    ignorance, truth and falsehood, top and bottom, and the
    shapeless thought hung suspended in the void. Then the sage
    clutched his gray head and cried out frantically:
"I cannot think! I cannot think!"
Thus under the indifferent glance for him, who miraculously
    had risen from the dead, perished everything that asserts life,
    its significance and joys. And it was suggested that it was
    dangerous to let him see the emperor, that it was better to
    kill him and, having buried him secretly, to tell the emperor
    that he had disappeared no one knew whither. Already swords
    were being whetted and youths devoted to the public welfare
    prepared for the murder, when Augustus ordered Lazarus to be
    brought before him next morning, thus destroying the cruel
    plans.
If there was no way of getting rid of Lazarus, at least it
    was possible to soften the terrible impression his face
    produced. With this in view, skillful painters, barbers, and
    artists were summoned, and all night long they were busy over
    Lazarus' head. They cropped his beard, curled it, and gave it a
    tidy, agreeable appearance. By means of paints they concealed
    the corpse-like blueness of his hands and face. Repulsive were
    the wrinkles of suffering that furrowed his old face, and they
    were puttied, painted, and smoothed; then, over the smooth
    background, wrinkles of good-tempered laughter and pleasant,
    carefree mirth were skillfully painted with fine brushes.
Lazarus submitted indifferently to everything that was done
    to him. Soon he was turned into a becomingly stout, venerable
    old man, into a quiet and kind grandfather of numerous
    offspring. It seemed that the smile, with which only a while
    ago he was spinning funny yarns, was still lingering on his
    lips, and that in the corner of his eye serene tenderness was
    hiding, the companion of old age. But people did not dare
    change his nuptial garments, and they could not change his
    eyes, two dark and frightful glasses through which looked at
    men, the unknowable Yonder.
VI
Lazarus was not moved by the magnificence of the imperial
    palace. It was as though he saw no difference between the
    crumbling house, closely pressed by the desert, and the stone
    palace, solid and fair, and indifferently he passed into it.
    And the hard marble of the floors under his feet grew similar
    to the quicksand of the desert, and the multitude of richly
    dressed and haughty men became like void air under his glance.
    No one looked into his face, as Lazarus passed by, fearing to
    fall under the appalling influence of his eyes; but when the
    sound of his heavy footsteps had sufficiently died down, the
    courtiers raised their heads and with fearful curiosity
    examined the figure of a stout, tall, slightly bent old man,
    who was slowly penetrating into the very heart of the imperial
    palace. Were Death itself passing, it would be faced with no
    greater fear: for until then the dead alone knew Death, and
    those alive knew Life only—and there was no bridge
    between them. But this extraordinary man, although alive, knew
    Death, and enigmatical, appalling, was his cursed knowledge.
    "Woe," people thought, "he will take the life of our great,
    deified Augustus," and they sent curses after Lazarus, who
    meanwhile kept on advancing into the interior of the
    palace.
Already did the emperor know who Lazarus was, and prepared
    to meet him. But the monarch was a brave man, and felt his own
    tremendous, unconquerable power, and in his fatal duel with him
    who had miraculously risen from the dead he wanted not to
    invoke human help. And so he met Lazarus face to face:
"Lift not thine eyes upon me, Lazarus," he ordered. "I heard
    thy face is like that of Medusa and turns into stone whomsoever
    thou lookest at. Now, I wish to see thee and to have a talk
    with thee, before I turn into stone,"—added he in a tone
    of kingly jesting, not devoid of fear.
Coming close to him, he carefully examined Lazarus' face and
    his strange festal garments. And although he had a keen eye, he
    was deceived by his appearance.
"So. Thou dost not appear terrible, my venerable old man.
    But the worse for us, if horror assumes such a respectable and
    pleasant air. Now let us have a talk."
Augustus sat, and questioning Lazarus with his eye as much
    as with words, started the conversation:
"Why didst thou not greet me as thou enteredst?"
Lazarus answered indifferent:
"I knew not it was necessary."
"Art thou a Christian?"
"No."
Augustus approvingly shook his head.
"That is good. I do not like Christians. They shake the tree
    of life before it is covered with fruit, and disperse its
    odorous bloom to the winds. But who art thou?"
With a visible effort Lazarus answered:
"I was dead."
"I had heard that. But who art thou now?"
Lazarus was silent, but at last repeated in a tone of weary
    apathy:
"I was dead."
"Listen to me, stranger," said the emperor, distinctly and
    severely giving utterance to the thought that had come to him
    at the beginning, "my realm is the realm of Life, my people are
    of the living, not of the dead. Thou art here one too many. I
    know not who thou art and what thou sawest there; but, if thou
    liest, I hate thy lies, and if thou tellst the truth, I hate
    thy truth. In my bosom I feel the throb of life; I feel
    strength in my arm, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, pierce
    the space. And yonder in the shelter of my rule, under the
    protection of laws created by me, people live and toil and
    rejoice. Dost thou hear the battle-cry, the challenge men throw
    into the face of the future?"
Augustus, as in prayer, stretched forth his arms and
    exclaimed solemnly:
"Be blessed, O great and divine Life!"
Lazarus was silent, and with growing sternness the emperor
    went on:
"Thou art not wanted here, miserable remnant, snatched from
    under Death's teeth, thou inspirest weariness and disgust with
    life; like a caterpillar in the fields, thou gloatest on the
    rich ear of joy and belchest out the drivel of despair and
    sorrow. Thy truth is like a rusty sword in the hands of a
    nightly murderer,—and as a murderer thou shalt be
    executed. But before that, let me look into thine eyes.
    Perchance, only cowards are afraid of them, but in the brave
    they awake the thirst for strife and victory; then thou shalt
    be rewarded, not executed.... Now, look at me, Lazarus."
At first it appeared to the deified Augustus that a friend
    was looking at him,—so soft, so tenderly fascinating was
    Lazarus' glance. It promised not horror, but sweet rest and the
    Infinite seemed to him a tender mistress, a compassionate
    sister, a mother. But stronger and stronger grew its embraces,
    and already the mouth, greedy of hissing kisses, interfered
    with the monarch's breathing, and already to the surface of the
    soft tissues of the body came the iron of the bones and
    tightened its merciless circle,—and unknown fangs, blunt
    and cold, touched his heart and sank into it with slow
    indolence.
"It pains," said the deified Augustus, growing pale. "But
    look at me, Lazarus, look."
It was as though some heavy gates, ever closed, were slowly
    moving apart, and through the growing interstice the appalling
    horror of the Infinite poured in slowly and steadily. Like two
    shadows there entered the shoreless void and the unfathomable
    darkness; they extinguished the sun, ravished the earth from
    under the feet, and the roof from over the head. No more did
    the frozen heart ache.
"Look, look, Lazarus," ordered Augustus tottering.
Time stood still, and the beginning of each thing grew
    frightfully near to its end. Augustus' throne just erected,
    crumbled down, and the void was already in the place of the
    throne and of Augustus. Noiselessly did Rome crumble down, and
    a new city stood on its site and it too was swallowed by the
    void. Like fantastic giants, cities, states, and countries fell
    down and vanished in the void darkness—and with uttermost
    indifference did the insatiable black womb of the Infinite
    swallow them.
"Halt!"—ordered the emperor.
In his voice sounded already a note of indifference, his
    hands dropped in languor, and in the vain struggle with the
    onrushing darkness his fiery eyes now blazed up, and now went
    out.
"My life thou hast taken from me, Lazarus,"—said he in
    a spiritless, feeble voice.
And these words of hopelessness saved him. He remembered his
    people, whose shield he was destined to be, and keen salutary
    pain pierced his deadened heart. "They are doomed to death," he
    thought wearily. "Serene shadows in the darkness of the
    Infinite," thought he, and horror grew upon him. "Frail vessels
    with living seething blood with a heart that knows sorrow and
    also great joy," said he in his heart, and tenderness pervaded
    it.
Thus pondering and oscillating between the poles of Life and
    Death, he slowly came back to life, to find in its suffering
    and in its joys a shield against the darkness of the void and
    the horror of the Infinite.
"No, thou hast not murdered me, Lazarus," said he firmly,
    "but I will take thy life. Be gone."
That evening the deified Augustus partook of his meats and
    drinks with particular joy. Now and then his lifted hand
    remained suspended in the air, and a dull glimmer replaced the
    bright sheen of his fiery eye. It was the cold wave of Horror
    that surged at his feet. Defeated, but not undone, ever
    awaiting its hour, that Horror stood at the emperor's bedside,
    like a black shadow all through his life; it swayed his nights,
    but yielded the days to the sorrows and joys of life.
The following day, the hangman with a hot iron burned out
    Lazarus' eyes. Then he was sent home. The deified Augustus
    dared not kill him.

Lazarus returned to the desert, and the wilderness met him
    with hissing gusts of wind and the heat of the blazing sun.
    Again he was sitting on a stone, his rough, bushy beard lifted
    up; and the two black holes in place of his eyes looked at the
    sky with an expression of dull terror. Afar-off the holy city
    stirred noisily and restlessly, but around him everything was
    deserted and dumb. No one approached the place where lived he
    who had miraculously risen from the dead, and long since his
    neighbors had forsaken their houses. Driven by the hot iron
    into the depth of his skull, his cursed knowledge hid there in
    an ambush. As though leaping out from an ambush it plunged its
    thousand invisible eyes into the man,—and no one dared
    look at Lazarus.
And in the evening, when the sun, reddening and growing
    wider, would come nearer and nearer the western horizon, the
    blind Lazarus would slowly follow it. He would stumble against
    stones and fall, stout and weak as he was; would rise heavily
    to his feet and walk on again; and on the red screen of the
    sunset his black body and outspread hands would form a
    monstrous likeness of a cross.
And it came to pass that once he went out and did not come
    back. Thus seemingly ended the second life of him who for three
    days had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and rose
    miraculously from the dead.