THE DISTRICT DOCTOR

 BY IVAN S. TURGENEV

 O

ne day in autumn on my way back from a remote part of the country I
caught cold and fell ill. Fortunately the fever attacked me in the
district town at the inn; I sent for the doctor. In half-an-hour the
district doctor appeared, a thin, dark-haired man of middle height. He
prescribed me the usual sudorific, ordered a mustard-plaster to be put on,
very deftly slid a five-ruble note up his sleeve, coughing drily and
looking away as he did so, and then was getting up to go home, but somehow
fell into talk and remained. I was exhausted with feverishness; I foresaw
a sleepless night, and was glad of a little chat with a pleasant
companion. Tea was served. My doctor began to converse freely. He was a
sensible fellow, and expressed himself with vigour and some humour. Queer
things happen in the world: you may live a long while with some people,
and be on friendly terms with them, and never once speak openly with them
from your soul; with others you have scarcely time to get acquainted, and
all at once you are pouring out to him—or he to you—all your
secrets, as though you were at confession. I don’t know how I gained
the confidence of my new friend—anyway, with nothing to lead up to
it, he told me a rather curious incident; and here I will report his tale
for the information of the indulgent reader. I will try to tell it in the
doctor’s own words.

 “You don’t happen to know,” he began in a weak and
quavering voice (the common result of the use of unmixed Berezov snuff);
“you don’t happen to know the judge here, Mylov, Pavel
Lukich?... You don’t know him?... Well, it’s all the same.”
(He cleared his throat and rubbed his eyes.) “Well, you see, the
thing happened, to tell you exactly without mistake, in Lent, at the very
time of the thaws. I was sitting at his house—our judge’s, you
know—playing preference. Our judge is a good fellow, and fond of
playing preference. Suddenly” (the doctor made frequent use of this
word, suddenly) “they tell me, ‘There’s a servant asking
for you.’ I say, ‘What does he want?’ They say, He has
brought a note—it must be from a patient.’ ‘Give me the
note,’ I say. So it is from a patient—well and good—you
understand—it’s our bread and butter... But this is how it
was: a lady, a widow, writes to me; she says, ‘My daughter is dying.
Come, for God’s sake!’ she says, ‘and the horses have
been sent for you.’... Well, that’s all right. But she was
twenty miles from the town, and it was midnight out of doors, and the
roads in such a state, my word! And as she was poor herself, one could not
expect more than two silver rubles, and even that problematic; and perhaps
it might only be a matter of a roll of linen and a sack of oatmeal in payment .
However, duty, you know, before everything: a fellow-creature may be
dying. I hand over my cards at once to Kalliopin, the member of the
provincial commission, and return home. I look; a wretched little trap was
standing at the steps, with peasant’s horses, fat—too fat—and
their coat as shaggy as felt; and the coachman sitting with his cap off
out of respect. Well, I think to myself, ‘It’s clear, my
friend, these patients aren’t rolling in riches.’... You
smile; but I tell you, a poor man like me has to take everything into
consideration... If the coachman sits like a prince, and doesn’t
touch his cap, and even sneers at you behind his beard, and flicks his
whip—then you may bet on six rubles. But this case, I saw, had a
very different air. However, I think there’s no help for it; duty
before everything. I snatch up the most necessary drugs, and set off. Will
you believe it? I only just managed to get there at all. The road was
infernal: streams, snow, watercourses, and the dyke had suddenly burst
there—that was the worst of it! However, I arrived at last. It was a
little thatched house. There was a light in the windows; that meant they
expected me. I was met by an old lady, very venerable, in a cap. ‘Save
her!’ she says; ‘she is dying.’ I say, ‘Pray don’t
distress yourself—Where is the invalid?’ ‘Come this way.’
I see a clean little room, a lamp in the corner; on the bed a girl of
twenty, unconscious. She was in a burning heat, and breathing heavily—it
was fever. There were two other girls, her sisters, scared and in tears.
‘Yesterday,’ they tell me, ‘she was perfectly well and
had a good appetite; this morning she complained of her head, and this
evening, suddenly, you see, like this.’ I say again: ‘Pray don’t
be uneasy.’ It’s a doctor’s duty, you know—and I
went up to her and bled her, told them to put on a mustard-plaster, and
prescribed a mixture. Meantime I looked at her; I looked at her, you know—there,
by God! I had never seen such a face!—she was a beauty, in a word! I
felt quite shaken with pity. Such lovely features; such eyes!... But,
thank God! she became easier; she fell into a perspiration, seemed to come
to her senses, looked round, smiled, and passed her hand over her face...
Her sisters bent over her. They ask, ‘How are you?’ ‘All
right,’ she says, and turns away. I looked at her; she had fallen
asleep. ‘Well,’ I say, ‘now the patient should be left alone.’
So we all went out on tiptoe; only a maid remained, in case she was
wanted. In the parlour there was a samovar standing on the table, and a
bottle of rum; in our profession one can’t get on without it. They
gave me tea; asked me to stop the night... I consented: where could I go,
indeed, at that time of night? The old lady kept groaning. ‘What is
it?’ I say; ‘she will live; don’t worry yourself; you
had better take a little rest yourself; it is about two o’clock.’
‘But will you send to wake me if anything happens?’ ‘Yes,
yes.’ The old lady went away, and the girls too went to their own
room; they made up a bed for me in the parlour. Well, I went to bed—but
I could not get to sleep, for a wonder! for in reality I was very tired. I
could not get my patient out of my head. At last I could not put up with
it any longer; I got up suddenly; I think to myself, ‘I will go and
see how the patient is getting on.’ Her bedroom was next to the
parlour. Well, I got up, and gently opened the door—how my heart
beat! I looked in: the servant was asleep, her mouth wide open, and even
snoring, the wretch! but the patient lay with her face towards me and her
arms flung wide apart, poor girl! I went up to her ... when suddenly she
opened her eyes and stared at me! ‘Who is it? who is it?’ I
was in confusion. ‘Don’t be alarmed, madam,’ I say;
‘I am the doctor; I have come to see how you feel.’ ‘You
the doctor?’ ‘Yes, the doctor; your mother sent for me from
the town; we have bled you, madam; now pray go to sleep, and in a day or
two, please God! we will set you on your feet again.’ ‘Ah,
yes, yes, doctor, don’t let me die... please, please.’ ‘Why
do you talk like that? God bless you!’ She is in a fever again, I
think to myself; I felt her pulse; yes, she was feverish. She looked at
me, and then took me by the hand. ‘I will tell you why I don’t
want to die: I will tell you... Now we are alone; and only, please don’t
you ... not to any one ... Listen...’ I bent down; she moved her
lips quite to my ear; she touched my cheek with her hair—I confess
my head went round—and began to whisper... I could make out nothing
of it... Ah, she was delirious! ... She whispered and whispered, but so
quickly, and as if it were not in Russian; at last she finished, and
shivering dropped her head on the pillow, and threatened me with her
finger: ‘Remember, doctor, to no one.’ I calmed her somehow, gave
her something to drink, waked the servant, and went away.”

 At this point the doctor again took snuff with exasperated energy, and for
a moment seemed stupefied by its effects.

 “However,” he continued, “the next day, contrary to my
expectations, the patient was no better. I thought and thought, and
suddenly decided to remain there, even though my other patients were
expecting me... And you know one can’t afford to disregard that; one’s
practice suffers if one does. But, in the first place, the patient was
really in danger; and secondly, to tell the truth, I felt strongly drawn
to her. Besides, I liked the whole family. Though they were really badly
off, they were singularly, I may say, cultivated people... Their father
had been a learned man, an author; he died, of course, in poverty, but he
had managed before he died to give his children an excellent education; he
left a lot of books too. Either because I looked after the invalid very
carefully, or for some other reason; anyway, I can venture to say all the
household loved me as if I were one of the family... Meantime the roads
were in a worse state than ever; all communications, so to say, were cut
off completely; even medicine could with difficulty be got from the
town... The sick girl was not getting better... Day after day, and day
after day ... but ... here...” (The doctor made a brief pause.)
“I declare I don’t know how to tell you.”... (He again
took snuff, coughed, and swallowed a little tea.) “I will tell you
without beating about the bush. My patient ... how should I say?... Well
she had fallen in love with me ... or, no, it was not that she was in love
... however ... really, how should one say?” (The doctor looked down
and grew red.) “No,” he went on quickly, “in love,
indeed! A man should not over-estimate himself. She was an educated girl,
clever and well-read, and I had even forgotten my Latin, one may say,
completely. As to appearance” (the doctor looked himself over with a
smile) “I am nothing to boast of there either. But God Almighty did
not make me a fool; I don’t take black for white; I know a thing or
two; I could see very clearly, for instance that Aleksandra Andreyevna—that
was her name—did not feel love for me, but had a friendly, so to
say, inclination—a respect or something for me. Though she herself
perhaps mistook this sentiment, anyway this was her attitude; you may form
your own judgment of it. But,” added the doctor, who had brought out
all these disconnected sentences without taking breath, and with obvious
embarrassment, “I seem to be wandering rather—you won’t
understand anything like this ... There, with your leave, I will relate it
all in order.”

 He drank off a glass of tea, and began in a calmer voice.

 “Well, then. My patient kept getting worse and worse. You are not a
doctor, my good sir; you cannot understand what passes in a poor fellow’s
heart, especially at first, when he begins to suspect that the disease is
getting the upper hand of him. What becomes of his belief in himself? You
suddenly grow so timid; it’s indescribable. You fancy then that you
have forgotten everything you knew, and that the patient has no faith in
you, and that other people begin to notice how distracted you are, and
tell you the symptoms with reluctance; that they are looking at you
suspiciously, whispering... Ah! it’s horrid! There must be a remedy,
you think, for this disease, if one could find it. Isn’t this it?
You try—no, that’s not it! You don’t allow the medicine
the necessary time to do good... You clutch at one thing, then at another.
Sometimes you take up a book of medical prescriptions—here it is,
you think! Sometimes, by Jove, you pick one out by chance, thinking to
leave it to fate... But meantime a fellow-creature’s dying, and
another doctor would have saved him. ‘We must have a consultation,’
you say; ‘I will not take the responsibility on myself.’ And
what a fool you look at such times! Well, in time you learn to bear it; it’s
nothing to you. A man has died—but it’s not your fault; you
treated him by the rules. But what’s still more torture to you is to
see blind faith in you, and to feel yourself that you are not able to be
of use. Well, it was just this blind faith that the whole of Aleksandra
Andreyevna’s family had in me; they had forgotten to think that
their daughter was in danger. I, too, on my side assure them that it’s
nothing, but meantime my heart sinks into my boots. To add to our
troubles, the roads were in such a state that the coachman was gone for
whole days together to get medicine. And I never left the patient’s
room; I could not tear myself away; I tell her amusing stories, you know,
and play cards with her. I watch by her side at night. The old mother
thanks me with tears in her eyes; but I think to myself, ‘I don’t
deserve your gratitude.’ I frankly confess to you—there is no
object in concealing it now—I was in love with my patient. And
Aleksandra Andreyevna had grown fond of me; she would not sometimes let
any one be in her room but me. She began to talk to me, to ask me
questions; where I had studied, how I lived, who are my people, whom I go
to see. I feel that she ought not to talk; but to forbid her to—to
forbid her resolutely, you know—I could not. Sometimes I held my
head in my hands, and asked myself, “What are you doing, villain?”...
And she would take my hand and hold it, give me a long, long look, and
turn away, sigh, and say, ‘How good you are!’ Her hands were
so feverish, her eyes so large and languid... ‘Yes,’ she says,
‘you are a good, kind man; you are not like our neighbours... No,
you are not like that... Why did I not know you till now!’ ‘Aleksandra
Andreyevna, calm yourself,’ I say... ‘I feel, believe me, I
don’t know how I have gained ... but there, calm yourself... All
will be right; you will be well again.’ And meanwhile I must tell
you,” continued the doctor, bending forward and raising his
eyebrows, “that they associated very little with the neighbours,
because the smaller people were not on their level, and pride hindered
them from being friendly with the rich. I tell you, they were an
exceptionally cultivated family; so you know it was gratifying for me. She
would only take her medicine from my hands ... she would lift herself up,
poor girl, with my aid, take it, and gaze at me... My heart felt as if it
were bursting. And meanwhile she was growing worse and worse, worse and
worse, all the time; she will die, I think to myself; she must die.
Believe me, I would sooner have gone to the grave myself; and here were
her mother and sisters watching me, looking into my eyes ... and their
faith in me was wearing away. ‘Well? how is she?’ ‘Oh, all
right, all right!’ All right, indeed! My mind was failing me. Well,
I was sitting one night alone again by my patient. The maid was sitting
there too, and snoring away in full swing; I can’t find fault with
the poor girl, though; she was worn out too. Aleksandra Andreyevna had
felt very unwell all the evening; she was very feverish. Until midnight
she kept tossing about; at last she seemed to fall asleep; at least, she
lay still without stirring. The lamp was burning in the corner before the
holy image. I sat there, you know, with my head bent; I even dozed a
little. Suddenly it seemed as though some one touched me in the side; I
turned round... Good God! Aleksandra Andreyevna was gazing with intent
eyes at me ... her lips parted, her cheeks seemed burning. ‘What is
it?’ ‘Doctor, shall I die?’ ‘Merciful Heavens!’
‘No, doctor, no; please don’t tell me I shall live ... don’t
say so... If you knew... Listen! for God’s sake don’t conceal
my real position,’ and her breath came so fast. ‘If I can know
for certain that I must die ... then I will tell you all— all!’
‘Aleksandra Andreyevna, I beg!’ ‘Listen; I have not been
asleep at all ... I have been looking at you a long while... For God’s
sake!... I believe in you; you are a good man, an honest man; I entreat
you by all that is sacred in the world—tell me the truth! If you
knew how important it is for me... Doctor, for God’s sake tell me...
Am I in danger?’ ‘What can I tell you, Aleksandra Andreyevna,
pray?’ ‘For God’s sake, I beseech you!’ ‘I
can’t disguise from you,’ I say, ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna;
you are certainly in danger; but God is merciful.’ ‘I shall
die, I shall die.’ And it seemed as though she were pleased; her
face grew so bright; I was alarmed. ‘Don’t be afraid, don’t
be afraid! I am not frightened of death at all.’ She suddenly sat up
and leaned on her elbow. ‘Now ... yes, now I can tell you that I
thank you with my whole heart ... that you are kind and good—that I
love you!’ I stare at her, like one possessed; it was terrible for
me, you know. ‘Do you hear, I love you!’ ‘Aleksandra
Andreyevna, how have I deserved—’ ‘No, no, you don’t—you
don’t understand me.’... And suddenly she stretched out her
arms, and taking my head in her hands, she kissed it... Believe me, I
almost screamed aloud... I threw myself on my knees, and buried my head in
the pillow. She did not speak; her fingers trembled in my hair; I listen;
she is weeping. I began to soothe her, to assure her... I really don’t
know what I did say to her. ‘You will wake up the girl,’ I say
to her; ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna, I thank you ... believe me ... calm
yourself.’ ‘Enough, enough!’ she persisted; ‘never mind
all of them; let them wake, then; let them come in—it does not
matter; I am dying, you see... And what do you fear? why are you afraid?
Lift up your head... Or, perhaps, you don’t love me; perhaps I am
wrong... In that case, forgive me.’ ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna,
what are you saying!... I love you, Aleksandra Andreyevna.’ She
looked straight into my eyes, and opened her arms wide. ‘Then take
me in your arms.’ I tell you frankly, I don’t know how it was
I did not go mad that night. I feel that my patient is killing herself; I
see that she is not fully herself; I understand, too, that if she did not
consider herself on the point of death, she would never have thought of
me; and, indeed, say what you will, it’s hard to die at twenty
without having known love; this was what was torturing her; this was why,
in despair, she caught at me—do you understand now? But she held me
in her arms, and would not let me go. ‘Have pity on me, Aleksandra
Andreyevna, and have pity on yourself,’ I say. ‘Why,’
she says; ‘what is there to think of? You know I must die.’
... This she repeated incessantly ... ‘If I knew that I should
return to life, and be a proper young lady again, I should be ashamed ...
of course, ashamed ... but why now?’ ‘But who has said you
will die?’ ‘Oh, no, leave off! you will not deceive me; you
don’t know how to lie—look at your face.’ ... ‘You
shall live, Aleksandra Andreyevna; I will cure you; we will ask your
mother’s blessing ... we will be united—we will be happy.’
‘No, no, I have your word; I must die ... you have promised me ...
you have told me.’ ... It was cruel for me—cruel for many
reasons. And see what trifling things can do sometimes; it seems nothing
at all, but it’s painful. It occurred to her to ask me, what is my
name; not my surname, but my first name. I must needs be so unlucky as to
be called Trifon. Yes, indeed; Trifon Ivanich. Every one in the house
called me doctor. However, there’s no help for it. I say, ‘Trifon,
madam.’ She frowned, shook her head, and muttered something in
French—ah, something unpleasant, of course!—and then she
laughed—disagreeably too. Well, I spent the whole night with her in
this way. Before morning I went away, feeling as though I were mad. When I
went again into her room it was daytime, after morning tea. Good God! I
could scarcely recognise her; people are laid in their grave looking
better than that. I swear to you, on my honour, I don’t understand—I
absolutely don’t understand—now, how I lived through that
experience. Three days and nights my patient still lingered on. And what
nights! What things she said to me! And on the last night—only
imagine to yourself—I was sitting near her, and kept praying to God
for one thing only: ‘Take her,’ I said, ‘quickly, and me
with her.’ Suddenly the old mother comes unexpectedly into the room.
I had already the evening before told her—-the mother—there
was little hope, and it would be well to send for a priest. When the sick
girl saw her mother she said: ‘It’s very well you have come;
look at us, we love one another—we have given each other our word.’
‘What does she say, doctor? what does she say?’ I turned
livid. ‘She is wandering,’ I say; ‘the fever.’
But she: ‘Hush, hush; you told me something quite different just
now, and have taken my ring. Why do you pretend? My mother is good—she
will forgive—she will understand—and I am dying. ... I have no
need to tell lies; give me your hand.’ I jumped up and ran out of
the room. The old lady, of course, guessed how it was.

 “I will not, however, weary you any longer, and to me too, of
course, it’s painful to recall all this. My patient passed away the
next day. God rest her soul!” the doctor added, speaking quickly and
with a sigh. “Before her death she asked her family to go out and
leave me alone with her.”

 “‘Forgive me,’ she said; ‘I am perhaps to blame
towards you ... my illness ... but believe me, I have loved no one more
than you ... do not forget me ... keep my ring.’”

 The doctor turned away; I took his hand.

 “Ah!” he said, “let us talk of something else, or would
you care to play preference for a small stake? It is not for people like
me to give way to exalted emotions. There’s only one thing for me to
think of; how to keep the children from crying and the wife from scolding.
Since then, you know, I have had time to enter into lawful wedlock, as
they say... Oh ... I took a merchant’s daughter—seven thousand
for her dowry. Her name’s Akulina; it goes well with Trifon. She is
an ill-tempered woman, I must tell you, but luckily she’s asleep all
day... Well, shall it be preference?”

 We sat down to preference for halfpenny points. Trifon Ivanich won two
rubles and a half from me, and went home late, well pleased with his
success.