The Shadows on the Wall
By MARY E. WILKINS FREEMAN

From The Wind in the Rose-bush, by Mary E.
        Wilkins Freeman. Copyright by Harper and Brothers. By
        permission of the publishers and Mary E. Wilkins
        Freeman.

"Henry had words with Edward in the study the night before
    Edward died," said Caroline Glynn.
She spoke not with acrimony, but with grave severity.
    Rebecca Ann Glynn gasped by way of assent. She sat in a wide
    flounce of black silk in the corner of the sofa, and rolled
    terrified eyes from her sister Caroline to her sister Mrs.
    Stephen Brigham, who had been Emma Glynn, the one beauty of the
    family. The latter was beautiful still, with a large, splendid,
    full-blown beauty, she filled a great rocking-chair with her
    superb bulk of femininity, and swayed gently back and forth,
    her black silks whispering and her black frills fluttering.
    Even the shock of death—for her brother Edward lay dead
    in the house—could not disturb her outward serenity of
    demeanor.
But even her expression of masterly placidity changed before
    her sister Caroline's announcement and her sister Rebecca Ann's
    gasp of terror and distress in response.
"I think Henry might have controlled his temper, when poor
    Edward was so near his end," she said with an asperity which
    disturbed slightly the roseate curves of her beautiful
    mouth.
"Of course he did not know," murmured Rebecca Ann
    in a faint tone.
"Of course he did not know it," said Caroline quickly. She
    turned on her sister with a strange, sharp look of suspicion.
    Then she shrank as if from the other's possible answer.
Rebecca gasped again. The married sister, Mrs. Emma Brigham,
    was now sitting up straight in her chair; she had ceased
    rocking, and was eyeing them both intently with a sudden
    accentuation of family likeness in her face.
"What do you mean?" said she impartially to them both. Then
    she, too, seemed to shrink before a possible answer. She even
    laughed an evasive sort of laugh.
"Nobody means anything," said Caroline firmly. She rose and
    crossed the room toward the door with grim decisiveness.
"Where are you going?" asked Mrs. Brigham.
"I have something to see to," replied Caroline, and the
    others at once knew by her tone that she had some solemn and
    sad duty to perform in the chamber of death.
"Oh," said Mrs. Brigham.
After the door had closed behind Caroline, she turned to
    Rebecca.
"Did Henry have many words with him?" she asked.
"They were talking very loud," replied Rebecca
    evasively.
Mrs. Brigham looked at her. She had not resumed rocking. She
    still sat up straight, with a slight knitting of intensity on
    her fair forehead, between the pretty rippling curves of her
    auburn hair.
"Did you—ever hear anything?" she asked in a low voice
    with a glance toward the door.
"I was just across the hall in the south parlor, and that
    door was open and this door ajar," replied Rebecca with a
    slight flush.
"Then you must have——"
"I couldn't help it."
"Everything?"
"Most of it."
"What was it?"
"The old story."
"I suppose Henry was mad, as he always was, because Edward
    was living on here for nothing, when he had wasted all the
    money father left him."
Rebecca nodded, with a fearful glance at the door.
When Emma spoke again her voice was still more hushed. "I
    know how he felt," said she. "It must have looked to him as if
    Edward was living at his expense, but he wasn't."
"No, he wasn't."
"And Edward had a right here according to the terms of
    father's will, and Henry ought to have remembered it."
"Yes, he ought."
"Did he say hard things?"
"Pretty hard, from what I heard."
"What?"
"I heard him tell Edward that he had no business here at
    all, and he thought he had better go away."
"What did Edward say?"
"That he would stay here as long as he lived and afterward,
    too, if he was a mind to, and he would like to see Henry get
    him out; and then——"
"What?"
"Then he laughed."
"What did Henry say?"
"I didn't hear him say anything, but——"
"But what?"
"I saw him when he came out of this room."
"He looked mad?"
"You've seen him when he looked so."
Emma nodded. The expression of horror on her face had
    deepened.
"Do you remember that time he killed the cat because she had
    scratched him?"
"Yes. Don't!"
Then Caroline reentered the room; she went up to the stove,
    in which a wood fire was burning—it was a cold, gloomy
    day of fall—and she warmed her hands, which were reddened
    from recent washing in cold water.
Mrs. Brigham looked at her and hesitated. She glanced at the
    door, which was still ajar; it did not easily shut, being still
    swollen with the damp weather of the summer. She rose and
    pushed it together with a sharp thud, which jarred the house.
    Rebecca started painfully with a half-exclamation. Caroline
    looked at her disapprovingly.
"It is time you controlled your nerves, Rebecca," she
    said.
Mrs. Brigham, returning from the closed door, said
    imperiously that it ought to be fixed, it shut so hard.
"It will shrink enough after we have had the fire a few
    days," replied Caroline.
"I think Henry ought to be ashamed of himself for talking as
    he did to Edward," said Mrs. Brigham abruptly, but in an almost
    inaudible voice.
"Hush," said Caroline, with a glance of actual fear at the
    closed door.
"Nobody can hear with the door shut. I say again I think
    Henry ought to be ashamed of himself. I shouldn't think he'd
    ever get over it, having words with poor Edward the very night
    before he died. Edward was enough sight better disposition than
    Henry, with all his faults."
"I never heard him speak a cross word, unless he spoke cross
    to Henry that last night. I don't know but he did from what
    Rebecca overheard."
"Not so much cross, as sort of soft, and sweet, and
    aggravating," sniffed Rebecca.
"What do you really think ailed Edward?" asked Emma in
    hardly more than a whisper. She did not look at her sister.
"I know you said that he had terrible pains in his stomach,
    and had spasms, but what do you think made him have them?"
"Henry called it gastric trouble. You know Edward has always
    had dyspepsia."
Mrs. Brigham hesitated a moment. "Was there any talk of
    an—examination?" said she.
Then Caroline turned on her fiercely.
"No," said she in a terrible voice. "No."
The three sisters' souls seemed to meet on one common ground
    of terrified understanding through their eyes.
The old-fashioned latch of the door was heard to rattle, and
    a push from without made the door shake ineffectually. "It's
    Henry," Rebecca sighed rather than whispered. Mrs. Brigham
    settled herself, after a noiseless rush across the floor, into
    her rocking-chair again, and was swaying back and forth with
    her head comfortably leaning back, when the door at last
    yielded and Henry Glynn entered. He cast a covertly sharp,
    comprehensive glance at Mrs. Brigham with her elaborate calm;
    at Rebecca quietly huddled in the corner of the sofa with her
    handkerchief to her face and only one small uncovered reddened
    ear as attentive as a dog's, and at Caroline sitting with a
    strained composure in her armchair by the stove. She met his
    eyes quite firmly with a look of inscrutable fear, and defiance
    of the fear and of him.
Henry Glynn looked more like this sister than the others.
    Both had the same hard delicacy of form and aquilinity of
    feature. They confronted each other with the pitiless
    immovability of two statues in whose marble lineaments emotions
    were fixed for all eternity.
Then Henry Glynn smiled and the smile transformed his face.
    He looked suddenly years younger, and an almost boyish
    recklessness appeared in his face. He flung himself into a
    chair with a gesture which was bewildering from its incongruity
    with his general appearance. He leaned his head back, flung one
    leg over the other, and looked laughingly at Mrs. Brigham.
"I declare, Emma, you grow younger every year," he said.
She flushed a little, and her placid mouth widened at the
    corners. She was susceptible to praise.
"Our thoughts to-day ought to belong to the one of us who
    will never grow older," said Caroline in a hard
    voice.
Henry looked at her, still smiling. "Of course, we none of
    us forget that," said he, in a deep, gentle voice; "but we have
    to speak to the living, Caroline, and I have not seen Emma for
    a long time, and the living are as dear as the dead."
"Not to me," said Caroline.
She rose and went abruptly out of the room again. Rebecca
    also rose and hurried after her, sobbing loudly.
Henry looked slowly after them.
"Caroline is completely unstrung," said he.
Mrs. Brigham rocked. A confidence in him inspired by his
    manner was stealing over her. Out of that confidence she spoke
    quite easily and naturally.
"His death was very sudden," said she.
Henry's eyelids quivered slightly but his gaze was
    unswerving.
"Yes," said he, "it was very sudden. He was sick only a few
    hours."
"What did you call it?"
"Gastric."
"You did not think of an examination?"
"There was no need. I am perfectly certain as to the cause
    of his death."
Suddenly Mrs. Brigham felt a creep as of some live horror
    over her very soul. Her flesh prickled with cold, before an
    inflection of his voice. She rose, tottering on weak knees.
"Where are you going?" asked Henry in a strange, breathless
    voice.
Mrs. Brigham said something incoherent about some sewing
    which she had to do—some black for the funeral—and
    was out of the room. She went up to the front chamber which she
    occupied. Caroline was there. She went close to her and took
    her hands, and the two sisters looked at each other.
"Don't speak, don't, I won't have it!" said Caroline finally
    in an awful whisper.
"I won't," replied Emma.
That afternoon the three sisters were in the study.
Mrs. Brigham was hemming some black material. At last she
    laid her work on her lap.
"It's no use, I cannot see to sew another stitch until we
    have a light," said she.
Caroline, who was writing some letters at the table, turned
    to Rebecca, in her usual place on the sofa.
"Rebecca, you had better get a lamp," she said.
Rebecca started up; even in the dusk her face showed her
    agitation.
"It doesn't seem to me that we need a lamp quite yet," she
    said in a piteous, pleading voice like a child's.
"Yes, we do," returned Mrs. Brigham peremptorily. "I can't
    see to sew another stitch."
Rebecca rose and left the room. Presently she entered with a
    lamp. She set it on the table, an old-fashioned card-table
    which was placed against the opposite wall from the window.
    That opposite wall was taken up with three doors; the one small
    space was occupied by the table.
"What have you put that lamp over there for?" asked Mrs.
    Brigham, with more of impatience than her voice usually
    revealed. "Why didn't you set it in the hall, and have done
    with it? Neither Caroline nor I can see if it is on that
    table."
"I thought perhaps you would move," replied Rebecca
    hoarsely.
"If I do move, we can't both sit at that table. Caroline has
    her paper all spread around. Why don't you set the lamp on the
    study table in the middle of the room, then we can both
    see?"
Rebecca hesitated. Her face was very pale. She looked with
    an appeal that was fairly agonizing at her sister Caroline.
"Why don't you put the lamp on this table, as she says?"
    asked Caroline, almost fiercely. "Why do you act so,
    Rebecca?"
Rebecca took the lamp and set it on the table in the middle
    of the room without another word. Then she seated herself on
    the sofa and placed a hand over her eyes as if to shade them,
    and remained so.
"Does the light hurt your eyes, and is that the reason why
    you didn't want the lamp?" asked Mrs. Brigham kindly.
"I always like to sit in the dark," replied Rebecca
    chokingly. Then she snatched her handkerchief hastily from her
    pocket and began to weep. Caroline continued to write, Mrs.
    Brigham to sew.
Suddenly Mrs. Brigham as she sewed glanced at the opposite
    wall. The glance became a steady stare. She looked intently,
    her work suspended in her hands. Then she looked away again and
    took a few more stitches, then she looked again, and again
    turned to her task. At last she laid her work in her lap and
    stared concentratedly. She looked from the wall round the room,
    taking note of the various objects. Then she turned to her
    sisters.
"What is that?" said she.
"What?" asked Caroline harshly.
"That strange shadow on the wall," replied Mrs. Brigham.
Rebecca sat with her face hidden; Caroline dipped her pen in
    the inkstand.
"Why don't you turn around and look?" asked Mrs. Brigham in
    a wondering and somewhat aggrieved way.
"I am in a hurry to finish this letter," replied Caroline
    shortly.
Mrs. Brigham rose, her work slipping to the floor, and began
    walking round the room, moving various articles of furniture,
    with her eyes on the shadow.
Then suddenly she shrieked out:
"Look at this awful shadow! What is it? Caroline, look,
    look! Rebecca, look! What is it?"
All Mrs. Brigham's triumphant placidity was gone. Her
    handsome face was livid with horror. She stood stiffly pointing
    at the shadow.
Then after a shuddering glance at the wall Rebecca burst out
    in a wild wail.
"Oh, Caroline, there it is again, there it is again!"
"Caroline Glynn, you look!" said Mrs. Brigham. "Look! What
    is that dreadful shadow?"
Caroline rose, turned, and stood confronting the wall.
"How should I know?" she said.
"It has been there every night since he died!" cried
    Rebecca.
"Every night?"
"Yes; he died Thursday and this is Saturday; that makes
    three nights," said Caroline rigidly. She stood as if holding
    her calm with a vise of concentrated will.
"It—it looks like—like—" stammered Mrs.
    Brigham in a tone of intense horror.
"I know what it looks like well enough," said Caroline.
    "I've got eyes in my head."
"It looks like Edward," burst out Rebecca in a sort of
    frenzy of fear. "Only——"
"Yes, it does," assented Mrs. Brigham, whose horror-stricken
    tone matched her sisters', "only—Oh, it is awful! What is
    it, Caroline?"
"I ask you again, how should I know?" replied Caroline. "I
    see it there like you. How should I know any more than
    you?"
"It must be something in the room," said Mrs.
    Brigham, staring wildly around.
"We moved everything in the room the first night it came,"
    said Rebecca; "it is not anything in the room."
Caroline turned upon her with a sort of fury. "Of course it
    is something in the room," said she. "How you act! What do you
    mean talking so? Of course it is something in the room."
"Of course it is," agreed Mrs. Brigham, looking at Caroline
    suspiciously. "It must be something in the room."
"It is not anything in the room," repeated Rebecca with
    obstinate horror.
The door opened suddenly and Henry Glynn entered. He began
    to speak, then his eyes followed the direction of the others.
    He stood staring at the shadow on the wall.
"What is that?" he demanded in a strange voice.
"It must be due to something in the room," Mrs. Brigham said
    faintly.
Henry Glynn stood and stared a moment longer. His face
    showed a gamut of emotions. Horror, conviction, then furious
    incredulity. Suddenly he began hastening hither and thither
    about the room. He moved the furniture with fierce jerks,
    turning ever to see the effect upon the shadow on the wall. Not
    a line of its terrible outlines wavered.
"It must be something in the room!" he declared in a voice
    which seemed to snap like a lash.
His face changed, the inmost secrecy of his nature seemed
    evident upon his face, until one almost lost sight of his
    lineaments. Rebecca stood close to her sofa, regarding him with
    woeful, fascinated eyes. Mrs. Brigham clutched Caroline's hand.
    They both stood in a corner out of his way. For a few moments
    he raged about the room like a caged wild animal. He moved
    every piece of furniture; when the moving of a piece did not
    affect the shadow he flung it to the floor.
Then suddenly he desisted. He laughed.
"What an absurdity," he said easily. "Such a to-do about a
    shadow."
"That's so," assented Mrs. Brigham, in a scared voice which
    she tried to make natural. As she spoke she lifted a chair near
    her.
"I think you have broken the chair that Edward was fond of,"
    said Caroline.
Terror and wrath were struggling for expression on her face.
    Her mouth was set, her eyes shrinking. Henry lifted the chair
    with a show of anxiety.
"Just as good as ever," he said pleasantly. He laughed
    again, looking at his sisters. "Did I scare you?" he said. "I
    should think you might be used to me by this time. You know my
    way of wanting to leap to the bottom of a mystery, and that
    shadow does look—queer, like—and I thought if there
    was any way of accounting for it I would like to without any
    delay."
"You don't seem to have succeeded," remarked Caroline dryly,
    with a slight glance at the wall.
Henry's eyes followed hers and he quivered perceptibly.
"Oh, there is no accounting for shadows," he said, and he
    laughed again. "A man is a fool to try to account for
    shadows."
Then the supper bell rang, and they all left the room, but
    Henry kept his back to the wall—as did, indeed, the
    others.
Henry led the way with an alert motion like a boy; Rebecca
    brought up the rear. She could scarcely walk, her knees
    trembled so.
"I can't sit in that room again this evening," she whispered
    to Caroline after supper.
"Very well; we will sit in the south room," replied
    Caroline. "I think we will sit in the south parlor," she said
    aloud; "it isn't as damp as the study, and I have a cold."
So they all sat in the south room with their sewing. Henry
    read the newspaper, his chair drawn close to the lamp on the
    table. About nine o'clock he rose abruptly and crossed the hall
    to the study. The three sisters looked at one another. Mrs.
    Brigham rose, folded her rustling skirts compactly round her,
    and began tiptoeing toward the door.
"What are you going to do?" inquired Rebecca agitatedly.
"I am going to see what he is about," replied Mrs. Brigham
    cautiously.
As she spoke she pointed to the study door across the hall;
    it was ajar. Henry had striven to pull it together behind him,
    but it had somehow swollen beyond the limit with curious speed.
    It was still ajar and a streak of light showed from top to
    bottom.
Mrs. Brigham folded her skirts so tightly that her bulk with
    its swelling curves was revealed in a black silk sheath, and
    she went with a slow toddle across the hall to the study door.
    She stood there, her eye at the crack.
In the south room Rebecca stopped sewing and sat watching
    with dilated eyes. Caroline sewed steadily. What Mrs. Brigham,
    standing at the crack in the study door, saw was this:
Henry Glynn, evidently reasoning that the source of the
    strange shadow must be between the table on which the lamp
    stood and the wall, was making systematic passes and thrusts
    with an old sword which had belonged to his father all over and
    through the intervening space. Not an inch was left unpierced.
    He seemed to have divided the space into mathematical sections.
    He brandished the sword with a sort of cold fury and
    calculation; the blade gave out flashes of light, the shadow
    remained unmoved. Mrs. Brigham, watching, felt herself cold
    with horror.
Finally Henry ceased and stood with the sword in hand and
    raised as if to strike, surveying the shadow on the wall
    threateningly. Mrs. Brigham toddled back across the hall and
    shut the south room door behind her before she related what she
    had seen.
"He looked like a demon," she said again. "Have you got any
    of that old wine in the house, Caroline? I don't feel as if I
    could stand much more."
"Yes, there's plenty," said Caroline; "you can have some
    when you go to bed."
"I think we had all better take some," said Mrs. Brigham.
    "Oh, Caroline, what——"
"Don't ask; don't speak," said Caroline.
"No, I'm not going to," replied Mrs. Brigham;
    "but——"
Soon the three sisters went to their chambers and the south
    parlor was deserted. Caroline called to Henry in the study to
    put out the light before he came upstairs. They had been gone
    about an hour when he came into the room bringing the lamp
    which had stood in the study. He set it on the table, and
    waited a few minutes, pacing up and down. His face was
    terrible, his fair complexion showed livid, and his blue eyes
    seemed dark blanks of awful reflections.
Then he took up the lamp and returned to the library. He set
    the lamp on the center table and the shadow sprang out on the
    wall. Again he studied the furniture and moved it about, but
    deliberately, with none of his former frenzy. Nothing affected
    the shadow. Then he returned to the south room with the lamp
    and again waited. Again he returned to the study and placed the
    lamp on the table, and the shadow sprang out upon the wall. It
    was midnight before he went upstairs. Mrs. Brigham and the
    other sisters, who could not sleep, heard him.
The next day was the funeral. That evening the family sat in
    the south room. Some relatives were with them. Nobody entered
    the study until Henry carried a lamp in there after the others
    had retired for the night. He saw again the shadow on the wall
    leap to an awful life before the light.
The next morning at breakfast Henry Glynn announced that he
    had to go to the city for three days. The sisters looked at him
    with surprise. He very seldom left home, and just now his
    practice had been neglected on account of Edward's death.
"How can you leave your patients now?" asked Mrs. Brigham
    wonderingly.
"I don't know how to, but there is no other way," replied
    Henry easily. "I have had a telegram from Dr. Mitford."
"Consultation?" inquired Mrs. Brigham.
"I have business," replied Henry.
Doctor Mitford was an old classmate of his who lived in a
    neighboring city and who occasionally called upon him in the
    case of a consultation.
After he had gone, Mrs. Brigham said to Caroline that, after
    all, Henry had not said that he was going to consult with
    Doctor Mitford, and she thought it very strange.
"Everything is very strange," said Rebecca with a
    shudder.
"What do you mean?" inquired Caroline.
"Nothing," replied Rebecca.
Nobody entered the study that day, nor the next. The third
    day Henry was expected home, but he did not arrive and the last
    train from the city had come.
"I call it pretty queer work," said Mrs. Brigham. "The idea
    of a doctor leaving his patients at such a time as this, and
    the idea of a consultation lasting three days! There is no
    sense in it, and now he has not come. I don't
    understand it, for my part."
"I don't either," said Rebecca.
They were all in the south parlor. There was no light in the
    study; the door was ajar.
Presently Mrs. Brigham rose—she could not have told
    why; something seemed to impel her—some will outside her
    own. She went out of the room, again wrapping her rustling
    skirts round that she might pass noiselessly, and began pushing
    at the swollen door of the study.
"She has not got any lamp," said Rebecca in a shaking
    voice.
Caroline, who was writing letters, rose again, took the only
    remaining lamp in the room, and followed her sister. Rebecca
    had risen, but she stood trembling, not venturing to
    follow.
The doorbell rang, but the others did not hear it; it was on
    the south door on the other side of the house from the study.
    Rebecca, after hesitating until the bell rang the second time,
    went to the door; she remembered that the servant was out.
Caroline and her sister Emma entered the study. Caroline set
    the lamp on the table. They looked at the wall, and there were
    two shadows. The sisters stood clutching each other, staring at
    the awful things on the wall. Then Rebecca came in, staggering,
    with a telegram in her hand. "Here is—a telegram," she
    gasped. "Henry is—dead."