THE WATKINSON EVENING

 [From Godey's Lady's Book , December, 1846.]

 By Eliza Leslie (1787-1858)

 Mrs. Morland, a polished and accomplished woman, was the widow of a
      distinguished senator from one of the western states, of which, also, her
      husband had twice filled the office of governor. Her daughter having
      completed her education at the best boarding-school in Philadelphia, and
      her son being about to graduate at Princeton, the mother had planned with
      her children a tour to Niagara and the lakes, returning by way of Boston.
      On leaving Philadelphia, Mrs. Morland and the delighted Caroline stopped
      at Princeton to be present at the annual commencement, and had the
      happiness of seeing their beloved Edward receive his diploma as bachelor
      of arts; after hearing him deliver, with great applause, an oration on the
      beauties of the American character. College youths are very prone to treat
      on subjects that imply great experience of the world. But Edward Morland
      was full of kind feeling for everything and everybody; and his views of
      life had hitherto been tinted with a perpetual rose-color.

 Mrs. Morland, not depending altogether upon the celebrity of her late
      husband, and wishing that her children should see specimens of the best
      society in the northern cities, had left home with numerous letters of
      introduction. But when they arrived at New York, she found to her great
      regret, that having unpacked and taken out her small traveling desk,
      during her short stay in Philadelphia, she had strangely left it behind in
      the closet of her room at the hotel. In this desk were deposited all her
      letters, except two which had been offered to her by friends in
      Philadelphia. The young people, impatient to see the wonders of Niagara,
      had entreated her to stay but a day or two in the city of New York, and
      thought these two letters would be quite sufficient for the present. In
      the meantime she wrote back to the hotel, requesting that the missing desk
      should be forwarded to New York as soon as possible.

 On the morning after their arrival at the great commercial metropolis of
      America, the Morland family took a carriage to ride round through the
      principal parts of the city, and to deliver their two letters at the
      houses to which they were addressed, and which were both situated in the
      region that lies between the upper part of Broadway and the North River.
      In one of the most fashionable streets they found the elegant mansion of
      Mrs. St. Leonard; but on stopping at the door, were informed that its
      mistress was not at home. They then left the introductory letter (which
      they had prepared for this mischance, by enclosing it in an envelope with
      a card), and proceeding to another street considerably farther up, they
      arrived at the dwelling of the Watkinson family, to the mistress of which
      the other Philadelphia letter was directed. It was one of a large block of
      houses all exactly alike, and all shut up from top to bottom, according to
      a custom more prevalent in New York than in any other city.

 Here they were also unsuccessful; the servant who came to the door telling
      them that the ladies were particularly engaged and could see no company.
      So they left their second letter and card and drove off, continuing their
      ride till they reached the Croton water works, which they quitted the
      carriage to see and admire. On returning to the hotel, with the intention
      after an hour or two of rest to go out again, and walk till near
      dinner-time, they found waiting them a note from Mrs. Watkinson,
      expressing her regret that she had not been able to see them when they
      called; and explaining that her family duties always obliged her to deny
      herself the pleasure of receiving morning visitors, and that her servants
      had general orders to that effect. But she requested their company for
      that evening (naming nine o'clock as the hour), and particularly desired
      an immediate answer.

 "I suppose," said Mrs. Morland, "she intends asking some of her friends to
      meet us, in case we accept the invitation; and therefore is naturally
      desirous of a reply as soon as possible. Of course we will not keep her in
      suspense. Mrs. Denham, who volunteered the letter, assured me that Mrs.
      Watkinson was one of the most estimable women in New York, and a pattern
      to the circle in which she moved. It seems that Mr. Denham and Mr.
      Watkinson are connected in business. Shall we go?"

 The young people assented, saying they had no doubt of passing a pleasant
      evening.

 The billet of acceptance having been written, it was sent off immediately,
      entrusted to one of the errand-goers belonging to the hotel, that it might
      be received in advance of the next hour for the dispatch-post—and
      Edward Morland desired the man to get into an omnibus with the note that
      no time might be lost in delivering it. "It is but right"—said he to
      his mother—"that we should give Mrs. Watkinson an ample opportunity
      of making her preparations, and sending round to invite her friends."

 "How considerate you are, dear Edward"—said Caroline—"always
      so thoughtful of every one's convenience. Your college friends must have
      idolized you."

 "No"—said Edward—"they called me a prig." Just then a
      remarkably handsome carriage drove up to the private door of the hotel.
      From it alighted a very elegant woman, who in a few moments was ushered
      into the drawing-room by the head waiter, and on his designating Mrs.
      Morland's family, she advanced and gracefully announced herself as Mrs.
      St. Leonard. This was the lady at whose house they had left the first
      letter of introduction. She expressed regret at not having been at home
      when they called; but said that on finding their letter, she had
      immediately come down to see them, and to engage them for the evening.
      "Tonight"—said Mrs. St. Leonard—"I expect as many friends as I
      can collect for a summer party. The occasion is the recent marriage of my
      niece, who with her husband has just returned from their bridal excursion,
      and they will be soon on their way to their residence in Baltimore. I
      think I can promise you an agreeable evening, as I expect some very
      delightful people, with whom I shall be most happy to make you
      acquainted."

 Edward and Caroline exchanged glances, and could not refrain from looking
      wistfully at their mother, on whose countenance a shade of regret was very
      apparent. After a short pause she replied to Mrs. St. Leonard—"I am
      truly sorry to say that we have just answered in the affirmative a
      previous invitation for this very evening."

 "I am indeed disappointed"—said Mrs. St. Leonard, who had been
      looking approvingly at the prepossessing appearance of the two young
      people. "Is there no way in which you can revoke your compliance with this
      unfortunate first invitation—at least, I am sure, it is unfortunate
      for me. What a vexatious contretemps that I should have chanced to
      be out when you called; thus missing the pleasure of seeing you at once,
      and securing that of your society for this evening? The truth is, I was
      disappointed in some of the preparations that had been sent home this
      morning, and I had to go myself and have the things rectified, and was
      detained away longer than I expected. May I ask to whom you are engaged
      this evening? Perhaps I know the lady—if so, I should be very much
      tempted to go and beg you from her."

 "The lady is Mrs. John Watkinson"—replied Mrs. Morland—"most
      probably she will invite some of her friends to meet us."

 "That of course"—answered Mrs. St. Leonard—"I am really very
      sorry—and I regret to say that I do not know her at all."

 "We shall have to abide by our first decision," said Mrs. Morland. "By
      Mrs. Watkinson, mentioning in her note the hour of nine, it is to be
      presumed she intends asking some other company. I cannot possibly
      disappoint her. I can speak feelingly as to the annoyance (for I have
      known it by my own experience) when after inviting a number of my friends
      to meet some strangers, the strangers have sent an excuse almost at the
      eleventh hour. I think no inducements, however strong, could tempt me to
      do so myself."

 "I confess that you are perfectly right," said Mrs. St. Leonard. "I see
      you must go to Mrs. Watkinson. But can you not divide the evening, by
      passing a part of it with her and then finishing with me?"

 At this suggestion the eyes of the young people sparkled, for they had
      become delighted with Mrs. St. Leonard, and imagined that a party at her
      house must be every way charming. Also, parties were novelties to both of
      them.

 "If possible we will do so," answered Mrs. Morland, "and with what
      pleasure I need not assure you. We leave New York to-morrow, but we shall
      return this way in September, and will then be exceedingly happy to see
      more of Mrs. St. Leonard."

 After a little more conversation Mrs. St. Leonard took her leave,
      repeating her hope of still seeing her new friends at her house that
      night; and enjoining them to let her know as soon as they returned to New
      York on their way home.

 Edward Morland handed her to her carriage, and then joined his mother and
      sister in their commendations of Mrs. St. Leonard, with whose exceeding
      beauty were united a countenance beaming with intelligence, and a manner
      that put every one at their ease immediately.

 "She is an evidence," said Edward, "how superior our women of fashion are
      to those of Europe."

 "Wait, my dear son," said Mrs. Morland, "till you have been in Europe, and
      had an opportunity of forming an opinion on that point (as on many others)
      from actual observation. For my part, I believe that in all civilized
      countries the upper classes of people are very much alike, at least in
      their leading characteristics."

 "Ah! here comes the man that was sent to Mrs. Watkinson," said Caroline
      Morland. "I hope he could not find the house and has brought the note back
      with him. We shall then be able to go at first to Mrs. St. Leonard's, and
      pass the whole evening there."

 The man reported that he had found the house, and had delivered the
      note into Mrs. Watkinson's own hands, as she chanced to be crossing the
      entry when the door was opened; and that she read it immediately, and said
      "Very well."

 "Are you certain that you made no mistake in the house," said Edward, "and
      that you really did give it to Mrs. Watkinson?"

 "And it's quite sure I am, sir," replied the man, "when I first came over
      from the ould country I lived with them awhile, and though when she saw me
      to-day, she did not let on that she remembered my doing that same, she
      could not help calling me James. Yes, the rale words she said when I
      handed her the billy-dux was, 'Very well, James.'"

 "Come, come," said Edward, when they found themselves alone, "let us look
      on the bright side. If we do not find a large party at Mrs. Watkinson's,
      we may in all probability meet some very agreeable people there, and enjoy
      the feast of reason and the flow of soul. We may find the Watkinson house
      so pleasant as to leave it with regret even for Mrs. St. Leonard's."

 "I do not believe Mrs. Watkinson is in fashionable society," said
      Caroline, "or Mrs. St. Leonard would have known her. I heard some of the
      ladies here talking last evening of Mrs. St. Leonard, and I found from
      what they said that she is among the lite of the lite ."

 "Even if she is," observed Mrs. Morland, "are polish of manners and
      cultivation of mind confined exclusively to persons of that class?"

 "Certainly not," said Edward, "the most talented and refined youth at our
      college, and he in whose society I found the greatest pleasure, was the
      son of a bricklayer."

 In the ladies' drawing-room, after dinner, the Morlands heard a
      conversation between several of the female guests, who all seemed to know
      Mrs. St. Leonard very well by reputation, and they talked of her party
      that was to "come off" on this evening.

 "I hear," said one lady, "that Mrs. St. Leonard is to have an unusual
      number of lions."

 She then proceeded to name a gallant general, with his elegant wife and
      accomplished daughter; a celebrated commander in the navy; two highly
      distinguished members of Congress, and even an ex-president. Also several
      of the most eminent among the American literati, and two first-rate
      artists.

 Edward Morland felt as if he could say, "Had I three ears I'd hear thee."

 "Such a woman as Mrs. St. Leonard can always command the best lions that
      are to be found," observed another lady.

 "And then," said a third, "I have been told that she has such exquisite
      taste in lighting and embellishing her always elegant rooms. And her
      supper table, whether for summer or winter parties, is so beautifully
      arranged; all the viands are so delicious, and the attendance of the
      servants so perfect—and Mrs. St. Leonard does the honors with so
      much ease and tact."

 "Some friends of mine that visit her," said a fourth lady, "describe her
      parties as absolute perfection. She always manages to bring together those
      persons that are best fitted to enjoy each other's conversation. Still no
      one is overlooked or neglected. Then everything at her reunions is so well
      proportioned—she has just enough of music, and just enough of
      whatever amusement may add to the pleasure of her guests; and still there
      is no appearance of design or management on her part."

 "And better than all," said the lady who had spoken firsts "Mrs. St.
      Leonard is one of the kindest, most generous, and most benevolent of women—she
      does good in every possible way."

 "I can listen no longer," said Caroline to Edward, rising to change her
      seat. "If I hear any more I shall absolutely hate the Watkinsons. How
      provoking that they should have sent us the first invitation. If we had
      only thought of waiting till we could hear from Mrs. St. Leonard!"

 "For shame, Caroline," said her brother, "how can you talk so of persons
      you have never seen, and to whom you ought to feel grateful for the
      kindness of their invitation; even if it has interfered with another
      party, that I must confess seems to offer unusual attractions. Now I have
      a presentiment that we shall find the Watkinson part of the evening very
      enjoyable."

 As soon as tea was over, Mrs. Morland and her daughter repaired to their
      toilettes. Fortunately, fashion as well as good taste, has decided that,
      at a summer party, the costume of the ladies should never go beyond an
      elegant simplicity. Therefore our two ladies in preparing for their
      intended appearance at Mrs. St. Leonard's, were enabled to attire
      themselves in a manner that would not seem out of place in the smaller
      company they expected to meet at the Watkinsons. Over an under-dress of
      lawn, Caroline Morland put on a white organdy trimmed with lace, and
      decorated with bows of pink ribbon. At the back of her head was a wreath
      of fresh and beautiful pink flowers, tied with a similar ribbon. Mrs.
      Morland wore a black grenadine over a satin, and a lace cap trimmed with
      white.

 It was but a quarter past nine o'clock when their carriage stopped at the
      Watkinson door. The front of the house looked very dark. Not a ray gleamed
      through the Venetian shutters, and the glimmer beyond the fan-light over
      the door was almost imperceptible. After the coachman had rung several
      times, an Irish girl opened the door, cautiously (as Irish girls always
      do), and admitted them into the entry, where one light only was burning in
      a branch lamp. "Shall we go upstairs?" said Mrs. Morland. "And what for
      would ye go upstairs?" said the girl in a pert tone. "It's all dark there,
      and there's no preparations. Ye can lave your things here a-hanging on the
      rack. It is a party ye're expecting? Blessed are them what expects
      nothing."

 The sanguine Edward Morland looked rather blank at this intelligence, and
      his sister whispered to him, "We'll get off to Mrs. St. Leonard's as soon
      as we possibly can. When did you tell the coachman to come for us?"

 "At half past ten," was the brother's reply.

 "Oh! Edward, Edward!" she exclaimed, "And I dare say he will not be
      punctual. He may keep us here till eleven."

 " Courage, mes enfants ," said their mother, " et parlez plus
      doucement ."

 The girl then ushered them into the back parlor, saying, "Here's the
      company."

 The room was large and gloomy. A checquered mat covered the floor, and all
      the furniture was encased in striped calico covers, and the lamps,
      mirrors, etc. concealed under green gauze. The front parlor was entirely
      dark, and in the back apartment was no other light than a shaded lamp on a
      large centre table, round which was assembled a circle of children of all
      sizes and ages. On a backless, cushionless sofa sat Mrs. Watkinson, and a
      young lady, whom she introduced as her daughter Jane. And Mrs. Morland in
      return presented Edward and Caroline.

 "Will you take the rocking-chair, ma'am?" inquired Mrs. Watkinson.

 Mrs. Morland declining the offer, the hostess took it herself, and
      see-sawed on it nearly the whole time. It was a very awkward, high-legged,
      crouch-backed rocking-chair, and shamefully unprovided with anything in
      the form of a footstool.

 "My husband is away, at Boston, on business," said Mrs. Watkinson. "I
      thought at first, ma'am, I should not be able to ask you here this
      evening, for it is not our way to have company in his absence; but my
      daughter Jane over-persuaded me to send for you."

 "What a pity," thought Caroline.

 "You must take us as you find us, ma'am," continued Mrs. Watkinson. "We
      use no ceremony with anybody; and our rule is never to put ourselves out
      of the way. We do not give parties [looking at the dresses of the ladies].
      Our first duty is to our children, and we cannot waste our substance on
      fashion and folly. They'll have cause to thank us for it when we die."

 Something like a sob was heard from the centre table, at which the
      children were sitting, and a boy was seen to hold his handkerchief to his
      face.

 "Joseph, my child," said his mother, "do not cry. You have no idea, ma'am,
      what an extraordinary boy that is. You see how the bare mention of such a
      thing as our deaths has overcome him."

 There was another sob behind the handkerchief, and the Morlands thought it
      now sounded very much like a smothered laugh.

 "As I was saying, ma'am," continued Mrs. Watkinson, "we never give
      parties. We leave all sinful things to the vain and foolish. My daughter
      Jane has been telling me, that she heard this morning of a party that is
      going on tonight at the widow St. Leonard's. It is only fifteen years
      since her husband died. He was carried off with a three days' illness, but
      two months after they were married. I have had a domestic that lived with
      them at the time, so I know all about it. And there she is now, living in
      an elegant house, and riding in her carriage, and dressing and dashing,
      and giving parties, and enjoying life, as she calls it. Poor creature, how
      I pity her! Thank heaven, nobody that I know goes to her parties. If they
      did I would never wish to see them again in my house. It is an
      encouragement to folly and nonsense—and folly and nonsense are
      sinful. Do not you think so, ma'am?"

 "If carried too far they may certainly become so," replied Mrs. Morland.

 "We have heard," said Edward, "that Mrs. St. Leonard, though one of the
      ornaments of the gay world, has a kind heart, a beneficent spirit and a
      liberal hand."

 "I know very little about her," replied Mrs. Watkinson, drawing up her
      head, "and I have not the least desire to know any more. It is well she
      has no children; they'd be lost sheep if brought up in her fold. For my
      part, ma'am," she continued, turning to Mrs. Morland, "I am quite
      satisfied with the quiet joys of a happy home. And no mother has the least
      business with any other pleasures. My innocent babes know nothing about
      plays, and balls, and parties; and they never shall. Do they look as if
      they had been accustomed to a life of pleasure?"

 They certainly did not! for when the Morlands took a glance at them, they
      thought they had never seen youthful faces that were less gay, and indeed
      less prepossessing.

 There was not a good feature or a pleasant expression among them all.
      Edward Morland recollected his having often read "that childhood is always
      lovely." But he saw that the juvenile Watkinsons were an exception to the
      rule.

 "The first duty of a mother is to her children," repeated Mrs. Watkinson.
      "Till nine o'clock, my daughter Jane and myself are occupied every evening
      in hearing the lessons that they have learned for to-morrow's school.
      Before that hour we can receive no visitors, and we never have company to
      tea, as that would interfere too much with our duties. We had just
      finished hearing these lessons when you arrived. Afterwards the children
      are permitted to indulge themselves in rational play, for I permit no
      amusement that is not also instructive. My children are so well trained,
      that even when alone their sports are always serious."

 Two of the boys glanced slyly at each other, with what Edward Morland
      comprehended as an expression of pitch-penny and marbles.

 "They are now engaged at their game of astronomy," continued Mrs.
      Watkinson. "They have also a sort of geography cards, and a set of
      mathematical cards. It is a blessed discovery, the invention of these
      educationary games; so that even the play-time of children can be turned
      to account. And you have no idea, ma'am, how they enjoy them."

 Just then the boy Joseph rose from the table, and stalking up to Mrs.
      Watkinson, said to her, "Mamma, please to whip me."

 At this unusual request the visitors looked much amazed, and Mrs.
      Watkinson replied to him, "Whip you, my best Joseph—for what cause?
      I have not seen you do anything wrong this evening, and you know my
      anxiety induces me to watch my children all the time."

 "You could not see me," answered Joseph, "for I have not done anything very wrong. But I have had a bad thought, and you know Mr.
      Ironrule says that a fault imagined is just as wicked as a fault
      committed."

 "You see, ma'am, what a good memory he has," said Mrs. Watkinson aside to
      Mrs. Morland. "But my best Joseph, you make your mother tremble. What
      fault have you imagined? What was your bad thought?"

 "Ay," said another boy, "what's your thought like?"

 "My thought," said Joseph, "was 'Confound all astronomy, and I could see
      the man hanged that made this game.'"

 "Oh! my child," exclaimed the mother, stopping her ears, "I am indeed
      shocked. I am glad you repented so immediately."

 "Yes," returned Joseph, "but I am afraid my repentance won't last. If I am
      not whipped, I may have these bad thoughts whenever I play at astronomy,
      and worse still at the geography game. Whip me, ma, and punish me as I
      deserve. There's the rattan in the corner: I'll bring it to you myself."

 "Excellent boy!" said his mother. "You know I always pardon my children
      when they are so candid as to confess their faults."

 "So you do," said Joseph, "but a whipping will cure me better."

 "I cannot resolve to punish so conscientious a child," said Mrs.
      Watkinson.

 "Shall I take the trouble off your hands?" inquired Edward, losing all
      patience in his disgust at the sanctimonious hypocrisy of this young
      Blifil. "It is such a rarity for a boy to request a whipping, that so
      remarkable a desire ought by all means to be gratified."

 Joseph turned round and made a face at him.

 "Give me the rattan," said Edward, half laughing, and offering to take it
      out of his hand. "I'll use it to your full satisfaction."

 The boy thought it most prudent to stride off and return to the table, and
      ensconce himself among his brothers and sisters; some of whom were staring
      with stupid surprise; others were whispering and giggling in the hope of
      seeing Joseph get a real flogging.

 Mrs. Watkinson having bestowed a bitter look on Edward, hastened to turn
      the attention of his mother to something else. "Mrs. Morland," said she,
      "allow me to introduce you to my youngest hope." She pointed to a sleepy
      boy about five years old, who with head thrown back and mouth wide open,
      was slumbering in his chair.

 Mrs. Watkinson's children were of that uncomfortable species who never go
      to bed; at least never without all manner of resistance. All her boasted
      authority was inadequate to compel them; they never would confess
      themselves sleepy; always wanted to "sit up," and there was a nightly
      scene of scolding, coaxing, threatening and manoeuvring to get them off.

 "I declare," said Mrs. Watkinson, "dear Benny is almost asleep. Shake him
      up, Christopher. I want him to speak a speech. His school-mistress takes
      great pains in teaching her little pupils to speak, and stands up herself
      and shows them how."

 The child having been shaken up hard (two or three others helping
      Christopher), rubbed his eyes and began to whine. His mother went to him,
      took him on her lap, hushed him up, and began to coax him. This done, she
      stood him on his feet before Mrs. Morland, and desired him to speak a
      speech for the company. The child put his thumb into his mouth, and
      remained silent.

 "Ma," said Jane Watkinson, "you had better tell him what speech to speak."

 "Speak Cato or Plato," said his mother. "Which do you call it? Come now,
      Benny—how does it begin? 'You are quite right and reasonable,
      Plato.' That's it."

 "Speak Lucius," said his sister Jane. "Come now, Benny—say 'your
      thoughts are turned on peace.'"

 The little boy looked very much as if they were not , and as if
      meditating an outbreak.

 "No, no!" exclaimed Christopher, "let him say Hamlet. Come now, Benny—'To
      be or not to be.'"

 "It ain't to be at all," cried Benny, "and I won't speak the least bit of
      it for any of you. I hate that speech!"

 "Only see his obstinacy," said the solemn Joseph. "And is he to be given
      up to?"

 "Speak anything, Benny," said Mrs. Watkinson, "anything so that it is only
      a speech."

 All the Watkinson voices now began to clamor violently at the obstinate
      child—"Speak a speech! speak a speech! speak a speech!" But they had
      no more effect than the reiterated exhortations with which nurses confuse
      the poor heads of babies, when they require them to "shake a day-day—shake
      a day-day!"

 Mrs. Morland now interfered, and begged that the sleepy little boy might
      be excused; on which he screamed out that "he wasn't sleepy at all, and
      would not go to bed ever."

 "I never knew any of my children behave so before," said Mrs. Watkinson.
      "They are always models of obedience, ma'am. A look is sufficient for
      them. And I must say that they have in every way profited by the education
      we are giving them. It is not our way, ma'am, to waste our money in
      parties and fooleries, and fine furniture and fine clothes, and rich food,
      and all such abominations. Our first duty is to our children, and to make
      them learn everything that is taught in the schools. If they go wrong, it
      will not be for want of education. Hester, my dear, come and talk to Miss
      Morland in French."

 Hester (unlike her little brother that would not speak a speech) stepped
      boldly forward, and addressed Caroline Morland with: " Parlez-vous
      Franais, mademoiselle? Comment se va madame votre mre? Aimez-vous la
      musique? Aimez-vous la danse? Bon jour—bon soir—bon repos.
      Comprenez-vous? "

 To this tirade, uttered with great volubility, Miss Morland made no other
      reply than, " Oui—je comprens. "

 "Very well, Hester—very well indeed," said Mrs. Watkinson. "You see,
      ma'am," turning to Mrs. Morland, "how very fluent she is in French; and
      she has only been learning eleven quarters."

 After considerable whispering between Jane and her mother, the former
      withdrew, and sent in by the Irish girl a waiter with a basket of soda
      biscuit, a pitcher of water, and some glasses. Mrs. Watkinson invited her
      guests to consider themselves at home and help themselves freely, saying:
      "We never let cakes, sweetmeats, confectionery, or any such things enter
      the house, as they would be very unwholesome for the children, and it
      would be sinful to put temptation in their way. I am sure, ma'am, you will
      agree with me that the plainest food is the best for everybody. People
      that want nice things may go to parties for them; but they will never get
      any with me."

 When the collation was over, and every child provided with a biscuit, Mrs.
      Watkinson said to Mrs. Morland: "Now, ma'am, you shall have some music
      from my daughter Jane, who is one of Mr. Bangwhanger's best scholars."

 Jane Watkinson sat down to the piano and commenced a powerful piece of six
      mortal pages, which she played out of time and out of tune; but with
      tremendous force of hands; notwithstanding which, it had, however, the
      good effect of putting most of the children to sleep.

 To the Morlands the evening had seemed already five hours long. Still it
      was only half past ten when Jane was in the midst of her piece. The guests
      had all tacitly determined that it would be best not to let Mrs. Watkinson
      know their intention to go directly from her house to Mrs. St. Leonard's
      party; and the arrival of their carriage would have been the signal of
      departure, even if Jane's piece had not reached its termination. They
      stole glances at the clock on the mantel. It wanted but a quarter of
      eleven, when Jane rose from the piano, and was congratulated by her mother
      on the excellence of her music. Still no carriage was heard to stop; no
      doorbell was heard to ring. Mrs. Morland expressed her fears that the
      coachman had forgotten to come for them.

 "Has he been paid for bringing you here?" asked Mrs. Watkinson.

 "I paid him when we came to the door," said Edward. "I thought perhaps he
      might want the money for some purpose before he came for us."

 "That was very kind in you, sir," said Mrs. Watkinson, "but not very wise.
      There's no dependence on any coachman; and perhaps as he may be sure of
      business enough this rainy night he may never come at all—being
      already paid for bringing you here."

 Now, the truth was that the coachman had come at the appointed
      time, but the noise of Jane's piano had prevented his arrival being heard
      in the back parlor. The Irish girl had gone to the door when he rang the
      bell, and recognized in him what she called "an ould friend." Just then a
      lady and gentleman who had been caught in the rain came running along, and
      seeing a carriage drawing up at a door, the gentleman inquired of the
      driver if he could not take them to Rutgers Place. The driver replied that
      he had just come for two ladies and a gentleman whom he had brought from
      the Astor House.

 "Indeed and Patrick," said the girl who stood at the door, "if I was you
      I'd be after making another penny to-night. Miss Jane is pounding away at
      one of her long music pieces, and it won't be over before you have time to
      get to Rutgers and back again. And if you do make them wait awhile,
      where's the harm? They've a dry roof over their heads, and I warrant it's
      not the first waiting they've ever had in their lives; and it won't be the
      last neither."

 "Exactly so," said the gentleman; and regardless of the propriety of first
      sending to consult the persons who had engaged the carriage, he told his
      wife to step in, and following her instantly himself, they drove away to
      Rutgers Place.

 Reader, if you were ever detained in a strange house by the non-arrival of
      your carriage, you will easily understand the excessive annoyance of
      finding that you are keeping a family out of their beds beyond their usual
      hour. And in this case, there was a double grievance; the guests being all
      impatience to get off to a better place. The children, all crying when
      wakened from their sleep, were finally taken to bed by two servant maids,
      and Jane Watkinson, who never came back again. None were left but Hester,
      the great French scholar, who, being one of those young imps that seem to
      have the faculty of living without sleep, sat bolt upright with her eyes
      wide open, watching the uncomfortable visitors.

 The Morlands felt as if they could bear it no longer, and Edward proposed
      sending for another carriage to the nearest livery stable.

 "We don't keep a man now," said Mrs. Watkinson, who sat nodding in the
      rocking-chair, attempting now and then a snatch of conversation, and
      saying "ma'am" still more frequently than usual. "Men servants are
      dreadful trials, ma'am, and we gave them up three years ago. And I don't
      know how Mary or Katy are to go out this stormy night in search of a
      livery stable."

 "On no consideration could I allow the women to do so," replied Edward.
      "If you will oblige me by the loan of an umbrella, I will go myself."

 Accordingly he set out on this business, but was unsuccessful at two
      livery stables, the carriages being all out. At last he found one, and was
      driven in it to Mr. Watkinson's house, where his mother and sister were
      awaiting him, all quite ready, with their calashes and shawls on. They
      gladly took their leave; Mrs. Watkinson rousing herself to hope they had
      spent a pleasant evening, and that they would come and pass another with
      her on their return to New York. In such cases how difficult it is to
      reply even with what are called "words of course."

 A kitchen lamp was brought to light them to the door, the entry lamp
      having long since been extinguished. Fortunately the rain had ceased; the
      stars began to reappear, and the Morlands, when they found themselves in
      the carriage and on their way to Mrs. St. Leonard's, felt as if they could
      breathe again. As may be supposed, they freely discussed the annoyances of
      the evening; but now those troubles were over they felt rather inclined to
      be merry about them.

 "Dear mother," said Edward, "how I pitied you for having to endure Mrs.
      Watkinson's perpetual 'ma'aming' and 'ma'aming'; for I know you dislike
      the word."

 "I wish," said Caroline, "I was not so prone to be taken with ridiculous
      recollections. But really to-night I could not get that old foolish
      child's play out of my head—

 Here come three knights out of Spain
  A-courting of your daughter Jane."

 " I shall certainly never be one of those Spanish knights," said
      Edward. "Her daughter Jane is in no danger of being ruled by any
      'flattering tongue' of mine. But what a shame for us to be talking of them
      in this manner."

 They drove to Mrs. St. Leonard's, hoping to be yet in time to pass half an
      hour there; though it was now near twelve o'clock and summer parties never
      continue to a very late hour. But as they came into the street in which
      she lived they were met by a number of coaches on their way home, and on
      reaching the door of her brilliantly lighted mansion, they saw the last of
      the guests driving off in the last of the carriages, and several musicians
      coming down the steps with their instruments in their hands.

 "So there has been a dance, then!" sighed Caroline. "Oh, what we
      have missed! It is really too provoking."

 "So it is," said Edward; "but remember that to-morrow morning we set off
      for Niagara."

 "I will leave a note for Mrs. St. Leonard," said his mother, "explaining
      that we were detained at Mrs. Watkinson's by our coachman disappointing
      us. Let us console ourselves with the hope of seeing more of this lady on
      our return. And now, dear Caroline, you must draw a moral from the
      untoward events of to-day. When you are mistress of a house, and wish to
      show civility to strangers, let the invitation be always accompanied with
      a frank disclosure of what they are to expect. And if you cannot
      conveniently invite company to meet them, tell them at once that you will
      not insist on their keeping their engagement with you if anything
      offers afterwards that they think they would prefer; provided only that
      they apprize you in time of the change in their plan."

 "Oh, mamma," replied Caroline, "you may be sure I shall always take care
      not to betray my visitors into an engagement which they may have cause to
      regret, particularly if they are strangers whose time is limited. I shall
      certainly, as you say, tell them not to consider themselves bound to me if
      they afterwards receive an invitation which promises them more enjoyment.
      It will be a long while before I forget, the Watkinson evening."