THE BULLER-PODINGTON COMPACT
    

      BY FRANK RICHARD STOCKTON (1834-1902)
    

      [From Scribner's Magazine, August, 1897. Republished in Afield
      and Afloat, by Frank Richard Stockton; copyright, 1900, by Charles
      Scribner's Sons. Reprinted by permission of the publishers.]
    

      "I tell you, William," said Thomas Buller to his friend Mr. Podington, "I
      am truly sorry about it, but I cannot arrange for it this year. Now, as to
      my invitation—that is very different."
    

      "Of course it is different," was the reply, "but I am obliged to say, as I
      said before, that I really cannot accept it."
    

      Remarks similar to these had been made by Thomas Buller and William
      Podington at least once a year for some five years. They were old friends;
      they had been schoolboys together and had been associated in business
      since they were young men. They had now reached a vigorous middle age;
      they were each married, and each had a house in the country in which he
      resided for a part of the year. They were warmly attached to each other,
      and each was the best friend which the other had in this world. But during
      all these years neither of them had visited the other in his country home.
    

      The reason for this avoidance of each other at their respective rural
      residences may be briefly stated. Mr. Buller's country house was situated
      by the sea, and he was very fond of the water. He had a good cat-boat,
      which he sailed himself with much judgment and skill, and it was his
      greatest pleasure to take his friends and visitors upon little excursions
      on the bay. But Mr. Podington was desperately afraid of the water, and he
      was particularly afraid of any craft sailed by an amateur. If his friend
      Buller would have employed a professional mariner, of years and
      experience, to steer and manage his boat, Podington might have been
      willing to take an occasional sail; but as Buller always insisted upon
      sailing his own boat, and took it ill if any of his visitors doubted his
      ability to do so properly, Podington did not wish to wound the self-love
      of his friend, and he did not wish to be drowned. Consequently he could
      not bring himself to consent to go to Buller's house by the sea.
    

      To receive his good friend Buller at his own house in the beautiful upland
      region in which he lived would have been a great joy to Mr. Podington; but
      Buller could not be induced to visit him. Podington was very fond of
      horses and always drove himself, while Buller was more afraid of horses
      than he was of elephants or lions. To one or more horses driven by a
      coachman of years and experience he did not always object, but to a horse
      driven by Podington, who had much experience and knowledge regarding
      mercantile affairs, but was merely an amateur horseman, he most decidedly
      and strongly objected. He did not wish to hurt his friend's feelings by
      refusing to go out to drive with him, but he would not rack his own
      nervous system by accompanying him. Therefore it was that he had not yet
      visited the beautiful upland country residence of Mr. Podington.
    

      At last this state of things grew awkward. Mrs. Buller and Mrs. Podington,
      often with their families, visited each other at their country houses, but
      the fact that on these occasions they were never accompanied by their
      husbands caused more and more gossip among their neighbors both in the
      upland country and by the sea.
    

      One day in spring as the two sat in their city office, where Mr. Podington
      had just repeated his annual invitation, his friend replied to him thus:
    

      "William, if I come to see you this summer, will you visit me? The thing
      is beginning to look a little ridiculous, and people are talking about
      it."
    

      Mr. Podington put his hand to his brow and for a few moments closed his
      eyes. In his mind he saw a cat-boat upon its side, the sails spread out
      over the water, and two men, almost entirely immersed in the waves, making
      efforts to reach the side of the boat. One of these was getting on very
      well—that was Buller. The other seemed about to sink, his arms were
      uselessly waving in the air—that was himself. But he opened his eyes
      and looked bravely out of the window; it was time to conquer all this; it
      was indeed growing ridiculous. Buller had been sailing many years and had
      never been upset.
    

      "Yes," said he; "I will do it; I am ready any time you name."
    

      Mr. Buller rose and stretched out his hand.
    

      "Good!" said he; "it is a compact!"
    

      Buller was the first to make the promised country visit. He had not
      mentioned the subject of horses to his friend, but he knew through Mrs.
      Buller that Podington still continued to be his own driver. She had
      informed him, however, that at present he was accustomed to drive a big
      black horse which, in her opinion, was as gentle and reliable as these
      animals ever became, and she could not imagine how anybody could be afraid
      of him. So when, the next morning after his arrival, Mr. Buller was asked
      by his host if he would like to take a drive, he suppressed a certain
      rising emotion and said that it would please him very much.
    

      When the good black horse had jogged along a pleasant road for half an
      hour Mr. Buller began to feel that, perhaps, for all these years he had
      been laboring under a misconception. It seemed to be possible that there
      were some horses to which surrounding circumstances in the shape of sights
      and sounds were so irrelevant that they were to a certain degree entirely
      safe, even when guided and controlled by an amateur hand. As they passed
      some meadow-land, somebody behind a hedge fired a gun; Mr. Buller was
      frightened, but the horse was not.
    

      "William," said Buller, looking cheerfully around him,
    

      "I had no idea that you lived in such a pretty country. In fact, I might
      almost call it beautiful. You have not any wide stretch of water, such as
      I like so much, but here is a pretty river, those rolling hills are very
      charming, and, beyond, you have the blue of the mountains."
    

      "It is lovely," said his friend; "I never get tired of driving through
      this country. Of course the seaside is very fine, but here we have such a
      variety of scenery."
    

      Mr. Buller could not help thinking that sometimes the seaside was a little
      monotonous, and that he had lost a great deal of pleasure by not varying
      his summers by going up to spend a week or two with Podington.
    

      "William," said he, "how long have you had this horse?"
    

      "About two years," said Mr. Podington; "before I got him, I used to drive
      a pair."
    

      "Heavens!" thought Buller, "how lucky I was not to come two years ago!"
      And his regrets for not sooner visiting his friend greatly decreased.
    

      Now they came to a place where the stream, by which the road ran, had been
      dammed for a mill and had widened into a beautiful pond.
    

      "There now!" cried Mr. Buller. "That's what I like. William, you seem to
      have everything! This is really a very pretty sheet of water, and the
      reflections of the trees over there make a charming picture; you can't get
      that at the seaside, you know."
    

      Mr. Podington was delighted; his face glowed; he was rejoiced at the
      pleasure of his friend. "I tell you, Thomas," said he, "that——"
    

      "William!" exclaimed Buller, with a sudden squirm in his seat, "what is
      that I hear? Is that a train?"
    

      "Yes," said Mr. Podington, "that is the ten-forty, up."
    

      "Does it come near here?" asked Mr. Buller, nervously. "Does it go over
      that bridge?"
    

      "Yes," said Podington, "but it can't hurt us, for our road goes under the
      bridge; we are perfectly safe; there is no risk of accident."
    

      "But your horse! Your horse!" exclaimed Buller, as the train came nearer
      and nearer. "What will he do?"
    

      "Do?" said Podington; "he'll do what he is doing now; he doesn't mind
      trains."
    

      "But look here, William," exclaimed Buller, "it will get there just as we
      do; no horse could stand a roaring up in the air like that!"
    

      Podington laughed. "He would not mind it in the least," said he.
    

      "Come, come now," cried Buller. "Really, I can't stand this! Just stop a
      minute, William, and let me get out. It sets all my nerves quivering."
    

      Mr. Podington smiled with a superior smile. "Oh, you needn't get out,"
      said he; "there's not the least danger in the world. But I don't want to
      make you nervous, and I will turn around and drive the other way."
    

      "But you can't!" screamed Buller. "This road is not wide enough, and that
      train is nearly here. Please stop!"
    

      The imputation that the road was not wide enough for him to turn was too
      much for Mr. Podington to bear. He was very proud of his ability to turn a
      vehicle in a narrow place.
    

      "Turn!" said he; "that's the easiest thing in the world. See; a little to
      the right, then a back, then a sweep to the left and we will be going the
      other way." And instantly he began the maneuver in which he was such an
      adept.
    

      "Oh, Thomas!" cried Buller, half rising in his seat, "that train is almost
      here!"
    

      "And we are almost——" Mr. Podington was about to say "turned
      around," but he stopped. Mr. Buller's exclamations had made him a little
      nervous, and, in his anxiety to turn quickly, he had pulled upon his
      horse's bit with more energy than was actually necessary, and his
      nervousness being communicated to the horse, that animal backed with such
      extraordinary vigor that the hind wheels of the wagon went over a bit of
      grass by the road and into the water. The sudden jolt gave a new impetus
      to Mr. Buller's fears.
    

      "You'll upset!" he cried, and not thinking of what he was about, he laid
      hold of his friend's arm. The horse, startled by this sudden jerk upon his
      bit, which, combined with the thundering of the train, which was now on
      the bridge, made him think that something extraordinary was about to
      happen, gave a sudden and forcible start backward, so that not only the
      hind wheels of the light wagon, but the fore wheels and his own hind legs
      went into the water. As the bank at this spot sloped steeply, the wagon
      continued to go backward, despite the efforts of the agitated horse to
      find a footing on the crumbling edge of the bank.
    

      "Whoa!" cried Mr. Buller.
    

      "Get up!" exclaimed Mr. Podington, applying his whip upon the plunging
      beast.
    

      But exclamations and castigations had no effect upon the horse. The
      original bed of the stream ran close to the road, and the bank was so
      steep and the earth so soft that it was impossible for the horse to
      advance or even maintain his footing. Back, back he went, until the whole
      equipage was in the water and the wagon was afloat.
    

      This vehicle was a road wagon, without a top, and the joints of its
      box-body were tight enough to prevent the water from immediately entering
      it; so, somewhat deeply sunken, it rested upon the water. There was a
      current in this part of the pond and it turned the wagon downstream. The
      horse was now entirely immersed in the water, with the exception of his
      head and the upper part of his neck, and, unable to reach the bottom with
      his feet, he made vigorous efforts to swim.
    

      Mr. Podington, the reins and whip in his hands, sat horrified and pale;
      the accident was so sudden, he was so startled and so frightened that, for
      a moment, he could not speak a word. Mr. Buller, on the other hand, was
      now lively and alert. The wagon had no sooner floated away from the shore
      than he felt himself at home. He was upon his favorite element; water had
      no fears for him. He saw that his friend was nearly frightened out of his
      wits, and that, figuratively speaking, he must step to the helm and take
      charge of the vessel. He stood up and gazed about him.
    

      "Put her across stream!" he shouted; "she can't make headway against this
      current. Head her to that clump of trees on the other side; the bank is
      lower there, and we can beach her. Move a little the other way, we must
      trim boat. Now then, pull on your starboard rein."
    

      Podington obeyed, and the horse slightly changed his direction.
    

      "You see," said Buller, "it won't do to sail straight across, because the
      current would carry us down and land us below that spot."
    

      Mr. Podington said not a word; he expected every moment to see the horse
      sink into a watery grave.
    

      "It isn't so bad after all, is it, Podington? If we had a rudder and a bit
      of a sail it would be a great help to the horse. This wagon is not a bad
      boat."
    

      The despairing Podington looked at his feet. "It's coming in," he said in
      a husky voice. "Thomas, the water is over my shoes!"
    

      "That is so," said Buller. "I am so used to water I didn't notice it. She
      leaks. Do you carry anything to bail her out with?"
    

      "Bail!" cried Podington, now finding his voice. "Oh, Thomas, we are
      sinking!"
    

      "That's so," said Buller; "she leaks like a sieve."
    

      The weight of the running-gear and of the two men was entirely too much
      for the buoyancy of the wagon body. The water rapidly rose toward the top
      of its sides.
    

      "We are going to drown!" cried Podington, suddenly rising.
    

      "Lick him! Lick him!" exclaimed Buller. "Make him swim faster!"
    

      "There's nothing to lick," cried Podington, vainly lashing at the water,
      for he could not reach the horse's head. The poor man was dreadfully
      frightened; he had never even imagined it possible that he should be
      drowned in his own wagon.
    

      "Whoop!" cried Buller, as the water rose over the sides. "Steady yourself,
      old boy, or you'll go overboard!" And the next moment the wagon body sunk
      out of sight.
    

      But it did not go down very far. The deepest part of the channel of the
      stream had been passed, and with a bump the wheels struck the bottom.
    

      "Heavens!" exclaimed Buller, "we are aground."
    

      "Aground!" exclaimed Podington, "Heaven be praised!"
    

      As the two men stood up in the submerged wagon the water was above their
      knees, and when Podington looked out over the surface of the pond, now so
      near his face, it seemed like a sheet of water he had never seen before.
      It was something horrible, threatening to rise and envelop him. He
      trembled so that he could scarcely keep his footing.
    

      "William," said his companion, "you must sit down; if you don't, you'll
      tumble overboard and be drowned. There is nothing for you to hold to."
    

      "Sit down," said Podington, gazing blankly at the water around him, "I
      can't do that!"
    

      At this moment the horse made a slight movement. Having touched bottom
      after his efforts in swimming across the main bed of the stream, with a
      floating wagon in tow, he had stood for a few moments, his head and neck
      well above water, and his back barely visible beneath the surface. Having
      recovered his breath, he now thought it was time to move on.
    

      At the first step of the horse Mr. Podington began to totter.
      Instinctively he clutched Buller.
    

      "Sit down!" cried the latter, "or you'll have us both overboard." There
      was no help for it; down sat Mr. Podington; and, as with a great splash he
      came heavily upon the seat, the water rose to his waist.
    

      "Ough!" said he. "Thomas, shout for help."
    

      "No use doing that," replied Buller, still standing on his nautical legs;
      "I don't see anybody, and I don't see any boat. We'll get out all right.
      Just you stick tight to the thwart."
    

      "The what?" feebly asked the other.
    

      "Oh, the seat, I mean. We can get to the shore all right if you steer the
      horse straight. Head him more across the pond."
    

      "I can't head him," cried Podington. "I have dropped the reins!"
    

      "Good gracious!" cried Mr. Buller, "that's bad. Can't you steer him by
      shouting 'Gee' and 'Haw'?"
    

      "No," said Podington, "he isn't an ox; but perhaps I can stop him." And
      with as much voice as he could summon, he called out: "Whoa!" and the
      horse stopped.
    

      "If you can't steer him any other way," said Buller, "we must get the
      reins. Lend me your whip."
    

      "I have dropped that too," said Podington; "there it floats."
    

      "Oh, dear," said Buller, "I guess I'll have to dive for them; if he were
      to run away, we should be in an awful fix."
    

      "Don't get out! Don't get out!" exclaimed Podington. "You can reach over
      the dashboard."
    

      "As that's under water," said Buller, "it will be the same thing as
      diving; but it's got to be done, and I'll try it. Don't you move now; I am
      more used to water than you are."
    

      Mr. Buller took off his hat and asked his friend to hold it. He thought of
      his watch and other contents of his pockets, but there was no place to put
      them, so he gave them no more consideration. Then bravely getting on his
      knees in the water, he leaned over the dashboard, almost disappearing from
      sight. With his disengaged hand Mr. Podington grasped the submerged
      coat-tails of his friend.
    

      In a few seconds the upper part of Mr. Buller rose from the water. He was
      dripping and puffing, and Mr. Podington could not but think what a
      difference it made in the appearance of his friend to have his hair
      plastered close to his head.
    

      "I got hold of one of them," said the sputtering Buller, "but it was fast
      to something and I couldn't get it loose."
    

      "Was it thick and wide?" asked Podington.
    

      "Yes," was the answer; "it did seem so."
    

      "Oh, that was a trace," said Podington; "I don't want that; the reins are
      thinner and lighter."
    

      "Now I remember they are," said Buller. "I'll go down again."
    

      Again Mr. Buller leaned over the dashboard, and this time he remained down
      longer, and when he came up he puffed and sputtered more than before.
    

      "Is this it?" said he, holding up a strip of wet leather.
    

      "Yes," said Podington, "you've got the reins."
    

      "Well, take them, and steer. I would have found them sooner if his tail
      had not got into my eyes. That long tail's floating down there and
      spreading itself out like a fan; it tangled itself all around my head. It
      would have been much easier if he had been a bob-tailed horse."
    

      "Now then," said Podington, "take your hat, Thomas, and I'll try to
      drive."
    

      Mr. Buller put on his hat, which was the only dry thing about him, and the
      nervous Podington started the horse so suddenly that even the sea-legs of
      Buller were surprised, and he came very near going backward into the
      water; but recovering himself, he sat down.
    

      "I don't wonder you did not like to do this, William," said he. "Wet as I
      am, it's ghastly!"
    

      Encouraged by his master's voice, and by the feeling of the familiar hand
      upon his bit, the horse moved bravely on.
    

      But the bottom was very rough and uneven. Sometimes the wheels struck a
      large stone, terrifying Mr. Buller, who thought they were going to upset;
      and sometimes they sank into soft mud, horrifying Mr. Podington, who
      thought they were going to drown.
    

      Thus proceeding, they presented a strange sight. At first Mr. Podington
      held his hands above the water as he drove, but he soon found this
      awkward, and dropped them to their usual position, so that nothing was
      visible above the water but the head and neck of a horse and the heads and
      shoulders of two men.
    

      Now the submarine equipage came to a low place in the bottom, and even Mr.
      Buller shuddered as the water rose to his chin. Podington gave a howl of
      horror, and the horse, with high, uplifted head, was obliged to swim. At
      this moment a boy with a gun came strolling along the road, and hearing
      Mr. Podington's cry, he cast his eyes over the water. Instinctively he
      raised his weapon to his shoulder, and then, in an instant, perceiving
      that the objects he beheld were not aquatic birds, he dropped his gun and
      ran yelling down the road toward the mill.
    

      But the hollow in the bottom was a narrow one, and when it was passed the
      depth of the water gradually decreased. The back of the horse came into
      view, the dashboard became visible, and the bodies and the spirits of the
      two men rapidly rose. Now there was vigorous splashing and tugging, and
      then a jet black horse, shining as if he had been newly varnished, pulled
      a dripping wagon containing two well-soaked men upon a shelving shore.
    

      "Oh, I am chilled to the bones!" said Podington.
    

      "I should think so," replied his friend; "if you have got to be wet, it is
      a great deal pleasanter under the water."
    

      There was a field-road on this side of the pond which Podington well knew,
      and proceeding along this they came to the bridge and got into the main
      road.
    

      "Now we must get home as fast as we can," cried Podington, "or we shall
      both take cold. I wish I hadn't lost my whip. Hi now! Get along!"
    

      Podington was now full of life and energy, his wheels were on the hard
      road, and he was himself again.
    

      When he found his head was turned toward his home, the horse set off at a
      great rate.
    

      "Hi there!" cried Podington. "I am so sorry I lost my whip."
    

      "Whip!" said Buller, holding fast to the side of the seat; "surely you
      don't want him to go any faster than this. And look here, William," he
      added, "it seems to me we are much more likely to take cold in our wet
      clothes if we rush through the air in this way. Really, it seems to me
      that horse is running away."
    

      "Not a bit of it," cried Podington. "He wants to get home, and he wants
      his dinner. Isn't he a fine horse? Look how he steps out!"
    

      "Steps out!" said Buller, "I think I'd like to step out myself. Don't you
      think it would be wiser for me to walk home, William? That will warm me
      up."
    

      "It will take you an hour," said his friend. "Stay where you are, and I'll
      have you in a dry suit of clothes in less than fifteen minutes."
    

      "I tell you, William," said Mr. Buller, as the two sat smoking after
      dinner, "what you ought to do; you should never go out driving without a
      life-preserver and a pair of oars; I always take them. It would make you
      feel safer."
    

      Mr. Buller went home the next day, because Mr. Podington's clothes did not
      fit him, and his own outdoor suit was so shrunken as to be uncomfortable.
      Besides, there was another reason, connected with the desire of horses to
      reach their homes, which prompted his return. But he had not forgotten his
      compact with his friend, and in the course of a week he wrote to
      Podington, inviting him to spend some days with him. Mr. Podington was a
      man of honor, and in spite of his recent unfortunate water experience he
      would not break his word. He went to Mr. Buller's seaside home at the time
      appointed.
    

      Early on the morning after his arrival, before the family were up, Mr.
      Podington went out and strolled down to the edge of the bay. He went to
      look at Buller's boat. He was well aware that he would be asked to take a
      sail, and as Buller had driven with him, it would be impossible for him to
      decline sailing with Buller; but he must see the boat. There was a train
      for his home at a quarter past seven; if he were not on the premises he
      could not be asked to sail. If Buller's boat were a little, flimsy thing,
      he would take that train—but he would wait and see.
    

      There was only one small boat anchored near the beach, and a man—apparently
      a fisherman—informed Mr. Podington that it belonged to Mr. Buller.
      Podington looked at it eagerly; it was not very small and not flimsy.
    

      "Do you consider that a safe boat?" he asked the fisherman.
    

      "Safe?" replied the man. "You could not upset her if you tried. Look at
      her breadth of beam! You could go anywhere in that boat! Are you thinking
      of buying her?"
    

      The idea that he would think of buying a boat made Mr. Podington laugh.
      The information that it would be impossible to upset the little vessel had
      greatly cheered him, and he could laugh.
    

      Shortly after breakfast Mr. Buller, like a nurse with a dose of medicine,
      came to Mr. Podington with the expected invitation to take a sail.
    

      "Now, William," said his host, "I understand perfectly your feeling about
      boats, and what I wish to prove to you is that it is a feeling without any
      foundation. I don't want to shock you or make you nervous, so I am not
      going to take you out today on the bay in my boat. You are as safe on the
      bay as you would be on land—a little safer, perhaps, under certain
      circumstances, to which we will not allude—but still it is sometimes
      a little rough, and this, at first, might cause you some uneasiness, and
      so I am going to let you begin your education in the sailing line on
      perfectly smooth water. About three miles back of us there is a very
      pretty lake several miles long. It is part of the canal system which
      connects the town with the railroad. I have sent my boat to the town, and
      we can walk up there and go by the canal to the lake; it is only about
      three miles."
    

      If he had to sail at all, this kind of sailing suited Mr. Podington. A
      canal, a quiet lake, and a boat which could not be upset. When they
      reached the town the boat was in the canal, ready for them.
    

      "Now," said Mr. Buller, "you get in and make yourself comfortable. My idea
      is to hitch on to a canal-boat and be towed to the lake. The boats
      generally start about this time in the morning, and I will go and see
      about it."
    

      Mr. Podington, under the direction of his friend, took a seat in the stern
      of the sailboat, and then he remarked:
    

      "Thomas, have you a life-preserver on board? You know I am not used to any
      kind of vessel, and I am clumsy. Nothing might happen to the boat, but I
      might trip and fall overboard, and I can't swim."
    

      "All right," said Buller; "here's a life-preserver, and you can put it on.
      I want you to feel perfectly safe. Now I will go and see about the tow."
    

      But Mr. Buller found that the canal-boats would not start at their usual
      time; the loading of one of them was not finished, and he was informed
      that he might have to wait for an hour or more. This did not suit Mr.
      Buller at all, and he did not hesitate to show his annoyance.
    

      "I tell you, sir, what you can do," said one of the men in charge of the
      boats; "if you don't want to wait till we are ready to start, we'll let
      you have a boy and a horse to tow you up to the lake. That won't cost you
      much, and they'll be back before we want 'em."
    

      The bargain was made, and Mr. Buller joyfully returned to his boat with
      the intelligence that they were not to wait for the canal-boats. A long
      rope, with a horse attached to the other end of it, was speedily made fast
      to the boat, and with a boy at the head of the horse, they started up the
      canal.
    

      "Now this is the kind of sailing I like," said Mr. Podington. "If I lived
      near a canal I believe I would buy a boat and train my horse to tow. I
      could have a long pair of rope-lines and drive him myself; then when the
      roads were rough and bad the canal would always be smooth."
    

      "This is all very nice," replied Mr. Buller, who sat by the tiller to keep
      the boat away from the bank, "and I am glad to see you in a boat under any
      circumstances. Do you know, William, that although I did not plan it,
      there could not have been a better way to begin your sailing education.
      Here we glide along, slowly and gently, with no possible thought of
      danger, for if the boat should suddenly spring a leak, as if it were the
      body of a wagon, all we would have to do would be to step on shore, and by
      the time you get to the end of the canal you will like this gentle motion
      so much that you will be perfectly ready to begin the second stage of your
      nautical education."
    

      "Yes," said Mr. Podington. "How long did you say this canal is?"
    

      "About three miles," answered his friend. "Then we will go into the lock
      and in a few minutes we shall be on the lake."
    

      "So far as I am concerned," said Mr. Podington, "I wish the canal were
      twelve miles long. I cannot imagine anything pleasanter than this. If I
      lived anywhere near a canal—a long canal, I mean, this one is too
      short—I'd—"
    

      "Come, come now," interrupted Buller. "Don't be content to stay in the
      primary school just because it is easy. When we get on the lake I will
      show you that in a boat, with a gentle breeze, such as we are likely to
      have today, you will find the motion quite as pleasing, and ever so much
      more inspiriting. I should not be a bit surprised, William, if after you
      have been two or three times on the lake you will ask me—yes,
      positively ask me—to take you out on the bay!"
    

      Mr. Podington smiled, and leaning backward, he looked up at the beautiful
      blue sky.
    

      "You can't give me anything better than this, Thomas," said he; "but you
      needn't think I am weakening; you drove with me, and I will sail with
      you."
    

      The thought came into Buller's mind that he had done both of these things
      with Podington, but he did not wish to call up unpleasant memories, and
      said nothing.
    

      About half a mile from the town there stood a small cottage where
      house-cleaning was going on, and on a fence, not far from the canal, there
      hung a carpet gaily adorned with stripes and spots of red and yellow.
    

      When the drowsy tow-horse came abreast of the house, and the carpet caught
      his eye, he suddenly stopped and gave a start toward the canal. Then,
      impressed with a horror of the glaring apparition, he gathered himself up,
      and with a bound dashed along the tow-path. The astounded boy gave a
      shout, but was speedily left behind. The boat of Mr. Buller shot forward
      as if she had been struck by a squall.
    

      The terrified horse sped on as if a red and yellow demon were after him.
      The boat bounded, and plunged, and frequently struck the grassy bank of
      the canal, as if it would break itself to pieces. Mr. Podington clutched
      the boom to keep himself from being thrown out, while Mr. Buller, both
      hands upon the tiller, frantically endeavored to keep the boat from the
      bank.
    

      "William!" he screamed, "he is running away with us; we shall be dashed to
      pieces! Can't you get forward and cast off that line?"
    

      "What do you mean?" cried Podington, as the boom gave a great jerk as if
      it would break its fastenings and drag him overboard.
    

      "I mean untie the tow-line. We'll be smashed if you don't! I can't leave
      this tiller. Don't try to stand up; hold on to the boom and creep forward.
      Steady now, or you'll be overboard!"
    

      Mr. Podington stumbled to the bow of the boat, his efforts greatly impeded
      by the big cork life-preserver tied under his arms, and the motion of the
      boat was so violent and erratic that he was obliged to hold on to the mast
      with one arm and to try to loosen the knot with the other; but there was a
      great strain on the rope, and he could do nothing with one hand.
    

      "Cut it! Cut it!" cried Mr. Buller.
    

      "I haven't a knife," replied Podington.
    

      Mr. Buller was terribly frightened; his boat was cutting through the water
      as never vessel of her class had sped since sail-boats were invented, and
      bumping against the bank as if she were a billiard-ball rebounding from
      the edge of a table. He forgot he was in a boat; he only knew that for the
      first time in his life he was in a runaway. He let go the tiller. It was
      of no use to him.
    

      "William," he cried, "let us jump out the next time we are near enough to
      shore!"
    

      "Don't do that! Don't do that!" replied Podington. "Don't jump out in a
      runaway; that is the way to get hurt. Stick to your seat, my boy; he can't
      keep this up much longer. He'll lose his wind!"
    

      Mr. Podington was greatly excited, but he was not frightened, as Buller
      was. He had been in a runaway before, and he could not help thinking how
      much better a wagon was than a boat in such a case.
    

      "If he were hitched up shorter and I had a snaffle-bit and a stout pair of
      reins," thought he, "I could soon bring him up."
    

      But Mr. Buller was rapidly losing his wits. The horse seemed to be going
      faster than ever. The boat bumped harder against the bank, and at one time
      Buller thought they could turn over.
    

      Suddenly a thought struck him.
    

      "William," he shouted, "tip that anchor over the side! Throw it in, any
      way!"
    

      Mr. Podington looked about him, and, almost under his feet, saw the
      anchor. He did not instantly comprehend why Buller wanted it thrown
      overboard, but this was not a time to ask questions. The difficulties
      imposed by the life-preserver, and the necessity of holding on with one
      hand, interfered very much with his getting at the anchor and throwing it
      over the side, but at last he succeeded, and just as the boat threw up her
      bow as if she were about to jump on shore, the anchor went out and its
      line shot after it. There was an irregular trembling of the boat as the
      anchor struggled along the bottom of the canal; then there was a great
      shock; the boat ran into the bank and stopped; the tow-line was tightened
      like a guitar-string, and the horse, jerked back with great violence, came
      tumbling in a heap upon the ground.
    

      Instantly Mr. Podington was on the shore and running at the top of his
      speed toward the horse. The astounded animal had scarcely begun to
      struggle to his feet when Podington rushed upon him, pressed his head back
      to the ground, and sat upon it.
    

      "Hurrah!" he cried, waving his hat above his head. "Get out, Buller; he is
      all right now!"
    

      Presently Mr. Buller approached, very much shaken up.
    

      "All right?" he said. "I don't call a horse flat in a road with a man on
      his head all right; but hold him down till we get him loose from my boat.
      That is the thing to do. William, cast him loose from the boat before you
      let him up! What will he do when he gets up?"
    

      "Oh. he'll be quiet enough when he gets up," said Podington. "But if
      you've got a knife you can cut his traces—-I mean that rope—but
      no, you needn't. Here comes the boy. We'll settle this business in very
      short order now."
    

      When the horse was on his feet, and all connection between the animal and
      the boat had been severed, Mr. Podington looked at his friend.
    

      "Thomas," said he, "you seem to have had a hard time of it. You have lost
      your hat and you look as if you had been in a wrestling-match."
    

      "I have," replied the other; "I wrestled with that tiller and I wonder it
      didn't throw me out."
    

      Now approached the boy. "Shall I hitch him on again, sir?" said he. "He's
      quiet enough now."
    

      "No," cried Mr. Buller; "I want no more sailing after a horse, and,
      besides, we can't go on the lake with that boat; she has been battered
      about so much that she must have opened a dozen seams. The best thing we
      can do is to walk home."
    

      Mr. Podington agreed with his friend that walking home was the best thing
      they could do. The boat was examined and found to be leaking, but not very
      badly, and when her mast had been unshipped and everything had been made
      tight and right on board, she was pulled out of the way of tow-lines and
      boats, and made fast until she could be sent for from the town.
    

      Mr. Buller and Mr. Podington walked back toward the town. They had not
      gone very far when they met a party of boys, who, upon seeing them, burst
      into unseemly laughter.
    

      "Mister," cried one of them, "you needn't be afraid of tumbling into the
      canal. Why don't you take off your life-preserver and let that other man
      put it on his head?"
    

      The two friends looked at each other and could not help joining in the
      laughter of the boys.
    

      "By George! I forgot all about this," said Podington, as he unfastened the
      cork jacket. "It does look a little super-timid to wear a life-preserver
      just because one happens to be walking by the side of a canal."
    

      Mr. Buller tied a handkerchief on his head, and Mr. Podington rolled up
      his life-preserver and carried it under his arm. Thus they reached the
      town, where Buller bought a hat, Podington dispensed with his bundle, and
      arrangements were made to bring back the boat.
    

      "Runaway in a sailboat!" exclaimed one of the canal boatmen when he had
      heard about the accident. "Upon my word! That beats anything that could
      happen to a man!"
    

      "No, it doesn't," replied Mr. Buller, quietly. "I have gone to the bottom
      in a foundered road-wagon."
    

      The man looked at him fixedly.
    

      "Was you ever struck in the mud in a balloon?" he asked.
    

      "Not yet," replied Mr. Buller.
    

      It required ten days to put Mr. Buller's sailboat into proper condition,
      and for ten days Mr. Podington stayed with his friend, and enjoyed his
      visit very much. They strolled on the beach, they took long walks in the
      back country, they fished from the end of a pier, they smoked, they
      talked, and were happy and content.
    

      "Thomas," said Mr. Podington, on the last evening of his stay, "I have
      enjoyed myself very much since I have been down here, and now, Thomas, if
      I were to come down again next summer, would you mind—would you
      mind, not——"
    

      "I would not mind it a bit," replied Buller, promptly. "I'll never so much
      as mention it; so you can come along without a thought of it. And since
      you have alluded to the subject, William," he continued, "I'd like very
      much to come and see you again; you know my visit was a very short one
      this year. That is a beautiful country you live in. Such a variety of
      scenery, such an opportunity for walks and rambles! But, William, if you
      could only make up your mind not to——"
    

      "Oh, that is all right!" exclaimed Podington. "I do not need to make up my
      mind. You come to my house and you will never so much as hear of it.
      Here's my hand upon it!"
    

      "And here's mine!" said Mr. Buller.
    

      And they shook hands over a new compact.