THE REVENGE OF HER RACE, By Mary Beaumont
    

      The low hedge, where the creepers climbed, divided the lawn and its
      magnificent Wellingtonias from the meadow. There was little grass to be
      seen, for it was at this time one vast profusion of delicate ixias of
      every bright and tender shade.
    

      The evening was still, and the air heavy with scent. In a room opening
      upon the veranda wreathed with white-and-scarlet passion-flowers, where
      she could see the garden and the meadow, and, beyond all, the Mountain
      Beautiful, lay a sick woman. Her dark face was lovely as an autumn leaf is
      lovely—hectic with the passing life. Her eyes wandered to the upper
      snows of the mountain, from time to time resting upon the brown-haired
      English girl who sat on a low stool by her side, holding the frail hand in
      her cool, firm clasp.
    

      The invalid was speaking; her voice was curiously sweet, and there was a
      peculiarity about the “s,” and an occasional turn of the sentence, which
      told the listener that her English was an acquired language.
    

      “I am glad he is not here,” she said slowly. “I do not want him to have
      pain.”
     

      “But perhaps, Mrs. Denison, you will be much better in a day or two, and
      able to welcome him when he comes back.”
     

      “No, I shall not be here when he comes back, and it is just as it should
      be. I asked him to turn round as he left the garden, and I could see him,
      oh, so well! He looked kind and so beautiful, and he waved to me his hand.
      Now he will come back, and he will be sad. He did not want to leave me,
      but the governor sent for him. He will be sad, and he will remember that I
      loved him, and some day he will be glad again.” She smiled into the
      troubled face near her.
    

      The girl stroked the thick dark hair lovingly.
    

      “Don’t,” she implored; “it hurts me. You are better to-night, and the
      children are coming in.” Mrs. Denison closed her eyes, and with her left
      hand she covered her face.
    

      “No, not the children,” she whispered, “not my darlings. I cannot bear it.
      I must see them no more.” She pressed her companion’s hand with a sudden
      close pressure. “But you will help them, Alice; you will make them English
      like you—like him. We will not pretend to-night; it is not long that
      I shall speak to you. I ask you to promise me to help them to be English.”
     

      “Dear,” the girl urged, “they are such a delicious mixture of England and
      New Zealand—prettier, sweeter than any mere English child could ever
      be. They are enchanting.”
     

      But into the dying woman’s eyes leaped an eager flame.
    

      “They must all be English, no Maori!” she cried. A violent fit of coughing
      interrupted her, and when the paroxysm was over she was too exhausted to
      speak. The English nurse, Mrs. Bentley, an elderly Yorkshire woman, who
      had been with Mrs. Denison since her first baby came six years ago, and
      who had, in fact, been Horace Denison’s own nurse-maid, came in and sent
      the agitated girl into the garden. “For you haven’t had a breath of fresh
      air to-day,” she said.
    

      At the door Alice turned. The large eyes were resting upon her with an
      intent and solemn regard, in which lay a message. “What was it?” she
      thought, as she passed through the wide hall sweet with flowers. “She
      wanted to say something; I am sure she did. To-morrow I will ask her.” But
      before the morrow came she knew. Mrs. Dennison had said good-bye.
    

      The funeral was over. Mr. Denison, who had looked unaccountably ill and
      weary for months, had been sent home by Mr. Danby for at least a year’s
      change and rest, and the doctor’s young sister had yielded to various
      pressure, and promised to stay with the children until he returned. There
      was every reason for it. She had loved and been loved by the gentle Maori
      mother; she delighted in the dark beauty and sweetness of the children.
      And they, on their side, clung to her as to an adorable fairy relative,
      dowered with love and the fruits of love—tales and new games and
      tender ways. Best reason of all, in a sense, Mrs. Bentley, that kind
      autocrat, entreated her to stay, “as the happiest thing for the children,
      and to please that poor lamb we laid yonder, who fair longed that you
      should! She was mightily taken up with you, Miss Danby, and you’ve your
      brother and his wife near, so that you won’t be lonesome, and if there’s
      aught I can do to make you comfortable, you’ve only to speak, miss.” As
      for Mr. Denison, he was pathetically grateful and relieved when Alice
      promised to remain.
    

      After the evening romp and the last good-night, when the two elder
      children, Ben and Marie, called after her mother, Maritana, had given her
      their last injunctions to be sure and come for them “her very own self” on
      her way down to breakfast in the morning, she usually rode down between
      the cabbage-trees, down by the old rata, fired last autumn, away through
      the grasslands to the doctor’s house, a few miles nearer Rochester; or he
      and his wife would ride out to chat with her. But there were many evenings
      when she preferred the quiet of the airy house and the garden. The
      colonial life was new to her, everything had its charm, and in the
      colonies there is always a letter to write to those at home—the
      mail-bag is never satisfied. On such evenings it was her custom to cross
      the meadow to the copse of feathery trees beyond, where, sung to by the
      brook and the Tui, the children’s mother slept. And from the high presence
      of the Mountain Beautiful there fell a dew of peace.
    

      She would often ask Mrs. Bentley to sit with her until bedtime, and revel
      in the shrewd north-country woman’s experiences, and her impressions of
      the new land to which love had brought her. Both women grew to have a
      sincere and trustful affection for each other, and one night, seven or
      eight months after Mrs. Denison’s death, Mrs. Bentley told a story which
      explained what had frequently puzzled Alice—the patient sorrow in
      Mrs. Denison’s eyes, and Mr. Denison’s harassed and dejected manner. “But
      for your goodness to the children,” said the old woman, “and the way that
      precious baby takes to you, I don’t think I should be willing to say what
      I am going to do, miss. Though my dear mistress wished it, and said, the
      very last night, ‘You must tell her all about it, some day, Nana,’—and
      I promised, to quiet her,—I don’t think I could bring myself to it
      if I hadn’t lived with you and known you.” And then the good nurse told
      her strange and moving tale.
    

      She described how her master had come out young and careless-hearted to
      New Zealand in the service of the government, and how scandalised and
      angry his father and mother, the old Tory squire and his wife, had been to
      receive from him, after a year or two, letters brimming with a boyish love
      for his “beautiful Maori princess,” whom he described as having “the
      sweetest heart and the loveliest eyes in the world.” It gave them little
      comfort to hear that her father was one of the wealthiest Maoris in the
      island, and that, though but half civilised himself, he had had his
      daughter well educated in the “bishop’s” and other English schools. To
      them she was a savage. There was no threat of disinheritance, for there
      was nothing for him to inherit. There was little money, and the estate was
      entailed on the elder brother. But all that could be done to intimidate
      him was done, and in vain. Then silence fell between the parents and the
      son.
    

      But one spring day came the news of a grandson, called Benjamin after his
      grandfather, and an urgent letter from their boy himself, enclosing a
      prettily and humbly worded note from the new strange daughter, begging for
      an English nurse. She told them that she had now no father and no mother,
      for they had died before the baby came, and if she might love her
      husband’s parents a little she would be glad.
    

      “My lady read the letters to me herself,” Mrs. Bentley said; “I’d taken
      the housekeeper’s place a bit before, and she asked me to find her a
      sensible young woman. Well, I tried, but there wasn’t a girl in the place
      that was fit to nurse Master Horace’s child. And the end of it was, I came
      myself, for Master Horace had been like my own when he was a little lad.
      My lady pretended to be vexed with me, but the day I sailed she thanked me
      in words I never thought to hear from her, for she was a bit proud
      always.” The faithful servant’s voice trembled. She leaned back in her
      chair, and forgot for the moment the new house and the new duties. She was
      back again in the old nursery with the fair-haired child playing about her
      knees. But Alice’s face recalled her, and she continued the story. She
      had, she said, dreaded the meeting with her new mistress, and was prepared
      to find her “a sort of a heathen woman, who’d pull down Master Horace till
      he couldn’t call himself a gentleman.”
     

      But when she saw the graceful creature who received her with gentle words
      and gestures of kindliness, and when she found her young master not only
      content, but happy, and when she took in her arms the laughing healthy
      baby, she felt—though she regretted its dark eyes and hair—more
      at home than she could have believed possible. The nurseries were so large
      and comfortable, and so much consideration was shown to her, that she
      confessed, “I should have been more ungrateful than a cat if I hadn’t
      settled comfortable.”
     

      Then came nearly five happy years, during which time her young mistress
      had found a warm and secure place in the good Yorkshire heart. “She was
      that loving and that kind that Dick Burdas, the groom, used to say that he
      believed she was an angel as had took up with them dark folks, to show ‘em
      what an angel was like.” Mrs. Bentley went on:
    

      “She wasn’t always quite happy, and I wondered what brought the shadow
      into her face, and why she would at times sigh that deep that I could have
      cried. After a bit I knew what it was. It was the Maori in her. She told
      me one night that she was a wicked woman, and ought never to have married
      Master Horace, for she got tired sometimes of the English house and its
      ways, and longed for her father’s whare; (that’s a native hut,
      miss). She grieved something awful one day when she had been to see old
      Tim, the Maori who lives behind the stables. She called herself a bad and
      ungrateful woman, and thought there must be some evil spirit in her
      tempting her into the old ways, because, when she saw Tim eating, and you
      know what bad stuff they eat, she had fair longed to join him. She gave me
      a fright I didn’t get over for nigh a week. She leaned her bonny head
      against my knee, and I stroked her cheek and hummed some silly nursery
      tune,—for she was all of a tremble and like a child,—and she
      fell asleep just where she was.”
     

      “Poor thing!” said Alice, softly.
    

      “Eh, but it’s what’s coming that upsets me, ma’am. Eh, what suffering for
      my pretty lamb, and her that wouldn’t have hurt a worm! Baby would be
      about six months old when she came in one day with him in her arms, and
      they were a picture. His little hand was fast in her hair. She
      always walked as if she’d wheels on her feet, that gliding and graceful.
      She had on a sort of sheeny yellow silk, and her cheeks were like them
      damask roses at home, and her eyes fair shone like stars. ‘Isn’t he a
      beauty, Nana?’ she asked me. ‘If only he had blue eyes, and that hair of
      gold like my husband’s, and not these ugly eyes of mine!’ And as she spoke
      she sighed as I dreaded to hear. Then she told me to help her to unpack
      her new dress from Paris, which she was to wear at the Rochester races the
      next day. Master Horace always chose her dresses, and he was right proud
      of her in them. And next morning he came into the nursery with her, and
      she was all in pale red, and that beautiful! ‘Isn’t she scrumptious,
      Nana?’ he said, in his boyish way. ‘Don’t spoil her dress, children. How
      like her Marie grows!’ Those two little ones they had got her on her knees
      on the ground, and were hugging her as if they couldn’t let her go. But
      when he said that, she got up very still and white.
    

      “‘I am sorry,’ she said; ‘they must never be like me.’ 
    

      “‘They can’t be any one better, can they, baby?’ he answered her, and he
      tossed the child nearly up to the ceiling. But he looked worried as he
      went out. I saw them drive away, and they looked happy enough. And oh,
      miss, I saw them come back. We were in the porch, me and the children.
      Master Horace lifted her down, and I heard him say, ‘Never mind, Marie.’ 
      But she never looked his way nor ours; she walked straight in and upstairs
      to her room, past my bonny darling with his arm stretched out to her, and
      past Miss Marie, who was jumping up and down, and shouting ‘Muvver’; and I
      heard her door shut. Then Master Horace took baby from me.
    

      “‘Go up to her,’ he said, and I could scarce hear him. His face was all
      drawn like, but I felt that silly and stupid that I could say nothing, and
      just went upstairs.” Mrs. Bentley put her knitting down, and throwing her
      apron over her head sobbed aloud.
    

      “O nurse, what was it?” cried Alice, and the colour left her cheeks. “Do
      tell me. I am so sorry for them. What was it?” It was several minutes
      before the good woman could recover herself; then she began:
    

      “She told me, and Dick Burdas he told me, and it was like this. When they
      got to the race-course,—it was the first races they’d had in
      Rochester,—all the gentry was there, and those that knew her always
      made a deal of her, she had such half-shy, winning ways. And she seemed
      very bright, Dick said, talking with the governor’s lady, who is full of
      fun and sparkle. The carriages were all together, and Major Beaumont, a
      kind old gentleman who’s always been a good friend to Master Horace, would
      have them in his carriage for luncheon, or whatever it was. Dick says he
      was thinking that she was the prettiest lady there, when his eye was
      caught by two or three parties of Maoris setting themselves right in front
      of the carriages. There were four or five in each lot, and they were
      mostly old. They got out their sharks’ flesh and that bad corn they eat,
      and began to make their meal of them. Near Mrs. Denison there was one old
      man with a better sort of face, and Dick heard her say to master, ‘Isn’t
      he like my father?’ What Master Horace answered he didn’t hear; he says he
      never saw anything like her face, so sad and wild, and working for all the
      world as if something were fighting her within. Then all in a minute she
      ran out and slipped down in her beautiful dress close by the old Maori in
      his dirty rags, and was rubbing her face against his, as them folks do
      when they meet. She had just taken a mouthful of the raw fish when Master
      Horace missed her. He hadn’t noticed her slip away. But in a moment he
      seemed to understand what it meant. He saw the Maori come out strong in
      her face, and he knew the Maori had got the better of everything, husband
      and friends and all. He gave a little cry, and in a minute he had her on
      her feet and was bringing her back to the carriage. Some folks thought
      Dick Burdas a rough hard man, and I know he was a shocker of a lad (he was
      fra Whitby), but that night he cried like a baby when he tell ‘t me,” and
      Mrs. Bentley fell for a moment into the dialect of her youth.
    

      “He said,” she continued, “that she looked like a poor stricken thing
      condemned, and let herself be led back as submissive as a child, and
      Master Horace’s face was like the dead. He didn’t think any one but the
      major and Dr. Danby saw her go, all was done in a minute. But it was done,
      and some few had seen, and it got out, and things were said that wasn’t
      true. Not the doctor! No, miss, you needn’t tell me that; he’s told none,
      that I’ll warrant. He’s faithful and he’s close.”
     

      “O Mrs. Bentley, how dreadful for her, how dreadful!” and the girl went
      down on her knees by the old woman, her tears flowing fast.
    

      “That’s it, miss, you understand. I feel like that. It was bad enough for
      Master Horace with the future before him, and his children to think of,
      but for her it was desperate cruel. Eh, ma’am, what she went through! She
      loved more than you’d have thought us poor human beings could. And, after
      all, the nature was in her; she didn’t put it there. I’ve had a deal to do
      to keep down sinful thoughts since then; there’s a lot of things that’s
      wrong in this world, ma’am.”
     

      “What did she do?” Alice whispered.
    

      “She! She was for going away and leaving everything; she felt herself the
      worst woman in the world. It was only by begging and praying of her on my
      knees that I got her to stay in the house that night, for she was so far
      English, and had such a fancy, that she saw everything blacker than any
      Englishwoman would, even the partick’lerest. Afterward Master Horace was
      that good and gentle, and she loved him so much, that he persuaded her to
      say nothing more about it, and to try to live as if it hadn’t been. And so
      she seemed to do, outward like, to other people. But it wasn’t ever the
      same again. Something had broken in them both; with him it was his trust
      and his pride, but in her it was her heart.”
     

      “But the children—surely they comforted her.”
     

      “Eh, miss, that was the worst. Poor lamb, poor lamb! Never after that day,
      though they were more to her nor children ever were to a mother before,
      would she have them with her. Just a morning and a good-night kiss, and a
      quarter of an hour at most, and I must take them away. She watched them
      play in the garden from her window or the little hill there, and when they
      were asleep she would sit by them for hours, saying how bonny they were
      and how good they were growing. And she looked after their clothes and
      their food and every little toy and pleasure, but never came in for a romp
      and a chat any more.”
     

      “Dear, brave heart!” murmured the girl.
    

      “Yes, ma’am, you feel for her, I know. She was fair terrified of them
      turning Maori and shaming their father. That was it. You didn’t notice?
      No; after you came she was too ill to bear them about, and it seemed
      natural, I dare say. The Maoris are a fearful delicate set of folks. A bad
      cold takes them off into consumption directly. And with her there was the
      sorrow as well as the cold. It was wonderful that she lived so long.”
     

      Alice threw her arms round Mrs. Bentley’s neck.
    

      “O nurse, it is all so dreadful and sad. Couldn’t we have somehow kept her
      with us and made her happy?”
     

      The old woman held her close. “Nay, my dear bairn, never after that
      happened. It, or worse, might have come again. It’s something stronger in
      them than we know; it’s the very blood, I’m thinking. But she’s gone to be
      the angel that Dick always said she was.”
     

      Alice looked away over the starlit garden to where the plumy trees stirred
      in the night wind. “No,” she said, fervently, “not ‘gone to be,’ nurse
      dear; she was an angel always. Dick was right.”