The Bowmen
By ARTHUR MACHEN

From The Bowmen, by Arthur Machen. Published in
        England by Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co.,
        Ltd., and in America by G.P. Putnam's Sons. By permission
        of the publishers and Arthur Machen.

It was during the Retreat of the Eighty Thousand, and the
    authority of the Censorship is sufficient excuse for not being
    more explicit. But it was on the most awful day of that awful
    time, on the day when ruin and disaster came so near that their
    shadow fell over London far away; and, without any certain
    news, the hearts of men failed within them and grew faint; as
    if the agony of the army in the battlefield had entered into
    their souls.
On this dreadful day, then, when three hundred thousand men
    in arms with all their artillery swelled like a flood against
    the little English company, there was one point above all other
    points in our battle line that was for a time in awful danger,
    not merely of defeat, but of utter annihilation. With the
    permission of the Censorship and of the military expert, this
    corner may, perhaps, be described as a salient, and if this
    angle were crushed and broken, then the English force as a
    whole would be shattered, the Allied left would be turned, and
    Sedan would inevitably follow.
All the morning the German guns had thundered and shrieked
    against this corner, and against the thousand or so of men who
    held it. The men joked at the shells, and found funny names for
    them, and had bets about them, and greeted them with scraps of
    music-hall songs. But the shells came on and burst, and tore
    good Englishmen limb from limb, and tore brother from brother,
    and as the heat of the day increased so did the fury of that
    terrific cannonade. There was no help, it seemed. The English
    artillery was good, but there was not nearly enough of it; it
    was being steadily battered into scrap iron.
There comes a moment in a storm at sea when people say to
    one another, "It is at its worst; it can blow no harder," and
    then there is a blast ten times more fierce than any before it.
    So it was in these British trenches.
There were no stouter hearts in the whole world than the
    hearts of these men; but even they were appalled as this
    seven-times-heated hell of the German cannonade fell upon them
    and overwhelmed them and destroyed them. And at this very
    moment they saw from their trenches that a tremendous host was
    moving against their lines. Five hundred of the thousand
    remained, and as far as they could see the German infantry was
    pressing on against them, column upon column, a gray world of
    men, ten thousand of them, as it appeared afterwards.
There was no hope at all. They shook hands, some of them.
    One man improvised a new version of the battle-song, "Good-by,
    good-by to Tipperary," ending with "And we shan't get there."
    And they all went on firing steadily. The officer pointed out
    that such an opportunity for high-class fancy shooting might
    never occur again; the Tipperary humorist asked, "What price
    Sidney Street?" And the few machine guns did their best. But
    everybody knew it was of no use. The dead gray bodies lay in
    companies and battalions, as others came on and on and on, and
    they swarmed and stirred, and advanced from beyond and
    beyond.
"World without end. Amen," said one of the British soldiers
    with some irrelevance as he took aim and fired. And then he
    remembered—he says he cannot think why or
    wherefore—a queer vegetarian restaurant in London where
    he had once or twice eaten eccentric dishes of cutlets made of
    lentils and nuts that pretended to be steak. On all the plates
    in this restaurant there was printed a figure of St. George in
    blue, with the motto, "Adsit Anglis Sanctus
    Georgius"—"May St. George be a present help to the
    English." This soldier happened to know Latin and other useless
    things, and now, as he fired at his man in the gray advancing
    mass—three hundred yards away—he uttered the pious
    vegetarian motto. He went on firing to the end, and at last
    Bill on his right had to clout him cheerfully over the head to
    make him stop, pointing out as he did so that the King's
    ammunition cost money and was not lightly to be wasted in
    drilling funny patterns into dead Germans.
For as the Latin scholar uttered his invocation he felt
    something between a shudder and an electric shock pass through
    his body. The roar of the battle died down in his ears to a
    gentle murmur; instead of it, he says, he heard a great voice
    and a shout louder than a thunder-peal crying, "Array, array,
    array!"
His heart grew hot as a burning coal, it grew cold as ice
    within him, as it seemed to him that a tumult of voices
    answered to his summons. He heard, or seemed to hear, thousands
    shouting: "St. George! St. George!"
"Ha! Messire, ha! sweet Saint, grant us good
    deliverance!"
"St. George for merry England!"
"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur St. George, succor us!"
"Ha! St. George! Ha! St. George! a long bow and a strong
    bow."
"Heaven's Knight, aid us!"
And as the soldier heard these voices he saw before him,
    beyond the trench, a long line of shapes, with a shining about
    them. They were like men who drew the bow, and with another
    shout, their cloud of arrows flew singing and tingling through
    the air towards the German hosts.
The other men in the trench were firing all the while. They
    had no hope; but they aimed just as if they had been shooting
    at Bisley.
Suddenly one of them lifted up his voice in the plainest
    English.
"Gawd help us!" he bellowed to the man next to him, "but
    we're blooming marvels! Look at those gray ... gentlemen, look
    at them! D'ye see them? They're not going down in dozens nor in
    'undreds; it's thousands, it is. Look! look! there's a regiment
    gone while I'm talking to ye."
"Shut it!" the other soldier bellowed, taking aim, "what are
    ye gassing about?"
But he gulped with astonishment even as he spoke, for,
    indeed, the gray men were falling by the thousands. The English
    could hear the guttural scream of the German officers, the
    crackle of their revolvers as they shot the reluctant; and
    still line after line crashed to the earth.
All the while the Latin-bred soldier heard the cry:
"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur, dear Saint, quick to our aid!
    St. George help us!"
"High Chevalier, defend us!"
The singing arrows fled so swift and thick that they
    darkened the air, the heathen horde melted from before
    them.
"More machine guns!" Bill yelled to Tom.
"Don't hear them," Tom yelled back.
"But, thank God, anyway; they've got it in the neck."
In fact, there were ten thousand dead German soldiers left
    before that salient of the English army, and consequently there
    was no Sedan. In Germany, a country ruled by scientific
    principles, the Great General Staff decided that the
    contemptible English must have employed shells containing an
    unknown gas of a poisonous nature, as no wounds were
    discernible on the bodies of the dead German soldiers. But the
    man who knew what nuts tasted like when they called themselves
    steak knew also that St. George had brought his Agincourt
    Bowmen to help the English.