THE BIRD ON ITS JOURNEY, By Beatrice Harraden

 It was about four in the afternoon when a young girl came into the salon
      of the little hotel at C—— in Switzerland, and drew her chair
      up to the fire.

 “You are soaked through,” said an elderly lady, who was herself trying to
      get roasted. “You ought to lose no time in changing your clothes.”

 “I have not anything to change,” said the young girl, laughing. “Oh, I
      shall soon be dry!”

 “Have you lost all your luggage?” asked the lady, sympathetically.

 “No,” said the young girl; “I had none to lose.” And she smiled a little
      mischievously, as though she knew by instinct that her companion’s
      sympathy would at once degenerate into suspicion!

 “I don’t mean to say that I have not a knapsack,” she added,
      considerately. “I have walked a long distance—in fact, from Z——.”

 “And where did you leave your companions?” asked the lady, with a touch of
      forgiveness in her voice.

 “I am without companions, just as I am without luggage,” laughed the girl.

 And then she opened the piano, and struck a few notes. There was something
      caressing in the way in which she touched the keys; whoever she was, she
      knew how to make sweet music; sad music, too, full of that undefinable
      longing, like the holding out of one’s arms to one’s friends in the
      hopeless distance.

 The lady bending over the fire looked up at the little girl, and forgot
      that she had brought neither friends nor luggage with her. She hesitated
      for one moment, and then she took the childish face between her hands and
      kissed it.

 “Thank you, dear, for your music,” she said, gently.

 “The piano is terribly out of tune,” said the little girl, suddenly; and
      she ran out of the room, and came back carrying her knapsack.

 “What are you going to do?” asked her companion.

 “I am going to tune the piano,” the little girl said; and she took a
      tuning-hammer out of her knapsack, and began her work in real earnest. She
      evidently knew what she was about, and pegged away at the notes as though
      her whole life depended upon the result.

 The lady by the fire was lost in amazement. Who could she be? Without
      luggage and without friends, and with a tuning-hammer!

 Meanwhile one of the gentlemen had strolled into the salon; but hearing
      the sound of tuning, and being in secret possession of nerves, he fled,
      saying, “The tuner, by Jove!”

 A few minutes afterward Miss Blake, whose nerves were no secret
      possession, hastened into the salon, and, in her usual imperious fashion,
      demanded instant silence.

 “I have just done,” said the little girl. “The piano was so terribly out
      of tune, I could not resist the temptation.”

 Miss Blake, who never listened to what any one said, took it for granted
      that the little girl was the tuner for whom M. le Proprietaire had
      promised to send; and having bestowed on her a condescending nod, passed
      out into the garden, where she told some of the visitors that the piano
      had been tuned at last, and that the tuner was a young woman of rather
      eccentric appearance.

 “Really, it is quite abominable how women thrust themselves into every
      profession,” she remarked, in her masculine voice. “It is so unfeminine,
      so unseemly.”

 There was nothing of the feminine about Miss Blake; her horse-cloth dress,
      her waistcoat and high collar, and her billycock hat were of the masculine
      genus; even her nerves could not be called feminine, since we learn from
      two or three doctors (taken off their guard) that nerves are neither
      feminine nor masculine, but common.

 “I should like to see this tuner,” said one of the tennis-players, leaning
      against a tree.

 “Here she comes,” said Miss Blake, as the little girl was seen sauntering
      into the garden.

 The men put up their eye-glasses, and saw a little lady with a childish
      face and soft brown hair, of strictly feminine appearance and bearing. The
      goat came toward her and began nibbling at her frock. She seemed to
      understand the manner of goats, and played with him to his heart’s
      content. One of the tennis players, Oswald Everard by name, strolled down
      to the bank where she was having her frolic.

 “Good-afternoon,” he said, raising his cap. “I hope the goat is not
      worrying you. Poor little fellow! this is his last day of play. He is to
      be killed to-morrow for table d’hote .”

 “What a shame!” she said. “Fancy to be killed, and then grumbled at!”

 “That is precisely what we do here,” he said, laughing. “We grumble at
      everything we eat. And I own to being one of the grumpiest; though the
      lady in the horse-cloth dress yonder follows close upon my heels.”

 “She was the lady who was annoyed at me because I tuned the piano,” the
      little girl said. “Still, it had to be done. It was plainly my duty. I
      seemed to have come for that purpose.”

 “It has been confoundedly annoying having it out of tune,” he said. “I’ve
      had to give up singing altogether. But what a strange profession you have
      chosen! Very unusual, isn’t it?”

 “Why, surely not,” she answered, amused. “It seems to me that every other
      woman has taken to it. The wonder to me is that any one ever scores a
      success. Nowadays, however, no one could amass a huge fortune out of it.”

 “No one, indeed!” replied Oswald Everard, laughing. “What on earth made
      you take to it?”

 “It took to me,” she said simply. “It wrapped me round with enthusiasm. I
      could think of nothing else. I vowed that I would rise to the top of my
      profession. I worked day and night. But it means incessant toil for years
      if one wants to make any headway.”

 “Good gracious! I thought it was merely a matter of a few months,” he
      said, smiling at the little girl.

 “A few months!” she repeated, scornfully. “You are speaking the language
      of an amateur. No; one has to work faithfully year after year; to grasp
      the possibilities, and pass on to greater possibilities. You imagine what
      it must feel like to touch the notes, and know that you are keeping the
      listeners spellbound; that you are taking them into a fairy-land of sound,
      where petty personality is lost in vague longing and regret.”

 “I confess I had not thought of it in that way,” he said, humbly. “I have
      only regarded it as a necessary every-day evil; and to be quite honest
      with you, I fail to see now how it can inspire enthusiasm. I wish I could
      see,” he added, looking up at the engaging little figure before him.

 “Never mind,” she said, laughing at his distress; “I forgive you. And,
      after all, you are not the only person who looks upon it as a necessary
      evil. My poor old guardian abominated it. He made many sacrifices to come
      and listen to me. He knew I liked to see his kind old face, and that the
      presence of a real friend inspired me with confidence.”

 “I should not have thought it was nervous work,” he said.

 “Try it and see,” she answered. “But surely you spoke of singing. Are you
      not nervous when you sing?”

 “Sometimes,” he replied, rather stiffly. “But that is slightly different.”
       (He was very proud of his singing, and made a great fuss about it.) “Your
      profession, as I remarked before, is an unavoidable nuisance. When I think
      what I have suffered from the gentlemen of your profession, I only wonder
      that I have any brains left. But I am uncourteous.”

 “No, no,” she said; “let me hear about your sufferings.”

 “Whenever I have specially wanted to be quiet,” he said—and then he
      glanced at her childish little face, and he hesitated. “It seems so rude
      of me,” he added. He was the soul of courtesy, although he was an amateur
      tenor singer.

 “Please tell me,” the little girl said, in her winning way.

 “Well,” he said, gathering himself together, “it is the one subject on
      which I can be eloquent. Ever since I can remember, I have been worried
      and tortured by those rascals. I have tried in every way to escape from
      them, but there is no hope for me. Yes; I believe that all the tuners in
      the universe are in league against me, and have marked me out for their
      special prey.”

 “ All the what ?” asked the little girl, with a jerk in her voice.

 “All the tuners, of course,” he replied, rather snappishly. “I know that
      we cannot do without them; but good heavens! they have no tact, no
      consideration, no mercy. Whenever I’ve wanted to write or read quietly,
      that fatal knock has come at the door, and I’ve known by instinct that all
      chance of peace was over. Whenever I’ve been giving a luncheon party, the
      tuner has arrived, with his abominable black bag, and his abominable card
      which has to be signed at once. On one occasion I was just proposing to a
      girl in her father’s library when the tuner struck up in the drawing-room.
      I left off suddenly, and fled from the house. But there is no escape from
      these fiends; I believe they are swarming about in the air like so many
      bacteria. And how, in the name of goodness, you should deliberately choose
      to be one of them, and should be so enthusiastic over your work, puzzles
      me beyond all words. Don’t say that you carry a black bag, and present
      cards which have to be filled up at the most inconvenient time; don’t—”

 He stopped suddenly, for the little girl was convulsed with laughter. She
      laughed until the tears rolled down her cheeks, and then she dried her
      eyes and laughed again.

 “Excuse me,” she said; “I can’t help myself; it’s so funny.”

 “It may be funny to you,” he said, laughing in spite of himself; “but it
      is not funny to me.”

 “Of course it isn’t,” she replied, making a desperate effort to be
      serious. “Well, tell me something more about these tuners.”

 “Not another word,” he said, gallantly. “I am ashamed of myself as it is.
      Come to the end of the garden, and let me show you the view down into the
      valley.”

 She had conquered her fit of merriment, but her face wore a settled look
      of mischief, and she was evidently the possessor of some secret joke. She
      seemed in capital health and spirits, and had so much to say that was
      bright and interesting that Oswald Everard found himself becoming
      reconciled to the whole race of tuners. He was amazed to learn that she
      had walked all the way from Z——, and quite alone, too.

 “Oh, I don’t think anything of that,” she said; “I had a splendid time,
      and I caught four rare butterflies. I would not have missed those for
      anything. As for the going about by myself, that is a second nature.
      Besides, I do not belong to any one. That has its advantages, and I
      suppose its disadvantages; but at present I have only discovered the
      advantages. The disadvantages will discover themselves!”

 “I believe you are what the novels call an advanced young woman,” he said.
      “Perhaps you give lectures on woman’s suffrage, or something of that
      sort?”

 “I have very often mounted the platform,” she answered. “In fact, I am
      never so happy as when addressing an immense audience. A most unfeminine
      thing to do, isn’t it? What would the lady yonder in the horse-cloth dress
      and billycock hat say? Don’t you think you ought to go and help her drive
      away the goat? She looks so frightened. She interests me deeply. I wonder
      whether she has written an essay on the feminine in woman. I should like
      to read it; it would do me so much good.”

 “You are at least a true woman,” he said, laughing, “for I see you can be
      spiteful. The tuning has not driven that away.”

 “Ah, I had forgotten about the tuning,” she answered, brightly; “but now
      you remind me, I have been seized with a great idea.”

 “Won’t you tell it to me?” he asked.

 “No,” she answered; “I keep my great ideas for myself, and work them out
      in secret. And this one is particularly amusing. What fun I shall have!”

 “But why keep the fun to yourself?” he said. “We all want to be amused
      here; we all want to be stirred up; a little fun would be a charity.”

 “Very well, since you wish it, you shall be stirred up,” she answered;
      “but you must give me time to work out my great idea. I do not hurry about
      things, not even about my professional duties; for I have a strong feeling
      that it is vulgar to be always amassing riches! As I have neither a
      husband nor a brother to support, I have chosen less wealth, and more
      leisure to enjoy all the loveliness of life! So you see I take my time
      about everything. And to-morrow I shall catch butterflies at my leisure,
      and lie among the dear old pines, and work at my great idea.”

 “I shall catch butterflies,” said her companion; “and I too shall lie
      among the dear old pines.”

 “Just as you please,” she said; and at that moment the table d’hote bell rang.

 The little girl hastened to the bureau, and spoke rapidly in German to the
      cashier.

 “ Ach, Fraulein !” he said. “You are not really serious?”

 “Yes, I am,” she said. “I don’t want them to know my name. It will only
      worry me. Say I am the young lady who tuned the piano.”

 She had scarcely given these directions and mounted to her room when
      Oswald Everard, who was much interested in his mysterious companion, came
      to the bureau, and asked for the name of the little lady.

 “ Es ist das Fraulein welches das Piano gestimmt hat ,” answered the
      man, returning with unusual quickness to his account-book.

 No one spoke to the little girl at table d’hote , but for all that
      she enjoyed her dinner, and gave her serious attention to all the courses.
      Being thus solidly occupied, she had not much leisure to bestow on the
      conversation of the other guests. Nor was it specially original; it
      treated of the short-comings of the chef, the tastelessness of the soup,
      the toughness of the beef, and all the many failings which go to complete
      a mountain hotel dinner. But suddenly, so it seemed to the little girl,
      this time-honoured talk passed into another phase; she heard the word
      “music” mentioned, and she became at once interested to learn what these
      people had to say on a subject which was dearer to her than any other.

 “For my own part,” said a stern-looking old man, “I have no words to
      describe what a gracious comfort music has been to me all my life. It is
      the noblest language which man may understand and speak. And I sometimes
      think that those who know it, or know something of it, are able at rare
      moments to find an answer to life’s perplexing problems.”

 The little girl looked up from her plate. Robert Browning’s words rose to
      her lips, but she did not give them utterance:

 God has a few of us whom He whispers in the ear;
     The rest may reason, and welcome; ‘tis we musicians know.

 “I have lived through a long life,” said another elderly man, “and have
      therefore had my share of trouble; but the grief of being obliged to give
      up music was the grief which held me longest, or which perhaps has never
      left me. I still crave for the gracious pleasure of touching once more the
      strings of the violoncello, and hearing the dear, tender voice singing and
      throbbing, and answering even to such poor skill as mine. I still yearn to
      take my part in concerted music, and be one of those privileged to play
      Beethoven’s string-quartettes. But that will have to be in another
      incarnation, I think.”

 He glanced at his shrunken arm, and then, as though ashamed of this
      allusion to his own personal infirmity, he added hastily:

 “But when the first pang of such a pain is over, there remains the comfort
      of being a listener. At first one does not think it is a comfort; but as
      time goes on there is no resisting its magic influence. And Lowell said
      rightly that ‘one of God’s great charities is music.’”

 “I did not know you were musical, Mr. Keith,” said an English lady. “You
      have never before spoken of music.”

 “Perhaps not, madam,” he answered. “One does not often speak of what one
      cares for most of all. But when I am in London I rarely miss hearing our
      best players.”

 At this point others joined in, and the various merits of eminent pianists
      were warmly discussed.

 “What a wonderful name that little English lady has made for herself!”
       said the major, who was considered an authority on all subjects. “I would
      go anywhere to hear Miss Thyra Flowerdew. We all ought to be very proud of
      her. She has taken even the German musical world by storm, and they say
      her recitals at Paris have been brilliantly successful. I myself have
      heard her at New York, Leipsic, London, Berlin, and even Chicago.”

 The little girl stirred uneasily in her chair.

 “I don’t think Miss Flowerdew has ever been to Chicago,” she said.

 There was a dead silence. The admirer of Miss Thyra Flowerdew looked much
      annoyed, and twiddled his watch-chain. He had meant to say “Philadelphia,”
       but he did not think it necessary to own to his mistake.

 “What impertinence!” said one of the ladies to Miss Blake. “What can she
      know about it? Is she not the young person who tuned the piano?”

 “Perhaps she tunes Miss Thyra Flowerdew’s piano!” suggested Miss Blake, in
      a loud whisper.

 “You are right, madam,” said the little girl, quietly. “I have often tuned
      Miss Flowerdew’s piano.”

 There was another embarrassing silence; and then a lovely old lady, whom
      every one reverenced, came to the rescue.

 “I think her playing is simply superb,” she said. “Nothing that I ever
      hear satisfies me so entirely. She has all the tenderness of an angel’s
      touch.”

 “Listening to her,” said the major, who had now recovered from his
      annoyance at being interrupted, “one becomes unconscious of her presence,
      for she is the music itself . And that is rare. It is but seldom
      nowadays that we are allowed to forget the personality of the player. And
      yet her personality is an unusual one; having once seen her, it would not
      be easy to forget her. I should recognise her anywhere.”

 As he spoke, he glanced at the little tuner, and could not help admiring
      her dignified composure under circumstances which might have been
      distressing to any one; and when she rose with the others he followed her,
      and said stiffly:

 “I regret that I was the indirect cause of putting you in an awkward
      position.”

 “It is really of no consequence,” she said, brightly. “If you think I was
      impertinent, I ask your forgiveness. I did not mean to be officious. The
      words were spoken before I was aware of them.”

 She passed into the salon, where she found a quiet corner for herself, and
      read some of the newspapers. No one took the slightest notice of her; not
      a word was spoken to her; but when she relieved the company of her
      presence her impertinence was commented on.

 “I am sorry that she heard what I said,” remarked Miss Blake; “but she did
      not seem to mind. These young women who go out into the world lose the
      edge of their sensitiveness and femininity. I have always observed that.”

 “How much they are spared then!” answered some one.

 Meanwhile the little girl slept soundly. She had merry dreams, and finally
      woke up laughing. She hurried over her breakfast, and then stood ready to
      go for a butterfly hunt. She looked thoroughly happy, and evidently had
      found, and was holding tightly, the key to life’s enjoyment.

 Oswald Everard was waiting on the balcony, and he reminded her that he
      intended to go with her.

 “Come along then,” she answered; “we must not lose a moment.”

 They caught butterflies; they picked flowers; they ran; they lingered by
      the wayside; they sang; they climbed, and he marvelled at her easy speed.
      Nothing seemed to tire her, and everything seemed to delight her—the
      flowers, the birds, the clouds, the grasses, and the fragrance of the pine
      woods.

 “Is it not good to live?” she cried. “Is it not splendid to take in the
      scented air? Draw in as many long breaths as you can. Isn’t it good? Don’t
      you feel now as though you were ready to move mountains? I do. What a dear
      old nurse Nature is! How she pets us, and gives us the best of her
      treasures!”

 Her happiness invaded Oswald Everard’s soul, and he felt like a school-boy
      once more, rejoicing in a fine day and his liberty, with nothing to spoil
      the freshness of the air, and nothing to threaten the freedom of the
      moment.

 “Is it not good to live?” he cried. “Yes, indeed it is, if we know how to
      enjoy.”

 They had come upon some haymakers, and the little girl hastened up to help
      them, laughing and talking to the women, and helping them to pile up the
      hay on the shoulders of a broad-backed man, who then conveyed his burden
      to a pear-shaped stack. Oswald Everard watched his companion for a moment,
      and then, quite forgetting his dignity as an amateur tenor singer, he too
      lent his aid, and did not leave off until his companion sank exhausted on
      the ground.

 “Oh,” she laughed, “what delightful work for a very short time! Come
      along; let us go into that brown chatlet yonder and ask for some milk. I
      am simply parched with thirst. Thank you, but I prefer to carry my own
      flowers.”

 “What an independent little lady you are!” he said.

 “It is quite necessary in our profession, I can assure you,” she said,
      with a tone of mischief in her voice. “That reminds me that my profession
      is evidently not looked upon with any favour by the visitors at the hotel.
      I am heartbroken to think that I have not won the esteem of that lady in
      the billycock hat. What will she say to you for coming out with me? And
      what will she say of me for allowing you to come? I wonder whether she
      will say, ‘How unfeminine!’ I wish I could hear her!”

 “I don’t suppose you care,” he said. “You seem to be a wild little bird.”

 “I don’t care what a person of that description says,” replied his
      companion.

 “What on earth made you contradict the major at dinner last night?” he
      asked. “I was not at the table, but some one told me of the incident; and
      I felt very sorry about it. What could you know of Miss Thyra Flowerdew?”

 “Well, considering that she is in my profession, of course I know
      something about her,” said the little girl.

 “Confound it all!” he said, rather rudely. “Surely there is some
      difference between the bellows-blower and the organist.”

 “Absolutely none,” she answered; “merely a variation of the original
      theme!”

 As she spoke she knocked at the door of the chalet, and asked the old dame
      to give them some milk. They sat in the Stube , and the little girl
      looked about, and admired the spinning-wheel and the quaint chairs and the
      queer old jugs and the pictures on the walls.

 “Ah, but you shall see the other room,” the old peasant woman said; and
      she led them into a small apartment which was evidently intended for a
      study. It bore evidences of unusual taste and care, and one could see that
      some loving hand had been trying to make it a real sanctum of refinement.
      There was even a small piano. A carved book-rack was fastened to the wall.

 The old dame did not speak at first; she gave her guests time to recover
      from the astonishment which she felt they must be experiencing; then she
      pointed proudly to the piano.

 “I bought that for my daughters,” she said, with a strange mixture of
      sadness and triumph. “I wanted to keep them at home with me, and I saved
      and saved, and got enough money to buy the piano. They had always wanted
      to have one, and I thought they would then stay with me. They liked music
      and books, and I knew they would be glad to have a room of their own where
      they might read and play and study; and so I gave them this corner.”

 “Well, mother,” asked the little girl, “and where are they this
      afternoon?”

 “Ah,” she answered sadly, “they did not care to stay; but it was natural
      enough, and I was foolish to grieve. Besides, they come to see me.”

 “And then they play to you?” asked the little girl, gently.

 “They say the piano is out of tune,” the old dame said. “I don’t know.
      Perhaps you can tell.”

 The little girl sat down to the piano, and struck a few chords.

 “Yes,” she said; “it is badly out of tune. Give me the tuning-hammer. I am
      sorry,” she added, smiling at Oswald Everard, “but I cannot neglect my
      duty. Don’t wait for me.”

 “I will wait for you,” he said, sullenly; and he went into the balcony and
      smoked his pipe, and tried to possess his soul in patience.

 When she had faithfully done her work she played a few simple melodies,
      such as she knew the old woman would love and understand; and she turned
      away when she saw that the listener’s eyes were moist.

 “Play once again,” the old woman whispered. “I am dreaming of beautiful
      things.”

 So the little tuner touched the keys again with all the tenderness of an
      angel.

 “Tell your daughters,” she said, as she rose to say good-bye, “that the
      piano is now in good tune. Then they will play to you the next time they
      come.”

 “I shall always remember you, mademoiselle,” the old woman said; and,
      almost unconsciously, she took the childish face and kissed it.

 Oswald Everard was waiting in the hay-field for his companion; and when
      she apologised to him for this little professional intermezzo, as she
      called it, he recovered from his sulkiness and readjusted his nerves,
      which the noise of the tuning had somewhat disturbed.

 “It was very good of you to tune the old dame’s piano,” he said, looking
      at her with renewed interest.

 “Some one had to do it, of course,” she answered, brightly, “and I am glad
      the chance fell to me. What a comfort it is to think that the next time
      those daughters come to see her they will play to her and make her very
      happy! Poor old dear!”

 “You puzzle me greatly,” he said. “I cannot for the life of me think what
      made you choose your calling. You must have many gifts; any one who talks
      with you must see that at once. And you play quite nicely, too.”

 “I am sorry that my profession sticks in your throat,” she answered. “Do
      be thankful that I am nothing worse than a tuner. For I might be something
      worse—a snob, for instance.”

 And, so speaking, she dashed after a butterfly, and left him to recover
      from her words. He was conscious of having deserved a reproof; and when at
      last he overtook her he said as much, and asked for her kind indulgence.

 “I forgive you,” she said, laughing. “You and I are not looking at things
      from the same point of view; but we have had a splendid morning together,
      and I have enjoyed every minute of it. And to-morrow I go on my way.”

 “And to-morrow you go,” he repeated. “Can it not be the day after
      to-morrow?”

 “I am a bird of passage,” she said, shaking her head. “You must not seek
      to detain me. I have taken my rest, and off I go to other climes.”

 They had arrived at the hotel, and Oswald Everard saw no more of his
      companion until the evening, when she came down rather late for table
      d’hote . She hurried over her dinner and went into the salon. She
      closed the door, and sat down to the piano, and lingered there without
      touching the keys; once or twice she raised her hands, and then she let
      them rest on the notes, and, half unconsciously, they began to move and
      make sweet music; and then they drifted into Schumann’s “Abendlied,” and
      then the little girl played some of his “Kinderscenen,” and some of his
      “Fantasie Stucke,” and some of his songs.

 Her touch and feeling were exquisite, and her phrasing betrayed the true
      musician. The strains of music reached the dining-room, and, one by one,
      the guests came creeping in, moved by the music and anxious to see the
      musician.

 The little girl did not look up; she was in a Schumann mood that evening,
      and only the players of Schumann know what enthralling possession he takes
      of their very spirit. All the passion and pathos and wildness and longing
      had found an inspired interpreter; and those who listened to her were held
      by the magic which was her own secret, and which had won for her such
      honour as comes only to the few. She understood Schumann’s music, and was
      at her best with him.

 Had she, perhaps, chosen to play his music this evening because she wished
      to be at her best? Or was she merely being impelled by an overwhelming
      force within her? Perhaps it was something of both.

 Was she wishing to humiliate these people who had received her so coldly?
      This little girl was only human; perhaps there was something of that
      feeling too. Who can tell? But she played as she had never played in
      London, or Paris, or Berlin, or New York, or Philadelphia.

 At last she arrived at the “Carnaval,” and those who heard her declared
      afterward that they had never listened to a more magnificent rendering.
      The tenderness was so restrained; the vigour was so refined. When the last
      notes of that spirited “Marche des Davidsbundler contre les Philistins”
       had died away, she glanced at Oswald Everard, who was standing near her
      almost dazed.

 “And now my favourite piece of all,” she said; and she at once began the
      “Second Novelette,” the finest of the eight, but seldom played in public.

 What can one say of the wild rush of the leading theme, and the pathetic
      longing of the intermezzo?

 . . . The murmuring dying notes,
     That fall as soft as snow on the sea;

 and

 The passionate strain that, deeply going,
     Refines the bosom it trembles through.

 What can one say of those vague aspirations and finest thoughts which
      possess the very dullest among us when such music as that which the little
      girl had chosen catches us and keeps us, if only for a passing moment, but
      that moment of the rarest worth and loveliness in our unlovely lives?

 What can one say of the highest music except that, like death, it is the
      great leveller: it gathers us all to its tender keeping—and we rest.

 The little girl ceased playing. There was not a sound to be heard; the
      magic was still holding her listeners. When at last they had freed
      themselves with a sigh, they pressed forward to greet her.

 “There is only one person who can play like that,” cried the major, with
      sudden inspiration—“she is Miss Thyra Flowerdew.”

 The little girl smiled.

 “That is my name,” she said, simply; and she slipped out of the room.

 The next morning, at an early hour, the bird of passage took her flight
      onward, but she was not destined to go off unobserved. Oswald Everard saw
      the little figure swinging along the road, and she overtook her.

 “You little wild bird!” he said. “And so this was your great idea—to
      have your fun out of us all, and then play to us and make us feel I don’t
      know how, and then to go.”

 “You said the company wanted stirring up,” she answered, “and I rather
      fancy I have stirred them up.”

 “And what do you suppose you have done for me?” he asked.

 “I hope I have proved to you that the bellows-blower and the organist are
      sometimes identical,” she answered.

 But he shook his head.

 “Little wild bird,” he said, “you have given me a great idea, and I will
      tell you what it is: to tame you . So good-bye for the present.”

 “Good-bye,” she said. “But wild birds are not so easily tamed.”

 Then she waved her hand over her head, and went on her way singing.

  

  









 KOOSJE: A STUDY OF DUTCH LIFE, by John Strange Winter

 Her name was Koosje van Kampen, and she lived in Utrecht, that most quaint
      of quaint cities, the Venice of the North.

 All her life had been passed under the shadow of the grand old Dom Kerk;
      she had played bo-peep behind the columns and arcades of the ruined,
      moss-grown cloisters; had slipped up and fallen down the steps leading to
      the grachts ; had once or twice, in this very early life, been
      fished out of those same slimy, stagnant waters; had wandered under the
      great lindens in the Baan, and gazed curiously up at the stork’s nest in
      the tree by the Veterinary School; had pattered about the hollow-sounding
      streets in her noisy wooden klompen ; had danced and laughed, had
      quarrelled and wept, and fought and made friends again, to the tune of the
      silver chimes high up in the Dom—chimes that were sometimes old Nederlandsche hymns, sometimes Mendelssohn’s melodies and tender “Lieder ohne Worte.”

 But that was ever so long ago, and now she had left her romping childhood
      behind her, and had become a maid-servant—a very dignified and
      aristocratic maid-servant indeed—with no less a sum than eight
      pounds ten a year in wages.

 She lived in the house of a professor, who dwelt on the Munster Kerkhoff,
      one of the most aristocratic parts of that wonderfully aristocratic city;
      and once or twice every week you might have seen her, if you had been
      there to see, busily engaged in washing the red tile and blue slate
      pathway in front of the professor’s house. You would have seen that she
      was very pleasant to look at, this Koosje, very comely and clean, whether
      she happened to be very busy, or whether it had been Sunday, and, with her
      very best gown on, she was out for a promenade in the Baan, after duly
      going to service as regularly as the Sabbath dawned in the grand old
      Gothic choir of the cathedral.

 During the week she wore always the same costume as does every other
      servant in the country: a skirt of black stuff, short enough to show a
      pair of very neat-set and well-turned ankles, clad in cloth shoes and
      knitted stockings that showed no wrinkles; over the skirt a bodice and a
      kirtle of lilac, made with a neatly gathered frilling about her round
      brown throat; above the frilling five or six rows of unpolished garnet
      beads fastened by a massive clasp of gold filigree, and on her head a
      spotless white cap tied with a neat bow under her chin—as neat, let
      me tell you, as an Englishman’s tie at a party.

 But it was on Sunday that Koosje shone forth in all the glory of a black
      gown and her jewellery—with great ear-rings to match the clasp of
      her necklace, and a heavy chain and cross to match that again, and one or
      two rings; while on her head she wore an immense cap, much too big to put
      a bonnet over, though for walking she was most particular to have gloves.

 Then, indeed, she was a young person to be treated with respect, and with
      respect she was undoubtedly treated. As she passed along the quaint,
      resounding streets, many a head was turned to look after her; but Koosje
      went on her way like the staid maiden she was, duly impressed with the
      fact that she was principal servant of Professor van Dijck, the most
      celebrated authority on the study of osteology in Europe. So Koosje never
      heeded the looks, turned her head neither to the right nor to the left,
      but went sedately on her business or pleasure, whichever it happened to
      be.

 It was not likely that such a treasure could remain long unnoticed and
      unsought after. Servants in the Netherlands, I hear, are not so good but
      that they might be better; and most people knew what a treasure Professor
      van Dijck had in his Koosje. However, as the professor conscientiously
      raised her wages from time to time, Koosje never thought of leaving him.

 But there is one bribe no woman can resist—the bribe that is offered
      by love. As Professor van Dijck had expected and feared, that bribe ere
      long was held out to Koosje, and Koosje was too weak to resist it. Not
      that he wished her to do so. If the girl had a chance of settling well and
      happily for life, he would be the last to dream of throwing any obstacle
      in her way. He had come to be an old man himself; he lived all alone, save
      for his servants, in a great, rambling house, whose huge apartments were
      all set out with horrible anatomical preparations and grisly skeletons;
      and, though the stately passages were paved with white marble, and led
      into rooms which would easily have accommodated crowds of guests, he went
      into no society save that of savants as old and fossil-like as himself; in
      other words, he was an old bachelor who lived entirely for his profession
      and the study of the great masters by the interpretation of a genuine old
      Stradivari. Yet the old professor had a memory; he recalled the time when
      he had been young who now was old—the time when his heart was a good
      deal more tender, his blood a great deal warmer, and his fancy very much
      more easily stirred than nowadays. There was a dead-and-gone romance which
      had broken his heart, sentimentally speaking—a romance long since
      crumbled into dust, which had sent him for comfort into the study of
      osteology and the music of the Stradivari; yet the memory thereof made him
      considerably more lenient to Koosje’s weakness than Koosje herself had
      ever expected to find him.

 Not that she had intended to tell him at first; she was only three and
      twenty, and, though Jan van der Welde was as fine a fellow as could be
      seen in Utrecht, and had good wages and something put by, Koosje was by no
      means inclined to rush headlong into matrimony with undue hurry. It was
      more pleasant to live in the professor’s good house, to have delightful
      walks arm in arm with Jan under the trees in the Baan or round the
      Singels, parting under the stars with many a lingering word and promise to
      meet again. It was during one of those very partings that the professor
      suddenly became aware, as he walked placidly home, of the change that had
      come into Koosje’s life.

 However, Koosje told him blushingly that she did not wish to leave him
      just at present; so he did not trouble himself about the matter. He was a
      wise man, this old authority on osteology, and quoted oftentimes,
      “Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.”

 So the courtship sped smoothly on, seeming for once to contradict the
      truth of the old saying, “The course of true love never did run smooth.”
       The course of their love did, of a truth, run marvellously smooth indeed.
      Koosje, if a trifle coy, was pleasant and sweet; Jan as fine a fellow as
      ever waited round a corner on a cold winter night. So brightly the happy
      days slipped by, when suddenly a change was effected in the professor’s
      household which made, as a matter of course, somewhat of a change in
      Koosje’s life. It came about in this wise.

 Koosje had been on an errand for the professor,—one that had kept
      her out of doors some time,—and it happened that the night was
      bitterly cold; the cold, indeed, was fearful. The air had that damp
      rawness so noticeable in Dutch climate, a thick mist overhung the city,
      and a drizzling rain came down with a steady persistence such as quickly
      soaked through the stoutest and thickest garments. The streets were
      well-nigh empty. The great thoroughfare, the Oude Gracht, was almost
      deserted, and as Koosje hurried along the Meinerbroederstraat—for
      she had a second commission there—she drew her great shawl more
      tightly round her, muttering crossly, “What weather! yesterday so warm,
      to-day so cold. ‘Tis enough to give one the fever.”

 She delivered her message, and ran on through Oude Kerkhoff as fast as her
      feet could carry her, when, just as she turned the corner into the
      Domplein, a fierce gust of wind, accompanied by a blinding shower of rain,
      assailed her; her foot caught against something soft and heavy, and she
      fell.

 “Bless us!” she ejaculated, blankly. “What fool has left a bundle out on
      the path on such a night? Pitch dark, with half the lamps out, and rain
      and mist enough to blind one.”

 She gathered herself up, rubbing elbows and knees vigorously, casting the
      while dark glances at the obnoxious bundle which had caused the disaster.
      Just then the wind was lulled, the lamp close at hand gave out a steady
      light, which shed its rays through the fog upon Koosje and the bundle,
      from which, to the girl’s horror and dismay, came a faint moan. Quickly
      she drew nearer, when she perceived that what she had believed to be a
      bundle was indeed a woman, apparently in the last stage of exhaustion.

 Koosje tried to lift her; but the dead-weight was beyond her, young and
      strong as she was. Then the rain and the wind came on again in fiercer
      gusts than before; the woman’s moans grew louder and louder, and what to
      do Koosje knew not.

 She struggled on for the few steps that lay between her and the
      professor’s house, and then she rang a peal which resounded through the
      echoing passages, bringing Dortje, the other maid, running out; after the
      manner of her class, imagining all sorts of terrible catastrophes had
      happened. She uttered a cry of relief when she perceived it was only
      Koosje, who, without vouchsafing any explanation, dashed past her and ran
      straight into the professor’s room.

 “O professor!” she gasped out; but, between her efforts to remove the
      woman, her struggle with the elements, and her race down the passage, her
      breath was utterly gone.

 The professor looked up from his book and his tea-tray in surprise. For a
      moment he thought that Koosje, his domestic treasure, had altogether taken
      leave of her senses; for she was streaming with water, covered with mud,
      and head and cap were in a state of disorder, such as neither he nor any
      one else had ever seen them in since the last time she had been fished out
      of the Nieuwe Gracht.

 “What is the matter, Koosje?” he asked, regarding her gravely over his
      spectacles.

 “There’s a woman outside—dying,” she panted, “I fell over her.”

 “You had better try to get her in then,” the old gentleman said, in quite
      a relieved tone. “You and Dortje must bring her in. Dear, dear, poor soul!
      but it is a dreadful night.”

 The old gentleman shivered as he spoke, and drew a little nearer to the
      tall white porcelain stove.

 It was, as he had said a minute before, a terrible night. He could hear
      the wind beating about the house and rattling about the casements and
      moaning down the chimneys; and to think any poor soul should be out on
      such a night, dying ! Heaven preserve others who might be belated or
      houseless in any part of the world!

 He fell into a fit of abstraction,—a habit not uncommon with learned
      men,—wondering why life should be so different with different
      people; why he should be in that warm, handsome room, with its soft rich
      hangings and carpet, with its beautiful furniture of carved wood, its
      pictures, and the rare china scattered here and there among the grim array
      of skeletons which were his delight. He wondered why he should take his
      tea out of costly and valuable Oriental china, sugar and cream out of
      antique silver, while other poor souls had no tea at all, and nothing to
      take it out of even if they had. He wondered why he should have a lamp
      under his teapot that was a very marvel of art transparencies; why he
      should have every luxury, and this poor creature should be dying in the
      street amid the wind and the rain. It was all very unequal.

 It was very odd, the professor argued, leaning his back against the tall,
      warm stove; it was very odd indeed. He began to feel that, grand as the
      study of osteology undoubtedly is, he ought not to permit it to become so
      engrossing as to blind him to the study of the greater philosophies of
      life. His reverie was, however, broken by the abrupt reentrance of Koosje,
      who this time was a trifle less breathless than she had been before.

 “We have got her into the kitchen, professor,” she announced. “She is a
      child—a mere baby, and so pretty! She has opened her eyes and
      spoken.”

 “Give her some soup and wine—hot,” said the professor, without
      stirring.

 “But won’t you come?” she asked.

 The professor hesitated; he hated attending in cases of illness, though he
      was a properly qualified doctor and in an emergency would lay his
      prejudice aside.

 “Or shall I run across for the good Dr. Smit?” Koosje asked. “He would
      come in a minute, only it is such a night!”

 At that moment a fiercer gust than before rattled at the casements, and
      the professor laid aside his scruples.

 He followed his housekeeper down the chilly, marble-flagged passage into
      the kitchen, where he never went for months together—a cosey enough,
      pleasant place, with a deep valance hanging from the mantel-shelf, with
      many great copper pans, bright and shining as new gold, and furniture all
      scrubbed to the whiteness of snow.

 In an arm-chair before the opened stove sat the rescued girl—a
      slight, golden-haired thing, with wistful blue eyes and a frightened air.
      Every moment she caught her breath in a half-hysterical sob, while violent
      shivers shook her from head to foot.

 The professor went and looked at her over his spectacles, as if she had
      been some curious specimen of his favourite study; but at the same time he
      kept at a respectful distance from her.

 “Give her some soup and wine,” he said, at length, putting his hands under
      the tails of his long dressing-gown of flowered cashmere. “Some soup and
      wine—hot; and put her to bed.”

 “Is she then to remain for the night?” Koosje asked, a little surprised.

 “Oh, don’t send me away!” the golden-haired girl broke out, in a voice
      that was positively a wail, and clasping a pair of pretty, slender hands
      in piteous supplication.

 “Where do you come from?” the old gentleman asked, much as if he expected
      she might suddenly jump up and bite him.

 “From Beijerland, mynheer,” she answered, with a sob.

 “So! Koosje, she is remarkably well dressed, is she not?” the professor
      said, glancing at the costly lace head-gear, the heavy gold head-piece,
      which lay on the table together with the great gold spiral ornaments and
      filigree pendants—a dazzling head of richness. He looked, too, at
      the girl’s white hands, at the rich, crape-laden gown, at their delicate
      beauty, and shower of waving golden hair, which, released from the
      confinement of the cap and head-piece, floated in a rich mass of
      glittering beauty over the pillows which his servant had placed beneath
      her head.

 The professor was old; the professor was wholly given up to his
      profession, which he jokingly called his sweetheart; and, though he cut
      half of his acquaintances in the street through inattention and the
      shortness of his sight, he had eyes in his head, and upon occasions could
      use them. He therefore repeated the question.

 “Very well dressed indeed, professor,” returned Koosje, promptly.

 “And what are you doing in Utrecht—in such a plight as this, too?”
       he asked, still keeping at a safe distance.

 “O mynheer, I am all alone in the world,” she answered, her blue misty
      eyes filled with tears. “I had a month ago a dear, good, kind father, but
      he has died, and I am indeed desolate. I always believed him rich, and to
      these things,” with a gesture that included her dress and the ornaments on
      the table, “I have ever been accustomed. Thus I ordered without
      consideration such clothes as I thought needful. And then I found there
      was nothing for me—not a hundred guilders to call my own when all
      was paid.”

 “But what brought you to Utrecht?”

 “He sent me here, mynheer. In his last illness, only of three days’ 
      duration, he bade me gather all together and come to this city, where I
      was to ask for a Mevrouw Baake, his cousin.”

 “Mevrouw Baake, of the Sigaren Fabrijk,” said Dortje, in an aside, to the
      others. “I lived servant with her before I came here.”

 “I had heard very little about her, only my father had sometimes mentioned
      his cousin to me; they had once been betrothed,” the stranger continued.
      “But when I reached Utrecht I found she was dead—two years dead; but
      we had never heard of it.”

 “Dear, dear, dear!” exclaimed the professor, pityingly. “Well, you had
      better let Koosje put you to bed, and we will see what can be done for you
      in the morning.”

 “Am I to make up a bed?” Koosje asked, following him along the passage.

 The professor wheeled round and faced her.

 “She had better sleep in the guest room,” he said, thoughtfully,
      regardless of the cold which struck to his slippered feet from the marble
      floor. “That is the only room which does not contain specimens that would
      probably frighten the poor child. I am very much afraid, Koosje,” he
      concluded, doubtfully, “that she is a lady; and what we are to do with a
      lady I can’t think.”

 With that the old gentleman shuffled off to his cosey room, and Koosje
      turned back to her kitchen.

 “He’ll never think of marrying her,” mused Koosje, rather blankly. If she
      had spoken the thoughts to the professor himself, she would have received
      a very emphatic assurance that, much as the study of osteology and the
      Stradivari had blinded him to the affairs of this workaday world, he was
      not yet so thoroughly foolish as to join his fossilised wisdom to the
      ignorance of a child of sixteen or seventeen.

 However, on the morrow matters assumed a somewhat different aspect.
      Gertrude van Floote proved to be not exactly a gentlewoman. It is true
      that her father had been a well-to-do man for his station in life, and had
      very much spoiled and indulged his one motherless child. Yet her education
      was so slight that she could do little more than read and write, besides
      speaking a little English, which she had picked up from the yachtsmen
      frequenting her native town. The professor found she had been but a
      distant relative of the Mevrouw Baake, to seek whom she had come to
      Utrecht, and that she had no kinsfolk upon whom she could depend—a
      fact which accounted for the profusion of her jewellery, all her golden
      trinkets having descended to her as heirlooms.

 “I can be your servant, mynheer,” she suggested. “Indeed, I am a very
      useful girl, as you will find if you will but try me.”

 Now, as a rule, the professor vigorously set his face against admitting
      young servants into his house. They broke his china, they disarranged his
      bones, they meddled with his papers, and made general havoc. So, in truth,
      he was not very willing to have Gertrude van Floote as a permanent member
      of his household, and he said so.

 But Koosje had taken a fancy to the girl; and having an eye to her own
      departure at no very distant date,—for she had been betrothed more
      than two years,—she pleaded so hard to keep her, promising to train
      her in all the professor’s ways, to teach her the value of old china and
      osteologic specimens, that eventually, with a good deal of grumbling, the
      old gentleman gave way, and, being a wise as well as an old gentleman,
      went back to his studies, dismissing Koosje and the girl alike from his
      thoughts.

 Just at first Truide, poor child, was charmed.

 She put away her splendid ornaments, and some lilac frocks and black
      skirts were purchased for her. Her box, which she had left at the station,
      supplied all that was necessary for Sunday.

 It was great fun! For a whole week this young person danced about the
      rambling old house, playing at being a servant. Then she began to grow a
      little weary of it all. She had been accustomed, of course, to performing
      such offices as all Dutch ladies fulfil—the care of china, of linen,
      the dusting of rooms, and the like; but she had done them as a mistress,
      not as an underling. And that was not the worst; it was when it came to
      her pretty feet having to be thrust into klompen, and her having to take a
      pail and syringe and mop and clean the windows and the pathway and the
      front of the house, that the game of maid-servant began to assume a very
      different aspect. When, after having been as free as air to come and go as
      she chose, she was only permitted to attend service on Sundays, and to
      take an hour’s promenade with Dortje, who was dull and heavy and stupid,
      she began to feel positively desperate; and the result of it all was that
      when Jan van der Welde came, as he was accustomed to do nearly every
      evening, to see Koosje, Miss Truide, from sheer longing for excitement and
      change, began to make eyes at him, with what effect I will endeavour to
      show.

 Just at first Koosje noticed nothing. She herself was of so faithful a
      nature that an idea, a suspicion, of Jan’s faithlessness never entered her
      mind. When the girl laughed and blushed and dimpled and smiled, when she
      cast her great blue eyes at the big young fellow, Koosje only thought how
      pretty she was, and it was just a thousand pities she had not been born a
      great lady.

 And thus weeks slipped over. Never very demonstrative herself, Koosje saw
      nothing, Dortje, for her part, saw a great deal; but Dortje was a woman of
      few words, one who quite believed in the saying, “If speech is silver,
      silence is gold;” so she held her peace.

 Now Truide, rendered fairly frantic by her enforced confinement to the
      house, grew to look upon Jan as her only chance of excitement and
      distraction; and Jan, poor, thick-headed noodle of six feet high, was
      thoroughly wretched. What to do he knew not. A strange, mad, fierce
      passion for Truide had taken possession of him, and an utter distaste,
      almost dislike, had come in place of the old love for Koosje. Truide was
      unlike anything he had ever come in contact with before; she was so
      fairy-like, so light, so delicate, so dainty. Against Koosje’s plumper,
      maturer charms, she appeared to the infatuated young man like—if he
      had ever heard of it he would probably have said like a Dresden china
      image; but since he had not, he compared her in his own foolish heart to
      an angel. Her feet were so tiny, her hands so soft, her eyes so
      expressive, her waist so slim, her manner so bewitching! Somehow Koosje
      was altogether different; he could not endure the touch of her heavy hand,
      the tones of her less refined voice; he grew impatient at the denser
      perceptions of her mind. It was very foolish, very short-sighted; for the
      hands, though heavy, were clever and willing; the voice, though a trifle
      coarser in accent than Truide’s childish tones, would never tell him a
      lie; the perceptions, though not brilliant, were the perceptions of good,
      every-day common sense. It really was very foolish, for what charmed him
      most in Truide was the merest outside polish, a certain ease of manner
      which doubtless she had caught from the English aristocrats whom she had
      known in her native place. She had not half the sterling good qualities
      and steadfastness of Koosje; but Jan was in love, and did not stop to
      argue the matter as you or I are able to do. Men in love—very wise
      and great men, too—are often like Jan van der Welde. They lay aside
      pro tem. the whole amount, be it great or small, of wisdom they possess.
      And it must be remembered that Jan van der Welde was neither a wise nor a
      great man.

 Well, in the end there came what the French call un denouement ,—what
      we in forcible modern English would call a smash ,—and it
      happened thus. It was one evening toward the summer that Koosje’s eyes
      were suddenly opened, and she became aware of the free-and-easy
      familiarity of Truide’s manner toward her betrothed lover, Jan. It was
      some very slight and trivial thing that led her to notice it, but in an
      instant the whole truth flashed across her mind.

 “Leave the kitchen!” she said, in a tone of authority.

 But it happened that, at the very instant she spoke, Jan was furtively
      holding Truide’s fingers under the cover of the table-cloth; and when, on
      hearing the sharp words, the girl would have snatched them away, he, with
      true masculine instinct of opposition, held them fast.

 “What do you mean by speaking to her like that?” he demanded, an angry
      flush overspreading his dark face.

 “What is the maid to you?” Koosje asked, indignantly.

 “Maybe more than you are,” he retorted; in answer to which Koosje
      deliberately marched out of the kitchen, leaving them alone.

 To say she was indignant would be but very mildly to express the state of
      her feelings; she was furious . She knew that the end of her romance
      had come. No thoughts of making friends with Jan entered her mind; only a
      great storm filled her heart till it was ready to burst with pain and
      anguish.

 As she went along the passage the professor’s bell sounded, and Koosje,
      being close to the door, went abruptly in. The professor looked up in mild
      astonishment, quickly enough changed to dismay as he caught sight of his
      valued Koosje’s face, from out of which anger seemed in a moment to have
      thrust all the bright, comely beauty.

 “How now, my good Koosje?” said the old gentleman. “Is aught amiss?”

 “Yes, professor, there is,” returned Koosje, all in a blaze of anger, and
      moving, as she spoke, the tea-tray, which she set down upon the oaken
      buffet with a bang, which made its fair and delicate freight fairly jingle
      again.

 “But you needn’t break my china, Koosje,” suggested the old gentleman,
      mildly, rising from his chair and getting into his favourite attitude
      before the stove.

 “You are quite right, professor,” returned Koosje, curtly; she was
      sensible even in her trouble.

 “And what is the trouble?” he asked, gently.

 “It’s just this, professor,” cried Koosje, setting her arms akimbo and
      speaking in a high-pitched, shrill voice; “you and I have been warming a
      viper in our bosoms, and, viper-like, she has turned round and bitten me.”

 “Is it Truide?”

 “Truide,” she affirmed, disdainfully. “Yes, it is Truide, who but for me
      would be dead now of hunger and cold—or worse . And she has
      been making love to that great fool, Jan van der Welde,—great oaf
      that he is,—after all I have done for her; after my dragging her in
      out of the cold and rain; after all I have taught her. Ah, professor, but
      it is a vile, venomous viper that we have been warming in our bosoms!”

 “I must beg, Koosje,” said the old gentleman, sedately, “that you will
      exonerate me from any such proceeding. If you remember rightly, I was
      altogether against your plan for keeping her in the house.” He could not
      resist giving her that little dig, kind of heart as he was.

 “Serves me right for being so soft-hearted!” thundered Koosje. “I’ll be
      wiser next time I fall over a bundle, and leave it where I find it.”

 “No, no, Koosje; don’t say that,” the old gentleman remonstrated, gently.
      “After all, it may be but a blessing in disguise. God sends all our trials
      for some good and wise purpose. Our heaviest afflictions are often, nay,
      most times, Koosje, means to some great end which, while the cloud of
      adversity hangs over us, we are unable to discern.”

 “Ah!” sniffed Koosje, scornfully.

 “This oaf—as I must say you justly term him, for you are a good
      clever woman, Koosje, as I can testify after the experience of years—has
      proved that he can be false; he has shown that he can throw away substance
      for shadow (for, of a truth, that poor, pretty child would make a sad wife
      for a poor man); yet it is better you should know it now than at some
      future date, when—when there might be other ties to make the
      knowledge more bitter to you.”

 “Yes, that is true,” said Koosje, passing the back of her hand across her
      trembling lips. She could not shed tears over her trouble; her eyes were
      dry and burning, as if anger had scorched the blessed drops up ere they
      should fall. She went on washing up the cups and saucers, or at least the cup and saucer, and other articles the professor had used for his tea; and
      after a few minutes’ silence he spoke again.

 “What are you going to do? Punish her, or turn her out, or what?”

 “I shall let him— marry her,” replied Koosje, with a
      portentous nod.

 The old gentleman couldn’t help laughing. “You think he will pay off your
      old scores?”

 “Before long,” answered Koosje, grimly, “she will find him out—as I
      have done.”

 Then, having finished washing the tea-things, which the professor had
      shuddered to behold in her angry hands, she whirled herself out of the
      room and left him alone.

 “Oh, these women—these women!” he cried, in confidence, to the
      pictures and skeletons. “What a worry they are! An old bachelor has the
      best of it in the main, I do believe. But oh, Jan van der Welde, what a
      donkey you must be to get yourself mixed up in such a broil! and yet—ah!”

 The fossilised old gentleman broke off with a sigh as he recalled the
      memory of a certain dead-and-gone romance which had happened—goodness
      only knows how many years before—when he, like Jan van der Welde,
      would have thrown the world away for a glance of a certain pair of blue
      eyes, at the bidding of a certain English tongue, whose broken Nederlandsche
      taal was to him the sweetest music ever heard on earth—sweeter
      even than the strains of the Stradivari when from under his skilful
      fingers rose the perfect melodies of old masters. Ay, but the sweet eyes
      had been closed in death many a long, long, year, the sweet voice hushed
      in silence. He had watched the dear life ebb away, the fire in the blue
      eyes fade out. He had felt each day that the clasp of the little greeting
      fingers was less close; each day he had seen the outline of the face grow
      sharper; and at last there had come one when the poor little English-woman
      met him with the gaze of one who knew him not, and babbled, not of green
      fields, but of horses and dogs, and of a brother Jack, who, five years
      before, had gone down with her Majesty’s ship Alligator in
      mid-Atlantic.

 Ay, but that was many and many a year agone. His young, blue-eyed love
      stood out alone in life’s history, a thing apart. Of the gentler sex, in a
      general way, the old professor had not seen that which had raised it in
      his estimation to the level of the one woman over whose memory hung a
      bright halo of romance.

 Fifteen years had passed away; the old professor of osteology had passed
      away with them; and in the large house on the Domplein lived a baron, with
      half a dozen noisy, happy, healthy children,—young fraulas and jonkheers ,—who scampered up and down the marble passages,
      and fell headlong down the steep, narrow, unlighted stairways, to the
      imminent danger of dislocating their aristocratic little necks. There was
      a new race of neat maids, clad in the same neat livery of lilac and black,
      who scoured and cleaned, just as Koosje and Dortje had done in the old
      professor’s day. You might, indeed, have heard the selfsame names
      resounding through the echoing rooms: “Koos-je! Dort-je!”

 But the Koosje and Dortje were not the same. What had become of Dortje I
      cannot say; but on the left-hand side of the busy, bustling, picturesque
      Oude Gracht there was a handsome shop filled with all manner of cakes,
      sweeties, confections, and liquors—from absinthe to Benedictine, or
      arrack to chartreuse. In that shop was a handsome, prosperous, middle-aged
      woman, well dressed and well mannered, no longer Professor van Dijck’s
      Koosje, but the Jevrouw van Kampen.

 Yes; Koosje had come to be a prosperous tradeswoman of good position,
      respected by all. But she was Koosje van Kampen still; the romance which
      had come to so disastrous and abrupt an end had sufficed for her life.
      Many an offer had been made to her, it is true; but she had always
      declared that she had had enough of lovers—she had found out their
      real value.

 I must tell you that at the time of Jan’s infidelity, after the first
      flush of rage was over, Koosje disdained to show any sign of grief or
      regret. She was very proud, this Netherland servant-maid, far too proud to
      let those by whom she was surrounded imagine she was wearing the willow
      for the faithless Jan; and when Dortje, on the day of the wedding,
      remarked that for her part she had always considered Koosje remarkably
      cool on the subject of matrimony, Koosje with a careless out-turning of
      her hands, palms uppermost, answered that she was right.

 Very soon after their marriage Jan and his young wife left Utrecht for
      Arnheim, where Jan had promise of higher wages; and thus they passed, as
      Koosje thought, completely out of her life.

 “I don’t wish to hear anything more about them, if—you—please,”
       she said, severely and emphatically, to Dortje.

 But not so. In time the professor died, leaving Koosje the large legacy
      with which she set up the handsome shop in the Oude Gracht; and several
      years passed on.

 It happened one day that Koosje was sitting in her shop sewing. In the
      large inner room a party of ladies and officers were eating cakes and
      drinking chocolates and liquors with a good deal of fun and laughter, when
      the door opened timidly, thereby letting in a gust of bitter wind, and a
      woman crept fearfully in, followed by two small, crying children.

 Could the lady give her something to eat? she asked; they had had nothing
      during the day, and the little ones were almost famished.

 Koosje, who was very charitable, lifted a tray of large, plain buns, and
      was about to give her some, when her eyes fell upon the poor beggar’s
      faded face, and she exclaimed:

 “Truide!”

 Truide, for it was she, looked up in startled surprise.

 “I did not know, or I would not have come in, Koosje,” she said, humbly;
      “for I treated you very badly.”

 “Ve-ry bad-ly,” returned Koosje, emphatically. “Then where is Jan?”

 “Dead!” murmured Truide, sadly.

 “Dead! so—ah, well! I suppose I must do something for you. Here
      Yanke!” opening the door and calling, “Yanke!”

 “ Je, jevrouw ,” a voice cried, in reply.

 The next moment a maid came running into the shop.

 “Take these people into the kitchen and give them something to eat. Put
      them by the stove while you prepare it. There is some soup and that smoked
      ham we had for koffy . Then come here and take my place for a
      while.”

 “ Je, jevrouw ,” said Yanke, disappearing again, followed by Truide
      and her children.

 Then Koosje sat down again, and began to think.

 “I said,” she mused, presently, “ that night that the next time I
      fell over a bundle I’d leave it where I found it. Ah, well! I’m not a
      barbarian; I couldn’t do that. I never thought, though, it would be
      Truide.”

 “ Hi, jevrouw ,” was called from the inner room.

 “ Je, mynheer ,” jumping up and going to her customers.

 She attended to their wants, and presently bowed them out.

 “I never thought it would be Truide,” she repeated to herself, as she
      closed the door behind the last of the gay uniforms and jingling
      scabbards. “And Jan is dead—ah, well!”

 Then she went into the kitchen, where the miserable children—girls
      both of them, and pretty had they been clean and less forlornly clad—were
      playing about the stove.

 “So Jan is dead,” began Koosje, seating herself.

 “Yes, Jan is dead,” Truide answered.

 “And he left you nothing?” Koosje asked.

 “We had had nothing for a long time,” Truide replied, in her sad, crushed
      voice. “We didn’t get on very well; he soon got tired of me.”

 “That was a weakness of his,” remarked Koosje, drily.

 “We lost five little ones, one after another,” Truide continued. “And Jan
      was fond of them, and somehow it seemed to sour him. As for me, I was
      sorry enough at the time, Heaven knows, but it was as well. But Jan said
      it seemed as if a curse had fallen upon us; he began to wish you back
      again, and to blame me for having come between you. And then he took to genever ,
      and then to wish for something stronger; so at last every stiver went for
      absinthe, and once or twice he beat me, and then he died.”

 “Just as well,” muttered Koosje, under her breath.

 “It is very good of you to have fed and warmed us,” Truide went on, in her
      faint, complaining tones. “Many a one would have let me starve, and I
      should have deserved it. It is very good of you and we are grateful; but
      ‘tis time we were going, Koosje and Mina;” then added, with a shake of her
      head, “but I don’t know where.”

 “Oh, you’d better stay,” said Koosje, hurriedly. “I live in this big house
      by myself, and I dare say you’ll be more useful in the shop than Yanke—if
      your tongue is as glib as it used to be, that is. You know some English,
      too, don’t you?”

 “A little,” Truide answered, eagerly.

 “And after all,” Koosje said, philosophically, shrugging her shoulders,
      “you saved me from the beatings and the starvings and the rest. I owe you
      something for that. Why, if it hadn’t been for you I should have been
      silly enough to have married him.”

 And then she went back to her shop, saying to herself:

 “The professor said it was a blessing in disguise; God sends all our
      trials to work some great purpose. Yes; that was what he said, and he knew
      most things. Just think if I were trailing about now with those two little
      ones, with nothing to look back to but a schnapps-drinking husband who
      beat me! Ah, well, well! things are best as they are. I don’t know that I
      ought not to be very much obliged to her—and she’ll be very useful
      in the shop.”