THE LITTLE FRENCHMAN AND HIS WATER LOTS

 BY GEORGE POPE MORRIS (1802-1864)

 [From The Little Frenchman and His Water Lots, with Other Sketches of
      the Times (1839), by George Pope Morris.]

 Look into those they call unfortunate,
  And, closer view'd, you'll find they are unwise.— Young. Let wealth come in by comely thrift,
  And not by any foolish shift:
        Tis haste
        Makes waste:
  Who gripes too hard the dry and slippery sand
  Holds none at all, or little, in his hand.— Herrick .

            Let well alone.— Proverb .

 How much real comfort every one might enjoy if he would be contented with
      the lot in which heaven has cast him, and how much trouble would be
      avoided if people would only "let well alone." A moderate independence,
      quietly and honestly procured, is certainly every way preferable even to
      immense possessions achieved by the wear and tear of mind and body so
      necessary to procure them. Yet there are very few individuals, let them be
      doing ever so well in the world, who are not always straining every nerve
      to do better; and this is one of the many causes why failures in business
      so frequently occur among us. The present generation seem unwilling to
      "realize" by slow and sure degrees; but choose rather to set their whole
      hopes upon a single cast, which either makes or mars them forever!

 Gentle reader, do you remember Monsieur Poopoo? He used to keep a small
      toy-store in Chatham, near the corner of Pearl Street. You must recollect
      him, of course. He lived there for many years, and was one of the most
      polite and accommodating of shopkeepers. When a juvenile, you have bought
      tops and marbles of him a thousand times. To be sure you have; and seen
      his vinegar-visage lighted up with a smile as you flung him the coppers;
      and you have laughed at his little straight queue and his dimity breeches,
      and all the other oddities that made up the every-day apparel of my little
      Frenchman. Ah, I perceive you recollect him now.

 Well, then, there lived Monsieur Poopoo ever since he came from "dear,
      delightful Paris," as he was wont to call the city of his nativity—there
      he took in the pennies for his kickshaws—there he laid aside five
      thousand dollars against a rainy day—there he was as happy as a lark—and
      there, in all human probability, he would have been to this very day, a
      respected and substantial citizen, had he been willing to "let well
      alone." But Monsieur Poopoo had heard strange stories about the prodigious
      rise in real estate; and, having understood that most of his neighbors had
      become suddenly rich by speculating in lots, he instantly grew
      dissatisfied with his own lot, forthwith determined to shut up shop, turn
      everything into cash, and set about making money in right-down earnest. No
      sooner said than done; and our quondam storekeeper a few days afterward
      attended an extensive sale of real estate, at the Merchants' Exchange.

 There was the auctioneer, with his beautiful and inviting lithographic
      maps—all the lots as smooth and square and enticingly laid out as
      possible—and there were the speculators—and there, in the
      midst of them, stood Monsieur Poopoo.

 "Here they are, gentlemen," said he of the hammer, "the most valuable lots
      ever offered for sale. Give me a bid for them!"

 "One hundred each," said a bystander.

 "One hundred!" said the auctioneer, "scarcely enough to pay for the maps.
      One hundred—going—and fifty—gone! Mr. H., they are
      yours. A noble purchase. You'll sell those same lots in less than a
      fortnight for fifty thousand dollars profit!"

 Monsieur Poopoo pricked up his ears at this, and was lost in astonishment.
      This was a much easier way certainly of accumulating riches than selling
      toys in Chatham Street, and he determined to buy and mend his fortune
      without delay.

 The auctioneer proceeded in his sale. Other parcels were offered and
      disposed of, and all the purchasers were promised immense advantages for
      their enterprise. At last came a more valuable parcel than all the rest.
      The company pressed around the stand, and Monsieur Poopoo did the same.

 "I now offer you, gentlemen, these magnificent lots, delightfully situated
      on Long Island, with valuable water privileges. Property in fee—title
      indisputable—terms of sale, cash—deeds ready for delivery
      immediately after the sale. How much for them? Give them a start at
      something. How much?" The auctioneer looked around; there were no bidders.
      At last he caught the eye of Monsieur Poopoo. "Did you say one hundred,
      sir? Beautiful lots—valuable water privileges—shall I say one
      hundred for you?"

 " Oui, monsieur ; I will give you von hundred dollar apiece, for de
      lot vid de valuarble vatare privalege; c'est a ."

 "Only one hundred apiece for these sixty valuable lots—only one
      hundred—going—going—going—gone!"

 Monsieur Poopoo was the fortunate possessor. The auctioneer congratulated
      him—the sale closed—and the company dispersed.

 " Pardonnez-moi, monsieur ," said Poopoo, as the auctioneer descended
      his pedestal, "you shall excusez-moi , if I shall go to votre
      bureau , your counting-house, ver quick to make every ting sure wid
      respec to de lot vid de valuarble vatare privalege. Von leetle bird in de
      hand he vorth two in de tree, c'est vrai —eh?"

 "Certainly, sir."

 "Vell den, allons ."

 And the gentlemen repaired to the counting-house, where the six thousand
      dollars were paid, and the deeds of the property delivered. Monsieur
      Poopoo put these carefully in his pocket, and as he was about taking his
      leave, the auctioneer made him a present of the lithographic outline of
      the lots, which was a very liberal thing on his part, considering the map
      was a beautiful specimen of that glorious art. Poopoo could not admire it
      sufficiently. There were his sixty lots, as uniform as possible, and his
      little gray eyes sparkled like diamonds as they wandered from one end of
      the spacious sheet to the other.

 Poopoo's heart was as light as a feather, and he snapped his fingers in
      the very wantonness of joy as he repaired to Delmonico's, and ordered the
      first good French dinner that had gladdened his palate since his arrival
      in America.

 After having discussed his repast, and washed it down with a bottle of
      choice old claret, he resolved upon a visit to Long Island to view his
      purchase. He consequently immediately hired a horse and gig, crossed the
      Brooklyn ferry, and drove along the margin of the river to the Wallabout,
      the location in question.

 Our friend, however, was not a little perplexed to find his property.
      Everything on the map was as fair and even as possible, while all the
      grounds about him were as undulated as they could well be imagined, and
      there was an elbow of the East River thrusting itself quite into the ribs
      of the land, which seemed to have no business there. This puzzled the
      Frenchman exceedingly; and, being a stranger in those parts, he called to
      a farmer in an adjacent field.

 " Mon ami , are you acquaint vid dis part of de country—eh?"

 "Yes, I was born here, and know every inch of it."

 "Ah, c'est bien , dat vill do," and the Frenchman got out of the
      gig, tied the horse, and produced his lithographic map.

 "Den maybe you vill have de kindness to show me de sixty lot vich I have
      bought, vid de valuarble vatare privalege?"

 The farmer glanced his eye over the paper.

 "Yes, sir, with pleasure; if you will be good enough to get into my
      boat, I will row you out to them !"

 "Vat dat you say, sure?"

 "My friend," said the farmer, "this section of Long Island has recently
      been bought up by the speculators of New York, and laid out for a great
      city; but the principal street is only visible at low tide . When
      this part of the East River is filled up, it will be just there. Your
      lots, as you will perceive, are beyond it; and are now all under water ."

 At first the Frenchman was incredulous. He could not believe his senses.
      As the facts, however, gradually broke upon him, he shut one eye, squinted
      obliquely at the heavens—-the river—the farmer—and then
      he turned away and squinted at them all over again! There was his purchase
      sure enough; but then it could not be perceived for there was a river
      flowing over it! He drew a box from his waistcoat pocket, opened it, with
      an emphatic knock upon the lid, took a pinch of snuff and restored it to
      his waistcoat pocket as before. Poopoo was evidently in trouble, having
      "thoughts which often lie too deep for tears"; and, as his grief was also
      too big for words, he untied his horse, jumped into his gig, and returned
      to the auctioneer in hot haste.

 It was near night when he arrived at the auction-room—his horse in a
      foam and himself in a fury. The auctioneer was leaning back in his chair,
      with his legs stuck out of a low window, quietly smoking a cigar after the
      labors of the day, and humming the music from the last new opera.

 "Monsieur, I have much plaisir to fin' you, chez vous , at home."

 "Ah, Poopoo! glad to see you. Take a seat, old boy."

 "But I shall not take de seat, sare."

 "No—why, what's the matter?"

 "Oh, beaucoup de matter. I have been to see de gran lot vot you
      sell me to-day."

 "Well, sir, I hope you like your purchase?"

 "No, monsieur, I no like him."

 "I'm sorry for it; but there is no ground for your complaint."

 "No, sare; dare is no ground at all—de ground is all vatare!"

 "You joke!"

 "I no joke. I nevare joke; je n'entends pas la raillerie , Sare, voulez-vous have de kindness to give me back de money vot I pay!"

 "Certainly not."

 "Den vill you be so good as to take de East River off de top of my lot?"

 "That's your business, sir, not mine."

 "Den I make von mauvaise affaire —von gran mistake!"

 "I hope not. I don't think you have thrown your money away in the land ."

 "No, sare; but I tro it avay in de vatare! "

 "That's not my fault."

 "Yes, sare, but it is your fault. You're von ver gran rascal to swindle me
      out of de l'argent ."

 "Hello, old Poopoo, you grow personal; and if you can't keep a civil
      tongue in your head, you must go out of my counting-room."

 "Vare shall I go to, eh?"

 "To the devil, for aught I care, you foolish old Frenchman!" said the
      auctioneer, waxing warm.

 "But, sare, I vill not go to de devil to oblige you!" replied the
      Frenchman, waxing warmer. "You sheat me out of all de dollar vot I make in
      Shatham Street; but I vill not go to de devil for all dat. I vish you may
      go to de devil yourself you dem yankee-doo-dell, and I vill go and drown
      myself, tout de suite , right avay."

 "You couldn't make a better use of your water privileges, old boy!"

 "Ah, misricorde! Ah, mon dieu, je suis abm . I am ruin! I
      am done up! I am break all into ten sousan leetle pieces! I am von lame
      duck, and I shall vaddle across de gran ocean for Paris, vish is de only
      valuarble vatare privalege dat is left me present! "

 Poor Poopoo was as good as his word. He sailed in the next packet, and
      arrived in Paris almost as penniless as the day he left it.

 Should any one feel disposed to doubt the veritable circumstances here
      recorded, let him cross the East River to the Wallabout, and farmer J——
      will row him out to the very place where the poor Frenchman's lots
      still remain under water .