TONTON By A. Cheneviere

 There are men who seem born to be soldiers. They have the face, the
      bearing, the gesture, the quality of mind. But there are others who have
      been forced to become so, in spite of themselves and of the rebellion of
      reason and the heart, through a rash deed, a disappointment in love, or
      simply because their destiny demanded it, being sons of soldiers and
      gentlemen. Such is the case of my friend Captain Robert de X——.
      And I said to him one summer evening, under the great trees of his
      terrace, which is washed by the green and sluggish Marne:

 “Yes, old fellow, you are sensitive. What the deuce would you have
      done on a campaign where you were obliged to shoot, to strike down with a
      sabre and to kill? And then, too, you have never fought except against the
      Arabs, and that is quite another thing.”

 He smiled, a little sadly. His handsome mouth, with its blond mustache,
      was almost like that of a youth. His blue eyes were dreamy for an instant,
      then little by little he began to confide to me his thought, his
      recollections and all that was mystic and poetic in his soldier’s
      heart.

 “You know we are soldiers in my family. We have a marshal of France
      and two officers who died on the field of honor. I have perhaps obeyed a
      law of heredity. I believe rather that my imagination has carried me away.
      I saw war through my reveries of epic poetry. In my fancy I dwelt only
      upon the intoxication of victory, the triumphant flourish of trumpets and
      women throwing flowers to the victor. And then I loved the sonorous words
      of the great captains, the dramatic representations of martial glory. My
      father was in the third regiment of zouaves, the one which was hewn in
      pieces at Reichshofen, in the Niedervald, and which in 1859 at Palestro,
      made that famous charge against the Austrians and hurled them into the
      great canal. It was superb; without them the Italian divisions would have
      been lost. Victor Emmanuel marched with the zouaves. After this affair,
      while still deeply moved, not by fear but with admiration for this
      regiment of demons and heroes, he embraced their old colonel and declared
      that he would be proud, were he not a king, to join the regiment. Then the
      zouaves acclaimed him corporal of the Third. And for a long time on the
      anniversary festival of St. Palestro, when the roll was called, they
      shouted ‘Corporal of the first squad, in the first company of the
      first battalion, Victor Emmanuel,’ and a rough old sergeant solemnly
      responded: ‘Sent as long into Italy.’

 “That is the way my father talked to us, and by these recitals, a
      soldier was made of a dreamy child. But later, what a disillusion! Where
      is the poetry of battle? I have never made any campaign except in Africa,
      but that has been enough for me. And I believe the army surgeon is right,
      who said to me one day: ‘If instantaneous photographs could be taken
      after a battle, and millions of copies made and scattered through the
      world, there would be no more war. The people would refuse to take part in
      it.’

 “Africa, yes, I have suffered there. On one occasion I was sent to
      the south, six hundred kilometres from Oran, beyond the oasis of Fignig,
      to destroy a tribe of rebels.... On this expedition we had a pretty
      serious affair with a military chief of the great desert, called
      Bon-Arredji. We killed nearly all of the tribe, and seized nearly fifteen
      hundred sheep; in short, it was a complete success. We also captured the
      wives and children of the chief. A dreadful thing happened at that time,
      under my very eyes! A woman was fleeing, pursued by a black mounted
      soldier. She turned around and shot at him with a revolver. The
      horse-soldier was furious, and struck her down with one stroke of his
      sabre. I did not have the time to interfere. I dismounted from my horse to
      take the woman up. She was dead, and almost decapitated. I uttered not one
      word of reproach to the Turkish soldier, who smiled fiercely, and turned
      back.

 “I placed the poor body sadly on the sand, and was going to remount
      my horse, when I perceived, a few steps back, behind a thicket, a little
      girl five or six years old. I recognized at once that she was a Touareg,
      of white race, notwithstanding her tawny color. I approached her. Perhaps
      she was not afraid of me, because I was white like herself. I took her on
      the saddle with me, without resistance on her part, and returned slowly to
      the place where we were to camp for the night. I expected to place her
      under the care of the women whom we had taken prisoners, and were carrying
      away with us. But all refused, saying that she was a vile little Touareg,
      belonging to a race which carries misfortune with it and brings forth only
      traitors.

 “I was greatly embarrassed. I would not abandon the child.... I felt
      somewhat responsible for the crime, having been one of those who had
      directed the massacre. I had made an orphan! I must take her part. One of
      the prisoners of the band had said to me (I understand a little of the
      gibberish of these people) that if I left the little one to these women
      they would kill her because she was the daughter of a Touareg, whom the
      chief had preferred to them, and that they hated the petted, spoiled
      child, whom he had given rich clothes and jewels. What was to be done?

 “I had a wide-awake orderly, a certain Michel of Batignolles. I
      called him and said to him: ‘Take care of the little one.’
      ‘Very well, Captain, I will take her in charge.’ He then
      petted the child, made her sociable, and led her away with him, and two
      hours later he had manufactured a little cradle for her out of biscuit
      boxes which are used on the march for making coffins. In the evening
      Michel put her to bed in it. He had christened her ‘Tonton,’ an
      abbreviation of Touareg. In the morning the cradle was bound on an ass,
      and behold Tonton following the column with the baggage, in the convoy of
      the rear guard, under the indulgent eye of Michel.

 “This lasted for days and weeks. In the evening at the halting
      place, Tonton was brought into my tent, with the goat, which furnished her
      the greater part of her meals, and her inseparable friend, a large
      chameleon, captured by Michel, and responding or not responding to the
      name of Achilles.

 “Ah, well! old fellow, you may believe me or not; but it gave me
      pleasure to see the little one sleeping in her cradle, during the short
      night full of alarm, when I felt the weariness of living, the dull sadness
      of seeing my companions dying, one by one, leaving the caravan; the
      enervation of the perpetual state of alertness, always attacking or being
      attacked, for weeks and months. I, with the gentle instincts of a
      civilized man, was forced to order the beheading of spies and traitors,
      the binding of women in chains and the kidnapping of children, to raid the
      herds, to make of myself an Attila. And this had to be done without a
      moment of wavering, and I the cold and gentle Celt, whom you know,
      remained there, under the scorching African sun. Then what repose of soul,
      what strange meditations were mine, when free at last, at night, in my
      sombre tent, around which death might be prowling, I could watch the
      little Touareg, saved by me, sleeping in her cradle by the side of her
      chameleon lizard. Ridiculous, is it not? But, go there and lead the life
      of a brute, of a plunderer and assassin, and you will see how at times
      your civilized imagination will wander away to take refuge from itself.

 “I could have rid myself of Tonton. In an oasis we met some rebels,
      bearing a flag of truce, and exchanged the women for guns and ammunition.
      I kept the little one, notwithstanding the five months of march we must
      make, before returning to Tlemcen. She had grown gentle, was inclined to
      be mischievous, but was yielding and almost affectionate with me. She ate
      with the rest, never wanting to sit down, but running from one to another
      around the table. She had proud little manners, as if she knew herself to
      be a daughter of the chief’s favorite, obeying only the officers and
      treating Michel with an amusing scorn. All this was to have a sad ending.
      One day I did not find the chameleon in the cradle, though I remembered to
      have seen it there the evening before. I had even taken it in my hands and
      caressed it before Tonton, who had just gone to bed. Then I had given it
      back to her and gone out. Accordingly I questioned her. She took me by the
      hand, and leading me to the camp fire, showed me the charred skeleton of
      the chameleon, explaining to me, as best she could, that she had thrown it
      in the fire, because I had petted it! Oh! women! women! And she gave a
      horrible imitation of the lizard, writhing in the midst of the flames, and
      she smiled with delighted eyes. I was indignant. I seized her by the arm,
      shook her a little, and finished by boxing her ears.

 “My dear fellow, from that day she appeared not to know me. Tonton
      and I sulked; we were angry. However, one morning, as I felt the sun was
      going to be terrible, I went myself to the baggage before the loading for
      departure, and arranged a sheltering awning over the cradle. Then to make
      peace, I embraced my little friend. But as soon as we were on the march,
      she furiously tore off the canvas with which I had covered the cradle.
      Michel put it all in place again, and there was a new revolt. In short, it
      was necessary to yield because she wanted to be able to lean outside of
      her box, under the fiery sun, to look at the head of the column, of which
      I had the command. I saw this on arriving at the resting place. Then
      Michel brought her under my tent. She had not yet fallen asleep, but
      followed with her eyes all of my movements, with a grave air, without a
      smile, or gleam of mischief.

 “She refused to eat and drink; the next day she was ill, with sunken
      eyes and body burning with fever. When the major wished to give her
      medicine she refused to take it and ground her teeth together to keep from
      swallowing.

 “There remained still six days’ march before arriving at Oran.
      I wanted to give her into the care of the nuns. She died before I could do
      so, very suddenly, with a severe attack of meningitis. She never wanted to
      see me again. She was buried under a clump of African shrubs near
      Geryville, in her little campaign cradle. And do you know what was found
      in her cradle? The charred skeleton of the poor chameleon, which had been
      the indirect cause of her death. Before leaving the bivouac, where she had
      committed her crime, she had picked it out of the glowing embers, and
      brought it into the cradle, and that is why her little fingers were
      burned. Since the beginning of the meningitis the major had never been
      able to explain the cause of these burns.”

 Robert was silent for an instant, then murmured: “Poor little one! I
      feel remorseful. If I had not given her that blow.... who knows?... she
      would perhaps be living still....

 “My story is sad, is it not? Ah, well, it is still the sweetest of
      my African memories. War is beautiful! Eh?”

 And Robert shrugged his shoulders....