I was stormbound in the fishing village. I had come there by
steamer, but now the steamer was gone and I was left behind there, a
stranger, at a loss what to do.

My idea was to continue my journey overland, and my route lay for
the most part through the mountainous country on the other side of
the fjord. I hadn't managed to hire horses or a guide, and it was no
easy matter to find one's own way in such stormy weather when the
rivers were running in full flood. This was in the spring-time,
round about the beginning of May.

I was staying at the home of the local doctor, who had given me
shelter and who was now trying to help me in every way he could. He
was in my room with me, and we were both sitting there, smoking
cigars and chatting together. I had given up all hope of continuing
my journey that day and was making myself comfortable on the
doctor's sofa. But when we least expected it, we heard the sound of
heavy sea-boots clumping along the corridor, and there was a knock
at the door.

Come in, said the doctor. The door opened slowly, and a young man in
seamen's clothes stood in the doorway.

I was asked to tell you that old Hrolfur from Weir will take that
chap over there across in his boat, if he likes, said the man,
addressing himself to the doctor.

We both stood up, the doctor and I, and walked towards the door.
That possibility hadn't occurred to either of us.

Is old Hrolfur going fishing then? asked the doctor.

Yes, he's going out to the islands and staying there about a week.
It won't make any difference to him to slip ashore at Muladalir, if
it would be any help.

That's fine, said the doctor, turning to me. It's worth thinking
over, unless you really need to go round the end of the fjord. It'll
save you at least a day on your journey, and it'll be easier to get
horses and a man in Muladalir than it is here.

This was all so unexpected that I didn't quite know what to say. I
looked at the doctor and the stranger in turn, and my first thought
was that the doctor was trying to get rid of me. Then it occurred to
me what a fine thing it would be to avoid having to cross all those
rivers which flow into the head of the fjord. Finally I decided that
the doctor had no ulterior motive and that his advice was prompted
by sheer goodwill.

Is old Hrolfur all right at the moment? the doctor asked the man in
the doorway.

Yes, of course he is, said the man.

All right? I said, looking at them questioningly. I thought that was
a funny thing to ask.

The doctor smiled.

He's just a bit queer--up here, he said, pointing to his forehead.

The thought of having to set out on a long sea journey with a man
who was half crazy made me shudder. I am certain, too, that the
doctor could see what I was thinking, for he smiled good-naturedly.

Is it safe to go with him then? I asked.

Oh yes, quite safe. He's not mad, far from it. He's just a bit
queer--he's got 'bats in the belfry', as men say. He gets these
attacks when he's at home in the dark winter days and has nothing to
occupy him. But there's little sign of it in the summer. And he's a
first-class seaman.

Yes, a first-class seaman who never fails, said the man in the
doorway. It's quite safe to go on board with him now. You can take
my word for that.

Are you going with him? asked the doctor.

Yes, there's a crew of three with him. There'll be four of us in the
boat altogether.

I looked at the man in the doorway--he was a young man of about
twenty, promising and assured. I liked the look of him, very much.

Secretly I began to be ashamed of not daring to cross the fjord with
three men such as he, even though the skipper was 'a bit queer in
the head'.

Are you going to-day? said the doctor. Don't you think it's blowing
a bit hard?

I don't think old Hrolfur'll let that bother him, said the man and
smiled.

Can you use your sails?

Yes, I think so--there's a fair wind.

It was decided that I should go with them. I went to get ready as
quickly as possible, and my luggage, saddle and bridle, were carried
down to the boat.

The doctor walked to the jetty with us.

There, in the shelter of the breakwater, was old Hrolfur's boat, its
mast already stepped, with the sail wrapped round it. It was a four-
oared boat, rather bigger than usual, tarred all over except for the
top plank, which was painted light blue. In the boat were the
various bits of equipment needed for shark-fishing, including a
thick wooden beam to which were attached four hooks of wrought iron,
a keg of shark-bait which stank vilely, and barrels for the shark's
liver. There were shark knives under the thwarts and huge gaffs
hooked under the rib-boards. The crew had put the boxes containing
their food and provisions in the prow.

In the stern could be seen the back of a man bending down. He was
arranging stones in the well of the boat. He was dressed in overalls
made of skin, which reached up to his armpits and which were
fastened by pieces of thin rope crossing over his shoulders. Further
forward there was a second man, and a third was up on the jetty.

Good day to you, Hrolfur, said the doctor.

Good day to you, grunted Hrolfur as he straightened himself up and
spat a stream of yellowish-brown liquid from his mouth. Hand me that
stone over there.

These last words were addressed not to the doctor or me, but to the
man on the jetty. Hrolfur vouchsafed me one quick, unfriendly
glance, but apart from that scarcely seemed to notice me. The look
in those sharp, haunting eyes went through me like a knife. Never
before had anyone looked at me with a glance so piercing and so full
of misgiving.

He was a small man, and lively, though ageing fast. The face was
thin, rather wrinkled, dark and weather-beaten, with light untidy
wisps of hair round the mouth. I was immediately struck by a curious
twitching in his features, perhaps a relic of former bouts of
drinking. Otherwise his expression was harsh and melancholy. His
hands were red, swollen and calloused as if by years of rowing.

Don't you think it's blowing rather hard, Hrolfur? asked the doctor
after a long silence.

Oh, so-so, answered Hrolfur, without looking up.

Again there was silence. It was as if Hrolfur had neither time nor
inclination for gossiping, even though it was the district medical
officer talking to him.

The doctor looked at me and smiled. I was meant to understand that
this was exactly what he had expected.

After another interval the doctor said: You are going to do this
traveller a favour then, Hrolfur?

Oh, well, the boat won't mind taking him.

In other words, I was to be nothing but so much ballast.

Don't you think it's going to be tricky landing there in Mular
Creek?

Hrolfur straightened up, putting his hand to his back.

Oh, no, damn it, he said. There's an offshore wind and the sea's not
bad, and anyway we'll probably get there with the incoming tide.

It isn't going to take you out of your way? I asked.

We won't argue about that. We'll get there all the same. We often
give ourselves a rest in the old creek when we have to row.

Immediately afterwards I said good-bye to the doctor and slid down
into the boat. The man on the jetty cast off, threw the rope down
into the boat and jumped in after it.

One of the crew thrust the handle of an oar against the breakwater
and pushed off. Then they rowed for a short spell to get into the
wind, whilst old Hrolfur fixed the rudder.

The sail filled out; the boat heeled gently over and ran in a long
curve. The islets at the harbour mouth rushed past us. We were
making straight for the open bay.

On the horizon before us the mountainous cliffs, dark blue with a
thick, ragged patch of mist at the top, towered steeply over the
waves. In between, the sea stretched out, seemingly for miles.

Hrolfur was at the rudder. He sat back in the stern on a crossbeam
flush with the gunwale, his feet braced against the ribs on either
side and in his hands the rudder lines, one on each side, close to
his thighs.

I was up with the crew near the mast. We all knew from experience
that Icelandic boats sailed better when well-loaded forward. All
four of us were lying down on the windward side, but to leeward the
foam still bubbled up over the rowlocks.

If you think we're not going fast enough, lads, you'd better start
rowing--but no extra pay, said old Hrolfur, grinning.

We all took his joke well, and I felt that it brought me nearer to
the old man; up to then I'd been just a little scared of him. A joke
is always like an outstretched hand.

For a long time we hardly spoke. In front of the mast we lay in
silence, whilst old Hrolfur was at the stern with the whole length
of the boat between us.

The crew did all they could to make me comfortable. I lay on some
soft sacking just in front of the thwart and kept my head under the
gunwale for protection. The spray from the sea went right over me
and splashed down into the boat on the far side.

The boy who had come for me to the doctor's settled himself down in
the bows in front of me. His name was Eric Ericsson, and the more I
saw of him the more I liked him.

The second member of the crew sat crosswise over the thwart with his
back to the mast. He too was young, his beard just beginning to
grow, red-faced, quiet and rather indolent-looking. He seemed
completely indifferent, even though showers of spray blew, one after
another, straight into his face.

The third member of the crew lay down across the boat behind the
thwart; he put a folded oilskin jacket under his head and fell
asleep.

For a long time, almost an hour, I lay in silence, thinking only of
what I saw and heard around me. There was more than enough to keep
me awake.

I noticed how the sail billowed out, full of wind, pulling hard at
the clew-line, which was made fast to the gunwhale beside Hrolfur.
The fore-sail resembled a beautifully curved sheet of steel, stiff
and unyielding. Both sails were snow-white, semi-transparent and
supple in movement, like the ivory sails on the model ships in
Rosenborg Palace. The mast seemed to bend slightly and the stays
were as taut as fiddle-strings. The boat quivered like a leaf. The
waves pounded hard against the thin strakes of the boat's side. I
could feel them on my cheek, though their dampness never penetrated;
but in between these hammer blows their little pats were wonderfully
friendly. Every now and then I could see the white frothing of the
wave-crests above the gunwale, and sometimes under the sail the
horizon was visible but, more often, there was nothing to be seen
but the broad back of a wave, on which, for a time, the boat tossed
before sinking down once more. The roll was scarcely noticeable, for
the boat kept at the same angle all the time and cleft her way
through the waves. The motion was comfortable and soothing to the
mind; quite unlike the violent lunging of bigger ships.

Gradually the conversation came to life again. It was Eric who
proved to be the most talkative, though the man on the thwart also
threw in a word here and there.

We began to talk about old Hrolfur.

We spoke in a low voice so that he shouldn't hear what we said.
There was, indeed, little danger of his doing so--the distance was
too great and the storm was bound to carry our words away; but men
always lower their voices when they speak of those they can see,
even though they are speaking well of them.

My eyes scarcely left old Hrolfur, and as the men told me more, my
picture of him became clearer and clearer.

He sat there silent, holding on to the steering ropes and staring
straight ahead, not deigning us a single glance.

The crew's story was roughly this.

He was born and bred in the village, and he had never left it. The
croft which he lived in was just opposite the weir in the river
which flowed through the village, and was named after it.

He went to sea whenever possible; fished for shark in the spring and
for cod and haddock in the other seasons. He never felt so happy as
when he was on the sea; and if he couldn't go to sea, he sat alone
at home in the croft mending his gear. He never went down to the
harbour for work like the other fishermen and never worked on the
land. Humming away and talking to himself he fiddled about in his
shed, around his boat-house or his croft, his hands all grubby with
tar and grease. If addressed, he was abrupt and curt in his answers,
sometimes even abusive. Hardly anyone dared go near him.

Yet everyone liked him really. Everyone who got to know him said
that he improved on acquaintance. His eccentricity increased as he
grew older, but particularly after he had lost his son.

His son was already grown-up and had been a most promising young
fellow. He was thought to be the most daring of all the skippers in
the village and always went furthest out to sea; he was also the
most successful fisherman of them all. But one day a sudden storm
had caught them far out to sea, well outside the mouth of the fjord.
Rowing hard, in the teeth of wind and tide, they managed to reach
the cliffs, but by that time they were quite exhausted. Their idea
had been to land at Mular Creek, but unfortunately their boat
overturned as they tried to enter. Hrolfur's son and one other on
board had been drowned, though the rest were saved.

After the disaster Hrolfur ignored everybody for a long time. It
wasn't that he wept or lost heart. Perhaps he had done so for the
first few days, but not afterwards. He just kept to himself. He took
not the slightest notice of his wife and his other children, just as
if they were no longer his concern. It was as though he felt he'd
lost everything. He lived all alone with his sorrow and talked of it
to no one. Nobody tried to question him; no one dared try to comfort
him. Then, one winter, he started talking to himself.

Day and night, for a long time, he talked to himself, talked as
though two or more men were chatting together, changing his tone of
voice and acting in every way as though he were taking part in a
lively and interesting conversation. There was nothing silly in what
he said, although the subject matter was often difficult to follow.
He would always answer if anyone spoke to him, slowly to be sure,
but always sensibly and agreeably. Often, before he could answer, it
was as though he had to wake up as from a sleep, and yet his work
never suffered from these bouts of absentmindedness.

He never talked about his son. The conversations he held with
himself were mostly concerned with various adventures he thought had
befallen him; some were exaggerated, others pure invention.
Sometimes he would talk of things he was going to do in the future,
or things he would have done or ought to have in the past, but never
about the present.

It wasn't long before the rumour spread that old Hrolfur was crazy,
and for a long time hardly anyone dared to go to sea with him.

Now, that's all a thing of the past, said Eric and smiled. Nowadays
there are always more who would like to go with him than he can
take.

And does he catch plenty of fish?

Yes, he rarely fails.

Isn't he quite well-off then?

I don't know. At any rate he's not dependent on anyone else, and
he's the sole owner of his boat and tackle.

He's rolling in money, the old devil, said the man at the mast,
wiping the spray from his face with his hand.

Then they began to tell me about Mular Island and the life they
would lead there in the coming week.

The island was a barren rock beyond the cliffs, and, in the autumn
storms, was almost covered by the waves. The first thing they'd have
to do, when they arrived, was to rebuild their refuge from the year
before, roof it over with bits of driftwood and cover them with
seaweed. That was to be their shelter at night, no matter what the
weather. Nature had provided a landing-place, so that they'd no
trouble with that, though the spot was so treacherous that one of
them would have to stand watch over the boat every night.

Each evening they would row off from the island with their lines to
some well-known fishing bank, for it was after midnight that the
shark was most eager to take the bait. Savouring in his nostrils the
smell of horse flesh soaked in rum and of rotten seal blubber, he
would rush on the scent and greedily swallow whatever was offered.
When he realised the sad truth that a huge hook with a strong barb
was hidden inside this tempting dish and that it was no easy matter
to disgorge the tasty morsel, he would try to gnaw through the shaft
of the hook with his teeth. Very occasionally he might succeed, but
usually his efforts failed. Attached to the hook was a length of
strong iron chain; and sometimes, though defeated by the hook, he
would manage to snip through the chain. Then, in his joy at being
free, this creature with the magnificent appetite would immediately
rush to the next hook, only to be caught there when the lines were
drawn in. If the shark failed in his efforts to gnaw himself free,
he would try, by twisting and turning, to break either the hook or
the chain; but man had foreseen this possibility and had made the
hook to turn with him. With exemplary patience 'the grey one' would
continue his twisting until he had been drawn right up to the side
of the boat and a second hook made fast in him. His sea-green,
light-shy, pig-like eyes would glare malevolently up at his
tormentors, and in his maddened fury he would bite, snap and fight
until he almost capsized the boat.

For centuries our forefathers had hunted the shark like this in open
boats, but nowadays men preferred to use decked vessels. No one in
the district still used the old method, apart from old Hrolfur.

He had dragged in many a 'grey one'. From the bottom of the boat
Eric picked up one of the hooks and passed it to me; it was of
wrought iron, half an inch thick, with a point of cast steel. But
the spinning joint was almost chewed through and the hook shaft
bitten and gnawed--the 'grey one' had fought hard that time.

The crew told me so much about their fishing adventures that I
longed to go to the island with them.

Suddenly Eric gave me a nudge.

The conversation stopped, and we all looked back at old Hrolfur.

Now he's talking to himself.

We all held our breath and listened.

Hrolfur sat like a statue, holding the rudder-lines. His eyes wore a
far-away look and a curious smile of happiness played over his face.

After a short silence, he spoke again--in a perfectly normal voice.

When I was on the frigate--

For the time being that was all.

There was a touch of vanity in his smile, as though in memory of
some old, half-ludicrous story from the past.

Yes, when I was on the frigate, my lad--

It was just as if there were someone sitting next to him beside the
rudder, to whom he was relating his adventures.

Has he ever been on a warship? I whispered.

Never in his life, said Eric.

Our eyes never left him. I can still remember the curious twitching
and working of his features. The eyes themselves were invisible; it
was as though the man were asleep. But his forehead and temples were
forever on the move, as if in mimicry of what he said.

I couldn't utter a sound. Everything was blurred before my eyes, for
it was only then that the full realisation came upon me that the man
at the rudder--the man who held all our lives in his hands--was
half-crazed.

The crew nudged each other and chortled. They'd seen all this
before.

She was running aground--heading straight for the reef,--a total
loss, said Hrolfur, a total loss, I tell you. She was a beautiful
craft, shining black and diced with white along the sides--ten
fighting mouths on either side and a carved figure on her prow. I
think the king would have been sorry to lose her. She was far too
lovely to be ground to pieces there--they were glad when I turned
up.

The crew did their best to smother their laughter.

'Top-sails up,' I shouted.--'Top-sails up, my lad.' The officer, for
all his gold braid, went as pale as death. 'Top-sails up, in the
devil's name.' The blue-jackets on the deck fell over themselves in
fear. Yes, my lad, even though I hadn't a sword dangling by my side,
I said, 'Top-sails up, in the devil's name.' And they obeyed me--
they obeyed me. They didn't dart not to. 'Top-sails up, in the
devil's name.'

Hrolfur raised himself up on the crossbeam, his fists clenched round
the steering-ropes.

Eric was almost bursting with laughter and trying hard not to let it
be heard; but the man at the mast made little attempt to stifle his.

She's made it, said Hrolfur, his face all smiles and nodding his
head.--Out to sea. Straight out to sea. Let her lie down a bit, if
she wants to. It'll do her no harm to ship a drop or two. Let it
'bubble up over her rowlocks,' as we Icelanders say. Even though she
creaks a bit, it's all to the good. Her planks aren't rotten when
they make that noise. All right, we'll sail the bottom out of her--
but forward she'll go--forward, forward she shall go!

Hrolfur let his voice drop and drew out his jet words slowly.

By now we were far out in the fjord. The sea was rising and becoming
more choppy because of tide currents. Good steering became more and more
difficult. Hrolfur seemed to do it instinctively. He never once looked
up and yet seemed to see all around him. He seemed to sense the approach
of those bigger waves which had to be avoided or passed by. The general
direction was never lost, but the boat ran wonderfully smoothly in and
out of the waves--over them, before them and through them, as though she
were possessed with human understanding. Not a single wave fell on her;
they towered high above, advanced on her foaming and raging, but
somehow--at the last moment--she turned aside. She was as sensitive as a
frightened hind, quick to answer the rudder, as supple in her movements
as a willing racehorse. Over her reigned the spirit of Hrolfur.

But Hrolfur himself was no longer there. He was 'on the frigate'. It
was not his own boat he was steering in that hour, but a huge three-
master with a whole cloud of sails above her and ten cannon on
either side--a miracle of the shipwright's craft. The mainstays were
of many-stranded steelwire, the halyards, all clustered together,
struck at the mast and stays; they seemed inextricably tangled, and
yet were in fact all ship-shape, taut and true, like the nerves in a
human body. There was no need to steer her enormous bulk to avoid
the waves or pass them by; it was enough to let her crush them with
all her weight, let her grind them down and push them before her
like drifts of snow. Groaning and creaking she ploughed straight on
through all that came against her, heeling before the wind right
down to her gunwale and leaving behind her a long furrow in the sea.
High above the deck of this magnificent vessel, between two curved
iron pillars, Hrolfur's boat hung like a tiny mussel shell.

Once upon a time this had been a dream of the future. But now that
all hope of its fulfilment had been lost, the dream had long since
become a reality. Hrolfur's adventure 'on the frigate' was a thing
of the past.

For a long time he continued talking to himself, talked of how he
had brought 'the frigate' safely to harbour, and how he had been
awarded a 'gold medal' by the king. We could hear only anppets of
this long rigmarole, but we never lost the drift of it. He spoke
alternately in Danish and Icelandic, in many different tones of
voice, and one could always tell, by the way he spoke, where he was
in 'the frigate': whether he was addressing the crew on the deck, or
the officers on the bridge, and when, his fantastic feat
accomplished, he clinked glasses with them in the cabin on the poop.

The wind had slackened somewhat, but now that we had reached so far
out into the bay the waves were higher; they were the remains of the
huge ocean waves which raged on the high seas, remains which,
despite the adverse wind, made their way far up the fjord.

Hrolfur no longer talked aloud, but he continued to hum quietly to
himself. The crew around me began to doze off, and I think even I
was almost asleep for a time. To tell the truth I wasn't very far
from feeling seasick.

Soon afterwards the man who had been asleep in the space behind the
mast rose to his feet, yawned once or twice, shook himself to
restore his circulation and looked around.

It won't be long now before we get to Mular Creek, he said with his
mouth still wide-open.

I was wide awake at once when I heard this, and raised myself up on
my elbow. The mountain I had seen from the village--which then had
been wrapped in a dark haze--now towered directly above us, rocky
and enormous, with black sea-crags at its feet. The rocks were
drenched with spray from the breakers, and the booming of the sea as
it crashed into the basalt caves resounded like the roar of cannon.

There'll be no landing in the creek today, Hrolfur, the man said and
yawned again. The breakers are too heavy.

Hrolfur pretended he hadn't heard.

Everybody aboard was awake now and watching the shore; and I think
he was not the only one amongst us to shudder at the thought of
landing.

On the mountain in front of us it was as though a panel was slowly
moved to one side: the valleys of Muladalir opened up before us.
Soon we glimpsed the roofs of the farms up on the hill-side. The
beach itself was covered with rocks.

The boat turned into the inlet. It was quieter there than outside,
and the sea was just a little another.

Loosen the foresail, Hrolfur ordered. It was Eric who obeyed and
held on to the sheet Hrolfur himself untied the mainsail, whilst at
the same time keeping hold of the sheet. I imagined Hrolfur must be
thinking it safer to have the sails loose as it was likely to be
gusty in the inlet.

Are you going to sail in? said the man who'd been asleep. His voice
came through a nose filled with snuff.

Shut up, said Hrolfur savagely.

The man took the hint and asked no more questions. No one asked a
question, though every moment now was one of suspense.

We all gazed in silence at the cliffs, which were lathered in white
foam.

One wave after another passed under the boat. They lifted her high
up, as if to show us the surf. As the boat sank slowly down into the
trough of the wave, the surf disappeared and with it much of the
shore. The wave had shut it out.

I was surprised how little the boat moved, but an explanation of the
mystery was soon forthcoming: the boat and all she carried were
still subject to Hrolfur's will.

He let the wind out of the mainsail and, by careful manipulation of
the rudder, kept the boat wonderfully still. He was standing up now
in front of the crossbeam and staring fixedly out in front of the
boat. He was no longer talking to himself, he was no longer 'on the
frigate', but in his own boat; he knew well how much depended on
him.

After waiting for a while, watching his opportunity, Hrolfur
suddenly let her go at full speed once more.

Now the moment had come--a moment I shall never forget--nor probably
any of us who were in the boat with him. It was not fear that
gripped us but something more like excitement before a battle. Yet,
if the choice had been mine, we should have turned back from the
creek that day.

Hrolfur stood at the rudder, immovable, his eyes shifting from side
to side, now under the sail, now past it. He chewed vigorously on
his quid of tobacco and spat. There was much less sign now of the
twitchings round his eyes than there'd been earlier in the day, and
his very calmness had a soothing effect on us all.

As we approached the creek, a huge wave rose up behind us. Hrolfur
glanced at it with the corner of his eye. He spat and bared his
teeth. The wave rose and rose, and it reached us just at the mouth
of the creek, its overhanging peak so sharp as to be almost
transparent. It seemed to be making straight for the boat.

As I watched, I felt the boat plummet down, as if the sea was
snatched from under her; it was the undertow--the wave was drawing
the waters back beneath it. By the gunwale the blue-green sea
frothed white as it poured back from the skerries near the entrance
to the creek.

The boat almost stood on end; it was as if the sea was boiling
around us--boiling until the very seaweed on the rocks was turned to
broth.

Suddenly an ice-cold lash, as of a whip, seemed to strike me in the
face. I staggered forwards under the blow and grasped at one of the
mainstays.

Let go the foresail, shouted Hrolfur.

When I was able to look up, the sails were flapping idly over the
gunwale. The boat floated gently into the creek, thwart-deep in
water.

We all felt fine.

It's true, I could feel the cold sea water dripping down my bare
back, underneath my shirt, but I didn't mind. All that had happened
to me was but a kiss, given me in token of farewell by the youngest
daughter of the goddess of the waves.

The boat floated slowly in on the unaccustomed calm of the waters
and stopped at the landing-place.

Standing there watching were two men from the farm.

I thought as much, it had to be old Hrolfur, one of them called out
as we landed. It's no ordinary man's job to get into the creek on a
day like this.

Hrolfur's face was wreathed in smiles: he made no answer, but
slipping off the rudder in case it should touch bottom he laid it
down across the stern.

We were given a royal welcome by the fanners from Mular, and all
that I needed to further me on my journey was readily available and
willingly granted. Nowhere does Iceland's hospitality flourish so
well as in her outlying stations and in the remotest of her valleys,
where travellers are few.

We all got out of the boat and pulled her clear of the waves. Every
one of us was only too glad to get the opportunity of stretching his
legs after sitting cramped up on the hard boards for nearly four
hours.

I walked up to where old Hrolfur stood apart, on the low, flat
rocks, thanked him for the trip and asked him what it cost.

Cost? he said, scarce looking at me. What does it cost? Just a
minute now, my lad,--just a minute.

He answered me with the complete lack of formality one accords an
old friend, though we had met for the first time that day. His whole
face was scowling now, as he answered me brusquely--indeed, almost
curtly; and yet there was something attractive about him, something
that aroused both trust and respect and which made it impossible for
me to resent his familiarity.

How much the trip costs? Just a minute now.

It seemed that his thoughts were elsewhere. He unloosened the brace
of his overalls, reached down into the pocket of his patched
garments beneath and, drawing out a fine length of chewing tobacco,
took a bite. Then, breaking off a smallish length, he dropped it
into the crown of his seaman's hat. Finally, slowly and very
deliberately, he refastened the top of his overalls.

I expect you got a bit wet out there coming into the creek.

Oh, not really.

Sometimes one gets unpleasantly damp out there.

Hrolfur stood still, chewing his quid of tobacco and staring out at
the entrance to the creek. He seemed to have forgotten all about
answering my question.

Sometimes one gets unpleasantly damp out there, he repeated, laying
great emphasis on every word. I looked straight at him and saw there
were tears in his eyes. Now his features were all working again and
twitching as they had done earlier.

There's many a boat filled up there, he added, and some have got no
further. But I've floated in and out so far. Oh well, 'The silver
cup sinks, but the wooden bowl floats on', as the proverb says.
There was a time when I had to drag out of the water here a man who
was better than me in every way--that's when I really got to know
the old creek.

For a time he continued to stand there, staring out at the creek
without saying a word. But, at last, after wiping the tears from his
face with the back of his glove, he seemed to come to himself once
more.

You were asking, my lad, what the journey costs--it costs nothing.

Nothing? What nonsense!

Not since you got wet, said Hrolfur and smiled, though you could
still see the tears in his eyes. It's an old law of ours that if the
ferry-man lets his passengers get wet, even though it's only their
big toe, then he forfeits his toll.

I repeatedly begged Hrolfur to let me pay him for the journey, but
it was no use. At last he became serious again and said:

The journey costs nothing, as I said to you. I've brought many a
traveller over here to the creek and never taken a penny in return.
But if you ever come back to our village again, and old Hrolfur
should happen to be on land, come over to Weir and drink a cup of
coffee with him--black coffee with brown rock-sugar and a drop of
brandy in it; that is, if you can bring yourself to do such a thing.

This I promised him, and old Hrolfur shook me firmly and
meaningfully by the hand as we parted.

As they prepared to leave, we all three, the farmers from Mular and
I, stood there on the rocks to see how Hrolfur would manage. The
crew had furled the sails and sat down to the oars, whilst old
Hrolfur stood in front of the crossbeam, holding the rudder-line.

They weren't rowing though, but held their oars up, waiting for
their opportunity. All this while, wave after wave came riding
through the entrance to the creek, pouring their white cascades of
foam over the reefs.

Hrolfur watched them steadily and waited, like an animal ready to
pounce on its prey.

Now, my lads, cried Hrolfur suddenly. The oars crashed into the sea,
and the boat shot forward.

Just so, I thought, must the vikings in olden time have rowed to the
attack.

Hrolfur's voice was lost to us in the roaring of the surf, but he
seemed to be urging the men on to row their utmost. They rowed,
indeed, like things possessed, and the boat hurtled forward.

At the mouth of the creek a surf-topped wave rose against them,
sharp and concave, as it rushed on its way to the reefs. We held our
breath. It was a terrifying but magnificent sight.

Hrolfur shouted something loudly, and at the same moment every oar
hugged the side of the boat, like the fins of a salmon as it hurls
itself at a waterfall. The boat plunged straight into the wave. For
a moment we lost sight of her in the swirling spray; only the mast
was visible. When we saw her again, she was well out past the
breakers. She'd been moving fast and was well steered.

Hrolfur took his place on the crossbeam as if nothing had happened,
just as he had sat there earlier in the day, whilst he was 'on the
frigate'.

Two of the crew began to set the sails, whilst one started to bail
out. Soon the boat was once more on the move.

I felt a strange lump in my throat as I watched old Hrolfur sailing
away.

God bless you, old salt, I thought. You thoroughly deserved to
cleave through the cold waters of Iceland in a shapely frigate.

The boat heeled over gracefully and floated over the waves like a
gull with its wings outstretched. We stood there watching, without a
move, until she disappeared behind the headland.




GUNNAR GUNNARSSON