ZADIG THE BABYLONIAN By Francois Marie Arouet De Voltaire

 THE BLIND OF ONE EYE

 There lived at Babylon, in the reign of King Moabdar, a young man named
      Zadig, of a good natural disposition, strengthened and improved by
      education. Though rich and young, he had learned to moderate his passions;
      he had nothing stiff or affected in his behavior, he did not pretend to
      examine every action by the strict rules of reason, but was always ready
      to make proper allowances for the weakness of mankind.

 It was matter of surprise that, notwithstanding his sprightly wit, he
      never exposed by his raillery those vague, incoherent, and noisy
      discourses, those rash censures, ignorant decisions, coarse jests, and all
      that empty jingle of words which at Babylon went by the name of
      conversation. He had learned, in the first book of Zoroaster, that self
      love is a football swelled with wind, from which, when pierced, the most
      terrible tempests issue forth.

 Above all, Zadig never boasted of his conquests among the women, nor
      affected to entertain a contemptible opinion of the fair sex. He was
      generous, and was never afraid of obliging the ungrateful; remembering the
      grand precept of Zoroaster, “When thou eatest, give to the dogs,
      should they even bite thee.” He was as wise as it is possible for
      man to be, for he sought to live with the wise.

 Instructed in the sciences of the ancient Chaldeans, he understood the
      principles of natural philosophy, such as they were then supposed to be;
      and knew as much of metaphysics as hath ever been known in any age, that
      is, little or nothing at all. He was firmly persuaded, notwithstanding the
      new philosophy of the times, that the year consisted of three hundred and
      sixty-five days and six hours, and that the sun was in the center of the
      world. But when the principal magi told him, with a haughty and
      contemptuous air, that his sentiments were of a dangerous tendency, and
      that it was to be an enemy to the state to believe that the sun revolved
      round its own axis, and that the year had twelve months, he held his
      tongue with great modesty and meekness.

 Possessed as he was of great riches, and consequently of many friends,
      blessed with a good constitution, a handsome figure, a mind just and
      moderate, and a heart noble and sincere, he fondly imagined that he might
      easily be happy. He was going to be married to Semira, who, in point of
      beauty, birth, and fortune, was the first match in Babylon. He had a real
      and virtuous affection for this lady, and she loved him with the most
      passionate fondness.

 The happy moment was almost arrived that was to unite them forever in the
      bands of wedlock, when happening to take a walk together toward one of the
      gates of Babylon, under the palm trees that adorn the banks of the
      Euphrates, they saw some men approaching, armed with sabers and arrows.
      These were the attendants of young Orcan, the minister’s nephew,
      whom his uncle’s creatures had flattered into an opinion that he
      might do everything with impunity. He had none of the graces nor virtues
      of Zadig; but thinking himself a much more accomplished man, he was
      enraged to find that the other was preferred before him. This jealousy,
      which was merely the effect of his vanity, made him imagine that he was
      desperately in love with Semira; and accordingly he resolved to carry her
      off. The ravishers seized her; in the violence of the outrage they wounded
      her, and made the blood flow from her person, the sight of which would
      have softened the tigers of Mount Imaus. She pierced the heavens with her
      complaints. She cried out, “My dear husband! they tear me from the
      man I adore.” Regardless of her own danger, she was only concerned
      for the fate of her dear Zadig, who, in the meantime, defended himself
      with all the strength that courage and love could inspire. Assisted only
      by two slaves, he put the ravishers to flight and carried home Semira,
      insensible and bloody as she was.

 On opening her eyes and beholding her deliverer. “O Zadig!”
      said she, “I loved thee formerly as my intended husband; I now love
      thee as the preserver of my honor and my life.” Never was heart more
      deeply affected than that of Semira. Never did a more charming mouth
      express more moving sentiments, in those glowing words inspired by a sense
      of the greatest of all favors, and by the most tender transports of a
      lawful passion.

 Her wound was slight and was soon cured. Zadig was more dangerously
      wounded; an arrow had pierced him near his eye, and penetrated to a
      considerable depth. Semira wearied Heaven with her prayers for the
      recovery of her lover. Her eyes were constantly bathed in tears; she
      anxiously awaited the happy moment when those of Zadig should be able to
      meet hers; but an abscess growing on the wounded eye gave everything to
      fear. A messenger was immediately dispatched to Memphis for the great
      physician Hermes, who came with a numerous retinue. He visited the patient
      and declared that he would lose his eye. He even foretold the day and hour
      when this fatal event would happen. “Had it been the right eye,”
      said he, “I could easily have cured it; but the wounds of the left
      eye are incurable.” All Babylon lamented the fate of Zadig, and
      admired the profound knowledge of Hermes.

 In two days the abscess broke of its own accord and Zadig was perfectly
      cured. Hermes wrote a book to prove that it ought not to have been cured.
      Zadig did not read it; but, as soon as he was able to go abroad, he went
      to pay a visit to her in whom all his hopes of happiness were centered,
      and for whose sake alone he wished to have eyes. Semira had been in the
      country for three days past. He learned on the road that that fine lady,
      having openly declared that she had an unconquerable aversion to one-eyed
      men, had the night before given her hand to Orcan. At this news he fell
      speechless to the ground. His sorrow brought him almost to the brink of
      the grave. He was long indisposed; but reason at last got the better of
      his affliction, and the severity of his fate served to console him.

 “Since,” said he, “I have suffered so much from the
      cruel caprice of a woman educated at court, I must now think of marrying
      the daughter of a citizen.” He pitched upon Azora, a lady of the
      greatest prudence, and of the best family in town. He married her and
      lived with her for three months in all the delights of the most tender
      union. He only observed that she had a little levity; and was too apt to
      find that those young men who had the most handsome persons were likewise
      possessed of most wit and virtue.

 THE NOSE

 One morning Azora returned from a walk in a terrible passion, and uttering
      the most violent exclamations. “What aileth thee,” said he,
      “my dear spouse? What is it that can thus have discomposed thee?”

 “Alas,” said she, “thou wouldst be as much enraged as I
      am hadst thou seen what I have just beheld. I have been to comfort the
      young widow Cosrou, who, within these two days, hath raised a tomb to her
      young husband, near the rivulet that washes the skirts of this meadow. She
      vowed to heaven, in the bitterness of her grief, to remain at this tomb
      while the water of the rivulet should continue to run near it.”—“Well,”
      said Zadig, “she is an excellent woman, and loved her husband with
      the most sincere affection.”

 “Ah,” replied Azora, “didst thou but know in what she
      was employed when I went to wait upon her!”

 “In what, pray, beautiful Azora? Was she turning the course of the
      rivulet?”

 Azora broke out into such long invectives and loaded the young widow with
      such bitter reproaches, that Zadig was far from being pleased with this
      ostentation of virtue.

 Zadig had a friend named Cador, one of those young men in whom his wife
      discovered more probity and merit than in others. He made him his
      confidant, and secured his fidelity as much as possible by a considerable
      present. Azora, having passed two days with a friend in the country,
      returned home on the third. The servants told her, with tears in their
      eyes, that her husband died suddenly the night before; that they were
      afraid to send her an account of this mournful event; and that they had
      just been depositing his corpse in the tomb of his ancestors, at the end
      of the garden.

 She wept, she tore her hair, and swore she would follow him to the grave.

 In the evening Cador begged leave to wait upon her, and joined his tears
      with hers. Next day they wept less, and dined together. Cador told her
      that his friend had left him the greatest part of his estate; and that he
      should think himself extremely happy in sharing his fortune with her. The
      lady wept, fell into a passion, and at last became more mild and gentle.
      They sat longer at supper than at dinner. They now talked with greater
      confidence. Azora praised the deceased; but owned that he had many
      failings from which Cador was free.

 During supper Cador complained of a violent pain in his side. The lady,
      greatly concerned, and eager to serve him, caused all kinds of essences to
      be brought, with which she anointed him, to try if some of them might not
      possibly ease him of his pain. She lamented that the great Hermes was not
      still in Babylon. She even condescended to touch the side in which Cador
      felt such exquisite pain.

 “Art thou subject to this cruel disorder?” said she to him
      with a compassionate air.

 “It sometimes brings me,” replied Cador, “to the brink
      of the grave; and there is but one remedy that can give me relief, and
      that is to apply to my side the nose of a man who is lately dead.”

 “A strange remedy, indeed!” said Azora.

 “Not more strange,” replied he, “than the sachels of
      Arnon against the apoplexy.” This reason, added to the great merit
      of the young man, at last determined the lady.

 “After all,” says she, “when my husband shall cross the
      bridge Tchinavar, in his journey to the other world, the angel Asrael will
      not refuse him a passage because his nose is a little shorter in the
      second life than it was in the first.” She then took a razor, went
      to her husband’s tomb, bedewed it with her tears, and drew near to
      cut off the nose of Zadig, whom she found extended at full length in the
      tomb. Zadig arose, holding his nose with one hand, and, putting back the
      razor with the other, “Madam,” said he, “don’t
      exclaim so violently against young Cosrou; the project of cutting off my
      nose is equal to that of turning the course of a rivulet.” Zadig
      found by experience that the first month of marriage, as it is written in
      the book of Zend, is the moon of honey, and that the second is the moon of
      wormwood. He was some time after obliged to repudiate Azora, who became
      too difficult to be pleased; and he then sought for happiness in the study
      of nature. “No man,” said he, “can be happier than a
      philosopher who reads in this great book which God hath placed before our
      eyes. The truths he discovers are his own; he nourishes and exalts his
      soul; he lives in peace; he fears nothing from men; and his tender spouse
      will not come to cut off his nose.”

 Possessed of these ideas he retired to a country house on the banks of the
      Euphrates. There he did not employ himself in calculating how many inches
      of water flow in a second of time under the arches of a bridge, or whether
      there fell a cube line of rain in the month of the Mouse more than in the
      month of the Sheep. He never dreamed of making silk of cobwebs, or
      porcelain of broken bottles; but he chiefly studied the properties of
      plants and animals; and soon acquired a sagacity that made him discover a
      thousand differences where other men see nothing but uniformity.

 One day, as he was walking near a little wood, he saw one of the queen’s
      eunuchs running toward him, followed by several officers, who appeared to
      be in great perplexity, and who ran to and fro like men distracted,
      eagerly searching for something they had lost of great value. “Young
      man,” said the first eunuch, “hast thou seen the queen’s
      dog?” “It is a female,” replied Zadig. “Thou art
      in the right,” returned the first eunuch. “It is a very small
      she spaniel,” added Zadig; “she has lately whelped; she limps
      on the left forefoot, and has very long ears.” “Thou hast seen
      her,” said the first eunuch, quite out of breath. “No,”
      replied Zadig, “I have not seen her, nor did I so much as know that
      the queen had a dog.”

 Exactly at the same time, by one of the common freaks of fortune, the
      finest horse in the king’s stable had escaped from the jockey in the
      plains of Babylon. The principal huntsman and all the other officers ran
      after him with as much eagerness and anxiety as the first eunuch had done
      after the spaniel. The principal huntsman addressed himself to Zadig, and
      asked him if he had not seen the king’s horse passing by. “He
      is the fleetest horse in the king’s stable,” replied Zadig;
      “he is five feet high, with very small hoofs, and a tail three feet
      and a half in length; the studs on his bit are gold of twenty-three
      carats, and his shoes are silver of eleven pennyweights.” “What
      way did he take? where is he?” demanded the chief huntsman. “I
      have not seen him,” replied Zadig, “and never heard talk of
      him before.”

 The principal huntsman and the first eunuch never doubted but that Zadig
      had stolen the king’s horse and the queen’s spaniel. They
      therefore had him conducted before the assembly of the grand desterham,
      who condemned him to the knout, and to spend the rest of his days in
      Siberia. Hardly was the sentence passed when the horse and the spaniel
      were both found. The judges were reduced to the disagreeable necessity of
      reversing their sentence; but they condemned Zadig to pay four hundred
      ounces of gold for having said that he had not seen what he had seen. This
      fine he was obliged to pay; after which he was permitted to plead his
      cause before the counsel of the grand desterham, when he spoke to the
      following effect:

 “Ye stars of justice, abyss of sciences, mirrors of truth, who have
      the weight of lead, the hardness of iron, the splendor of the diamond, and
      many properties of gold: Since I am permitted to speak before this august
      assembly, I swear to you by Oramades that I have never seen the queen’s
      respectable spaniel, nor the sacred horse of the king of kings. The truth
      of the matter was as follows: I was walking toward the little wood, where
      I afterwards met the venerable eunuch, and the most illustrious chief
      huntsman. I observed on the sand the traces of an animal, and could easily
      perceive them to be those of a little dog. The light and long furrows
      impressed on little eminences of sand between the marks of the paws
      plainly discovered that it was a female, whose dugs were hanging down, and
      that therefore she must have whelped a few days before. Other traces of a
      different kind, that always appeared to have gently brushed the surface of
      the sand near the marks of the forefeet, showed me that she had very long
      ears; and as I remarked that there was always a slighter impression made
      on the sand by one foot than the other three, I found that the spaniel of
      our august queen was a little lame, if I may be allowed the expression.

 “With regard to the horse of the king of kings, you will be pleased
      to know that, walking in the lanes of this wood, I observed the marks of a
      horse’s shoes, all at equal distances. This must be a horse, said I
      to myself, that gallops excellently. The dust on the trees in the road
      that was but seven feet wide was a little brushed off, at the distance of
      three feet and a half from the middle of the road. This horse, said I, has
      a tail three feet and a half long, which being whisked to the right and
      left, has swept away the dust. I observed under the trees that formed an
      arbor five feet in height, that the leaves of the branches were newly
      fallen; from whence I inferred that the horse had touched them, and that
      he must therefore be five feet high. As to his bit, it must be gold of
      twenty-three carats, for he had rubbed its bosses against a stone which I
      knew to be a touchstone, and which I have tried. In a word, from the marks
      made by his shoes on flints of another kind, I concluded that he was shod
      with silver eleven deniers fine.”

 All the judges admired Zadig for his acute and profound discernment. The
      news of this speech was carried even to the king and queen. Nothing was
      talked of but Zadig in the antechambers, the chambers, and the cabinet;
      and though many of the magi were of opinion that he ought to be burned as
      a sorcerer, the king ordered his officers to restore him the four hundred
      ounces of gold which he had been obliged to pay. The register, the
      attorneys, and bailiffs went to his house with great formality, to carry
      him back his four hundred ounces. They only retained three hundred and
      ninety-eight of them to defray the expenses of justice; and their servants
      demanded their fees.

 Zadig saw how extremely dangerous it sometimes is to appear too knowing,
      and therefore resolved that on the next occasion of the like nature he
      would not tell what he had seen.

 Such an opportunity soon offered. A prisoner of state made his escape, and
      passed under the window of Zadig’s house. Zadig was examined and
      made no answer. But it was proved that he had looked at the prisoner from
      this window. For this crime he was condemned to pay five hundred ounces of
      gold; and, according to the polite custom of Babylon, he thanked his
      judges for their indulgence.

 “Great God!” said he to himself, “what a misfortune it
      is to walk in a wood through which the queen’s spaniel or the king’s
      horse has passed! how dangerous to look out at a window! and how difficult
      to be happy in this life!”

 THE ENVIOUS MAN

 Zadig resolved to comfort himself by philosophy and friendship for the
      evils he had suffered from fortune. He had in the suburbs of Babylon a
      house elegantly furnished, in which he assembled all the arts and all the
      pleasures worthy the pursuit of a gentleman. In the morning his library
      was open to the learned. In the evening his table was surrounded by good
      company. But he soon found what very dangerous guests these men of letters
      are. A warm dispute arose on one of Zoroaster’s laws, which forbids
      the eating of a griffin. “Why,” said some of them, “prohibit
      the eating of a griffin, if there is no such an animal in nature?”
      “There must necessarily be such an animal,” said the others,
      “since Zoroaster forbids us to eat it.” Zadig would fain have
      reconciled them by saying, “If there are no griffins, we cannot
      possibly eat them; and thus either way we shall obey Zoroaster.”

 A learned man who had composed thirteen volumes on the properties of the
      griffin, and was besides the chief theurgite, hastened away to accuse
      Zadig before one of the principal magi, named Yebor, the greatest
      blockhead and therefore the greatest fanatic among the Chaldeans. This man
      would have impaled Zadig to do honors to the sun, and would then have
      recited the breviary of Zoroaster with greater satisfaction. The friend
      Cador (a friend is better than a hundred priests) went to Yebor, and said
      to him, “Long live the sun and the griffins; beware of punishing
      Zadig; he is a saint; he has griffins in his inner court and does not eat
      them; and his accuser is an heretic, who dares to maintain that rabbits
      have cloven feet and are not unclean.”

 “Well,” said Yebor, shaking his bald pate, “we must
      impale Zadig for having thought contemptuously of griffins, and the other
      for having spoken disrespectfully of rabbits.” Cador hushed up the
      affair by means of a maid of honor with whom he had a love affair, and who
      had great interest in the College of the Magi. Nobody was impaled.

 This levity occasioned a great murmuring among some of the doctors, who
      from thence predicted the fall of Babylon. “Upon what does happiness
      depend?” said Zadig. “I am persecuted by everything in the
      world, even on account of beings that have no existence.” He cursed
      those men of learning, and resolved for the future to live with none but
      good company.

 He assembled at his house the most worthy men and the most beautiful
      ladies of Babylon. He gave them delicious suppers, often preceded by
      concerts of music, and always animated by polite conversation, from which
      he knew how to banish that affectation of wit which is the surest method
      of preventing it entirely, and of spoiling the pleasure of the most
      agreeable society. Neither the choice of his friends nor that of the
      dishes was made by vanity; for in everything he preferred the substance to
      the shadow; and by these means he procured that real respect to which he
      did not aspire.

 Opposite to his house lived one Arimazes, a man whose deformed countenance
      was but a faint picture of his still more deformed mind. His heart was a
      mixture of malice, pride, and envy. Having never been able to succeed in
      any of his undertakings, he revenged himself on all around him by loading
      them with the blackest calumnies. Rich as he was, he found it difficult to
      procure a set of flatterers. The rattling of the chariots that entered
      Zadig’s court in the evening filled him with uneasiness; the sound
      of his praises enraged him still more. He sometimes went to Zadig’s
      house, and sat down at table without being desired; where he spoiled all
      the pleasure of the company, as the harpies are said to infect the viands
      they touch. It happened that one day he took it in his head to give an
      entertainment to a lady, who, instead of accepting it, went to sup with
      Zadig. At another time, as he was talking with Zadig at court, a minister
      of state came up to them, and invited Zadig to supper without inviting
      Arimazes. The most implacable hatred has seldom a more solid foundation.
      This man, who in Babylon was called the Envious, resolved to ruin Zadig
      because he was called the Happy. “The opportunity of doing mischief
      occurs a hundred times in a day, and that of doing good but once a year,”
      as sayeth the wise Zoroaster.

 The envious man went to see Zadig, who was walking in his garden with two
      friends and a lady, to whom he said many gallant things, without any other
      intention than that of saying them. The conversation turned upon a war
      which the king had just brought to a happy conclusion against the prince
      of Hircania, his vassal. Zadig, who had signalized his courage in this
      short war, bestowed great praises on the king, but greater still on the
      lady. He took out his pocket-book, and wrote four lines extempore, which
      he gave to this amiable person to read. His friends begged they might see
      them; but modesty, or rather a well-regulated self love, would not allow
      him to grant their request. He knew that extemporary verses are never
      approved of by any but by the person in whose honor they are written. He
      therefore tore in two the leaf on which he had wrote them, and threw both
      the pieces into a thicket of rose-bushes, where the rest of the company
      sought for them in vain. A slight shower falling soon after obliged them
      to return to the house. The envious man, who stayed in the garden,
      continued the search till at last he found a piece of the leaf. It had
      been torn in such a manner that each half of a line formed a complete
      sense, and even a verse of a shorter measure; but what was still more
      surprising, these short verses were found to contain the most injurious
      reflections on the king. They ran thus:

 To flagrant crimes His crown he owes, To peaceful times The worst of foes.

 The envious man was now happy for the first time of his life. He had it in
      his power to ruin a person of virtue and merit. Filled with this fiendlike
      joy, he found means to convey to the king the satire written by the hand
      of Zadig, who, together with the lady and his two friends, was thrown into
      prison.

 His trial was soon finished, without his being permitted to speak for
      himself. As he was going to receive his sentence, the envious man threw
      himself in his way and told him with a loud voice that his verses were
      good for nothing. Zadig did not value himself on being a good poet; but it
      filled him with inexpressible concern to find that he was condemned for
      high treason; and that the fair lady and his two friends were confined in
      prison for a crime of which they were not guilty. He was not allowed to
      speak because his writing spoke for him. Such was the law of Babylon.
      Accordingly he was conducted to the place of execution, through an immense
      crowd of spectators, who durst not venture to express their pity for him,
      but who carefully examined his countenance to see if he died with a good
      grace. His relations alone were inconsolable, for they could not succeed
      to his estate. Three-fourths of his wealth were confiscated into the king’s
      treasury, and the other fourth was given to the envious man.

 Just as he was preparing for death the king’s parrot flew from its
      cage and alighted on a rosebush in Zadig’s garden. A peach had been
      driven thither by the wind from a neighboring tree, and had fallen on a
      piece of the written leaf of the pocketbook to which it stuck. The bird
      carried off the peach and the paper and laid them on the king’s
      knee. The king took up the paper with great eagerness and read the words,
      which formed no sense, and seemed to be the endings of verses. He loved
      poetry; and there is always some mercy to be expected from a prince of
      that disposition. The adventure of the parrot set him a-thinking.

 The queen, who remembered what had been written on the piece of Zadig’s
      pocketbook, caused it to be brought. They compared the two pieces together
      and found them to tally exactly; they then read the verses as Zadig had
      wrote them.

 TYRANTS ARE PRONE         TO FLAGRANT CRIMES.
  TO CLEMENCY               HIS CROWN HE OWES.
TO CONCORD AND            TO PEACEFUL TIMES.
  LOVE ONLY IS              THE WORST OF FOES.

 The king gave immediate orders that Zadig should be brought before him,
      and that his two friends and the lady should be set at liberty. Zadig fell
      prostrate on the ground before the king and queen; humbly begged their
      pardon for having made such bad verses and spoke with so much propriety,
      wit, and good sense, that their majesties desired they might see him
      again. He did himself that honor, and insinuated himself still farther
      into their good graces. They gave him all the wealth of the envious man;
      but Zadig restored him back the whole of it. And this instance of
      generosity gave no other pleasure to the envious man than that of having
      preserved his estate.

 The king’s esteem for Zadig increased every day. He admitted him
      into all his parties of pleasure, and consulted him in all affairs of
      state. From that time the queen began to regard him with an eye of
      tenderness that might one day prove dangerous to herself, to the king, her
      august comfort, to Zadig, and to the kingdom in general. Zadig now began
      to think that happiness was not so unattainable as he had formerly
      imagined.

 THE GENEROUS

 The time now arrived for celebrating a grand festival, which returned
      every five years. It was a custom in Babylon solemnly to declare at the
      end of every five years which of the citizens had performed the most
      generous action. The grandees and the magi were the judges. The first
      satrap, who was charged with the government of the city, published the
      most noble actions that had passed under his administration. The
      competition was decided by votes; and the king pronounced the sentence.
      People came to this solemnity from the extremities of the earth. The
      conqueror received from the monarch’s hand a golden cup adorned with
      precious stones, his majesty at the same time making him this compliment:

 “Receive this reward of thy generosity, and may the gods grant me
      many subjects like to thee.”

 This memorable day being come, the king appeared on his throne, surrounded
      by the grandees, the magi, and the deputies of all nations that came to
      these games, where glory was acquired not by the swiftness of horses, nor
      by strength of body, but by virtue. The first satrap recited, with an
      audible voice, such actions as might entitle the authors of them to this
      invaluable prize. He did not mention the greatness of soul with which
      Zadig had restored the envious man his fortune, because it was not judged
      to be an action worthy of disputing the prize.

 He first presented a judge who, having made a citizen lose a considerable
      cause by a mistake, for which, after all, he was not accountable, had
      given him the whole of his own estate, which was just equal to what the
      other had lost.

 He next produced a young man who, being desperately in love with a lady
      whom he was going to marry, had yielded her up to his friend, whose
      passion for her had almost brought him to the brink of the grave, and at
      the same time had given him the lady’s fortune.

 He afterwards produced a soldier who, in the wars of Hircania, had given a
      still more noble instance of generosity. A party of the enemy having
      seized his mistress, he fought in her defense with great intrepidity. At
      that very instant he was informed that another party, at the distance of a
      few paces, were carrying off his mother; he therefore left his mistress
      with tears in his eyes and flew to the assistance of his mother. At last
      he returned to the dear object of his love and found her expiring. He was
      just going to plunge his sword in his own bosom; but his mother
      remonstrating against such a desperate deed, and telling him that he was
      the only support of her life, he had the courage to endure to live.

 The judges were inclined to give the prize to the soldier. But the king
      took up the discourse and said: “The action of the soldier, and
      those of the other two, are doubtless very great, but they have nothing in
      them surprising. Yesterday Zadig performed an action that filled me with
      wonder. I had a few days before disgraced Coreb, my minister and favorite.
      I complained of him in the most violent and bitter terms; all my courtiers
      assured me that I was too gentle and seemed to vie with each other in
      speaking ill of Coreb. I asked Zadig what he thought of him, and he had
      the courage to commend him. I have read in our histories of many people
      who have atoned for an error by the surrender of their fortune; who have
      resigned a mistress; or preferred a mother to the object of their
      affection; but never before did I hear of a courtier who spoke favorably
      of a disgraced minister that labored under the displeasure of his
      sovereign. I give to each of those whose generous actions have been now
      recited twenty thousand pieces of gold; but the cup I give to Zadig.”

 “May it please your majesty,” said Zadig, “thyself alone
      deservest the cup; thou hast performed an action of all others the most
      uncommon and meritorious, since, notwithstanding thy being a powerful
      king, thou wast not offended at thy slave when he presumed to oppose thy
      passion.” The king and Zadig were equally the object of admiration.
      The judge, who had given his estate to his client; the lover, who had
      resigned his mistress to a friend; and the soldier, who had preferred the
      safety of his mother to that of his mistress, received the king’s
      presents and saw their names enrolled in the catalogue of generous men.
      Zadig had the cup, and the king acquired the reputation of a good prince,
      which he did not long enjoy. The day was celebrated by feasts that lasted
      longer than the law enjoined; and the memory of it is still preserved in
      Asia. Zadig said, “Now I am happy at last;” but he found
      himself fatally deceived.

 THE MINISTER

 The king had lost his first minister and chose Zadig to supply his place.
      All the ladies in Babylon applauded the choice; for since the foundation
      of the empire there had never been such a young minister. But all the
      courtiers were filled with jealousy and vexation. The envious man in
      particular was troubled with a spitting of blood and a prodigious
      inflammation in his nose. Zadig, having thanked the king and queen for
      their goodness, went likewise to thank the parrot. “Beautiful bird,”
      said he, “‘tis thou that hast saved my life and made me first
      minister. The queen’s spaniel and the king’s horse did me a
      great deal of mischief; but thou hast done me much good. Upon such slender
      threads as these do the fates of mortals hang! But,” added he,
      “this happiness perhaps will vanish very soon.”

 “Soon,” replied the parrot.

 Zadig was somewhat startled at this word. But as he was a good natural
      philosopher and did not believe parrots to be prophets, he quickly
      recovered his spirits and resolved to execute his duty to the best of his
      power.

 He made everyone feel the sacred authority of the laws, but no one felt
      the weight of his dignity. He never checked the deliberation of the diran;
      and every vizier might give his opinion without the fear of incurring the
      minister’s displeasure. When he gave judgment, it was not he that
      gave it, it was the law; the rigor of which, however, whenever it was too
      severe, he always took care to soften; and when laws were wanting, the
      equity of his decisions was such as might easily have made them pass for
      those of Zoroaster. It is to him that the nations are indebted for this
      grand principle, to wit, that it is better to run the risk of sparing the
      guilty than to condemn the innocent. He imagined that laws were made as
      well to secure the people from the suffering of injuries as to restrain
      them from the commission of crimes. His chief talent consisted in
      discovering the truth, which all men seek to obscure.

 This great talent he put in practice from the very beginning of his
      administration. A famous merchant of Babylon, who died in the Indies,
      divided his estate equally between his two sons, after having disposed of
      their sister in marriage, and left a present of thirty thousand pieces of
      gold to that son who should be found to have loved him best. The eldest
      raised a tomb to his memory; the youngest increased his sister’s
      portion, by giving her part of his inheritance. Everyone said that the
      eldest son loved his father best, and the youngest his sister; and that
      the thirty thousand pieces belonged to the eldest.

 Zadig sent for both of them, the one after the other. To the eldest he
      said: “Thy father is not dead; he is recovered of his last illness,
      and is returning to Babylon,” “God be praised,” replied
      the young man; “but his tomb cost me a considerable sum.”
      Zadig afterwards said the same to the youngest. “God be praised,”
      said he, “I will go and restore to my father all that I have; but I
      could wish that he would leave my sister what I have given her.”
      “Thou shalt restore nothing,” replied Zadig, “and thou
      shalt have the thirty thousand pieces, for thou art the son who loves his
      father best.”

 THE DISPUTES AND THE AUDIENCES

 In this manner he daily discovered the subtilty of his genius and the
      goodness of his heart. The people at once admired and loved him. He passed
      for the happiest man in the world. The whole empire resounded with his
      name. All the ladies ogled him. All the men praised him for his justice.
      The learned regarded him as an oracle; and even the priests confessed that
      he knew more than the old archmage Yebor. They were now so far from
      prosecuting him on account of the griffin, that they believed nothing but
      what he thought credible.

 There had reigned in Babylon, for the space of fifteen hundred years, a
      violent contest that had divided the empire into two sects. The one
      pretended that they ought to enter the temple of Mitra with the left foot
      foremost; the other held this custom in detestation and always entered
      with the right foot first. The people waited with great impatience for the
      day on which the solemn feast of the sacred fire was to be celebrated, to
      see which sect Zadig would favor. All the world had their eyes fixed on
      his two feet, and the whole city was in the utmost suspense and
      perturbation. Zadig jumped into the temple with his feet joined together,
      and afterwards proved, in an eloquent discourse, that the Sovereign of
      heaven and earth, who accepted not the persons of men, makes no
      distinction between the right and left foot. The envious man and his wife
      alleged that his discourse was not figurative enough, and that he did not
      make the rocks and mountains to dance with sufficient agility.

 “He is dry.” said they, “and void of genius: he does not
      make the flea to fly, and stars to fall, nor the sun to melt wax; he has
      not the true Oriental style.” Zadig contented himself with having
      the style of reason. All the world favored him, not because he was in the
      right road or followed the dictates of reason, or was a man of real merit,
      but because he was prime vizier.

 He terminated with the same happy address the grand difference between the
      white and the black magi. The former maintained that it was the height of
      impiety to pray to God with the face turned toward the east in winter; the
      latter asserted that God abhorred the prayers of those who turned toward
      the west in summer. Zadig decreed that every man should be allowed to turn
      as he pleased.

 Thus he found out the happy secret of finishing all affairs, whether of a
      private or a public nature, in the morning. The rest of the day he
      employed in superintending and promoting the embellishments of Babylon. He
      exhibited tragedies that drew tears from the eyes of the spectators, and
      comedies that shook their sides with laughter; a custom which had long
      been disused, and which his good taste now induced him to revive. He never
      affected to be more knowing in the polite arts than the artists
      themselves; he encouraged them by rewards and honors, and was never
      jealous of their talents. In the evening the king was highly entertained
      with his conversation, and the queen still more. “Great minister!”
      said the king. “Amiable minister!” said the queen; and both of
      them added, “It would have been a great loss to the state had such a
      man been hanged.”

 Never was a man in power obliged to give so many audiences to the ladies.
      Most of them came to consult him about no business at all, that so they
      might have some business with him. But none of them won his attention.

 Meanwhile Zadig perceived that his thoughts were always distracted, as
      well when he gave audience as when he sat in judgment. He did not know to
      what to attribute this absence of mind; and that was his only sorrow.

 He had a dream in which he imagined that he laid himself down upon a heap
      of dry herbs, among which there were many prickly ones that gave him great
      uneasiness, and that he afterwards reposed himself on a soft bed of roses
      from which there sprung a serpent that wounded him to the heart with its
      sharp and venomed tongue. “Alas,” said he, “I have long
      lain on these dry and prickly herbs, I am now on the bed of roses; but
      what shall be the serpent?”

 JEALOUSY

 Zadig’s calamities sprung even from his happiness and especially
      from his merit. He every day conversed with the king and Astarte, his
      august comfort. The charms of his conversation were greatly heightened by
      that desire of pleasing, which is to the mind what dress is to beauty. His
      youth and graceful appearance insensibly made an impression on Astarte,
      which she did not at first perceive. Her passion grew and flourished in
      the bosom of innocence. Without fear or scruple, she indulged the pleasing
      satisfaction of seeing and hearing a man who was so dear to her husband
      and to the empire in general. She was continually praising him to the
      king. She talked of him to her women, who were always sure to improve on
      her praises. And thus everything contributed to pierce her heart with a
      dart, of which she did not seem to be sensible. She made several presents
      to Zadig, which discovered a greater spirit of gallantry than she
      imagined. She intended to speak to him only as a queen satisfied with his
      services and her expressions were sometimes those of a woman in love.

 Astarte was much more beautiful than that Semira who had such a strong
      aversion to one-eyed men, or that other woman who had resolved to cut off
      her husband’s nose. Her unreserved familiarity, her tender
      expressions, at which she began to blush; and her eyes, which, though she
      endeavored to divert them to other objects, were always fixed upon his,
      inspired Zadig with a passion that filled him with astonishment. He
      struggled hard to get the better of it. He called to his aid the precepts
      of philosophy, which had always stood him in stead; but from thence,
      though he could derive the light of knowledge, he could procure no remedy
      to cure the disorders of his lovesick heart. Duty, gratitude, and violated
      majesty presented themselves to his mind as so many avenging gods. He
      struggled; he conquered; but this victory, which he was obliged to
      purchase afresh every moment, cost him many sighs and tears. He no longer
      dared to speak to the queen with that sweet and charming familiarity which
      had been so agreeable to them both. His countenance was covered with a
      cloud. His conversation was constrained and incoherent. His eyes were
      fixed on the ground; and when, in spite of all his endeavors to the
      contrary, they encountered those of the queen, they found them bathed in
      tears and darting arrows of flame. They seemed to say, We adore each other
      and yet are afraid to love; we both burn with a fire which we both
      condemn.

 Zadig left the royal presence full of perplexity and despair, and having
      his heart oppressed with a burden which he was no longer able to bear. In
      the violence of his perturbation he involuntarily betrayed the secret to
      his friend Cador, in the same manner as a man who, having long supported
      the fits of a cruel disease, discovers his pain by a cry extorted from him
      by a more severe fit and by the cold sweat that covers his brow.

 “I have already discovered,” said Cador, “the sentiments
      which thou wouldst fain conceal from thyself. The symptoms by which the
      passions show themselves are certain and infallible. Judge, my dear Zadig,
      since I have read thy heart, whether the king will not discover something
      in it that may give him offense. He has no other fault but that of being
      the most jealous man in the world. Thou canst resist the violence of thy
      passion with greater fortitude than the queen because thou art a
      philosopher, and because thou art Zadig. Astarte is a woman: she suffers
      her eyes to speak with so much the more imprudence, as she does not as yet
      think herself guilty. Conscious of her innocence, she unhappily neglects
      those external appearances which are so necessary. I shall tremble for her
      so long as she has nothing wherewithal to reproach herself. Were ye both
      of one mind, ye might easily deceive the whole world. A growing passion,
      which we endeavor to suppress, discovers itself in spite of all our
      efforts to the contrary; but love, when gratified, is easily concealed.”

 Zadig trembled at the proposal of betraying the king, his benefactor; and
      never was he more faithful to his prince than when guilty of an
      involuntary crime against him.

 Meanwhile the queen mentioned the name of Zadig so frequently and with
      such a blushing and downcast look; she was sometimes so lively and
      sometimes so perplexed when she spoke to him in the king’s presence,
      and was seized with such deep thoughtfulness at his going away, that the
      king began to be troubled. He believed all that he saw and imagined all
      that he did not see. He particularly remarked that his wife’s shoes
      were blue and that Zadig’s shoes were blue; that his wife’s
      ribbons were yellow and that Zadig’s bonnet was yellow; and these
      were terrible symptoms to a prince of so much delicacy. In his jealous
      mind suspicions were turned into certainty.

 All the slaves of kings and queens are so many spies over their hearts.
      They soon observed that Astarte was tender and that Moabdar was jealous.
      The envious man brought false reports to the king. The monarch now thought
      of nothing but in what manner he might best execute his vengeance. He one
      night resolved to poison the queen and in the morning to put Zadig to
      death by the bowstring. The orders were given to a merciless eunuch, who
      commonly executed his acts of vengeance. There happened at that time to be
      in the king’s chamber a little dwarf, who, though dumb, was not
      deaf. He was allowed, on account of his insignificance, to go wherever he
      pleased, and, as a domestic animal, was a witness of what passed in the
      most profound secrecy. This little mute was strongly attached to the queen
      and Zadig. With equal horror and surprise he heard the cruel orders given.
      But how to prevent the fatal sentence that in a few hours was to be
      carried into execution! He could not write, but he could paint; and
      excelled particularly in drawing a striking resemblance. He employed a
      part of the night in sketching out with his pencil what he meant to impart
      to the queen. The piece represented the king in one corner, boiling with
      rage, and giving orders to the eunuch; a bowstring, and a bowl on a table;
      the queen in the middle of the picture, expiring in the arms of her woman,
      and Zadig strangled at her feet The horizon, represented a rising sun, to
      express that this shocking execution was to be performed in the morning.
      As soon as he had finished the picture he ran to one of Astarte’s
      women, awakened her, and made her understand that she must immediately
      carry it to the queen.

 At midnight a messenger knocks at Zadig’s door, awakes him, and
      gives him a note from the queen. He doubts whether it is a dream; and
      opens the letter with a trembling hand. But how great was his surprise!
      and who can express the consternation and despair into which he was thrown
      upon reading these words: “Fly this instant, or thou art a dead man.
      Fly, Zadig, I conjure thee by our mutual love and my yellow ribbons. I
      have not been guilty, but I find I must die like a criminal.”

 Zadig was hardly able to speak. He sent for Cador, and, without uttering a
      word, gave him the note. Cador forced him to obey, and forthwith to take
      the road to Memphis. “Shouldst thou dare,” said he, “to
      go in search of the queen, thou wilt hasten her death. Shouldst thou speak
      to the king, thou wilt infallibly ruin her. I will take upon me the charge
      of her destiny; follow thy own. I will spread a report that thou hast
      taken the road to India. I will soon follow thee, and inform thee of all
      that shall have passed in Babylon.” At that instant, Cador caused
      two of the swiftest dromedaries to be brought to a private gate of the
      palace. Upon one of these he mounted Zadig, whom he was obliged to carry
      to the door, and who was ready to expire with grief. He was accompanied by
      a single domestic; and Cador, plunged in sorrow and astonishment, soon
      lost sight of his friend.

 This illustrious fugitive arriving on the side of a hill, from whence he
      could take a view of Babylon, turned his eyes toward the queen’s
      palace, and fainted away at the sight; nor did he recover his senses but
      to shed a torrent of tears and to wish for death. At length, after his
      thoughts had been long engrossed in lamenting the unhappy fate of the
      loveliest woman and the greatest queen in the world, he for a moment
      turned his views on himself and cried: “What then is human life? O
      virtue, how hast thou served me! Two women have basely deceived me, and
      now a third, who is innocent, and more beautiful than both the others, is
      going to be put to death! Whatever good I have done hath been to me a
      continual source of calamity and affliction; and I have only been raised
      to the height of grandeur, to be tumbled down the most horrid precipice of
      misfortune.” Filled with these gloomy reflections, his eyes
      overspread with the veil of grief, his countenance covered with the
      paleness of death, and his soul plunged in an abyss of the blackest
      despair, he continued his journey toward Egypt.

 THE WOMAN BEATEN

 Zadig directed his course by the stars. The constellation of Orion and the
      splendid Dog Star guided his steps toward the pole of Cassiopeia. He
      admired those vast globes of light, which appear to our eyes but as so
      many little sparks, while the earth, which in reality is only an
      imperceptible point in nature, appears to our fond imaginations as
      something so grand and noble.

 He then represented to himself the human species as it really is, as a
      parcel of insects devouring one another on a little atom of clay. This
      true image seemed to annihilate his misfortunes, by making him sensible of
      the nothingness of his own being, and of that of Babylon. His soul
      launched out into infinity, and, detached from the senses, contemplated
      the immutable order of the universe. But when afterwards, returning to
      himself, and entering into his own heart, he considered that Astarte had
      perhaps died for him, the universe vanished from his sight, and he beheld
      nothing in the whole compass of nature but Astarte; expiring and Zadig
      unhappy. While he thus alternately gave up his mind to this flux and
      reflux of sublime philosophy and intolerable grief, he advanced toward the
      frontiers of Egypt; and his faithful domestic was already in the first
      village, in search of a lodging.

 Upon reaching the village Zadig generously took the part of a woman
      attacked by her jealous lover. The combat grew so fierce that Zadig slew
      the lover. The Egyptians were then just and humane. The people conducted
      Zadig to the town house. They first of all ordered his wounds to be
      dressed and then examined him and his servant apart, in order to discover
      the truth. They found that Zadig was not an assassin; but as he was guilty
      of having killed a man, the law condemned him to be a slave. His two
      camels were sold for the benefit of the town; all the gold he had brought
      with him was distributed among the inhabitants; and his person, as well as
      that of the companion of his journey, was exposed to sale in the
      marketplace.

 An Arabian merchant, named Setoc, made the purchase; but as the servant
      was fitter for labor than the master, he was sold at a higher price. There
      was no comparison between the two men. Thus Zadig became a slave
      subordinate to his own servant. They were linked together by a chain
      fastened to their feet, and in this condition they followed the Arabian
      merchant to his house. BY the way Zadig comforted his servant, and
      exhorted him to patience; but he could not help making, according to his
      usual custom, some reflections on human life. “I see,” said
      he, “that the unhappiness of my fate hath an influence on thine.
      Hitherto everything has turned out to me in a most unaccountable manner. I
      have been condemned to pay a fine for having seen the marks of a spaniel’s
      feet. I thought that I should once have been impaled on account of a
      griffin. I have been sent to execution for having made some verses in
      praise of the king. I have been upon the point of being strangled because
      the queen had yellow ribbons; and now I am a slave with thee, because a
      brutal wretch beat his mistress. Come, let us keep a good heart; all this
      perhaps will have an end. The Arabian merchants must necessarily have
      slaves; and why not me as well as another, since, as well as another, I am
      a man? This merchant will not be cruel; he must treat his slaves well, if
      he expects any advantage from them.” But while he spoke thus, his
      heart was entirely engrossed by the fate of the Queen of Babylon.

 Two days after, the merchant Setoc set out for Arabia Deserta, with his
      slaves and his camels. His tribe dwelt near the Desert of Oreb. The
      journey was long and painful. Setoc set a much greater value on the
      servant than the master, because the former was more expert in loading the
      camels; and all the little marks of distinction were shown to him. A camel
      having died within two days’ journey of Oreb, his burden was divided
      and laid on the backs of the servants; and Zadig had his share among the
      rest.

 Setoc laughed to see all his slaves walking with their bodies inclined.
      Zadig took the liberty to explain to him the cause, and inform him of the
      laws of the balance. The merchant was astonished, and began to regard him
      with other eyes. Zadig, finding he had raised his curiosity, increased it
      still further by acquainting him with many things that related to
      commerce, the specific gravity of metals, and commodities under an equal
      bulk; the properties of several useful animals; and the means of rendering
      those useful that are not naturally so. At last Setoc began to consider
      Zadig as a sage, and preferred him to his companion, whom he had formerly
      so much esteemed. He treated him well and had no cause to repent of his
      kindness.

 THE STONE

 As soon as Setoc arrived among his own tribe he demanded the payment of
      five hundred ounces of silver, which he had lent to a Jew in presence of
      two witnesses; but as the witnesses were dead, and the debt could not be
      proved, the Hebrew appropriated the merchant’s money to himself, and
      piously thanked God for putting it in his power to cheat an Arabian. Setoc
      imparted this troublesome affair to Zadig, who was now become his counsel.

 “In what place,” said Zadig, “didst thou lend the five
      hundred ounces to this infidel?”

 “Upon a large stone,” replied the merchant, “that lies
      near Mount Oreb.”

 “What is the character of thy debtor?” said Zadig. “That
      of a knave,” returned Setoc.

 “But I ask thee whether he is lively or phlegmatic, cautious or
      imprudent?”

 “He is, of all bad payers,” said Setoc, “the most lively
      fellow I ever knew.”

 “Well,” resumed Zadig, “allow me to plead thy cause.”
      In effect Zadig, having summoned the Jew to the tribunal, addressed the
      judge in the following terms: “Pillar of the throne of equity, I
      come to demand of this man, in the name of my master, five hundred ounces
      of silver, which he refuses to pay.”

 “Hast thou any witnesses?” said the judge.

 “No, they are dead; but there remains a large stone upon which the
      money was counted; and if it please thy grandeur to order the stone to be
      sought for, I hope that it will bear witness. The Hebrew and I will tarry
      here till the stone arrives; I will send for it at my master’s
      expense.”

 “With all my heart,” replied the judge, and immediately
      applied himself to the discussion of other affairs.

 When the court was going to break up, the judge said to Zadig. “Well,
      friend, is not thy stone come yet?”

 The Hebrew replied with a smile, “Thy grandeur may stay here till
      the morrow, and after all not see the stone. It is more than six miles
      from hence; and it would require fifteen men to move it.”

 “Well,” cried Zadig, “did not I say that the stone would
      bear witness? Since this man knows where it is, he thereby confesses that
      it was upon it that the money was counted.” The Hebrew was
      disconcerted, and was soon after obliged to confess the truth. The judge
      ordered him to be fastened to the stone, without meat or drink, till he
      should restore the five hundred ounces, which were soon after paid.

 The slave Zadig and the stone were held in great repute in Arabia.

 THE FUNERAL PILE

 Setoc, charmed with the happy issue of this affair, made his slave his
      intimate friend. He had now conceived as great esteem for him as ever the
      King of Babylon had done; and Zadig was glad that Setoc had no wife. He
      discovered in his master a good natural disposition, much probity of
      heart, and a great share of good sense; but he was sorry to see that,
      according to the ancient custom of Arabia, he adored the host of heaven;
      that is, the sun, moon, and stars. He sometimes spoke to him on this
      subject with great prudence and discretion. At last he told him that these
      bodies were like all other bodies in the universe, and no more deserving
      of our homage than a tree or a rock.

 “But,” said Setoc, “they are eternal beings; and it is
      from them we derive all we enjoy. They animate nature; they regulate the
      seasons; and, besides, are removed at such an immense distance from us
      that we cannot help revering them.”

 “Thou receivest more advantage,” replied Zadig, “from
      the waters of the Red Sea, which carry thy merchandise to the Indies. Why
      may not it be as ancient as the stars? And if thou adorest what is placed
      at a distance from thee, thou oughtest to adore the land of the
      Gangarides, which lies at the extremity of the earth.”

 “No,” said Setoc, “the brightness of the stars commands
      my adoration.”

 At night Zadig lighted up a great number of candles in the tent where he
      was to sup with Setoc; and the moment his patron appeared, he fell on his
      knees before these lighted tapers, and said, “Eternal and shining
      luminaries! be ye always propitious to me.” Having thus said, he sat
      down at table, without taking the least notice of Setoc.

 “What art thou doing?” said Setoc to him in amaze.

 “I act like thee,” replied Zadig, “I adore these
      candles, and neglect their master and mine.” Setoc comprehended the
      profound sense of this apologue. The wisdom of his slave sunk deep into
      his soul; he no longer offered incense to the creatures, but adored the
      eternal Being who made them.

 There prevailed at that time in Arabia a shocking custom, sprung
      originally from Leythia, and which, being established in the Indies by the
      credit of the Brahmans, threatened to overrun all the East. When a married
      man died, and his beloved wife aspired to the character of a saint, she
      burned herself publicly on the body of her husband. This was a solemn
      feast and was called the Funeral Pile of Widowhood, and that tribe in
      which most women had been burned was the most respected.

 An Arabian of Setoc’s tribe being dead, his widow, whose name was
      Almona, and who was very devout, published the day and hour when she
      intended to throw herself into the fire, amidst the sound of drums and
      trumpets. Zadig remonstrated against this horrible custom; he showed Setoc
      how inconsistent it was with the happiness of mankind to suffer young
      widows to burn themselves every other day, widows who were capable of
      giving children to the state, or at least of educating those they already
      had; and he convinced him that it was his duty to do all that lay in his
      power to abolish such a barbarous practice.

 “The women,” said Setoc, “have possessed the right of
      burning themselves for more than a thousand years; and who shall dare to
      abrogate a law which time hath rendered sacred? Is there anything more
      respectable than ancient abuses?”

 “Reason is more ancient,” replied Zadig; “meanwhile,
      speak thou to the chiefs of the tribes and I will go to wait on the young
      widow.”

 Accordingly he was introduced to her; and, after having insinuated himself
      into her good graces by some compliments on her beauty and told her what a
      pity it was to commit so many charms to the flames, he at last praised her
      for her constancy and courage. “Thou must surely have loved thy
      husband,” said he to her, “with the most passionate fondness.”

 “Who, I?” replied the lady. “I loved him not at all. He
      was a brutal, jealous, insupportable wretch; but I am firmly resolved to
      throw myself on his funeral pile.”

 “It would appear then,” said Zadig, “that there must be
      a very delicious pleasure in being burned alive.”

 “Oh! it makes nature shudder,” replied the lady, “but
      that must be overlooked. I am a devotee, and I should lose my reputation
      and all the world would despise me if I did not burn myself.”

 Zadig having made her acknowledge that she burned herself to gain the good
      opinion of others and to gratify her own vanity, entertained her with a
      long discourse, calculated to make her a little in love with life, and
      even went so far as to inspire her with some degree of good will for the
      person who spoke to her.

 “Alas!” said the lady, “I believe I should desire thee
      to marry me.”

 Zadig’s mind was too much engrossed with the idea of Astarte not to
      elude this declaration; but he instantly went to the chiefs of the tribes,
      told them what had passed, and advised them to make a law, by which a
      widow should not be permitted to burn herself till she had conversed
      privately with a young man for the space of an hour. Since that time not a
      single woman hath burned herself in Arabia. They were indebted to Zadig
      alone for destroying in one day a cruel custom that had lasted for so many
      ages and thus he became the benefactor of Arabia.

 THE SUPPER

 Setoc, who could not separate himself from this man, in whom dwelt wisdom,
      carried him to the great fair of Balzora, whither the richest merchants in
      the earth resorted. Zadig was highly pleased to see so many men of
      different countries united in the same place. He considered the whole
      universe as one large family assembled at Balzora.

 Setoc, after having sold his commodities at a very high price, returned to
      his own tribe with his friend Zadig; who learned upon his arrival that he
      had been tried in his absence and was now going to be burned by a slow
      fire. Only the friendship of Almona saved his life. Like so many pretty
      women she possessed great influence with the priesthood. Zadig thought it
      best to leave Arabia.

 Setoc was so charmed with the ingenuity and address of Almona that he made
      her his wife. Zadig departed, after having thrown himself at the feet of
      his fair deliverer. Setoc and he took leave of each other with tears in
      their eyes, swearing an eternal friendship, and promising that the first
      of them that should acquire a large fortune should share it with the
      other.

 Zadig directed his course along the frontiers of Assyria, still musing on
      the unhappy Astarte, and reflecting on the severity of fortune which
      seemed determined to make him the sport of her cruelty and the object of
      her persecution.

 “What,” said he to himself, “four hundred ounces of gold
      for having seen a spaniel! condemned to lose my head for four bad verses
      in praise of the king! ready to be strangled because the queen had shoes
      of the color of my bonnet! reduced to slavery for having succored a woman
      who was beat! and on the point of being burned for having saved the lives
      of all the young widows of Arabia!”

 THE ROBBER

 Arriving on the frontiers which divide Arabia Petraea from Syria, he
      passed by a pretty strong castle, from which a party of armed Arabians
      sallied forth. They instantly surrounded him and cried, “All thou
      hast belongs to us, and thy person is the property of our master.”
      Zadig replied by drawing his sword; his servant, who was a man of courage,
      did the same. They killed the first Arabians that presumed to lay hands on
      them; and, though the number was redoubled, they were not dismayed, but
      resolved to perish in the conflict. Two men defended themselves against a
      multitude; and such a combat could not last long.

 The master of the castle, whose name was Arbogad, having observed from a
      window the prodigies of valor performed by Zadig, conceived a high esteem
      for this heroic stranger. He descended in haste and went in person to call
      off his men and deliver the two travelers.

 “All that passes over my lands,” said he, “belongs to
      me, as well as what I find upon the lands of others; but thou seemest to
      be a man of such undaunted courage that I will exempt thee from the common
      law.” He then conducted him to his castle, ordering his men to treat
      him well; and in the evening Arbogad supped with Zadig.

 The lord of the castle was one of those Arabians who are commonly called
      robbers; but he now and then performed some good actions amid a multitude
      of bad ones. He robbed with a furious rapacity, and granted favors with
      great generosity; he was intrepid in action; affable in company; a
      debauchee at table, but gay in debauchery; and particularly remarkable for
      his frank and open behavior. He was highly pleased with Zadig, whose
      lively conversation lengthened the repast.

 At last Arbogad said to him; “I advise thee to enroll thy name in my
      catalogue; thou canst not do better; this is not a bad trade; and thou
      mayest one day become what I am at present.”

 “May I take the liberty of asking thee,” said Zadig, “how
      long thou hast followed this noble profession?”

 “From my most tender youth,” replied the lord. “I was a
      servant to a pretty good-natured Arabian, but could not endure the
      hardships of my situation. I was vexed to find that fate had given me no
      share of the earth, which equally belongs to all men. I imparted the cause
      of my uneasiness to an old Arabian, who said to me: ‘My son, do not
      despair; there was once a grain of sand that lamented that it was no more
      than a neglected atom in the desert; at the end of a few years it became a
      diamond; and is now the brightest ornament in the crown of the king of the
      Indies.’ This discourse made a deep impression on my mind. I was the
      grain of sand, and I resolved to become the diamond. I began by stealing
      two horses; I soon got a party of companions; I put myself in a condition
      to rob small caravans; and thus, by degrees, I destroyed the difference
      which had formerly subsisted between me and other men. I had my share of
      the good things of this world; and was even recompensed with usury for the
      hardships I had suffered. I was greatly respected, and became the captain
      of a band of robbers. I seized this castle by force. The Satrap of Syria
      had a mind to dispossess me of it; but I was too rich to have any thing to
      fear. I gave the satrap a handsome present, by which means I preserved my
      castle and increased my possessions. He even appointed me treasurer of the
      tributes which Arabia Petraea pays to the king of kings. I perform my
      office of receiver with great punctuality; but take the freedom to
      dispense with that of paymaster.

 “The grand Desterham of Babylon sent hither a pretty satrap in the
      name of King Moabdar, to have me strangled. This man arrived with his
      orders: I was apprised of all; I caused to be strangled in his presence
      the four persons he had brought with him to draw the noose; after which I
      asked him how much his commission of strangling me might be worth. He
      replied, that his fees would amount to about three hundred pieces of gold.
      I then convinced him that he might gain more by staying with me. I made
      him an inferior robber; and he is now one of my best and richest officers.
      If thou wilt take my advice thy success may be equal to his; never was
      there a better season for plunder, since King Moabdar is killed, and all
      Babylon thrown into confusion.”

 “Moabdar killed!” said Zadig, “and what is become of
      Queen Astarte?”

 “I know not,” replied Arbogad. “All I know is, that
      Moabdar lost his senses and was killed; that Babylon is a scene of
      disorder and bloodshed; that all the empire is desolated; that there are
      some fine strokes to be struck yet; and that, for my own part, I have
      struck some that are admirable.”

 “But the queen,” said Zadig; “for heaven’s sake,
      knowest thou nothing of the queen’s fate?”

 “Yes,” replied he, “I have heard something of a prince
      of Hircania; if she was not killed in the tumult, she is probably one of
      his concubines; but I am much fonder of booty than news. I have taken
      several women in my excursions; but I keep none of them. I sell them at a
      high price, when they are beautiful, without inquiring who they are. In
      commodities of this kind rank makes no difference, and a queen that is
      ugly will never find a merchant. Perhaps I may have sold Queen Astarte;
      perhaps she is dead; but, be it as it will, it is of little consequence to
      me, and I should imagine of as little to thee.” So saying he drank a
      large draught which threw all his ideas into such confusion that Zadig
      could obtain no further information.

 Zadig remained for some time without speech, sense, or motion. Arbogad
      continued drinking; told stories; constantly repeated that he was the
      happiest man in the world; and exhorted Zadig to put himself in the same
      condition. At last the soporiferous fumes of the wine lulled him into a
      gentle repose.

 Zadig passed the night in the most violent perturbation. “What,”
      said he, “did the king lose his senses? and is he killed? I cannot
      help lamenting his fate. The empire is rent in pieces; and this robber is
      happy. O fortune! O destiny! A robber is happy, and the most beautiful of
      nature’s works hath perhaps perished in a barbarous manner or lives
      in a state worse than death. O Astarte! what is become of thee?”

 At daybreak he questioned all those he met in the castle; but they were
      all busy, and he received no answer. During the night they had made a new
      capture, and they were now employed in dividing the spoils. All he could
      obtain in this hurry and confusion was an opportunity of departing, which
      he immediately embraced, plunged deeper than ever in the most gloomy and
      mournful reflections.

 Zadig proceeded on his journey with a mind full of disquiet and
      perplexity, and wholly employed on the unhappy Astarte, on the King of
      Babylon, on his faithful friend Cador, on the happy robber Arbogad; in a
      word, on all the misfortunes and disappointments he had hitherto suffered.

 THE FISHERMAN

 At a few leagues’ distance from Arbogad’s castle he came to
      the banks of a small river, still deploring his fate, and considering
      himself as the most wretched of mankind. He saw a fisherman lying on the
      brink of the river, scarcely holding, in his weak and feeble hand, a net
      which he seemed ready to drop, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven.

 “I am certainly,” said the fisherman, “the most unhappy
      man in the world. I was universally allowed to be the most famous dealer
      in cream cheese in Babylon, and yet I am ruined. I had the most handsome
      wife that any man in my station could have; and by her I have been
      betrayed. I had still left a paltry house, and that I have seen pillaged
      and destroyed. At last I took refuge in this cottage, where I have no
      other resource than fishing, and yet I cannot catch a single fish. Oh, my
      net! no more will I throw thee into the water; I will throw myself in thy
      place.” So saying, he arose and advanced forward, in the attitude of
      a man ready to throw himself into the river, and thus to finish his life.

 “What!” said Zadig to himself, “are there men as
      wretched as I?” His eagerness to save the fisherman’s life was
      as this reflection. He ran to him, stopped him, and spoke to him with a
      tender and compassionate air. It is commonly supposed that we are less
      miserable when we have companions in our misery. This, according to
      Zoroaster, does not proceed from malice , but necessity. We feel
      ourselves insensibly drawn to an unhappy person as to one like ourselves.
      The joy of the happy would be an insult; but two men in distress are like
      two slender trees, which, mutually supporting each other, fortify
      themselves against the storm.

 “Why,” said Zadig to the fisherman, “dost thou sink
      under thy misfortunes?”

 “Because,” replied he, “I see no means of relief. I was
      the most considerable man in the village of Derlback, near Babylon, and
      with the assistance of my wife I made the best cream cheese in the empire.
      Queen Astarte and the famous minister Zadig were extremely fond of them.”

 Zadig, transported, said, “What, knowest thou nothing of the queen’s
      fate?”

 “No, my lord,” replied the fisherman; “but I know that
      neither the queen nor Zadig has paid me for my cream cheeses; that I have
      lost my wife, and am now reduced to despair.”

 “I flatter myself,” said Zadig, “that thou wilt not lose
      all thy money. I have heard of this Zadig; he is an honest man; and if he
      returns to Babylon, as he expects, he will give thee more than he owes
      thee. Believe me, go to Babylon. I shall be there before thee, because I
      am on horseback, and thou art on foot. Apply to the illustrious Cador;
      tell him thou hast met his friend; wait for me at his house; go, perhaps
      thou wilt not always be unhappy.”

 “Oh, powerful Oromazes!” continued he, “thou employest
      me to comfort this man; whom wilt thou employ to give me consolation?”
      So saying, he gave the fisherman half the money he had brought from
      Arabia. The fisherman, struck with surprise and ravished with joy, kissed
      the feet of the friend of Cador, and said, “Thou art surely an angel
      sent from Heaven to save me!”

 Meanwhile, Zadig continued to make fresh inquiries, and to shed tears.
      “What, my lord!” cried the fisherman, “art thou then so
      unhappy, thou who bestowest favors?”

 “An hundred times more unhappy than thou art,” replied Zadig.

 “But how is it possible,” said the good man, “that the
      giver can be more wretched than the receiver?”

 “Because,” replied Zadig, “thy greatest misery arose
      from poverty, and mine is seated in the heart.”

 “Did Orcan take thy wife from thee?” said the fisherman.

 This word recalled to Zadig’s mind the whole of his adventures.

 He repeated the catalogue of his misfortunes, beginning with the queen’s
      spaniel, and ending with his arrival at the castle of the robber Arbogad.
      “Ah!” said he to the fisherman, “Orcan deserves to be
      punished; but it is commonly such men as those that are the favorites of
      fortune. However, go thou to the house of Lord Cador, and there wait my
      arrival.” They then parted, the fisherman walked, thanking Heaven
      for the happiness of his condition; and Zadig rode, accusing fortune for
      the hardness of his lot.

 THE BASILISK

 Arriving in a beautiful meadow, he there saw several women, who were
      searching for something with great application. He took the liberty to
      approach one of them, and to ask if he might have the honor to assist them
      in their search. “Take care that thou dost not,” replied the
      Syrian; “what we are searching for can be touched only by women.”

 “Strange,” said Zadig, “may I presume to ask thee what
      it is that women only are permitted to touch?”

 “It is a basilisk,” said she.

 “A basilisk, madam! and for what purpose, pray, dost thou seek for a
      basilisk?”

 “It is for our lord and master Ogul, whose cattle thou seest on the
      bank of that river at the end of the meadow. We are his most humble
      slaves. The lord Ogul is sick. His physician hath ordered him to eat a
      basilisk, stewed in rose water; and as it is a very rare animal, and can
      only be taken by women, the lord Ogul hath promised to choose for his
      well-beloved wife the woman that shall bring him a basilisk; let me go on
      in my search; for thou seest what I shall lose if I am prevented by my
      companions.”

 Zadig left her and the other Assyrians to search for their basilisk, and
      continued to walk in the meadow; when coming to the brink of a small
      rivulet, he found another lady lying on the grass, and who was not
      searching for anything. Her person worried to be majestic; but her face
      was covered with a veil. She was inclined toward the rivulet, and profound
      sighs proceeded from her mouth. In her hand she held a small rod with
      which she was tracing characters on the fine sand that lay between the
      turf and the brook. Zadig had the curiosity to examine what this woman was
      writing. He drew near; he saw the letter Z, then an A; he was astonished;
      then appeared a D; he started. But never was surprise equal to his when he
      saw the last letters of his name.

 He stood for some time immovable. At last, breaking silence with a
      faltering voice: “O generous lady! pardon a stranger, an unfortunate
      man, for presuming to ask thee by what surprising adventure I here find
      the name of Zadig traced out by thy divine hand!”

 At this voice and these words, the lady lifted up the veil with a
      trembling hand, looked at Zadig, sent forth a cry of tenderness, surprise
      and joy, and sinking under the various emotions which at once assaulted
      her soul, fell speechless into his arms. It was Astarte herself; it was
      the Queen of Babylon; it was she whom Zadig adored, and whom he had
      reproached himself for adoring; it was she whose misfortunes he had so
      deeply lamented, and for whose fate he had been so anxiously concerned.

 He was for a moment deprived of the use of his senses, when he had fixed
      his eyes on those of Astarte, which now began to open again with a languor
      mixed with confusion and tenderness: “O ye immortal powers!”
      cried he, “who preside over the fates of weak mortals, do ye indeed
      restore Astarte to me! at what a time, in what a place, and in what a
      condition do I again behold her!” He fell on his knees before
      Astarte and laid his face in the dust at her feet. The Queen of Babylon
      raised him up, and made him sit by her side on the brink of the rivulet.
      She frequently wiped her eyes, from which the tears continued to flow
      afresh. She twenty times resumed her discourse, which her sighs as often
      interrupted; she asked by what strange accident they were brought
      together, and suddenly prevented his answers by other questions; she
      waived the account of her own misfortunes, and desired to be informed of
      those of Zadig.

 At last, both of them having a little composed the tumult of their souls,
      Zadig acquainted her in a few words by what adventure he was brought into
      that meadow. “But, O unhappy and respectable queen! by what means do
      I find thee in this lonely place, clothed in the habit of a slave, and
      accompanied by other female slaves, who are searching for a basilisk,
      which, by order of the physician, is to be stewed in rose water?”

 “While they are searching for their basilisk,” said the fair
      Astarte, “I will inform thee of all I have suffered, for which
      Heaven has sufficiently recompensed me by restoring thee to my sight. Thou
      knowest that the king, my husband, was vexed to see thee the most amiable
      of mankind; and that for this reason he one night resolved to strangle
      thee and poison me. Thou knowest how Heaven permitted my little mute to
      inform me of the orders of his sublime majesty. Hardly had the faithful
      Cador advised thee to depart, in obedience to my command, when he ventured
      to enter my apartment at midnight by a secret passage. He carried me off
      and conducted me to the temple of Oromazes, where the mage his brother
      shut me up in that huge statue whose base reaches to the foundation of the
      temple and whose top rises to the summit of the dome. I was there buried
      in a manner; but was saved by the mage; and supplied with all the
      necessaries of life. At break of day his majesty’s apothecary
      entered my chamber with a potion composed of a mixture of henbane, opium,
      hemlock, black hellebore, and aconite; and another officer went to thine
      with a bowstring of blue silk. Neither of us was to be found. Cador, the
      better to deceive the king, pretended to come and accuse us both. He said
      that thou hadst taken the road to the Indies, and I that to Memphis, on
      which the king’s guards were immediately dispatched in pursuit of us
      both.

 “The couriers who pursued me did not know me. I had hardly ever
      shown my face to any but thee, and to thee only in the presence and by the
      order of my husband. They conducted themselves in the pursuit by the
      description that had been given them of my person. On the frontiers of
      Egypt they met with a woman of the same stature with me, and possessed
      perhaps of greater charms. She was weeping and wandering. They made no
      doubt but that this woman was the Queen of Babylon and accordingly brought
      her to Moabdar. Their mistake at first threw the king into a violent
      passion; but having viewed this woman more attentively, he found her
      extremely handsome and was comforted. She was called Missouf. I have since
      been informed that this name in the Egyptian language signifies the
      capricious fair one. She was so in reality; but she had as much cunning as
      caprice. She pleased Moabdar and gained such an ascendancy over him as to
      make him choose her for his wife. Her character then began to appear in
      its true colors. She gave herself up, without scruple, to all the freaks
      of a wanton imagination. She would have obliged the chief of the magi, who
      was old and gouty, to dance before her; and on his refusal, she persecuted
      him with the most unrelenting cruelty. She ordered her master of the horse
      to make her a pie of sweetmeats. In vain did he represent that he was not
      a pastry-cook; he was obliged to make it, and lost his place, because it
      was baked a little too hard. The post of master of the horse she gave to
      her dwarf, and that of chancellor to her page. In this manner did she
      govern Babylon. Everybody regretted the loss of me. The king, who till the
      moment of his resolving to poison me and strangle thee had been a
      tolerably good kind of man, seemed now to have drowned all his virtues in
      his immoderate fondness for this capricious fair one. He came to the
      temple on the great day of the feast held in honor of the sacred fire. I
      saw him implore the gods in behalf of Missouf, at the feet of the statue
      in which I was inclosed. I raised my voice, I cried out, ‘The gods
      reject the prayers of a king who is now become a tyrant, and who attempted
      to murder a reasonable wife, in order to marry a woman remarkable for
      nothing but her folly and extravagance.’ At these words Moabdar was
      confounded and his head became disordered. The oracle I had pronounced,
      and the tyranny of Missouf, conspired to deprive him of his judgment, and
      in a few days his reason entirely forsook him.

 “Moabdar’s madness, which seemed to be the judgment of Heaven,
      was the signal to a revolt. The people rose and ran to arms; and Babylon,
      which had been so long immersed in idleness and effeminacy, became the
      theater of a bloody civil war. I was taken from the heart of my statue and
      placed at the head of a party. Cador flew to Memphis to bring thee back to
      Babylon. The Prince of Hircania, informed of these fatal events, returned
      with his army and made a third party in Chaldea. He attacked the king, who
      fled before him with his capricious Egyptian. Moabdar died pierced with
      wounds. I myself had the misfortune to be taken by a party of Hircanians,
      who conducted me to their prince’s tent, at the very moment that
      Missouf was brought before him. Thou wilt doubtless be pleased to hear
      that the prince thought me beautiful; but thou wilt be sorry to be
      informed that he designed me for his seraglio. He told me, with a blunt
      and resolute air, that as soon as he had finished a military expedition,
      which he was just going to undertake, he would come to me. Judge how great
      must have been my grief. My ties with Moabdar were already dissolved; I
      might have been the wife of Zadig; and I was fallen into the hands of a
      barbarian. I answered him with all the pride which my high rank and noble
      sentiment could inspire. I had always heard it affirmed that Heaven
      stamped on persons of my condition a mark of grandeur, which, with a
      single word or glance, could reduce to the lowliness of the most profound
      respect those rash and forward persons who presume to deviate from the
      rules of politeness. I spoke like a queen, but was treated like a
      maidservant. The Hircanian, without even deigning to speak to me, told his
      black eunuch that I was impertinent, but that he thought me handsome. He
      ordered him to take care of me, and to put me under the regimen of
      favorites, that so my complexion being improved, I might be the more
      worthy of his favors when he should be at leisure to honor me with them, I
      told him that rather than submit to his desires I would put an end to my
      life. He replied, with a smile, that women, he believed, were not, so
      bloodthirsty, and that he was accustomed to such violent expressions; and
      then left me with the air of a man who had just put another parrot into
      his aviary. What a state for the first queen of the universe, and, what is
      more, for a heart devoted to Zadig!”

 At these words Zadig threw himself at her feet and bathed them with his
      tears. Astarte raised him with great tenderness and thus continued her
      story: “I now saw myself in the power of a barbarian and rival to
      the foolish woman with whom I was confined. She gave me an account of her
      adventures in Egypt. From the description she gave me of your person, from
      the time, from the dromedary on which you were mounted, and from every
      other circumstance, I inferred that Zadig was the man who had fought for
      her. I doubted not but that you were at Memphis, and, therefore, resolved
      to repair thither. Beautiful Missouf, said I, thou art more handsome than
      I, and will please the Prince of Hircania much better. Assist me in
      contriving the means of my escape; thou wilt then reign alone; thou wilt
      at once make me happy and rid thyself of a rival. Missouf concerted with
      me the means of my flight; and I departed secretly with a female Egyptian
      slave.

 “As I approached the frontiers of Arabia, a famous robber, named
      Arbogad, seized me and sold me to some merchants, who brought me to this
      castle, where Lord Ogul resides. He bought me without knowing who I was.
      He is a voluptuary, ambitious of nothing but good living, and thinks that
      God sent him into the world for no other purpose than to sit at table. He
      is so extremely corpulent that he is always in danger of suffocation. His
      physician, who has but little credit with him when he has a good
      digestion, governs him with a despotic sway when he has eaten too much. He
      has persuaded him that a basilisk stewed in rose water will effect a
      complete cure. The Lord Ogul hath promised his hand to the female slave
      that brings him a basilisk. Thou seest that I leave them to vie with each
      other in meriting this honor; and never was I less desirous of finding the
      basilisk than since Heaven hath restored thee to my sight.”

 This account was succeeded by a long conversation between Astarte and
      Zadig, consisting of everything that their long-suppressed sentiments,
      their great sufferings, and their mutual love could inspire in hearts the
      most noble and tender; and the genii who preside over love carried their
      words to the sphere of Venus.

 The woman returned to Ogul without having found the basilisk. Zadig was
      introduced to this mighty lord and spoke to him in the following terms:
      “May immortal health descend from heaven to bless all thy days! I am
      a physician; at the first report of thy indisposition I flew to thy castle
      and have now brought thee a basilisk stewed in rose water. Not that I
      pretend to marry thee. All I ask is the liberty of a Babylonian slave, who
      hath been in thy possession for a few days; and, if I should not be so
      happy as to cure thee, magnificent Lord Ogul, I consent to remain a slave
      in her place.”

 The proposal was accepted. Astarte set out for Babylon with Zadig’s
      servant, promising, immediately upon her arrival, to send a courier to
      inform him of all that had happened. Their parting was as tender as their
      meeting. The moment of meeting and that of parting are the two greatest
      epochs of life, as sayeth the great book of Zend. Zadig loved the queen
      with as much ardor as he professed; and the queen loved him more than she
      thought proper to acknowledge.

 Meanwhile Zadig spoke thus to Ogul: “My lord, my basilisk is not to
      be eaten; all its virtues must enter through thy pores. I have inclosed it
      in a little ball, blown up and covered with a fine skin. Thou must strike
      this ball with all thy might and I must strike it back for a considerable
      time; and by observing this regimen for a few days thou wilt see the
      effects of my art.” The first day Ogul was out of breath and thought
      he should have died with fatigue. The second he was less fatigued, slept
      better. In eight days he recovered all the strength, all the health, all
      the agility and cheerfulness of his most agreeable years.

 “Thou hast played at ball, and thou hast been temperate,” said
      Zadig; “know that there is no such thing in nature as a basilisk;
      that temperance and exercise are the two great preservatives of health;
      and that the art of reconciling intemperance and health is as chimerical
      as the philosopher’s stone, judicial astrology, or the theology of
      the magi.”

 Ogul’s first physician, observing how dangerous this man might prove
      to the medical art, formed a design, in conjunction with the apothecary,
      to send Zadig to search for a basilisk in the other world. Thus, having
      suffered such a long train of calamities on account of his good actions,
      he was now upon the point of losing his life for curing a gluttonous lord.
      He was invited to an excellent dinner and was to have been poisoned in the
      second course, but, during the first, he happily received a courier from
      the fair Astarte. “When one is beloved by a beautiful woman,”
      says the great Zoroaster, “he hath always the good fortune to
      extricate himself out of every kind of difficulty and danger.”

 THE COMBATS

 The queen was received at Babylon with all those transports of joy which
      are ever felt on the return of a beautiful princess who hath been involved
      in calamities. Babylon was now in greater tranquillity. The Prince of
      Hircania had been killed in battle. The victorious Babylonians declared
      that the queen should marry the man whom they should choose for their
      sovereign. They were resolved that the first place in the world, that of
      being husband to Astarte and King of Babylon, should not depend on cabals
      and intrigues. They swore to acknowledge for king the man who, upon trial,
      should be found to be possessed of the greatest valor and the greatest
      wisdom. Accordingly, at the distance of a few leagues from the city, a
      spacious place was marked out for the list, surrounded with magnificent
      amphitheaters. Thither the combatants were to repair in complete armor.
      Each of them had a separate apartment behind the amphitheaters, where they
      were neither to be seen nor known by anyone. Each was to encounter four
      knights, and those that were so happy as to conquer four were then to
      engage with one another; so that he who remained the last master of the
      field would be proclaimed conqueror at the games.

 Four days after he was to return with the same arms and to explain the
      enigmas proposed by the magi. If he did not explain the enigmas he was not
      king; and the running at the lances was to be begun afresh till a man
      would be found who was conqueror in both these combats; for they were
      absolutely determined to have a king possessed of the greatest wisdom and
      the most invincible courage. The queen was all the while to be strictly
      guarded: she was only allowed to be present at the games, and even there
      she was to be covered with a veil; but was not permitted to speak to any
      of the competitors, that so they might neither receive favor, nor suffer
      injustice.

 These particulars Astarte communicated to her lover, hoping that in order
      to obtain her he would show himself possessed of greater courage and
      wisdom than any other person. Zadig set out on his journey, beseeching
      Venus to fortify his courage and enlighten his understanding. He arrived
      on the banks of the Euphrates on the eve of this great day. He caused his
      device to be inscribed among those of the combatants, concealing his face
      and his name, as the law ordained; and then went to repose himself in the
      apartment that fell to him by lot. His friend Cador, who, after the
      fruitless search he had made for him in Egypt, was now returned to
      Babylon, sent to his tent a complete suit of armor, which was a present
      from the queen; as also, from himself, one of the finest horses in Persia.
      Zadig presently perceived that these presents were sent by Astarte; and
      from thence his courage derived fresh strength, and his love the most
      animating hopes.

 Next day, the queen being seated under a canopy of jewels, and the
      amphitheaters filled with all the gentlemen and ladies of rank in Babylon,
      the combatants appeared in the circus. Each of them came and laid his
      device at the feet of the grand magi. They drew their devices by lot; and
      that of Zadig was the last. The first who advanced was a certain lord,
      named Itobad, very rich and very vain, but possessed of little courage, of
      less address, and hardly of any judgment at all. His servants had
      persuaded him that such a man as he ought to be king; he had said in
      reply, “Such a man as I ought to reign”; and thus they had
      armed him cap-à-pie. He wore an armor of gold enameled with green, a plume
      of green feathers, and a lance adorned with green ribbons. It was
      instantly perceived by the manner in which Itobad managed his horse, that
      it was not for such a man as he that Heaven reserved the scepter of
      Babylon. The first knight that ran against him threw him out of his
      saddle; the second laid him flat on his horse’s buttocks, with his
      legs in the air, and his arms extended. Itobad recovered himself, but with
      so bad a grace that the whole amphitheater burst out a-laughing. The third
      knight disdained to make use of his lance; but, making a pass at him, took
      him by the right leg and, wheeling him half round, laid him prostrate on
      the sand. The squires of the game ran to him laughing, and replaced him in
      his saddle. The fourth combatant took him by the left leg, and tumbled him
      down on the other side. He was conducted back with scornful shouts to his
      tent, where, according to the law, he was to pass the night; and as he
      climbed along with great difficulty he said, “What an adventure for
      such a man as I!”

 The other knights acquitted themselves with greater ability and success.
      Some of them conquered two combatants; a few of them vanquished three; but
      none but Prince Otamus conquered four. At last Zadig fought him in his
      turn. He successively threw four knights off their saddles with all the
      grace imaginable. It then remained to be seen who should be conqueror,
      Otamus or Zadig. The arms of the first were gold and blue, with a plume of
      the same color; those of the last were white. The wishes of all the
      spectators were divided between the knight in blue and the knight in
      white. The queen, whose heart was in a violent palpitation, offered
      prayers to Heaven for the success of the white color.

 The two champions made their passes and vaults with so much agility, they
      mutually gave and received such dexterous blows with their lances, and sat
      so firmly in their saddles, that everybody but the queen wished there
      might be two kings in Babylon. At length, their horses being tired and
      their lances broken, Zadig had recourse to this stratagem: He passes
      behind the blue prince; springs upon the buttocks of his horse; seizes him
      by the middle; throws him on the earth; places himself in the saddle; and
      wheels around Otamus as he lay extended on the ground. All the
      amphitheater cried out, “Victory to the white knight!”

 Otamus rises in a violent passion, and draws his sword; Zadig leaps from
      his horse with his saber in his hand. Both of them are now on the ground,
      engaged in a new combat, where strength and agility triumph by turns. The
      plumes of their helmets, the studs of their bracelets, the rings of their
      armor, are driven to a great distance by the violence of a thousand
      furious blows. They strike with the point and the edge; to the right, to
      the left, on the head, on the breast; they retreat; they advance; they
      measure swords; they close; they seize each other; they bend like
      serpents; they attack like lions; and the fire every moment flashes from
      their blows.

 At last Zadig, having recovered his spirits, stops; makes a feint; leaps
      upon Otamus; throws him on the ground and disarms him; and Otamus cries
      out, “It is thou alone, O white knight, that oughtest to reign over
      Babylon!” The queen was now at the height of her joy. The knight in
      blue armor and the knight in white were conducted each to his own
      apartment, as well as all the others, according to the intention of the
      law. Mutes came to wait upon them and to serve them at table. It may be
      easily supposed that the queen’s little mute waited upon Zadig. They
      were then left to themselves to enjoy the sweets of repose till next
      morning, at which time the conqueror was to bring his device to the grand
      magi, to compare it with that which he had left, and make himself known.

 Zadig though deeply in love, was so much fatigued that he could not help
      sleeping. Itobad, who lay near him, never closed his eyes. He arose in the
      night, entered his apartment, took the white arms and the device of Zadig,
      and put his green armor in their place. At break of day he went boldly to
      the grand magi to declare that so great a man as he was conqueror. This
      was little expected; however, he was proclaimed while Zadig was still
      asleep. Astarte, surprised and filled with despair, returned to Babylon.
      The amphitheater was almost empty when Zadig awoke; he sought for his
      arms, but could find none but the green armor. With this he was obliged to
      cover himself, having nothing else near him. Astonished and enraged, he
      put it on in a furious passion, and advanced in this equipage.

 The people that still remained in the amphitheater and the circus received
      him with hoots and hisses. They surrounded him and insulted him to his
      face. Never did man suffer such cruel mortifications. He lost his
      patience; with his saber he dispersed such of the populace as dared to
      affront him; but he knew not what course to take. He could not see the
      queen; he could not claim the white armor she had sent him without
      exposing her; and thus, while she was plunged in grief, he was filled with
      fury and distraction. He walked on the banks of the Euphrates, fully
      persuaded that his star had destined him to inevitable misery, and
      resolving in his own mind all his misfortunes, from the adventure of the
      woman who hated one-eyed men to that of his armor. “This,”
      said he, “is the consequence of my having slept too long. Had I
      slept less, I should now have been King of Babylon and in possession of
      Astarte. Knowledge, virtue, and courage have hitherto served only to make
      me miserable.” He then let fall some secret murmurings against
      Providence, and was tempted to believe that the world was governed by a
      cruel destiny, which oppressed the good and prospered knights in green
      armor. One of his greatest mortifications was his being obliged to wear
      that green armor which had exposed him to such contumelious treatment. A
      merchant happening to pass by, he sold it to him for a trifle and bought a
      gown and a long bonnet. In this garb he proceeded along the banks of the
      Euphrates, filled with despair, and secretly accusing Providence, which
      thus continued to persecute him with unremitting severity.

 THE HERMIT

 While he was thus sauntering he met a hermit, whose white and venerable
      beard hung down to his girdle. He held a book in his hand, which he read
      with great attention. Zadig stopped, and made him a profound obeisance.
      The hermit returned the compliment with such a noble and engaging air,
      that Zadig had the curiosity to enter into conversation with him. He asked
      him what book it was that he had been reading? “It is the Book of
      Destinies,” said the hermit; “wouldst thou choose to look into
      it?” He put the book into the hands of Zadig, who, thoroughly versed
      as he was in several languages, could not decipher a single character of
      it. This only redoubled his curiosity.

 “Thou seemest,” said this good father, “to be in great
      distress.”

 “Alas,” replied Zadig, “I have but too much reason.”

 “If thou wilt permit me to accompany thee,” resumed the old
      man, “perhaps I may be of some service to thee. I have often poured
      the balm of consolation into the bleeding heart of the unhappy.”

 Zadig felt himself inspired with respect for the air, the beard, and the
      book of the hermit. He found, in the course of the conversation, that he
      was possessed of superior degrees of knowledge. The hermit talked of fate,
      of justice, of morals, of the chief good, of human weakness, and of virtue
      and vice, with such a spirited and moving eloquence, that Zadig felt
      himself drawn toward him by an irresistible charm. He earnestly entreated
      the favor of his company till their return to Babylon.

 “I ask the same favor of thee,” said the old man; “swear
      to me by Oromazes, that whatever I do, thou wilt not leave me for some
      days.” Zadig swore, and they set out together.

 In the evening the two travelers arrived in a superb castle. The hermit
      entreated a hospitable reception for himself and the young man who
      accompanied him. The porter, whom one might have easily mistaken for a
      great lord, introduced them with a kind of disdainful civility. He
      presented them to a principal domestic, who showed them his master’s
      magnificent apartments. They were admitted to the lower end of the table,
      without being honored with the least mark of regard by the lord of the
      castle; but they were served, like the rest, with delicacy and profusion.
      They were then presented with water to wash their hands, in a golden basin
      adorned with emeralds and rubies. At last they were conducted to bed in a
      beautiful apartment; and in the morning a domestic brought each of them a
      piece of gold, after which they took their leave and departed.

 “The master of the house,” said Zadig, as they were proceeding
      on the journey, “appears to be a generous man, though somewhat too
      proud; he nobly performs the duties of hospitality.” At that instant
      he observed that a kind of large pocket, which the hermit had, was filled
      and distended; and upon looking more narrowly he found that it contained
      the golden basin adorned with precious stones, which the hermit had
      stolen. He durst not take any notice of it, but he was filled with a
      strange surprise.

 About noon, the hermit came to the door of a paltry house inhabited by a
      rich miser, and begged the favor of an hospitable reception for a few
      hours. An old servant, in a tattered garb, received them with a blunt and
      rude air, and led them into the stable, where he gave them some rotten
      olives, moldy bread, and sour beer. The hermit ate and drank with as much
      seeming satisfaction as he had done the evening before; and then
      addressing himself to the old servant, who watched them both, to prevent
      their stealing anything, and rudely pressed them to depart, he gave him
      the two pieces of gold he had received in the morning, and thanked him for
      his great civility.

 “Pray,” added he, “allow me to speak to thy master.”
      The servant, filled with astonishment, introduced the two travelers.
      “Magnificent lord,” said the hermit, “I cannot but
      return thee my most humble thanks for the noble manner in which thou hast
      entertained us. Be pleased to accept this golden basin as a small mark of
      my gratitude.” The miser started, and was ready to fall backward;
      but the hermit, without giving him time to recover from his surprise,
      instantly departed with his young fellow traveler.

 “Father,” said Zadig, “what is the meaning of all this?
      Thou seemest to me to be entirely different from other men; thou stealest
      a golden basin adorned with precious stones from a lord who received thee
      magnificently, and givest it to a miser who treats thee with indignity.”

 “Son,” replied the old man, “this magnificent lord, who
      receives strangers only from vanity and ostentation, will hereby be
      rendered more wise; and the miser will learn to practice the duties of
      hospitality. Be surprised at nothing, but follow me.”

 Zadig knew not as yet whether he was in company with the most foolish or
      the most prudent of mankind; but the hermit spoke with such an ascendancy,
      that Zadig, who was moreover bound by his oath, could not refuse to follow
      him.

 In the evening they arrived at a house built with equal elegance and
      simplicity, where nothing savored either of prodigality or avarice. The
      master of it was a philosopher, who had retired from the world, and who
      cultivated in peace the study of virtue and wisdom, without any of that
      rigid and morose severity so commonly to be found in men of his character.
      He had chosen to build this country house, in which he received strangers
      with a generosity free from ostentation. He went himself to meet the two
      travelers, whom he led into a commodious apartment, where he desired them
      to repose themselves a little. Soon after he came and invited them to a
      decent and well-ordered repast during which he spoke with great judgment
      of the last revolutions in Babylon. He seemed to be strongly attached to
      the queen, and wished that Zadig had appeared in the lists to dispute the
      crown. “But the people,” added he, “do not deserve to
      have such a king as Zadig.”

 Zadig blushed, and felt his griefs redoubled. They agreed, in the course
      of the conversation, that the things of this world did not always answer
      the wishes of the wise. The hermit still maintained that the ways of
      Providence were inscrutable; and that men were in the wrong to judge of a
      whole, of which they understood but the smallest part.

 They talked of passions. “Ah,” said Zadig, “how fatal
      are their effects!”

 “They are in the winds,” replied the hermit, “that swell
      the sails of the ship; it is true, they sometimes sink her, but without
      them she could not sail at all. The bile makes us sick and choleric; but
      without bile we could not live. Everything in this world is dangerous, and
      yet everything is necessary.”

 The conversation turned on pleasure; and the hermit proved that it was a
      present bestowed by the Deity. “For,” said he, “man
      cannot give himself either sensations or ideas; he receives all; and pain
      and pleasure proceed from a foreign cause as well as his being.”

 Zadig was surprised to see a man, who had been guilty of such extravagant
      actions, capable of reasoning with so much judgment and propriety. At
      last, after a conversation equally entertaining and instructive, the host
      led back his two guests to their apartment, blessing Heaven for having
      sent him two men possessed of so much wisdom and virtue. He offered them
      money with such an easy and noble air as could not possibly give any
      offense. The hermit refused it, and said that he must now take his leave
      of him, as he set out for Babylon before it was light. Their parting Was
      tender; Zadig especially felt himself filled with esteem and affection for
      a man of such an amiable character.

 When he and the hermit were alone in their apartment, they spent a long
      time praising their host. At break of day the old man awakened his
      companion. “We must now depart,” said he, “but while all
      the family are still asleep, I will leave this man a mark of my esteem and
      affection.” So saying, he took a candle and set fire to the house.

 Zadig, struck with horror, cried aloud, and endeavored to hinder him from
      committing such a barbarous action; but the hermit drew him away by a
      superior force, and the house was soon in flames. The hermit, who, with
      his companion, was already at a considerable distance, looked back to the
      conflagration with great tranquillity.

 “Thanks be to God,” said he, “the house of my dear host
      is entirely destroyed! Happy man!”

 At these words Zadig was at once tempted to burst out a-laughing, to
      reproach the reverend father, to beat him, and to run away. But he did
      none of all of these, for still subdued by the powerful ascendancy of the
      hermit, he followed him, in spite of himself, to the next stage.

 This was at the house of a charitable and virtuous widow, who had a nephew
      fourteen years of age, a handsome and promising youth, and her only hope.
      She performed the honors of her house as well as she could. Next day, she
      ordered her nephew to accompany the strangers to a bridge, which being
      lately broken down, was become extremely dangerous in passing. The young
      man walked before them with great alacrity. As they were crossing the
      bridge, “Come” said the hermit to the youth, “I must
      show my gratitude to thy aunt.” He then took him by the hair and
      plunged him into the river. The boy sunk, appeared again on the surface of
      the water, and was swallowed up by the current.

 “O monster! O thou most wicked of mankind!” cried Zadig.

 “Thou promisedst to behave with greater patience,” said the
      hermit, interrupting him. “Know that under the ruins of that house
      which Providence hath set on fire the master hath found an immense
      treasure. Know that this young, man, whose life Providence hath shortened,
      would have assassinated his aunt in the space of a year, and thee in that
      of two.”

 “Who told thee so, barbarian?” cried Zadig; “and though
      thou hadst read this event in thy Book of Destinies, art thou permitted to
      drown a youth who never did thee any harm?”

 While the Babylonian was thus exclaiming, he observed that the old man had
      no longer a beard, and that his countenance assumed the features and
      complexion of youth. The hermit’s habit disappeared, and four
      beautiful wings covered a majestic body resplendent with light.

 “O sent of heaven! O divine angel!” cried Zadig, humbly
      prostrating himself on the ground, “hast thou then descended from
      the Empyrean to teach a weak mortal to submit to the eternal decrees of
      Providence?”

 “Men,” said the angel Jesrad, “judge of all without
      knowing anything; and, of all men, thou best deservest to be enlightened.”

 Zadig begged to be permitted to speak. “I distrust myself,”
      said he, “but may I presume to ask the favor of thee to clear up one
      doubt that still remains in my mind? Would it not have been better to have
      corrected this youth, and made him virtuous, than to have drowned him?”

 “Had he been virtuous,” replied Jesrad, “and enjoyed a
      longer life, it would have been his fate to be assassinated himself,
      together with the wife he would have married, and the child he would have
      had by her.”

 “But why,” said Zadig, “is it necessary that there
      should be crimes and misfortunes, and that these misfortunes should fall
      on the good?”

 “The wicked,” replied Jesrad, “are always unhappy; they
      serve to prove and try the small number of the just that are scattered
      through the earth; and there is no evil that is not productive of some
      good.”

 “But,” said Zadig, “suppose there were nothing but good
      and no evil at all.”

 “Then,” replied Jesrad, “this earth would be another
      earth. The chain of events would be ranged in another order and directed
      by wisdom; but this other order, which would be perfect, can exist only in
      the eternal abode of the Supreme Being, to which no evil can approach. The
      Deity hath created millions of worlds among which there is not one that
      resembles another. This immense variety is the effect of His immense
      power. There are not two leaves among the trees of the earth, nor two
      globes in the unlimited expanse of heaven that are exactly similar; and
      all that thou seest on the little atom in which thou art born, ought to be
      in its proper time and place, according to the immutable decree of Him who
      comprehends all. Men think that this child who hath just perished is
      fallen into the water by chance; and that it is by the same chance that
      this house is burned; but there is no such thing as chance; all is either
      a trial, or a punishment, or a reward, or a foresight. Remember the
      fisherman who thought himself the most wretched of mankind. Oromazes sent
      thee to change his fate. Cease, then, frail mortal, to dispute against
      what thou oughtest to adore.”

 “But,” said Zadig—as he pronounced the word “But,”
      the angel took his flight toward the tenth sphere. Zadig on his knees
      adored Providence, and submitted. The angel cried to him from on high,
      “Direct thy course toward Babylon.”

 THE ENIGMAS

 Zadig, entranced, as it were, and like a man about whose head the thunder
      had burst, walked at random. He entered Babylon on the very day when those
      who had fought at the tournaments were assembled in the grand vestibule of
      the palace to explain the enigmas and to answer the questions of the grand
      magi. All the knights were already arrived, except the knight in green
      armor. As soon as Zadig appeared in the city the people crowded round him;
      every eye was fixed on him; every mouth blessed him, and every heart
      wished him the empire. The envious man saw him pass; he frowned and turned
      aside. The people conducted him to the place where the assembly was held.
      The queen, who was informed of his arrival, became a prey to the most
      violent agitations of hope and fear. She was filled with anxiety and
      apprehension. She could not comprehend why Zadig was without arms, nor why
      Itobad wore the white armor. A confused murmur arose at the sight of
      Zadig. They were equally surprised and charmed to see him; but none but
      the knights who had fought were permitted to appear in the assembly.

 “I have fought as well as the other knights,” said Zadig,
      “but another here wears my arms; and while I wait for the honor of
      proving the truth of my assertion, I demand the liberty of presenting
      myself to explain the enigmas.” The question was put to the vote,
      and his reputation for probity was still so deeply impressed in their
      minds, that they admitted him without scruple.

 The first question proposed by the grand magi was: “What, of all
      things in the world, is the longest and the shortest, the swiftest and the
      slowest, the most divisible and the most extended the most neglected and
      the most regretted, without which nothing can be done, which devours all
      that is little, and enlivens all that is great?”

 Itobad was to speak. He replied that so great a man as he did not
      understand enigmas, and that it was sufficient for him to have conquered
      by his strength and valor. Some said that the meaning of the enigma was
      Fortune; some, the Earth; and others the Light. Zadig said that it was
      Time. “Nothing,” added he, “is longer, since it is the
      measure of eternity; nothing is shorter, since it is insufficient for the
      accomplishment of our projects; nothing more slow to him that expects,
      nothing more rapid to him that enjoys; in greatness, it extends to
      infinity; in smallness, it is infinitely divisible; all men neglect it;
      all regret the loss of it; nothing can be done without it; it consigns to
      oblivion whatever is unworthy of being transmitted to posterity, and it
      immortalizes such actions as are truly great.” The assembly
      acknowledged that Zadig was in the right.

 The next question was: “What is the thing which we receive without
      thanks, which we enjoy without knowing how, which we give to others when
      we know not where we are, and which we lose without perceiving it?”

 Everyone gave his own explanation. Zadig alone guessed that it was Life,
      and explained all the other enigmas with the same facility. Itobad always
      said that nothing was more easy, and that he could have answered them with
      the same readiness had he chosen to have given himself the trouble.
      Questions were then proposed on justice, on the sovereign good, and on the
      art of government. Zadig’s answers were judged to be the most solid.
      “What a pity is it,” said they, “that such a great
      genius should be so bad a knight!”

 “Illustrious lords,” said Zadig, “I have had the honor
      of conquering in the tournaments. It is to me that the white armor
      belongs. Lord Itobad took possession of it during my sleep. He probably
      thought that it would fit him better than the green. I am now ready to
      prove in your presence, with my gown and sword, against all that beautiful
      white armor which he took from me, that it is I who have had the honor of
      conquering the brave Otamus.”

 Itobad accepted the challenge with the greatest confidence. He never
      doubted but that, armed as he was, with a helmet, a cuirass, and
      brassarts, he would obtain an easy victory over a champion in a cap and
      nightgown. Zadig drew his sword, saluting the queen, who looked at him
      with a mixture of fear and joy. Itobad drew his without saluting anyone.
      He rushed upon Zadig, like a man who had nothing to fear; he was ready to
      cleave him in two. Zadig knew how to ward off his blows, by opposing the
      strongest part of his sword to the weakest of that of his adversary, in
      such a manner that Itobad’s sword was broken. Upon which Zadig,
      seizing his enemy by the waist, threw him on the ground; and firing the
      point of his sword at the breastplate, “Suffer thyself to be
      disarmed,” said he, “or thou art a dead man.”

 Itobad, always surprised at the disgraces that happened to such a man as
      he, was obliged to yield to Zadig, who took from him with great composure
      his magnificent helmet, his superb cuirass, his fine brassarts, his
      shining cuishes; clothed himself with them, and in this dress ran to throw
      himself at the feet of Astarte. Cador easily proved that the armor
      belonged to Zadig. He was acknowledged king by the unanimous consent of
      the whole nation, and especially by that of Astarte, who, after so many
      calamities, now tasted the exquisite pleasure of seeing her lover worthy,
      in the eyes of all the world, to be her husband. Itobad went home to be
      called lord in his own house. Zadig was king, and was happy. The queen and
      Zadig adored Providence. He sent in search of the robber Arbogad, to whom
      he gave an honorable post in his army, promising to advance him to the
      first dignities if he behaved like a true warrior, and threatening to hang
      him if he followed the profession of a robber.

 Setoc, with the fair Almona, was called from the heart of Arabia and
      placed at the head of the commerce of Babylon. Cador was preferred and
      distinguished according to his great services. He was the friend of the
      king; and the king was then the only monarch on earth that had a friend.
      The little mute was not forgotten.

 But neither could the beautiful Semira be comforted for having believed
      that Zadig would be blind of an eye; nor did Azora cease to lament her
      having attempted to cut off his nose. Their griefs, however, he softened
      by his presents. The envious man died of rage and shame. The empire
      enjoyed peace, glory, and plenty. This was the happiest age of the earth;
      it was governed by love and justice. The people blessed Zadig, and Zadig
      blessed Heaven.