A BAYARD OF BROADWAY

 The younger man—he was only a boy—grinned
impishly at the elder, bringing out the
two dimples in his flushed, girlish cheeks.

 "That's all right enough, Dill," he drawled; he
always drawled when he had been drinking. When
he was sober the familiar Huntington staccato
was very marked in him.

 "That's all right, Dilly, my boy, and a grand
truth, as old Jim used to tell us at chapel, but
maybe little Robert doesn't see your game? Oh,
yes, he sees it, fast enough. Sis hands it out to
you, and you recite it to Robbie, and Robbie reforms,
and you get Sis! How's that for a young
fellow who flunks his math? Not bad, eh?"

 Dillon flushed and set his teeth, mastering an
almost irresistible longing to slap those red cheeks
in vicious alternation. To think that this chattering
young idiot stood between him and his heart's
desire!

 Bob drawled on: "Anyhow, Dill, I think it's right queer, you know. Why don't she marry you?
She can't love you very much, if it depends on
me. You're a man o' the world, you know, man o'
world"—he grew absent-minded and stared at the
wall. Dillon snapped his fingers nervously, and the
speaker began again with a start:

 "That's what I say—a man o' world. Tell her
it's all bosh worryin' over me, tell her that, Dill,
tell her I say so. No use her tryin' to be my mother.
Now is there, Dill, as a man, is there? If she got
married and had some children of her own——"

 "Bob," the older man burst out, "for heaven's
sake, shut up, will you, and listen to me! I'm
going to tell you the truth. You've got the whole
thing in your hands—God knows why, but you
have—and I'm going to lay it before you once
for all. Then do as you please: make us all happy,
or go to the devil your own way—and I'll go
mine," he added, lower and quicker.

 Bob sat up, blinked rapidly, and smoothed his
hair down tight over his ears—sure sign that he
was nearly himself.

 "Go ahead," he said shortly, "I'll come in."

 Dillon bit his lip a moment; he would rather
have taken a whipping than say what he had to
say. The clock ticked loud in the pause, and Bob,
every moment clearer-eyed, heavy sleep a thing of
the past, stared at him disconcertingly.

 "What I'm going to say to you," Dillon began,
"isn't very often said by one man to another, I
imagine. Few men are placed in just my position.
I've known you all so well, I've seen so much of
you all my life——" he paused.

 "I needn't say how much I thought of your
mother. When your father was—when he broke
down so often at the last, of course I saw a great
deal of her, and she trusted me a lot—she had to,
once she began. When she died, and you weren't
there, because you——"

 "Don't! please don't, Dill!" the boy's lips contracted;
his slim body twisted with a helpless remorse.

 "Well, then, when she died she asked me to look
out for you, because she knew how I loved her and—and
Helena. She knew you had it in you, and
she didn't blame you—they never do, I suppose, mothers—but she asked me if I'd try to look out
for you. She knew I wasn't perfect myself. That's—that's
why she thought I wouldn't do for
Helena. Helena was always so wonderful, so high
above——"

 Again he stopped, and the boy's voice broke in:

 "Helena's made of snow and ice-water," he said
moodily, "she's too good for this earth. She doesn't
know——"

 "She knows what her brother should be, and she
knows what her husband must be," Dillon interrupted
sternly. "No sister could have been more
of an angel to you, Bob.

 "Now I'll go on. It's going to be necessary just
here for me to tell you that I love your sister.
You don't know anything about that, of course.
You don't for a second of your life realise what
it is to love a woman as I've loved her for—for
five years, we'll say. I put it five because, though
I loved her long before, things happened in between,
and I don't count it till five years ago.
Heaven knows I'm not worth her shoe-laces. Once
or twice—before the five years—I've realised that a little too much, and then—the things happened.
But since then I've honestly tried to keep to the
mark your mother set me. She said to me once,
'If you would only keep as good as you are at
your best, Lawrence, you'd be good enough for
Helena,' and—perhaps because that wasn't so very
good, after all—I've really been keeping there,
after a fashion."

 Bob stared at him in unaffected amazement.
This clubman, this elegant, this social arbiter
was standing before him with tears in his level
grey eyes. It dawned upon his reckless young soul
that the soul of another man was slowly and painfully
stripping itself before him.

 "We'll let that part of it go," Dillon went on
hurriedly, "you couldn't see. I—I think I could
make her happy, Bob. I know her better than she
thinks. She almost said she'd have me, and then
you went on that spree. You nearly broke her
heart—I needn't go over it. Only she made a vow,
then—it was when she went into that convent-place
in Holy Week, and she's never been the
same since—and it was about you."

 "About me? What d'you mean?"

 "She told me she never could marry till she was
certain whether you were just obstinate and wild,
or—or like your father; and that in that case——"

 "What, in that case?" Bob muttered through
his teeth.

 "She was going to devote her life to taking care
of you."

 There was a silence.

 "There's no use in going over all the arguments
now, Bob—you know what the doctor said.
Three months without a drop, and then he'd warrant
you. Every day that goes by makes it harder
for you. And here's your Uncle Owen promising
that the first month you go without a spree he'll
send you for a three months' cruise on the yacht
with Stebbins—you know what a chance that
is."

 Bob looked fairly up for the first time.

 "Stebbins! Would Stebbins go? I don't believe
you!" he cried eagerly.

 "He told me he would," said Dillon.

 "Why on earth should he?"

 "He's a friend of mine," the other answered simply.

 Bob twisted his lips together a moment, while
the muscles around his mouth worked. Suddenly
he gave way and broke into sobbing speech.

 "You're a good fellow, Dill—I'm not worth it—truly,
I'm not! I've been a beast—and the college
and all that—you all despise me—but so do I!"

 He gripped the chair, turning his handsome,
tear-stained face up to his friend's. How the
straight, thin nose, the black-lashed blue eyes, the
white forehead reflected Helena! Dillon could have
kissed him for the likeness.

 "Will you, Bob? Will you? We'll all stand by
you!"

 "I will, Dillon, I will, so help me—Bob!" he
smiled through wet lashes. "You hang on, and I
will! But look out for that rector—he's running
a close second, and Aunt Sarah's backing him for
all she's worth!" He was smiling wisely now; the
strain was lifted, and he was almost himself again.
Dillon scowled.

 "He takes her slumming, you know, and, say, you ought to hear him give it to Aunt Sarah
about knowing the condition the poor devils are
in before you deal out the tracts, you know. He
wants the good ladies and gentlemen to come and
see—that way, you know."

 "He's right enough there," Dillon said constrainedly,
"and I suppose he's better for her than
I'd be—no, by George, he's not! Bob, I tell you,
I know her better than he does—I tell you I've
waited five years—Oh, Lord, I can't talk any more
about it!"

 They went out arm in arm, the boy warm and
friendly, proud of his confidence and full of high
resolve, Dillon impassive outwardly, but conscious
of great stakes. To say, in four short weeks, to
those wide, blue eyes, a little scornful, perhaps,
but with so sweet, so pure a scorn! " The strain is
over: he is safe; can you not trust me now? " His
heart leaped and grew large at the thought.

 It was so like Helena, this service, half-sacred
in her mother's trust, half-shy in maidenly delaying.
"She is afraid of me!" he thought exultingly—indeed,
she admitted as much.

 "You and your set—one knows you, and yet
one doesn't," she said to him. "You seem so still,
so satisfied, so sure about life—there seems to be
so much you don't tell! Do you see what I mean?
It frightens me. There is so much we don't think
the same about, Lawrence—so much of you I don't
know! I wanted, when I married, to come into a—a
peace. I wanted it to be—don't laugh—like my
Confirmation: do you think it would, if I married
you? Do you, Lawrence?"

 He turned his head away. A vision of her, those
ten short years ago, in white procession down the
aisle of Easter lilies, rapt and aloof, flashed before
him. For one sweet second he saw her in fancy,
again in white, but trembling now, and near
him——

 "Oh, dearest child," he begged, "I don't know
about the peace—how can I? The things are so
different! But we could be happy—I know we
could! Is peace all you want, sweetheart, all?"

 Caught by his eyes, her own wavered and
dropped; a flood of red rose to her hair.

 "Don't, Lawrence, you frighten me! When you look like that—Oh, wait a month, only this month,
Lawrence, till Bob has gone and we're sure!"

 "You want that more than anything else, don't
you? You'd give up anything——"

 Her eyes grew soft, then stern, and looked
clearly into his.

 "Anything in the world," she said instantly,
"so that mamma could see he was—safe. I am all
Bob has. Oh, if he can only——"

 "He shall," Dillon assured her stoutly, "he
shall, this time!"

 And indeed it seemed that he would. He
seemed awakened to the strongest effort they had
known him to make. His uncle's offer, grimly set
for one month from its date, or never, took on for
him a superstitious colour of finality. He was convinced
that it was his last chance.

 "If I'm downed this time, Dill, it's all up," he
would say, wearily, as they paced the endless city
blocks together, arm in arm, under the night. "If
I can keep up till the yacht—how long is it, a
week?—then, something tells me I'm all right. I
swear it's so. I never felt that before. But if I don't"—he paused ominously. "There's always
one way out," he added.

 "You will break Helena's heart, then."

 "Heart? I don't think she has one. If she had,
you'd have had her long ago. Oh, no, I sha'n't.
She'll go into that beastly retreat for a while, and
then she'll marry that crazy rector-man and go
about saving souls. You'll see."

 The week was nearly up. The yacht was ready
in the harbour. The boy, though, showed the
strain, and Dillon, fearful of too much dogging
him, and warned by his furtive eyes and narrowed
lips, called in Stebbins to the rescue.

 "I can't have him hate me, Steb," he explained.
"We're both of us worn pretty thin. If you could
give up to-day and to-night——"

 They shook hands.

 "It's every minute, practically, you know,
Steb," he added doubtfully, "it's a good deal."

 "Oh, get on!" the other broke in, with a good-natured
shoulder clap.

 As he swung the glass door of the club behind
him, Dillon ran down a messenger-boy, bulging with yellow envelopes. The boy glanced at him
questioningly.

 "Mist' Wardwell, Adams, Stebbins, 'r Waite?"
he inquired, holding out four telegrams as he
slipped in.

 Dillon shook his head, and walked down the
steps.

 One more night and she would be all to win, no
promise between, no scruple that a lover might not
smother. Shame on him if he could not woo more
persuasively than a mystical evangelist! In the
evening he would see her; the precious little note
lay warm over his heart.

 He dined alone, he could not have said where,
and an idle impulse for the lights and bustle of
the great thoroughfare sent him strolling down
Broadway. It was too early for the crowd, and he
found himself guessing vaguely as to the characteristics
of the couples that met and passed him.
That tall, slender lad, for instance, with such a
hint of Bob—poor, troublesome Bob!—in his
loose, telltale swagger, what had led him to the
dark-eyed creature that tapped her high heels be side
him? As she came under the light, one saw
better; her flashing smile, her careless carriage of
the head, her broad sweep of shoulder, had a certain
charm—great heavens, it was Bob steadying
himself on her arm! A moment, and the familiar
drawl reached his ear:

 "An' so you always want to choose mos' prom'nent
place, every time, an' you're safe's a church.
No chance to meet y'r dear frien's——"

 Dillon strode to his side, raising his hat to the
surprised woman.

 "I beg your pardon, Bob, but had you forgotten
your engagement this evening?" he said
smoothly. Bob stopped, glared a moment uncertainly,
but the scrupulous courtesy of Dillon's
bearing had its intended effect.

 "What—what engagement?" he inquired suspiciously.
"Friend o' mine," he added to his companion.

 "Haven't you met Stebbins? He—he was expecting
you." Lawrence felt his heart sink. Where
was Stebbins? Oh, fool, to have lost hold at the
eleventh hour!

 "Stebbins? Stebbins?" Bob murmured to himself.
"Ah, yes; the beastly boat got afire, and he
had to go down; I'm going too, after a while—too
early yet—take a little walk, first, with Miss—Miss——"
He paused, and stared thoughtfully at
the woman. "I don't seem to just recall your
name," he said pleasantly. "Would you mind telling
me, so that I can introduce you? Bad form,
his poking in, though, terribly bad form."

 Dillon noted with anger that Bob was at his
most argumentative, obstinate stage; at this point,
if he felt the necessity, he could speak most correctly
and clearly, by giving some thought to the
matter, and it was almost impossible to alter his
determinations.

 "My name is Williams," said the woman. Dillon
bowed.

 "What have you had, Bob?" he inquired, moving
along with them.

 "Oh, only a cocktail—here and there—Miss—Miss
Willis likes 'em as well as anything. About
time we had another?" he suggested, eyeing Lawrence
combatively.

 The older man stopped dead. A weary despair
of the whole business seized him. It was all up,
then. Even if he went about with the boy, which
Bob would hardly allow, his condition next morning
would be all too apparent. And then Uncle
Owen would wash his hands of it all. Aunt Sarah
would never consent to any institutional cure.
Helena would never marry while Bob needed
her—thank God, she had never suspected the
woman!

 As if in answer to his thoughts, Bob complained
loudly:

 "I say it's a blamed shame, the first time I go
out with a girl to enjoy the evening, to have you
pokin' in, Dill! Always stuck with the fellows before;
and now I get a girl, like anybody else, and
here you come! Why don't you get out? Two's
company."

 Dillon caught his arm.

 "Bob," he said beseechingly, "you don't know
what you're doing. Surely you know what this
means! Don't you remember that the Eider-duck
sails to-morrow at nine? Don't you realise that by this night's folly you're losing your last chance?
Your last chance, Bob! Think how you called it
that yourself! If this lady realised all this meant
to you, she'd excuse you, I'm sure. Don't be a fool,
Bob! Let me put you in a cab and go right to
Stebbins—old Steb'll put you up, and nobody will
ever know! You can sleep it off—it's only eight
o'clock."

 To his unexpected delight Bob yawned sleepily.
His eyes were dull, his mouth drooped.

 "Sleep it off," he murmured. "I wish I was in
bed this minute. Lord, I'm tired. And I know why,
too. I told her bromo-seltzer would settle me. Always
puts me to sleep—no good at all. Fool to
drink it. Told her so...."

 Dillon's spirits rose.

 "That's so," he assented, "it always acts that
way with you, doesn't it? Especially with cocktails.
Now, you be a wise man, Bob," he urged,
"and get into this cab——"

 "And where do I come in?" said the woman
sharply. "I call this a little queer, if you don't
mind my saying so."

 Bob roused himself for a moment.

 "Just so," he declared heavily, "just so.
Where does Miss Willard come in? You must think
I'm a terrible cad, Dill, to ask a lady out for
the evening, and leave her like that! Not a bit
of it! You go on! Sorry, but can't leave the
lady."

 Lawrence moved toward his pocket involuntarily.
The woman struck his arm lightly.

 "That'll do," she said sullenly. "I don't want
your money. You think I'm a kind of a bundle, do
you? Pick me up and drop me. Well, that's where
you make a mistake. Why don't you let your
friend alone?"

 "Helen—she'll know. You say nobody will,"
Bob broke in suddenly. "She won't lie, if you will.
She'll tell Uncle Owen. What's the use?"

 "I won't tell her," Lawrence returned quickly,
"and nobody else knows."

 "Well, then," Bob faced him cunningly, walking
backwards through the comparatively empty
cross-street they had turned down, "I think maybe
I'll do it. I want to go with Stebbins, all right. But"—his obstinacy rose again, suddenly—"I
swear I won't go back on a lady! Nobody offer a
lady money in my presence! 'Twon't do, Dill! Get
out!"

 "Bob," Lawrence urged, despairingly, "if I
take Miss Williams wherever she wants to go, and
she will accept my escort"—he half turned to her,
but his doubt was not evident, if he had it—"will
you go to Stebbins?"

 Bob stopped short, nearly falling backwards.

 "Great head!" he cried. "Never thought old
Dilly had it in him! I'll—I'll consider the prop—the
prop—the plan." He yawned widely. "I certainly
am sleepy," he observed, sinking on a convenient
step.

 Dillon shook him and dragged him up.

 "Come," he said, shortly, "will you?"

 Bob pointed a theatrical finger at them.

 "Do you, Dilly, being of sound mind, body, or
estate, give me your solemn word of honour as a
gentleman to escort Miss Willins wherever she
wants to go? Do you?"

 "And drop me when your back's turned," inter posed
the woman, laconically, but not angrily.
Her interest was awakened, perhaps her sense of
humour, too, and she awaited developments philosophically.

 "Never a bit," Bob returned. "You don't know
old Dill. If he says it, he'll do it, if there were
what-do-you-call-'ems in the way."

 "I give you my word of honour," said Lawrence,
steadily.

 "And you'll never tell Helen? Because if you
do, she tells Uncle Owen, and it's all up with
Robbie."

 "I will never tell her."

 "On your word of honour?"

 "On my word of honour."

 "Then call your cab and tuck me in my little
bed. My eyes will crack if I prop 'em up any
longer."

 "Miss—Miss—I can't recall your name, but you
don't object?..."

 "Oh, no, I don't object in the least," said Miss
Williams satirically, with a wondering glance at
the tall, immaculate gentleman at her side, his face stern in the electric-light, his evening clothes in
marked contrast to Bob's neglige. "In fact, I
rather——"

 Dillon whistled a cab and gave the driver whispered
directions. A bill fluttered as he passed it
up. The man nodded, respectful.

 "And now I am at your service," said Dillon,
standing tall and straight before her. "Where did
you wish to go?"

 Not for one moment did it occur to him to evade
his duty, and not for one moment did she intend
that he should. Where they went, through all that
nightmare evening, he could never afterward tell.
From dance-hall to concert-hall they wandered,
sat awhile, and departed. Nor were they silent on
the way. What they spoke of he could not have
told for his life, but they talked, fairly steadily
at first, less and less as the night wore on, and the
woman grew dreamily content with the lights, the
warmth, and the liquor. Dillon was imperturbably
polite, gravely attentive to her wishes, curiously
conscious of one life with her and another distinct
existence at Helena's home. Now he was waiting, waiting, waiting in front of the close-shaded windows
to see if she had left the house or if she still
sat in surprised idleness expecting him. Now he
was at Stebbins's house watching Bob as he lay
asleep there.

 He remembered afterward thinking that the
woman must have been a Southerner, for, as she
drank, her tongue turned to those softer tones,
slurred vowels and quaint idioms.

 "It seems like you're having a good time, after
all," she said once. He bowed gravely.

 By eleven they were well down-town, he was not
quite certain where. They stayed but little time in
any one place. It seemed as if they had been on
this endless journey for years. Now and then he
saw a man he knew. In one place he wakened,
with a shock of remembrance, to the fact that he
had been there before: there, and at the place opposite,
too. How little it had changed! It was before
the five years....

 They were at a corner table, he with his back
to the room, the woman facing it. On a platform
opposite a young fellow sat before a piano, strik ing
desultory chords. Presently he began to sing,
in a sweet, piercing tenor:

   " Oh, promise me that some day you and I ——"



 There was a moved silence through the room;
his voice had a quality that reached for the
heart:

   " Those first sweet violets of early spring ——"



 Dillon glanced at the woman; her large, dark
eyes were brimmed with tears. A great pity surged
over him: he would have given anything he owned
to be able to offer her her life to live again. Tenderly,
as over a dusty, broken bird, he laid his
hand over her clasped ones on the table. They sat
in awed silence; the song swelled on. He did not
hear the door open behind him, nor turn as a new
party of four entered quietly. Directly behind his
chair a man's voice spoke softly.

 "This is a fair sample. Not very bad, you think?
But every man in this room is a confirmed opium-eater,
and the women——"

 The two at the table hardly heard.

 "Oh, the women!" said a woman's voice in a
rough whisper. "I cannot bear to think——"

 "Oh, it isn't the women, Aunty! You sha'n't
say that—they are heart-breaking. It's the men,
the men I bl——"

 Swiftly, hopelessly, as the steel turns to the
magnet, Dillon turned and faced Helena Huntington.

 As her eyes met his all the rose colour in her
soft cheeks seemed to sweep into his and burn
dully there, leaving her whiter than bone. For one
fiery second her eyes rested on the table, the half-emptied
glasses, the clasped hands of the pair, the
tear-stained cheeks of the handsome girl. For one
breath two groups of stone confronted each other.
Then, with no sign of recognition, she swept from
her seat, her hand on the rector's arm, her aunt
and an older man behind them. Her aunt looked
at Dillon as if he were the chair he sat in.

 The door swung behind them.

   " No life so perfect as a life with thee,  Oh, promise me; oh, promise me! "



 the tenor shrilled. Lawrence burst into jangling
laughter.

 "The evening is over," he said, still red and
shaking. "Allow me to escort you home."

 He never remembered the time between this
speech and the moment when she asked him to step
in for a while, and he laughed in her face. Then
there was another time, and he was at his rooms
at the club. But that was early morning. He was
lame and his shoes hurt his feet—he must have
walked a great deal.

 At eight o'clock Stebbins dashed into the
room.

 "Well, of all the fellows! What's the matter
with you?"

 He was fresh and rosy; a faint, wholesome
aroma of cigars and eau-de-cologne swept in with
him.

 "Why the deuce aren't you down to see us off?
They're all there. Got my telegram yesterday?
Fire didn't amount to much, but the fools hadn't
half the stuff I ordered. I was down there all the
afternoon seeing to it. I sent Bob right around to you. You must have walked him well. Stevens
said he came in at eight and tumbled straight to
bed. He's fresh as paint this morning. Asked him
where he'd been, and I swear he didn't know. Says
you told him to go to bed, and he went. Drove
home, he says. Actually doesn't remember a living
thing but that, since dinner. When you said he'd
be that way sometimes I didn't really believe you,
but I do now. Where were you?"

 Dillon faced him.

 "For God's sake, Lawrence, what is it? Are you
sick? She said you wouldn't be there——"

 "She? Who?"

 "The old one—the aunt. Bob was wondering
about it, and she says directly, 'No, he won't be
here this morning,' so I slipped off. Bob said if
you were tired, never mind.

 "I say, Lawrence, that's an awfully attractive
boy. You can't help liking him. He called me
aside, and, 'Look here,' says he, 'Uncle Owen says
there's to be no wine packed for you. Now I can't
have that, Stebbins, it won't do. It's awfully bully
of you to come, and you must have everything you want.' I told him that would be all right and
what a fine vacation it was going to be for
me——"

 Lawrence turned the water into the tub and
began to pull at his shoes. Never had he felt so
grateful for Stebbins's constant chatter.

 "I don't believe I'll come down," he heard himself
say. "I have a beastly headache. I didn't get
much sleep——"

 "Well, for heaven's sake get some, if it makes
you look like that! Where'd you go, anyway, after
you put Bob to bed?"

 Lawrence pulled off his coat.

 "Parson's down there, you know. He and uncle
seem to be hand in glove. He's pretty well fixed
with most of the family, I shouldn't wonder."

 "How much time have you got?" said Lawrence's
voice.

 "George, not much! Cab's waiting outside. I
won't mention how you look, then—just tell 'em
good-bye."

 "That's all. Just tell 'em good-bye."

 Lawrence was in the bath-room as Stebbins hurried out. He sat down on the porcelain rim of
the tub, his face drawn and grey above his white
shirt.

 "It seems to be pretty well settled up," he said
quietly. "I hope his mother's pleased!"