[

277 ] 

A CAPE HORN CHRISTMAS.

 All

hands in Yamba hut had turned in, except a
couple at the end of the long rough table.

 These late birds were playing euchre by the flickering
light of an evil-smelling slush lamp. The cook
had banked up the fire for the night, but the myall
ashes still glowed redly and cast heat around. On
the stone hearth stewed a bucket of tea. But for
the snores of the men in the double tier of bunks
ranged ship-fashion along both sides of the big hut,
the frizzling of the grease in the lamp, and the
muttered exclamations of the players, everything was
very quiet.

 ‘Pass me!’

 ‘Make it!’

 ‘Hearts!’

 And both men dropped their hands and sprang up
in affright as a wild scream rang out from the bunk
just above them.

 As they gazed, a white face, wet with the sweat of
fear, poked out and stared down upon them with eyes
in which the late terror still lived.

 [

278 ] 

‘What the dickens is up?’ asked one, recovering from
his surprise, whilst the grumbles of awakened sleepers
travelled around the hut.

 ‘My God! what a dream! what a dream!’ exclaimed
the man addressed, sticking out a pair of naked legs,
and softly alighting on the earthen floor, and standing
there trembling.

 ‘Shoo!’ said the station wit, as he turned for a
fresh start; ‘it’s only Jack the Sailor had the night-horse.’

 But the man, crouching close to the players, and
wiping his pallid face with his loose shirt sleeve, still exclaimed,—

 ‘What a dream! My God! What a dream!’

 ‘Tell us what it were all about, Jack,’ asked one
of the others, handing him a pannikin of tea. ‘It
oughter been bad, judgin’ by the dashed skreek as
you give.’

 ‘It was,’ said the other—a grizzled, tanned, elderly
man—as he warmed his legs, and looked rather
ashamed of himself. ‘But hardly enough to make
such a row over as you chaps reckons I did. I
was dreamin’,’ he continued, speaking slowly, ‘as I
was at sea again. It was on Christmas Day, an’ the
ship was close to Cape Horn. How I knowed that,
I can’t tell. But the land was in sight quite plain.
Me an’ another feller—I can see his ugly face yet,
and sha’n’t never forget it—was makin’ fast one of
the jibs. Presen’ly we seemed to ’ave some words
out there, hot an’ sharp. Then I done a thing, [

279 ]

the like o’ which ud never come into my mind
when awake—not if I lived to the age of Methyuseler—I
puts my sheath-knife into him right up to the
handle.

 ‘The weather were heavy, an’ the ship a-pitchin’
bowsprit under into a head sea. Well, I was just
watchin’ his face turn sorter slate colour, an’ him
clingin’ on to a gasket an’ starin’ hard, when she gives
a dive fathoms deep.

 ‘When I comes up again I was in the water, an’ there
was the ship half-a-mile away.

 ‘Swimmin’ an’ lookin’ round, I spies the other feller
alongside me on top of a big comber, with the white
spume all red about him.

 ‘Nex’ minute, down he comes, an’ I feels his two
hands a-grippin’ me tight by the throat. I expect’s it was
then I sung out an’ woke myself,’ and the man shivered
as he gazed intently into the heart of the glowing myall
ashes.

 ‘Well, Jack Ashby,’ said one of his hearers, gathering
up the scattered cards, ‘it wasn’t a nice dream. If I
was you I should take it as a warnin’ never to go a-sailorin’
no more. Never was at the game myself, and
don’t want to be. There can’t be much in it, though,
when just the very thoughts o’ what’s never ’appened, an’
what’s never a-goin’ to ’appen, is able to give a chap such
a start as you got.’

 ‘Ugh!’ exclaimed the sailor, getting up and shaking
himself as he climbed into his bunk. ‘No, I’ll never go
back to sea again!’

 [

280 ] 

But, in course of time, Jack Ashby became tired of
station life—became tired of the everlasting drudgery of
the rouseabout, the burr-cutting, lamb-catching, and all
the rest of it.

 He had no more dreams of the kind. But when o’
nights the wind whistled around and shook the crazy old
hut, he would turn restlessly in his bunk and listen for
the hollow thud of the rope-coils on the deck above, the
call of ‘All hands,’ the wild racket of the gale, and the
hiss of stormy waters.

 So his thoughts irresistibly wandered back again to the
tall ships and the old shipmates, and all the magic and
mystery of the great deep on whose bosom he had passed
his life. He knew that he was infinitely better off where
he was—better paid, better fed, better off in every
respect than he could ever possibly hope to be at sea.

 Battling with his longing, he contrasted the weevilly
biscuits and salt junk of the fo’k’stle with the wholesome
damper and fresh mutton and beef of the hut.

 He thought of the ‘all night in’ of undisturbed
rest, contrasting it with the ‘Watch ahoy! Now
then, you sleepers, turn out!’ of each successive four
hours.

 He thought, too, of tyrannous masters and mates; of
drenched decks and leaking fo’k’stles, of frozen rigging,
of dark wild nights of storm, and of swaying foot-ropes
and thundrous TN: ok OED canvas slatting like iron plates about his
ears; of hunger, wet, and misery.

 Long and carefully he thought of all these things, and
weighed the balance for and against. Then, one [

281 ]

morning, rolling up his swag hurriedly, he went straight back
to them.

 Even the thought of his dream had no power to stay
him.

 But he made a reservation to himself. Said he,—

 ‘No more deep water! I’ll try the coast. I’ve heard
it’s good. TN: punctuation invisible No more deep water; and, above all, no
Cape Horn!’

 He shipped on board a coaster, and went trips to
Circular Head for potatoes; got bar-bound for weeks in
eastern rivers looking for maize and fruit; sailed coal-laden,
with pumps going clanketty-clank all down the
land, and finally, after some months of this sort of work,
found himself in Port Adelaide, penniless, and fresh from
a gorgeous spree. Here he fell in with an old deep-water
shipmate belonging to one of the vessels in harbour.

 ‘Come home with us, Jack,’ said his friend. ‘She
ain’t so bad for a limejuicer—patent reefs, watch an’
watch, an’ no stun’s’ls for’ard. The mate’s a Horse. But
the ole man’s right enough; an’ he wants a couple o’
A.B.’s.’

 ‘No,’ said Jack Ashby, firmly, ‘I’ll never go deep
water again. The coast’s the ticket for this child. I’ve
got reasons, Bill.’

 And then he told his friend of the dream.

 The latter did not appear at all surprised. Nor did
he laugh. Sailors attach more importance to such things
than do landsmen. All he said was,—

 ‘The Dido’s

a fine big ship. She’s a-goin’ home by [

282 ]

Good Hope. Was it a ship or a barque, now, as you
was on in that dream?’

 ‘Can’t say for certain,’ replied Ashby, reflectively;
‘but, by the size o’ her spars, I should reckon she’d be
full-rigged. Howsomever, if ever I clap eyes on his
ugly mug again—which the Lord forbid—you may bet
your bottom dollar, Bill Baker, as I’ll swear to that,
with its big red beard, an’ the tip o’ the nose sliced clean
off.’

 ‘A-a-a-h!’ said the other, staring for a minute, and
then hastily finishing his pint of ‘sheoak.’ And he
pressed Ashby no more to go to England in the Dido

.

 But the latter found it just then anything but easy to
get another berth in a coaster. Also he was in debt to
his boarding-house; and, altogether, it seemed as if
presently he would have to take the very first thing that
offered, or be ‘chucked out.’

 ‘Two A.B.’s wanted for the Dido

,’ roared the shipping
master into a knot of seamen at his office door one day
shortly after Jack and his old shipmate had foregathered
at the ‘Lass o’ Gowrie.’ And the former, feeling very
uncomfortable, and as a man between the Devil and the
Deep Sea, signed articles.

 His one solitary consolation was that the Dido

was
not bound round Cape Horn. He cared for none other
of the world’s promontories. Also, as he cheered up a
little, it came into his mind that it would be rather
pleasant than otherwise once more to have a run down
Ratcliffe Highway, a lark with the girls in Tiger Bay,
and a look-in at the old penny gaff in Whitechapel. [

283 ]

But the main point was that there was no Cape Horn.
Had not Bill Baker told him so? ‘Falmouth and the
United Kingdom,’ said the Articles. Certainly there was
no particular route mentioned. But who should know
if Bill Baker did not?

 But all too surely had the thing that men call Fate
laid fast hold on the Dreamer. And the boarding-house-keeper TN: this is (boarding-house)-keeper, not boarding-(housekeeper) hence needs both hyphens cashed his advance note—returning nothing—and
carted him to the Dido

, and left him stretched out
on the fo’k’stle floor, not knowing or caring where he
was, or who he was, or where he was going, and oblivious
of all things under the sun.

 Nor did he show on deck again until, in the grey of
next morning, a man with a great red beard and a flat
nose looked into his bunk and called him obscene names,
and bade him jump aloft and loose the fore-topsail, or
he would let him know what shirking meant on board
of the Dido

.

 ‘This is a bad beginning,’ thought Jack Ashby, as,
with trembling body and splitting head, he unsteadily
climbed the rigging, listening as one but yet half awake
to the clank of the windlass pawls and the roaring chorus
of the men at the brakes. ‘That’s the feller, sure
enough!’ he gasped, as, winded, he dragged himself
into the fore-top. ‘I’d swear to him anywhere. Thank
the Lord we ain’t goin’ round the Horn! I wonder if
he knowed me

? He’s the mate. An’ Bill was right;
he is

a Horse. Damn deep water!’

 ‘Now then, fore-top, there, shift your pins or I’ll haze

you,’ came up in a bellow from the deck, making poor [

284 ]

Jack jump again as he stared ruefully down at the fierce
upturned face, its red beard forking out like a new swab.

 ‘Thank the Lord, we ain’t goin’ round the Horn!’
said Jack Ashby, as, with tremulous fingers, he loosened
the gaskets and let the stiff folds of canvas fall, and sang
out to sheet home.

 Down the Gulf with a fair wind rattled the Dido

,
through Investigator Straits and out into the Southern
Ocean, whilst Jack cast a regretful look at the lessening
line of distant blue, and exclaimed once more,—

 ‘Damn deep water!’

 That evening the officers spin a coin, and proceed to
pick their respective watches.

 To his disgust, Jack is the very first man chosen by
the fierce chief mate, who has won the toss, and who
at once says,—

 ‘Go below the port watch!’—his own.

 It is blowing a fresh breeze when he comes on deck
again at eight bells. It is his wheel. He finds his
friend Bill Baker there.

 ‘East by sowthe,’ says Bill emphatically, giving him
a pitying look, and walking for’ard.

 ‘East by sowthe it is,’ replies Jack, mechanically.

 Then, as he somewhat nervously, after the long absence,
eyes the white bobbing disc in the binnacle, and squints
aloft at the dark piles of canvas, it suddenly bursts upon
him. Whilst he has been asleep the wind has shifted
into the west. It blows now as if it meant to stay there.
They are bound round Cape Horn after all.

 ‘ TN: opening quote invisible Mind your hellum, you booby,’ roars the mate, just [

285 ]

come on deck. ‘Where are you going to with the ship—back
to Adelaide? I’ll keep an eye on you, my lad,’
lurching aft, and glancing first at Jack’s face and then
at the compass.

 Truth to tell, the latter had been so flustered that he
had let the Dido

come up two or three points off her
course. But he soon got her nose straight again, with,
for the first time, a feeling of hot satisfaction at his
heart that, upon a day not far distant, he and the man
with the red beard, and tip off his nose might, if there
was any truth in dreams, be quits. Be sure that, by this
Jack’s story was well known for’ard of the foremast. Bill
Baker’s tongue had not been idle, and, although a few
scoffed, more believed, and waited expectantly.

 ‘There’s more in dreams than most people thinks for,’
remarked an old sailor in the starboard watch, shaking
his head sagely. ‘The first part o’ Jack’s has comed
true. If I was Mister Horse I’d go a bit easy, an’ not
haze the chap about the way he’s a-doing of.’

 But the chief officer seemed to have taken an unaccountable
dislike to Ashby from the moment he had
first seen him. And this dislike he showed in every
conceivable way until he nearly drove the poor chap
frantic.

 At sea an evil-minded man in authority can do things
of this sort with impunity. The process is called ‘hazing.’
The sufferer gets all the dirtiest and most disagreeable
of the many such jobs to be found on shipboard. He
is singled out from his fellows of the watch and sent
aloft with tarry wads to hang on to a stay by his [

286 ]

eyelashes. Or he is set to scraping masts, or greasing down,
or slung outboard on a stage scrubbing paintwork, where
every roll submerges him neck high, whilst his more
fortunate companions are loafing about the decks.

 If the hazed one openly rebels, and gives his persecutor
a good thrashing, he is promptly ‘logged,’ perhaps
ironed, and at the end of the passage loses his pay,
holding himself lucky not to have got six months in
gaol for ‘mutiny on the high seas.’ There is another
thing that may and does happen; and every day the
crew of the Dido

watched placidly for the heavy iron-clad
block, or marlingspike TN: ok OED , sharp-pointed and massive, that
by pure accident should descend from some lofty nook
and brain or transfix their first officer—the Horse, as
unmindful of the qualities of that noble animal, they
had named him. But Jack Ashby never thought of
such a thing. Nor did he take any notice of friendly
hints from his mates—also sufferers, but in a less degree—that
the best of spike lanyards would wear out by
constant use, and that the best-fitted block-strops would
at times fail to hold.

 Jack’s mind was far too much occupied by the approaching
test to which his dream was to be subjected
to bother about compassing a lesser revenge that might
only end in maiming.

 He, by this, fully believed things were going to turn
out exactly as he had seen them that night in Yamba
men’s hut in the far-away Australian Bush. Therefore
he looked upon himself and his tyrant as lost men.

 At times, even, he caught himself regarding the first [

287 ]

officer with an emotion of curious pity, as one whose
doom was so near and yet so unexpected. And, by
degrees, the men, recognising this attitude of his, and
sympathising heartily with it in different fashions, and
different degrees of credulity, forbore further advice, and
waited with what patience they might.

 It was getting well on towards Christmas.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 I no more wished to go to London viâ Cape Horn
than did John Ashby. But my reasons were altogether
different.

 When I had engaged a saloon passage on the Dido

it
was an understood thing that she would take the other
Cape for it. But a short four hours’ fight against a
westerly wind so sickened the captain that he put his
helm up, and squared his yards, and shaped a course
that would bring him closer to Staten Island than to
Simon’s Bay.

 It was some time before I had any conception of
how things stood for’ard, with respect at least to the
subject of this story.

 I saw, of course, that the chief officer was a bully,
and that he was heartily disliked by the men. But of
Jack Ashby and his dream I knew nothing. Nor, until
my attention was especially drawn to it, did I perceive
that he was undergoing the hazing process.

 As the only passenger, and one who had paid his
footing liberally, I was often on the fo’k’stle and in other
parts of the ship supposed to belong peculiarly to the
men.

 [

288 ] 

Thus, one night, happening to be having a smoke
on the top-gallant fo’k’stle, underneath which lay the
quarters of the crew, I sat down on the anchor stock,
and watched the cold-looking seas rolling up from the
Antarctic Circle, and exchanging at intervals a word
with the look-out man as he stumped across from rail
to rail.

 Close beside me was a small scuttle, with the sliding-lid
of it pushed back.

 I had scarcely lit my pipe when up through this,
making me nearly drop it from my mouth, came a long,
sharp scream as one in dire agony.

 ‘What’s the matter down there?’ shouted my companion,
falling on his knees and craning his head over
the coamings of the hatch.

 Without waiting for an answer, we both bolted on to
the main deck and into the fo’k’stle, where could be
heard broken murmurs and growlings from the sleepy
watch who filled the double tier of open bunks running
with the sheer of the ship right into the eyes of her.

 And on one of these, as I struck a match and lit
the swinging slush lamp, and glanced around me,
I saw a man sitting, his bare legs dangling over
the side. Down his pale face ran great drops of
sweat, and his eyes were staring, glassy, and fixed.
One or two of his mates tumbled out; others poked
their heads over the bunk-boards and swore that it
couldn’t be eight bells already. But the man still
gazed over and beyond us with that horrible stare in
his dilated eyes, and when I laid my hand on him [

289 ]

he was rigid. Then one who, in place of drinking
his ‘tot’ of rum that night, had treasured it up for
another time, produced it; and, laying the man back,
and forcing open the clenched teeth, we got some of
it down his throat; and presently he came to himself
and sat up.

 His first words were,—

 ‘I’ve had it again! Just the same—the mate an’ TN: apostrophe invisible me!’ Then, with a look around, ‘I’m sorry to
have roused ye up, mates. I’m all right now.’ Then,
to myself, ‘How long afore we’re off the Horn,
sir?’

 ‘About a week if the wind holds. Why?’

 ‘Because,’ replied he, lying back and rolling over in
his blankets, ‘I’ve got a week longer to live.’

 ‘That was Jack Ashby, an’ he’s had his dream again,’
said the lookout man in an awed voice as we hurried
on deck, fearful of wandering bergs.

 Then (his name was Baker) he told me the whole
story, and, in spite of my utter incredulity, I became
interested, and, having little to do, watched closely the
progress of the expected drama.

 Also, after that night, I had many a talk with Ashby. TN: punctuation invisible I found him a man rather above the average run of
his class, and one open to reason and argument; nor,
on the whole, very superstitious. But on the subject
of his vision he was immovable.

 ‘You saw the land in your dreams, did you not?’ I
once asked.

 ‘Yes, sir,’ replied he. ‘Big cliffs, not more ’n a mile [

290 ]

away,’ and he described its appearance, and the position
of the vessel.

 ‘Well, then,’ I said, ‘it may interest you to know
that the skipper intends to keep well to the south’ard,
and that we’re more likely to sight the Shetlands than
the Horn.’

 But he only shook his head and smiled faintly as
he replied,—

 ‘He was goin’ home by Good Hope, sir. But he
didn’t. What the skipper means to do, an’ what the
Lord wills is two very different things. My time’s
gettin’ short; but we’ll both go together— him

an’ me.
I don’t reckon as there ’ll be any hazin’ to speak of
in the next world. P’r’aps it’s best as it is. If I
wasn’t sure an’ certain o’ what’s comin’, I’d have killed
him long ago. But,’ he concluded, ‘I’m ready. I’ve
been showed how it’s ordained to happen; an’, so long
as I’ve the company I want, I don’t care.’

 During these days, impressed, somehow, by the feeling
of intense expectation that pervaded all hands for’ard,
I took more notice of Mr Harris, the mate, than I had
hitherto done.

 ‘He was no favourite of mine, and, beyond passing
the time of day, we had found very little to say to
each other.

 And now, although scouting the idea of anything
being about to happen to the man, I watched him and
listened to him with curiosity.

 Certainly he was an ill-favoured customer. Besides
being plentifully pitted with smallpox over what of his [

291 ]

face was visible through the red tangle of hair and
beard, the fleshy tip of his nose had been sliced clean
off, leaving a nasty-looking, flat, red scar.

 This, he said, was the work of a Malay kreese, whilst
ashore at Samarang on a drunken spree. But the
captain once told me confidentially that common report
around Limehouse and the Docks attributed the mishap
to Mrs Harris and a carving-knife.

 Be this as it may, he was a bad-tempered, overbearing
brute, although, I believe, a good seaman.

 At meal times he rarely spoke, but, gulping his food
down, left the table as quickly as possible.

 The captain, who occupied the whole of his time in
making models of a new style of condenser, for which
he had taken out a patent, but by no means could get
to work properly, never interfered with his first officer,
but left the ship entirely in his charge.

 No thought of approaching evil appeared to trouble
Mr Harris, and he became, if possible, more tyrannical
in his behaviour towards the crew, Ashby in particular.
Truly wonderful is it how much hazing Mercantile Jack
will stand before having recourse to the limited amount
of comparatively safe reprisal that a heavy object and
a high altitude endows him with!

 But the Jacks of the Dido

were waiting, with more
or less of faith, the fulfilment of their shipmate’s dream.

 It was on the 23d of December—which, by the way,
was also the extra day we gained—that the strong
westerlies, after serving us so well, began to haul to
the south’ard.

 [

292 ] 

‘You’ll see the Horn after all,’ remarked the captain
to me that morning. ‘Two years ago I was
becalmed close to it. But I scarcely think that such
a thing will happen this time,’ and off he went to his
condenser.

 It was bitterly cold, and the sharp wind from the
ice-fields cut like a knife. The water was like green
glass for the colour and clearness of it, the sky speckless,
and as bitter looking as the water. Gradually
freshening, and hauling still to the south, the wind at
length made it necessary to shorten some of the plain
sail the Dido

had carried right across. On the 24th
land was sighted, and the captain, coming on deck with
his pockets full of tools and little tin things, told us that
it was Cape Horn.

 The fo’k’stle-head was crowded with men, one minute
all gazing at the land, the next staring aft.

 ‘What the deuce are those fellows garping at?’ growled
the mate, walking for’ard.

 Whereupon the watchers scattered.

 Looking behind me, I saw that Jack Ashby was at
the wheel.

 He smiled as his eye caught mine, and pointed one
mittened hand at the chief officer’s back. I looked
at the land, and began for the first time, to feel
doubtful.

 Coming on deck that Christmas morning, I rubbed
my eyes before being able to take in the desolation
of the scene, and make sure that I was indeed on board
the Dido

.

 [

293 ] 

The ship looked as if she had been storm-driven
across the whole Southern Ocean, and then mopped all
over with a heavy rain-squall.

 The wet decks, the naked spars, the two top-sails
tucked up to a treble reef, and seeming mere strips
of canvas, grey with damp, the raffle of gear lying
about, with here and there a man over his knees
in water slowly coiling it up, hanging on meanwhile
by one hand, combined, with the lowering sky and
leaden sea, to make up a gloomy picture indeed.
The ship was nearly close-hauled, and a big lump
of a head-sea on, with which she was doing her level,
or rather, most unlevel, best to fill her decks fore
and aft.

 Broad on the port bow loomed the land—great cliffs,
stern and ragged—at whose base, through the thin mist
that was softly drizzling, could be seen a broad white
belt of broken water.

 ‘Cape Horn weather!’ quoth the captain at my elbow.

 He was swathed in oilskins, and squinting rather
anxiously at the sky.

 ‘The glass is falling,’ he continued; ‘but there’s more
southing in the wind. Might give us a slant presently
through the Straits of Le Maire.’

 And with that, pulling out a bit of the condenser, and
looking lovingly at it, he went below. The mate was
standing near, staring hard at the land. It might have
been the shadow of the sou’-wester on his face, but I
thought he appeared even more surly and forbidding
than ever.

 [

294 ] 

Of course it was a holiday. During the last four hours
both watches had been on deck shortening sail. After
clearing up the washing raffle of ropes, and leaving a
man at the wheel and another on the lookout, they were
free to go into the fo’k’stle, and smoke or sleep, as they
pleased.

 Dinner—a curious acrobatic feat that Christmas day
in the Dido’s

cabin—over, I donned waterproofs and
sea-boots, and, putting four bottles of rum in a handbag,
which I slung over my shoulder, I stepped across the
washboards and made for the fo’k’stle.

 Creeping from hold to hold along the weather bulwarks,
at times up to my waist in water, I wondered how
any ship could pitch as the Dido

was doing and yet
live.

 One moment, looking aft, you would imagine that the
man at the wheel was about to fall on your head; the
next that the jibbooms were a fourth mast; whilst incessantly
poured such foaming torrents over her fo’k’stle
that, as I slowly approached, I seriously doubted of
getting in safely with my precious freight. Luckily, the
men were watching me, and a couple, running out,
caught hold of my hands, roaring in my ear,—

 ‘Run, sir, when she lifts again!’

 And, making a dash for it, we got through the
doorless entrance just in time to escape another avalanche.

 I found the fo’k’stle awash, chests and bags lashed into
lower bunks, and the greater part of both watches
sitting on the upper ones, smoking, and eyeing the [

295 ]

cold sparking water as it rushed to and fro their habitation.

 My arrival, or rather, perhaps, my cargo, was hailed
with acclamation.

 The captain certainly had sent them a couple of
dozen of porter. But, as one explained,—

 ‘What’s the good of sich rubbishin’ swankey as that
when a feller wants somethin’ as ’ll warm ’is innards this
weather?’

 ‘Where’s Ashby?’ I asked, hoisting on to a bunk
amongst the crowd.

 ‘Here I am, sir,’ replied a voice close to in the dimness.

 ‘Well,’ I said, cheerily, ‘what did I tell you? Here’s
Christmas Day well on for through, everything snug—if
damp—and nothing happening. Give him a stiff nip,
one of you, and let us drink to better times, and no
more nonsense. Once we’re round the corner, yonder,
this trip will soon be over.’

 ‘Thank you kindly, sir,’ replied Ashby, as he emptied
the pannikin, which was being so carefully passed around
by the one appointed, who, holding on like grim death,
after every poured-out portion, held the bottle up to the
light to see how the contents were faring. ‘Thank you
kindly, sir,’ said he. ‘But Christmas Day isn’t done
yet.’

 Even as he spoke, a form clad in glistening oilskins
came through the water-curtain that was roaring over the
break of the fo’k’stle, and, leaning upon the windlass,
sang out,—

 [

296 ] 

‘You there, Ashby?’

 ‘Ay, ay, sir,’ replied the seaman.

 ‘Lie out, then,’ continued the mate, for he it was,
‘and put another gasket around that inner jib! It’s
coming adrift! Bear a hand, now!’

 The ship for a minute seemed to stand quite still, as
if waiting to hear the answer, and each man turned to
look at his neighbour.

 Then Ashby, jumping down, with a curious set expression
on his face, walked up to the mate and said very loud,—

 ‘Don’t send a man where you’d be frightened to go
yourself.’

 ‘You infernal soger!’ shouted the other, enraged
beyond measure at this first sign of rebellion in his
victim. ‘Come out here and I’ll show you all about
that! Come out and crawl after me, and I’ll learn you
how to do your work!’

 He disappeared, and Ashby followed him like a flash.
In a trice every soul was outside—some clinging to the
running gear around the foremast, others on the galley,
others in the fore rigging.

 I could see no sign of any of the head sails being
adrift. All, except the set fore-topmast stay-sail, lay on
their booms, masses of sodden canvas, off which poured
green cataracts as the Dido

lifted her nose from a mighty
plunge.

 For a minute or two, so dense was the smother for’ard
of the windlass bits, that nothing was visible but foam.
But, presently, as the Dido

paused, weaving her head [

297 ]

backwards and forwards as if choosing a good spot for
her next dive, we saw, clear of everything, and high in air
fronting us, the two men.

 One was on the boom, the other on the foot-rope.
The topmost man seemed to be hitting rapidly at the
one below him, who strove with uplifted arm to shield
himself.

 Perhaps for half a minute this lasted. Then the ship
gave her headlong plunge, the crest of a great wave met
the descending bows, and when the bitter spray cleared
out of our eyes again the lower figure was missing.

 From the other, overhanging us, a black streak against
the sullen sky, came what sounded like a faint cheer.
There was a rapid throwing motion of the arm released
from the supporting stay, followed by a clink of steel on
the roof of the galley. Then came once more the
roaring plunge, and slow upheaval as of a creature
mortally wounded.

 But, this time, the booms were vacant, and a man
beside me was curiously examining a sheath-knife,
bloody from point of blade to tip of wooden handle.

 Louder shrieked the gale through the strained rigging,
and more heavily beat the thundrous seas against the Dido’s

sides, as, breathless, drenched and horrified, I
staggered into the captain’s state-room.

 ‘I think I’ve got it now,’ said he, smiling, and holding
up a thing like a tin saucepan.

 THE END.



  Transcriber’s Note

 The text contains a lot of dialect spelling, which has been left as printed. Punctuation has been amended where required to clarify the sense of the text. A small number of errors that appear to be typographical rather than authorial have been corrected; otherwise inconsistent spelling and hyphenation
(agoin’/a-goin’,
anigh/a-nigh,
apiece/a-piece,
ashen grey/ashen-grey,
befel/befell,
black fellow/black-fellow,
bulkhead/bulk-head,
close hauled/close-hauled,
dark blue/dark-blue,
doorposts/door-posts,
enquiries/inquiries,
far inland/far-inland,
fo’c’sle/fo’c’stle,
greenhide/green-hide,
half way/half-way,
head sea/head-sea,
highly connected/highly-connected,
lifelike/life-like,
lookout/look-out,
main deck/main-deck,
middle age/middle-age,
mopoke/mo-poke,
native born/native-born,
new chum/new-chum,
newcomer/new-comer,
out an’ out/out-an’-out,
p’raps/p’r’aps,
rain water/rain-water,
remarkable looking/remarkable-looking,
rope coils/rope-coils,
saddlestraps/saddle-straps,
soger/sojur,
sojur ants/sojur-ants,
such like/such-like,
thundrous/thunderous,
topsail/top-sail,
upturned/up-turned,
viâ/via)
have been retained as printed.



  End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Steve Brown's Bunyip and other Stories, by 
James Arthur Barry and Rudyard Kipling