A CREMATION

 Last Monday an Indian prince died at Etretat, Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay,
      a relation of His Highness, the Maharajah Gaikwar, prince of Baroda, in
      the province of Guzerat, Presidency of Bombay.

 For about three weeks there had been seen walking in the streets about ten
      young East Indians, small, lithe, with dark skins, dressed all in gray and
      wearing on their heads caps such as English grooms wear. They were men of
      high rank who had come to Europe to study the military institutions of the
      principal Western nations. The little band consisted of three princes, a
      nobleman, an interpreter and three servants.

 The head of the commission had just died, an old man of forty-two and
      father-in-law of Sampatro Kashivao Gaikwar, brother of His Highness, the
      Gaikwar of Baroda.

 The son-in-law accompanied his father-in-law.

 The other East Indians were called Ganpatrao Shravanrao Gaikwar, cousin of
      His Highness Khasherao Gadhav; Vasudev Madhav Samarth, interpreter and
      secretary; the slaves: Ramchandra Bajaji, Ganu bin Pukiram Kokate,
      Rhambhaji bin Fabji.

 On leaving his native land the one who died recently was overcome with
      terrible grief, and feeling convinced that he would never return he wished
      to give up the journey, but he had to obey the wishes of his noble
      relative, the Prince of Baroda, and he set out.

 They came to spend the latter part of the summer at Etretat, and people
      would go out of curiosity every morning to see them taking their bath at
      the Etablissment des Roches-Blanches.

 Five or six days ago Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay was taken with pains in
      his gums; then the inflammation spread to the throat and became
      ulceration. Gangrene set in and, on Monday, the doctors told his young
      friends that their relative was dying. The final struggle was already
      beginning, and the breath had almost left the unfortunate man's body when
      his friends seized him, snatched him from his bed and laid him on the
      stone floor of the room, so that, stretched out on the earth, our mother,
      he should yield up his soul, according to the command of Brahma.

 They then sent to ask the mayor, M. Boissaye, for a permit to burn the
      body that very day so as to fulfill the prescribed ceremonial of the
      Hindoo religion. The mayor hesitated, telegraphed to the prefecture to
      demand instructions, at the same time sending word that a failure to reply
      would be considered by him tantamount to a consent. As he had received no
      reply at 9 o'clock that evening, he decided, in view of the infectious
      character of the disease of which the East Indian had died, that the
      cremation of the body should take place that very night, beneath the
      cliff, on the beach, at ebb tide.

 The mayor is being criticized now for this decision, though he acted as an
      intelligent, liberal and determined man, and was upheld and advised by the
      three physicians who had watched the case and reported the death.

 They were dancing at the Casino that evening. It was an early autumn
      evening, rather chilly. A pretty strong wind was blowing from the ocean,
      although as yet there was no sea on, and swift, light, ragged clouds were
      driving across the sky. They came from the edge of the horizon, looking
      dark against the background of the sky, but as they approached the moon
      they grew whiter and passed hurriedly across her face, veiling it for a
      few seconds without completely hiding it.

 The tall straight cliffs that inclose the rounded beach of Etretat and
      terminate in two celebrated arches, called “the Gates,” lay in
      shadow, and made two great black patches in the softly lighted landscape.

 It had rained all day.

 The Casino orchestra was playing waltzes, polkas and quadrilles. A rumor
      was presently circulated among the groups of dancers. It was said that an
      East Indian prince had just died at the Hotel des Bains and that the
      ministry had been approached for permission to burn the body. No one
      believed it, or at least no one supposed that such a thing could occur so
      foreign was the custom as yet to our customs, and as the night was far
      advanced every one went home.

 At midnight, the lamplighter, running from street to street, extinguished,
      one after another, the yellow jets of flame that lighted up the sleeping
      houses, the mud and the puddles of water. We waited, watching for the hour
      when the little town should be quiet and deserted.

 Ever since noon a carpenter had been cutting up wood and asking himself
      with amazement what was going to be done with all these planks sawn up
      into little bits, and why one should destroy so much good merchandise.
      This wood was piled up in a cart which went along through side streets as
      far as the beach, without arousing the suspicion of belated persons who
      might meet it. It went along on the shingle at the foot of the cliff, and
      having dumped its contents on the beach the three Indian servants began to
      build a funeral pile, a little longer than it was wide. They worked alone,
      for no profane hand must aid in this solemn duty.

 It was one o'clock in the morning when the relations of the deceased were
      informed that they might accomplish their part of the work.

 The door of the little house they occupied was open, and we perceived,
      lying on a stretcher in the small, dimly lighted vestibule the corpse
      covered with white silk. We could see him plainly as he lay stretched out
      on his back, his outline clearly defined beneath this white veil.

 The East Indians, standing at his feet, remained motionless, while one of
      them performed the prescribed rites, murmuring unfamiliar words in a low,
      monotonous tone. He walked round and round the corpse; touching it
      occasionally, then, taking an urn suspended from three slender chains, he
      sprinkled it for some time with the sacred water of the Ganges, that East
      Indians must always carry with them wherever they go.

 Then the stretcher was lifted by four of them who started off at a slow
      march. The moon had gone down, leaving the muddy, deserted streets in
      darkness, but the body on the stretcher appeared to be luminous, so
      dazzlingly white was the silk, and it was a weird sight to see, passing
      along through the night, the semi-luminous form of this corpse, borne by
      those men, the dusky skin of whose faces and hands could scarcely be
      distinguished from their clothing in the darkness.

 Behind the corpse came three Indians, and then, a full head taller than
      themselves and wrapped in an ample traveling coat of a soft gray color,
      appeared the outline of an Englishman, a kind and superior man, a friend
      of theirs, who was their guide and counselor in their European travels.

 Beneath the cold, misty sky of this little northern beach I felt as if I
      were taking part in a sort of symbolical drama. It seemed to me that they
      were carrying there, before me, the conquered genius of India, followed,
      as in a funeral procession, by the victorious genius of England robed in a
      gray ulster.

 On the shingly beach the four bearers halted a few moments to take breath,
      and then proceeded on their way. They now walked quickly, bending beneath
      the weight of their burden. At length they reached the funeral pile. It
      was erected in an indentation, at the very foot of the cliff, which rose
      above it perpendicularly a hundred meters high, perfectly white but
      looking gray in the night.

 The funeral pile was about three and a half feet high. The corpse was
      placed on it and then one of the Indians asked to have the pole star
      pointed out to him. This was done, and the dead Rajah was laid with his
      feet turned towards his native country. Then twelve bottles of kerosene
      were poured over him and he was covered completely with thin slabs of pine
      wood. For almost another hour the relations and servants kept piling up
      the funeral pyre which looked like one of those piles of wood that
      carpenters keep in their yards. Then on top of this was poured the
      contents of twenty bottles of oil, and on top of all they emptied a bag of
      fine shavings. A few steps further on, a flame was glimmering in a little
      bronze brazier, which had remained lighted since the arrival of the
      corpse.

 The moment had arrived. The relations went to fetch the fire. As it was
      barely alight, some oil was poured on it, and suddenly a flame arose
      lighting up the great wall of rock from summit to base. An Indian who was
      leaning over the brazier rose upright, his two hands in the air, his
      elbows bent, and all at once we saw arising, all black on the immense
      white cliff, a colossal shadow, the shadow of Buddha in his hieratic
      posture. And the little pointed toque that the man wore on his head even
      looked like the head-dress of the god.

 The effect was so striking and unexpected that I felt my heart beat as
      though some supernatural apparition had risen up before me.

 That was just what it was—the ancient and sacred image, come from
      the heart of the East to the ends of Europe, and watching over its son
      whom they were going to cremate there.

 It vanished. They brought fire. The shavings on top of the pyre were
      lighted and then the wood caught fire and a brilliant light illumined the
      cliff, the shingle and the foam of the waves as they broke on the beach.

 It grew brighter from second to second, lighting up on the sea in the
      distance the dancing crest of the waves.

 The breeze from the ocean blew in gusts, increasing the heat of the flame
      which flattened down, twisted, then shot up again, throwing out millions
      of sparks. They mounted with wild rapidity along the cliff and were lost
      in the sky, mingling with the stars, increasing their number. Some sea
      birds who had awakened uttered their plaintive cry, and, describing long
      curves, flew, with their white wings extended, through the gleam from the
      funeral pyre and then disappeared in the night.

 Before long the pile of wood was nothing but a mass of flame, not red but
      yellow, a blinding yellow, a furnace lashed by the wind. And, suddenly,
      beneath a stronger gust, it tottered, partially crumbling as it leaned
      towards the sea, and the corpse came to view, full length, blackened on
      his couch of flame and burning with long blue flames:

 The pile of wood having crumbled further on the right the corpse turned
      over as a man does in bed. They immediately covered him with fresh wood
      and the fire started up again more furiously than ever.

 The East Indians, seated in a semi-circle on the shingle, looked out with
      sad, serious faces. And the rest of us, as it was very cold, had drawn
      nearer to the fire until the smoke and sparks came in our faces. There was
      no odor save that of burning pine and petroleum.

 Hours passed; day began to break. Toward five o'clock in the morning
      nothing remained but a heap of ashes. The relations gathered them up, cast
      some of them to the winds, some in the sea, and kept some in a brass vase
      that they had brought from India. They then retired to their home to give
      utterance to lamentations.

 These young princes and their servants, by the employment of the most
      inadequate appliances succeeded in carrying out the cremation of their
      relation in the most perfect manner, with singular skill and remarkable
      dignity. Everything was done according to ritual, according to the rigid
      ordinances of their religion. Their dead one rests in peace.

 The following morning at daybreak there was an indescribable commotion in
      Etretat. Some insisted that they had burned a man alive, others that they
      were trying to hide a crime, some that the mayor would be put in jail,
      others that the Indian prince had succumbed to an attack of cholera.

 The men were amazed, the women indignant. A crowd of people spent the day
      on the site of the funeral pile, looking for fragments of bone in the
      shingle that was still warm. They found enough bones to reconstruct ten
      skeletons, for the farmers on shore frequently throw their dead sheep into
      the sea. The finders carefully placed these various fragments in their
      pocketbooks. But not one of them possesses a true particle of the Indian
      prince.

 That very night a deputy sent by the government came to hold an inquest.
      He, however, formed an estimate of this singular case like a man of
      intelligence and good sense. But what should he say in his report?

 The East Indians declared that if they had been prevented in France from
      cremating their dead they would have taken him to a freer country where
      they could have carried out their customs.

 Thus, I have seen a man cremated on a funeral pile, and it has given me a
      wish to disappear in the same manner.

 In this way everything ends at once. Man expedites the slow work of
      nature, instead of delaying it by the hideous coffin in which one
      decomposes for months. The flesh is dead, the spirit has fled. Fire which
      purifies disperses in a few hours all that was a human being; it casts it
      to the winds, converting it into air and ashes, and not into ignominious
      corruption.

 This is clean and hygienic. Putrefaction beneath the ground in a closed
      box where the body becomes like pap, a blackened, stinking pap, has about
      it something repugnant and disgusting. The sight of the coffin as it
      descends into this muddy hole wrings one's heart with anguish. But the
      funeral pyre which flames up beneath the sky has about it something grand,
      beautiful and solemn.