A FABLE

 Once upon a time an artist who had painted a small and very beautiful
      picture placed it so that he could see it in the mirror. He said, “This
      doubles the distance and softens it, and it is twice as lovely as it was
      before.”

 The animals out in the woods heard of this through the housecat, who was
      greatly admired by them because he was so learned, and so refined and
      civilized, and so polite and high-bred, and could tell them so much which
      they didn't know before, and were not certain about afterward. They were
      much excited about this new piece of gossip, and they asked questions, so
      as to get at a full understanding of it. They asked what a picture was,
      and the cat explained.

 “It is a flat thing,” he said; “wonderfully flat, marvelously flat,
      enchantingly flat and elegant. And, oh, so beautiful!”

 That excited them almost to a frenzy, and they said they would give the
      world to see it. Then the bear asked:

 “What is it that makes it so beautiful?”

 “It is the looks of it,” said the cat.

 This filled them with admiration and uncertainty, and they were more
      excited than ever. Then the cow asked:

 “What is a mirror?”

 “It is a hole in the wall,” said the cat. “You look in it, and there you
      see the picture, and it is so dainty and charming and ethereal and
      inspiring in its unimaginable beauty that your head turns round and round,
      and you almost swoon with ecstasy.”

 The ass had not said anything as yet; he now began to throw doubts. He
      said there had never been anything as beautiful as this before, and
      probably wasn't now. He said that when it took a whole basketful of
      sesquipedalian adjectives to whoop up a thing of beauty, it was time for
      suspicion.

 It was easy to see that these doubts were having an effect upon the
      animals, so the cat went off offended. The subject was dropped for a
      couple of days, but in the meantime curiosity was taking a fresh start,
      and there was a revival of interest perceptible. Then the animals assailed
      the ass for spoiling what could possibly have been a pleasure to them, on
      a mere suspicion that the picture was not beautiful, without any evidence
      that such was the case. The ass was not troubled; he was calm, and said
      there was one way to find out who was in the right, himself or the cat: he
      would go and look in that hole, and come back and tell what he found
      there. The animals felt relieved and grateful, and asked him to go at once—which
      he did.

 But he did not know where he ought to stand; and so, through error, he
      stood between the picture and the mirror. The result was that the picture
      had no chance, and didn't show up. He returned home and said:

 “The cat lied. There was nothing in that hole but an ass. There wasn't a
      sign of a flat thing visible. It was a handsome ass, and friendly, but
      just an ass, and nothing more.”

 The elephant asked:

 “Did you see it good and clear? Were you close to it?”

 “I saw it good and clear, O Hathi, King of Beasts. I was so close that I
      touched noses with it.”

 “This is very strange,” said the elephant; “the cat was always truthful
      before—as far as we could make out. Let another witness try. Go,
      Baloo, look in the hole, and come and report.”

 So the bear went. When he came back, he said:

 “Both the cat and the ass have lied; there was nothing in the hole but a
      bear.”

 Great was the surprise and puzzlement of the animals. Each was now anxious
      to make the test himself and get at the straight truth. The elephant sent
      them one at a time.

 First, the cow. She found nothing in the hole but a cow.

 The tiger found nothing in it but a tiger.

 The lion found nothing in it but a lion.

 The leopard found nothing in it but a leopard.

 The camel found a camel, and nothing more.

 Then Hathi was wroth, and said he would have the truth, if he had to go
      and fetch it himself. When he returned, he abused his whole subjectry for
      liars, and was in an unappeasable fury with the moral and mental blindness
      of the cat. He said that anybody but a near-sighted fool could see that
      there was nothing in the hole but an elephant.

 MORAL, BY THE CAT

 You can find in a text whatever you bring, if you will stand between it
      and the mirror of your imagination. You may not see your ears, but they
      will be there.