A FAMILY AFFAIR
    

      The small engine attached to the Neuilly steam-tram whistled as it passed
      the Porte Maillot to warn all obstacles to get out of its way and puffed
      like a person out of breath as it sent out its steam, its pistons moving
      rapidly with a noise as of iron legs running. The train was going along
      the broad avenue that ends at the Seine. The sultry heat at the close of a
      July day lay over the whole city, and from the road, although there was
      not a breath of wind stirring, there arose a white, chalky, suffocating,
      warm dust, which adhered to the moist skin, filled the eyes and got into
      the lungs. People stood in the doorways of their houses to try and get a
      breath of air.
    

      The windows of the steam-tram were open and the curtains fluttered in the
      wind. There were very few passengers inside, because on warm days people
      preferred the outside or the platforms. They consisted of stout women in
      peculiar costumes, of those shopkeepers' wives from the suburbs, who made
      up for the distinguished looks which they did not possess by ill-assumed
      dignity; of men tired from office-work, with yellow faces, stooped
      shoulders, and with one shoulder higher than the other, in consequence of,
      their long hours of writing at a desk. Their uneasy and melancholy faces
      also spoke of domestic troubles, of constant want of money, disappointed
      hopes, for they all belonged to the army of poor, threadbare devils who
      vegetate economically in cheap, plastered houses with a tiny piece of
      neglected garden on the outskirts of Paris, in the midst of those fields
      where night soil is deposited.
    

      A short, corpulent man, with a puffy face, dressed all in black and
      wearing a decoration in his buttonhole, was talking to a tall, thin man,
      dressed in a dirty, white linen suit, the coat all unbuttoned, with a
      white Panama hat on his head. The former spoke so slowly and hesitatingly
      that it occasionally almost seemed as if he stammered; he was Monsieur
      Caravan, chief clerk in the Admiralty. The other, who had formerly been
      surgeon on board a merchant ship, had set up in practice in Courbevoie,
      where he applied the vague remnants of medical knowledge which he had
      retained after an adventurous life, to the wretched population of that
      district. His name was Chenet, and strange rumors were current as to his
      morality.
    

      Monsieur Caravan had always led the normal life of a man in a Government
      office. For the last thirty years he had invariably gone the same way to
      his office every morning, and had met the same men going to business at
      the same time, and nearly on the same spot, and he returned home every
      evening by the same road, and again met the same faces which he had seen
      growing old. Every morning, after buying his penny paper at the corner of
      the Faubourg Saint Honore, he bought two rolls, and then went to his
      office, like a culprit who is giving himself up to justice, and got to his
      desk as quickly as possible, always feeling uneasy; as though he were
      expecting a rebuke for some neglect of duty of which he might have been
      guilty.
    

      Nothing had ever occurred to change the monotonous order of his existence,
      for no event affected him except the work of his office, perquisites,
      gratuities, and promotion. He never spoke of anything but of his duties,
      either at the office, or at home—he had married the portionless
      daughter of one of his colleagues. His mind, which was in a state of
      atrophy from his depressing daily work, had no other thoughts, hopes or
      dreams than such as related to the office, and there was a constant source
      of bitterness that spoilt every pleasure that he might have had, and that
      was the employment of so many naval officials, tinsmiths, as they were
      called because of their silver-lace as first-class clerks; and every
      evening at dinner he discussed the matter hotly with his wife, who shared
      his angry feelings, and proved to their own satisfaction that it was in
      every way unjust to give places in Paris to men who ought properly to have
      been employed in the navy.
    

      He was old now, and had scarcely noticed how his life was passing, for
      school had merely been exchanged for the office without any intermediate
      transition, and the ushers, at whom he had formerly trembled, were
      replaced by his chiefs, of whom he was terribly afraid. When he had to go
      into the rooms of these official despots, it made him tremble from head to
      foot, and that constant fear had given him a very awkward manner in their
      presence, a humble demeanor, and a kind of nervous stammering.
    

      He knew nothing more about Paris than a blind man might know who was led
      to the same spot by his dog every day; and if he read the account of any
      uncommon events or scandals in his penny paper, they appeared to him like
      fantastic tales, which some pressman had made up out of his own head, in
      order to amuse the inferior employees. He did not read the political news,
      which his paper frequently altered as the cause which subsidized it might
      require, for he was not fond of innovations, and when he went through the
      Avenue of the Champs-Elysees every evening, he looked at the surging crowd
      of pedestrians, and at the stream of carriages, as a traveller might who
      has lost his way in a strange country.
    

      As he had completed his thirty years of obligatory service that year, on
      the first of January, he had had the cross of the Legion of Honor bestowed
      upon him, which, in the semi-military public offices, is a recompense for
      the miserable slavery—the official phrase is, loyal services—of
      unfortunate convicts who are riveted to their desk. That unexpected
      dignity gave him a high and new idea of his own capacities, and altogether
      changed him. He immediately left off wearing light trousers and fancy
      waistcoats, and wore black trousers and long coats, on which his ribbon,
      which was very broad, showed off better. He got shaved every morning,
      manicured his nails more carefully, changed his linen every two days, from
      a legitimate sense of what was proper, and out of respect for the national
      Order, of which he formed a part, and from that day he was another
      Caravan, scrupulously clean, majestic and condescending.
    

      At home, he said, “my cross,” at every moment, and he had
      become so proud of it, that he could not bear to see men wearing any other
      ribbon in their button-holes. He became especially angry on seeing strange
      orders: “Which nobody ought to be allowed to wear in France,”
      and he bore Chenet a particular grudge, as he met him on a tram-car every
      evening, wearing a decoration of one kind or another, white, blue, orange,
      or green.
    

      The conversation of the two men, from the Arc de Triomphe to Neuilly, was
      always the same, and on that day they discussed, first of all, various
      local abuses which disgusted them both, and the Mayor of Neuilly received
      his full share of their censure. Then, as invariably happens in the
      company of medical men, Caravan began to enlarge on the chapter of illness,
      as in that manner, he hoped to obtain a little gratuitous advice, if he
      was careful not to show his hand. His mother had been causing him no
      little anxiety for some time; she had frequent and prolonged fainting
      fits, and, although she was ninety, she would not take care of herself.
    

      Caravan grew quite tender-hearted when he mentioned her great age, and
      more than once asked Doctor Chenet, emphasizing the word doctor—although
      he was not fully qualified, being only an Offcier de Sante—whether
      he had often met anyone as old as that. And he rubbed his hands with
      pleasure; not, perhaps, that he cared very much about seeing the good
      woman last forever here on earth, but because the long duration of his
      mother's life was, as it were an earnest of old age for himself, and he
      continued:
    

      “In my family, we last long, and I am sure that, unless I meet with
      an accident, I shall not die until I am very old.”
    

      The doctor looked at him with pity, and glanced for a moment at his
      neighbor's red face, his short, thick neck, his “corporation,”
      as Chenet called it to himself, his two fat, flabby legs, and the
      apoplectic rotundity of the old official; and raising the white Panama hat
      from his head, he said with a snigger:
    

      “I am not so sure of that, old fellow; your mother is as tough as
      nails, and I should say that your life is not a very good one.”
    

      This rather upset Caravan, who did not speak again until the tram put them
      down at their destination, where the two friends got out, and Chenet asked
      his friend to have a glass of vermouth at the Cafe du Globe, opposite,
      which both of them were in the habit of frequenting. The proprietor, who
      was a friend of theirs, held out to them two fingers, which they shook
      across the bottles of the counter; and then they joined three of their
      friends, who were playing dominoes, and who had been there since midday.
      They exchanged cordial greetings, with the usual question: “Anything
      new?” And then the three players continued their game, and held out
      their hands without looking up, when the others wished them “Good-night,”
      and then they both went home to dinner.
    

      Caravan lived in a small two-story house in Courbevaie, near where the
      roads meet; the ground floor was occupied by a hair-dresser. Two bed
      rooms, a dining-room and a kitchen, formed the whole of their apartments,
      and Madame Caravan spent nearly her whole time in cleaning them up, while
      her daughter, Marie-Louise, who was twelve, and her son, Phillip-Auguste,
      were running about with all the little, dirty, mischievous brats of the
      neighborhood, and playing in the gutter.
    

      Caravan had installed his mother, whose avarice was notorious in the
      neighborhood, and who was terribly thin, in the room above them. She was
      always cross, and she never passed a day without quarreling and flying
      into furious tempers. She would apostrophize the neighbors, who were
      standing at their own doors, the coster-mongers, the street-sweepers, and
      the street-boys, in the most violent language; and the latter, to have
      their revenge, used to follow her at a distance when she went out, and
      call out rude things after her.
    

      A little servant from Normandy, who was incredibly giddy and thoughtless,
      performed the household work, and slept on the second floor in the same
      room as the old woman, for fear of anything happening to her in the night.
    

      When Caravan got in, his wife, who suffered from a chronic passion for
      cleaning, was polishing up the mahogany chairs that were scattered about
      the room with a piece of flannel. She always wore cotton gloves, and
      adorned her head with a cap ornamented with many colored ribbons, which
      was always tilted over one ear; and whenever anyone caught her polishing,
      sweeping, or washing, she used to say:
    

      “I am not rich; everything is very simple in my house, but
      cleanliness is my luxury, and that is worth quite as much as any other.”
    

      As she was gifted with sound, obstinate, practical common sense, she led
      her husband in everything. Every evening during dinner, and afterwards
      when they were in their room, they talked over the business of the office
      for a long time, and although she was twenty years younger than he was, he
      confided everything to her as if she took the lead, and followed her
      advice in every matter.
    

      She had never been pretty, and now she had grown ugly; in addition to
      that, she was short and thin, while her careless and tasteless way of
      dressing herself concealed her few small feminine attractions, which might
      have been brought out if she had possessed any taste in dress. Her skirts
      were always awry, and she frequently scratched herself, no matter on what
      part of her person, totally indifferent as to who might see her, and so
      persistently, that anyone who saw her might think that she was suffering
      from something like the itch. The only adornments that she allowed herself
      were silk ribbons, which she had in great profusion, and of various colors
      mixed together, in the pretentious caps which she wore at home.
    

      As soon as she saw her husband she rose and said, as she kissed his
      whiskers:
    

      “Did you remember Potin, my dear?”
    

      He fell into a chair, in consternation, for that was the fourth time on
      which he had forgotten a commission that he had promised to do for her.
    

      “It is a fatality,” he said; “it is no good for me to
      think of it all day long, for I am sure to forget it in the evening.”
    

      But as he seemed really so very sorry, she merely said, quietly:
    

      “You will think of it to-morrow, I dare say. Anything new at the
      office?”
    

      “Yes, a great piece of news; another tinsmith has been appointed
      second chief clerk.” She became very serious, and said:
    

      “So he succeeds Ramon; this was the very post that I wanted you to
      have. And what about Ramon?”
    

      “He retires on his pension.”
    

      She became furious, her cap slid down on her shoulder, and she continued:
    

      “There is nothing more to be done in that shop now. And what is the
      name of the new commissioner?”
    

      “Bonassot.”
    

      She took up the Naval Year Book, which she always kept close at hand, and
      looked him up.
    

      “'Bonassot-Toulon. Born in 1851. Student Commissioner in 1871.
      Sub-Commissioner in 1875.' Has he been to sea?” she continued. At
      that question Caravan's looks cleared up, and he laughed until his sides
      shook.
    

      “As much as Balin—as much as Baffin, his chief.” And he
      added an old office joke, and laughed more than ever:
    

      “It would not even do to send them by water to inspect the
      Point-du-Jour, for they would be sick on the penny steamboats on the
      Seine.”
    

      But she remained as serious as if she had not heard him, and then she said
      in a low voice, as she scratched her chin:
    

      “If we only had a Deputy to fall back upon. When the Chamber hears
      everything that is going on at the Admiralty, the Minister will be turned
      out——”
    

      She was interrupted by a terrible noise on the stairs. Marie-Louise and
      Philippe-Auguste, who had just come in from the gutter, were slapping each
      other all the way upstairs. Their mother rushed at them furiously, and
      taking each of them by an arm she dragged them into the room, shaking them
      vigorously; but as soon as they saw their father, they rushed up to him,
      and he kissed them affectionately, and taking one of them on each knee,
      began to talk to them.
    

      Philippe-Auguste was an ugly, ill-kempt little brat, dirty from head to
      foot, with the face of an idiot, and Marie-Louise was already like her
      mother—spoke like her, repeated her words, and even imitated her
      movements. She also asked him whether there was anything fresh at the
      office, and he replied merrily:
    

      “Your friend, Ramon, who comes and dines here every Sunday, is going
      to leave us, little one. There is a new second head-clerk.”
    

      She looked at her father, and with a precocious child's pity, she said:
    

      “Another man has been put over your head again.”
    

      He stopped laughing, and did not reply, and in order to create a
      diversion, he said, addressing his wife, who was cleaning the windows:
    

      “How is mamma, upstairs?”
    

      Madame Caravan left off rubbing, turned round pulled her cap up, as it had
      fallen quite on to her back, and said with trembling lips:
    

      “Ah! yes; let us talk about your mother, for she has made a pretty
      scene. Just imagine: a short time ago Madame Lebaudin, the hairdresser's
      wife, came upstairs to borrow a packet of starch of me, and, as I was not
      at home, your mother chased her out as though she were a beggar; but I
      gave it to the old woman. She pretended not to hear, as she always does
      when one tells her unpleasant truths, but she is no more deaf than I am,
      as you know. It is all a sham, and the proof of it is, that she went up to
      her own room immediately, without saying a word.”
    

      Caravan, embarrassed, did not utter a word, and at that moment the little
      servant came in to announce dinner. In order to let his mother know, he
      took a broom-handle, which always stood in a corner, and rapped loudly on
      the ceiling three times, and then they went into the dining-room. Madame
      Caravan, junior, helped the soup, and waited for the old woman, but she
      did not come, and as the soup was getting cold, they began to eat slowly,
      and when their plates were empty, they waited again, and Madame Caravan,
      who was furious, attacked her husband:
    

      “She does it on purpose, you know that as well as I do. But you
      always uphold her.”
    

      Not knowing which side to take, he sent Marie-Louise to fetch her
      grandmother, and he sat motionless, with his eyes cast down, while his
      wife tapped her glass angrily with her knife. In about a minute, the door
      flew open suddenly, and the child came in again, out of breath and very
      pale, and said hurriedly:
    

      “Grandmamma has fallen on the floor.”
    

      Caravan jumped up, threw his table-napkin down, and rushed upstairs, while
      his wife, who thought it was some trick of her mother-in-law's, followed
      more slowly, shrugging her shoulders, as if to express her doubt. When
      they got upstairs, however, they found the old woman lying at full length
      in the middle of the room; and when they turned her over, they saw that
      she was insensible and motionless, while her skin looked more wrinkled and
      yellow than usual, her eyes were closed, her teeth clenched, and her thin
      body was stiff.
    

      Caravan knelt down by her, and began to moan.
    

      “My poor mother! my poor mother!” he said. But the other
      Madame Caravan said:
    

      “Bah! She has only fainted again, that is all, and she has done it
      to prevent us from dining comfortably, you may be sure of that.”
    

      They put her on the bed, undressed her completely, and Caravan, his wife,
      and the servant began to rub her; but, in spite of their efforts, she did
      not recover consciousness, so they sent Rosalie, the servant, to fetch
      Doctor Chenet. He lived a long way off, on the quay, going towards
      Suresnes, and so it was a considerable time before he arrived. He came at
      last, however, and, after having looked at the old woman, felt her pulse,
      and listened for a heart beat, he said: “It is all over.”
    

      Caravan threw himself on the body, sobbing violently; he kissed his
      mother's rigid face, and wept so that great tears fell on the dead woman's
      face like drops of water, and, naturally, Madame Caravan, junior, showed a
      decorous amount of grief, and uttered feeble moans as she stood behind her
      husband, while she rubbed her eyes vigorously.
    

      But, suddenly, Caravan raised himself up, with his thin hair in disorder,
      and, looking very ugly in his grief, said:
    

      “But—are you sure, doctor? Are you quite sure?”
    

      The doctor stooped over the body, and, handling it with professional
      dexterity, as a shopkeeper might do, when showing off his goods, he said:
    

      “See, my dear friend, look at her eye.”
    

      He raised the eyelid, and the old woman's eye appeared altogether
      unaltered, unless, perhaps, the pupil was rather larger, and Caravan felt
      a severe shock at the sight. Then Monsieur Chenet took her thin arm,
      forced the fingers open, and said, angrily, as if he had been
      contradicted:
    

      “Just look at her hand; I never make a mistake, you may be quite
      sure of that.”
    

      Caravan fell on the bed, and almost bellowed, while his wife, still
      whimpering, did what was necessary.
    

      She brought the night-table, on which she spread a towel and placed four
      wax candles on it, which she lighted; then she took a sprig of box, which
      was hanging over the chimney glass, and put it between the four candles,
      in a plate, which she filled with clean water, as she had no holy water.
      But, after a moment's rapid reflection, she threw a pinch of salt into the
      water, no doubt thinking she was performing some sort of act of
      consecration by doing that, and when she had finished, she remained
      standing motionless, and the doctor, who had been helping her, whispered
      to her:
    

      “We must take Caravan away.”
    

      She nodded assent, and, going up to her husband, who was still on his
      knees, sobbing, she raised him up by one arm, while Chenet took him by the
      other.
    

      They put him into a chair, and his wife kissed his forehead, and then
      began to lecture him. Chenet enforced her words and preached firmness,
      courage, and resignation—the very things which are always wanting in
      such overwhelming misfortunes—and then both of them took him by the
      arms again and led him out.
    

      He was crying like a great child, with convulsive sobs; his arms hanging
      down, and his legs weak, and he went downstairs without knowing what he
      was doing, and moving his feet mechanically. They put him into the chair
      which he always occupied at dinner, in front of his empty soup plate. And
      there he sat, without moving, his eyes fixed on his glass, and so
      stupefied with grief, that he could not even think.
    

      In a corner, Madame Caravan was talking with the doctor and asking what
      the necessary formalities were, as she wanted to obtain practical
      information. At last, Monsieur Chenet, who appeared to be waiting for
      something, took up his hat and prepared to go, saying that he had not
      dined yet; whereupon she exclaimed:
    

      “What! you have not dined? Why, stay here, doctor; don't go. You
      shall have whatever we have, for, of course, you understand that we do not
      fare sumptuously.” He made excuses and refused, but she persisted,
      and said: “You really must stay; at times like this, people like to
      have friends near them, and, besides that, perhaps you will be able to
      persuade my husband to take some nourishment; he must keep up his
      strength.”
    

      The doctor bowed, and, putting down his hat, he said:
    

      “In that case, I will accept your invitation, madame.”
    

      She gave Rosalie, who seemed to have lost her head, some orders, and then
      sat down, “to pretend to eat,” as she said, “to keep the
      doctor company.”
    

      The soup was brought in again, and Monsieur Chenet took two helpings. Then
      there came a dish of tripe, which exhaled a smell of onions, and which
      Madame Caravan made up her mind to taste.
    

      “It is excellent,” the doctor said, at which she smiled, and,
      turning to her husband, she said:
    

      “Do take a little, my poor Alfred, only just to put something in
      your stomach. Remember that you have got to pass the night watching by
      her!”
    

      He held out his plate, docilely, just as he would have gone to bed, if he
      had been told to, obeying her in everything, without resistance and
      without reflection, and he ate; the doctor helped himself three times,
      while Madame Caravan, from time to time, fished out a large piece at the
      end of her fork, and swallowed it with a sort of studied indifference.
    

      When a salad bowl full of macaroni was brought in, the doctor said:
    

      “By Jove! That is what I am very fond of.” And this time,
      Madame Caravan helped everybody. She even filled the saucers that were
      being scraped by the children, who, being left to themselves, had been
      drinking wine without any water, and were now kicking each other under the
      table.
    

      Chenet remembered that Rossini, the composer, had been very fond of that
      Italian dish, and suddenly he exclaimed:
    

      “Why! that rhymes, and one could begin some lines like this:
    

        The Maestro Rossini
        Was fond of macaroni.”
 

      Nobody listened to him, however. Madame Caravan, who had suddenly grown
      thoughtful, was thinking of all the probable consequences of the event,
      while her husband made bread pellets, which he put on the table-cloth, and
      looked at with a fixed, idiotic stare. As he was devoured by thirst, he
      was continually raising his glass full of wine to his lips, and the
      consequence was that his mind, which had been upset by the shock and
      grief, seemed to become vague, and his ideas danced about as digestion
      commenced.
    

      The doctor, who, meanwhile, had been drinking away steadily, was getting
      visibly drunk, and Madame Caravan herself felt the reaction which follows
      all nervous shocks, and was agitated and excited, and, although she had
      drunk nothing but water, her head felt rather confused.
    

      Presently, Chenet began to relate stories of death that appeared comical
      to him. For in that suburb of Paris, that is full of people from the
      provinces, one finds that indifference towards death which all peasants
      show, were it even their own father or mother; that want of respect, that
      unconscious brutality which is so common in the country, and so rare in
      Paris, and he said:
    

      “Why, I was sent for last week to the Rue du Puteaux, and when I
      went, I found the patient dead and the whole family calmly sitting beside
      the bed finishing a bottle of aniseed cordial, which had been bought the
      night before to satisfy the dying man's fancy.”
    

      But Madame Caravan was not listening; she was continually thinking of the
      inheritance, and Caravan was incapable of understanding anything further.
    

      Coffee was presently served, and it had been made very strong to give them
      courage. As every cup was well flavored with cognac, it made all their
      faces red, and confused their ideas still more. To make matters still
      worse, Chenet suddenly seized the brandy bottle and poured out “a
      drop for each of them just to wash their mouths out with,” as he
      termed it, and then, without speaking any more, overcome in spite of
      themselves, by that feeling of animal comfort which alcohol affords after
      dinner, they slowly sipped the sweet cognac, which formed a yellowish
      syrup at the bottom of their cups.
    

      The children had fallen asleep, and Rosalie carried them off to bed.
      Caravan, mechanically obeying that wish to forget oneself which possesses
      all unhappy persons, helped himself to brandy again several times, and his
      dull eyes grew bright. At last the doctor rose to go, and seizing his
      friend's arm, he said:
    

      “Come with me; a little fresh air will do you good. When one is in
      trouble, one must not remain in one spot.”
    

      The other obeyed mechanically, put on his hat, took his stick, and went
      out, and both of them walked arm-in-arm towards the Seine, in the
      starlight night.
    

      The air was warm and sweet, for all the gardens in the neighborhood were
      full of flowers at this season of the year, and their fragrance, which is
      scarcely perceptible during the day, seemed to awaken at the approach of
      night, and mingled with the light breezes which blew upon them in the
      darkness.
    

      The broad avenue with its two rows of gas lamps, that extended as far as
      the Arc de Triomphe, was deserted and silent, but there was the distant
      roar of Paris, which seemed to have a reddish vapor hanging over it. It
      was a kind of continual rumbling, which was at times answered by the
      whistle of a train in the distance, travelling at full speed to the ocean,
      through the provinces.
    

      The fresh air on the faces of the two men rather overcame them at first,
      made the doctor lose his equilibrium a little, and increased Caravan's
      giddiness, from which he had suffered since dinner. He walked as if he
      were in a dream; his thoughts were paralyzed, although he felt no great
      grief, for he was in a state of mental torpor that prevented him from
      suffering, and he even felt a sense of relief which was increased by the
      mildness of the night.
    

      When they reached the bridge, they turned to the right, and got the fresh
      breeze from the river, which rolled along, calm and melancholy, bordered
      by tall poplar trees, while the stars looked as if they were floating on
      the water and were moving with the current. A slight white mist that
      floated over the opposite banks, filled their lungs with a sensation of
      cold, and Caravan stopped suddenly, for he was struck by that smell from
      the water which brought back old memories to his mind. For, in his mind,
      he suddenly saw his mother again, in Picardy, as he had seen her years
      before, kneeling in front of their door, and washing the heaps of linen at
      her side in the stream that ran through their garden. He almost fancied
      that he could hear the sound of the wooden paddle with which she beat the
      linen in the calm silence of the country, and her voice, as she called out
      to him: “Alfred, bring me some soap.” And he smelled that odor
      of running water, of the mist rising from the wet ground, that marshy
      smell, which he should never forget, and which came back to him on this
      very evening on which his mother had died.
    

      He stopped, seized with a feeling of despair. A sudden flash seemed to
      reveal to him the extent of his calamity, and that breath from the river
      plunged him into an abyss of hopeless grief. His life seemed cut in half,
      his youth disappeared, swallowed up by that death. All the former days
      were over and done with, all the recollections of his youth had been swept
      away; for the future, there would be nobody to talk to him of what had
      happened in days gone by, of the people he had known of old, of his own
      part of the country, and of his past life; that was a part of his
      existence which existed no longer, and the rest might as well end now.
    

      And then he saw “the mother” as she was when young, wearing
      well-worn dresses, which he remembered for such a long time that they
      seemed inseparable from her; he recollected her movements, the different
      tones of her voice, her habits, her predilections, her fits of anger, the
      wrinkles on her face, the movements of her thin fingers, and all her
      well-known attitudes, which she would never have again, and clutching hold
      of the doctor, he began to moan and weep. His thin legs began to tremble,
      his whole stout body was shaken by his sobs, all he could say was:
    

      “My mother, my poor mother, my poor mother!”
    

      But his companion, who was still drunk, and who intended to finish the
      evening in certain places of bad repute that he frequented secretly, made
      him sit down on the grass by the riverside, and left him almost
      immediately, under the pretext that he had to see a patient.
    

      Caravan went on crying for some time, and when he had got to the end of
      his tears, when his grief had, so to say, run out, he again felt relief,
      repose and sudden tranquillity.
    

      The moon had risen, and bathed the horizon in its soft light.
    

      The tall poplar trees had a silvery sheen on them, and the mist on the
      plain looked like drifting snow; the river, in which the stars were
      reflected, and which had a sheen as of mother-of-pearl, was gently rippled
      by the wind. The air was soft and sweet, and Caravan inhaled it almost
      greedily, and thought that he could perceive a feeling of freshness, of
      calm and of superhuman consolation pervading him.
    

      He actually resisted that feeling of comfort and relief, and kept on
      saying to himself: “My poor mother, my poor mother!” and tried
      to make himself cry, from a kind of conscientious feeling; but he could
      not succeed in doing so any longer, and those sad thoughts, which had made
      him sob so bitterly a shore time before, had almost passed away. In a few
      moments, he rose to go home, and returned slowly, under the influence of
      that serene night, and with a heart soothed in spite of himself.
    

      When he reached the bridge, he saw that the last tramcar was ready to
      start, and behind it were the brightly lighted windows of the Cafe du
      Globe. He felt a longing to tell somebody of his loss, to excite pity, to
      make himself interesting. He put on a woeful face, pushed open the door,
      and went up to the counter, where the landlord still was. He had counted
      on creating a sensation, and had hoped that everybody would get up and
      come to him with outstretched hands, and say: “Why, what is the
      matter with you?” But nobody noticed his disconsolate face, so he
      rested his two elbows on the counter, and, burying his face in his hands,
      he murmured: “Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!”
    

      The landlord looked at him and said: “Are you ill, Monsieur Caravan?”
    

      “No, my friend,” he replied, “but my mother has just
      died.”
    

      “Ah!” the other exclaimed, and as a customer at the other end
      of the establishment asked for a glass of Bavarian beer, he went to attend
      to him, leaving Caravan dumfounded at his want of sympathy.
    

      The three domino players were sitting at the same table which they had
      occupied before dinner, totally absorbed in their game, and Caravan went
      up to them, in search of pity, but as none of them appeared to notice him
      he made up his mind to speak.
    

      “A great misfortune has happened to me since I was here,” he
      said.
    

      All three slightly raised their heads at the same instant, but keeping
      their eyes fixed on the pieces which they held in their hands.
    

      “What do you say?”
    

      “My mother has just died”; whereupon one of them said:
    

      “Oh! the devil,” with that false air of sorrow which
      indifferent people assume. Another, who could not find anything to say,
      emitted a sort of sympathetic whistle, shaking his head at the same time,
      and the third turned to the game again, as if he were saying to himself:
      “Is that all!”
    

      Caravan had expected some of these expressions that are said to “come
      from the heart,” and when he saw how his news was received, he left
      the table, indignant at their calmness at their friend's sorrow, although
      this sorrow had stupefied him so that he scarcely felt it any longer. When
      he got home his wife was waiting for him in her nightgown, and sitting in
      a low chair by the open window, still thinking of the inheritance.
    

      “Undress yourself,” she said; “we can go on talking.”
    

      He raised his head, and looking at the ceiling, said:
    

      “But—there is nobody upstairs.”
    

      “I beg your pardon, Rosalie is with her, and you can go and take her
      place at three o'clock in the morning, when you have had some sleep.”
    

      He only partially undressed, however, so as to be ready for anything that
      might happen, and after tying a silk handkerchief round his head, he lay
      down to rest, and for some time neither of them spoke. Madame Caravan was
      thinking.
    

      Her nightcap was adorned with a red bow, and was pushed rather to one
      side, as was the way with all the caps she wore, and presently she turned
      towards him and said:
    

      “Do you know whether your mother made a will?”
    

      He hesitated for a moment, and then replied:
    

      “I—I do not think so. No, I am sure that she did not.”
    

      His wife looked at him, and she said, in a low, angry tone:
    

      “I call that infamous; here we have been wearing ourselves out for
      ten years in looking after her, and have boarded and lodged her! Your
      sister would not have done so much for her, nor I either, if I had known
      how I was to be rewarded! Yes, it is a disgrace to her memory! I dare say
      that you will tell me that she paid us, but one cannot pay one's children
      in ready money for what they do; that obligation is recognized after
      death; at any rate, that is how honorable people act. So I have had all my
      worry and trouble for nothing! Oh, that is nice! that is very nice!”
    

      Poor Caravan, who was almost distracted, kept on repeating:
    

      “My dear, my dear, please, please be quiet.”
    

      She grew calmer by degrees, and, resuming her usual voice and manner, she
      continued:
    

      “We must let your sister know to-morrow.”
    

      He started, and said:
    

      “Of course we must; I had forgotten all about it; I will send her a
      telegram the first thing in the morning.”
    

      “No,” she replied, like a woman who had foreseen everything;
      “no, do not send it before ten or eleven o'clock, so that we may
      have time to turn round before she comes. It does not take more than two
      hours to get here from Charenton, and we can say that you lost your head
      from grief. If we let her know in the course of the day, that will be soon
      enough, and will give us time to look round.”
    

      Caravan put his hand to his forehead, and, in the came timid voice in
      which he always spoke of his chief, the very thought of whom made him
      tremble, he said:
    

      “I must let them know at the office.”
    

      “Why?” she replied. “On occasions like this, it is
      always excusable to forget. Take my advice, and don't let him know; your
      chief will not be able to say anything to you, and you will put him in a
      nice fix.
    

      “Oh! yes, that I shall, and he will be in a terrible rage, too, when
      he notices my absence. Yes, you are right; it is a capital idea, and when
      I tell him that my mother is dead, he will be obliged to hold his tongue.”
    

      And he rubbed his hands in delight at the joke, when he thought of his
      chief's face; while upstairs lay the body of the dead old woman, with the
      servant asleep beside it.
    

      But Madame Caravan grew thoughtful, as if she were preoccupied by
      something which she did not care to mention, and at last she said:
    

      “Your mother had given you her clock, had she not—the girl
      playing at cup and ball?”
    

      He thought for a moment, and then replied:
    

      “Yes, yes; she said to me (but it was a long time ago, when she
      first came here): 'I shall leave the clock to you, if you look after me
      well.'”
    

      Madame Caravan was reassured, and regained her serenity, and said:
    

      “Well, then, you must go and fetch it out of her room, for if we get
      your sister here, she will prevent us from taking it.”
    

      He hesitated.
    

      “Do you think so?”
    

      That made her angry.
    

      “I certainly think so; once it is in our possession, she will know
      nothing at all about where it came from; it belongs to us. It is just the
      same with the chest of drawers with the marble top, that is in her room;
      she gave it me one day when she was in a good temper. We will bring it
      down at the same time.”
    

      Caravan, however, seemed incredulous, and said:
    

      “But, my dear, it is a great responsibility!”
    

      She turned on him furiously.
    

      “Oh! Indeed! Will you never change? You would let your children die
      of hunger, rather than make a move. Does not that chest of drawers belong
      to us, as she gave it to me? And if your sister is not satisfied, let her
      tell me so, me! I don't care a straw for your sister. Come, get up, and we
      will bring down what your mother gave us, immediately.”
    

      Trembling and vanquished, he got out of bed and began to put on his
      trousers, but she stopped him:
    

      “It is not worth while to dress yourself; your underwear is quite
      enough. I mean to go as I am.”
    

      They both left the room in their night clothes, went upstairs quite
      noiselessly, opened the door and went into the room, where the four
      lighted tapers and the plate with the sprig of box alone seemed to be
      watching the old woman in her rigid repose, for Rosalie, who was lying
      back in the easy chair with her legs stretched out, her hands folded in
      her lap, and her head on one side, was also quite motionless, and was
      snoring with her mouth wide open.
    

      Caravan took the clock, which was one of those grotesque objects that were
      produced so plentifully under the Empire. A girl in gilt bronze was
      holding a cup and ball, and the ball formed the pendulum.
    

      “Give that to me,” his wife said, “and take the marble
      slab off the chest of drawers.”
    

      He put the marble slab on his shoulder with considerable effort, and they
      left the room. Caravan had to stoop in the doorway, and trembled as he
      went downstairs, while his wife walked backwards, so as to light him, and
      held the candlestick in one hand, carrying the clock under the other arm.
    

      When they were in their own room, she heaved a sigh.
    

      “We have got over the worst part of the job,” she said;
      “so now let us go and fetch the other things.”
    

      But the bureau drawers were full of the old woman's wearing apparel, which
      they must manage to hide somewhere, and Madame Caravan soon thought of a
      plan.
    

      “Go and get that wooden packing case in the vestibule; it is hardly
      worth anything, and we may just as well put it here.”
    

      And when he had brought it upstairs they began to fill it. One by one they
      took out all the collars, cuffs, chemises, caps, all the well-worn things
      that had belonged to the poor woman lying there behind them, and arranged
      them methodically in the wooden box in such a manner as to deceive Madame
      Braux, the deceased woman's other child, who would be coming the next day.
    

      When they had finished, they first of all carried the bureau drawers
      downstairs, and the remaining portion afterwards, each of them holding an
      end, and it was some time before they could make up their minds where it
      would stand best; but at last they decided upon their own room, opposite
      the bed, between the two windows, and as soon as it was in its place
      Madame Caravan filled it with her own things. The clock was placed on the
      chimney-piece in the dining-room, and they looked to see what the effect
      was, and were both delighted with it and agreed that nothing could be
      better. Then they retired, she blew out the candle, and soon everybody in
      the house was asleep.
    

      It was broad daylight when. Caravan opened his eyes again. His mind was
      rather confused when he woke up, and he did not clearly remember what had
      happened for a few minutes; when he did, he felt a weight at his heart,
      and jumped out of bed, almost ready to cry again.
    

      He hastened to the room overhead, where Rosalie was still sleeping in the
      same position as the night before, not having awakened once. He sent her
      to do her work, put fresh tapers in the place of those that had burnt out,
      and then he looked at his mother, revolving in his brain those apparently
      profound thoughts, those religious and philosophical commonplaces which
      trouble people of mediocre intelligence in the presence of death.
    

      But, as his wife was calling him, he went downstairs. She had written out
      a list of what had to be done during the morning, and he was horrified
      when he saw the memorandum:
    

      1. Report the death at the mayor's office. 2. See the doctor who had
      attended her. 3. Order the coffin. 4. Give notice at the church. 5. Go to
      the undertaker. 6. Order the notices of her death at the printer's. 7. Go
      to the lawyer. 8. Telegraph the news to all the family.
    

      Besides all this, there were a number of small commissions; so he took his
      hat and went out. As the news had spread abroad, Madame Caravan's female
      friends and neighbors soon began to come in and begged to be allowed to
      see the body. There had been a scene between husband and wife at the
      hairdresser's on the ground floor about the matter, while a customer was
      being shaved. The wife, who was knitting steadily, said: “Well,
      there is one less, and as great a miser as one ever meets with. I
      certainly did not care for her; but, nevertheless, I must go and have a
      look at her.”
    

      The husband, while lathering his patient's chin, said: “That is
      another queer fancy! Nobody but a woman would think of such a thing. It is
      not enough for them to worry you during life, but they cannot even leave
      you at peace when you are dead:” But his wife, without being in the
      least disconcerted, replied: “The feeling is stronger than I am, and
      I must go. It has been on me since the morning. If I were not to see her,
      I should think about it all my life; but when I have had a good look at
      her, I shall be satisfied.”
    

      The knight of the razor shrugged his shoulders and remarked in a low voice
      to the gentleman whose cheek he was scraping: “I just ask you, what
      sort of ideas do you think these confounded females have? I should not
      amuse myself by going to see a corpse!” But his wife had heard him
      and replied very quietly: “But it is so, it is so.” And then,
      putting her knitting on the counter, she went upstairs to the first floor,
      where she met two other neighbors, who had just come, and who were
      discussing the event with Madame Caravan, who was giving them the details,
      and they all went together to the death chamber. The four women went in
      softly, and, one after the other, sprinkled the bed clothes with the salt
      water, knelt down, made the sign of the cross while they mumbled a prayer.
      Then they rose from their knees and looked for some time at the corpse
      with round, wide-open eyes and mouths partly open, while the
      daughter-in-law of the dead woman, with her handkerchief to her face,
      pretended to be sobbing piteously.
    

      When she turned about to walk away whom should she perceive standing close
      to the door but Marie-Louise and Philippe-Auguste, who were curiously
      taking stock of all that was going on. Then, forgetting her pretended
      grief, she threw herself upon them with uplifted hands, crying out in a
      furious voice, “Will you get out of this, you horrid brats!”
    

      Ten minutes later, going upstairs again with another contingent of
      neighbors, she prayed, wept profusely, performed all her duties, and found
      once more her two children, who had followed her upstairs. She again boxed
      their ears soundly, but the next time she paid no heed to them, and at
      each fresh arrival of visitors the two urchins always followed in the
      wake, kneeling down in a corner and imitating slavishly everything they
      saw their mother do.
    

      When the afternoon came the crowds of inquisitive people began to
      diminish, and soon there were no more visitors. Madame Caravan, returning
      to her own apartments, began to make the necessary preparations for the
      funeral ceremony, and the deceased was left alone.
    

      The window of the room was open. A torrid heat entered, along with clouds
      of dust; the flames of the four candles were flickering beside the
      immobile corpse, and upon the cloth which covered the face, the closed
      eyes, the two stretched-out hands, small flies alighted, came, went and
      careered up and down incessantly, being the only companions of the old
      woman for the time being.
    

      Marie-Louise and Philippe-Auguste, however, had now left the house and
      were running up and down the street. They were soon surrounded by their
      playmates, by little girls especially, who were older and who were much
      more interested in all the mysteries of life, asking questions as if they
      were grown people.
    

      “Then your grandmother is dead?” “Yes, she died
      yesterday evening.” “What does a dead person look like?”
    

      Then Marie began to explain, telling all about the candles, the sprig of
      box and the face of the corpse. It was not long before great curiosity was
      aroused in the minds of all the children, and they asked to be allowed to
      go upstairs to look at the departed.
    

      Marie-Louise at once organized a first expedition, consisting of five
      girls and two boys—the biggest and the most courageous. She made
      them take off their shoes so that they might not be discovered. The troupe
      filed into the house and mounted the stairs as stealthily as an army of
      mice.
    

      Once in the chamber, the little girl, imitating her mother, regulated the
      ceremony. She solemnly walked in advance of her comrades, went down on her
      knees, made the sign of the cross, moved her lips as in prayer, rose,
      sprinkled the bed, and while the children, all crowded together, were
      approaching—frightened and curious and eager to look at the face and
      hands of the deceased—she began suddenly to simulate sobbing and to
      bury her eyes in her little handkerchief. Then, becoming instantly
      consoled, on thinking of the other children who were downstairs waiting at
      the door, she ran downstairs followed by the rest, returning in a minute
      with another group, then a third; for all the little ragamuffins of the
      countryside, even to the little beggars in rags, had congregated in order
      to participate in this new pleasure; and each time she repeated her
      mother's grimaces with absolute perfection.
    

      At length, however, she became tired. Some game or other drew the children
      away from the house, and the old grandmother was left alone, forgotten
      suddenly by everybody.
    

      The room was growing dark, and upon the dry and rigid features of the
      corpse the fitful flames of the candles cast patches of light.
    

      Towards 8 o'clock Caravan ascended to the chamber of death, closed the
      windows and renewed the candles. He was now quite composed on entering the
      room, accustomed already to regard the corpse as though it had been there
      for months. He even went the length of declaring that, as yet, there were
      no signs of decomposition, making this remark just at the moment when he
      and his wife were about to sit down at table. “Pshaw!” she
      responded, “she is now stark and stiff; she will keep for a year.”
    

      The soup was eaten in silence. The children, who had been left to
      themselves all day, now worn out by fatigue, were sleeping soundly on
      their chairs, and nobody ventured to break the silence.
    

      Suddenly the flame of the lamp went down. Madame Caravan immediately
      turned up the wick, a hollow sound ensued, and the light went out. They
      had forgotten to buy oil. To send for it now to the grocer's would keep
      back the dinner, and they began to look for candles, but none were to be
      found except the tapers which had been placed upon the table upstairs in
      the death chamber.
    

      Madame Caravan, always prompt in her decisions, quickly despatched
      Marie-Louise to fetch two, and her return was awaited in total darkness.
    

      The footsteps of the girl who had ascended the stairs were distinctly
      heard. There was silence for a few seconds and then the child descended
      precipitately. She threw open the door and in a choking voice murmured:
      “Oh! papa, grandmamma is dressing herself!”
    

      Caravan bounded to his feet with such precipitance that his chair fell
      over against the wall. He stammered out: “You say? . . . . What are
      you saying?”
    

      But Marie-Louise, gasping with emotion, repeated: “Grand—grand
      —grandmamma is putting on her clothes, she is coming downstairs.”
    

      Caravan rushed boldly up the staircase, followed by his wife, dumfounded;
      but he came to a standstill before the door of the second floor, overcome
      with terror, not daring to enter. What was he going to see? Madame
      Caravan, more courageous, turned the handle of the door and stepped
      forward into the room.
    

      The old woman was standing up. In awakening from her lethargic sleep,
      before even regaining full consciousness, in turning upon her side and
      raising herself on her elbow, she had extinguished three of the candles
      which burned near the bed. Then, gaining strength, she got off the bed and
      began to look for her clothes. The absence of her chest of drawers had at
      first worried her, but, after a little, she had succeeded in finding her
      things at the bottom of the wooden box, and was now quietly dressing. She
      emptied the plateful of water, replaced the sprig of box behind the
      looking-glass, and arranged the chairs in their places, and was ready to
      go downstairs when there appeared before her her son and daughter-in-law.
    

      Caravan rushed forward, seized her by the hands, embraced her with tears
      in his eyes, while his wife, who was behind him, repeated in a
      hypocritical tone of voice: “Oh, what a blessing! oh, what a
      blessing!”
    

      But the old woman, without being at all moved, without even appearing to
      understand, rigid as a statue, and with glazed eyes, simply asked: “Will
      dinner soon be ready?”
    

      He stammered out, not knowing what he said:
    

      “Oh, yes, mother, we have been waiting for you.”
    

      And with an alacrity unusual in him, he took her arm, while Madame
      Caravan, the younger, seized the candle and lighted them downstairs,
      walking backwards in front of them, step by step, just as she had done the
      previous night for her husband, who was carrying the marble.
    

      On reaching the first floor, she almost ran against people who were
      ascending the stairs. It was the Charenton family, Madame Braux, followed
      by her husband.
    

      The wife, tall and stout, with a prominent stomach, opened wide her
      terrified eyes and was ready to make her escape. The husband, a socialist
      shoemaker, a little hairy man, the perfect image of a monkey, murmured
      quite unconcerned: “Well, what next? Is she resurrected?”
    

      As soon as Madame Caravan recognized them, she made frantic gestures to
      them; then, speaking aloud, she said: “Why, here you are! What a
      pleasant surprise!”
    

      But Madame Braux, dumfounded, understood nothing. She responded in a low
      voice: “It was your telegram that brought us; we thought that all
      was over.”
    

      Her husband, who was behind her, pinched her to make her keep silent. He
      added with a sly laugh, which his thick beard concealed: “It was
      very kind of you to invite us here. We set out post haste,” which
      remark showed the hostility which had for a long time reigned between the
      households. Then, just as the old woman reached the last steps, he pushed
      forward quickly and rubbed his hairy face against her cheeks, shouting in
      her ear, on account of her deafness: “How well you look, mother;
      sturdy as usual, hey!”
    

      Madame Braux, in her stupefaction at seeing the old woman alive, whom they
      all believed to be dead, dared not even embrace her; and her enormous bulk
      blocked up the passageway and hindered the others from advancing. The old
      woman, uneasy and suspicious, but without speaking, looked at everyone
      around her; and her little gray eyes, piercing and hard, fixed themselves
      now on one and now on the other, and they were so full of meaning that the
      children became frightened.
    

      Caravan, to explain matters, said: “She has been somewhat ill, but
      she is better now; quite well, indeed, are you not, mother?”
    

      Then the good woman, continuing to walk, replied in a husky voice, as
      though it came from a distance: “It was syncope. I heard you all the
      while.”
    

      An embarrassing silence followed. They entered the dining-room, and in a
      few minutes all sat down to an improvised dinner.
    

      Only M. Braux had retained his self-possession. His gorilla features
      grinned wickedly, while he let fall some words of double meaning which
      painfully disconcerted everyone.
    

      But the door bell kept ringing every second, and Rosalie, distracted, came
      to call Caravan, who rushed out, throwing down his napkin. His
      brother-in-law even asked him whether it was not one of his reception
      days, to which he stammered out in answer: “No, only a few packages;
      nothing more.”
    

      A parcel was brought in, which he began to open carelessly, and the
      mourning announcements with black borders appeared unexpectedly. Reddening
      up to the very eyes, he closed the package hurriedly and pushed it under
      his waistcoat.
    

      His mother had not seen it! She was looking intently at her clock which
      stood on the mantelpiece, and the embarrassment increased in midst of a
      dead silence. Turning her wrinkled face towards her daughter, the old
      woman, in whose eyes gleamed malice, said: “On Monday you must take
      me away from here, so that I can see your little girl. I want so much to
      see her.” Madame Braux, her features all beaming, exclaimed: “Yes,
      mother, that I will,” while Madame Caravan, the younger, who had
      turned pale, was ready to faint with annoyance. The two men, however,
      gradually drifted into conversation and soon became embroiled in a
      political discussion. Braux maintained the most revolutionary and
      communistic doctrines, his eyes glowing, and gesticulating and throwing
      about his arms. “Property, sir,” he said, “is a robbery
      perpetrated on the working classes; the land is the common property of
      every man; hereditary rights are an infamy and a disgrace.” But here
      he suddenly stopped, looking as if he had just said something foolish,
      then added in softer tones: “But this is not the proper moment to
      discuss such things.”
    

      The door was opened and Dr. Chenet appeared. For a moment he seemed
      bewildered, but regaining his usual smirking expression of countenance, he
      jauntily approached the old woman and said: “Aha! mamma; you are
      better to-day. Oh! I never had any doubt but you would come round again;
      in fact, I said to myself as I was mounting the staircase, 'I have an idea
      that I shall find the old lady on her feet once more';” and as he
      patted her gently on the back: “Ah! she is as solid as the
      Pont-Neuf, she will bury us all; see if she does not.”
    

      He sat down, accepted the coffee that was offered him, and soon began to
      join in the conversation of the two men, backing up Braux, for he himself
      had been mixed up in the Commune.
    

      The old woman, now feeling herself fatigued, wished to retire. Caravan
      rushed forward. She looked him steadily in the eye and said: “You,
      you must carry my clock and chest of drawers upstairs again without a
      moment's delay.” “Yes, mamma,” he replied, gasping;
      “yes, I will do so.” The old woman then took the arm of her
      daughter and withdrew from the room. The two Caravans remained astounded,
      silent, plunged in the deepest despair, while Braux rubbed his hands and
      sipped his coffee gleefully.
    

      Suddenly Madame Caravan, consumed with rage, rushed at him, exclaiming:
      “You are a thief, a footpad, a cur! I would spit in your face! I—I
      —would——” She could find nothing further to say,
      suffocating as she was with rage, while he went on sipping his coffee with
      a smile.
    

      His wife returning just then, Madame Caravan attacked her sister-in-law,
      and the two women—the one with her enormous bulk, the other
      epileptic and spare, with changed voices and trembling hands flew at one
      another with words of abuse.
    

      Chenet and Braux now interposed, and the latter, taking his better half by
      the shoulders, pushed her out of the door before him, shouting: “Go
      on, you slut; you talk too much”; and the two were heard in the
      street quarrelling until they disappeared from sight.
    

      M. Chenet also took his departure, leaving the Caravans alone, face to
      face. The husband fell back on his chair, and with the cold sweat standing
      out in beads on his temples, murmured: “What shall I say to my chief
      to-morrow?”