A GENTLEMAN FRIEND
    

      THE charming Vanda, or, as she was described in her passport, the
      "Honourable Citizen Nastasya Kanavkin," found herself, on leaving the
      hospital, in a position she had never been in before: without a home to go
      to or a farthing in her pocket. What was she to do?
    

      The first thing she did was to visit a pawn-broker's and pawn her
      turquoise ring, her one piece of jewellery. They gave her a rouble for the
      ring . . . but what can you get for a rouble? You can't buy for that sum a
      fashionable short jacket, nor a big hat, nor a pair of bronze shoes, and
      without those things she had a feeling of being, as it were, undressed.
      She felt as though the very horses and dogs were staring and laughing at
      the plainness of her dress. And clothes were all she thought about: the
      question what she should eat and where she should sleep did not trouble
      her in the least.
    

      "If only I could meet a gentleman friend," she thought to herself, "I
      could get some money. . . . There isn't one who would refuse me, I know. .
      ."
    

      But no gentleman she knew came her way. It would be easy enough to meet
      them in the evening at the "Renaissance," but they wouldn't let her in at
      the "Renaissance" in that shabby dress and with no hat. What was she to
      do?
    

      After long hesitation, when she was sick of walking and sitting and
      thinking, Vanda made up her mind to fall back on her last resource: to go
      straight to the lodgings of some gentleman friend and ask for money.
    

      She pondered which to go to. "Misha is out of the question; he's a married
      man. . . . The old chap with the red hair will be at his office at this
      time. . ."
    

      Vanda remembered a dentist, called Finkel, a converted Jew, who six months
      ago had given her a bracelet, and on whose head she had once emptied a
      glass of beer at the supper at the German Club. She was awfully pleased at
      the thought of Finkel.
    

      "He'll be sure to give it me, if only I find him at home," she thought, as
      she walked in his direction. "If he doesn't, I'll smash all the lamps in
      the house."
    

      Before she reached the dentist's door she thought out her plan of action:
      she would run laughing up the stairs, dash into the dentist's room and
      demand twenty-five roubles. But as she touched the bell, this plan seemed
      to vanish from her mind of itself. Vanda began suddenly feeling frightened
      and nervous, which was not at all her way. She was bold and saucy enough
      at drinking parties, but now, dressed in everyday clothes, feeling herself
      in the position of an ordinary person asking a favour, who might be
      refused admittance, she felt suddenly timid and humiliated. She was
      ashamed and frightened.
    

      "Perhaps he has forgotten me by now," she thought, hardly daring to pull
      the bell. "And how can I go up to him in such a dress, looking like a
      beggar or some working girl?"
    

      And she rang the bell irresolutely.
    

      She heard steps coming: it was the porter.
    

      "Is the doctor at home?" she asked.
    

      She would have been glad now if the porter had said "No," but the latter,
      instead of answering ushered her into the hall, and helped her off with
      her coat. The staircase impressed her as luxurious, and magnificent, but
      of all its splendours what caught her eye most was an immense
      looking-glass, in which she saw a ragged figure without a fashionable
      jacket, without a big hat, and without bronze shoes. And it seemed strange
      to Vanda that, now that she was humbly dressed and looked like a laundress
      or sewing girl, she felt ashamed, and no trace of her usual boldness and
      sauciness remained, and in her own mind she no longer thought of herself
      as Vanda, but as the Nastasya Kanavkin she used to be in the old days. . .
      .
    

      "Walk in, please," said a maidservant, showing her into the
      consulting-room. "The doctor will be here in a minute. Sit down."
    

      Vanda sank into a soft arm-chair.
    

      "I'll ask him to lend it me," she thought; "that will be quite proper,
      for, after all, I do know him. If only that servant would go. I don't like
      to ask before her. What does she want to stand there for?"
    

      Five minutes later the door opened and Finkel came in. He was a tall, dark
      Jew, with fat cheeks and bulging eyes. His cheeks, his eyes, his chest,
      his body, all of him was so well fed, so loathsome and repellent! At the
      "Renaissance" and the German Club he had usually been rather tipsy, and
      would spend his money freely on women, and be very long-suffering and
      patient with their pranks (when Vanda, for instance, poured the beer over
      his head, he simply smiled and shook his finger at her): now he had a
      cross, sleepy expression and looked solemn and frigid like a police
      captain, and he kept chewing something.
    

      "What can I do for you?" he asked, without looking at Vanda.
    

      Vanda looked at the serious countenance of the maid and the smug figure of
      Finkel, who apparently did not recognize her, and she turned red.
    

      "What can I do for you?" repeated the dentist a little irritably.
    

      "I've got toothache," murmured Vanda.
    

      "Aha! . . . Which is the tooth? Where?"
    

      Vanda remembered she had a hole in one of her teeth.
    

      "At the bottom . . . on the right . . ." she said.
    

      "Hm! . . . Open your mouth."
    

      Finkel frowned and, holding his breath, began examining the tooth.
    

      "Does it hurt?" he asked, digging into it with a steel instrument.
    

      "Yes," Vanda replied, untruthfully.
    

      "Shall I remind him?" she was wondering. "He would be sure to remember me.
      But that servant! Why will she stand there?"
    

      Finkel suddenly snorted like a steam-engine right into her mouth, and
      said:
    

      "I don't advise you to have it stopped. That tooth will never be worth
      keeping anyhow."
    

      After probing the tooth a little more and soiling Vanda's lips and gums
      with his tobacco-stained fingers, he held his breath again, and put
      something cold into her mouth. Vanda suddenly felt a sharp pain, cried
      out, and clutched at Finkel's hand.
    

      "It's all right, it's all right," he muttered; "don't you be frightened!
      That tooth would have been no use to you, anyway . . . you must be brave.
      . ."
    

      And his tobacco-stained fingers, smeared with blood, held up the tooth to
      her eyes, while the maid approached and put a basin to her mouth.
    

      "You wash out your mouth with cold water when you get home, and that will
      stop the bleeding," said Finkel.
    

      He stood before her with the air of a man expecting her to go, waiting to
      be left in peace.
    

      "Good-day," she said, turning towards the door.
    

      "Hm! . . . and how about my fee?" enquired Finkel, in a jesting tone.
    

      "Oh, yes!" Vanda remembered, blushing, and she handed the Jew the rouble
      that had been given her for her ring.
    

      When she got out into the street she felt more overwhelmed with shame than
      before, but now it was not her poverty she was ashamed of. She was
      unconscious now of not having a big hat and a fashionable jacket. She
      walked along the street, spitting blood, and brooding on her life, her
      ugly, wretched life, and the insults she had endured, and would have to
      endure to-morrow, and next week, and all her life, up to the very day of
      her death.
    

      "Oh! how awful it is! My God, how fearful!"
    

      Next day, however, she was back at the "Renaissance," and dancing there.
      She had on an enormous new red hat, a new fashionable jacket, and bronze
      shoes. And she was taken out to supper by a young merchant up from Kazan.
    

      A TRIVIAL INCIDENT
    

      IT was a sunny August midday as, in company with a Russian prince who had
      come down in the world, I drove into the immense so-called Shabelsky
      pine-forest where we were intending to look for woodcocks. In virtue of
      the part he plays in this story my poor prince deserves a detailed
      description. He was a tall, dark man, still youngish, though already
      somewhat battered by life; with long moustaches like a police captain's;
      with prominent black eyes, and with the manners of a retired army man. He
      was a man of Oriental type, not very intelligent, but straightforward and
      honest, not a bully, not a fop, and not a rake-virtues which, in the eyes
      of the general public, are equivalent to a certificate of being a
      nonentity and a poor creature. People generally did not like him (he was
      never spoken of in the district, except as "the illustrious duffer"). I
      personally found the poor prince extremely nice with his misfortunes and
      failures, which made up indeed his whole life. First of all he was poor.
      He did not play cards, did not drink, had no occupation, did not poke his
      nose into anything, and maintained a perpetual silence but yet he had
      somehow succeeded in getting through thirty to forty thousand roubles left
      him at his father's death. God only knows what had become of the money.
      All that I can say is that owing to lack of supervision a great deal was
      stolen by stewards, bailiffs, and even footmen; a great deal went on
      lending money, giving bail, and standing security. There were few
      landowners in the district who did not owe him money. He gave to all who
      asked, and not so much from good nature or confidence in people as from
      exaggerated gentlemanliness as though he would say: "Take it and feel how
      comme il faut I am!" By the time I made his acquaintance he had got
      into debt himself, had learned what it was like to have a second mortgage
      on his land, and had sunk so deeply into difficulties that there was no
      chance of his ever getting out of them again. There were days when he had
      no dinner, and went about with an empty cigar-holder, but he was always
      seen clean and fashionably dressed, and always smelt strongly of
      ylang-ylang.
    

      The prince's second misfortune was his absolute solitariness. He was not
      married, he had no friends nor relations. His silent and reserved
      character and his comme il faut deportment, which became the more
      conspicuous the more anxious he was to conceal his poverty, prevented him
      from becoming intimate with people. For love affairs he was too heavy,
      spiritless, and cold, and so rarely got on with women. . . .
    

      When we reached the forest this prince and I got out of the chaise and
      walked along a narrow woodland path which was hidden among huge ferns. But
      before we had gone a hundred paces a tall, lank figure with a long oval
      face, wearing a shabby reefer jacket, a straw hat, and patent leather
      boots, rose up from behind a young fir-tree some three feet high, as
      though he had sprung out of the ground. The stranger held in one hand a
      basket of mushrooms, with the other he playfully fingered a cheap
      watch-chain on his waistcoat. On seeing us he was taken aback, smoothed
      his waistcoat, coughed politely, and gave an agreeable smile, as though he
      were delighted to see such nice people as us. Then, to our complete
      surprise, he came up to us, scraping with his long feet on the grass,
      bending his whole person, and, still smiling agreeably, lifted his hat and
      pronounced in a sugary voice with the intonations of a whining dog:
    

      "Aie, aie . . . gentlemen, painful as it is, it is my duty to warn you
      that shooting is forbidden in this wood. Pardon me for venturing to
      disturb you, though unacquainted, but . . . allow me to present myself. I
      am Grontovsky, the head clerk on Madame Kandurin's estate."
    

      "Pleased to make your acquaintance, but why can't we shoot?"
    

      "Such is the wish of the owner of this forest!"
    

      The prince and I exchanged glances. A moment passed in silence. The prince
      stood looking pensively at a big fly agaric at his feet, which he had
      crushed with his stick. Grontovsky went on smiling agreeably. His whole
      face was twitching, exuding honey, and even the watch-chain on his
      waistcoat seemed to be smiling and trying to impress us all with its
      refinement. A shade of embarrassment passed over us like an angel passing;
      all three of us felt awkward.
    

      "Nonsense!" I said. "Only last week I was shooting here!"
    

      "Very possible!" Grontovsky sniggered through his teeth. "As a matter of
      fact everyone shoots here regardless of the prohibition. But once I have
      met you, it is my duty . . . my sacred duty to warn you. I am a man in a
      dependent position. If the forest were mine, on the word of honour of a
      Grontovsky, I should not oppose your agreeable pleasure. But whose fault
      is it that I am in a dependent position?"
    

      The lanky individual sighed and shrugged his shoulders. I began arguing,
      getting hot and protesting, but the more loudly and impressively I spoke
      the more mawkish and sugary Grontovsky's face became. Evidently the
      consciousness of a certain power over us afforded him the greatest
      gratification. He was enjoying his condescending tone, his politeness, his
      manners, and with peculiar relish pronounced his sonorous surname, of
      which he was probably very fond. Standing before us he felt more than at
      ease, but judging from the confused sideway glances he cast from time to
      time at his basket, only one thing was spoiling his satisfaction-the
      mushrooms, womanish, peasantish, prose, derogatory to his dignity.
    

      "We can't go back!" I said. "We have come over ten miles!"
    

      "What's to be done?" sighed Grontovsky. "If you had come not ten but a
      hundred thousand miles, if the king even had come from America or from
      some other distant land, even then I should think it my duty . . . sacred,
      so to say, obligation . . ."
    

      "Does the forest belong to Nadyezhda Lvovna?" asked the prince.
    

      "Yes, Nadyezhda Lvovna . . ."
    

      "Is she at home now?"
    

      "Yes . . . I tell you what, you go to her, it is not more than half a mile
      from here; if she gives you a note, then I. . . . I needn't say! Ha-ha . .
      . he-he-!"
    

      "By all means," I agreed. "It's much nearer than to go back. . . . You go
      to her, Sergey Ivanitch," I said, addressing the prince. "You know her."
    

      The prince, who had been gazing the whole time at the crushed agaric,
      raised his eyes to me, thought a minute, and said:
    

      "I used to know her at one time, but . . . it's rather awkward for me to
      go to her. Besides, I am in shabby clothes. . . . You go, you don't know
      her. . . . It's more suitable for you to go."
    

      I agreed. We got into our chaise and, followed by Grontovsky's smiles,
      drove along the edge of the forest to the manor house. I was not
      acquainted with Nadyezhda Lvovna Kandurin, nÃ©e Shabelsky. I had never seen
      her at close quarters, and knew her only by hearsay. I knew that she was
      incredibly wealthy, richer than anyone else in the province. After the
      death of her father, Shabelsky, who was a landowner with no other
      children, she was left with several estates, a stud farm, and a lot of
      money. I had heard that, though she was only twenty-five or twenty-six,
      she was ugly, uninteresting, and as insignificant as anybody, and was only
      distinguished from the ordinary ladies of the district by her immense
      wealth.
    

      It has always seemed to me that wealth is felt, and that the rich must
      have special feelings unknown to the poor. Often as I passed by Nadyezhda
      Lvovna's big fruit garden, in which stood the large, heavy house with its
      windows always curtained, I thought: "What is she thinking at this moment?
      Is there happiness behind those blinds?" and so on. Once I saw her from a
      distance in a fine light cabriolet, driving a handsome white horse, and,
      sinful man that I am, I not only envied her, but even thought that in her
      poses, in her movements, there was something special, not to be found in
      people who are not rich, just as persons of a servile nature succeed in
      discovering "good family" at the first glance in people of the most
      ordinary exterior, if they are a little more distinguished than
      themselves. Nadyezhda Lvovna's inner life was only known to me by scandal.
      It was said in the district that five or six years ago, before she was
      married, during her father's lifetime, she had been passionately in love
      with Prince Sergey Ivanitch, who was now beside me in the chaise. The
      prince had been fond of visiting her father, and used to spend whole days
      in his billiard room, where he played pyramids indefatigably till his arms
      and legs ached. Six months before the old man's death he had suddenly
      given up visiting the Shabelskys. The gossip of the district having no
      positive facts to go upon explained this abrupt change in their relations
      in various ways. Some said that the prince, having observed the plain
      daughter's feeling for him and being unable to reciprocate it, considered
      it the duty of a gentleman to cut short his visits. Others maintained that
      old Shabelsky had discovered why his daughter was pining away, and had
      proposed to the poverty-stricken prince that he should marry her; the
      prince, imagining in his narrow-minded way that they were trying to buy
      him together with his title, was indignant, said foolish things, and
      quarrelled with them. What was true and what was false in this nonsense
      was difficult to say. But that there was a portion of truth in it was
      evident, from the fact that the prince always avoided conversation about
      Nadyezhda Lvovna.
    

      I knew that soon after her father's death Nadyezhda Lvovna had married one
      Kandurin, a bachelor of law, not wealthy, but adroit, who had come on a
      visit to the neighbourhood. She married him not from love, but because she
      was touched by the love of the legal gentleman who, so it was said, had
      cleverly played the love-sick swain. At the time I am describing, Kandurin
      was for some reason living in Cairo, and writing thence to his friend, the
      marshal of the district, "Notes of Travel," while she sat languishing
      behind lowered blinds, surrounded by idle parasites, and whiled away her
      dreary days in petty philanthropy.
    

      On the way to the house the prince fell to talking.
    

      "It's three days since I have been at home," he said in a half whisper,
      with a sidelong glance at the driver. "I am not a child, nor a silly
      woman, and I have no prejudices, but I can't stand the bailiffs. When I
      see a bailiff in my house I turn pale and tremble, and even have a
      twitching in the calves of my legs. Do you know Rogozhin refused to honour
      my note?"
    

      The prince did not, as a rule, like to complain of his straitened
      circumstances; where poverty was concerned he was reserved and exceedingly
      proud and sensitive, and so this announcement surprised me. He stared a
      long time at the yellow clearing, warmed by the sun, watched a long string
      of cranes float in the azure sky, and turned facing me.
    

      "And by the sixth of September I must have the money ready for the bank .
      . . the interest for my estate," he said aloud, by now regardless of the
      coachman. "And where am I to get it? Altogether, old man, I am in a tight
      fix! An awfully tight fix!"
    

      The prince examined the cock of his gun, blew on it for some reason, and
      began looking for the cranes which by now were out of sight.
    

      "Sergey Ivanitch," I asked, after a minute's silence, "imagine if they
      sell your Shatilovka, what will you do?"
    

      "I? I don't know! Shatilovka can't be saved, that's clear as daylight, but
      I cannot imagine such a calamity. I can't imagine myself without my daily
      bread secure. What can I do? I have had hardly any education; I have not
      tried working yet; for government service it is late to begin, . . .
      Besides, where could I serve? Where could I be of use? Admitting that no
      great cleverness is needed for serving in our Zemstvo, for example, yet I
      suffer from . . . the devil knows what, a sort of faintheartedness, I
      haven't a ha'p'orth of pluck. If I went into the Service I should always
      feel I was not in my right place. I am not an idealist; I am not a
      Utopian; I haven't any special principles; but am simply, I suppose,
      stupid and thoroughly incompetent, a neurotic and a coward. Altogether not
      like other people. All other people are like other people, only I seem to
      be something . . . a poor thing. . . . I met Naryagin last Wednesday-you
      know him?-drunken, slovenly . . . doesn't pay his debts, stupid" (the
      prince frowned and tossed his head) . . . "a horrible person! He said to
      me, staggering: 'I'm being balloted for as a justice of the peace!' Of
      course, they won't elect him, but, you see, he believes he is fit to be a
      justice of the peace and considers that position within his capacity. He
      has boldness and self-confidence. I went to see our investigating
      magistrate too. The man gets two hundred and fifty roubles a month, and
      does scarcely anything. All he can do is to stride backwards and forwards
      for days together in nothing but his underclothes, but, ask him, he is
      convinced he is doing his work and honourably performing his duty. I
      couldn't go on like that! I should be ashamed to look the clerk in the
      face."
    

      At that moment Grontovsky, on a chestnut horse, galloped by us with a
      flourish. On his left arm the basket bobbed up and down with the mushrooms
      dancing in it. As he passed us he grinned and waved his hand, as though we
      were old friends.
    

      "Blockhead!" the prince filtered through his teeth, looking after him.
      "It's wonderful how disgusting it sometimes is to see satisfied faces. A
      stupid, animal feeling due to hunger, I expect. . . . What was I saying?
      Oh, yes, about going into the Service, . . . I should be ashamed to take
      the salary, and yet, to tell the truth, it is stupid. If one looks at it
      from a broader point of view, more seriously, I am eating what isn't mine
      now. Am I not? But why am I not ashamed of that. . . . It is a case of
      habit, I suppose . . . and not being able to realize one's true position.
      . . . But that position is most likely awful. . ."
    

      I looked at him, wondering if the prince were showing off. But his face
      was mild and his eyes were mournfully following the movements of the
      chestnut horse racing away, as though his happiness were racing away with
      it.
    

      Apparently he was in that mood of irritation and sadness when women weep
      quietly for no reason, and men feel a craving to complain of themselves,
      of life, of God. . . .
    

      When I got out of the chaise at the gates of the house the prince said to
      me:
    

      "A man once said, wanting to annoy me, that I have the face of a
      cardsharper. I have noticed that cardsharpers are usually dark. Do you
      know, it seems that if I really had been born a cardsharper I should have
      remained a decent person to the day of my death, for I should never have
      had the boldness to do wrong. I tell you frankly I have had the chance
      once in my life of getting rich if I had told a lie, a lie to myself and
      one woman . . . and one other person whom I know would have forgiven me
      for lying; I should have put into my pocket a million. But I could not. I
      hadn't the pluck!"
    

      From the gates we had to go to the house through the copse by a long road,
      level as a ruler, and planted on each side with thick, lopped lilacs. The
      house looked somewhat heavy, tasteless, like a faÃ§ade on the stage. It
      rose clumsily out of a mass of greenery, and caught the eye like a great
      stone thrown on the velvety turf. At the chief entrance I was met by a fat
      old footman in a green swallow-tail coat and big silver-rimmed spectacles;
      without making any announcement, only looking contemptuously at my dusty
      figure, he showed me in. As I mounted the soft carpeted stairs there was,
      for some reason, a strong smell of india-rubber. At the top I was
      enveloped in an atmosphere found only in museums, in signorial mansions
      and old-fashioned merchant houses; it seemed like the smell of something
      long past, which had once lived and died and had left its soul in the
      rooms. I passed through three or four rooms on my way from the entry to
      the drawing-room. I remember bright yellow, shining floors, lustres
      wrapped in stiff muslin, narrow, striped rugs which stretched not straight
      from door to door, as they usually do, but along the walls, so that not
      venturing to touch the bright floor with my muddy boots I had to describe
      a rectangle in each room. In the drawing-room, where the footman left me,
      stood old-fashioned ancestral furniture in white covers, shrouded in
      twilight. It looked surly and elderly, and, as though out of respect for
      its repose, not a sound was audible.
    

      Even the clock was silent . . . it seemed as though the Princess Tarakanov
      had fallen asleep in the golden frame, and the water and the rats were
      still and motionless through magic. The daylight, afraid of disturbing the
      universal tranquillity, scarcely pierced through the lowered blinds, and
      lay on the soft rugs in pale, slumbering streaks.
    

      Three minutes passed and a big, elderly woman in black, with her cheek
      bandaged up, walked noiselessly into the drawing-room. She bowed to me and
      pulled up the blinds. At once, enveloped in the bright sunlight, the rats
      and water in the picture came to life and movement, Princess Tarakanov was
      awakened, and the old chairs frowned gloomily.
    

      "Her honour will be here in a minute, sir . . ." sighed the old lady,
      frowning too.
    

      A few more minutes of waiting and I saw Nadyezhda Lvovna. What struck me
      first of all was that she certainly was ugly, short, scraggy, and
      round-shouldered. Her thick, chestnut hair was magnificent; her face, pure
      and with a look of culture in it, was aglow with youth; there was a clear
      and intelligent expression in her eyes; but the whole charm of her head
      was lost through the thickness of her lips and the over-acute facial
      angle.
    

      I mentioned my name, and announced the object of my visit.
    

      "I really don't know what I am to say!" she said, in hesitation, dropping
      her eyes and smiling. "I don't like to refuse, and at the same time. . .
      ."
    

      "Do, please," I begged.
    

      Nadyezhda Lvovna looked at me and laughed. I laughed too. She was probably
      amused by what Grontovsky had so enjoyed-that is, the right of giving or
      withholding permission; my visit suddenly struck me as queer and strange.
    

      "I don't like to break the long-established rules," said Madame Kandurin.
      "Shooting has been forbidden on our estate for the last six years. No!"
      she shook her head resolutely. "Excuse me, I must refuse you. If I allow
      you I must allow others. I don't like unfairness. Either let all or no
      one."
    

      "I am sorry!" I sighed. "It's all the sadder because we have come more
      than ten miles. I am not alone," I added, "Prince Sergey Ivanitch is with
      me."
    

      I uttered the prince's name with no arriÃ¨re pensÃ©e, not prompted by
      any special motive or aim; I simply blurted it out without thinking, in
      the simplicity of my heart. Hearing the familiar name Madame Kandurin
      started, and bent a prolonged gaze upon me. I noticed her nose turn pale.
    

      "That makes no difference . . ." she said, dropping her eyes.
    

      As I talked to her I stood at the window that looked out on the shrubbery.
      I could see the whole shrubbery with the avenues and the ponds and the
      road by which I had come. At the end of the road, beyond the gates, the
      back of our chaise made a dark patch. Near the gate, with his back to the
      house, the prince was standing with his legs apart, talking to the lanky
      Grontovsky.
    

      Madame Kandurin had been standing all the time at the other window. She
      looked from time to time towards the shrubbery, and from the moment I
      mentioned the prince's name she did not turn away from the window.
    

      "Excuse me," she said, screwing up her eyes as she looked towards the road
      and the gate, "but it would be unfair to allow you only to shoot. . . .
      And, besides, what pleasure is there in shooting birds? What's it for? Are
      they in your way?"
    

      A solitary life, immured within four walls, with its indoor twilight and
      heavy smell of decaying furniture, disposes people to sentimentality.
      Madame Kandurin's idea did her credit, but I could not resist saying:
    

      "If one takes that line one ought to go barefoot. Boots are made out of
      the leather of slaughtered animals."
    

      "One must distinguish between a necessity and a caprice," Madame Kandurin
      answered in a toneless voice.
    

      She had by now recognized the prince, and did not take her eyes off his
      figure. It is hard to describe the delight and the suffering with which
      her ugly face was radiant! Her eyes were smiling and shining, her lips
      were quivering and laughing, while her face craned closer to the panes.
      Keeping hold of a flower-pot with both hands, with bated breath and with
      one foot slightly lifted, she reminded me of a dog pointing and waiting
      with passionate impatience for "Fetch it!"
    

      I looked at her and at the prince who could not tell a lie once in his
      life, and I felt angry and bitter against truth and falsehood, which play
      such an elemental part in the personal happiness of men.
    

      The prince started suddenly, took aim and fired. A hawk, flying over him,
      fluttered its wings and flew like an arrow far away.
    

      "He aimed too high!" I said. "And so, Nadyezhda Lvovna," I sighed, moving
      away from the window, "you will not permit . . ."-Madame Kandurin was
      silent.
    

      "I have the honour to take my leave," I said, "and I beg you to forgive my
      disturbing you. . ."
    

      Madame Kandurin would have turned facing me, and had already moved through
      a quarter of the angle, when she suddenly hid her face behind the
      hangings, as though she felt tears in her eyes that she wanted to conceal.
    

      "Good-bye. . . . Forgive me . . ." she said softly.
    

      I bowed to her back, and strode away across the bright yellow floors, no
      longer keeping to the carpet. I was glad to get away from this little
      domain of gilded boredom and sadness, and I hastened as though anxious to
      shake off a heavy, fantastic dream with its twilight, its enchanted
      princess, its lustres. . . .
    

      At the front door a maidservant overtook me and thrust a note into my
      hand: "Shooting is permitted on showing this. N. K.," I read.
    



Love and Oher Stories







      LOVE
    

“THREE o’clock
      in the morning. The soft April night is looking in at my windows and
      caressingly winking at me with its stars. I can’t sleep, I am so
      happy!
    

      “My whole being from head to heels is bursting with a strange,
      incomprehensible feeling. I can’t analyse it just now—I haven’t
      the time, I’m too lazy, and there—hang analysis! Why, is a man
      likely to interpret his sensations when he is flying head foremost from a
      belfry, or has just learned that he has won two hundred thousand? Is he in
      a state to do it?”
    

      This was more or less how I began my love-letter to Sasha, a girl of
      nineteen with whom I had fallen in love. I began it five times, and as
      often tore up the sheets, scratched out whole pages, and copied it all
      over again. I spent as long over the letter as if it had been a novel I
      had to write to order. And it was not because I tried to make it longer,
      more elaborate, and more fervent, but because I wanted endlessly to
      prolong the process of this writing, when one sits in the stillness of one’s
      study and communes with one’s own day-dreams while the spring night
      looks in at one’s window. Between the lines I saw a beloved image,
      and it seemed to me that there were, sitting at the same table writing
      with me, spirits as naÃ¯vely happy, as foolish, and as blissfully smiling
      as I. I wrote continually, looking at my hand, which still ached
      deliciously where hers had lately pressed it, and if I turned my eyes away
      I had a vision of the green trellis of the little gate. Through that
      trellis Sasha gazed at me after I had said goodbye to her. When I was
      saying good-bye to Sasha I was thinking of nothing and was simply admiring
      her figure as every decent man admires a pretty woman; when I saw through
      the trellis two big eyes, I suddenly, as though by inspiration, knew that
      I was in love, that it was all settled between us, and fully decided
      already, that I had nothing left to do but to carry out certain
      formalities.
    

      It is a great delight also to seal up a love-letter, and, slowly putting
      on one’s hat and coat, to go softly out of the house and to carry
      the treasure to the post. There are no stars in the sky now: in their
      place there is a long whitish streak in the east, broken here and there by
      clouds above the roofs of the dingy houses; from that streak the whole sky
      is flooded with pale light. The town is asleep, but already the
      water-carts have come out, and somewhere in a far-away factory a whistle
      sounds to wake up the workpeople. Beside the postbox, slightly moist with
      dew, you are sure to see the clumsy figure of a house porter, wearing a
      bell-shaped sheepskin and carrying a stick. He is in a condition akin to
      catalepsy: he is not asleep or awake, but something between.
    

      If the boxes knew how often people resort to them for the decision of
      their fate, they would not have such a humble air. I, anyway, almost
      kissed my postbox, and as I gazed at it I reflected that the post is the
      greatest of blessings.
    

      I beg anyone who has ever been in love to remember how one usually hurries
      home after dropping the letter in the box, rapidly gets into bed and pulls
      up the quilt in the full conviction that as soon as one wakes up in the
      morning one will be overwhelmed with memories of the previous day and look
      with rapture at the window, where the daylight will be eagerly making its
      way through the folds of the curtain.
    

      Well, to facts. . . . Next morning at midday, Sasha’s maid brought
      me the following answer: “I am delited be sure to come to us to day
      please I shall expect you. Your S.”
    

      Not a single comma. This lack of punctuation, and the misspelling of the
      word “delighted,” the whole letter, and even the long, narrow
      envelope in which it was put filled my heart with tenderness. In the
      sprawling but diffident handwriting I recognised Sasha’s walk, her
      way of raising her eyebrows when she laughed, the movement of her lips. .
      . . But the contents of the letter did not satisfy me. In the first place,
      poetical letters are not answered in that way, and in the second, why
      should I go to Sasha’s house to wait till it should occur to her
      stout mamma, her brothers, and poor relations to leave us alone together?
      It would never enter their heads, and nothing is more hateful than to have
      to restrain one’s raptures simply because of the intrusion of some
      animate trumpery in the shape of a half-deaf old woman or little girl
      pestering one with questions. I sent an answer by the maid asking Sasha to
      select some park or boulevard for a rendezvous. My suggestion was readily
      accepted. I had struck the right chord, as the saying is.
    

      Between four and five o’clock in the afternoon I made my way to the
      furthest and most overgrown part of the park. There was not a soul in the
      park, and the tryst might have taken place somewhere nearer in one of the
      avenues or arbours, but women don’t like doing it by halves in
      romantic affairs; in for a penny, in for a pound—if you are in for a
      tryst, let it be in the furthest and most impenetrable thicket, where one
      runs the risk of stumbling upon some rough or drunken man. When I went up
      to Sasha she was standing with her back to me, and in that back I could
      read a devilish lot of mystery. It seemed as though that back and the nape
      of her neck, and the black spots on her dress were saying: Hush! . . . The
      girl was wearing a simple cotton dress over which she had thrown a light
      cape. To add to the air of mysterious secrecy, her face was covered with a
      white veil. Not to spoil the effect, I had to approach on tiptoe and speak
      in a half whisper.
    

      From what I remember now, I was not so much the essential point of the
      rendezvous as a detail of it. Sasha was not so much absorbed in the
      interview itself as in its romantic mysteriousness, my kisses, the silence
      of the gloomy trees, my vows. . . . There was not a minute in which she
      forgot herself, was overcome, or let the mysterious expression drop from
      her face, and really if there had been any Ivan Sidoritch or Sidor
      Ivanitch in my place she would have felt just as happy. How is one to make
      out in such circumstances whether one is loved or not? Whether the love is
      “the real thing” or not?
    

      From the park I took Sasha home with me. The presence of the beloved woman
      in one’s bachelor quarters affects one like wine and music. Usually
      one begins to speak of the future, and the confidence and self-reliance
      with which one does so is beyond bounds. You make plans and projects, talk
      fervently of the rank of general though you have not yet reached the rank
      of a lieutenant, and altogether you fire off such high-flown nonsense that
      your listener must have a great deal of love and ignorance of life to
      assent to it. Fortunately for men, women in love are always blinded by
      their feelings and never know anything of life. Far from not assenting,
      they actually turn pale with holy awe, are full of reverence and hang
      greedily on the maniac’s words. Sasha listened to me with attention,
      but I soon detected an absent-minded expression on her face, she did not
      understand me. The future of which I talked interested her only in its
      external aspect and I was wasting time in displaying my plans and projects
      before her. She was keenly interested in knowing which would be her room,
      what paper she would have in the room, why I had an upright piano instead
      of a grand piano, and so on. She examined carefully all the little things
      on my table, looked at the photographs, sniffed at the bottles, peeled the
      old stamps off the envelopes, saying she wanted them for something.
    

      “Please collect old stamps for me!” she said, making a grave
      face. “Please do.”
    

      Then she found a nut in the window, noisily cracked it and ate it.
    

      “Why don’t you stick little labels on the backs of your books?”
      she asked, taking a look at the bookcase.
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Oh, so that each book should have its number. And where am I to put
      my books? I’ve got books too, you know.”
    

      “What books have you got?” I asked.
    

      Sasha raised her eyebrows, thought a moment and said:
    

      “All sorts.”
    

      And if it had entered my head to ask her what thoughts, what convictions,
      what aims she had, she would no doubt have raised her eyebrows, thought a
      minute, and have said in the same way: “All sorts.”
    

      Later I saw Sasha home and left her house regularly, officially engaged,
      and was so reckoned till our wedding. If the reader will allow me to judge
      merely from my personal experience, I maintain that to be engaged is very
      dreary, far more so than to be a husband or nothing at all. An engaged man
      is neither one thing nor the other, he has left one side of the river and
      not reached the other, he is not married and yet he can’t be said to
      be a bachelor, but is in something not unlike the condition of the porter
      whom I have mentioned above.
    

      Every day as soon as I had a free moment I hastened to my fiancÃ©e. As I
      went I usually bore within me a multitude of hopes, desires, intentions,
      suggestions, phrases. I always fancied that as soon as the maid opened the
      door I should, from feeling oppressed and stifled, plunge at once up to my
      neck into a sea of refreshing happiness. But it always turned out
      otherwise in fact. Every time I went to see my fiancÃ©e I found all her
      family and other members of the household busy over the silly trousseau.
      (And by the way, they were hard at work sewing for two months and then
      they had less than a hundred roubles’ worth of things). There was a
      smell of irons, candle grease and fumes. Bugles scrunched under one’s
      feet. The two most important rooms were piled up with billows of linen,
      calico, and muslin and from among the billows peeped out Sasha’s
      little head with a thread between her teeth. All the sewing party welcomed
      me with cries of delight but at once led me off into the dining-room where
      I could not hinder them nor see what only husbands are permitted to
      behold. In spite of my feelings, I had to sit in the dining-room and
      converse with Pimenovna, one of the poor relations. Sasha, looking worried
      and excited, kept running by me with a thimble, a skein of wool or some
      other boring object.
    

      “Wait, wait, I shan’t be a minute,” she would say when I
      raised imploring eyes to her. “Only fancy that wretch Stepanida has
      spoilt the bodice of the barÃ¨ge dress!”
    

      And after waiting in vain for this grace, I lost my temper, went out of
      the house and walked about the streets in the company of the new cane I
      had bought. Or I would want to go for a walk or a drive with my fiancÃ©e,
      would go round and find her already standing in the hall with her mother,
      dressed to go out and playing with her parasol.
    

      “Oh, we are going to the Arcade,” she would say. “We
      have got to buy some more cashmere and change the hat.”
    

      My outing is knocked on the head. I join the ladies and go with them to
      the Arcade. It is revoltingly dull to listen to women shopping, haggling
      and trying to outdo the sharp shopman. I felt ashamed when Sasha, after
      turning over masses of material and knocking down the prices to a minimum,
      walked out of the shop without buying anything, or else told the shopman
      to cut her some half rouble’s worth.
    

      When they came out of the shop, Sasha and her mamma with scared and
      worried faces would discuss at length having made a mistake, having bought
      the wrong thing, the flowers in the chintz being too dark, and so on.
    

      Yes, it is a bore to be engaged! I’m glad it’s over.
    

      Now I am married. It is evening. I am sitting in my study reading. Behind
      me on the sofa Sasha is sitting munching something noisily. I want a glass
      of beer.
    

      “Sasha, look for the corkscrew. . . .” I say. “It’s
      lying about somewhere.”
    

      Sasha leaps up, rummages in a disorderly way among two or three heaps of
      papers, drops the matches, and without finding the corkscrew, sits down in
      silence. . . . Five minutes pass—ten. . . I begin to be fretted both
      by thirst and vexation.
    

      “Sasha, do look for the corkscrew,” I say.
    

      Sasha leaps up again and rummages among the papers near me. Her munching
      and rustling of the papers affects me like the sound of sharpening knives
      against each other. . . . I get up and begin looking for the corkscrew
      myself. At last it is found and the beer is uncorked. Sasha remains by the
      table and begins telling me something at great length.
    

      “You’d better read something, Sasha,” I say.
    

      She takes up a book, sits down facing me and begins moving her lips . . .
      . I look at her little forehead, moving lips, and sink into thought.
    

      “She is getting on for twenty. . . .” I reflect. “If one
      takes a boy of the educated class and of that age and compares them, what
      a difference! The boy would have knowledge and convictions and some
      intelligence.”
    

      But I forgive that difference just as the low forehead and moving lips are
      forgiven. I remember in my old Lovelace days I have cast off women for a
      stain on their stockings, or for one foolish word, or for not cleaning
      their teeth, and now I forgive everything: the munching, the muddling
      about after the corkscrew, the slovenliness, the long talking about
      nothing that matters; I forgive it all almost unconsciously, with no
      effort of will, as though Sasha’s mistakes were my mistakes, and
      many things which would have made me wince in old days move me to
      tenderness and even rapture. The explanation of this forgiveness of
      everything lies in my love for Sasha, but what is the explanation of the
      love itself, I really don’t know.
    











      LIGHTS
    

THE dog was barking
      excitedly outside. And Ananyev the engineer, his assistant called Von
      Schtenberg, and I went out of the hut to see at whom it was barking. I was
      the visitor, and might have remained indoors, but I must confess my head
      was a little dizzy from the wine I had drunk, and I was glad to get a
      breath of fresh air.
    

      “There is nobody here,” said Ananyev when we went out. “Why
      are you telling stories, Azorka? You fool!”
    

      There was not a soul in sight.
    

      “The fool,” Azorka, a black house-dog, probably conscious of
      his guilt in barking for nothing and anxious to propitiate us, approached
      us, diffidently wagging his tail. The engineer bent down and touched him
      between his ears.
    

      “Why are you barking for nothing, creature?” he said in the
      tone in which good-natured people talk to children and dogs. “Have
      you had a bad dream or what? Here, doctor, let me commend to your
      attention,” he said, turning to me, “a wonderfully nervous
      subject! Would you believe it, he can’t endure solitude—he is
      always having terrible dreams and suffering from nightmares; and when you
      shout at him he has something like an attack of hysterics.”
    

      “Yes, a dog of refined feelings,” the student chimed in.
    

      Azorka must have understood that the conversation was concerning him. He
      turned his head upwards and grinned plaintively, as though to say, “Yes,
      at times I suffer unbearably, but please excuse it!”
    

      It was an August night, there were stars, but it was dark. Owing to the
      fact that I had never in my life been in such exceptional surroundings, as
      I had chanced to come into now, the starry night seemed to me gloomy,
      inhospitable, and darker than it was in reality. I was on a railway line
      which was still in process of construction. The high, half-finished
      embankment, the mounds of sand, clay, and rubble, the holes, the
      wheel-barrows standing here and there, the flat tops of the mud huts in
      which the workmen lived—all this muddle, coloured to one tint by the
      darkness, gave the earth a strange, wild aspect that suggested the times
      of chaos. There was so little order in all that lay before me that it was
      somehow strange in the midst of the hideously excavated, grotesque-looking
      earth to see the silhouettes of human beings and the slender telegraph
      posts. Both spoiled the ensemble of the picture, and seemed to belong to a
      different world. It was still, and the only sound came from the telegraph
      wire droning its wearisome refrain somewhere very high above our heads.
    

      We climbed up on the embankment and from its height looked down upon the
      earth. A hundred yards away where the pits, holes, and mounds melted into
      the darkness of the night, a dim light was twinkling. Beyond it gleamed
      another light, beyond that a third, then a hundred paces away two red eyes
      glowed side by side—probably the windows of some hut—and a
      long series of such lights, growing continually closer and dimmer,
      stretched along the line to the very horizon, then turned in a semicircle
      to the left and disappeared in the darkness of the distance. The lights
      were motionless. There seemed to be something in common between them and
      the stillness of the night and the disconsolate song of the telegraph
      wire. It seemed as though some weighty secret were buried under the
      embankment and only the lights, the night, and the wires knew of it.
    

      “How glorious, O Lord!” sighed Ananyev; “such space and
      beauty that one can’t tear oneself away! And what an embankment! It’s
      not an embankment, my dear fellow, but a regular Mont Blanc. It’s
      costing millions. . . .”
    

      Going into ecstasies over the lights and the embankment that was costing
      millions, intoxicated by the wine and his sentimental mood, the engineer
      slapped Von Schtenberg on the shoulder and went on in a jocose tone:
    

      “Well, Mihail Mihailitch, lost in reveries? No doubt it is pleasant
      to look at the work of one’s own hands, eh? Last year this very spot
      was bare steppe, not a sight of human life, and now look: life . . .
      civilisation. . . And how splendid it all is, upon my soul! You and I are
      building a railway, and after we are gone, in another century or two, good
      men will build a factory, a school, a hospital, and things will begin to
      move! Eh!”
    

      The student stood motionless with his hands thrust in his pockets, and did
      not take his eyes off the lights. He was not listening to the engineer,
      but was thinking, and was apparently in the mood in which one does not
      want to speak or to listen. After a prolonged silence he turned to me and
      said quietly:
    

      “Do you know what those endless lights are like? They make me think
      of something long dead, that lived thousands of years ago, something like
      the camps of the Amalekites or the Philistines. It is as though some
      people of the Old Testament had pitched their camp and were waiting for
      morning to fight with Saul or David. All that is wanting to complete the
      illusion is the blare of trumpets and sentries calling to one another in
      some Ethiopian language.”
    

      And, as though of design, the wind fluttered over the line and brought a
      sound like the clank of weapons. A silence followed. I don’t know
      what the engineer and the student were thinking of, but it seemed to me
      already that I actually saw before me something long dead and even heard
      the sentry talking in an unknown tongue. My imagination hastened to
      picture the tents, the strange people, their clothes, their armour.
    

      “Yes,” muttered the student pensively, “once Philistines
      and Amalekites were living in this world, making wars, playing their part,
      and now no trace of them remains. So it will be with us. Now we are making
      a railway, are standing here philosophising, but two thousand years will
      pass—and of this embankment and of all those men, asleep after their
      hard work, not one grain of dust will remain. In reality, it’s
      awful!”
    

      “You must drop those thoughts . . .” said the engineer gravely
      and admonishingly.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Because. . . . Thoughts like that are for the end of life, not for
      the beginning of it. You are too young for them.”
    

      “Why so?” repeated the student.
    

      “All these thoughts of the transitoriness, the insignificance and
      the aimlessness of life, of the inevitability of death, of the shadows of
      the grave, and so on, all such lofty thoughts, I tell you, my dear fellow,
      are good and natural in old age when they come as the product of years of
      inner travail, and are won by suffering and really are intellectual
      riches; for a youthful brain on the threshold of real life they are simply
      a calamity! A calamity!” Ananyev repeated with a wave of his hand.
      “To my mind it is better at your age to have no head on your
      shoulders at all than to think on these lines. I am speaking seriously,
      Baron. And I have been meaning to speak to you about it for a long time,
      for I noticed from the very first day of our acquaintance your partiality
      for these damnable ideas!”
    

      “Good gracious, why are they damnable?” the student asked with
      a smile, and from his voice and his face I could see that he asked the
      question from simple politeness, and that the discussion raised by the
      engineer did not interest him in the least.
    

      I could hardly keep my eyes open. I was dreaming that immediately after
      our walk we should wish each other good-night and go to bed, but my dream
      was not quickly realised. When we had returned to the hut the engineer put
      away the empty bottles and took out of a large wicker hamper two full
      ones, and uncorking them, sat down to his work-table with the evident
      intention of going on drinking, talking, and working. Sipping a little
      from his glass, he made pencil notes on some plans and went on pointing
      out to the student that the latter’s way of thinking was not what it
      should be. The student sat beside him checking accounts and saying
      nothing. He, like me, had no inclination to speak or to listen. That I
      might not interfere with their work, I sat away from the table on the
      engineer’s crooked-legged travelling bedstead, feeling bored and
      expecting every moment that they would suggest I should go to bed. It was
      going on for one o’clock.
    

      Having nothing to do, I watched my new acquaintances. I had never seen
      Ananyev or the student before. I had only made their acquaintance on the
      night I have described. Late in the evening I was returning on horseback
      from a fair to the house of a landowner with whom I was staying, had got
      on the wrong road in the dark and lost my way. Going round and round by
      the railway line and seeing how dark the night was becoming, I thought of
      the “barefoot railway roughs,” who lie in wait for travellers
      on foot and on horseback, was frightened, and knocked at the first hut I
      came to. There I was cordially received by Ananyev and the student. As is
      usually the case with strangers casually brought together, we quickly
      became acquainted, grew friendly and at first over the tea and afterward
      over the wine, began to feel as though we had known each other for years.
      At the end of an hour or so, I knew who they were and how fate had brought
      them from town to the far-away steppe; and they knew who I was, what my
      occupation and my way of thinking.
    

      Nikolay Anastasyevitch Ananyev, the engineer, was a broad-shouldered,
      thick-set man, and, judging from his appearance, he had, like Othello,
      begun the “descent into the vale of years,” and was growing
      rather too stout. He was just at that stage which old match-making women
      mean when they speak of “a man in the prime of his age,” that
      is, he was neither young nor old, was fond of good fare, good liquor, and
      praising the past, panted a little as he walked, snored loudly when he was
      asleep, and in his manner with those surrounding him displayed that calm
      imperturbable good humour which is always acquired by decent people by the
      time they have reached the grade of a staff officer and begun to grow
      stout. His hair and beard were far from being grey, but already, with a
      condescension of which he was unconscious, he addressed young men as
      “my dear boy” and felt himself entitled to lecture them
      good-humouredly about their way of thinking. His movements and his voice
      were calm, smooth, and self-confident, as they are in a man who is
      thoroughly well aware that he has got his feet firmly planted on the right
      road, that he has definite work, a secure living, a settled outlook. . . .
      His sunburnt, thick-nosed face and muscular neck seemed to say: “I am
      well fed, healthy, satisfied with myself, and the time will come when you
      young people too, will be well-fed, healthy, and satisfied with
      yourselves. . . .” He was dressed in a cotton shirt with the collar
      awry and in full linen trousers thrust into his high boots. From certain
      trifles, as for instance, from his coloured worsted girdle, his
      embroidered collar, and the patch on his elbow, I was able to guess that
      he was married and in all probability tenderly loved by his wife.
    

      Baron Von Schtenberg, a student of the Institute of Transport, was a young
      man of about three or four and twenty. Only his fair hair and scanty
      beard, and, perhaps, a certain coarseness and frigidity in his features
      showed traces of his descent from Barons of the Baltic provinces;
      everything else—his name, Mihail Mihailovitch, his religion, his
      ideas, his manners, and the expression of his face were purely Russian.
      Wearing, like Ananyev, a cotton shirt and high boots, with his round
      shoulders, his hair left uncut, and his sunburnt face, he did not look
      like a student or a Baron, but like an ordinary Russian workman. His words
      and gestures were few, he drank reluctantly without relish, checked the
      accounts mechanically, and seemed all the while to be thinking of
      something else. His movements and voice were calm, and smooth too, but his
      calmness was of a different kind from the engineer’s. His sunburnt,
      slightly ironical, dreamy face, his eyes which looked up from under his
      brows, and his whole figure were expressive of spiritual stagnatio—mental
      sloth. He looked as though it did not matter to him in the least whether
      the light were burning before him or not, whether the wine were nice or
      nasty, and whether the accounts he was checking were correct or not. . . .
      And on his intelligent, calm face I read: “I don’t see so far
      any good in definite work, a secure living, and a settled outlook. It’s
      all nonsense. I was in Petersburg, now I am sitting here in this hut, in
      the autumn I shall go back to Petersburg, then in the spring here again. .
      . . What sense there is in all that I don’t know, and no one knows.
      . . . And so it’s no use talking about it. . . .”
    

      He listened to the engineer without interest, with the condescending
      indifference with which cadets in the senior classes listen to an effusive
      and good-natured old attendant. It seemed as though there were nothing new
      to him in what the engineer said, and that if he had not himself been too
      lazy to talk, he would have said something newer and cleverer. Meanwhile
      Ananyev would not desist. He had by now laid aside his good-humoured,
      jocose tone and spoke seriously, even with a fervour which was quite out
      of keeping with his expression of calmness. Apparently he had no distaste
      for abstract subjects, was fond of them, indeed, but had neither skill nor
      practice in the handling of them. And this lack of practice was so
      pronounced in his talk that I did not always grasp his meaning at once.
    

      “I hate those ideas with all my heart!” he said, “I was
      infected by them myself in my youth, I have not quite got rid of them even
      now, and I tell you—perhaps because I am stupid and such thoughts
      were not the right food for my mind—they did me nothing but harm.
      That’s easy to understand! Thoughts of the aimlessness of life, of
      the insignificance and transitoriness of the visible world, Solomon’s
      'vanity of vanities’ have been, and are to this day, the highest and
      final stage in the realm of thought. The thinker reaches that stage and—comes
      to a halt! There is nowhere further to go. The activity of the normal
      brain is completed with this, and that is natural and in the order of
      things. Our misfortune is that we begin thinking at that end. What normal
      people end with we begin with. From the first start, as soon as the brain
      begins working independently, we mount to the very topmost, final step and
      refuse to know anything about the steps below.”
    

      “What harm is there in that?” said the student.
    

      “But you must understand that it’s abnormal,” shouted
      Ananyev, looking at him almost wrathfully. “If we find means of
      mounting to the topmost step without the help of the lower ones, then the
      whole long ladder, that is the whole of life, with its colours, sounds,
      and thoughts, loses all meaning for us. That at your age such reflections
      are harmful and absurd, you can see from every step of your rational
      independent life. Let us suppose you sit down this minute to read Darwin
      or Shakespeare, you have scarcely read a page before the poison shows
      itself; and your long life, and Shakespeare, and Darwin, seem to you
      nonsense, absurdity, because you know you will die, that Shakespeare and
      Darwin have died too, that their thoughts have not saved them, nor the
      earth, nor you, and that if life is deprived of meaning in that way, all
      science, poetry, and exalted thoughts seem only useless diversions, the
      idle playthings of grown up people; and you leave off reading at the
      second page. Now, let us suppose that people come to you as an intelligent
      man and ask your opinion about war, for instance: whether it is desirable,
      whether it is morally justifiable or not. In answer to that terrible
      question you merely shrug your shoulders and confine yourself to some
      commonplace, because for you, with your way of thinking, it makes
      absolutely no difference whether hundreds of thousands of people die a
      violent death, or a natural one: the results are the same—ashes and
      oblivion. You and I are building a railway line. What’s the use, one
      may ask, of our worrying our heads, inventing, rising above the hackneyed
      thing, feeling for the workmen, stealing or not stealing, when we know
      that this railway line will turn to dust within two thousand years, and so
      on, and so on. . . . You must admit that with such a disastrous way of
      looking at things there can be no progress, no science, no art, nor even
      thought itself. We fancy that we are cleverer than the crowd, and than
      Shakespeare. In reality our thinking leads to nothing because we have no
      inclination to go down to the lower steps and there is nowhere higher to
      go, so our brain stands at the freezing point—neither up nor down; I
      was in bondage to these ideas for six years, and by all that is holy, I
      never read a sensible book all that time, did not gain a ha’porth of
      wisdom, and did not raise my moral standard an inch. Was not that
      disastrous? Moreover, besides being corrupted ourselves, we bring poison
      into the lives of those surrounding us. It would be all right if, with our
      pessimism, we renounced life, went to live in a cave, or made haste to
      die, but, as it is, in obedience to the universal law, we live, feel, love
      women, bring up children, construct railways!”
    

      “Our thoughts make no one hot or cold,” the student said
      reluctantly.
    

      “Ah! there you are again!—do stop it! You have not yet had a
      good sniff at life. But when you have lived as long as I have you will
      know a thing or two! Our theory of life is not so innocent as you suppose.
      In practical life, in contact with human beings, it leads to nothing but
      horrors and follies. It has been my lot to pass through experiences which
      I would not wish a wicked Tatar to endure.”
    

      “For instance?” I asked.
    

      “For instance?” repeated the engineer.
    

      He thought a minute, smiled and said:
    

      “For instance, take this example. More correctly, it is not an
      example, but a regular drama, with a plot and a dÃ©nouement. An excellent
      lesson! Ah, what a lesson!”
    

      He poured out wine for himself and us, emptied his glass, stroked his
      broad chest with his open hands, and went on, addressing himself more to
      me than to the student.
    

      “It was in the year 187—, soon after the war, and when I had
      just left the University. I was going to the Caucasus, and on the way
      stopped for five days in the seaside town of N. I must tell you that I was
      born and grew up in that town, and so there is nothing odd in my thinking
      N. extraordinarily snug, cosy, and beautiful, though for a man from
      Petersburg or Moscow, life in it would be as dreary and comfortless as in
      any Tchuhloma or Kashira. With melancholy I passed by the high school
      where I had been a pupil; with melancholy I walked about the very familiar
      park, I made a melancholy attempt to get a nearer look at people I had not
      seen for a long time—all with the same melancholy.
    

      “Among other things, I drove out one evening to the so-called
      Quarantine. It was a small mangy copse in which, at some forgotten time of
      plague, there really had been a quarantine station, and which was now the
      resort of summer visitors. It was a drive of three miles from the town
      along a good soft road. As one drove along one saw on the left the blue
      sea, on the right the unending gloomy steppe; there was plenty of air to
      breathe, and wide views for the eyes to rest on. The copse itself lay on
      the seashore. Dismissing my cabman, I went in at the familiar gates and
      first turned along an avenue leading to a little stone summer-house which
      I had been fond of in my childhood. In my opinion that round, heavy
      summer-house on its clumsy columns, which combined the romantic charm of
      an old tomb with the ungainliness of a Sobakevitch,* was the most poetical
      nook in the whole town. It stood at the edge above the cliff, and from it
      there was a splendid view of the sea.
    

      *A character in Gogol’s Dead Souls.—Translator’s
      Note.


      “I sat down on the seat, and, bending over the parapet, looked down.
      A path ran from the summer-house along the steep, almost overhanging
      cliff, between the lumps of clay and tussocks of burdock. Where it ended,
      far below on the sandy shore, low waves were languidly foaming and softly
      purring. The sea was as majestic, as infinite, and as forbidding as seven
      years before when I left the high school and went from my native town to
      the capital; in the distance there was a dark streak of smoke—a
      steamer was passing—and except for this hardly visible and
      motionless streak and the sea-swallows that flitted over the water, there
      was nothing to give life to the monotonous view of sea and sky. To right
      and left of the summer-house stretched uneven clay cliffs.
    

      “You know that when a man in a melancholy mood is left tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte
      with the sea, or any landscape which seems to him grandiose, there is
      always, for some reason, mixed with melancholy, a conviction that he will
      live and die in obscurity, and he reflectively snatches up a pencil and
      hastens to write his name on the first thing that comes handy. And that, I
      suppose, is why all convenient solitary nooks like my summer-house are
      always scrawled over in pencil or carved with penknives. I remember as
      though it were to-day; looking at the parapet I read: ‘Ivan
      Korolkov, May 16, 1876.’ Beside Korolkov some local dreamer had
      scribbled freely, adding:
    

        “‘He stood on the desolate ocean’s strand,
           While his soul was filled with imaginings grand.’


      And his handwriting was dreamy, limp like wet silk. An individual called
      Kross, probably an insignificant, little man, felt his unimportance so
      deeply that he gave full licence to his penknife and carved his name in
      deep letters an inch high. I took a pencil out of my pocket mechanically,
      and I too scribbled on one of the columns. All that is irrelevant,
      however. . . You must forgive me—I don’t know how to tell a
      story briefly.
    

      “I was sad and a little bored. Boredom, the stillness, and the
      purring of the sea gradually brought me to the line of thought we have
      been discussing. At that period, towards the end of the 'seventies, it had
      begun to be fashionable with the public, and later, at the beginning of
      the ‘eighties, it gradually passed from the general public into
      literature, science, and politics. I was no more than twenty-six at the
      time, but I knew perfectly well that life was aimless and had no meaning,
      that everything was a deception and an illusion, that in its essential
      nature and results a life of penal servitude in Sahalin was not in any way
      different from a life spent in Nice, that the difference between the brain
      of a Kant and the brain of a fly was of no real significance, that no one
      in this world is righteous or guilty, that everything was stuff and
      nonsense and damn it all! I lived as though I were doing a favour to some
      unseen power which compelled me to live, and to which I seemed to say:
      ‘Look, I don’t care a straw for life, but I am living!’
      I thought on one definite line, but in all sorts of keys, and in that
      respect I was like the subtle gourmand who could prepare a hundred
      appetising dishes from nothing but potatoes. There is no doubt that I was
      one-sided and even to some extent narrow, but I fancied at the time that
      my intellectual horizon had neither beginning nor end, and that my thought
      was as boundless as the sea. Well, as far as I can judge by myself, the
      philosophy of which we are speaking has something alluring, narcotic in
      its nature, like tobacco or morphia. It becomes a habit, a craving. You
      take advantage of every minute of solitude to gloat over thoughts of the
      aimlessness of life and the darkness of the grave. While I was sitting in
      the summer-house, Greek children with long noses were decorously walking
      about the avenues. I took advantage of the occasion and, looking at them,
      began reflecting in this style:
    

      “‘Why are these children born, and what are they living for?
      Is there any sort of meaning in their existence? They grow up, without
      themselves knowing what for; they will live in this God-forsaken,
      comfortless hole for no sort of reason, and then they will die. . . .’
    

      “And I actually felt vexed with those children because they were
      walking about decorously and talking with dignity, as though they did not
      hold their little colourless lives so cheap and knew what they were living
      for. . . . I remember that far away at the end of an avenue three feminine
      figures came into sight. Three young ladies, one in a pink dress, two in
      white, were walking arm-in-arm, talking and laughing. Looking after them,
      I thought:
    

      “‘It wouldn’t be bad to have an affair with some woman
      for a couple of days in this dull place.’
    

      “I recalled by the way that it was three weeks since I had visited
      my Petersburg lady, and thought that a passing love affair would come in
      very appropriately for me just now. The young lady in white in the middle
      was rather younger and better looking than her companions, and judging by
      her manners and her laugh, she was a high-school girl in an upper form. I
      looked, not without impure thoughts, at her bust, and at the same time
      reflected about her: 'She will be trained in music and manners, she will
      be married to some Greek—God help us!—will lead a grey,
      stupid, comfortless life, will bring into the world a crowd of children
      without knowing why, and then will die. An absurd life!’
    

      “I must say that as a rule I was a great hand at combining my lofty
      ideas with the lowest prose.
    

      “Thoughts of the darkness of the grave did not prevent me from
      giving busts and legs their full due. Our dear Baron’s exalted ideas
      do not prevent him from going on Saturdays to Vukolovka on amatory
      expeditions. To tell the honest truth, as far as I remember, my attitude
      to women was most insulting. Now, when I think of that high-school girl, I
      blush for my thoughts then, but at the time my conscience was perfectly
      untroubled. I, the son of honourable parents, a Christian, who had
      received a superior education, not naturally wicked or stupid, felt not
      the slightest uneasiness when I paid women Blutgeld, as the Germans
      call it, or when I followed high-school girls with insulting looks. . . .
      The trouble is that youth makes its demands, and our philosophy has
      nothing in principle against those demands, whether they are good or
      whether they are loathsome. One who knows that life is aimless and death
      inevitable is not interested in the struggle against nature or the
      conception of sin: whether you struggle or whether you don’t, you
      will die and rot just the same. . . . Secondly, my friends, our philosophy
      instils even into very young people what is called reasonableness. The
      predominance of reason over the heart is simply overwhelming amongst us.
      Direct feeling, inspiration—everything is choked by petty analysis.
      Where there is reasonableness there is coldness, and cold people—it’s
      no use to disguise it—know nothing of chastity. That virtue is only
      known to those who are warm, affectionate, and capable of love. Thirdly,
      our philosophy denies the significance of each individual personality. It’s
      easy to see that if I deny the personality of some Natalya Stepanovna, it’s
      absolutely nothing to me whether she is insulted or not. To-day one
      insults her dignity as a human being and pays her Blutgeld, and
      next day thinks no more of her.
    

      “So I sat in the summer-house and watched the young ladies. Another
      woman’s figure appeared in the avenue, with fair hair, her head
      uncovered and a white knitted shawl on her shoulders. She walked along the
      avenue, then came into the summer-house, and taking hold of the parapet,
      looked indifferently below and into the distance over the sea. As she came
      in she paid no attention to me, as though she did not notice me. I
      scrutinised her from foot to head (not from head to foot, as one
      scrutinises men) and found that she was young, not more than
      five-and-twenty, nice-looking, with a good figure, in all probability
      married and belonging to the class of respectable women. She was dressed
      as though she were at home, but fashionably and with taste, as ladies are,
      as a rule, in N.
    

      “‘This one would do nicely,’ I thought, looking at her
      handsome figure and her arms; ‘she is all right. . . . She is
      probably the wife of some doctor or schoolmaster. . . .’
    

      “But to make up to her—that is, to make her the heroine of one
      of those impromptu affairs to which tourists are so prone—was not
      easy and, indeed, hardly possible. I felt that as I gazed at her face. The
      way she looked, and the expression of her face, suggested that the sea,
      the smoke in the distance, and the sky had bored her long, long ago, and
      wearied her sight. She seemed to be tired, bored, and thinking about
      something dreary, and her face had not even that fussy, affectedly
      indifferent expression which one sees in the face of almost every woman
      when she is conscious of the presence of an unknown man in her vicinity.
    

      “The fair-haired lady took a bored and passing glance at me, sat
      down on a seat and sank into reverie, and from her face I saw that she had
      no thoughts for me, and that I, with my Petersburg appearance, did not
      arouse in her even simple curiosity. But yet I made up my mind to speak to
      her, and asked: ‘Madam, allow me to ask you at what time do the
      waggonettes go from here to the town?’
    

      “‘At ten or eleven, I believe. . . .’”
    

      “I thanked her. She glanced at me once or twice, and suddenly there
      was a gleam of curiosity, then of something like wonder on her passionless
      face. . . . I made haste to assume an indifferent expression and to fall
      into a suitable attitude; she was catching on! She suddenly jumped up from
      the seat, as though something had bitten her, and examining me hurriedly,
      with a gentle smile, asked timidly:
    

      “‘Oh, aren’t you Ananyev?’
    

      “‘Yes, I am Ananyev,’ I answered.
    

      “‘And don’t you recognise me? No?’
    

      “I was a little confused. I looked intently at her, and—would
      you believe it?—I recognised her not from her face nor her figure,
      but from her gentle, weary smile. It was Natalya Stepanovna, or, as she
      was called, Kisotchka, the very girl I had been head over ears in love
      with seven or eight years before, when I was wearing the uniform of a
      high-school boy. The doings of far, vanished days, the days of long ago. .
      . . I remember this Kisotchka, a thin little high-school girl of fifteen
      or sixteen, when she was something just for a schoolboy’s taste,
      created by nature especially for Platonic love. What a charming little
      girl she was! Pale, fragile, light—she looked as though a breath
      would send her flying like a feather to the skies—a gentle,
      perplexed face, little hands, soft long hair to her belt, a waist as thin
      as a wasp’s—altogether something ethereal, transparent like
      moonlight—in fact, from the point of view of a high-school boy a
      peerless beauty. . . . Wasn’t I in love with her! I did not sleep at
      night. I wrote verses. . . . Sometimes in the evenings she would sit on a
      seat in the park while we schoolboys crowded round her, gazing reverently;
      in response to our compliments, our sighing, and attitudinising, she would
      shrink nervously from the evening damp, screw up her eyes, and smile
      gently, and at such times she was awfully like a pretty little kitten. As
      we gazed at her every one of us had a desire to caress her and stroke her
      like a cat, hence her nickname of Kisotchka.
    

      “In the course of the seven or eight years since we had met,
      Kisotchka had greatly changed. She had grown more robust and stouter, and
      had quite lost the resemblance to a soft, fluffy kitten. It was not that
      her features looked old or faded, but they had somehow lost their
      brilliance and looked sterner, her hair seemed shorter, she looked taller,
      and her shoulders were quite twice as broad, and what was most striking,
      there was already in her face the expression of motherliness and
      resignation commonly seen in respectable women of her age, and this, of
      course, I had never seen in her before. . . . In short, of the
      school-girlish and the Platonic her face had kept the gentle smile and
      nothing more. . . .
    

      “We got into conversation. Learning that I was already an engineer,
      Kisotchka was immensely delighted.
    

      “‘How good that is!’ she said, looking joyfully into my
      face. ‘Ah, how good! And how splendid you all are! Of all who left
      with you, not one has been a failure—they have all turned out well.
      One an engineer, another a doctor, a third a teacher, another, they say,
      is a celebrated singer in Petersburg. . . . You are all splendid, all of
      you. . . . Ah, how good that is!’
    

      “Kisotchka’s eyes shone with genuine goodwill and gladness.
      She was admiring me like an elder sister or a former governess. ‘While
      I looked at her sweet face and thought, It wouldn’t be bad to get
      hold of her to-day!’
    

      “‘Do you remember, Natalya Stepanovna,’ I asked her,
      ‘how I once brought you in the park a bouquet with a note in it? You
      read my note, and such a look of bewilderment came into your face. . . .’
    

      “‘No, I don’t remember that,’ she said, laughing.
      ‘But I remember how you wanted to challenge Florens to a duel over
      me. . . .’
    

      “‘Well, would you believe it, I don’t remember that. . .
      .’
    

      “‘Well, that’s all over and done with . . .’
      sighed Kisotchka. ‘At one time I was your idol, and now it is my
      turn to look up to all of you. . . .’
    

      “From further conversation I learned that two years after leaving
      the high school, Kisotchka had been married to a resident in the town who
      was half Greek, half Russian, had a post either in the bank or in the
      insurance society, and also carried on a trade in corn. He had a strange
      surname, something in the style of Populaki or Skarandopulo. . . .
      Goodness only knows—I have forgotten. . . . As a matter of fact,
      Kisotchka spoke little and with reluctance about herself. The conversation
      was only about me. She asked me about the College of Engineering, about my
      comrades, about Petersburg, about my plans, and everything I said moved
      her to eager delight and exclamations of, ‘Oh, how good that is!’
    

      “We went down to the sea and walked over the sands; then when the
      night air began to blow chill and damp from the sea we climbed up again.
      All the while our talk was of me and of the past. We walked about until
      the reflection of the sunset had died away from the windows of the summer
      villas.
    

      “‘Come in and have some tea,’ Kisotchka suggested.
      ‘The samovar must have been on the table long ago. . . . I am alone
      at home,’ she said, as her villa came into sight through the green
      of the acacias. ‘My husband is always in the town and only comes
      home at night, and not always then, and I must own that I am so dull that
      it’s simply deadly.’
    

      “I followed her in, admiring her back and shoulders. I was glad that
      she was married. Married women are better material for temporary love
      affairs than girls. I was also pleased that her husband was not at home.
      At the same time I felt that the affair would not come off. . . .
    

      “We went into the house. The rooms were smallish and had low
      ceilings, and the furniture was typical of the summer villa (Russians like
      having at their summer villas uncomfortable heavy, dingy furniture which
      they are sorry to throw away and have nowhere to put), but from certain
      details I could observe that Kisotchka and her husband were not badly off,
      and must be spending five or six thousand roubles a year. I remember that
      in the middle of the room which Kisotchka called the dining-room there was
      a round table, supported for some reason on six legs, and on it a samovar
      and cups. At the edge of the table lay an open book, a pencil, and an
      exercise book. I glanced at the book and recognised it as ‘Malinin
      and Burenin’s Arithmetical Examples.’ It was open, as I now
      remember, at the ‘Rules of Compound Interest.’
    

      “‘To whom are you giving lessons?’ I asked Kisotchka.
    

      “‘Nobody,’ she answered. ‘I am just doing some. .
      . . I have nothing to do, and am so bored that I think of the old days and
      do sums.’
    

      “‘Have you any children?’
    

      “‘I had a baby boy, but he only lived a week.’
    

      “We began drinking tea. Admiring me, Kisotchka said again how good
      it was that I was an engineer, and how glad she was of my success. And the
      more she talked and the more genuinely she smiled, the stronger was my
      conviction that I should go away without having gained my object. I was a
      connoisseur in love affairs in those days, and could accurately gauge my
      chances of success. You can boldly reckon on success if you are tracking
      down a fool or a woman as much on the look out for new experiences and
      sensations as yourself, or an adventuress to whom you are a stranger. If
      you come across a sensible and serious woman, whose face has an expression
      of weary submission and goodwill, who is genuinely delighted at your
      presence, and, above all, respects you, you may as well turn back. To
      succeed in that case needs longer than one day.
    

      “And by evening light Kisotchka seemed even more charming than by
      day. She attracted me more and more, and apparently she liked me too, and
      the surroundings were most appropriate: the husband not at home, no
      servants visible, stillness around. . . . Though I had little confidence
      in success, I made up my mind to begin the attack anyway. First of all it
      was necessary to get into a familiar tone and to change Kisotchka’s
      lyrically earnest mood into a more frivolous one.
    

      “‘Let us change the conversation, Natalya Stepanovna,’ I
      began. 'Let us talk of something amusing. First of all, allow me, for the
      sake of old times, to call you Kisotchka.’
    

      “She allowed me.
    

      “‘Tell me, please, Kisotchka,’ I went on, ‘what is
      the matter with all the fair sex here. What has happened to them? In old
      days they were all so moral and virtuous, and now, upon my word, if one
      asks about anyone, one is told such things that one is quite shocked at
      human nature. . . . One young lady has eloped with an officer; another has
      run away and carried off a high-school boy with her; another—a
      married woman—has run away from her husband with an actor; a fourth
      has left her husband and gone off with an officer, and so on and so on. It’s
      a regular epidemic! If it goes on like this there won’t be a girl or
      a young woman left in your town!’
    

      “I spoke in a vulgar, playful tone. If Kisotchka had laughed in
      response I should have gone on in this style: ‘You had better look
      out, Kisotchka, or some officer or actor will be carrying you off!’
      She would have dropped her eyes and said: ‘As though anyone would
      care to carry me off; there are plenty younger and better looking . . . .’
      And I should have said: ‘Nonsense, Kisotchka—I for one should
      be delighted!’ And so on in that style, and it would all have gone
      swimmingly. But Kisotchka did not laugh in response; on the contrary, she
      looked grave and sighed.
    

      “‘All you have been told is true,’ she said. ‘My
      cousin Sonya ran away from her husband with an actor. Of course, it is
      wrong. . . . Everyone ought to bear the lot that fate has laid on him, but
      I do not condemn them or blame them. . . . Circumstances are sometimes too
      strong for anyone!’
    

      “‘That is so, Kisotchka, but what circumstances can produce a
      regular epidemic?’
    

      “‘It’s very simple and easy to understand,’
      replied Kisotchka, raising her eyebrows. ‘There is absolutely
      nothing for us educated girls and women to do with ourselves. Not everyone
      is able to go to the University, to become a teacher, to live for ideas,
      in fact, as men do. They have to be married. . . . And whom would you have
      them marry? You boys leave the high-school and go away to the University,
      never to return to your native town again, and you marry in Petersburg or
      Moscow, while the girls remain. . . . To whom are they to be married? Why,
      in the absence of decent cultured men, goodness knows what sort of men
      they marry—stockbrokers and such people of all kinds, who can do
      nothing but drink and get into rows at the club. . . . A girl married like
      that, at random. . . . And what is her life like afterwards? You can
      understand: a well-educated, cultured woman is living with a stupid,
      boorish man; if she meets a cultivated man, an officer, an actor, or a
      doctor—well, she gets to love him, her life becomes unbearable to
      her, and she runs away from her husband. And one can’t condemn her!’
    

      “‘If that is so, Kisotchka, why get married?’ I asked.
    

      “‘Yes, of course,’ said Kisotchka with a sigh, ‘but
      you know every girl fancies that any husband is better than nothing. . . .
      Altogether life is horrid here, Nikolay Anastasyevitch, very horrid! Life
      is stifling for a girl and stifling when one is married. . . . Here they
      laugh at Sonya for having run away from her husband, but if they could see
      into her soul they would not laugh. . . .’”
    

      Azorka began barking outside again. He growled angrily at some one, then
      howled miserably and dashed with all his force against the wall of the
      hut. . . . Ananyev’s face was puckered with pity; he broke off his
      story and went out. For two minutes he could be heard outside comforting
      his dog. “Good dog! poor dog!”
    

      “Our Nikolay Anastasyevitch is fond of talking,” said Von
      Schtenberg, laughing. “He is a good fellow,” he added after a
      brief silence.
    

      Returning to the hut, the engineer filled up our glasses and, smiling and
      stroking his chest, went on:
    

      “And so my attack was unsuccessful. There was nothing for it, I put
      off my unclean thoughts to a more favourable occasion, resigned myself to
      my failure and, as the saying is, waved my hand. What is more, under the
      influence of Kisotchka’s voice, the evening air, and the stillness,
      I gradually myself fell into a quiet sentimental mood. I remember I sat in
      an easy chair by the wide-open window and glanced at the trees and
      darkened sky. The outlines of the acacias and the lime trees were just the
      same as they had been eight years before; just as then, in the days of my
      childhood, somewhere far away there was the tinkling of a wretched piano,
      and the public had just the same habit of sauntering to and fro along the
      avenues, but the people were not the same. Along the avenues there walked
      now not my comrades and I and the object of my adoration, but schoolboys
      and young ladies who were strangers. And I felt melancholy. When to my
      inquiries about acquaintances I five times received from Kisotchka the
      answer, ‘He is dead,’ my melancholy changed into the feeling
      one has at the funeral service of a good man. And sitting there at the
      window, looking at the promenading public and listening to the tinkling
      piano, I saw with my own eyes for the first time in my life with what
      eagerness one generation hastens to replace another, and what a momentous
      significance even some seven or eight years may have in a man’s
      life!
    

      “Kisotchka put a bottle of red wine on the table. I drank it off,
      grew sentimental, and began telling a long story about something or other.
      Kisotchka listened as before, admiring me and my cleverness. And time
      passed. The sky was by now so dark that the outlines of the acacias and
      lime trees melted into one, the public was no longer walking up and down
      the avenues, the piano was silent and the only sound was the even murmur
      of the sea.
    

      “Young people are all alike. Be friendly to a young man, make much
      of him, regale him with wine, let him understand that he is attractive and
      he will sit on and on, forget that it is time to go, and talk and talk and
      talk. . . . His hosts cannot keep their eyes open, it’s past their
      bedtime, and he still stays and talks. That was what I did. Once I chanced
      to look at the clock; it was half-past ten. I began saying good-bye.
    

      “‘Have another glass before your walk,’ said Kisotchka.
    

      “I took another glass, again I began talking at length, forgot it
      was time to go, and sat down. Then there came the sound of men’s
      voices, footsteps and the clank of spurs.
    

      “‘I think my husband has come in . . . .’ said Kisotchka
      listening.
    

      “The door creaked, two voices came now from the passage and I saw
      two men pass the door that led into the dining-room: one a stout, solid,
      dark man with a hooked nose, wearing a straw hat, and the other a young
      officer in a white tunic. As they passed the door they both glanced
      casually and indifferently at Kisotchka and me, and I fancied both of them
      were drunk.
    

      “‘She told you a lie then, and you believed her!’ we
      heard a loud voice with a marked nasal twang say a minute later. ‘To
      begin with, it wasn’t at the big club but at the little one.’
    

      “‘You are angry, Jupiter, so you are wrong . . . .’ said
      another voice, obviously the officer’s, laughing and coughing.
      ‘I say, can I stay the night? Tell me honestly, shall I be in your
      way?’
    

      “‘What a question! Not only you can, but you must. What will
      you have, beer or wine?’
    

      “They were sitting two rooms away from us, talking loudly, and
      apparently feeling no interest in Kisotchka or her visitor. A perceptible
      change came over Kisotchka on her husband’s arrival. At first she
      flushed red, then her face wore a timid, guilty expression; she seemed to
      be troubled by some anxiety, and I began to fancy that she was ashamed to
      show me her husband and wanted me to go.
    

      “I began taking leave. Kisotchka saw me to the front door. I
      remember well her gentle mournful smile and kind patient eyes as she
      pressed my hand and said:
    

      “‘Most likely we shall never see each other again. Well, God
      give you every blessing. Thank you!’
    

      “Not one sigh, not one fine phrase. As she said good-bye she was
      holding the candle in her hand; patches of light danced over her face and
      neck, as though chasing her mournful smile. I pictured to myself the old
      Kisotchka whom one used to want to stroke like a cat, I looked intently at
      the present Kisotchka, and for some reason recalled her words: ‘Everyone
      ought to bear the lot that fate has laid on him.’ And I had a pang
      at my heart. I instinctively guessed how it was, and my conscience
      whispered to me that I, in my happiness and indifference, was face to face
      with a good, warm-hearted, loving creature, who was broken by suffering.
    

      “I said good-bye and went to the gate. By now it was quite dark. In
      the south the evenings draw in early in July and it gets dark rapidly.
      Towards ten o’clock it is so dark that you can’t see an inch
      before your nose. I lighted a couple of dozen matches before, almost
      groping, I found my way to the gate.
    

      “‘Cab!’ I shouted, going out of the gate; not a sound,
      not a sigh in answer. . . . ‘Cab,’ I repeated, ‘hey,
      Cab!’
    

      “But there was no cab of any description. The silence of the grave.
      I could hear nothing but the murmur of the drowsy sea and the beating of
      my heart from the wine. Lifting my eyes to the sky I found not a single
      star. It was dark and sullen. Evidently the sky was covered with clouds.
      For some reason I shrugged my shoulders, smiling foolishly, and once more,
      not quite so resolutely, shouted for a cab.
    

      “The echo answered me. A walk of three miles across open country and
      in the pitch dark was not an agreeable prospect. Before making up my mind
      to walk, I spent a long time deliberating and shouting for a cab; then,
      shrugging my shoulders, I walked lazily back to the copse, with no
      definite object in my mind. It was dreadfully dark in the copse. Here and
      there between the trees the windows of the summer villas glowed a dull
      red. A raven, disturbed by my steps and the matches with which I lighted
      my way to the summer-house, flew from tree to tree and rustled among the
      leaves. I felt vexed and ashamed, and the raven seemed to understand this,
      and croaked 'krrra!’ I was vexed that I had to walk, and ashamed
      that I had stayed on at Kisotchka’s, chatting like a boy.
    

      “I made my way to the summer-house, felt for the seat and sat down.
      Far below me, behind a veil of thick darkness, the sea kept up a low angry
      growl. I remember that, as though I were blind, I could see neither sky
      nor sea, nor even the summer-house in which I was sitting. And it seemed
      to me as though the whole world consisted only of the thoughts that were
      straying through my head, dizzy from the wine, and of an unseen power
      murmuring monotonously somewhere below. And afterwards, as I sank into a
      doze, it began to seem that it was not the sea murmuring, but my thoughts,
      and that the whole world consisted of nothing but me. And concentrating
      the whole world in myself in this way, I thought no more of cabs, of the
      town, and of Kisotchka, and abandoned myself to the sensation I was so
      fond of: that is, the sensation of fearful isolation when you feel that in
      the whole universe, dark and formless, you alone exist. It is a proud,
      demoniac sensation, only possible to Russians whose thoughts and
      sensations are as large, boundless, and gloomy as their plains, their
      forests, and their snow. If I had been an artist I should certainly have
      depicted the expression of a Russian’s face when he sits motionless
      and, with his legs under him and his head clasped in his hands, abandons
      himself to this sensation. . . . And together with this sensation come
      thoughts of the aimlessness of life, of death, and of the darkness of the
      grave. . . . The thoughts are not worth a brass farthing, but the
      expression of face must be fine. . . .
    

      “While I was sitting and dozing, unable to bring myself to get up—I
      was warm and comfortable—all at once, against the even monotonous
      murmur of the sea, as though upon a canvas, sounds began to grow distinct
      which drew my attention from myself. . . . Someone was coming hurriedly
      along the avenue. Reaching the summer-house this someone stopped, gave a
      sob like a little girl, and said in the voice of a weeping child: ‘My
      God, when will it all end! Merciful Heavens!’
    

      “Judging from the voice and the weeping I took it to be a little
      girl of ten or twelve. She walked irresolutely into the summer-house, sat
      down, and began half-praying, half-complaining aloud. . . .
    

      “‘Merciful God!’ she said, crying, ‘it’s
      unbearable. It’s beyond all endurance! I suffer in silence, but I
      want to live too. . . . Oh, my God! My God!’
    

      “And so on in the same style.
    

      “I wanted to look at the child and speak to her. So as not to
      frighten her I first gave a loud sigh and coughed, then cautiously struck
      a match. . . . There was a flash of bright light in the darkness, which
      lighted up the weeping figure. It was Kisotchka!”
    

      “Marvels upon marvels!” said Von Schtenberg with a sigh.
      “Black night, the murmur of the sea; she in grief, he with a
      sensation of world—solitude. . . . It’s too much of a good
      thing. . . . You only want Circassians with daggers to complete it.”
    

      “I am not telling you a tale, but fact.”
    

      “Well, even if it is a fact . . . it all proves nothing, and there
      is nothing new in it. . . .”
    

      “Wait a little before you find fault! Let me finish,” said
      Ananyev, waving his hand with vexation; “don’t interfere,
      please! I am not telling you, but the doctor. . . . Well,” he went
      on, addressing me and glancing askance at the student who bent over his
      books and seemed very well satisfied at having gibed at the engineer—“well,
      Kisotchka was not surprised or frightened at seeing me. It seemed as
      though she had known beforehand that she would find me in the
      summer-house. She was breathing in gasps and trembling all over as though
      in a fever, while her tear-stained face, so far as I could distinguish it
      as I struck match after match, was not the intelligent, submissive weary
      face I had seen before, but something different, which I cannot understand
      to this day. It did not express pain, nor anxiety, nor misery—nothing
      of what was expressed by her words and her tears. . . . I must own that,
      probably because I did not understand it, it looked to me senseless and as
      though she were drunk.
    

      “‘I can’t bear it,’ muttered Kisotchka in the
      voice of a crying child. ‘It’s too much for me, Nikolay
      Anastasyitch. Forgive me, Nikolav Anastasyitch. I can’t go on living
      like this. . . . I am going to the town to my mother’s. . . . Take
      me there. . . . Take me there, for God’s sake!’
    

      “In the presence of tears I can neither speak nor be silent. I was
      flustered and muttered some nonsense trying to comfort her.
    

      “‘No, no; I will go to my mother’s,’ said
      Kisotchka resolutely, getting up and clutching my arm convulsively (her
      hands and her sleeves were wet with tears). ‘Forgive me, Nikolay
      Anastasyitch, I am going. . . . I can bear no more. . . .’
    

      “‘Kisotchka, but there isn’t a single cab,’ I
      said. ‘How can you go?’
    

      “‘No matter, I’ll walk. . . . It’s not far. I can’t
      bear it. . . .’
    

      “I was embarrassed, but not touched. Kisotchka’s tears, her
      trembling, and the blank expression of her face suggested to me a trivial,
      French or Little Russian melodrama, in which every ounce of cheap shallow
      feeling is washed down with pints of tears.
    

      “I didn’t understand her, and knew I did not understand her; I ought
      to have been silent, but for some reason, most likely for fear my silence
      might be taken for stupidity, I thought fit to try to persuade her not to
      go to her mother’s, but to stay at home. When people cry, they don’t
      like their tears to be seen. And I lighted match after match and went on
      striking till the box was empty. What I wanted with this ungenerous
      illumination, I can’t conceive to this day. Cold-hearted people are
      apt to be awkward, and even stupid.
    

      “In the end Kisotchka took my arm and we set off. Going out of the
      gate, we turned to the right and sauntered slowly along the soft dusty
      road. It was dark. As my eyes grew gradually accustomed to the darkness, I
      began to distinguish the silhouettes of the old gaunt oaks and lime trees
      which bordered the road. The jagged, precipitous cliffs, intersected here
      and there by deep, narrow ravines and creeks, soon showed indistinctly, a
      black streak on the right. Low bushes nestled by the hollows, looking like
      sitting figures. It was uncanny. I looked sideways suspiciously at the
      cliffs, and the murmur of the sea and the stillness of the country alarmed
      my imagination. Kisotchka did not speak. She was still trembling, and
      before she had gone half a mile she was exhausted with walking and was out
      of breath. I too was silent.
    

      “Three-quarters of a mile from the Quarantine Station there was a
      deserted building of four storeys, with a very high chimney in which there
      had once been a steam flour mill. It stood solitary on the cliff, and by
      day it could be seen for a long distance, both by sea and by land. Because
      it was deserted and no one lived in it, and because there was an echo in
      it which distinctly repeated the steps and voices of passers-by, it seemed
      mysterious. Picture me in the dark night arm-in-arm with a woman who was
      running away from her husband near this tall long monster which repeated
      the sound of every step I took and stared at me fixedly with its hundred
      black windows. A normal young man would have been moved to romantic
      feelings in such surroundings, but I looked at the dark windows and
      thought: ‘All this is very impressive, but time will come when of
      that building and of Kisotchka and her troubles and of me with my
      thoughts, not one grain of dust will remain. . . . All is nonsense and
      vanity. . . .’
    

      “When we reached the flour mill Kisotchka suddenly stopped, took her
      arm out of mine, and said, no longer in a childish voice, but in her own:
    

      “‘Nikolay Anastasvitch, I know all this seems strange to you.
      But I am terribly unhappy! And you cannot even imagine how unhappy! It’s
      impossible to imagine it! I don’t tell you about it because one can’t
      talk about it. . . . Such a life, such a life! . . .’
    

      “Kisotchka did not finish. She clenched her teeth and moaned as
      though she were doing her utmost not to scream with pain.
    

      “‘Such a life!’ she repeated with horror, with the
      cadence and the southern, rather Ukrainian accent which particularly in
      women gives to emotional speech the effect of singing. ‘It is a
      life! Ah, my God, my God! what does it mean? Oh, my God, my God!’
    

      “As though trying to solve the riddle of her fate, she shrugged her
      shoulders in perplexity, shook her head, and clasped her hands. She spoke
      as though she were singing, moved gracefully, and reminded me of a
      celebrated Little Russian actress.
    

      “‘Great God, it is as though I were in a pit,’ she went
      on. ‘If one could live for one minute in happiness as other people
      live! Oh, my God, my God! I have come to such disgrace that before a
      stranger I am running away from my husband by night, like some
      disreputable creature! Can I expect anything good after that?’
    

      “As I admired her movements and her voice, I began to feel annoyed
      that she was not on good terms with her husband. ‘It would be nice
      to have got on into relations with her!’ flitted through my mind;
      and this pitiless thought stayed in my brain, haunted me all the way and
      grew more and more alluring.
    

      “About a mile from the flour mill we had to turn to the left by the
      cemetery. At the turning by the corner of the cemetery there stood a stone
      windmill, and by it a little hut in which the miller lived. We passed the
      mill and the hut, turned to the left and reached the gates of the
      cemetery. There Kisotchka stopped and said:
    

      “‘I am going back, Nikolay Anastasyitch! You go home, and God
      bless you, but I am going back. I am not frightened.’
    

      “‘Well, what next!’ I said, disconcerted. ‘If you
      are going, you had better go!’
    

      “‘I have been too hasty. . . . It was all about nothing that
      mattered. You and your talk took me back to the past and put all sort of
      ideas into my head. . . . I was sad and wanted to cry, and my husband said
      rude things to me before that officer, and I could not bear it. . . . And
      what’s the good of my going to the town to my mother’s? Will
      that make me any happier? I must go back. . . . But never mind . . . let
      us go on,’ said Kisotchka, and she laughed. 'It makes no difference!’
    

      “I remembered that over the gate of the cemetery there was an
      inscription: ‘The hour will come wherein all they that lie in the
      grave will hear the voice of the Son of God.’ I knew very well that
      sooner or later I and Kisotchka and her husband and the officer in the
      white tunic would lie under the dark trees in the churchyard; I knew that
      an unhappy and insulted fellow-creature was walking beside me. All this I
      recognised distinctly, but at the same time I was troubled by an
      oppressive and unpleasant dread that Kisotchka would turn back, and that I
      should not manage to say to her what had to be said. Never at any other
      time in my life have thoughts of a higher order been so closely interwoven
      with the basest animal prose as on that night. . . . It was horrible!
    

      “Not far from the cemetery we found a cab. When we reached the High
      Street, where Kisotchka’s mother lived, we dismissed the cab and
      walked along the pavement. Kisotchka was silent all the while, while I
      looked at her, and I raged at myself, ‘Why don’t you begin?
      Now’s the time!’ About twenty paces from the hotel where I was
      staying, Kisotchka stopped by the lamp-post and burst into tears.
    

      “‘Nikolay Anastasyitch!’ she said, crying and laughing
      and looking at me with wet shining eyes, ‘I shall never forget your
      sympathy . . . . How good you are! All of you are so splendid—all of
      you! Honest, great-hearted, kind, clever. . . . Ah, how good that is!’
    

      “She saw in me a highly educated man, advanced in every sense of the
      word, and on her tear-stained laughing face, together with the emotion and
      enthusiasm aroused by my personality, there was clearly written regret
      that she so rarely saw such people, and that God had not vouchsafed her
      the bliss of being the wife of one of them. She muttered, ‘Ah, how
      splendid it is!’ The childish gladness on her face, the tears, the
      gentle smile, the soft hair, which had escaped from under the kerchief,
      and the kerchief itself thrown carelessly over her head, in the light of
      the street lamp reminded me of the old Kisotchka whom one had wanted to
      stroke like a kitten.
    

      “I could not restrain myself, and began stroking her hair, her
      shoulders, and her hands.
    

      “‘Kisotchka, what do you want?’ I muttered. ‘I’ll
      go to the ends of the earth with you if you like! I will take you out of
      this hole and give you happiness. I love you. . . . Let us go, my sweet?
      Yes? Will you?’
    

      “Kisotchka’s face was flooded with bewilderment. She stepped
      back from the street lamp and, completely overwhelmed, gazed at me with
      wide-open eyes. I gripped her by the arm, began showering kisses on her
      face, her neck, her shoulders, and went on making vows and promises. In
      love affairs vows and promises are almost a physiological necessity. There’s
      no getting on without them. Sometimes you know you are lying and that
      promises are not necessary, but still you vow and protest. Kisotchka,
      utterly overwhelmed, kept staggering back and gazing at me with round
      eyes.
    

      “‘Please don’t! Please don’t!’ she muttered,
      holding me off with her hands.
    

      “I clasped her tightly in my arms. All at once she broke into
      hysterical tears. And her face had the same senseless blank expression
      that I had seen in the summer-house when I lighted the matches. Without
      asking her consent, preventing her from speaking, I dragged her forcibly
      towards my hotel. She seemed almost swooning and did not walk, but I took
      her under the arms and almost carried her. . . . I remember, as we were
      going up the stairs, some man with a red band in his cap looked
      wonderingly at me and bowed to Kisotchka. . . .”
    

      Ananyev flushed crimson and paused. He walked up and down near the table
      in silence, scratched the back of his head with an air of vexation, and
      several times shrugged his shoulders and twitched his shoulder-blades,
      while a shiver ran down his huge back. The memory was painful and made him
      ashamed, and he was struggling with himself.
    

      “It’s horrible!” he said, draining a glass of wine and
      shaking his head. “I am told that in every introductory lecture on
      women’s diseases the medical students are admonished to remember
      that each one of them has a mother, a sister, a fiancÃ©e, before undressing
      and examining a female patient. . . . That advice would be very good not
      only for medical students but for everyone who in one way or another has
      to deal with a woman’s life. Now that I have a wife and a little
      daughter, oh, how well I understand that advice! How I understand it, my
      God! You may as well hear the rest, though. . . . As soon as she had
      become my mistress, Kisotchka’s view of the position was very
      different from mine. First of all she felt for me a deep and passionate
      love. What was for me an ordinary amatory episode was for her an absolute
      revolution in her life. I remember, it seemed to me that she had gone out
      of her mind. Happy for the first time in her life, looking five years
      younger, with an inspired enthusiastic face, not knowing what to do with
      herself for happiness, she laughed and cried and never ceased dreaming
      aloud how next day we would set off for the Caucasus, then in the autumn
      to Petersburg; how we would live afterwards.
    

      “‘Don’t worry yourself about my husband,’ she said
      to reassure me. 'He is bound to give me a divorce. Everyone in the town
      knows that he is living with the elder Kostovitch. We will get a divorce
      and be married.’
    

      “When women love they become acclimatised and at home with people
      very quickly, like cats. Kisotchka had only spent an hour and a half in my
      room when she already felt as though she were at home and was ready to
      treat my property as though it were her own. She packed my things in my
      portmanteau, scolded me for not hanging my new expensive overcoat on a peg
      instead of flinging it on a chair, and so on.
    

      “I looked at her, listened, and felt weariness and vexation. I was
      conscious of a slight twinge of horror at the thought that a respectable,
      honest, and unhappy woman had so easily, after some three or four hours,
      succumbed to the first man she met. As a respectable man, you see, I didn’t
      like it. Then, too, I was unpleasantly impressed by the fact that women of
      Kisotchka’s sort, not deep or serious, are too much in love with
      life, and exalt what is in reality such a trifle as love for a man to the
      level of bliss, misery, a complete revolution in life. . . . Moreover, now
      that I was satisfied, I was vexed with myself for having been so stupid as
      to get entangled with a woman whom I should have to deceive. And in spite
      of my disorderly life I must observe that I could not bear telling lies.
    

      “I remember that Kisotchka sat down at my feet, laid her head on my
      knees, and, looking at me with shining, loving eyes, asked:
    

      “‘Kolya, do you love me? Very, very much?’
    

      “And she laughed with happiness. . . . This struck me as
      sentimental, affected, and not clever; and meanwhile I was already
      inclined to look for ‘depth of thought’ before everything.
    

      “‘Kisotchka, you had better go home,’ I said, or else
      your people will be sure to miss you and will be looking for you all over
      the town; and it would be awkward for you to go to your mother in the
      morning.’
    

      “Kisotchka agreed. At parting we arranged to meet at midday next
      morning in the park, and the day after to set off together to Pyatigorsk.
      I went into the street to see her home, and I remember that I caressed her
      with genuine tenderness on the way. There was a minute when I felt
      unbearably sorry for her, for trusting me so implicitly, and I made up my
      mind that I would really take her to Pyatigorsk, but remembering that I
      had only six hundred roubles in my portmanteau, and that it would be far
      more difficult to break it off with her in the autumn than now, I made
      haste to suppress my compassion.
    

      “We reached the house where Kisotchka’s mother lived. I pulled
      at the bell. When footsteps were heard at the other side of the door
      Kisotchka suddenly looked grave, glanced upwards to the sky, made the sign
      of the Cross over me several times and, clutching my hand, pressed it to
      her lips.
    

      “‘Till to-morrow,’ she said, and disappeared into the
      house.
    

      “I crossed to the opposite pavement and from there looked at the
      house. At first the windows were in darkness, then in one of the windows
      there was the glimmer of the faint bluish flame of a newly lighted candle;
      the flame grew, gave more light, and I saw shadows moving about the rooms
      together with it.
    

      “‘They did not expect her,’ I thought.
    

      “Returning to my hotel room I undressed, drank off a glass of red
      wine, ate some fresh caviare which I had bought that day in the bazaar,
      went to bed in a leisurely way, and slept the sound, untroubled sleep of a
      tourist.
    

      “In the morning I woke up with a headache and in a bad humour.
      Something worried me.
    

      “‘What’s the matter?’ I asked myself, trying to
      explain my uneasiness. 'What’s upsetting me?’
    

      “And I put down my uneasiness to the dread that Kisotchka might turn
      up any minute and prevent my going away, and that I should have to tell
      lies and act a part before her. I hurriedly dressed, packed my things, and
      left the hotel, giving instructions to the porter to take my luggage to
      the station for the seven o’clock train in the evening. I spent the
      whole day with a doctor friend and left the town that evening. As you see,
      my philosophy did not prevent me from taking to my heels in a mean and
      treacherous flight. . . .
    

      “All the while that I was at my friend’s, and afterwards
      driving to the station, I was tormented by anxiety. I fancied that I was
      afraid of meeting with Kisotchka and a scene. In the station I purposely
      remained in the toilet room till the second bell rang, and while I was
      making my way to my compartment, I was oppressed by a feeling as though I
      were covered all over with stolen things. With what impatience and terror
      I waited for the third bell!
    

      “At last the third bell that brought my deliverance rang at last,
      the train moved; we passed the prison, the barracks, came out into the
      open country, and yet, to my surprise, the feeling of uneasiness still
      persisted, and still I felt like a thief passionately longing to escape.
      It was queer. To distract my mind and calm myself I looked out of the
      window. The train ran along the coast. The sea was smooth, and the
      turquoise sky, almost half covered with the tender, golden crimson light
      of sunset, was gaily and serenely mirrored in it. Here and there fishing
      boats and rafts made black patches on its surface. The town, as clean and
      beautiful as a toy, stood on the high cliff, and was already shrouded in
      the mist of evening. The golden domes of its churches, the windows and the
      greenery reflected the setting sun, glowing and melting like shimmering
      gold. . . . The scent of the fields mingled with the soft damp air from
      the sea.
    

      “The train flew rapidly along. I heard the laughter of passengers
      and guards. Everyone was good-humoured and light-hearted, yet my
      unaccountable uneasiness grew greater and greater. . . . I looked at the
      white mist that covered the town and I imagined how a woman with a
      senseless blank face was hurrying up and down in that mist by the churches
      and the houses, looking for me and moaning, ‘Oh, my God! Oh, my God!’
      in the voice of a little girl or the cadences of a Little Russian actress.
      I recalled her grave face and big anxious eyes as she made the sign of the
      Cross over me, as though I belonged to her, and mechanically I looked at
      the hand which she had kissed the day before.
    

      “‘Surely I am not in love?’ I asked myself, scratching
      my hand.
    

      “Only as night came on when the passengers were asleep and I was
      left tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte with my conscience, I began to understand what I
      had not been able to grasp before. In the twilight of the railway carriage
      the image of Kisotchka rose before me, haunted me and I recognised clearly
      that I had committed a crime as bad as murder. My conscience tormented me.
      To stifle this unbearable feeling, I assured myself that everything was
      nonsense and vanity, that Kisotchka and I would die and decay, that her
      grief was nothing in comparison with death, and so on and so on . . . and
      that if you come to that, there is no such thing as freewill, and that
      therefore I was not to blame. But all these arguments only irritated me
      and were extraordinarily quickly crowded out by other thoughts. There was
      a miserable feeling in the hand that Kisotchka had kissed. . . . I kept
      lying down and getting up again, drank vodka at the stations, forced
      myself to eat bread and butter, fell to assuring myself again that life
      had no meaning, but nothing was of any use. A strange and if you like
      absurd ferment was going on in my brain. The most incongruous ideas
      crowded one after another in disorder, getting more and more tangled,
      thwarting each other, and I, the thinker, 'with my brow bent on the earth,’
      could make out nothing and could not find my bearings in this mass of
      essential and non-essential ideas. It appeared that I, the thinker, had
      not mastered the technique of thinking, and that I was no more capable of
      managing my own brain than mending a watch. For the first time in my life
      I was really thinking eagerly and intensely, and that seemed to me so
      monstrous that I said to myself: ‘I am going off my head.’ A
      man whose brain does not work at all times, but only at painful moments,
      is often haunted by the thought of madness.
    

      “I spent a day and a night in this misery, then a second night, and
      learning from experience how little my philosophy was to me, I came to my
      senses and realised at last what sort of a creature I was. I saw that my
      ideas were not worth a brass farthing, and that before meeting Kisotchka I
      had not begun to think and had not even a conception of what thinking in
      earnest meant; now through suffering I realised that I had neither
      convictions nor a definite moral standard, nor heart, nor reason; my whole
      intellectual and moral wealth consisted of specialist knowledge,
      fragments, useless memories, other people’s ideas—and nothing
      else; and my mental processes were as lacking in complexity, as useless
      and as rudimentary as a Yakut’s. . . . If I had disliked lying, had
      not stolen, had not murdered, and, in fact, made obviously gross mistakes,
      that was not owing to my convictions—I had none, but because I was
      in bondage, hand and foot, to my nurse’s fairy tales and to
      copy-book morals, which had entered into my flesh and blood and without my
      noticing it guided me in life, though I looked on them as absurd. . . .
    

      “I realised that I was not a thinker, not a philosopher, but simply
      a dilettante. God had given me a strong healthy Russian brain with promise
      of talent. And, only fancy, here was that brain at twenty-six,
      undisciplined, completely free from principles, not weighed down by any
      stores of knowledge, but only lightly sprinkled with information of a sort
      in the engineering line; it was young and had a physiological craving for
      exercise, it was on the look-out for it, when all at once quite casually
      the fine juicy idea of the aimlessness of life and the darkness beyond the
      tomb descends upon it. It greedily sucks it in, puts its whole outlook at
      its disposal and begins playing with it, like a cat with a mouse. There is
      neither learning nor system in the brain, but that does not matter. It
      deals with the great ideas with its own innate powers, like a
      self-educated man, and before a month has passed the owner of the brain
      can turn a potato into a hundred dainty dishes, and fancies himself a
      philosopher . . . .
    

      “Our generation has carried this dilettantism, this playing with
      serious ideas into science, into literature, into politics, and into
      everything which it is not too lazy to go into, and with its dilettantism
      has introduced, too, its coldness, its boredom, and its one-sidedness and,
      as it seems to me, it has already succeeded in developing in the masses a
      new hitherto non-existent attitude to serious ideas.
    

      “I realised and appreciated my abnormality and utter ignorance,
      thanks to a misfortune. My normal thinking, so it seems to me now, dates
      from the day when I began again from the A, B, C, when my conscience sent
      me flying back to N., when with no philosophical subleties I repented,
      besought Kisotchka’s forgiveness like a naughty boy and wept with
      her. . . .”
    

      Ananyev briefly described his last interview with Kisotchka.
    

      “H’m. . . .” the student filtered through his teeth when
      the engineer had finished. “That’s the sort of thing that
      happens.”
    

      His face still expressed mental inertia, and apparently Ananyev’s
      story had not touched him in the least. Only when the engineer after a
      moment’s pause, began expounding his view again and repeating what
      he had said at first, the student frowned irritably, got up from the table
      and walked away to his bed. He made his bed and began undressing.
    

      “You look as though you have really convinced some one this time,”
      he said irritably.
    

      “Me convince anybody!” said the engineer. “My dear soul,
      do you suppose I claim to do that? God bless you! To convince you is
      impossible. You can reach conviction only by way of personal experience
      and suffering!”
    

      “And then—it’s queer logic!” grumbled the student
      as he put on his nightshirt. “The ideas which you so dislike, which
      are so ruinous for the young are, according to you, the normal thing for
      the old; it’s as though it were a question of grey hairs. . . .
      Where do the old get this privilege? What is it based upon? If these ideas
      are poison, they are equally poisonous for all?”
    

      “Oh, no, my dear soul, don’t say so!” said the engineer
      with a sly wink. “Don’t say so. In the first place, old men
      are not dilettanti. Their pessimism comes to them not casually from
      outside, but from the depths of their own brains, and only after they have
      exhaustively studied the Hegels and Kants of all sorts, have suffered,
      have made no end of mistakes, in fact—when they have climbed the
      whole ladder from bottom to top. Their pessimism has both personal
      experience and sound philosophic training behind it. Secondly, the
      pessimism of old thinkers does not take the form of idle talk, as it does
      with you and me, but of Weltschmertz, of suffering; it rests in
      them on a Christian foundation because it is derived from love for
      humanity and from thoughts about humanity, and is entirely free from the
      egoism which is noticeable in dilettanti. You despise life because its
      meaning and its object are hidden just from you, and you are only afraid
      of your own death, while the real thinker is unhappy because the truth is
      hidden from all and he is afraid for all men. For instance, there is
      living not far from here the Crown forester, Ivan Alexandritch. He is a
      nice old man. At one time he was a teacher somewhere, and used to write
      something; the devil only knows what he was, but anyway he is a remarkably
      clever fellow and in philosophy he is A1. He has read a great deal and he
      is continually reading now. Well, we came across him lately in the
      Gruzovsky district. . . . They were laying the sleepers and rails just at
      the time. It’s not a difficult job, but Ivan Alexandritch, not being
      a specialist, looked at it as though it were a conjuring trick. It takes
      an experienced workman less than a minute to lay a sleeper and fix a rail
      on it. The workmen were in good form and really were working smartly and
      rapidly; one rascal in particular brought his hammer down with exceptional
      smartness on the head of the nail and drove it in at one blow, though the
      handle of the hammer was two yards or more in length and each nail was a
      foot long. Ivan Alexandritch watched the workmen a long time, was moved,
      and said to me with tears in his eyes:
    

      “‘What a pity that these splendid men will die!’ Such
      pessimism I understand.”
    

      “All that proves nothing and explains nothing,” said the
      student, covering himself up with a sheet; “all that is simply
      pounding liquid in a mortar. No one knows anything and nothing can be
      proved by words.”
    

      He peeped out from under the sheet, lifted up his head and, frowning
      irritably, said quickly:
    

      “One must be very naÃ¯ve to believe in human words and logic and to
      ascribe any determining value to them. You can prove and disprove anything
      you like with words, and people will soon perfect the technique of
      language to such a point that they will prove with mathematical certainty
      that twice two is seven. I am fond of reading and listening, but as to
      believing, no thank you; I can’t, and I don’t want to. I
      believe only in God, but as for you, if you talk to me till the Second
      Coming and seduce another five hundred Kisothchkas, I shall believe in you
      only when I go out of my mind . . . . Goodnight.”
    

      The student hid his head under the sheet and turned his face towards the
      wall, meaning by this action to let us know that he did not want to speak
      or listen. The argument ended at that.
    

      Before going to bed the engineer and I went out of the hut, and I saw the
      lights once more.
    

      “We have tired you out with our chatter,” said Ananyev,
      yawning and looking at the sky. “Well, my good sir! The only
      pleasure we have in this dull hole is drinking and philosophising. . . .
      What an embankment, Lord have mercy on us!” he said admiringly, as
      we approached the embankment; “it is more like Mount Ararat than an
      embankment.”
    

      He paused for a little, then said: “Those lights remind the Baron of
      the Amalekites, but it seems to me that they are like the thoughts of man.
      . . . You know the thoughts of each individual man are scattered like that
      in disorder, stretch in a straight line towards some goal in the midst of
      the darkness and, without shedding light on anything, without lighting up
      the night, they vanish somewhere far beyond old age. But enough
      philosophising! It’s time to go bye-bye.”
    

      When we were back in the hut the engineer began begging me to take his
      bed.
    

      “Oh please!” he said imploringly, pressing both hands on his
      heart. “I entreat you, and don’t worry about me! I can sleep
      anywhere, and, besides, I am not going to bed just yet. Please do—it’s
      a favour!”
    

      I agreed, undressed, and went to bed, while he sat down to the table and
      set to work on the plans.
    

      “We fellows have no time for sleep,” he said in a low voice
      when I had got into bed and shut my eyes. “When a man has a wife and
      two children he can’t think of sleep. One must think now of food and
      clothes and saving for the future. And I have two of them, a little son
      and a daughter. . . . The boy, little rascal, has a jolly little face. He’s
      not six yet, and already he shows remarkable abilities, I assure you. . .
      . I have their photographs here, somewhere. . . . Ah, my children, my
      children!”
    

      He rummaged among his papers, found their photographs, and began looking
      at them. I fell asleep.
    

      I was awakened by the barking of Azorka and loud voices. Von Schtenberg
      with bare feet and ruffled hair was standing in the doorway dressed in his
      underclothes, talking loudly with some one . . . . It was getting light. A
      gloomy dark blue dawn was peeping in at the door, at the windows, and
      through the crevices in the hut walls, and casting a faint light on my
      bed, on the table with the papers, and on Ananyev. Stretched on the floor
      on a cloak, with a leather pillow under his head, the engineer lay asleep
      with his fleshy, hairy chest uppermost; he was snoring so loudly that I
      pitied the student from the bottom of my heart for having to sleep in the
      same room with him every night.
    

      “Why on earth are we to take them?” shouted Von Schtenberg.
      “It has nothing to do with us! Go to Tchalisov! From whom do the
      cauldrons come?”
    

      “From Nikitin . . .” a bass voice answered gruffly.
    

      “Well, then, take them to Tchalisov. . . . That’s not in our
      department. What the devil are you standing there for? Drive on!”
    

      “Your honour, we have been to Tchalisov already,” said the
      bass voice still more gruffly. “Yesterday we were the whole day
      looking for him down the line, and were told at his hut that he had gone
      to the Dymkovsky section. Please take them, your honour! How much longer
      are we to go carting them about? We go carting them on and on along the
      line, and see no end to it.”
    

      “What is it?” Ananyev asked huskily, waking up and lifting his
      head quickly.
    

      “They have brought some cauldrons from Nikitin’s,” said
      the student, “and he is begging us to take them. And what business
      is it of ours to take them?”
    

      “Do be so kind, your honour, and set things right! The horses have
      been two days without food and the master, for sure, will be angry. Are we
      to take them back, or what? The railway ordered the cauldrons, so it ought
      to take them. . . .”
    

      “Can’t you understand, you blockhead, that it has nothing to
      do with us? Go on to Tchalisov!”
    

      “What is it? Who’s there?” Ananyev asked huskily again.
      “Damnation take them all,” he said, getting up and going to
      the door. “What is it?”
    

      I dressed, and two minutes later went out of the hut. Ananyev and the
      student, both in their underclothes and barefooted, were angrily and
      impatiently explaining to a peasant who was standing before them
      bare-headed, with his whip in his hand, apparently not understanding them.
      Both faces looked preoccupied with workaday cares.
    

      “What use are your cauldrons to me,” shouted Ananyev. “Am
      I to put them on my head, or what? If you can’t find Tchalisov, find
      his assistant, and leave us in peace!”
    

      Seeing me, the student probably recalled the conversation of the previous
      night. The workaday expression vanished from his sleepy face and a look of
      mental inertia came into it. He waved the peasant off and walked away
      absorbed in thought.
    

      It was a cloudy morning. On the line where the lights had been gleaming
      the night before, the workmen, just roused from sleep, were swarming.
      There was a sound of voices and the squeaking of wheelbarrows. The working
      day was beginning. One poor little nag harnessed with cord was already
      plodding towards the embankment, tugging with its neck, and dragging along
      a cartful of sand.
    

      I began saying good-bye. . . . A great deal had been said in the night,
      but I carried away with me no answer to any question, and in the morning,
      of the whole conversation there remained in my memory, as in a filter,
      only the lights and the image of Kisotchka. As I got on the horse, I
      looked at the student and Ananyev for the last time, at the hysterical dog
      with the lustreless, tipsy-looking eyes, at the workmen flitting to and
      fro in the morning fog, at the embankment, at the little nag straining
      with its neck, and thought:
    

      “There is no making out anything in this world.”
    

      And when I lashed my horse and galloped along the line, and when a little
      later I saw nothing before me but the endless gloomy plain and the cold
      overcast sky, I recalled the questions which were discussed in the night.
      I pondered while the sun-scorched plain, the immense sky, the oak forest,
      dark on the horizon and the hazy distance, seemed saying to me:
    

      “Yes, there’s no understanding anything in this world!”
    

      The sun began to rise. . . .
    











      A STORY WITHOUT AN END
    

SOON after two o’clock
      one night, long ago, the cook, pale and agitated, rushed unexpectedly into
      my study and informed me that Madame Mimotih, the old woman who owned the
      house next door, was sitting in her kitchen.
    

      “She begs you to go in to her, sir . . .” said the cook,
      panting. “Something bad has happened about her lodger. . . . He has
      shot himself or hanged himself. . . .”
    

      “What can I do?” said I. “Let her go for the doctor or
      for the police!”
    

      “How is she to look for a doctor! She can hardly breathe, and she
      has huddled under the stove, she is so frightened. . . . You had better go
      round, sir.”
    

      I put on my coat and hat and went to Madame Mimotih’s house. The
      gate towards which I directed my steps was open. After pausing beside it,
      uncertain what to do, I went into the yard without feeling for the porter’s
      bell. In the dark and dilapidated porch the door was not locked. I opened
      it and walked into the entry. Here there was not a glimmer of light, it
      was pitch dark, and, moreover, there was a marked smell of incense.
      Groping my way out of the entry I knocked my elbow against something made
      of iron, and in the darkness stumbled against a board of some sort which
      almost fell to the floor. At last the door covered with torn baize was
      found, and I went into a little hall.
    

      I am not at the moment writing a fairy tale, and am far from intending to
      alarm the reader, but the picture I saw from the passage was fantastic and
      could only have been drawn by death. Straight before me was a door leading
      to a little drawing-room. Three five-kopeck wax candles, standing in a
      row, threw a scanty light on the faded slate-coloured wallpaper. A coffin
      was standing on two tables in the middle of the little room. The two
      candles served only to light up a swarthy yellow face with a half-open
      mouth and sharp nose. Billows of muslin were mingled in disorder from the
      face to the tips of the two shoes, and from among the billows peeped out
      two pale motionless hands, holding a wax cross. The dark gloomy corners of
      the little drawing-room, the ikons behind the coffin, the coffin itself,
      everything except the softly glimmering lights, were still as death, as
      the tomb itself.
    

      “How strange!” I thought, dumbfoundered by the unexpected
      panorama of death. “Why this haste? The lodger has hardly had time
      to hang himself, or shoot himself, and here is the coffin already!”
    

      I looked round. On the left there was a door with a glass panel; on the
      right a lame hat-stand with a shabby fur coat on it. . . .
    

      “Water. . . .” I heard a moan.
    

      The moan came from the left, beyond the door with the glass panel. I
      opened the door and walked into a little dark room with a solitary window,
      through which there came a faint light from a street lamp outside.
    

      “Is anyone here?” I asked.
    

      And without waiting for an answer I struck a match. This is what I saw
      while it was burning. A man was sitting on the blood-stained floor at my
      very feet. If my step had been a longer one I should have trodden on him.
      With his legs thrust forward and his hands pressed on the floor, he was
      making an effort to raise his handsome face, which was deathly pale
      against his pitch-black beard. In the big eyes which he lifted upon me, I
      read unutterable terror, pain, and entreaty. A cold sweat trickled in big
      drops down his face. That sweat, the expression of his face, the trembling
      of the hands he leaned upon, his hard breathing and his clenched teeth,
      showed that he was suffering beyond endurance. Near his right hand in a
      pool of blood lay a revolver.
    

      “Don’t go away,” I heard a faint voice when the match
      had gone out. “There’s a candle on the table.”
    

      I lighted the candle and stood still in the middle of the room not knowing
      what to do next. I stood and looked at the man on the floor, and it seemed
      to me that I had seen him before.
    

      “The pain is insufferable,” he whispered, “and I haven’t
      the strength to shoot myself again. Incomprehensible lack of will.”
    

      I flung off my overcoat and attended to the sick man. Lifting him from the
      floor like a baby, I laid him on the American-leather covered sofa and
      carefully undressed him. He was shivering and cold when I took off his
      clothes; the wound which I saw was not in keeping either with his
      shivering nor the expression on his face. It was a trifling one. The
      bullet had passed between the fifth and sixth ribs on the left side, only
      piercing the skin and the flesh. I found the bullet itself in the folds of
      the coat-lining near the back pocket. Stopping the bleeding as best I
      could and making a temporary bandage of a pillow-case, a towel, and two
      handkerchiefs, I gave the wounded man some water and covered him with a
      fur coat that was hanging in the passage. We neither of us said a word
      while the bandaging was being done. I did my work while he lay motionless
      looking at me with his eyes screwed up as though he were ashamed of his
      unsuccessful shot and the trouble he was giving me.
    

      “Now I must trouble you to lie still,” I said, when I had
      finished the bandaging, “while I run to the chemist and get
      something.”
    

      “No need!” he muttered, clutching me by the sleeve and opening
      his eyes wide.
    

      I read terror in his eyes. He was afraid of my going away.
    

      “No need! Stay another five minutes . . . ten. If it doesn’t
      disgust you, do stay, I entreat you.”
    

      As he begged me he was trembling and his teeth were chattering. I obeyed,
      and sat down on the edge of the sofa. Ten minutes passed in silence. I sat
      silent, looking about the room into which fate had brought me so
      unexpectedly. What poverty! This man who was the possessor of a handsome,
      effeminate face and a luxuriant well-tended beard, had surroundings which
      a humble working man would not have envied. A sofa with its
      American-leather torn and peeling, a humble greasy-looking chair, a table
      covered with a little of paper, and a wretched oleograph on the wall, that
      was all I saw. Damp, gloomy, and grey.
    

      “What a wind!” said the sick man, without opening his eyes,
      “How it whistles!”
    

      “Yes,” I said. “I say, I fancy I know you. Didn’t
      you take part in some private theatricals in General Luhatchev’s
      villa last year?”
    

      “What of it?” he asked, quickly opening his eyes.
    

      A cloud seemed to pass over his face.
    

      “I certainly saw you there. Isn’t your name Vassilyev?”
    

      “If it is, what of it? It makes it no better that you should know
      me.”
    

      “No, but I just asked you.”
    

      Vassilyev closed his eyes and, as though offended, turned his face to the
      back of the sofa.
    

      “I don’t understand your curiosity,” he muttered.
      “You’ll be asking me next what it was drove me to commit
      suicide!”
    

      Before a minute had passed, he turned round towards me again, opened his
      eyes and said in a tearful voice:
    

      “Excuse me for taking such a tone, but you’ll admit I’m
      right! To ask a convict how he got into prison, or a suicide why he shot
      himself is not generous . . . and indelicate. To think of gratifying idle
      curiosity at the expense of another man’s nerves!”
    

      “There is no need to excite yourself. . . . It never occurred to me
      to question you about your motives.”
    

      “You would have asked. . . . It’s what people always do.
      Though it would be no use to ask. If I told you, you would not believe or
      understand. . . . I must own I don’t understand it myself. . . .
      There are phrases used in the police reports and newspapers such as:
      ‘unrequited love,’ and ‘hopeless poverty,’ but the
      reasons are not known. . . . They are not known to me, nor to you, nor to
      your newspaper offices, where they have the impudence to write ‘The
      diary of a suicide.’ God alone understands the state of a man’s
      soul when he takes his own life; but men know nothing about it.”
    

      “That is all very nice,” I said, “but you oughtn’t
      to talk. . . .”
    

      But my suicide could not be stopped, he leaned his head on his fist, and
      went on in the tone of some great professor:
    

      “Man will never understand the psychological subtleties of suicide!
      How can one speak of reasons? To-day the reason makes one snatch up a
      revolver, while to-morrow the same reason seems not worth a rotten egg. It
      all depends most likely on the particular condition of the individual at
      the given moment. . . . Take me for instance. Half an hour ago, I had a
      passionate desire for death, now when the candle is lighted, and you are
      sitting by me, I don’t even think of the hour of death. Explain that
      change if you can! Am I better off, or has my wife risen from the dead? Is
      it the influence of the light on me, or the presence of an outsider?”
    

      “The light certainly has an influence . . .” I muttered for
      the sake of saying something. “The influence of light on the
      organism . . . .”
    

      “The influence of light. . . . We admit it! But you know men do
      shoot themselves by candle-light! And it would be ignominious indeed for
      the heroes of your novels if such a trifling thing as a candle were to
      change the course of the drama so abruptly. All this nonsense can be
      explained perhaps, but not by us. It’s useless to ask questions or
      give explanations of what one does not understand. . . .”
    

      “Forgive me,” I said, “but . . . judging by the
      expression of your face, it seems to me that at this moment you . . . are
      posing.”
    

      “Yes,” Vassilyev said, startled. “It’s very
      possible! I am naturally vain and fatuous. Well, explain it, if you
      believe in your power of reading faces! Half an hour ago I shot myself,
      and just now I am posing. . . . Explain that if you can.”
    

      These last words Vassilyev pronounced in a faint, failing voice. He was
      exhausted, and sank into silence. A pause followed. I began scrutinising
      his face. It was as pale as a dead man’s. It seemed as though life
      were almost extinct in him, and only the signs of the suffering that the
      “vain and fatuous” man was feeling betrayed that it was still
      alive. It was painful to look at that face, but what must it have been for
      Vassilyev himself who yet had the strength to argue and, if I were not
      mistaken, to pose?
    

      “You here—are you here?” he asked suddenly, raising
      himself on his elbow. “My God, just listen!”
    

      I began listening. The rain was pattering angrily on the dark window,
      never ceasing for a minute. The wind howled plaintively and lugubriously.
    

      “‘And I shall be whiter than snow, and my ears will hear
      gladness and rejoicing.’” Madame Mimotih, who had returned,
      was reading in the drawing-room in a languid, weary voice, neither raising
      nor dropping the monotonous dreary key.
    

      “It is cheerful, isn’t it?” whispered Vassilyev, turning
      his frightened eyes towards me. “My God, the things a man has to see
      and hear! If only one could set this chaos to music! As Hamlet says, 'it
      would—
    

      “Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes
      and ears.”
    

      “How well I should have understood that music then! How I should have felt
      it! What time is it?”
    

      “Five minutes to three.”
    

      “Morning is still far off. And in the morning there’s the
      funeral. A lovely prospect! One follows the coffin through the mud and
      rain. One walks along, seeing nothing but the cloudy sky and the wretched
      scenery. The muddy mutes, taverns, woodstacks. . . . One’s trousers
      drenched to the knees. The never-ending streets. The time dragging out
      like eternity, the coarse people. And on the heart a stone, a stone!”
    

      After a brief pause he suddenly asked: “Is it long since you saw
      General Luhatchev?”
    

      “I haven’t seen him since last summer.”
    

      “He likes to be cock of the walk, but he is a nice little old chap.
      And are you still writing?”
    

      “Yes, a little.”
    

      “Ah. . . . Do you remember how I pranced about like a needle, like
      an enthusiastic ass at those private theatricals when I was courting Zina?
      It was stupid, but it was good, it was fun. . . . The very memory of it
      brings back a whiff of spring. . . . And now! What a cruel change of
      scene! There is a subject for you! Only don’t you go in for writing
      ‘the diary of a suicide.’ That’s vulgar and
      conventional. You make something humorous of it.”
    

      “Again you are . . . posing,” I said. “There’s
      nothing humorous in your position.”
    

      “Nothing laughable? You say nothing laughable?” Vassilyev sat
      up, and tears glistened in his eyes. An expression of bitter distress came
      into his pale face. His chin quivered.
    

      “You laugh at the deceit of cheating clerks and faithless wives,”
      he said, “but no clerk, no faithless wife has cheated as my fate has
      cheated me! I have been deceived as no bank depositor, no duped husband
      has ever been deceived! Only realise what an absurd fool I have been made!
      Last year before your eyes I did not know what to do with myself for
      happiness. And now before your eyes. . . .”
    

      Vassilyev’s head sank on the pillow and he laughed.
    

      “Nothing more absurd and stupid than such a change could possibly be
      imagined. Chapter one: spring, love, honeymoon . . . honey, in fact;
      chapter two: looking for a job, the pawnshop, pallor, the chemist’s
      shop, and . . . to-morrow’s splashing through the mud to the
      graveyard.”
    

      He laughed again. I felt acutely uncomfortable and made up my mind to go.
    

      “I tell you what,” I said, “you lie down, and I will go
      to the chemist’s.”
    

      He made no answer. I put on my great-coat and went out of his room. As I
      crossed the passage I glanced at the coffin and Madame Mimotih reading
      over it. I strained my eyes in vain, I could not recognise in the swarthy,
      yellow face Zina, the lively, pretty ingÃ©nue of Luhatchev’s
      company.
    

      “Sic transit,” I thought.
    

      With that I went out, not forgetting to take the revolver, and made my way
      to the chemist’s. But I ought not to have gone away. When I came
      back from the chemist’s, Vassilyev lay on the sofa fainting. The
      bandages had been roughly torn off, and blood was flowing from the
      reopened wound. It was daylight before I succeeded in restoring him to
      consciousness. He was raving in delirium, shivering, and looking with
      unseeing eyes about the room till morning had come, and we heard the
      booming voice of the priest as he read the service over the dead.
    

      When Vassilyev’s rooms were crowded with old women and mutes, when
      the coffin had been moved and carried out of the yard, I advised him to
      remain at home. But he would not obey me, in spite of the pain and the
      grey, rainy morning. He walked bareheaded and in silence behind the coffin
      all the way to the cemetery, hardly able to move one leg after the other,
      and from time to time clutching convulsively at his wounded side. His face
      expressed complete apathy. Only once when I roused him from his lethargy
      by some insignificant question he shifted his eyes over the pavement and
      the grey fence, and for a moment there was a gleam of gloomy anger in
      them.
    

      “‘Weelright,’” he read on a signboard. “Ignorant,
      illiterate people, devil take them!”
    

      I led him home from the cemetery.
    

                              ——


      Only one year has passed since that night, and Vassilyev has hardly had
      time to wear out the boots in which he tramped through the mud behind his
      wife’s coffin.
    

      At the present time as I finish this story, he is sitting in my
      drawing-room and, playing on the piano, is showing the ladies how
      provincial misses sing sentimental songs. The ladies are laughing, and he
      is laughing too. He is enjoying himself.
    

      I call him into my study. Evidently not pleased at my taking him from
      agreeable company, he comes to me and stands before me in the attitude of
      a man who has no time to spare. I give him this story, and ask him to read
      it. Always condescending about my authorship, he stifles a sigh, the sigh
      of a lazy reader, sits down in an armchair and begins upon it.
    

      “Hang it all, what horrors,” he mutters with a smile.
    

      But the further he gets into the reading, the graver his face becomes. At
      last, under the stress of painful memories, he turns terribly pale, he
      gets up and goes on reading as he stands. When he has finished he begins
      pacing from corner to corner.
    

      “How does it end?” I ask him.
    

      “How does it end? H’m. . . .”
    

      He looks at the room, at me, at himself. . . . He sees his new fashionable
      suit, hears the ladies laughing and . . . sinking on a chair, begins
      laughing as he laughed on that night.
    

      “Wasn’t I right when I told you it was all absurd? My God! I
      have had burdens to bear that would have broken an elephant’s back;
      the devil knows what I have suffered—no one could have suffered
      more, I think, and where are the traces? It’s astonishing. One would
      have thought the imprint made on a man by his agonies would have been
      everlasting, never to be effaced or eradicated. And yet that imprint wears
      out as easily as a pair of cheap boots. There is nothing left, not a
      scrap. It’s as though I hadn’t been suffering then, but had
      been dancing a mazurka. Everything in the world is transitory, and that
      transitoriness is absurd! A wide field for humorists! Tack on a humorous
      end, my friend!”
    

      “Pyotr Nikolaevitch, are you coming soon?” The impatient
      ladies call my hero.
    

      “This minute,” answers the “vain and fatuous” man,
      setting his tie straight. “It’s absurd and pitiful, my friend,
      pitiful and absurd, but what’s to be done? Homo sum. . . .
      And I praise Mother Nature all the same for her transmutation of
      substances. If we retained an agonising memory of toothache and of all the
      terrors which every one of us has had to experience, if all that were
      everlasting, we poor mortals would have a bad time of it in this life.”
    

      I look at his smiling face and I remember the despair and the horror with
      which his eyes were filled a year ago when he looked at the dark window. I
      see him, entering into his habitual rÃ´le of intellectual chatterer,
      prepare to show off his idle theories, such as the transmutation of
      substances before me, and at the same time I recall him sitting on the
      floor in a pool of blood with his sick imploring eyes.
    

      “How will it end?” I ask myself aloud.
    

      Vassilyev, whistling and straightening his tie, walks off into the
      drawing-room, and I look after him, and feel vexed. For some reason I
      regret his past sufferings, I regret all that I felt myself on that man’s
      account on that terrible night. It is as though I had lost something. . .
      .
    











      MARI D’ELLE
    

IT was a free
      night. Natalya Andreyevna Bronin (her married name was Nikitin), the opera
      singer, is lying in her bedroom, her whole being abandoned to repose. She
      lies, deliciously drowsy, thinking of her little daughter who lives
      somewhere far away with her grandmother or aunt. . . . The child is more
      precious to her than the public, bouquets, notices in the papers, adorers
      . . . and she would be glad to think about her till morning. She is happy,
      at peace, and all she longs for is not to be prevented from lying
      undisturbed, dozing and dreaming of her little girl.
    

      All at once the singer starts, and opens her eyes wide: there is a harsh
      abrupt ring in the entry. Before ten seconds have passed the bell tinkles
      a second time and a third time. The door is opened noisily and some one
      walks into the entry stamping his feet like a horse, snorting and puffing
      with the cold.
    

      “Damn it all, nowhere to hang one’s coat!” the singer
      hears a husky bass voice. “Celebrated singer, look at that! Makes
      five thousand a year, and can’t get a decent hat-stand!”
    

      “My husband!” thinks the singer, frowning. “And I
      believe he has brought one of his friends to stay the night too. . . .
      Hateful!”
    

      No more peace. When the loud noise of some one blowing his nose and
      putting off his goloshes dies away, the singer hears cautious footsteps in
      her bedroom. . . . It is her husband, mari d’elle, Denis
      Petrovitch Nikitin. He brings a whiff of cold air and a smell of brandy.
      For a long while he walks about the bedroom, breathing heavily, and,
      stumbling against the chairs in the dark, seems to be looking for
      something. . . .
    

      “What do you want?” his wife moans, when she is sick of his
      fussing about. “You have woken me.”
    

      “I am looking for the matches, my love. You . . . you are not asleep
      then? I have brought you a message. . . . Greetings from that . . . what’s-his-name?
      . . . red-headed fellow who is always sending you bouquets. . . .
      Zagvozdkin. . . . I have just been to see him.”
    

      “What did you go to him for?”
    

      “Oh, nothing particular. . . . We sat and talked and had a drink.
      Say what you like, Nathalie, I dislike that individual—I dislike him
      awfully! He is a rare blockhead. He is a wealthy man, a capitalist; he has
      six hundred thousand, and you would never guess it. Money is no more use
      to him than a radish to a dog. He does not eat it himself nor give it to
      others. Money ought to circulate, but he keeps tight hold of it, is afraid
      to part with it. . . . What’s the good of capital lying idle?
      Capital lying idle is no better than grass.”
    

Mari d’elle gropes his way to the edge of the bed and,
      puffing, sits down at his wife’s feet.
    

      “Capital lying idle is pernicious,” he goes on. “Why has
      business gone downhill in Russia? Because there is so much capital lying
      idle among us; they are afraid to invest it. It’s very different in
      England. . . . There are no such queer fish as Zagvozdkin in England, my
      girl. . . . There every farthing is in circulation . . . . Yes. . . . They
      don’t keep it locked up in chests there . . . .”
    

      “Well, that’s all right. I am sleepy.”
    

      “Directly. . . . Whatever was it I was talking about? Yes. . . . In
      these hard times hanging is too good for Zagvozdkin. . . . He is a fool
      and a scoundrel. . . . No better than a fool. If I asked him for a loan
      without security—why, a child could see that he runs no risk
      whatever. He doesn’t understand, the ass! For ten thousand he would
      have got a hundred. In a year he would have another hundred thousand. I
      asked, I talked . . . but he wouldn’t give it me, the blockhead.”
    

      “I hope you did not ask him for a loan in my name.”
    

      “H’m. . . . A queer question. . . .” Mari d’elle
      is offended. “Anyway he would sooner give me ten thousand than you.
      You are a woman, and I am a man anyway, a business-like person. And what a
      scheme I propose to him! Not a bubble, not some chimera, but a sound
      thing, substantial! If one could hit on a man who would understand, one
      might get twenty thousand for the idea alone! Even you would understand if
      I were to tell you about it. Only you . . . don’t chatter about it .
      . . not a word . . . but I fancy I have talked to you about it already.
      Have I talked to you about sausage-skins?”
    

      “M’m . . . by and by.”
    

      “I believe I have. . . . Do you see the point of it? Now the
      provision shops and the sausage-makers get their sausage-skins locally,
      and pay a high price for them. Well, but if one were to bring
      sausage-skins from the Caucasus where they are worth nothing, and where
      they are thrown away, then . . . where do you suppose the sausage-makers
      would buy their skins, here in the slaughterhouses or from me? From me, of
      course! Why, I shall sell them ten times as cheap! Now let us look at it
      like this: every year in Petersburg and Moscow and in other centres these
      same skins would be bought to the . . . to the sum of five hundred
      thousand, let us suppose. That’s the minimum. Well, and if. . . .”
    

      “You can tell me to-morrow . . . later on. . . .”
    

      “Yes, that’s true. You are sleepy, pardon, I am just
      going . . . say what you like, but with capital you can do good business
      everywhere, wherever you go. . . . With capital even out of cigarette ends
      one may make a million. . . . Take your theatrical business now. Why, for
      example, did Lentovsky come to grief? It’s very simple. He did not
      go the right way to work from the very first. He had no capital and he
      went headlong to the dogs. . . . He ought first to have secured his
      capital, and then to have gone slowly and cautiously . . . . Nowadays, one
      can easily make money by a theatre, whether it is a private one or a
      people’s one. . . . If one produces the right plays, charges a low
      price for admission, and hits the public fancy, one may put a hundred
      thousand in one’s pocket the first year. . . . You don’t
      understand, but I am talking sense. . . . You see you are fond of hoarding
      capital; you are no better than that fool Zagvozdkin, you heap it up and
      don’t know what for. . . . You won’t listen, you don’t
      want to. . . . If you were to put it into circulation, you wouldn’t
      have to be rushing all over the place . . . . You see for a private
      theatre, five thousand would be enough for a beginning. . . . Not like
      Lentovsky, of course, but on a modest scale in a small way. I have got a
      manager already, I have looked at a suitable building. . . . It’s
      only the money I haven’t got. . . . If only you understood things
      you would have parted with your Five per cents . . . your Preference
      shares. . . .”
    

      “No, merci. . . . You have fleeced me enough already. . . .
      Let me alone, I have been punished already. . . .”
    

      “If you are going to argue like a woman, then of course . . .”
      sighs Nikitin, getting up. “Of course. . . .”
    

      “Let me alone. . . . Come, go away and don’t keep me awake. .
      . . I am sick of listening to your nonsense.”
    

      “H’m. . . . To be sure . . . of course! Fleeced. . .
      plundered. . . . What we give we remember, but we don’t remember
      what we take.”
    

      “I have never taken anything from you.”
    

      “Is that so? But when we weren’t a celebrated singer, at whose
      expense did we live then? And who, allow me to ask, lifted you out of
      beggary and secured your happiness? Don’t you remember that?”
    

      “Come, go to bed. Go along and sleep it off.”
    

      “Do you mean to say you think I am drunk? . . . if I am so low in
      the eyes of such a grand lady. . . I can go away altogether.”
    

      “Do. A good thing too.”
    

      “I will, too. I have humbled myself enough. And I will go.”
    

      “Oh, my God! Oh, do go, then! I shall be delighted!”
    

      “Very well, we shall see.”
    

      Nikitin mutters something to himself, and, stumbling over the chairs, goes
      out of the bedroom. Then sounds reach her from the entry of whispering,
      the shuffling of goloshes and a door being shut. Mari d’elle
      has taken offence in earnest and gone out.
    

      “Thank God, he has gone!” thinks the singer. “Now I can
      sleep.”
    

      And as she falls asleep she thinks of her mari d’elle, “what
      sort of a man he is, and how this affliction has come upon her. At one
      time he used to live at Tchernigov, and had a situation there as a
      book-keeper. As an ordinary obscure individual and not the mari d’elle,
      he had been quite endurable: he used to go to his work and take his
      salary, and all his whims and projects went no further than a new guitar,
      fashionable trousers, and an amber cigarette-holder. Since he had become
      “the husband of a celebrity” he was completely transformed.
      The singer remembered that when first she told him she was going on the
      stage he had made a fuss, been indignant, complained to her parents,
      turned her out of the house. She had been obliged to go on the stage
      without his permission. Afterwards, when he learned from the papers and
      from various people that she was earning big sums, he had ‘forgiven
      her,’ abandoned book-keeping, and become her hanger-on. The singer
      was overcome with amazement when she looked at her hanger-on: when and
      where had he managed to pick up new tastes, polish, and airs and graces?
      Where had he learned the taste of oysters and of different Burgundies? Who
      had taught him to dress and do his hair in the fashion and call her
      ‘Nathalie’ instead of Natasha?”
    

      “It’s strange,” thinks the singer. “In old days he
      used to get his salary and put it away, but now a hundred roubles a day is
      not enough for him. In old days he was afraid to talk before schoolboys
      for fear of saying something silly, and now he is overfamiliar even with
      princes . . . wretched, contemptible little creature!”
    

      But then the singer starts again; again there is the clang of the bell in
      the entry. The housemaid, scolding and angrily flopping with her slippers,
      goes to open the door. Again some one comes in and stamps like a horse.
    

      “He has come back!” thinks the singer. “When shall I be
      left in peace? It’s revolting!” She is overcome by fury.
    

      “Wait a bit. . . . I’ll teach you to get up these farces! You
      shall go away. I’ll make you go away!”
    

      The singer leaps up and runs barefoot into the little drawing-room where
      her mari usually sleeps. She comes at the moment when he is
      undressing, and carefully folding his clothes on a chair.
    

      “You went away!” she says, looking at him with bright eyes
      full of hatred. “What did you come back for?”
    

      Nikitin remains silent, and merely sniffs.
    

      “You went away! Kindly take yourself off this very minute! This very
      minute! Do you hear?”
    

Mari d’elle coughs and, without looking at his wife, takes
      off his braces.
    

      “If you don’t go away, you insolent creature, I shall go,”
      the singer goes on, stamping her bare foot, and looking at him with
      flashing eyes. “I shall go! Do you hear, insolent . . . worthless
      wretch, flunkey, out you go!”
    

      “You might have some shame before outsiders,” mutters her
      husband . . . .
    

      The singer looks round and only then sees an unfamiliar countenance that
      looks like an actor’s. . . . The countenance, seeing the singer’s
      uncovered shoulders and bare feet, shows signs of embarrassment, and looks
      ready to sink through the floor.
    

      “Let me introduce . . .” mutters Nikitin, “Bezbozhnikov,
      a provincial manager.”
    

      The singer utters a shriek, and runs off into her bedroom.
    

      “There, you see . . .” says mari d’elle, as he
      stretches himself on the sofa, “it was all honey just now . . . my
      love, my dear, my darling, kisses and embraces . . . but as soon as money
      is touched upon, then. . . . As you see . . . money is the great thing. .
      . . Good night!”
    

      A minute later there is a snore.
    











      A LIVING CHATTEL
    

GROHOLSKY embraced
      Liza, kept kissing one after another all her little fingers with their
      bitten pink nails, and laid her on the couch covered with cheap velvet.
      Liza crossed one foot over the other, clasped her hands behind her head,
      and lay down.
    

      Groholsky sat down in a chair beside her and bent over. He was entirely
      absorbed in contemplation of her.
    

      How pretty she seemed to him, lighted up by the rays of the setting sun!
    

      There was a complete view from the window of the setting sun, golden,
      lightly flecked with purple.
    

      The whole drawing-room, including Liza, was bathed by it with brilliant
      light that did not hurt the eyes, and for a little while covered with
      gold.
    

      Groholsky was lost in admiration. Liza was so incredibly beautiful. It is
      true her little kittenish face with its brown eyes, and turn up nose was
      fresh, and even piquant, his scanty hair was black as soot and curly, her
      little figure was graceful, well proportioned and mobile as the body of an
      electric eel, but on the whole. . . . However my taste has nothing to do
      with it. Groholsky who was spoilt by women, and who had been in love and
      out of love hundreds of times in his life, saw her as a beauty. He loved
      her, and blind love finds ideal beauty everywhere.
    

      “I say,” he said, looking straight into her eyes, “I
      have come to talk to you, my precious. Love cannot bear anything vague or
      indefinite. . . . Indefinite relations, you know, I told you yesterday,
      Liza . . . we will try to-day to settle the question we raised yesterday.
      Come, let us decide together. . . .”
    

      “What are we to do?”
    

      Liza gave a yawn and scowling, drew her right arm from under her head.
    

      “What are we to do?” she repeated hardly audibly after
      Groholsky.
    

      “Well, yes, what are we to do? Come, decide, wise little head . . .
      I love you, and a man in love is not fond of sharing. He is more than an
      egoist. It is too much for me to go shares with your husband. I mentally
      tear him to pieces, when I remember that he loves you too. In the second
      place you love me. . . . Perfect freedom is an essential condition for
      love. . . . And are you free? Are you not tortured by the thought that
      that man towers for ever over your soul? A man whom you do not love, whom
      very likely and quite naturally, you hate. . . . That’s the second
      thing. . . . And thirdly. . . . What is the third thing? Oh yes. . . . We
      are deceiving him and that . . . is dishonourable. Truth before
      everything, Liza. Let us have done with lying!”
    

      “Well, then, what are we to do?”
    

      “You can guess. . . . I think it necessary, obligatory, to inform
      him of our relations and to leave him, to begin to live in freedom. Both
      must be done as quickly as possible. . . . This very evening, for
      instance. . . . It’s time to make an end of it. Surely you must be
      sick of loving like a thief?”
    

      “Tell! tell Vanya?”
    

      “Why, yes!”
    

      “That’s impossible! I told you yesterday, Michel, that it is
      impossible.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “He will be upset. He’ll make a row, do all sorts of
      unpleasant things. . . . Don’t you know what he is like? God forbid!
      There’s no need to tell him. What an idea!”
    

      Groholsky passed his hand over his brow, and heaved a sigh.
    

      “Yes,” he said, “he will be more than upset. I am
      robbing him of his happiness. Does he love you?”
    

      “He does love me. Very much.”
    

      “There’s another complication! One does not know where to
      begin. To conceal it from him is base, telling him would kill him. . . .
      Goodness knows what’s one to do. Well, how is it to be?”
    

      Groholsky pondered. His pale face wore a frown.
    

      “Let us go on always as we are now,” said Liza. “Let him
      find out for himself, if he wants to.”
    

      “But you know that . . . is sinful, and besides the fact is you are
      mine, and no one has the right to think that you do not belong to me but
      to someone else! You are mine! I will not give way to anyone! . . . I am
      sorry for him—God knows how sorry I am for him, Liza! It hurts me to
      see him! But . . . it can’t be helped after all. You don’t
      love him, do you? What’s the good of your going on being miserable
      with him? We must have it out! We will have it out with him, and you will
      come to me. You are my wife, and not his. Let him do what he likes. He’ll
      get over his troubles somehow. . . . He is not the first, and he won’t
      be the last. . . . Will you run away? Eh? Make haste and tell me! Will you
      run away?”
    

      Liza got up and looked inquiringly at Groholsky.
    

      “Run away?”
    

      “Yes. . . . To my estate. . . . Then to the Crimea. . . . We will
      tell him by letter. . . . We can go at night. There is a train at half
      past one. Well? Is that all right?”
    

      Liza scratched the bridge of her nose, and hesitated.
    

      “Very well,” she said, and burst into tears.
    

      Patches of red came out of her cheeks, her eyes swelled, and tears flowed
      down her kittenish face. . . .
    

      “What is it?” cried Groholsky in a flutter. “Liza! what’s
      the matter? Come! what are you crying for? What a girl! Come, what is it?
      Darling! Little woman!”
    

      Liza held out her hands to Groholsky, and hung on his neck. There was a
      sound of sobbing.
    

      “I am sorry for him . . .” muttered Liza. “Oh, I am so
      sorry for him!”
    

      “Sorry for whom?”
    

      “Va—Vanya. . . .”
    

      “And do you suppose I’m not? But what’s to be done? We
      are causing him suffering. . . . He will be unhappy, will curse us . . .
      but is it our fault that we love one another?”
    

      As he uttered the last word, Groholsky darted away from Liza as though he
      had been stung and sat down in an easy chair. Liza sprang away from his
      neck and rapidly—in one instant—dropped on the lounge.
    

      They both turned fearfully red, dropped their eyes, and coughed.
    

      A tall, broad-shouldered man of thirty, in the uniform of a government
      clerk, had walked into the drawing-room. He had walked in unnoticed. Only
      the bang of a chair which he knocked in the doorway had warned the lovers
      of his presence, and made them look round. It was the husband.
    

      They had looked round too late.
    

      He had seen Groholsky’s arm round Liza’s waist, and had seen
      Liza hanging on Groholsky’s white and aristocratic neck.
    

      “He saw us!” Liza and Groholsky thought at the same moment,
      while they did not know what to do with their heavy hands and embarrassed
      eyes. . . .
    

      The petrified husband, rosy-faced, turned white.
    

      An agonising, strange, soul-revolting silence lasted for three minutes.
      Oh, those three minutes! Groholsky remembers them to this day.
    

      The first to move and break the silence was the husband. He stepped up to
      Groholsky and, screwing his face into a senseless grimace like a smile,
      gave him his hand. Groholsky shook the soft perspiring hand and shuddered
      all over as though he had crushed a cold frog in his fist.
    

      “Good evening,” he muttered.
    

      “How are you?” the husband brought out in a faint husky,
      almost inaudible voice, and he sat down opposite Groholsky, straightening
      his collar at the back of his neck.
    

      Again, an agonising silence followed . . . but that silence was no longer
      so stupid. . . . The first step, most difficult and colourless, was over.
    

      All that was left now was for one of the two to depart in search of
      matches or on some such trifling errand. Both longed intensely to get
      away. They sat still, not looking at one another, and pulled at their
      beards while they ransacked their troubled brains for some means of escape
      from their horribly awkward position. Both were perspiring. Both were
      unbearably miserable and both were devoured by hatred. They longed to
      begin the tussle but how were they to begin and which was to begin first?
      If only she would have gone out!
    

      “I saw you yesterday at the Assembly Hall,” muttered Bugrov
      (that was the husband’s name).
    

      “Yes, I was there . . . the ball . . . did you dance?”
    

      “M’m . . . yes . . . with that . . . with the younger
      Lyukovtsky . . . . She dances heavily. . . . She dances impossibly. She is
      a great chatterbox.” (Pause.) “She is never tired of talking.”
    

      “Yes. . . . It was slow. I saw you too. . .”
    

      Groholsky accidentally glanced at Bugrov. . . . He caught the shifting
      eyes of the deceived husband and could not bear it. He got up quickly,
      quickly seized Bugrov’s hand, shook it, picked up his hat, and
      walked towards the door, conscious of his own back. He felt as though
      thousands of eyes were looking at his back. It is a feeling known to the
      actor who has been hissed and is making his exit from the stage, and to
      the young dandy who has received a blow on the back of the head and is
      being led away in charge of a policeman.
    

      As soon as the sound of Groholsky’s steps had died away and the door
      in the hall creaked, Bugrov leapt up, and after making two or three rounds
      of the drawing-room, strolled up to his wife. The kittenish face puckered
      up and began bKlinking its eyes as though expecting a slap. Her husband
      went up to her, and with a pale, distorted face, with arms, head, and
      shoulders shaking, stepped on her dress and knocked her knees with his.
    

      “If, you wretched creature,” he began in a hollow, wailing
      voice, “you let him come here once again, I’ll. . . . Don’t
      let him dare to set his foot. . . . I’ll kill you. Do you
      understand? A-a-ah . . . worthless creature, you shudder! Fil-thy woman!”
    

      Bugrov seized her by the elbow, shook her, and flung her like an
      indiarubber ball towards the window. . . .
    

      “Wretched, vulgar woman! you have no shame!”
    

      She flew towards the window, hardly touching the floor with her feet, and
      caught at the curtains with her hands.
    

      “Hold your tongue,” shouted her husband, going up to her with
      flashing eyes and stamping his foot.
    

      She did hold her tongue, she looked at the ceiling, and whimpered while
      her face wore the expression of a little girl in disgrace expecting to be
      punished.
    

      “So that’s what you are like! Eh? Carrying on with a fop!
      Good! And your promise before the altar? What are you? A nice wife and
      mother. Hold your tongue!”
    

      And he struck her on her pretty supple shoulder. “Hold your tongue,
      you wretched creature. I’ll give you worse than that! If that
      scoundrel dares to show himself here ever again, if I see you—listen!—with
      that blackguard ever again, don’t ask for mercy! I’ll kill
      you, if I go to Siberia for it! And him too. I shouldn’t think twice
      about it! You can go, I don’t want to see you!”
    

      Bugrov wiped his eyes and his brow with his sleeve and strode about the
      drawing-room, Liza sobbing more and more loudly, twitching her shoulders
      and her little turned up nose, became absorbed in examining the lace on
      the curtain.
    

      “You are crazy,” her husband shouted. “Your silly head
      is full of nonsense! Nothing but whims! I won’t allow it, Elizaveta,
      my girl! You had better be careful with me! I don’t like it! If you
      want to behave like a pig, then . . . then out you go, there is no place
      in my house for you! Out you pack if. . . . You are a wife, so you must
      forget these dandies, put them out of your silly head! It’s all
      foolishness! Don’t let it happen again! You try defending yourself!
      Love your husband! You have been given to your husband, so you must love
      him. Yes, indeed! Is one not enough? Go away till . . . . Torturers!”
    

      Bugrov paused; then shouted:
    

      “Go away I tell you, go to the nursery! Why are you blubbering, it
      is your own fault, and you blubber! What a woman! Last year you were after
      Petka Totchkov, now you are after this devil. Lord forgive us! . . . Tfoo,
      it’s time you understood what you are! A wife! A mother! Last year
      there were unpleasantnesses, and now there will be unpleasantnesses. . . .
      Tfoo!”
    

      Bugrov heaved a loud sigh, and the air was filled with the smell of
      sherry. He had come back from dining and was slightly drunk . . . .
    

      “Don’t you know your duty? No! . . . you must be taught, you’ve
      not been taught so far! Your mamma was a gad-about, and you . . . you can
      blubber. Yes! blubber away. . . .”
    

      Bugrov went up to his wife and drew the curtain out of her hands.
    

      “Don’t stand by the window, people will see you blubbering. .
      . . Don’t let it happen again. You’ll go from embracing to
      worse trouble. You’ll come to grief. Do you suppose I like to be
      made a fool of? And you will make a fool of me if you carry on with them,
      the low brutes. . . . Come, that’s enough. . . . Don’t you. .
      . . Another time. . . . Of course I . . Liza . . . stay. . . .”
    

      Bugrov heaved a sigh and enveloped Liza in the fumes of sherry.
    

      “You are young and silly, you don’t understand anything. . . .
      I am never at home. . . . And they take advantage of it. You must be
      sensible, prudent. They will deceive you. And then I won’t endure
      it. . . . Then I may do anything. . . . Of course! Then you can just lie
      down, and die. I . . . I am capable of doing anything if you deceive me,
      my good girl. I might beat you to death. . . . And . . . I shall turn you
      out of the house, and then you can go to your rascals.”
    

      And Bugrov (horribile dictu) wiped the wet, tearful face of the
      traitress Liza with his big soft hand. He treated his twenty-year-old wife
      as though she were a child.
    

      “Come, that’s enough. . . . I forgive you. Only God forbid it
      should happen again! I forgive you for the fifth time, but I shall not
      forgive you for the sixth, as God is holy. God does not forgive such as
      you for such things.”
    

      Bugrov bent down and put out his shining lips towards Liza’s little
      head. But the kiss did not follow. The doors of the hall, of the
      dining-room, of the parlour, and of the drawing-room all slammed, and
      Groholsky flew into the drawing-room like a whirlwind. He was pale and
      trembling. He was flourishing his arms and crushing his expensive hat in
      his hands. His coat fluttered upon him as though it were on a peg. He was
      the incarnation of acute fever. When Bugrov saw him he moved away from his
      wife and began looking out of the other window. Groholsky flew up to him,
      and waving his arms and breathing heavily and looking at no one, he began
      in a shaking voice:
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch! Let us leave off keeping up this farce with one
      another! We have deceived each other long enough! It’s too much! I
      cannot stand it. You must do as you like, but I cannot! It’s hateful
      and mean, it’s revolting! Do you understand that it is revolting?”
    

      Groholsky spluttered and gasped for breath.
    

      “It’s against my principles. And you are an honest man. I love
      her! I love her more than anything on earth! You have noticed it and . . .
      it’s my duty to say this!”
    

      “What am I to say to him?” Ivan Petrovitch wondered.
    

      “We must make an end of it. This farce cannot drag on much longer!
      It must be settled somehow.”
    

      Groholsky drew a breath and went on:
    

      “I cannot live without her; she feels the same. You are an educated
      man, you will understand that in such circumstances your family life is
      impossible. This woman is not yours, so . . . in short, I beg you to look
      at the matter from an indulgent humane point of view. . . . Ivan
      Petrovitch, you must understand at last that I love her—love her
      more than myself, more than anything in the world, and to struggle against
      that love is beyond my power!”
    

      “And she?” Bugrov asked in a sullen, somewhat ironical tone.
    

      “Ask her; come now, ask her! For her to live with a man she does not
      love, to live with you is . . . is a misery!”
    

      “And she?” Bugrov repeated, this time not in an ironical tone.
    

      “She . . . she loves me! We love each other, Ivan Petrovitch! Kill
      us, despise us, pursue us, do as you will, but we can no longer conceal it
      from you. We are standing face to face—you may judge us with all the
      severity of a man whom we . . . whom fate has robbed of happiness!”
    

      Bugrov turned as red as a boiled crab, and looked out of one eye at Liza.
      He began bKlinking. His fingers, his lips, and his eyelids twitched. Poor
      fellow! The eyes of his weeping wife told him that Groholsky was right,
      that it was a serious matter.
    

      “Well!” he muttered. “If you. . . . In these days. . . .
      You are always. . . .”
    

      “As God is above,” Groholsky shrilled in his high tenor,
      “we understand you. Do you suppose we have no sense, no feeling? I
      know what agonies I am causing you, as God’s above! But be
      indulgent, I beseech you! We are not to blame. Love is not a crime. No
      will can struggle against it. . . . Give her up to me, Ivan Petrovitch!
      Let her go with me! Take from me what you will for your sufferings. Take
      my life, but give me Liza. I am ready to do anything. . . . Come, tell me
      how I can do something to make up in part at least! To make up for that
      lost happiness, I can give you other happiness. I can, Ivan Petrovitch; I
      am ready to do anything! It would be base on my part to leave you without
      satisfaction. . . . I understand you at this moment.”
    

      Bugrov waved his hand as though to say, ‘For God’s sake, go
      away.’ His eyes began to be dimmed by a treacherous moisture—in
      a moment they would see him crying like a child.
    

      “I understand you, Ivan Petrovitch. I will give you another
      happiness, such as hitherto you have not known. What would you like? I
      have money, my father is an influential man. . . . Will you? Come, how
      much do you want?”
    

      Bugrov’s heart suddenly began throbbing. . . . He clutched at the
      window curtains with both hands. . . .
    

      “Will you have fifty thousand? Ivan Petrovitch, I entreat you. . . .
      It’s not a bribe, not a bargain. . . . I only want by a sacrifice on
      my part to atone a little for your inevitable loss. Would you like a
      hundred thousand? I am willing. A hundred thousand?”
    

      My God! Two immense hammers began beating on the perspiring temples of the
      unhappy Ivan Petrovitch. Russian sledges with tinkling bells began racing
      in his ears. . . .
    

      “Accept this sacrifice from me,” Groholsky went on, “I
      entreat you! You will take a load off my conscience. . . . I implore you!”
    

      My God! A smart carriage rolled along the road wet from a May shower,
      passed the window through which Bugrov’s wet eyes were looking. The
      horses were fine, spirited, well-trained beasts. People in straw hats,
      with contented faces, were sitting in the carriage with long fishing-rods
      and bags. . . . A schoolboy in a white cap was holding a gun. They were
      driving out into the country to catch fish, to shoot, to walk about and
      have tea in the open air. They were driving to that region of bliss in
      which Bugrov as a boy—the barefoot, sunburnt, but infinitely happy
      son of a village deacon—had once raced about the meadows, the woods,
      and the river banks. Oh, how fiendishly seductive was that May! How happy
      those who can take off their heavy uniforms, get into a carriage and fly
      off to the country where the quails are calling and there is the scent of
      fresh hay. Bugrov’s heart ached with a sweet thrill that made him
      shiver. A hundred thousand! With the carriage there floated before him all
      the secret dreams over which he had gloated, through the long years of his
      life as a government clerk as he sat in the office of his department or in
      his wretched little study. . . . A river, deep, with fish, a wide garden
      with narrow avenues, little fountains, shade, flowers, arbours, a
      luxurious villa with terraces and turrets with an Aeolian harp and little
      silver bells (he had heard of the existence of an Aeolian harp from German
      romances); a cloudless blue sky; pure limpid air fragrant with the scents
      that recall his hungry, barefoot, crushed childhood. . . . To get up at
      five, to go to bed at nine; to spend the day catching fish, talking with
      the peasants. . . . What happiness!
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch, do not torture me! Will you take a hundred
      thousand?”
    

      “H’m . . . a hundred and fifty thousand!” muttered
      Bugrov in a hollow voice, the voice of a husky bull. He muttered it, and
      bowed his head, ashamed of his words, and awaiting the answer.
    

      “Good,” said Groholsky, “I agree. I thank you, Ivan
      Petrovitch . . . . In a minute. . . . I will not keep you waiting. . . .”
    

      Groholsky jumped up, put on his hat, and staggering backwards, ran out of
      the drawing-room.
    

      Bugrov clutched the window curtains more tightly than ever. . . . He was
      ashamed . . . . There was a nasty, stupid feeling in his soul, but, on the
      other hand, what fair shining hopes swarmed between his throbbing temples!
      He was rich!
    

      Liza, who had grasped nothing of what was happening, darted through the
      half-opened door trembling all over and afraid that he would come to her
      window and fling her away from it. She went into the nursery, laid herself
      down on the nurse’s bed, and curled herself up. She was shivering
      with fever.
    

      Bugrov was left alone. He felt stifled, and he opened the window. What
      glorious air breathed fragrance on his face and neck! It would be good to
      breathe such air lolling on the cushions of a carriage . . . . Out there,
      far beyond the town, among the villages and the summer villas, the air was
      sweeter still. . . . Bugrov actually smiled as he dreamed of the air that
      would be about him when he would go out on the verandah of his villa and
      admire the view. A long while he dreamed. . . . The sun had set, and still
      he stood and dreamed, trying his utmost to cast out of his mind the image
      of Liza which obstinately pursued him in all his dreams.
    

“I have brought it, Ivan Petrovitch!” Groholsky, re-entering,
whispered above his ear. “I have brought it—take it. . . . Here
in this roll there are forty thousand. . . . With this cheque will
you kindly get twenty the day after to-morrow from Valentinov? . . .
 Here is a bill of exchange . . . a cheque. . . . The remaining
thirty thousand in a day or two. . . . My steward will bring it to
you.”
 

      Groholsky, pink and excited, with all his limbs in motion, laid before
      Bugrov a heap of rolls of notes and bundles of papers. The heap was big,
      and of all sorts of hues and tints. Never in the course of his life had
      Bugrov seen such a heap. He spread out his fat fingers and, not looking at
      Groholsky, fell to going through the bundles of notes and bonds. . . .
    

      Groholsky spread out all the money, and moved restlessly about the room,
      looking for the Dulcinea who had been bought and sold.
    

      Filling his pockets and his pocket-book, Bugrov thrust the securities into
      the table drawer, and, drinking off half a decanter full of water, dashed
      out into the street.
    

      “Cab!” he shouted in a frantic voice.
    

      At half-past eleven that night he drove up to the entrance of the Paris
      Hotel. He went noisily upstairs and knocked at the door of Groholsky’s
      apartments. He was admitted. Groholsky was packing his things in a
      portmanteau, Liza was sitting at the table trying on bracelets. They were
      both frightened when Bugrov went in to them. They fancied that he had come
      for Liza and had brought back the money which he had taken in haste
      without reflection. But Bugrov had not come for Liza. Ashamed of his new
      get-up and feeling frightfully awkward in it, he bowed and stood at the
      door in the attitude of a flunkey. The get-up was superb. Bugrov was
      unrecognisable. His huge person, which had never hitherto worn anything
      but a uniform, was clothed in a fresh, brand-new suit of fine French cloth
      and of the most fashionable cut. On his feet spats shone with sparkling
      buckles. He stood ashamed of his new get-up, and with his right hand
      covered the watch-chain for which he had, an hour before, paid three
      hundred roubles.
    

      “I have come about something,” he began. “A business
      agreement is beyond price. I am not going to give up Mishutka. . . .”
    

      “What Mishutka?” asked Groholsky.
    

      “My son.”
    

      Groholsky and Liza looked at each other. Liza’s eyes bulged, her
      cheeks flushed, and her lips twitched. . . .
    

      “Very well,” she said.
    

      She thought of Mishutka’s warm little cot. It would be cruel to
      exchange that warm little cot for a chilly sofa in the hotel, and she
      consented.
    

      “I shall see him,” she said.
    

      Bugrov bowed, walked out, and flew down the stairs in his splendour,
      cleaving the air with his expensive cane. . . .
    

      “Home,” he said to the cabman. “I am starting at five o’clock
      to-morrow morning. . . . You will come; if I am asleep, you will wake me.
      We are driving out of town.”
    

      II
    

      It was a lovely August evening. The sun, set in a golden background
      lightly flecked with purple, stood above the western horizon on the point
      of sinking behind the far-away tumuli. In the garden, shadows and
      half-shadows had vanished, and the air had grown damp, but the golden
      light was still playing on the tree-tops. . . . It was warm. . . . Rain
      had just fallen, and made the fresh, transparent fragrant air still
      fresher.
    

      I am not describing the August of Petersburg or Moscow, foggy, tearful,
      and dark, with its cold, incredibly damp sunsets. God forbid! I am not
      describing our cruel northern August. I ask the reader to move with me to
      the Crimea, to one of its shores, not far from Feodosia, the spot where
      stands the villa of one of our heroes. It is a pretty, neat villa
      surrounded by flower-beds and clipped bushes. A hundred paces behind it is
      an orchard in which its inmates walk. . . . Groholsky pays a high rent for
      that villa, a thousand roubles a year, I believe. . . . The villa is not
      worth that rent, but it is pretty. . . . Tall, with delicate walls and
      very delicate parapets, fragile, slender, painted a pale blue colour, hung
      with curtains, portiÃ¨res, draperies, it suggests a charming,
      fragile Chinese lady. . . .
    

      On the evening described above, Groholsky and Liza were sitting on the
      verandah of this villa. Groholsky was reading Novoye Vremya and
      drinking milk out of a green mug. A syphon of Seltzer water was standing
      on the table before him. Groholsky imagined that he was suffering from
      catarrh of the lungs, and by the advice of Dr. Dmitriev consumed an
      immense quantity of grapes, milk, and Seltzer water. Liza was sitting in a
      soft easy chair some distance from the table. With her elbows on the
      parapet, and her little face propped on her little fists, she was gazing
      at the villa opposite. . . . The sun was playing upon the windows of the
      villa opposite, the glittering panes reflected the dazzling light. . . .
      Beyond the little garden and the few trees that surrounded the villa there
      was a glimpse of the sea with its waves, its dark blue colour, its
      immensity, its white masts. . . . It was so delightful! Groholsky was
      reading an article by Anonymous, and after every dozen lines he raised his
      blue eyes to Liza’s back. . . . The same passionate, fervent love
      was shining in those eyes still. . . . He was infinitely happy in spite of
      his imaginary catarrh of the lungs. . . . Liza was conscious of his eyes
      upon her back, and was thinking of Mishutka’s brilliant future, and
      she felt so comfortable, so serene . . . .
    

      She was not so much interested by the sea, and the glittering reflection
      on the windows of the villa opposite as by the waggons which were trailing
      up to that villa one after another.
    

      The waggons were full of furniture and all sorts of domestic articles.
      Liza watched the trellis gates and big glass doors of the villa being
      opened and the men bustling about the furniture and wrangling incessantly.
      Big armchairs and a sofa covered with dark raspberry coloured velvet,
      tables for the hall, the drawing-room and the dining-room, a big double
      bed and a child’s cot were carried in by the glass doors; something
      big, wrapped up in sacking, was carried in too. A grand piano, thought
      Liza, and her heart throbbed.
    

      It was long since she had heard the piano, and she was so fond of it. They
      had not a single musical instrument in their villa. Groholsky and she were
      musicians only in soul, no more. There were a great many boxes and
      packages with the words: “with care” upon them carried in
      after the piano.
    

      They were boxes of looking-glasses and crockery. A gorgeous and luxurious
      carriage was dragged in, at the gate, and two white horses were led in
      looking like swans.
    

      “My goodness, what riches!” thought Liza, remembering her old
      pony which Groholsky, who did not care for riding, had bought her for a
      hundred roubles. Compared with those swan-like steeds, her pony seemed to
      her no better than a bug. Groholsky, who was afraid of riding fast, had
      purposely bought Liza a poor horse.
    

      “What wealth!” Liza thought and murmured as she gazed at the
      noisy carriers.
    

      The sun hid behind the tumuli, the air began to lose its dryness and
      limpidity, and still the furniture was being driven up and hauled into the
      house. At last it was so dark that Groholsky left off reading the
      newspaper while Liza still gazed and gazed.
    

      “Shouldn’t we light the lamp?” said Groholsky, afraid
      that a fly might drop into his milk and be swallowed in the darkness.
    

      “Liza! shouldn’t we light the lamp? Shall we sit in darkness,
      my angel?”
    

      Liza did not answer. She was interested in a chaise which had driven up to
      the villa opposite. . . . What a charming little mare was in that chaise.
      Of medium size, not large, but graceful. . . . A gentleman in a top hat
      was sitting in the chaise, a child about three, apparently a boy, was
      sitting on his knees waving his little hands. . . . He was waving his
      little hands and shouting with delight.
    

      Liza suddenly uttered a shriek, rose from her seat and lurched forward.
    

      “What is the matter?” asked Groholsky.
    

      “Nothing. . . I only . . . I fancied. . . .”
    

      The tall, broad-shouldered gentleman in the top hat jumped out of the
      chaise, lifted the boy down, and with a skip and a hop ran gaily in at the
      glass door. The door opened noisily and he vanished into the darkness of
      the villa apartments.
    

      Two smart footmen ran up to the horse in the chaise, and most respectfully
      led it to the gate. Soon the villa opposite was lighted up, and the
      clatter of plates, knives, and forks was audible. The gentleman in the top
      hat was having his supper, and judging by the duration of the clatter of
      crockery, his supper lasted long. Liza fancied she could smell chicken
      soup and roast duck. After supper discordant sounds of the piano floated
      across from the villa. In all probability the gentleman in the top hat was
      trying to amuse the child in some way, and allowing it to strum on it.
    

      Groholsky went up to Liza and put his arm round her waist.
    

      “What wonderful weather!” he said. “What air! Do you
      feel it? I am very happy, Liza, very happy indeed. My happiness is so
      great that I am really afraid of its destruction. The greatest things are
      usually destroyed, and do you know, Liza, in spite of all my happiness, I
      am not absolutely . . . at peace. . . . One haunting thought torments me .
      . . it torments me horribly. It gives me no peace by day or by night. . .
      .”
    

      “What thought?”
    

      “An awful thought, my love. I am tortured by the thought of your
      husband. I have been silent hitherto. I have feared to trouble your inner
      peace, but I cannot go on being silent. Where is he? What has happened to
      him? What has become of him with his money? It is awful! Every night I see
      his face, exhausted, suffering, imploring. . . . Why, only think, my angel—can
      the money he so generously accepted make up to him for you? He loved you
      very much, didn’t he?”
    

      “Very much!”
    

      “There you see! He has either taken to drink now, or . . . I am
      anxious about him! Ah, how anxious I am! Should we write to him, do you
      think? We ought to comfort him . . . a kind word, you know.”
    

      Groholsky heaved a deep sigh, shook his head, and sank into an easy chair
      exhausted by painful reflection. Leaning his head on his fists he fell to
      musing. Judging from his face, his musings were painful.
    

      “I am going to bed,” said Liza; “it’s time.”
    

      Liza went to her own room, undressed, and dived under the bedclothes. She
      used to go to bed at ten o’clock and get up at ten. She was fond of
      her comfort.
    

      She was soon in the arms of Morpheus. Throughout the whole night she had
      the most fascinating dreams. . . . She dreamed whole romances, novels,
      Arabian Nights. . . . The hero of all these dreams was the gentleman in
      the top hat, who had caused her to utter a shriek that evening.
    

      The gentleman in the top hat was carrying her off from Groholsky, was
      singing, was beating Groholsky and her, was flogging the boy under the
      window, was declaring his love, and driving her off in the chaise. . . .
      Oh, dreams! In one night, lying with one’s eyes shut, one may
      sometimes live through more than ten years of happiness . . . . That night
      Liza lived through a great variety of experiences, and very happy ones,
      even in spite of the beating.
    

      Waking up between six and seven, she flung on her clothes, hurriedly did
      her hair, and without even putting on her Tatar slippers with pointed
      toes, ran impulsively on to the verandah. Shading her eyes from the sun
      with one hand, and with the other holding up her slipping clothes, she
      gazed at the villa opposite. Her face beamed . . . . There could be no
      further doubt it was he.
    

      On the verandah in the villa opposite there was a table in front of the
      glass door. A tea service was shining and glistening on the table with a
      silver samovar at the head. Ivan Petrovitch was sitting at the table. He
      had in his hand a glass in a silver holder, and was drinking tea. He was
      drinking it with great relish. That fact could be deduced from the
      smacking of his lips, the sound of which reached Liza’s ears. He was
      wearing a brown dressing-gown with black flowers on it. Massive tassels
      fell down to the ground. It was the first time in her life Liza had seen
      her husband in a dressing-gown, and such an expensive-looking one.
    

      Mishutka was sitting on one of his knees, and hindering him from drinking
      his tea. The child jumped up and down and tried to clutch his papa’s
      shining lip. After every three or four sips the father bent down to his
      son and kissed him on the head. A grey cat with its tail in the air was
      rubbing itself against one of the table legs, and with a plaintive mew
      proclaiming its desire for food. Liza hid behind the verandah curtain, and
      fastened her eyes upon the members of her former family; her face was
      radiant with joy.
    

      “Misha!” she murmured, “Misha! Are you really here,
      Misha? The darling! And how he loves Vanya! Heavens!”
    

      And Liza went off into a giggle when Mishutka stirred his father’s
      tea with a spoon. “And how Vanya loves Misha! My darlings!”
    

      Liza’s heart throbbed, and her head went round with joy and
      happiness. She sank into an armchair and went on observing them, sitting
      down.
    

      “How did they come here?” she wondered as she sent airy kisses
      to Mishutka. “Who gave them the idea of coming here? Heavens! Can
      all that wealth belong to them? Can those swan-like horses that were led
      in at the gate belong to Ivan Petrovitch? Ah!”
    

      When he had finished his tea, Ivan Petrovitch went into the house. Ten
      minutes later, he appeared on the steps and Liza was astounded . . . . He,
      who in his youth only seven years ago had been called Vanushka and Vanka
      and had been ready to punch a man in the face and turn the house upside
      down over twenty kopecks, was dressed devilishly well. He had on a
      broad-brimmed straw hat, exquisite brilliant boots, a piquÃ© waistcoat. . .
      . Thousands of suns, big and little, glistened on his watch-chain. With
      much chic he held in his right hand his gloves and cane.
    

      And what swagger, what style there was in his heavy figure when, with a
      graceful motion of his hand, he bade the footman bring the horse round.
    

      He got into the chaise with dignity, and told the footmen standing round
      the chaise to give him Mishutka and the fishing tackle they had brought.
      Setting Mishutka beside him, and putting his left arm round him, he held
      the reins and drove off.
    

      “Ge-ee up!” shouted Mishutka.
    

      Liza, unaware of what she was doing, waved her handkerchief after them. If
      she had looked in the glass she would have been surprised at her flushed,
      laughing, and, at the same time, tear-stained face. She was vexed that she
      was not beside her gleeful boy, and that she could not for some reason
      shower kisses on him at once.
    

      For some reason! . . . Away with all your petty delicacies!
    

      “Grisha! Grisha!” Liza ran into Groholsky’s bedroom and
      set to work to wake him. “Get up, they have come! The darling!”
    

      “Who has come?” asked Groholsky, waking up.
    

      “Our people . . . Vanya and Misha, they have come, they are in the
      villa opposite. . . . I looked out, and there they were drinking tea. . .
      . And Misha too. . . . What a little angel our Misha has grown! If only
      you had seen him! Mother of God!”
    

      “Seen whom? Why, you are. . . . Who has come? Come where?”
    

      “Vanya and Misha. . . . I have been looking at the villa opposite,
      while they were sitting drinking tea. Misha can drink his tea by himself
      now. . . . Didn’t you see them moving in yesterday, it was they who
      arrived!”
    

      Groholsky rubbed his forehead and turned pale.
    

      “Arrived? Your husband?” he asked.
    

      “Why, yes.”
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Most likely he is going to live here. They don’t know we are
      here. If they did, they would have looked at our villa, but they drank
      their tea and took no notice.”
    

      “Where is he now? But for God’s sake do talk sense! Oh, where
      is he?”
    

      “He has gone fishing with Misha in the chaise. Did you see the
      horses yesterday? Those are their horses . . . Vanya’s . . . Vanya
      drives with them. Do you know what, Grisha? We will have Misha to stay
      with us. . . . We will, won’t we? He is such a pretty boy. Such an
      exquisite boy!”
    

      Groholsky pondered, while Liza went on talking and talking.
    

      “This is an unexpected meeting,” said Groholsky, after
      prolonged and, as usual, harrassing reflection. “Well, who could
      have expected that we should meet here? Well. . . There it is. . . . So be
      it. It seems that it is fated. I can imagine the awkwardness of his
      position when he meets us.”
    

      “Shall we have Misha to stay with us?”
    

      “Yes, we will. . . . It will be awkward meeting him. . . . Why, what
      can I say to him? What can I talk of? It will be awkward for him and
      awkward for me. . . . We ought not to meet. We will carry on
      communications, if necessary, through the servants. . . . My head does
      ache so, Lizotchka. My arms and legs too, I ache all over. Is my head
      feverish?”
    

      Liza put her hand on his forehead and found that his head was hot.
    

      “I had dreadful dreams all night . . . I shan’t get up to-day.
      I shall stay in bed . . . I must take some quinine. Send me my breakfast
      here, little woman.”
    

      Groholsky took quinine and lay in bed the whole day. He drank warm water,
      moaned, had the sheets and pillowcase changed, whimpered, and induced an
      agonising boredom in all surrounding him.
    

      He was insupportable when he imagined he had caught a chill. Liza had
      continually to interrupt her inquisitive observations and run from the
      verandah to his room. At dinner-time she had to put on mustard plasters.
      How boring all this would have been, O reader, if the villa opposite had
      not been at the service of my heroine! Liza watched that villa all day
      long and was gasping with happiness.
    

      At ten o’clock Ivan Petrovitch and Mishutka came back from fishing
      and had breakfast. At two o’clock they had dinner, and at four o’clock
      they drove off somewhere in a carriage. The white horses bore them away
      with the swiftness of lightning. At seven o’clock visitors came to
      see them—all of them men. They were playing cards on two tables in
      the verandah till midnight. One of the men played superbly on the piano.
      The visitors played, ate, drank, and laughed. Ivan Petrovitch guffawing
      loudly, told them an anecdote of Armenian life at the top of his voice, so
      that all the villas round could hear. It was very gay and Mishutka sat up
      with them till midnight.
    

      “Misha is merry, he is not crying,” thought Liza, “so he
      does not remember his mamma. So he has forgotten me!”
    

      And there was a horrible bitter feeling in Liza’s soul. She spent
      the whole night crying. She was fretted by her little conscience, and by
      vexation and misery, and the desire to talk to Mishutka and kiss him. . .
      . In the morning she got up with a headache and tear-stained eyes. Her
      tears Groholsky put down to his own account.
    

      “Do not weep, darling,” he said to her, “I am all right
      to-day, my chest is a little painful, but that is nothing.”
    

      While they were having tea, lunch was being served at the villa opposite.
      Ivan Petrovitch was looking at his plate, and seeing nothing but a morsel
      of goose dripping with fat.
    

      “I am very glad,” said Groholsky, looking askance at Bugrov,
      “very glad that his life is so tolerable! I hope that decent
      surroundings anyway may help to stifle his grief. Keep out of sight, Liza!
      They will see you . . . I am not disposed to talk to him just now . . .
      God be with him! Why trouble his peace?”
    

      But the dinner did not pass off so quietly. During dinner precisely that
      “awkward position” which Groholsky so dreaded occurred. Just
      when the partridges, Groholsky’s favorite dish, had been put on the
      table, Liza was suddenly overcome with confusion, and Groholsky began
      wiping his face with his dinner napkin. On the verandah of the villa
      opposite they saw Bugrov. He was standing with his arms leaning on the
      parapet, and staring straight at them, with his eyes starting out of his
      head.
    

      “Go in, Liza, go in,” Groholsky whispered. “I said we
      must have dinner indoors! What a girl you are, really. . . .”
    

      Bugrov stared and stared, and suddenly began shouting. Groholsky looked at
      him and saw a face full of astonishment. . . .
    

      “Is that you?” bawled Ivan Petrovitch, “you! Are you
      here too?”
    

      Groholsky passed his fingers from one shoulder to another, as though to
      say, “My chest is weak, and so I can’t shout across such a
      distance.” Liza’s heart began throbbing, and everything turned
      round before her eyes. Bugrov ran from his verandah, ran across the road,
      and a few seconds later was standing under the verandah on which Groholsky
      and Liza were dining. Alas for the partridges!
    

      “How are you?” he began, flushing crimson, and stuffing his
      big hands in his pockets. “Are you here? Are you here too?”
    

      “Yes, we are here too. . . .”
    

      “How did you get here?”
    

      “Why, how did you?”
    

      “I? It’s a long story, a regular romance, my good friend! But
      don’t put yourselves out—eat your dinner! I’ve been
      living, you know, ever since then . . . in the Oryol province. I rented an
      estate. A splendid estate! But do eat your dinner! I stayed there from the
      end of May, but now I have given it up. . . . It was cold there, and—well,
      the doctor advised me to go to the Crimea. . . .”
    

      “Are you ill, then?” inquired Groholsky.
    

      “Oh, well. . . . There always seems, as it were . . . something
      gurgling here. . . .”
    

      And at the word “here” Ivan Petrovitch passed his open hand
      from his neck down to the middle of his stomach.
    

      “So you are here too. . . . Yes . . . that’s very pleasant.
      Have you been here long?”
    

      “Since July.”
    

      “Oh, and you, Liza, how are you? Quite well?”
    

      “Quite well,” answered Liza, and was embarrassed.
    

      “You miss Mishutka, I’ll be bound. Eh? Well, he’s here
      with me. . . . I’ll send him over to you directly with Nikifor. This
      is very nice. Well, good-bye! I have to go off directly. . . . I made the
      acquaintance of Prince Ter-Haimazov yesterday; delightful man, though he
      is an Armenian. So he has a croquet party to-day; we are going to play
      croquet. . . . Good-bye! The carriage is waiting . . . .”
    

      Ivan Petrovitch whirled round, tossed his head, and, waving adieu to them,
      ran home.
    

      “Unhappy man,” said Groholsky, heaving a deep sigh as he
      watched him go off.
    

      “In what way is he unhappy?” asked Liza.
    

      “To see you and not have the right to call you his!”
    

      “Fool!” Liza was so bold to think. “Idiot!”
    

      Before evening Liza was hugging and kissing Mishutka. At first the boy
      howled, but when he was offered jam, he was all friendly smiles.
    

      For three days Groholsky and Liza did not see Bugrov. He had disappeared
      somewhere, and was only at home at night. On the fourth day he visited
      them again at dinner-time. He came in, shook hands with both of them, and
      sat down to the table. His face was serious.
    

      “I have come to you on business,” he said. “Read this.”
      And he handed Groholsky a letter. “Read it! Read it aloud!”
    

      Groholsky read as follows:
    

      “My beloved and consoling, never-forgotten son Ioann! I have
      received the respectful and loving letter in which you invite your aged
      father to the mild and salubrious Crimea, to breathe the fragrant air, and
      behold strange lands. To that letter I reply that on taking my holiday, I
      will come to you, but not for long. My colleague, Father Gerasim, is a
      frail and delicate man, and cannot be left alone for long. I am very
      sensible of your not forgetting your parents, your father and your mother.
      . . . You rejoice your father with your affection, and you remember your
      mother in your prayers, and so it is fitting to do. Meet me at Feodosia.
      What sort of town is Feodosia—what is it like? It will be very
      agreeable to see it. Your godmother, who took you from the font, is called
      Feodosia. You write that God has been graciously pleased that you should
      win two hundred thousand roubles. That is gratifying to me. But I cannot
      approve of your having left the service while still of a grade of little
      importance; even a rich man ought to be in the service. I bless you
      always, now and hereafter. Ilya and Seryozhka Andronov send you their
      greetings. You might send them ten roubles each—they are badly off!
    

                                       “Your loving Father,

                                       “Pyotr Bugrov, Priest.”
 

      Groholsky read this letter aloud, and he and Liza both looked inquiringly
      at Bugrov.
    

      “You see what it is,” Ivan Petrovitch began hesitatingly.
      “I should like to ask you, Liza, not to let him see you, to keep out
      of his sight while he is here. I have written to him that you are ill and
      gone to the Caucasus for a cure. If you meet him. . . You see yourself. .
      . . It’s awkward. . . H’m. . . .”
    

      “Very well,” said Liza.
    

      “We can do that,” thought Groholsky, “since he makes
      sacrifices, why shouldn’t we?”
    

      “Please do. . . . If he sees you there will be trouble. . . . My
      father is a man of strict principles. He would curse me in seven churches.
      Don’t go out of doors, Liza, that is all. He won’t be here
      long. Don’t be afraid.”
    

      Father Pyotr did not long keep them waiting. One fine morning Ivan
      Petrovitch ran in and hissed in a mysterious tone:
    

      “He has come! He is asleep now, so please be careful.”
    

      And Liza was shut up within four walls. She did not venture to go out into
      the yard or on to the verandah. She could only see the sky from behind the
      window curtain. Unluckily for her, Ivan Petrovitch’s papa spent his
      whole time in the open air, and even slept on the verandah. Usually Father
      Pyotr, a little parish priest, in a brown cassock and a top hat with a
      curly brim, walked slowly round the villas and gazed with curiosity at the
      “strange lands” through his grandfatherly spectacles. Ivan
      Petrovitch with the Stanislav on a little ribbon accompanied him. He did
      not wear a decoration as a rule, but before his own people he liked to
      show off. In their society he always wore the Stanislav.
    

      Liza was bored to death. Groholsky suffered too. He had to go for his
      walks alone without a companion. He almost shed tears, but . . . had to
      submit to his fate. And to make things worse, Bugrov would run across
      every morning and in a hissing whisper would give some quite unnecessary
      bulletin concerning the health of Father Pyotr. He bored them with those
      bulletins.
    

      “He slept well,” he informed them. “Yesterday he was put
      out because I had no salted cucumbers. . . He has taken to Mishutka; he
      keeps patting him on the head.”
    

      At last, a fortnight later, little Father Pyotr walked for the last time
      round the villas and, to Groholsky’s immense relief, departed. He
      had enjoyed himself, and went off very well satisfied. Liza and Groholsky
      fell back into their old manner of life. Groholsky once more blessed his
      fate. But his happiness did not last for long. A new trouble worse than
      Father Pyotr followed. Ivan Petrovitch took to coming to see them every
      day. Ivan Petrovitch, to be frank, though a capital fellow, was a very
      tedious person. He came at dinner-time, dined with them and stayed a very
      long time. That would not have mattered. But they had to buy vodka, which
      Groholsky could not endure, for his dinner. He would drink five glasses
      and talk the whole dinner-time. That, too, would not have mattered. . . .
      But he would sit on till two o’clock in the morning, and not let
      them get to bed, and, worse still, he permitted himself to talk of things
      about which he should have been silent. When towards two o’clock in
      the morning he had drunk too much vodka and champagne, he would take
      Mishutka in his arms, and weeping, say to him, before Groholsky and Liza:
    

      “Mihail, my son, what am I? I . . . am a scoundrel. I have sold your
      mother! Sold her for thirty pieces of silver, may the Lord punish me!
      Mihail Ivanitch, little sucking pig, where is your mother? Lost! Gone!
      Sold into slavery! Well, I am a scoundrel.”
    

      These tears and these words turned Groholsky’s soul inside out. He
      would look timidly at Liza’s pale face and wring his hands.
    

      “Go to bed, Ivan Petrovitch,” he would say timidly.
    

      “I am going. . . . Come along, Mishutka. . . . The Lord be our
      judge! I cannot think of sleep while I know that my wife is a slave . . .
      . But it is not Groholsky’s fault. . . . The goods were mine, the
      money his. . . . Freedom for the free and Heaven for the saved.”
    

      By day Ivan Petrovitch was no less insufferable to Groholsky. To Groholsky’s
      intense horror, he was always at Liza’s side. He went fishing with
      her, told her stories, walked with her, and even on one occasion, taking
      advantage of Groholsky’s having a cold, carried her off in his
      carriage, goodness knows where, and did not bring her back till night!
    

      “It’s outrageous, inhuman,” thought Groholsky, biting
      his lips.
    

      Groholsky liked to be continually kissing Liza. He could not exist without
      those honeyed kisses, and it was awkward to kiss her before Ivan
      Petrovitch. It was agony. The poor fellow felt forlorn, but fate soon had
      compassion on him. Ivan Petrovitch suddenly went off somewhere for a whole
      week. Visitors had come and carried him off with them . . . And Mishutka
      was taken too.
    

      One fine morning Groholsky came home from a walk good-humoured and
      beaming.
    

      “He has come,” he said to Liza, rubbing his hands. “I am
      very glad he has come. Ha-ha-ha!”
    

      “What are you laughing at?”
    

      “There are women with him.”
    

      “What women?”
    

      “I don’t know. . . . It’s a good thing he has got women.
      . . . A capital thing, in fact. . . . He is still young and fresh. Come
      here! Look!”
    

      Groholsky led Liza on to the verandah, and pointed to the villa opposite.
      They both held their sides, and roared with laughter. It was funny. Ivan
      Petrovitch was standing on the verandah of the villa opposite, smiling.
      Two dark-haired ladies and Mishutka were standing below, under the
      verandah. The ladies were laughing, and loudly talking French.
    

      “French women,” observed Groholsky. “The one nearest us
      isn’t at all bad-looking. Lively damsels, but that’s no
      matter. There are good women to be found even among such. . . . But they
      really do go too far.”
    

      What was funny was that Ivan Petrovitch bent across the verandah, and
      stretching with his long arms, put them round the shoulders of one of the
      French girls, lifted her in the air, and set her giggling on the verandah.
      After lifting up both ladies on to the verandah, he lifted up Mishutka
      too. The ladies ran down and the proceedings were repeated.
    

      “Powerful muscles, I must say,” muttered Groholsky looking at
      this scene. The operation was repeated some six times, the ladies were so
      amiable as to show no embarrassment whatever when the boisterous wind
      disposed of their inflated skirts as it willed while they were being
      lifted. Groholsky dropped his eyes in a shamefaced way when the ladies
      flung their legs over the parapet as they reached the verandah. But Liza
      watched and laughed! What did she care? It was not a case of men
      misbehaving themselves, which would have put her, as a woman, to shame,
      but of ladies.
    

      In the evening, Ivan Petrovitch flew over, and with some embarrassment
      announced that he was now a man with a household to look after . . . .
    

      “You mustn’t imagine they are just anybody,” he said.
      “It is true they are French. They shout at the top of their voices,
      and drink . . . but we all know! The French are brought up to be like
      that! It can’t be helped. . . . The prince,” Ivan Petrovitch
      added, “let me have them almost for nothing. . . . He said: ‘take
      them, take them. . . .’ I must introduce you to the prince sometime.
      A man of culture! He’s for ever writing, writing. . . . And do you
      know what their names are? One is Fanny, the other Isabella. . . . There’s
      Europe, ha-ha-ha! . . . The west! Good-bye!”
    

      Ivan Petrovitch left Liza and Groholsky in peace, and devoted himself to
      his ladies. All day long sound of talk, laughter, and the clatter of
      crockery came from his villa. . . . The lights were not put out till far
      into the night. . . . Groholsky was in bliss. . . . At last, after a
      prolonged interval of agony, he felt happy and at peace again. Ivan
      Petrovitch with his two ladies had no such happiness as he had with one.
      But alas, destiny has no heart. She plays with the Groholskys, the Lizas,
      the Ivans, and the Mishutkas as with pawns. . . . Groholsky lost his peace
      again. . . .
    

      One morning, about ten days afterwards, on waking up late, he went out on
      to the verandah and saw a spectacle which shocked him, revolted him, and
      moved him to intense indignation. Under the verandah of the villa opposite
      stood the French women, and between them Liza. She was talking and looking
      askance at her own villa as though to see whether that tyrant, that despot
      were awake (so Groholsky interpreted those looks). Ivan Petrovitch
      standing on the verandah with his sleeves tucked up, lifted Isabella into
      the air, then Fanny, and then Liza. When he was lifting Liza it seemed to
      Groholsky that he pressed her to himself. . . . Liza too flung one leg
      over the parapet. . . . Oh these women! All sphinxes, every one of them!
    

      When Liza returned home from her husband’s villa and went into the
      bedroom on tip-toe, as though nothing had happened, Groholsky, pale, with
      hectic flushes on his cheeks, was lying in the attitude of a man at his
      last gasp and moaning.
    

      On seeing Liza, he sprang out of bed, and began pacing about the bedroom.
    

      “So that’s what you are like, is it?” he shrieked in a
      high tenor. “So that’s it! Very much obliged to you! It’s
      revolting, madam! Immoral, in fact! Let me tell you that!”
    

      Liza turned pale, and of course burst into tears. When women feel that
      they are in the right, they scold and shed tears; when they are conscious
      of being in fault, they shed tears only.
    

      “On a level with those depraved creatures! It’s . . . it’s
      . . . it’s . . . lower than any impropriety! Why, do you know what
      they are? They are kept women! Cocottes! And you a respectable woman go
      rushing off where they are. . . And he . . . He! What does he want? What
      more does he want of me? I don’t understand it! I have given him
      half of my property—I have given him more! You know it yourself! I
      have given him what I have not myself. . . . I have given him almost all.
      . . . And he! I’ve put up with your calling him Vanya, though he has
      no right whatever to such intimacy. I have put up with your walks, kisses
      after dinner. . . . I have put up with everything, but this I will not put
      up with. . . . Either he or I! Let him go away, or I go away! I’m
      not equal to living like this any longer, no! You can see that for
      yourself! . . . Either he or I. . . . Enough! The cup is brimming over. .
      . . I have suffered a great deal as it is. . . . I am going to talk to him
      at once—this minute! What is he, after all? What has he to be proud
      of? No, indeed. . . . He has no reason to think so much of himself . . . .”
    

      Groholsky said a great many more valiant and stinging things, but did not
      “go at once”; he felt timid and abashed. . . . He went to Ivan
      Petrovitch three days later.
    

      When he went into his apartment, he gaped with astonishment. He was amazed
      at the wealth and luxury with which Bugrov had surrounded himself. Velvet
      hangings, fearfully expensive chairs. . . . One was positively ashamed to
      step on the carpet. Groholsky had seen many rich men in his day, but he
      had never seen such frenzied luxury. . . . And the higgledy-piggledy
      muddle he saw when, with an inexplicable tremor, he walked into the
      drawing-room—plates with bits of bread on them were lying about on
      the grand piano, a glass was standing on a chair, under the table there
      was a basket with a filthy rag in it. . . . Nut shells were strewn about
      in the windows. Bugrov himself was not quite in his usual trim when
      Groholsky walked in . . . . With a red face and uncombed locks he was
      pacing about the room in deshabille, talking to himself, apparently much
      agitated. Mishutka was sitting on the sofa there in the drawing-room, and
      was making the air vibrate with a piercing scream.
    

      “It’s awful, Grigory Vassilyevitch!” Bugrov began on
      seeing Groholsky, “such disorder . . . such disorder . . . Please
      sit down. You must excuse my being in the costume of Adam and Eve. . . .
      It’s of no consequence. . . . Horrible disorderliness! I don’t
      understand how people can exist here, I don’t understand it! The
      servants won’t do what they are told, the climate is horrible,
      everything is expensive. . . . Stop your noise,” Bugrov shouted,
      suddenly coming to a halt before Mishutka; “stop it, I tell you!
      Little beast, won’t you stop it?”
    

      And Bugrov pulled Mishutka’s ear.
    

      “That’s revolting, Ivan Petrovitch,” said Groholsky in a
      tearful voice. “How can you treat a tiny child like that? You really
      are. . .”
    

      “Let him stop yelling then. . . . Be quiet—I’ll whip
      you!”
    

      “Don’t cry, Misha darling. . . . Papa won’t touch you
      again. Don’t beat him, Ivan Petrovitch; why, he is hardly more than
      a baby. . . . There, there. . . . Would you like a little horse? I’ll
      send you a little horse. . . . You really are hard-hearted. . . .”
    

      Groholsky paused, and then asked:
    

      “And how are your ladies getting on, Ivan Petrovitch?”
    

      “Not at all. I’ve turned them out without ceremony. I might
      have gone on keeping them, but it’s awkward. . . . The boy will grow
      up . . . . A father’s example. . . . If I were alone, then it would
      be a different thing. . . . Besides, what’s the use of my keeping
      them? Poof . . . it’s a regular farce! I talk to them in Russian,
      and they answer me in French. They don’t understand a thing—you
      can’t knock anything into their heads.”
    

      “I’ve come to you about something, Ivan Petrovitch, to talk
      things over. . . . H’m. . . . It’s nothing very particular.
      But just . . . two or three words. . . . In reality, I have a favour to
      ask of you.”
    

      “What’s that?”
    

      “Would you think it possible, Ivan Petrovitch, to go away? We are
      delighted that you are here; it’s very agreeable for us, but it’s
      inconvenient, don’t you know. . . . You will understand me. It’s
      awkward in a way. . . . Such indefinite relations, such continual
      awkwardness in regard to one another. . . . We must part. . . . It’s
      essential in fact. Excuse my saying so, but . . . you must see for
      yourself, of course, that in such circumstances to be living side by side
      leads to . . . reflections . . . that is . . . not to reflections, but
      there is a certain awkward feeling. . . .”
    

      “Yes. . . . That is so, I have thought of it myself. Very good, I
      will go away.”
    

      “We shall be very grateful to you. . . . Believe me, Ivan
      Petrovitch, we shall preserve the most flattering memory of you. The
      sacrifice which you. . .”
    

      “Very good. . . . Only what am I to do with all this? I say, you buy
      this furniture of mine! What do you say? It’s not expensive, eight
      thousand . . . ten. . . . The furniture, the carriage, the grand piano. .
      . .”
    

      “Very good. . . . I will give you ten thousand. . . .”
    

      “Well, that is capital! I will set off to-morrow. I shall go to
      Moscow. It’s impossible to live here. Everything is so dear! Awfully
      dear! The money fairly flies. . . . You can’t take a step without
      spending a thousand! I can’t go on like that. I have a child to
      bring up. . . . Well, thank God that you will buy my furniture. . . . That
      will be a little more in hand, or I should have been regularly bankrupt. .
      . .”
    

      Groholsky got up, took leave of Bugrov, and went home rejoicing. In the
      evening he sent him ten thousand roubles.
    

      Early next morning Bugrov and Mishutka were already at Feodosia.
    

      III
    

      Several months had passed; spring had come. With spring, fine bright days
      had come too. Life was not so dull and hateful, and the earth was more
      fair to look upon. . . . There was a warm breeze from the sea and the open
      country. . . . The earth was covered with fresh grass, fresh leaves were
      green upon the trees. Nature had sprung into new life, and had put on new
      array.
    

      It might be thought that new hopes and new desires would surge up in man
      when everything in nature is renewed, and young and fresh . . . but it is
      hard for man to renew life. . . .
    

      Groholsky was still living in the same villa. His hopes and desires, small
      and unexacting, were still concentrated on the same Liza, on her alone,
      and on nothing else! As before, he could not take his eyes off her, and
      gloated over the thought: how happy I am! The poor fellow really did feel
      awfully happy. Liza sat as before on the verandah, and unaccountably
      stared with bored eyes at the villa opposite and the trees near it through
      which there was a peep at the dark blue sea. . . . As before, she spent
      her days for the most part in silence, often in tears and from time to
      time in putting mustard plasters on Groholsky. She might be congratulated
      on one new sensation, however. There was a worm gnawing at her vitals. . .
      . That worm was misery. . . . She was fearfully miserable, pining for her
      son, for her old, her cheerful manner of life. Her life in the past had
      not been particularly cheerful, but still it was livelier than her present
      existence. When she lived with her husband she used from time to time to
      go to a theatre, to an entertainment, to visit acquaintances. But here
      with Groholsky it was all quietness and emptiness. . . . Besides, here
      there was one man, and he with his ailments and his continual mawkish
      kisses, was like an old grandfather for ever shedding tears of joy.
    

      It was boring! Here she had not Mihey Sergeyitch who used to be fond of
      dancing the mazurka with her. She had not Spiridon Nikolaitch, the son of
      the editor of the Provincial News. Spiridon Nikolaitch sang well
      and recited poetry. Here she had not a table set with lunch for visitors.
      She had not Gerasimovna, the old nurse who used to be continually
      grumbling at her for eating too much jam. . . . She had no one! There was
      simply nothing for her but to lie down and die of depression. Groholsky
      rejoiced in his solitude, but . . . he was wrong to rejoice in it. All too
      soon he paid for his egoism. At the beginning of May when the very air
      seemed to be in love and faint with happiness, Groholsky lost everything;
      the woman he loved and. . .
    

      That year Bugrov, too, visited the Crimea. He did not take the villa
      opposite, but pottered about, going from one town to another with
      Mishutka. He spent his time eating, drinking, sleeping, and playing cards.
      He had lost all relish for fishing, shooting and the French women, who,
      between ourselves, had robbed him a bit. He had grown thin, lost his broad
      and beaming smiles, and had taken to dressing in canvas. Ivan Petrovitch
      from time to time visited Groholsky’s villa. He brought Liza jam,
      sweets, and fruit, and seemed trying to dispel her ennui. Groholsky was
      not troubled by these visits, especially as they were brief and
      infrequent, and were apparently paid on account of Mishutka, who could not
      under any circumstances have been altogether deprived of the privilege of
      seeing his mother. Bugrov came, unpacked his presents, and after saying a
      few words, departed. And those few words he said not to Liza but to
      Groholsky . . . . With Liza he was silent and Groholsky’s mind was
      at rest; but there is a Russian proverb which he would have done well to
      remember: “Don’t fear the dog that barks, but fear the dog
      that’s quiet. . . .” A fiendish proverb, but in practical life
      sometimes indispensable.
    

      As he was walking in the garden one day, Groholsky heard two voices in
      conversation. One voice was a man’s, the other was a woman’s.
      One belonged to Bugrov, the other to Liza. Groholsky listened, and turning
      white as death, turned softly towards the speakers. He halted behind a
      lilac bush, and proceeded to watch and listen. His arms and legs turned
      cold. A cold sweat came out upon his brow. He clutched several branches of
      the lilac that he might not stagger and fall down. All was over!
    

      Bugrov had his arm round Liza’s waist, and was saying to her:
    

      “My darling! what are we to do? It seems it was God’s will. .
      . . I am a scoundrel. . . . I sold you. I was seduced by that Herod’s
      money, plague take him, and what good have I had from the money? Nothing
      but anxiety and display! No peace, no happiness, no position . . . . One
      sits like a fat invalid at the same spot, and never a step forwarder. . .
      . Have you heard that Andrushka Markuzin has been made a head clerk?
      Andrushka, that fool! While I stagnate. . . . Good heavens! I have lost
      you, I have lost my happiness. I am a scoundrel, a blackguard, how do you
      think I shall feel at the dread day of judgment?”
    

      “Let us go away, Vanya,” wailed Liza. “I am dull. . . .
      I am dying of depression.”
    

      “We cannot, the money has been taken. . . .”
    

      “Well, give it back again.”
    

      “I should be glad to, but . . . wait a minute. I have spent it all.
      We must submit, my girl. God is chastising us. Me for my covetousness and
      you for your frivolity. Well, let us be tortured. . . . It will be the
      better for us in the next world.”
    

      And in an access of religious feeling, Bugrov turned up his eyes to
      heaven.
    

      “But I cannot go on living here; I am miserable.”
    

      “Well, there is no help for it. I’m miserable too. Do you
      suppose I am happy without you? I am pining and wasting away! And my chest
      has begun to be bad! . . . You are my lawful wife, flesh of my flesh . . .
      one flesh. . . . You must live and bear it! While I . . . will drive over
      . . . visit you.”
    

      And bending down to Liza, Bugrov whispered, loudly enough, however, to be
      heard several yards away:
    

      “I will come to you at night, Lizanka. . . . Don’t worry. . .
      . I am staying at Feodosia close by. . . . I will live here near you till
      I have run through everything . . . and I soon shall be at my last
      farthing! A-a-ah, what a life it is! Dreariness, ill . . . my chest is
      bad, and my stomach is bad.”
    

      Bugrov ceased speaking, and then it was Liza’s turn. . . . My God,
      the cruelty of that woman! She began weeping, complaining, enumerating all
      the defects of her lover and her own sufferings. Groholsky as he listened
      to her, felt that he was a villain, a miscreant, a murderer.
    

      “He makes me miserable. . . .” Liza said in conclusion.
    

      After kissing Liza at parting, and going out at the garden gate, Bugrov
      came upon Groholsky, who was standing at the gate waiting for him.
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch,” said Groholsky in the tone of a dying man,
      “I have seen and heard it all. . . It’s not honourable on your
      part, but I do not blame you. . . . You love her too, but you must
      understand that she is mine. Mine! I cannot live without her! How is it
      you don’t understand that? Granted that you love her, that you are
      miserable. . . . Have I not paid you, in part at least, for your
      sufferings? For God’s sake, go away! For God’s sake, go away!
      Go away from here for ever, I implore you, or you will kill me. . . .”
    

      “I have nowhere to go,” Bugrov said thickly.
    

      “H’m, you have squandered everything. . . . You are an
      impulsive man. Very well. . . . Go to my estate in the province of
      Tchernigov. If you like I will make you a present of the property. It’s
      a small estate, but a good one. . . . On my honour, it’s a good one!”
    

      Bugrov gave a broad grin. He suddenly felt himself in the seventh heaven.
    

      “I will give it you. . . . This very day I will write to my steward
      and send him an authorisation for completing the purchase. You must tell
      everyone you have bought it. . . . Go away, I entreat you.”
    

      “Very good, I will go. I understand.”
    

      “Let us go to a notary . . . at once,” said Groholsky, greatly
      cheered, and he went to order the carriage.
    

      On the following evening, when Liza was sitting on the garden seat where
      her rendezvous with Ivan Petrovitch usually took place, Groholsky went
      quietly to her. He sat down beside her, and took her hand.
    

      “Are you dull, Lizotchka?” he said, after a brief silence.
      “Are you depressed? Why shouldn’t we go away somewhere? Why is
      it we always stay at home? We want to go about, to enjoy ourselves, to
      make acquaintances. . . . Don’t we?”
    

      “I want nothing,” said Liza, and turned her pale, thin face
      towards the path by which Bugrov used to come to her.
    

      Groholsky pondered. He knew who it was she expected, who it was she
      wanted.
    

      “Let us go home, Liza,” he said, “it is damp here. . . .”
    

      “You go; I’ll come directly.”
    

      Groholsky pondered again.
    

      “You are expecting him?” he asked, and made a wry face as
      though his heart had been gripped with red-hot pincers.
    

      “Yes. . . . I want to give him the socks for Misha. . . .”
    

      “He will not come.”
    

      “How do you know?”
    

      “He has gone away. . . .”
    

      Liza opened her eyes wide. . . .
    

      “He has gone away, gone to the Tchernigov province. I have given him
      my estate. . . .”
    

      Liza turned fearfully pale, and caught at Groholsky’s shoulder to
      save herself from falling.
    

      “I saw him off at the steamer at three o’clock.”
    

      Liza suddenly clutched at her head, made a movement, and falling on the
      seat, began shaking all over.
    

      “Vanya,” she wailed, “Vanya! I will go to Vanya. . . .
      Darling!”
    

      She had a fit of hysterics. . . .
    

      And from that evening, right up to July, two shadows could be seen in the
      park in which the summer visitors took their walks. The shadows wandered
      about from morning till evening, and made the summer visitors feel dismal.
      . . . After Liza’s shadow invariably walked the shadow of Groholsky.
      . . . I call them shadows because they had both lost their natural
      appearance. They had grown thin and pale and shrunken, and looked more
      like shadows than living people. . . . Both were pining away like fleas in
      the classic anecdote of the Jew who sold insect powder.
    

      At the beginning of July, Liza ran away from Groholsky, leaving a note in
      which she wrote that she was going for a time to “her son” . .
      . For a time! She ran away by night when Groholsky was asleep . . . .
      After reading her letter Groholsky spent a whole week wandering round
      about the villa as though he were mad, and neither ate nor slept. In
      August, he had an attack of recurrent fever, and in September he went
      abroad. There he took to drink. . . . He hoped in drink and dissipation to
      find comfort. . . . He squandered all his fortune, but did not succeed,
      poor fellow, in driving out of his brain the image of the beloved woman
      with the kittenish face . . . . Men do not die of happiness, nor do they
      die of misery. Groholsky’s hair went grey, but he did not die: he is
      alive to this day. . . . He came back from abroad to have “just a
      peep” at Liza . . . . Bugrov met him with open arms, and made him
      stay for an indefinite period. He is staying with Bugrov to this day.
    

      This year I happened to be passing through Groholyovka, Bugrov’s
      estate. I found the master and the mistress of the house having supper. .
      . . Ivan Petrovitch was highly delighted to see me, and fell to pressing
      good things upon me. . . . He had grown rather stout, and his face was a
      trifle puffy, though it was still rosy and looked sleek and
      well-nourished. . . . He was not bald. Liza, too, had grown fatter.
      Plumpness did not suit her. Her face was beginning to lose the kittenish
      look, and was, alas! more suggestive of the seal. Her cheeks were
      spreading upwards, outwards, and to both sides. The Bugrovs were living in
      first-rate style. They had plenty of everything. The house was overflowing
      with servants and edibles. . . .
    

      When we had finished supper we got into conversation. Forgetting that Liza
      did not play, I asked her to play us something on the piano.
    

      “She does not play,” said Bugrov; “she is no musician. .
      . . Hey, you there! Ivan! call Grigory Vassilyevitch here! What’s he
      doing there?” And turning to me, Bugrov added, “Our musician
      will come directly; he plays the guitar. We keep the piano for Mishutka—we
      are having him taught. . . .”
    

      Five minutes later, Groholsky walked into the room—sleepy, unkempt,
      and unshaven. . . . He walked in, bowed to me, and sat down on one side.
    

      “Why, whoever goes to bed so early?” said Bugrov, addressing
      him. “What a fellow you are really! He’s always asleep, always
      asleep . . . The sleepy head! Come, play us something lively. . . .”
    

      Groholsky turned the guitar, touched the strings, and began singing:
    

          “Yesterday I waited for my dear one. . . .”
 

      I listened to the singing, looked at Bugrov’s well-fed countenance,
      and thought: “Nasty brute!” I felt like crying. . . . When he
      had finished singing, Groholsky bowed to us, and went out.
    

      “And what am I to do with him?” Bugrov said when he had gone
      away. “I do have trouble with him! In the day he is always brooding
      and brooding. . . . And at night he moans. . . . He sleeps, but he sighs
      and moans in his sleep. . . . It is a sort of illness. . . . What am I to
      do with him, I can’t think! He won’t let us sleep. . . . I am
      afraid that he will go out of his mind. People think he is badly treated
      here. . . . In what way is he badly treated? He eats with us, and he
      drinks with us. . . . Only we won’t give him money. If we were to
      give him any he would spend it on drink or waste it . . . . That’s
      another trouble for me! Lord forgive me, a sinner!”
    

      They made me stay the night. When I woke next morning, Bugrov was giving
      some one a lecture in the adjoining room. . . .
    

      “Set a fool to say his prayers, and he will crack his skull on the
      floor! Why, who paints oars green! Do think, blockhead! Use your sense!
      Why don’t you speak?”
    

      “I . . . I . . . made a mistake,” said a husky tenor
      apologetically.
    

      The tenor belonged to Groholsky.
    

      Groholsky saw me to the station.
    

      “He is a despot, a tyrant,” he kept whispering to me all the
      way. “He is a generous man, but a tyrant! Neither heart nor brain
      are developed in him. . . . He tortures me! If it were not for that noble
      woman, I should have gone away long ago. I am sorry to leave her. It’s
      somehow easier to endure together.”
    

      Groholsky heaved a sigh, and went on:
    

      “She is with child. . . . You notice it? It is really my child. . .
      . Mine. . . . She soon saw her mistake, and gave herself to me again. She
      cannot endure him. . . .”
    

      “You are a rag,” I could not refrain from saying to Groholsky.
    

      “Yes, I am a man of weak character. . . . That is quite true. I was
      born so. Do you know how I came into the world? My late papa cruelly
      oppressed a certain little clerk—it was awful how he treated him! He
      poisoned his life. Well . . . and my late mama was tender-hearted. She
      came from the people, she was of the working class. . . . She took that
      little clerk to her heart from pity. . . . Well . . . and so I came into
      the world. . . . The son of the ill-treated clerk. How could I have a
      strong will? Where was I to get it from? But that’s the second bell.
      . . . Good-bye. Come and see us again, but don’t tell Ivan
      Petrovitch what I have said about him.”
    

      I pressed Groholsky’s hand, and got into the train. He bowed towards
      the carriage, and went to the water-barrel—I suppose he was thirsty!
    











      THE DOCTOR
    

IT was still in the
      drawing-room, so still that a house-fly that had flown in from outside
      could be distinctly heard brushing against the ceiling. Olga Ivanovna, the
      lady of the villa, was standing by the window, looking out at the
      flower-beds and thinking. Dr. Tsvyetkov, who was her doctor as well as an
      old friend, and had been sent for to treat her son Misha, was sitting in
      an easy chair and swinging his hat, which he held in both hands, and he
      too was thinking. Except them, there was not a soul in the drawing-room or
      in the adjoining rooms. The sun had set, and the shades of evening began
      settling in the corners under the furniture and on the cornices.
    

      The silence was broken by Olga Ivanovna.
    

      “No misfortune more terrible can be imagined,” she said,
      without turning from the window. “You know that life has no value
      for me whatever apart from the boy.”
    

      “Yes, I know that,” said the doctor.
    

      “No value whatever,” said Olga Ivanovna, and her voice
      quivered. “He is everything to me. He is my joy, my happiness, my
      wealth. And if, as you say, I cease to be a mother, if he . . . dies,
      there will be nothing left of me but a shadow. I cannot survive it.”
    

      Wringing her hands, Olga Ivanovna walked from one window to the other and
      went on:
    

      “When he was born, I wanted to send him away to the Foundling
      Hospital, you remember that, but, my God, how can that time be compared
      with now? Then I was vulgar, stupid, feather-headed, but now I am a
      mother, do you understand? I am a mother, and that’s all I care to
      know. Between the present and the past there is an impassable gulf.”
    

      Silence followed again. The doctor shifted his seat from the chair to the
      sofa and impatiently playing with his hat, kept his eyes fixed upon Olga
      Ivanovna. From his face it could be seen that he wanted to speak, and was
      waiting for a fitting moment.
    

      “You are silent, but still I do not give up hope,” said the
      lady, turning round. “Why are you silent?”
    

      “I should be as glad of any hope as you, Olga, but there is none,”
      Tsvyetkov answered, “we must look the hideous truth in the face. The
      boy has a tumour on the brain, and we must try to prepare ourselves for
      his death, for such cases never recover.”
    

      “Nikolay, are you certain you are not mistaken?”
    

      “Such questions lead to nothing. I am ready to answer as many as you
      like, but it will make it no better for us.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna pressed her face into the window curtains, and began weeping
      bitterly. The doctor got up and walked several times up and down the
      drawing-room, then went to the weeping woman, and lightly touched her arm.
      Judging from his uncertain movements, from the expression of his gloomy
      face, which looked dark in the dusk of the evening, he wanted to say
      something.
    

      “Listen, Olga,” he began. “Spare me a minute’s
      attention; there is something I must ask you. You can’t attend to me
      now, though. I’ll come later, afterwards. . . .” He sat down
      again, and sank into thought. The bitter, imploring weeping, like the
      weeping of a little girl, continued. Without waiting for it to end,
      Tsvyetkov heaved a sigh and walked out of the drawing-room. He went into
      the nursery to Misha. The boy was lying on his back as before, staring at
      one point as though he were listening. The doctor sat down on his bed and
      felt his pulse.
    

      “Misha, does your head ache?” he asked.
    

      Misha answered, not at once: “Yes. I keep dreaming.”
    

      “What do you dream?”
    

      “All sorts of things. . . .”
    

      The doctor, who did not know how to talk with weeping women or with
      children, stroked his burning head, and muttered:
    

      “Never mind, poor boy, never mind. . . . One can’t go through
      life without illness. . . . Misha, who am I—do you know me?”
    

      Misha did not answer.
    

      “Does your head ache very badly?”
    

      “Ve-ery. I keep dreaming.”
    

      After examining him and putting a few questions to the maid who was
      looking after the sick child, the doctor went slowly back to the
      drawing-room. There it was by now dark, and Olga Ivanovna, standing by the
      window, looked like a silhouette.
    

      “Shall I light up?” asked Tsvyetkov.
    

      No answer followed. The house-fly was still brushing against the ceiling.
      Not a sound floated in from outside as though the whole world, like the
      doctor, were thinking, and could not bring itself to speak. Olga Ivanovna
      was not weeping now, but as before, staring at the flower-bed in profound
      silence. When Tsvyetkov went up to her, and through the twilight glanced
      at her pale face, exhausted with grief, her expression was such as he had
      seen before during her attacks of acute, stupefying, sick headache.
    

      “Nikolay Trofimitch!” she addressed him, “and what do
      you think about a consultation?”
    

      “Very good; I’ll arrange it to-morrow.”
    

      From the doctor’s tone it could be easily seen that he put little
      faith in the benefit of a consultation. Olga Ivanovna would have asked him
      something else, but her sobs prevented her. Again she pressed her face
      into the window curtain. At that moment, the strains of a band playing at
      the club floated in distinctly. They could hear not only the wind
      instruments, but even the violins and the flutes.
    

      “If he is in pain, why is he silent?” asked Olga Ivanovna.
      “All day long, not a sound, he never complains, and never cries. I
      know God will take the poor boy from us because we have not known how to
      prize him. Such a treasure!”
    

      The band finished the march, and a minute later began playing a lively
      waltz for the opening of the ball.
    

      “Good God, can nothing really be done?” moaned Olga Ivanovna.
      “Nikolay, you are a doctor and ought to know what to do! You must
      understand that I can’t bear the loss of him! I can’t survive
      it.”
    

      The doctor, who did not know how to talk to weeping women, heaved a sigh,
      and paced slowly about the drawing-room. There followed a succession of
      oppressive pauses interspersed with weeping and the questions which lead
      to nothing. The band had already played a quadrille, a polka, and another
      quadrille. It got quite dark. In the adjoining room, the maid lighted the
      lamp; and all the while the doctor kept his hat in his hands, and seemed
      trying to say something. Several times Olga Ivanovna went off to her son,
      sat by him for half an hour, and came back again into the drawing-room;
      she was continually breaking into tears and lamentations. The time dragged
      agonisingly, and it seemed as though the evening had no end.
    

      At midnight, when the band had played the cotillion and ceased altogether,
      the doctor got ready to go.
    

      “I will come again to-morrow,” he said, pressing the mother’s
      cold hand. “You go to bed.”
    

      After putting on his greatcoat in the passage and picking up his
      walking-stick, he stopped, thought a minute, and went back into the
      drawing-room.
    

      “I’ll come to-morrow, Olga,” he repeated in a quivering
      voice. “Do you hear?”
    

      She did not answer, and it seemed as though grief had robbed her of all
      power of speech. In his greatcoat and with his stick still in his hand,
      the doctor sat down beside her, and began in a soft, tender half-whisper,
      which was utterly out of keeping with his heavy, dignified figure:
    

      “Olga! For the sake of your sorrow which I share. . . . Now, when
      falsehood is criminal, I beseech you to tell me the truth. You have always
      declared that the boy is my son. Is that the truth?”
    

      Olga Ivanovna was silent.
    

      “You have been the one attachment in my life,” the doctor went
      on, “and you cannot imagine how deeply my feeling is wounded by
      falsehood . . . . Come, I entreat you, Olga, for once in your life, tell
      me the truth. . . . At these moments one cannot lie. Tell me that Misha is
      not my son. I am waiting.”
    

      “He is.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna’s face could not be seen, but in her voice the doctor
      could hear hesitation. He sighed.
    

      “Even at such moments you can bring yourself to tell a lie,”
      he said in his ordinary voice. “There is nothing sacred to you! Do
      listen, do understand me. . . . You have been the one only attachment in
      my life. Yes, you were depraved, vulgar, but I have loved no one else but
      you in my life. That trivial love, now that I am growing old, is the one
      solitary bright spot in my memories. Why do you darken it with deception?
      What is it for?”
    

      “I don’t understand you.”
    

      “Oh my God!” cried Tsvyetkov. “You are lying, you
      understand very well!” he cried more loudly, and he began pacing
      about the drawing-room, angrily waving his stick. “Or have you
      forgotten? Then I will remind you! A father’s rights to the boy are
      equally shared with me by Petrov and Kurovsky the lawyer, who still make
      you an allowance for their son’s education, just as I do! Yes,
      indeed! I know all that quite well! I forgive your lying in the past, what
      does it matter? But now when you have grown older, at this moment when the
      boy is dying, your lying stifles me! How sorry I am that I cannot speak,
      how sorry I am!”
    

      The doctor unbuttoned his overcoat, and still pacing about, said:
    

      “Wretched woman! Even such moments have no effect on her! Even now
      she lies as freely as nine years ago in the Hermitage Restaurant! She is
      afraid if she tells me the truth I shall leave off giving her money, she
      thinks that if she did not lie I should not love the boy! You are lying!
      It’s contemptible!”
    

      The doctor rapped the floor with his stick, and cried:
    

      “It’s loathsome. Warped, corrupted creature! I must despise
      you, and I ought to be ashamed of my feeling. Yes! Your lying has stuck in
      my throat these nine years, I have endured it, but now it’s too much—too
      much.”
    

      From the dark corner where Olga Ivanovna was sitting there came the sound
      of weeping. The doctor ceased speaking and cleared his throat. A silence
      followed. The doctor slowly buttoned up his over-coat, and began looking
      for his hat which he had dropped as he walked about.
    

      “I lost my temper,” he muttered, bending down to the floor.
      “I quite lost sight of the fact that you cannot attend to me now. .
      . . God knows what I have said. . . . Don’t take any notice of it,
      Olga.”
    

      He found his hat and went towards the dark corner.
    

      “I have wounded you,” he said in a soft, tender half-whisper,
      “but once more I entreat you, tell me the truth; there should not be
      lying between us. . . . I blurted it out, and now you know that Petrov and
      Kurovsky are no secret to me. So now it is easy for you to tell me the
      truth.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna thought a moment, and with perceptible hesitation, said:
    

      “Nikolay, I am not lying—Misha is your child.”
    

      “My God,” moaned the doctor, “then I will tell you
      something more: I have kept your letter to Petrov in which you call him
      Misha’s father! Olga, I know the truth, but I want to hear it from
      you! Do you hear?”
    

      Olga Ivanovna made no reply, but went on weeping. After waiting for an
      answer the doctor shrugged his shoulders and went out.
    

      “I will come to-morrow,” he called from the passage.
    

      All the way home, as he sat in his carriage, he was shrugging his
      shoulders and muttering:
    

      “What a pity that I don’t know how to speak! I haven’t
      the gift of persuading and convincing. It’s evident she does not
      understand me since she lies! It’s evident! How can I make her see?
      How?”
    











      TOO EARLY!
    

THE bells are
      ringing for service in the village of Shalmovo. The sun is already kissing
      the earth on the horizon; it has turned crimson and will soon disappear.
      In Semyon’s pothouse, which has lately changed its name and become a
      restaurant—a title quite out of keeping with the wretched little hut
      with its thatch torn off its roof, and its couple of dingy windows—two
      peasant sportsmen are sitting. One of them is called Filimon Slyunka; he
      is an old man of sixty, formerly a house-serf, belonging to the Counts
      Zavalin, by trade a carpenter. He has at one time been employed in a nail
      factory, has been turned off for drunkenness and idleness, and now lives
      upon his old wife, who begs for alms. He is thin and weak, with a
      mangy-looking little beard, speaks with a hissing sound, and after every
      word twitches the right side of his face and jerkily shrugs his right
      shoulder. The other, Ignat Ryabov, a sturdy, broad-shouldered peasant who
      never does anything and is everlastingly silent, is sitting in the corner
      under a big string of bread rings. The door, opening inwards, throws a
      thick shadow upon him, so that Slyunka and Semyon the publican can see
      nothing but his patched knees, his long fleshy nose, and a big tuft of
      hair which has escaped from the thick uncombed tangle covering his head.
      Semyon, a sickly little man, with a pale face and a long sinewy neck,
      stands behind his counter, looks mournfully at the string of bread rings,
      and coughs meekly.
    

      “You think it over now, if you have any sense,” Slyunka says
      to him, twitching his cheek. “You have the thing lying by unused and
      get no sort of benefit from it. While we need it. A sportsman without a
      gun is like a sacristan without a voice. You ought to understand that, but
      I see you don’t understand it, so you can have no real sense. . . .
      Hand it over!”
    

      “You left the gun in pledge, you know!” says Semyon in a thin
      womanish little voice, sighing deeply, and not taking his eyes off the
      string of bread rings. “Hand over the rouble you borrowed, and then
      take your gun.”
    

      “I haven’t got a rouble. I swear to you, Semyon Mitritch, as
      God sees me: you give me the gun and I will go to-day with Ignashka and
      bring it you back again. I’ll bring it back, strike me dead. May I
      have happiness neither in this world nor the next, if I don’t.”
    

      “Semyon Mitritch, do give it,” Ignat Ryabov says in his bass,
      and his voice betrays a passionate desire to get what he asks for.
    

      “But what do you want the gun for?” sighs Semyon, sadly
      shaking his head. “What sort of shooting is there now? It’s
      still winter outside, and no game at all but crows and jackdaws.”
    

      “Winter, indeed,” says Slyunka, hooing the ash out of his pipe
      with his finger, “it is early yet of course, but you never can tell
      with the snipe. The snipe’s a bird that wants watching. If you are
      unlucky, you may sit waiting at home, and miss his flying over, and then
      you must wait till autumn. . . . It is a business! The snipe is not a
      rook. . . . Last year he was flying the week before Easter, while the year
      before we had to wait till the week after Easter! Come, do us a favour,
      Semyon Mitritch, give us the gun. Make us pray for you for ever. As
      ill-luck would have it, Ignashka has pledged his gun for drink too. Ah,
      when you drink you feel nothing, but now . . . ah, I wish I had never
      looked at it, the cursed vodka! Truly it is the blood of Satan! Give it
      us, Semyon Mitritch!”
    

      “I won’t give it you,” says Semyon, clasping his yellow
      hands on his breast as though he were going to pray. “You must act
      fairly, Filimonushka. . . . A thing is not taken out of pawn just anyhow;
      you must pay the money. . . . Besides, what do you want to kill birds for?
      What’s the use? It’s Lent now—you are not going to eat
      them.”
    

      Slyunka exchanges glances with Ryabov in embarrassment, sighs, and says:
      “We would only go stand-shooting.”
    

      “And what for? It’s all foolishness. You are not the sort of
      man to spend your time in foolishness. . . . Ignashka, to be sure, is a
      man of no understanding, God has afflicted him, but you, thank the Lord,
      are an old man. It’s time to prepare for your end. Here, you ought
      to go to the midnight service.”
    

      The allusion to his age visibly stings Slyunka. He clears his throat,
      wrinkles up his forehead, and remains silent for a full minute.
    

      “I say, Semyon Mitritch,” he says hotly, getting up and
      twitching not only in his right cheek but all over his face. “It’s
      God’s truth. . . . May the Almighty strike me dead, after Easter I
      shall get something from Stepan Kuzmitch for an axle, and I will pay you
      not one rouble but two! May the Lord chastise me! Before the holy image, I
      tell you, only give me the gun!”
    

      “Gi-ive it,” Ryabov says in his growling bass; they can hear
      him breathing hard, and it seems that he would like to say a great deal,
      but cannot find the words. “Gi-ive it.”
    

      “No, brothers, and don’t ask,” sighs Semyon, shaking his
      head mournfully. “Don’t lead me into sin. I won’t give
      you the gun. It’s not the fashion for a thing to be taken out of
      pawn and no money paid. Besides—why this indulgence? Go your way and
      God bless you!”
    

      Slyunka rubs his perspiring face with his sleeve and begins hotly swearing
      and entreating. He crosses himself, holds out his hands to the ikon, calls
      his deceased father and mother to bear witness, but Semyon sighs and
      meekly looks as before at the string of bread rings. In the end Ignashka
      Ryabov, hitherto motionless, gets up impulsively and bows down to the
      ground before the innkeeper, but even that has no effect on him.
    

      “May you choke with my gun, you devil,” says Slyunka, with his
      face twitching, and his shoulders, shrugging. “May you choke, you
      plague, you scoundrelly soul.”
    

      Swearing and shaking his fists, he goes out of the tavern with Ryabov and
      stands still in the middle of the road.
    

      “He won’t give it, the damned brute,” he says, in a
      weeping voice, looking into Ryabov’s face with an injured air.
    

      “He won’t give it,” booms Ryabov.
    

      The windows of the furthest huts, the starling cote on the tavern, the
      tops of the poplars, and the cross on the church are all gleaming with a
      bright golden flame. Now they can see only half of the sun, which, as it
      goes to its night’s rest, is winking, shedding a crimson light, and
      seems laughing gleefully. Slyunka and Ryabov can see the forest lying, a
      dark blur, to the right of the sun, a mile and a half from the village,
      and tiny clouds flitting over the clear sky, and they feel that the
      evening will be fine and still.
    

      “Now is just the time,” says Slyunka, with his face twitching.
      “It would be nice to stand for an hour or two. He won’t give
      it us, the damned brute. May he . . .”
    

      “For stand-shooting, now is the very time . . .” Ryabov
      articulated, as though with an effort, stammering.
    

      After standing still for a little they walk out of the village, without
      saying a word to each other, and look towards the dark streak of the
      forest. The whole sky above the forest is studded with moving black spots,
      the rooks flying home to roost. The snow, lying white here and there on
      the dark brown plough-land, is lightly flecked with gold by the sun.
    

      “This time last year I went stand-shooting in Zhivki,” says
      Slyunka, after a long silence. “I brought back three snipe.”
    

      Again there follows a silence. Both stand a long time and look towards the
      forest, and then lazily move and walk along the muddy road from the
      village.
    

      “It’s most likely the snipe haven’t come yet,”
      says Slyunka, “but may be they are here.”
    

      “Kostka says they are not here yet.”
    

      “Maybe they are not, who can tell; one year is not like another. But
      what mud!”
    

      “But we ought to stand.”
    

      “To be sure we ought—why not?”
    

      “We can stand and watch; it wouldn’t be amiss to go to the
      forest and have a look. If they are there we will tell Kostka, or maybe
      get a gun ourselves and come to-morrow. What a misfortune, God forgive me.
      It was the devil put it in my mind to take my gun to the pothouse! I am
      more sorry than I can tell you, Ignashka.”
    

      Conversing thus, the sportsmen approach the forest. The sun has set and
      left behind it a red streak like the glow of a fire, scattered here and
      there with clouds; there is no catching the colours of those clouds: their
      edges are red, but they themselves are one minute grey, at the next lilac,
      at the next ashen.
    

      In the forest, among the thick branches of fir-trees and under the birch
      bushes, it is dark, and only the outermost twigs on the side of the sun,
      with their fat buds and shining bark, stand out clearly in the air. There
      is a smell of thawing snow and rotting leaves. It is still; nothing stirs.
      From the distance comes the subsiding caw of the rooks.
    

      “We ought to be standing in Zhivki now,” whispers Slyunka,
      looking with awe at Ryabov; “there’s good stand-shooting
      there.”
    

      Ryabov too looks with awe at Slyunka, with unbKlinking eyes and open mouth.
    

      “A lovely time,” Slyunka says in a trembling whisper. “The
      Lord is sending a fine spring . . . and I should think the snipe are here
      by now. . . . Why not? The days are warm now. . . . The cranes were flying
      in the morning, lots and lots of them.”
    

      Slyunka and Ryabov, splashing cautiously through the melting snow and
      sticking in the mud, walk two hundred paces along the edge of the forest
      and there halt. Their faces wear a look of alarm and expectation of
      something terrible and extraordinary. They stand like posts, do not speak
      nor stir, and their hands gradually fall into an attitude as though they
      were holding a gun at the cock. . . .
    

      A big shadow creeps from the left and envelops the earth. The dusk of
      evening comes on. If one looks to the right, through the bushes and tree
      trunks, there can be seen crimson patches of the after-glow. It is still
      and damp. . . .
    

      “There’s no sound of them,” whispers Slyunka, shrugging
      with the cold and sniffing with his chilly nose.
    

      But frightened by his own whisper, he holds his finger up at some one,
      opens his eyes wide, and purses up his lips. There is a sound of a light
      snapping. The sportsmen look at each other significantly, and tell each
      other with their eyes that it is nothing. It is the snapping of a dry twig
      or a bit of bark. The shadows of evening keep growing and growing, the
      patches of crimson gradually grow dim, and the dampness becomes
      unpleasant.
    

      The sportsmen remain standing a long time, but they see and hear nothing.
      Every instant they expect to see a delicate leaf float through the air, to
      hear a hurried call like the husky cough of a child, and the flutter of
      wings.
    

      “No, not a sound,” Slyunka says aloud, dropping his hands and
      beginning to bKlink. “So they have not come yet.”
    

      “It’s early!”
    

      “You are right there.”
    

      The sportsmen cannot see each other’s faces, it is getting rapidly
      dark.
    

      “We must wait another five days,” says Slyunka, as he comes
      out from behind a bush with Ryabov. “It’s too early!”
    

      They go homewards, and are silent all the way.
    











      THE COSSACK
    

MAXIM TORTCHAKOV, a
      farmer in southern Russia, was driving home from church with his young
      wife and bringing back an Easter cake which had just been blessed. The sun
      had not yet risen, but the east was all tinged with red and gold and had
      dissipated the haze which usually, in the early morning, screens the blue
      of the sky from the eyes. It was quiet. . . . The birds were hardly yet
      awake . . . . The corncrake uttered its clear note, and far away above a
      little tumulus, a sleepy kite floated, heavily flapping its wings, and no
      other living creature could be seen all over the steppe.
    

      Tortchakov drove on and thought that there was no better nor happier
      holiday than the Feast of Christ’s Resurrection. He had only lately
      been married, and was now keeping his first Easter with his wife. Whatever
      he looked at, whatever he thought about, it all seemed to him bright,
      joyous, and happy. He thought about his farming, and thought that it was
      all going well, that the furnishing of his house was all the heart could
      desire—there was enough of everything and all of it good; he looked
      at his wife, and she seemed to him lovely, kind, and gentle. He was
      delighted by the glow in the east, and the young grass, and his squeaking
      chaise, and the kite. . . . And when on the way, he ran into a tavern to
      light his cigarette and drank a glass, he felt happier still.
    

      “It is said, ‘Great is the day,’” he chattered.
      “Yes, it is great! Wait a bit, Lizaveta, the sun will begin to
      dance. It dances every Easter. So it rejoices too!”
    

      “It is not alive,” said his wife.
    

      “But there are people on it!” exclaimed Tortchakov, “there
      are really! Ivan Stepanitch told me that there are people on all the
      planets—on the sun, and on the moon! Truly . . . but maybe the
      learned men tell lies—the devil only knows! Stay, surely that’s
      not a horse? Yes, it is!”
    

      At the Crooked Ravine, which was just half-way on the journey home,
      Tortchakov and his wife saw a saddled horse standing motionless, and
      sniffing last year’s dry grass. On a hillock beside the roadside a
      red-haired Cossack was sitting doubled up, looking at his feet.
    

      “Christ is risen!” Maxim shouted to him. “Wo-o-o!”
    

      “Truly He is risen,” answered the Cossack, without raising his
      head.
    

      “Where are you going?”
    

      “Home on leave.”
    

      “Why are you sitting here, then?”
    

      “Why . . . I have fallen ill . . . I haven’t the strength to
      go on.”
    

      “What is wrong?”
    

      “I ache all over.”
    

      “H’m. What a misfortune! People are keeping holiday, and you
      fall sick! But you should ride on to a village or an inn, what’s the
      use of sitting here!”
    

      The Cossack raised his head, and with big, exhausted eyes, scanned Maxim,
      his wife, and the horse.
    

      “Have you come from church?” he asked.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “The holiday found me on the high road. It was not God’s will
      for me to reach home. I’d get on my horse at once and ride off, but
      I haven’t the strength. . . . You might, good Christians, give a
      wayfarer some Easter cake to break his fast!”
    

      “Easter cake?” Tortchakov repeated, “That we can, to be
      sure. . . . Stay, I’ll. . . .”
    

      Maxim fumbled quickly in his pockets, glanced at his wife, and said:
    

      “I haven’t a knife, nothing to cut it with. And I don’t
      like to break it, it would spoil the whole cake. There’s a problem!
      You look and see if you haven’t a knife?”
    

      The Cossack got up groaning, and went to his saddle to get a knife.
    

      “What an idea,” said Tortchakov’s wife angrily. “I
      won’t let you slice up the Easter cake! What should I look like,
      taking it home already cut! Ride on to the peasants in the village, and
      break your fast there!”
    

      The wife took the napkin with the Easter cake in it out of her husband’s
      hands and said:
    

      “I won’t allow it! One must do things properly; it’s not
      a loaf, but a holy Easter cake. And it’s a sin to cut it just
      anyhow.”
    

      “Well, Cossack, don’t be angry,” laughed Tortchakov.
      “The wife forbids it! Good-bye. Good luck on your journey!”
    

      Maxim shook the reins, clicked to his horse, and the chaise rolled on
      squeaking. For some time his wife went on grumbling, and declaring that to
      cut the Easter cake before reaching home was a sin and not the proper
      thing. In the east the first rays of the rising sun shone out, cutting
      their way through the feathery clouds, and the song of the lark was heard
      in the sky. Now not one but three kites were hovering over the steppe at a
      respectful distance from one another. Grasshoppers began churring in the
      young grass.
    

      When they had driven three-quarters of a mile from the Crooked Ravine,
      Tortchakov looked round and stared intently into the distance.
    

      “I can’t see the Cossack,” he said. “Poor, dear
      fellow, to take it into his head to fall ill on the road. There couldn’t
      be a worse misfortune, to have to travel and not have the strength. . . .
      I shouldn’t wonder if he dies by the roadside. We didn’t give
      him any Easter cake, Lizaveta, and we ought to have given it. I’ll
      be bound he wants to break his fast too.”
    

      The sun had risen, but whether it was dancing or not Tortchakov did not
      see. He remained silent all the way home, thinking and keeping his eyes
      fixed on the horse’s black tail. For some unknown reason he felt
      overcome by depression, and not a trace of the holiday gladness was left
      in his heart. When he had arrived home and said, “Christ is risen”
      to his workmen, he grew cheerful again and began talking, but when he had
      sat down to break the fast and had taken a bite from his piece of Easter
      cake, he looked regretfully at his wife, and said:
    

      “It wasn’t right of us, Lizaveta, not to give that Cossack
      something to eat.”
    

      “You are a queer one, upon my word,” said Lizaveta, shrugging
      her shoulders in surprise. “Where did you pick up such a fashion as
      giving away the holy Easter cake on the high road? Is it an ordinary loaf?
      Now that it is cut and lying on the table, let anyone eat it that likes—your
      Cossack too! Do you suppose I grudge it?”
    

      “That’s all right, but we ought to have given the Cossack
      some. . . . Why, he was worse off than a beggar or an orphan. On the road,
      and far from home, and sick too.”
    

      Tortchakov drank half a glass of tea, and neither ate nor drank anything
      more. He had no appetite, the tea seemed to choke him, and he felt
      depressed again. After breaking their fast, his wife and he lay down to
      sleep. When Lizaveta woke two hours later, he was standing by the window,
      looking into the yard.
    

      “Are you up already?” asked his wife.
    

      “I somehow can’t sleep. . . . Ah, Lizaveta,” he sighed.
      “We were unkind, you and I, to that Cossack!”
    

      “Talking about that Cossack again!” yawned his wife. “You
      have got him on the brain.”
    

      “He has served his Tsar, shed his blood maybe, and we treated him as
      though he were a pig. We ought to have brought the sick man home and fed
      him, and we did not even give him a morsel of bread.”
    

      “Catch me letting you spoil the Easter cake for nothing! And one
      that has been blessed too! You would have cut it on the road, and shouldn’t
      I have looked a fool when I got home?”
    

      Without saying anything to his wife, Maxim went into the kitchen, wrapped
      a piece of cake up in a napkin, together with half a dozen eggs, and went
      to the labourers in the barn.
    

      “Kuzma, put down your concertina,” he said to one of them.
      “Saddle the bay, or Ivantchik, and ride briskly to the Crooked
      Ravine. There you will see a sick Cossack with a horse, so give him this.
      Maybe he hasn’t ridden away yet.”
    

      Maxim felt cheerful again, but after waiting for Kuzma for some hours, he
      could bear it no longer, so he saddled a horse and went off to meet him.
      He met him just at the Ravine.
    

      “Well, have you seen the Cossack?”
    

      “I can’t find him anywhere, he must have ridden on.”
    

      “H’m . . . a queer business.”
    

      Tortchakov took the bundle from Kuzma, and galloped on farther. When he
      reached Shustrovo he asked the peasants:
    

      “Friends, have you seen a sick Cossack with a horse? Didn’t he
      ride by here? A red-headed fellow on a bay horse.”
    

      The peasants looked at one another, and said they had not seen the
      Cossack.
    

      “The returning postman drove by, it’s true, but as for a
      Cossack or anyone else, there has been no such.”
    

      Maxim got home at dinner time.
    

      “I can’t get that Cossack out of my head, do what you will!”
      he said to his wife. “He gives me no peace. I keep thinking: what if
      God meant to try us, and sent some saint or angel in the form of a
      Cossack? It does happen, you know. It’s bad, Lizaveta; we were
      unkind to the man!”
    

      “What do you keep pestering me with that Cossack for?” cried
      Lizaveta, losing patience at last. “You stick to it like tar!”
    

      “You are not kind, you know . . .” said Maxim, looking into
      his wife’s face.
    

      And for the first time since his marriage he perceived that he wife was
      not kind.
    

      “I may be unkind,” cried Lizaveta, tapping angrily with her
      spoon, “but I am not going to give away the holy Easter cake to
      every drunken man in the road.”
    

      “The Cossack wasn’t drunk!”
    

      “He was drunk!”
    

      “Well, you are a fool then!”
    

      Maxim got up from the table and began reproaching his young wife for
      hard-heartedness and stupidity. She, getting angry too, answered his
      reproaches with reproaches, burst into tears, and went away into their
      bedroom, declaring she would go home to her father’s. This was the
      first matrimonial squabble that had happened in the Tortchakov’s
      married life. He walked about the yard till the evening, picturing his
      wife’s face, and it seemed to him now spiteful and ugly. And as
      though to torment him the Cossack haunted his brain, and Maxim seemed to
      see now his sick eyes, now his unsteady walk.
    

      “Ah, we were unkind to the man,” he muttered.
    

      When it got dark, he was overcome by an insufferable depression such as he
      had never felt before. Feeling so dreary, and being angry with his wife,
      he got drunk, as he had sometimes done before he was married. In his
      drunkenness he used bad language and shouted to his wife that she had a
      spiteful, ugly face, and that next day he would send her packing to her
      father’s. On the morning of Easter Monday, he drank some more to
      sober himself, and got drunk again.
    

      And with that his downfall began.
    

      His horses, cows, sheep, and hives disappeared one by one from the yard;
      Maxim was more and more often drunk, debts mounted up, he felt an aversion
      for his wife. Maxim put down all his misfortunes to the fact that he had
      an unkind wife, and above all, that God was angry with him on account of
      the sick Cossack.
    

      Lizaveta saw their ruin, but who was to blame for it she did not
      understand.
    











      ABORIGINES
    

BETWEEN nine and
      ten in the morning. Ivan Lyashkevsky, a lieutenant of Polish origin, who
      has at some time or other been wounded in the head, and now lives on his
      pension in a town in one of the southern provinces, is sitting in his
      lodgings at the open window talking to Franz Stepanitch Finks, the town
      architect, who has come in to see him for a minute. Both have thrust their
      heads out of the window, and are looking in the direction of the gate near
      which Lyashkevsky’s landlord, a plump little native with pendulous
      perspiring cheeks, in full, blue trousers, is sitting on a bench with his
      waistcoat unbuttoned. The native is plunged in deep thought, and is
      absent-mindedly prodding the toe of his boot with a stick.
    

      “Extraordinary people, I tell you,” grumbled Lyashkevsky,
      looking angrily at the native, “here he has sat down on the bench,
      and so he will sit, damn the fellow, with his hands folded till evening.
      They do absolutely nothing. The wastrels and loafers! It would be all
      right, you scoundrel, if you had money lying in the bank, or had a farm of
      your own where others would be working for you, but here you have not a
      penny to your name, you eat the bread of others, you are in debt all
      round, and you starve your family—devil take you! You wouldn’t
      believe me, Franz Stepanitch, sometimes it makes me so cross that I could
      jump out of the window and give the low fellow a good horse-whipping.
      Come, why don’t you work? What are you sitting there for?”
    

      The native looks indifferently at Lyashkevsky, tries to say something but
      cannot; sloth and the sultry heat have paralysed his conversational
      faculties. . . . Yawning lazily, he makes the sign of the cross over his
      mouth, and turns his eyes up towards the sky where pigeons fly, bathing in
      the hot air.
    

      “You must not be too severe in your judgments, honoured friend,”
      sighs Finks, mopping his big bald head with his handkerchief. “Put
      yourself in their place: business is slack now, there’s unemployment
      all round, a bad harvest, stagnation in trade.”
    

      “Good gracious, how you talk!” cries Lyashkevsky in
      indignation, angrily wrapping his dressing gown round him. “Supposing
      he has no job and no trade, why doesn’t he work in his own home, the
      devil flay him! I say! Is there no work for you at home? Just look, you
      brute! Your steps have come to pieces, the plankway is falling into the
      ditch, the fence is rotten; you had better set to and mend it all, or if
      you don’t know how, go into the kitchen and help your wife. Your
      wife is running out every minute to fetch water or carry out the slops.
      Why shouldn’t you run instead, you rascal? And then you must
      remember, Franz Stepanitch, that he has six acres of garden, that he has
      pigsties and poultry houses, but it is all wasted and no use. The flower
      garden is overgrown with weeds and almost baked dry, while the boys play
      ball in the kitchen garden. Isn’t he a lazy brute? I assure you,
      though I have only the use of an acre and a half with my lodgings, you
      will always find radishes, and salad, and fennel, and onions, while that
      blackguard buys everything at the market.”
    

      “He is a Russian, there is no doing anything with him,” said
      Finks with a condescending smile; “it’s in the Russian blood.
      . . . They are a very lazy people! If all property were given to Germans
      or Poles, in a year’s time you would not recognise the town.”
    

      The native in the blue trousers beckons a girl with a sieve, buys a kopeck’s
      worth of sunflower seeds from her and begins cracking them.
    

      “A race of curs!” says Lyashkevsky angrily. “That’s
      their only occupation, they crack sunflower seeds and they talk politics!
      The devil take them!”
    

      Staring wrathfully at the blue trousers, Lyashkevsky is gradually roused
      to fury, and gets so excited that he actually foams at the mouth. He
      speaks with a Polish accent, rapping out each syllable venomously, till at
      last the little bags under his eyes swell, and he abandons the Russian
      “scoundrels, blackguards, and rascals,” and rolling his eyes,
      begins pouring out a shower of Polish oaths, coughing from his efforts.
      “Lazy dogs, race of curs. May the devil take them!”
    

      The native hears this abuse distinctly, but, judging from the appearance
      of his crumpled little figure, it does not affect him. Apparently he has
      long ago grown as used to it as to the buzzing of the flies, and feels it
      superfluous to protest. At every visit Finks has to listen to a tirade on
      the subject of the lazy good-for-nothing aborigines, and every time
      exactly the same one.
    

      “But . . . I must be going,” he says, remembering that he has
      no time to spare. “Good-bye!”
    

      “Where are you off to?”
    

      “I only looked in on you for a minute. The wall of the cellar has
      cracked in the girls’ high school, so they asked me to go round at
      once to look at it. I must go.”
    

      “H’m. . . . I have told Varvara to get the samovar,”
      says Lyashkevsky, surprised. “Stay a little, we will have some tea;
      then you shall go.”
    

      Finks obediently puts down his hat on the table and remains to drink tea.
      Over their tea Lyashkevsky maintains that the natives are hopelessly
      ruined, that there is only one thing to do, to take them all
      indiscriminately and send them under strict escort to hard labour.
    

      “Why, upon my word,” he says, getting hot, “you may ask
      what does that goose sitting there live upon! He lets me lodgings in his
      house for seven roubles a month, and he goes to name-day parties, that’s
      all that he has to live on, the knave, may the devil take him! He has
      neither earnings nor an income. They are not merely sluggards and
      wastrels, they are swindlers too, they are continually borrowing money
      from the town bank, and what do they do with it? They plunge into some
      scheme such as sending bulls to Moscow, or building oil presses on a new
      system; but to send bulls to Moscow or to press oil you want to have a
      head on your shoulders, and these rascals have pumpkins on theirs! Of
      course all their schemes end in smoke . . . . They waste their money, get
      into a mess, and then snap their fingers at the bank. What can you get out
      of them? Their houses are mortgaged over and over again, they have no
      other property—it’s all been drunk and eaten up long ago.
      Nine-tenths of them are swindlers, the scoundrels! To borrow money and not
      return it is their rule. Thanks to them the town bank is going smash!”
    

      “I was at Yegorov’s yesterday,” Finks interrupts the
      Pole, anxious to change the conversation, “and only fancy, I won six
      roubles and a half from him at picquet.”
    

      “I believe I still owe you something at picquet,” Lyashkevsky
      recollects, “I ought to win it back. Wouldn’t you like one
      game?”
    

      “Perhaps just one,” Finks assents. “I must make haste to
      the high school, you know.”
    

      Lyashkevsky and Finks sit down at the open window and begin a game of
      picquet. The native in the blue trousers stretches with relish, and husks
      of sunflower seeds fall in showers from all over him on to the ground. At
      that moment from the gate opposite appears another native with a long
      beard, wearing a crumpled yellowish-grey cotton coat. He screws up his
      eyes affectionately at the blue trousers and shouts:
    

      “Good-morning, Semyon Nikolaitch, I have the honour to congratulate
      you on the Thursday.”
    

      “And the same to you, Kapiton Petrovitch!”
    

      “Come to my seat! It’s cool here!”
    

      The blue trousers, with much sighing and groaning and waddling from side
      to side like a duck, cross the street.
    

      “Tierce major . . .” mutters Lyashkevsky, “from the
      queen. . . . Five and fifteen. . . . The rascals are talking of politics.
      . . . Do you hear? They have begun about England. I have six hearts.”
    

      “I have the seven spades. My point.”
    

      “Yes, it’s yours. Do you hear? They are abusing Beaconsfield.
      They don’t know, the swine, that Beaconsfield has been dead for ever
      so long. So I have twenty-nine. . . . Your lead.”
    

      “Eight . . . nine . . . ten . . . . Yes, amazing people, these
      Russians! Eleven . . . twelve. . . . The Russian inertia is unique on the
      terrestrial globe.”
    

      “Thirty . . . Thirty-one. . . . One ought to take a good whip, you
      know. Go out and give them Beaconsfield. I say, how their tongues are
      wagging! It’s easier to babble than to work. I suppose you threw
      away the queen of clubs and I didn’t realise it.”
    

      “Thirteen . . . Fourteen. . . . It’s unbearably hot! One must
      be made of iron to sit in such heat on a seat in the full sun! Fifteen.”
    

      The first game is followed by a second, the second by a third. . . . Finks
      loses, and by degrees works himself up into a gambling fever and forgets
      all about the cracking walls of the high school cellar. As Lyashkevsky
      plays he keeps looking at the aborigines. He sees them, entertaining each
      other with conversation, go to the open gate, cross the filthy yard and
      sit down on a scanty patch of shade under an aspen tree. Between twelve
      and one o’clock the fat cook with brown legs spreads before them
      something like a baby’s sheet with brown stains upon it, and gives
      them their dinner. They eat with wooden spoons, keep brushing away the
      flies, and go on talking.
    

      “The devil, it is beyond everything,” cries Lyashkevsky,
      revolted. “I am very glad I have not a gun or a revolver or I should
      have a shot at those cattle. I have four knaves—fourteen. . . . Your
      point. . . . It really gives me a twitching in my legs. I can’t see
      those ruffians without being upset.”
    

      “Don’t excite yourself, it is bad for you.”
    

      “But upon my word, it is enough to try the patience of a stone!”
    

      When he has finished dinner the native in blue trousers, worn out and
      exhausted, staggering with laziness and repletion, crosses the street to
      his own house and sinks feebly on to his bench. He is struggling with
      drowsiness and the gnats, and is looking about him as dejectedly as though
      he were every minute expecting his end. His helpless air drives
      Lyashkevsky out of all patience. The Pole pokes his head out of the window
      and shouts at him, spluttering:
    

      “Been gorging? Ah, the old woman! The sweet darling. He has been
      stuffing himself, and now he doesn’t know what to do with his tummy!
      Get out of my sight, you confounded fellow! Plague take you!”
    

      The native looks sourly at him, and merely twiddles his fingers instead of
      answering. A school-boy of his acquaintance passes by him with his satchel
      on his back. Stopping him the native ponders a long time what to say to
      him, and asks:
    

      “Well, what now?”
    

      “Nothing.”
    

      “How, nothing?”
    

      “Why, just nothing.”
    

      “H’m. . . . And which subject is the hardest?”
    

      “That’s according.” The school-boy shrugs his shoulders.
    

      “I see—er . . . What is the Latin for tree?”
    

      “Arbor.”
    

      “Aha. . . . And so one has to know all that,” sighs the blue
      trousers. “You have to go into it all. . . . It’s hard work,
      hard work. . . . Is your dear Mamma well?”
    

      “She is all right, thank you.”
    

      “Ah. . . . Well, run along.”
    

      After losing two roubles Finks remembers the high school and is horrified.
    

      “Holy Saints, why it’s three o’clock already. How I have
      been staying on. Good-bye, I must run. . . .”
    

      “Have dinner with me, and then go,” says Lyashkevsky. “You
      have plenty of time.”
    

      Finks stays, but only on condition that dinner shall last no more than ten
      minutes. After dining he sits for some five minutes on the sofa and thinks
      of the cracked wall, then resolutely lays his head on the cushion and
      fills the room with a shrill whistling through his nose. While he is
      asleep, Lyashkevsky, who does not approve of an afternoon nap, sits at the
      window, stares at the dozing native, and grumbles:
    

      “Race of curs! I wonder you don’t choke with laziness. No
      work, no intellectual or moral interests, nothing but vegetating . . . .
      disgusting. Tfoo!”
    

      At six o’clock Finks wakes up.
    

      “It’s too late to go to the high school now,” he says,
      stretching. “I shall have to go to-morrow, and now. . . . How about
      my revenge? Let’s have one more game. . . .”
    

      After seeing his visitor off, between nine and ten, Lyashkevsky looks
      after him for some time, and says:
    

      “Damn the fellow, staying here the whole day and doing absolutely
      nothing. . . . Simply get their salary and do no work; the devil take
      them! . . . The German pig. . . .”
    

      He looks out of the window, but the native is no longer there. He has gone
      to bed. There is no one to grumble at, and for the first time in the day
      he keeps his mouth shut, but ten minutes passes and he cannot restrain the
      depression that overpowers him, and begins to grumble, shoving the old
      shabby armchair:
    

      “You only take up room, rubbishly old thing! You ought to have been
      burnt long ago, but I keep forgetting to tell them to chop you up. It’s
      a disgrace!”
    

      And as he gets into bed he presses his hand on a spring of the mattress,
      frowns and says peevishly:
    

      “The con—found—ed spring! It will cut my side all night.
      I will tell them to rip up the mattress to-morrow and get you out, you
      useless thing.”
    

      He falls asleep at midnight, and dreams that he is pouring boiling water
      over the natives, Finks, and the old armchair.
    











      AN INQUIRY
    

IT was midday.
      Voldyrev, a tall, thick-set country gentleman with a cropped head and
      prominent eyes, took off his overcoat, mopped his brow with his silk
      handkerchief, and somewhat diffidently went into the government office.
      There they were scratching away. . . .
    

      “Where can I make an inquiry here?” he said, addressing a
      porter who was bringing a trayful of glasses from the furthest recesses of
      the office. “I have to make an inquiry here and to take a copy of a
      resolution of the Council.”
    

      “That way please! To that one sitting near the window!” said
      the porter, indicating with the tray the furthest window. Voldyrev coughed
      and went towards the window; there, at a green table spotted like typhus,
      was sitting a young man with his hair standing up in four tufts on his
      head, with a long pimply nose, and a long faded uniform. He was writing,
      thrusting his long nose into the papers. A fly was walking about near his
      right nostril, and he was continually stretching out his lower lip and
      blowing under his nose, which gave his face an extremely care-worn
      expression.
    

      “May I make an inquiry about my case here . . . of you? My name is
      Voldyrev. And, by the way, I have to take a copy of the resolution of the
      Council of the second of March.”
    

      The clerk dipped his pen in the ink and looked to see if he had got too
      much on it. Having satisfied himself that the pen would not make a blot,
      he began scribbling away. His lip was thrust out, but it was no longer
      necessary to blow: the fly had settled on his ear.
    

      “Can I make an inquiry here?” Voldyrev repeated a minute
      later, “my name is Voldyrev, I am a landowner. . . .”
    

      “Ivan Alexeitch!” the clerk shouted into the air as though he
      had not observed Voldyrev, “will you tell the merchant Yalikov when
      he comes to sign the copy of the complaint lodged with the police! I’ve
      told him a thousand times!”
    

      “I have come in reference to my lawsuit with the heirs of Princess
      Gugulin,” muttered Voldyrev. “The case is well known. I
      earnestly beg you to attend to me.”
    

      Still failing to observe Voldyrev, the clerk caught the fly on his lip,
      looked at it attentively and flung it away. The country gentleman coughed
      and blew his nose loudly on his checked pocket handkerchief. But this was
      no use either. He was still unheard. The silence lasted for two minutes.
      Voldyrev took a rouble note from his pocket and laid it on an open book
      before the clerk. The clerk wrinkled up his forehead, drew the book
      towards him with an anxious air and closed it.
    

      “A little inquiry. . . . I want only to find out on what grounds the
      heirs of Princess Gugulin. . . . May I trouble you?”
    

      The clerk, absorbed in his own thoughts, got up and, scratching his elbow,
      went to a cupboard for something. Returning a minute later to his table he
      became absorbed in the book again: another rouble note was lying upon it.
    

      “I will trouble you for one minute only. . . . I have only to make
      an inquiry.”
    

      The clerk did not hear, he had begun copying something.
    

      Voldyrev frowned and looked hopelessly at the whole scribbling
      brotherhood.
    

      “They write!” he thought, sighing. “They write, the
      devil take them entirely!”
    

      He walked away from the table and stopped in the middle of the room, his
      hands hanging hopelessly at his sides. The porter, passing again with
      glasses, probably noticed the helpless expression of his face, for he went
      close up to him and asked him in a low voice:
    

      “Well? Have you inquired?”
    

      “I’ve inquired, but he wouldn’t speak to me.”
    

      “You give him three roubles,” whispered the porter.
    

      “I’ve given him two already.”
    

      “Give him another.”
    

      Voldyrev went back to the table and laid a green note on the open book.
    

      The clerk drew the book towards him again and began turning over the
      leaves, and all at once, as though by chance, lifted his eyes to Voldyrev.
      His nose began to shine, turned red, and wrinkled up in a grin.
    

      “Ah . . . what do you want?” he asked.
    

      “I want to make an inquiry in reference to my case. . . . My name is
      Voldyrev.”
    

      “With pleasure! The Gugulin case, isn’t it? Very good. What is
      it then exactly?”
    

      Voldyrev explained his business.
    

      The clerk became as lively as though he were whirled round by a hurricane.
      He gave the necessary information, arranged for a copy to be made, gave
      the petitioner a chair, and all in one instant. He even spoke about the
      weather and asked after the harvest. And when Voldyrev went away he
      accompanied him down the stairs, smiling affably and respectfully, and
      looking as though he were ready any minute to fall on his face before the
      gentleman. Voldyrev for some reason felt uncomfortable, and in obedience
      to some inward impulse he took a rouble out of his pocket and gave it to
      the clerk. And the latter kept bowing and smiling, and took the rouble
      like a conjuror, so that it seemed to flash through the air.
    

      “Well, what people!” thought the country gentleman as he went
      out into the street, and he stopped and mopped his brow with his
      handkerchief.
    











      MARTYRS
    

LIZOTCHKA
      KUDRINSKY, a young married lady who had many admirers, was suddenly taken
      ill, and so seriously that her husband did not go to his office, and a
      telegram was sent to her mamma at Tver. This is how she told the story of
      her illness:
    

      “I went to Lyesnoe to auntie’s. I stayed there a week and then
      I went with all the rest to cousin Varya’s. Varya’s husband is
      a surly brute and a despot (I’d shoot a husband like that), but we
      had a very jolly time there. To begin with I took part in some private
      theatricals. It was A Scandal in a Respectable Family. Hrustalev
      acted marvellously! Between the acts I drank some cold, awfully cold,
      lemon squash, with the tiniest nip of brandy in it. Lemon squash with
      brandy in it is very much like champagne. . . . I drank it and I felt
      nothing. Next day after the performance I rode out on horseback with that
      Adolf Ivanitch. It was rather damp and there was a strong wind. It was
      most likely then that I caught cold. Three days later I came home to see
      how my dear, good Vassya was getting on, and while here to get my silk
      dress, the one that has little flowers on it. Vassya, of course, I did not
      find at home. I went into the kitchen to tell Praskovya to set the
      samovar, and there I saw on the table some pretty little carrots and
      turnips like playthings. I ate one little carrot and well, a turnip too. I
      ate very little, but only fancy, I began having a sharp pain at once—spasms
      . . . spasms . . . spasms . . . ah, I am dying. Vassya runs from the
      office. Naturally he clutches at his hair and turns white. They run for
      the doctor. . . . Do you understand, I am dying, dying.”
    

      The spasms began at midday, before three o’clock the doctor came,
      and at six Lizotchka fell asleep and slept soundly till two o’clock
      in the morning.
    

      It strikes two. . . . The light of the little night lamp filters scantily
      through the pale blue shade. Lizotchka is lying in bed, her white lace cap
      stands out sharply against the dark background of the red cushion. Shadows
      from the blue lamp-shade lie in patterns on her pale face and her round
      plump shoulders. Vassily Stepanovitch is sitting at her feet. The poor
      fellow is happy that his wife is at home at last, and at the same time he
      is terribly alarmed by her illness.
    

      “Well, how do you feel, Lizotchka?” he asks in a whisper,
      noticing that she is awake.
    

      “I am better,” moans Lizotchka. “I don’t feel the
      spasms now, but there is no sleeping. . . . I can’t get to sleep!”
    

      “Isn’t it time to change the compress, my angel?”
    

      Lizotchka sits up slowly with the expression of a martyr and gracefully
      turns her head on one side. Vassily Stepanovitch with reverent awe,
      scarcely touching her hot body with his fingers, changes the compress.
      Lizotchka shrinks, laughs at the cold water which tickles her, and lies
      down again.
    

      “You are getting no sleep, poor boy!” she moans.
    

      “As though I could sleep!”
    

      “It’s my nerves, Vassya, I am a very nervous woman. The doctor
      has prescribed for stomach trouble, but I feel that he doesn’t
      understand my illness. It’s nerves and not the stomach, I swear that
      it is my nerves. There is only one thing I am afraid of, that my illness
      may take a bad turn.”
    

      “No, Lizotchka, no, to-morrow you will be all right!”
    

      “Hardly likely! I am not afraid for myself. . . . I don’t
      care, indeed, I shall be glad to die, but I am sorry for you! You’ll
      be a widower and left all alone.”
    

      Vassitchka rarely enjoys his wife’s society, and has long been used
      to solitude, but Lizotchka’s words agitate him.
    

      “Goodness knows what you are saying, little woman! Why these gloomy
      thoughts?”
    

      “Well, you will cry and grieve, and then you will get used to it.
      You’ll even get married again.”
    

      The husband clutches his head.
    

      “There, there, I won’t!” Lizotchka soothes him, “only
      you ought to be prepared for anything.”
    

      “And all of a sudden I shall die,” she thinks, shutting her
      eyes.
    

      And Lizotchka draws a mental picture of her own death, how her mother, her
      husband, her cousin Varya with her husband, her relations, the admirers of
      her “talent” press round her death bed, as she whispers her
      last farewell. All are weeping. Then when she is dead they dress her,
      interestingly pale and dark-haired, in a pink dress (it suits her) and lay
      her in a very expensive coffin on gold legs, full of flowers. There is a
      smell of incense, the candles splutter. Her husband never leaves the
      coffin, while the admirers of her talent cannot take their eyes off her,
      and say: “As though living! She is lovely in her coffin!” The
      whole town is talking of the life cut short so prematurely. But now they
      are carrying her to the church. The bearers are Ivan Petrovitch, Adolf
      Ivanitch, Varya’s husband, Nikolay Semyonitch, and the black-eyed
      student who had taught her to drink lemon squash with brandy. It’s
      only a pity there’s no music playing. After the burial service comes
      the leave-taking. The church is full of sobs, they bring the lid with
      tassels, and . . . Lizotchka is shut off from the light of day for ever,
      there is the sound of hammering nails. Knock, knock, knock.
    

      Lizotchka shudders and opens her eyes.
    

      “Vassya, are you here?” she asks. “I have such gloomy
      thoughts. Goodness, why am I so unlucky as not to sleep. Vassya, have
      pity, do tell me something!”
    

      “What shall I tell you?”
    

      “Something about love,” Lizotchka says languidly. “Or
      some anecdote about Jews. . . .”
    

      Vassily Stepanovitch, ready for anything if only his wife will be cheerful
      and not talk about death, combs locks of hair over his ears, makes an
      absurd face, and goes up to Lizotchka.
    

      “Does your vatch vant mending?” he asks.
    

      “It does, it does,” giggles Lizotchka, and hands him her gold
      watch from the little table. “Mend it.”
    

      Vassya takes the watch, examines the mechanism for a long time, and
      wriggling and shrugging, says: “She can not be mended . . . in vun
      veel two cogs are vanting. . . .”
    

      This is the whole performance. Lizotchka laughs and claps her hands.
    

      “Capital,” she exclaims. “Wonderful. Do you know,
      Vassya, it’s awfully stupid of you not to take part in amateur
      theatricals! You have a remarkable talent! You are much better than
      Sysunov. There was an amateur called Sysunov who played with us in It’s
      My Birthday. A first-class comic talent, only fancy: a nose as thick
      as a parsnip, green eyes, and he walks like a crane. . . . We all roared;
      stay, I will show you how he walks.”
    

      Lizotchka springs out of bed and begins pacing about the floor, barefooted
      and without her cap.
    

      “A very good day to you!” she says in a bass, imitating a man’s
      voice. “Anything pretty? Anything new under the moon? Ha, ha, ha!”
      she laughs.
    

      “Ha, ha, ha!” Vassya seconds her. And the young pair, roaring
      with laughter, forgetting the illness, chase one another about the room.
      The race ends in Vassya’s catching his wife by her nightgown and
      eagerly showering kisses upon her. After one particularly passionate
      embrace Lizotchka suddenly remembers that she is seriously ill. . . .
    

      “What silliness!” she says, making a serious face and covering
      herself with the quilt. “I suppose you have forgotten that I am ill!
      Clever, I must say!”
    

      “Sorry . . .” falters her husband in confusion.
    

      “If my illness takes a bad turn it will be your fault. Not kind! not
      good!”
    

      Lizotchka closes her eyes and is silent. Her former languor and expression
      of martyrdom return again, there is a sound of gentle moans. Vassya
      changes the compress, and glad that his wife is at home and not gadding
      off to her aunt’s, sits meekly at her feet. He does not sleep all
      night. At ten o’clock the doctor comes.
    

      “Well, how are we feeling?” he asks as he takes her pulse.
      “Have you slept?”
    

      “Badly,” Lizotchka’s husband answers for her, “very
      badly.”
    

      The doctor walks away to the window and stares at a passing chimney-sweep.
    

      “Doctor, may I have coffee to-day?” asks Lizotchka.
    

      “You may.”
    

      “And may I get up?”
    

      “You might, perhaps, but . . . you had better lie in bed another
      day.”
    

      “She is awfully depressed,” Vassya whispers in his ear,
      “such gloomy thoughts, such pessimism. I am dreadfully uneasy about
      her.”
    

      The doctor sits down to the little table, and rubbing his forehead,
      prescribes bromide of potassium for Lizotchka, then makes his bow, and
      promising to look in again in the evening, departs. Vassya does not go to
      the office, but sits all day at his wife’s feet.
    

      At midday the admirers of her talent arrive in a crowd. They are agitated
      and alarmed, they bring masses of flowers and French novels. Lizotchka, in
      a snow-white cap and a light dressing jacket, lies in bed with an
      enigmatic look, as though she did not believe in her own recovery. The
      admirers of her talent see her husband, but readily forgive his presence:
      they and he are united by one calamity at that bedside!
    

      At six o’clock in the evening Lizotchka falls asleep, and again
      sleeps till two o’clock in the morning. Vassya as before sits at her
      feet, struggles with drowsiness, changes her compress, plays at being a
      Jew, and in the morning after a second night of suffering, Liza is
      prinking before the looking-glass and putting on her hat.
    

      “Wherever are you going, my dear?” asks Vassya, with an
      imploring look at her.
    

      “What?” says Lizotchka in wonder, assuming a scared
      expression, “don’t you know that there is a rehearsal to-day
      at Marya Lvovna’s?”
    

      After escorting her there, Vassya having nothing to do to while away his
      boredom, takes his portfolio and goes to the office. His head aches so
      violently from his sleepless nights that his left eye shuts of itself and
      refuses to open. . . .
    

      “What’s the matter with you, my good sir?” his chief
      asks him. “What is it?”
    

      Vassya waves his hand and sits down.
    

      “Don’t ask me, your Excellency,” he says with a sigh.
      “What I have suffered in these two days, what I have suffered! Liza
      has been ill!”
    

      “Good heavens,” cried his chief in alarm. “Lizaveta
      Pavlovna, what is wrong with her?”
    

      Vassily Stepanovitch merely throws up his hands and raises his eyes to the
      ceiling, as though he would say: “It’s the will of Providence.”
    

      “Ah, my boy, I can sympathise with you with all my heart!”
      sighs his chief, rolling his eyes. “I’ve lost my wife, my
      dear, I understand. That is a loss, it is a loss! It’s awful, awful!
      I hope Lizaveta Pavlovna is better now! What doctor is attending her?”
    

      “Von Schterk.”
    

      “Von Schterk! But you would have been better to have called in
      Magnus or Semandritsky. But how very pale your face is. You are ill
      yourself! This is awful!”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, I haven’t slept. What I have suffered,
      what I have been through!”
    

      “And yet you came! Why you came I can’t understand? One can’t
      force oneself like that! One mustn’t do oneself harm like that. Go
      home and stay there till you are well again! Go home, I command you! Zeal
      is a very fine thing in a young official, but you mustn’t forget as
      the Romans used to say: ‘mens sana in corpore sano,’ that is,
      a healthy brain in a healthy body.”
    

      Vassya agrees, puts his papers back in his portfolio, and, taking leave of
      his chief, goes home to bed.
    











      THE LION AND THE SUN
    

IN one of the towns
      lying on this side of the Urals a rumour was afloat that a Persian
      magnate, called Rahat-Helam, was staying for a few days in the town and
      putting up at the “Japan Hotel.” This rumour made no
      impression whatever upon the inhabitants; a Persian had arrived, well, so
      be it. Only Stepan Ivanovitch Kutsyn, the mayor of the town, hearing of
      the arrival of the oriental gentleman from the secretary of the Town Hall,
      grew thoughtful and inquired:
    

      “Where is he going?”
    

      “To Paris or to London, I believe.”
    

      “H’m. . . . Then he is a big-wig, I suppose?”
    

      “The devil only knows.”
    

      As he went home from the Town Hall and had his dinner, the mayor sank into
      thought again, and this time he went on thinking till the evening. The
      arrival of the distinguished Persian greatly intrigued him. It seemed to
      him that fate itself had sent him this Rahat-Helam, and that a favourable
      opportunity had come at last for realising his passionate, secretly
      cherished dream. Kutsyn had already two medals, and the Stanislav of the
      third degree, the badge of the Red Cross, and the badge of the Society of
      Saving from Drowning, and in addition to these he had made himself a
      little gold gun crossed by a guitar, and this ornament, hung from a
      buttonhole in his uniform, looked in the distance like something special,
      and delightfully resembled a badge of distinction. It is well known that
      the more orders and medals you have the more you want—and the mayor
      had long been desirous of receiving the Persian order of The Lion and the
      Sun; he desired it passionately, madly. He knew very well that there was
      no need to fight, or to subscribe to an asylum, or to serve on committees
      to obtain this order; all that was needed was a favourable opportunity.
      And now it seemed to him that this opportunity had come.
    

      At noon on the following day he put on his chain and all his badges of
      distinction and went to the ‘Japan.’ Destiny favoured him.
      When he entered the distinguished Persian’s apartment the latter was
      alone and doing nothing. Rahat-Helam, an enormous Asiatic, with a long
      nose like the beak of a snipe, with prominent eyes, and with a fez on his
      head, was sitting on the floor rummaging in his portmanteau.
    

      “I beg you to excuse my disturbing you,” began Kutsyn,
      smiling. “I have the honour to introduce myself, the hereditary,
      honourable citizen and cavalier, Stepan Ivanovitch Kutsyn, mayor of this
      town. I regard it as my duty to honour, in the person of your Highness, so
      to say, the representative of a friendly and neighbourly state.”
    

      The Persian turned and muttered something in very bad French, that sounded
      like tapping a board with a piece of wood.
    

      “The frontiers of Persia”—Kutsyn continued the greeting
      he had previously learned by heart—“are in close contact with
      the borders of our spacious fatherland, and therefore mutual sympathies
      impel me, so to speak, to express my solidarity with you.”
    

      The illustrious Persian got up and again muttered something in a wooden
      tongue. Kutsyn, who knew no foreign language, shook his head to show that
      he did not understand.
    

      “Well, how am I to talk to him?” he thought. “It would
      be a good thing to send for an interpreter at once, but it is a delicate
      matter, I can’t talk before witnesses. The interpreter would be
      chattering all over the town afterwards.”
    

      And Kutsyn tried to recall the foreign words he had picked up from the
      newspapers.
    

      “I am the mayor of the town,” he muttered. “That is the
      lord mayor . . . municipalais . . . Vwee? Kompreney?”
    

      He wanted to express his social position in words or in gesture, and did
      not know how. A picture hanging on the wall with an inscription in large
      letters, “The Town of Venice,” helped him out of his
      difficulties. He pointed with his finger at the town, then at his own
      head, and in that way obtained, as he imagined, the phrase: “I am
      the head of the town.” The Persian did not understand, but he gave a
      smile, and said:
    

      “Goot, monsieur . . . goot . . . . .” Half-an-hour later the
      mayor was slapping the Persian, first on the knee and then on the
      shoulder, and saying:
    

      “Kompreney? Vwee? As lord mayor and municipalais I
      suggest that you should take a little promenage . . . kompreney?
      Promenage.”
    

      Kutsyn pointed at Venice, and with two fingers represented walking legs.
      Rahat-Helam who kept his eyes fixed on his medals, and was apparently
      guessing that this was the most important person in the town, understood
      the word promenage and grinned politely. Then they both put on
      their coats and went out of the room. Downstairs near the door leading to
      the restaurant of the ‘Japan,’ Kutsyn reflected that it would
      not be amiss to entertain the Persian. He stopped and indicating the
      tables, said:
    

      “By Russian custom it wouldn’t be amiss . . . puree,
      entrekot, champagne and so on, kompreney.”
    

      The illustrious visitor understood, and a little later they were both
      sitting in the very best room of the restaurant, eating, and drinking
      champagne.
    

      “Let us drink to the prosperity of Persia!” said Kutsyn.
      “We Russians love the Persians. Though we are of another faith, yet
      there are common interests, mutual, so to say, sympathies . . . progress .
      . . Asiatic markets. . . . The campaigns of peace so to say. . . .”
    

      The illustrious Persian ate and drank with an excellent appetite, he stuck
      his fork into a slice of smoked sturgeon, and wagging his head,
      enthusiastically said: “Goot, bien.”
    

      “You like it?” said the mayor delighted. “Bien,
      that’s capital.” And turning to the waiter he said: “Luka,
      my lad, see that two pieces of smoked sturgeon, the best you have, are
      sent up to his Highness’s room!”
    

      Then the mayor and the Persian magnate went to look at the menagerie. The
      townspeople saw their Stepan Ivanovitch, flushed with champagne, gay and
      very well pleased, leading the Persian about the principal streets and the
      bazaar, showing him the points of interest of the town, and even taking
      him to the fire tower.
    

      Among other things the townspeople saw him stop near some stone gates with
      lions on it, and point out to the Persian first the lion, then the sun
      overhead, and then his own breast; then again he pointed to the lion and
      to the sun while the Persian nodded his head as though in sign of assent,
      and smiling showed his white teeth. In the evening they were sitting in
      the London Hotel listening to the harp-players, and where they spent the
      night is not known.
    

      Next day the mayor was at the Town Hall in the morning; the officials
      there apparently already knew something and were making their conjectures,
      for the secretary went up to him and said with an ironical smile:
    

      “It is the custom of the Persians when an illustrious visitor comes
      to visit you, you must slaughter a sheep with your own hands.”
    

      And a little later an envelope that had come by post was handed to him.
      The mayor tore it open and saw a caricature in it. It was a drawing of
      Rahat-Helam with the mayor on his knees before him, stretching out his
      hands and saying:
    

            “To prove our Russian friendship
             For Persia’s mighty realm,
             And show respect for you, her envoy,
             Myself I’d slaughter like a lamb,
             But, pardon me, for I’m a—donkey!”
 

      The mayor was conscious of an unpleasant feeling like a gnawing in the pit
      of the stomach, but not for long. By midday he was again with the
      illustrious Persian, again he was regaling him and showing him the points
      of interest in the town. Again he led him to the stone gates, and again
      pointed to the lion, to the sun and to his own breast. They dined at the
      ‘Japan’; after dinner, with cigars in their teeth, both,
      flushed and blissful, again mounted the fire tower, and the mayor,
      evidently wishing to entertain the visitor with an unusual spectacle,
      shouted from the top to a sentry walking below:
    

      “Sound the alarm!”
    

      But the alarm was not sounded as the firemen were at the baths at the
      moment.
    

      They supped at the ‘London’ and, after supper, the Persian
      departed. When he saw him off, Stepan Ivanovitch kissed him three times
      after the Russian fashion, and even grew tearful. And when the train
      started, he shouted:
    

      “Give our greeting to Persia! Tell her that we love her!”
    

      A year and four months had passed. There was a bitter frost, thirty-five
      degrees, and a piercing wind was blowing. Stepan Ivanovitch was walking
      along the street with his fur coat thrown open over his chest, and he was
      annoyed that he met no one to see the Lion and the Sun upon his breast. He
      walked about like this till evening with his fur coat open, was chilled to
      the bone, and at night tossed from side to side and could not get to
      sleep.
    

      He felt heavy at heart.
    

      There was a burning sensation inside him, and his heart throbbed uneasily;
      he had a longing now to get a Serbian order. It was a painful, passionate
      longing.
    











      A DAUGHTER OF ALBION
    

A FINE carriage
      with rubber tyres, a fat coachman, and velvet on the seats, rolled up to
      the house of a landowner called Gryabov. Fyodor Andreitch Otsov, the
      district Marshal of Nobility, jumped out of the carriage. A drowsy footman
      met him in the hall.
    

      “Are the family at home?” asked the Marshal.
    

      “No, sir. The mistress and the children are gone out paying visits,
      while the master and mademoiselle are catching fish. Fishing all the
      morning, sir.”
    

      Otsov stood a little, thought a little, and then went to the river to look
      for Gryabov. Going down to the river he found him a mile and a half from
      the house. Looking down from the steep bank and catching sight of Gryabov,
      Otsov gushed with laughter. . . . Gryabov, a large stout man, with a very
      big head, was sitting on the sand, angling, with his legs tucked under him
      like a Turk. His hat was on the back of his head and his cravat had
      slipped on one side. Beside him stood a tall thin Englishwoman, with
      prominent eyes like a crab’s, and a big bird-like nose more like a
      hook than a nose. She was dressed in a white muslin gown through which her
      scraggy yellow shoulders were very distinctly apparent. On her gold belt
      hung a little gold watch. She too was angling. The stillness of the grave
      reigned about them both. Both were motionless, as the river upon which
      their floats were swimming.
    

      “A desperate passion, but deadly dull!” laughed Otsov. “Good-day,
      Ivan Kuzmitch.”
    

      “Ah . . . is that you?” asked Gryabov, not taking his eyes off
      the water. “Have you come?”
    

      “As you see . . . . And you are still taken up with your crazy
      nonsense! Not given it up yet?”
    

      “The devil’s in it. . . . I begin in the morning and fish all
      day . . . . The fishing is not up to much to-day. I’ve caught
      nothing and this dummy hasn’t either. We sit on and on and not a
      devil of a fish! I could scream!”
    

      “Well, chuck it up then. Let’s go and have some vodka!”
    

      “Wait a little, maybe we shall catch something. Towards evening the
      fish bite better . . . . I’ve been sitting here, my boy, ever since
      the morning! I can’t tell you how fearfully boring it is. It was the
      devil drove me to take to this fishing! I know that it is rotten idiocy
      for me to sit here. I sit here like some scoundrel, like a convict, and I
      stare at the water like a fool. I ought to go to the haymaking, but here I
      sit catching fish. Yesterday His Holiness held a service at Haponyevo, but
      I didn’t go. I spent the day here with this . . . with this
      she-devil.”
    

      “But . . . have you taken leave of your senses?” asked Otsov,
      glancing in embarrassment at the Englishwoman. “Using such language
      before a lady and she . . . .”
    

      “Oh, confound her, it doesn’t matter, she doesn’t
      understand a syllable of Russian, whether you praise her or blame her, it
      is all the same to her! Just look at her nose! Her nose alone is enough to
      make one faint. We sit here for whole days together and not a single word!
      She stands like a stuffed image and rolls the whites of her eyes at the
      water.”
    

      The Englishwoman gave a yawn, put a new worm on, and dropped the hook into
      the water.
    

      “I wonder at her not a little,” Gryabov went on, “the
      great stupid has been living in Russia for ten years and not a word of
      Russian! . . . Any little aristocrat among us goes to them and learns to
      babble away in their lingo, while they . . . there’s no making them
      out. Just look at her nose, do look at her nose!”
    

      “Come, drop it . . . it’s uncomfortable. Why attack a woman?”
    

      “She’s not a woman, but a maiden lady. . . . I bet she’s
      dreaming of suitors. The ugly doll. And she smells of something decaying .
      . . . I’ve got a loathing for her, my boy! I can’t look at her
      with indifference. When she turns her ugly eyes on me it sends a twinge
      all through me as though I had knocked my elbow on the parapet. She likes
      fishing too. Watch her: she fishes as though it were a holy rite! She
      looks upon everything with disdain . . . . She stands there, the wretch,
      and is conscious that she is a human being, and that therefore she is the
      monarch of nature. And do you know what her name is? Wilka Charlesovna
      Fyce! Tfoo! There is no getting it out!”
    

      The Englishwoman, hearing her name, deliberately turned her nose in
      Gryabov’s direction and scanned him with a disdainful glance; she
      raised her eyes from Gryabov to Otsov and steeped him in disdain. And all
      this in silence, with dignity and deliberation.
    

      “Did you see?” said Gryabov chuckling. “As though to say
      ‘take that.’ Ah, you monster! It’s only for the children’s
      sake that I keep that triton. If it weren’t for the children, I
      wouldn’t let her come within ten miles of my estate. . . . She has
      got a nose like a hawk’s . . . and her figure! That doll makes me
      think of a long nail, so I could take her, and knock her into the ground,
      you know. Stay, I believe I have got a bite. . . .”
    

      Gryabov jumped up and raised his rod. The line drew taut. . . . Gryabov
      tugged again, but could not pull out the hook.
    

      “It has caught,” he said, frowning, “on a stone I expect
      . . . damnation take it . . . .”
    

      There was a look of distress on Gryabov’s face. Sighing, moving
      uneasily, and muttering oaths, he began tugging at the line.
    

      “What a pity; I shall have to go into the water.”
    

      “Oh, chuck it!”
    

      “I can’t. . . . There’s always good fishing in the
      evening. . . . What a nuisance. Lord, forgive us, I shall have to wade
      into the water, I must! And if only you knew, I have no inclination to
      undress. I shall have to get rid of the Englishwoman. . . . It’s
      awkward to undress before her. After all, she is a lady, you know!”
    

      Gryabov flung off his hat, and his cravat.
    

      “Meess . . . er, er . . .” he said, addressing the
      Englishwoman, “Meess Fyce, je voo pree . . . ? Well, what am I to
      say to her? How am I to tell you so that you can understand? I say . . .
      over there! Go away over there! Do you hear?”
    

      Miss Fyce enveloped Gryabov in disdain, and uttered a nasal sound.
    

      “What? Don’t you understand? Go away from here, I tell you! I
      must undress, you devil’s doll! Go over there! Over there!”
    

      Gryabov pulled the lady by her sleeve, pointed her towards the bushes, and
      made as though he would sit down, as much as to say: Go behind the bushes
      and hide yourself there. . . . The Englishwoman, moving her eyebrows
      vigorously, uttered rapidly a long sentence in English. The gentlemen
      gushed with laughter.
    

      “It’s the first time in my life I’ve heard her voice.
      There’s no denying, it is a voice! She does not understand! Well,
      what am I to do with her?”
    

      “Chuck it, let’s go and have a drink of vodka!”
    

      “I can’t. Now’s the time to fish, the evening. . . . It’s
      evening . . . . Come, what would you have me do? It is a nuisance! I shall
      have to undress before her. . . .”
    

      Gryabov flung off his coat and his waistcoat and sat on the sand to take
      off his boots.
    

      “I say, Ivan Kuzmitch,” said the marshal, chuckling behind his
      hand. “It’s really outrageous, an insult.”
    

      “Nobody asks her not to understand! It’s a lesson for these
      foreigners!”
    

      Gryabov took off his boots and his trousers, flung off his undergarments
      and remained in the costume of Adam. Otsov held his sides, he turned
      crimson both from laughter and embarrassment. The Englishwoman twitched
      her brows and bKlinked . . . . A haughty, disdainful smile passed over her
      yellow face.
    

      “I must cool off,” said Gryabov, slapping himself on the ribs.
      “Tell me if you please, Fyodor Andreitch, why I have a rash on my
      chest every summer.”
    

      “Oh, do get into the water quickly or cover yourself with something,
      you beast.”
    

      “And if only she were confused, the nasty thing,” said
      Gryabov, crossing himself as he waded into the water. “Brrrr . . .
      the water’s cold. . . . Look how she moves her eyebrows! She doesn’t
      go away . . . she is far above the crowd! He, he, he . . . . and she doesn’t
      reckon us as human beings.”
    

      Wading knee deep in the water and drawing his huge figure up to its full
      height, he gave a wink and said:
    

      “This isn’t England, you see!”
    

      Miss Fyce coolly put on another worm, gave a yawn, and dropped the hook
      in. Otsov turned away, Gryabov released his hook, ducked into the water
      and, spluttering, waded out. Two minutes later he was sitting on the sand
      and angling as before.
    











      CHORISTERS
    

THE Justice of the
      Peace, who had received a letter from Petersburg, had set the news going
      that the owner of Yefremovo, Count Vladimir Ivanovitch, would soon be
      arriving. When he would arrive—there was no saying.
    

      “Like a thief in the night,” said Father Kuzma, a grey-headed
      little priest in a lilac cassock. “And when he does come the place
      will be crowded with the nobility and other high gentry. All the
      neighbours will flock here. Mind now, do your best, Alexey Alexeitch. . .
      . I beg you most earnestly.”
    

      “You need not trouble about me,” said Alexey Alexeitch,
      frowning. “I know my business. If only my enemy intones the litany
      in the right key. He may . . . out of sheer spite. . . .”
    

      “There, there. . . . I’ll persuade the deacon. . . I’ll
      persuade him.”
    

      Alexey Alexeitch was the sacristan of the Yefremovo church. He also taught
      the schoolboys church and secular singing, for which he received sixty
      roubles a year from the revenues of the Count’s estate. The
      schoolboys were bound to sing in church in return for their teaching.
      Alexey Alexeitch was a tall, thick-set man of dignified deportment, with a
      fat, clean-shaven face that reminded one of a cow’s udder. His
      imposing figure and double chin made him look like a man occupying an
      important position in the secular hierarchy rather than a sacristan. It
      was strange to see him, so dignified and imposing, flop to the ground
      before the bishop and, on one occasion, after too loud a squabble with the
      deacon Yevlampy Avdiessov, remain on his knees for two hours by order of
      the head priest of the district. Grandeur was more in keeping with his
      figure than humiliation.
    

      On account of the rumours of the Count’s approaching visit he had a
      choir practice every day, morning and evening. The choir practice was held
      at the school. It did not interfere much with the school work. During the
      practice the schoolmaster, Sergey Makaritch, set the children writing
      copies while he joined the tenors as an amateur.
    

      This is how the choir practice was conducted. Alexey Alexeitch would come
      into the school-room, slamming the door and blowing his nose. The trebles
      and altos extricated themselves noisily from the school-tables. The tenors
      and basses, who had been waiting for some time in the yard, came in,
      tramping like horses. They all took their places. Alexey Alexeitch drew
      himself up, made a sign to enforce silence, and struck a note with the
      tuning fork.
    

      “To-to-li-to-tom . . . Do-mi-sol-do!”
    

      “Adagio, adagio. . . . Once more.”
    

      After the “Amen” there followed “Lord have mercy upon us”
      from the Great Litany. All this had been learned long ago, sung a thousand
      times and thoroughly digested, and it was gone through simply as a
      formality. It was sung indolently, unconsciously. Alexey Alexeitch waved
      his arms calmly and chimed in now in a tenor, now in a bass voice. It was
      all slow, there was nothing interesting. . . . But before the “Cherubim”
      hymn the whole choir suddenly began blowing their noses, coughing and
      zealously turning the pages of their music. The sacristan turned his back
      on the choir and with a mysterious expression on his face began tuning his
      violin. The preparations lasted a couple of minutes.
    

      “Take your places. Look at your music carefully. . . . Basses, don’t
      overdo it . . . rather softly.”
    

      Bortnyansky’s “Cherubim” hymn, No. 7, was selected. At a
      given signal silence prevailed. All eyes were fastened on the music, the
      trebles opened their mouths. Alexey Alexeitch softly lowered his arm.
    

      “Piano . . . piano. . . . You see ‘piano’ is written
      there. . . . More lightly, more lightly.”
    

      When they had to sing “piano” an expression of benevolence and
      amiability overspread Alexey Alexeitch’s face, as though he was
      dreaming of a dainty morsel.
    

      “Forte . . . forte! Hold it!”
    

      And when they had to sing “forte” the sacristan’s fat
      face expressed alarm and even horror.
    

      The “Cherubim” hymn was sung well, so well that the
      school-children abandoned their copies and fell to watching the movements
      of Alexey Alexeitch. People stood under the windows. The school-watchman,
      Vassily, came in wearing an apron and carrying a dinner-knife in his hand
      and stood listening. Father Kuzma, with an anxious face appeared suddenly
      as though he had sprung from out of the earth. . . . After ‘Let us
      lay aside all earthly cares’ Alexey Alexeitch wiped the sweat off
      his brow and went up to Father Kuzma in excitement.
    

      “It puzzles me, Father Kuzma,” he said, shrugging his
      shoulders, “why is it that the Russian people have no understanding?
      It puzzles me, may the Lord chastise me! Such an uncultured people that
      you really cannot tell whether they have a windpipe in their throats or
      some other sort of internal arrangement. Were you choking, or what?”
      he asked, addressing the bass Gennady Semitchov, the innkeeper’s
      brother.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “What is your voice like? It rattles like a saucepan. I bet you were
      boozing yesterday! That’s what it is! Your breath smells like a
      tavern. . . . E-ech! You are a clodhopper, brother! You are a lout! How
      can you be a chorister if you keep company with peasants in the tavern?
      Ech, you are an ass, brother!”
    

      “It’s a sin, it’s a sin, brother,” muttered Father
      Kuzma. “God sees everything . . . through and through . . . .”
    

      “That’s why you have no idea of singing—because you care
      more for vodka than for godliness, you fool.”
    

      “Don’t work yourself up,” said Father Kuzma. “Don’t
      be cross. . . . I will persuade him.”
    

      Father Kuzma went up to Gennady Semitchov and began “persuading”
      him: “What do you do it for? Try and put your mind to it. A man who
      sings ought to restrain himself, because his throat is . . . er . .
      tender.”
    

      Gennady scratched his neck and looked sideways towards the window as
      though the words did not apply to him.
    

      After the “Cherubim” hymn they sang the Creed, then “It
      is meet and right”; they sang smoothly and with feeling, and so
      right on to “Our Father.”
    

      “To my mind, Father Kuzma,” said the sacristan, “the old
      ‘Our Father’ is better than the modern. That’s what we
      ought to sing before the Count.”
    

      “No, no. . . . Sing the modern one. For the Count hears nothing but
      modern music when he goes to Mass in Petersburg or Moscow. . . . In the
      churches there, I imagine . . . there’s very different sort of music
      there, brother!”
    

      After “Our Father” there was again a great blowing of noses,
      coughing and turning over of pages. The most difficult part of the
      performance came next: the “concert.” Alexey Alexeitch was
      practising two pieces, “Who is the God of glory” and “Universal
      Praise.” Whichever the choir learned best would be sung before the
      Count. During the “concert” the sacristan rose to a pitch of
      enthusiasm. The expression of benevolence was continually alternating with
      one of alarm.
    

      “Forte!” he muttered. “Andante! let yourselves go! Sing,
      you image! Tenors, you don’t bring it off! To-to-ti-to-tom. . . .
      Sol . . . si . . . sol, I tell you, you blockhead! Glory! Basses, glo . .
      . o . . . ry.”
    

      His bow travelled over the heads and shoulders of the erring trebles and
      altos. His left hand was continually pulling the ears of the young
      singers. On one occasion, carried away by his feelings he flipped the bass
      Gennady under the chin with his bent thumb. But the choristers were not
      moved to tears or to anger at his blows: they realised the full gravity of
      their task.
    

      After the “concert” came a minute of silence. Alexey
      Alexeitch, red, perspiring and exhausted, sat down on the window-sill, and
      turned upon the company lustreless, wearied, but triumphant eyes. In the
      listening crowd he observed to his immense annoyance the deacon Avdiessov.
      The deacon, a tall thick-set man with a red pock-marked face, and straw in
      his hair, stood leaning against the stove and grinning contemptuously.
    

      “That’s right, sing away! Perform your music!” he
      muttered in a deep bass. “Much the Count will care for your singing!
      He doesn’t care whether you sing with music or without. . . . For he
      is an atheist.”
    

      Father Kuzma looked round in a scared way and twiddled his fingers.
    

      “Come, come,” he muttered. “Hush, deacon, I beg.”
    

      After the “concert” they sang “May our lips be filled
      with praise,” and the choir practice was over. The choir broke up to
      reassemble in the evening for another practice. And so it went on every
      day.
    

      One month passed and then a second. . . . The steward, too, had by then
      received a notice that the Count would soon be coming. At last the dusty
      sun-blinds were taken off the windows of the big house, and Yefremovo
      heard the strains of the broken-down, out-of-tune piano. Father Kuzma was
      pining, though he could not himself have said why, or whether it was from
      delight or alarm. . . . The deacon went about grinning.
    

      The following Saturday evening Father Kuzma went to the sacristan’s
      lodgings. His face was pale, his shoulders drooped, the lilac of his
      cassock looked faded.
    

      “I have just been at his Excellency’s,” he said to the
      sacristan, stammering. “He is a cultivated gentleman with refined
      ideas. But . . . er . . . it’s mortifying, brother. . . . ‘At
      what o’clock, your Excellency, do you desire us to ring for Mass
      to-morrow?’ And he said: ‘As you think best. Only, couldn’t
      it be as short and quick as possible without a choir.’ Without a
      choir! Er . . . do you understand, without, without a choir. . . .”
    

      Alexey Alexeitch turned crimson. He would rather have spent two hours on
      his knees again than have heard those words! He did not sleep all night.
      He was not so much mortified at the waste of his labours as at the fact
      that the deacon would give him no peace now with his jeers. The deacon was
      delighted at his discomfiture. Next day all through the service he was
      casting disdainful glances towards the choir where Alexey Alexeitch was
      booming responses in solitude. When he passed by the choir with the censer
      he muttered:
    

      “Perform your music! Do your utmost! The Count will give a
      ten-rouble note to the choir!”
    

      After the service the sacristan went home, crushed and ill with
      mortification. At the gate he was overtaken by the red-faced deacon.
    

      “Stop a minute, Alyosha!” said the deacon. “Stop a
      minute, silly, don’t be cross! You are not the only one, I am in for
      it too! Immediately after the Mass Father Kuzma went up to the Count and
      asked: ‘And what did you think of the deacon’s voice, your
      Excellency. He has a deep bass, hasn’t he?’ And the Count—do
      you know what he answered by way of compliment? ‘Anyone can bawl,’
      he said. ‘A man’s voice is not as important as his brains.’
      A learned gentleman from Petersburg! An atheist is an atheist, and that’s
      all about it! Come, brother in misfortune, let us go and have a drop to
      drown our troubles!”
    

      And the enemies went out of the gate arm-in-arm.
    











      NERVES
    

DMITRI OSIPOVITCH
      VAXIN, the architect, returned from town to his holiday cottage greatly
      impressed by the spiritualistic sÃ©ance at which he had been present. As he
      undressed and got into his solitary bed (Madame Vaxin had gone to an
      all-night service) he could not help remembering all he had seen and
      heard. It had not, properly speaking, been a sÃ©ance at all, but the whole
      evening had been spent in terrifying conversation. A young lady had begun
      it by talking, apropos of nothing, about thought-reading. From
      thought-reading they had passed imperceptibly to spirits, and from spirits
      to ghosts, from ghosts to people buried alive. . . . A gentleman had read
      a horrible story of a corpse turning round in the coffin. Vaxin himself
      had asked for a saucer and shown the young ladies how to converse with
      spirits. He had called up among others the spirit of his deceased uncle,
      Klavdy Mironitch, and had mentally asked him:
    

      “Has not the time come for me to transfer the ownership of our house
      to my wife?”
    

      To which his uncle’s spirit had replied:
    

      “All things are good in their season.”
    

      “There is a great deal in nature that is mysterious and . . .
      terrible . . .” thought Vaxin, as he got into bed. “It’s
      not the dead but the unknown that’s so horrible.”
    

      It struck one o’clock. Vaxin turned over on the other side and
      peeped out from beneath the bedclothes at the blue light of the lamp
      burning before the holy ikon. The flame flickered and cast a faint light
      on the ikon-stand and the big portrait of Uncle Klavdy that hung facing
      his bed.
    

      “And what if the ghost of Uncle Klavdy should appear this minute?”
      flashed through Vaxin’s mind. “But, of course, that’s
      impossible.”
    

      Ghosts are, we all know, a superstition, the offspring of undeveloped
      intelligence, but Vaxin, nevertheless, pulled the bed-clothes over his
      head, and shut his eyes very tight. The corpse that turned round in its
      coffin came back to his mind, and the figures of his deceased
      mother-in-law, of a colleague who had hanged himself, and of a girl who
      had drowned herself, rose before his imagination. . . . Vaxin began trying
      to dispel these gloomy ideas, but the more he tried to drive them away the
      more haunting the figures and fearful fancies became. He began to feel
      frightened.
    

      “Hang it all!” he thought. “Here I am afraid in the dark
      like a child! Idiotic!”
    

      Tick . . . tick . . . tick . . . he heard the clock in the next room. The
      church-bell chimed the hour in the churchyard close by. The bell tolled
      slowly, depressingly, mournfully. . . . A cold chill ran down Vaxin’s
      neck and spine. He fancied he heard someone breathing heavily over his
      head, as though Uncle Klavdy had stepped out of his frame and was bending
      over his nephew. . . . Vaxin felt unbearably frightened. He clenched his
      teeth and held his breath in terror.
    

      At last, when a cockchafer flew in at the open window and began buzzing
      over his bed, he could bear it no longer and gave a violent tug at the
      bellrope.
    

      “Dmitri Osipitch, was wollen Sie?” he heard the voice
      of the German governess at his door a moment later.
    

      “Ah, it’s you, Rosalia Karlovna!” Vaxin cried,
      delighted. “Why do you trouble? Gavrila might just . . .”
    

      “Yourself Gavrila to the town sent. And Glafira is somewhere all the
      evening gone. . . . There’s nobody in the house. . . . Was wollen
      Sie doch?”
    

      “Well, what I wanted . . . it’s . . . but, please, come in . .
      . you needn’t mind! . . . it’s dark.”
    

      Rosalia Karlovna, a stout red-cheeked person, came in to the bedroom and
      stood in an expectant attitude at the door.
    

      “Sit down, please . . . you see, it’s like this. . . . What on
      earth am I to ask her for?” he wondered, stealing a glance at Uncle
      Klavdy’s portrait and feeling his soul gradually returning to
      tranquility.
    

      “What I really wanted to ask you was . . . Oh, when the man goes to
      town, don’t forget to tell him to . . . er . . . er . . . to get
      some cigarette-papers. . . . But do, please sit down.”
    

      “Cigarette-papers? good. . . . Was wollen Sie noch?”
    

      “Ich will . . . there’s nothing I will, but. . . But do
      sit down! I shall think of something else in a minute.”
    

      “It is shocking for a maiden in a man’s room to remain. . . .
      Mr. Vaxin, you are, I see, a naughty man. . . . I understand. . . . To
      order cigarette-papers one does not a person wake. . . . I understand you.
      . . .”
    

      Rosalia Karlovna turned and went out of the room.
    

      Somewhat reassured by his conversation with her and ashamed of his
      cowardice, Vaxin pulled the bedclothes over his head and shut his eyes.
      For about ten minutes he felt fairly comfortable, then the same nonsense
      came creeping back into his mind. . . . He swore to himself, felt for the
      matches, and without opening his eyes lighted a candle.
    

      But even the light was no use. To Vaxin’ s excited imagination it
      seemed as though someone were peeping round the corner and that his uncle’s
      eyes were moving.
    

      “I’ll ring her up again . . . damn the woman!” he
      decided. “I’ll tell her I’m unwell and ask for some
      drops.”
    

      Vaxin rang. There was no response. He rang again, and as though answering
      his ring, he heard the church-bell toll the hour.
    

      Overcome with terror, cold all over, he jumped out of bed, ran headlong
      out of his bedroom, and making the sign of the cross and cursing himself
      for his cowardice, he fled barefoot in his night-shirt to the governess’s
      room.
    

      “Rosalia Karlovna!” he began in a shaking voice as he knocked
      at her door, “Rosalia Karlovna! . . . Are you asleep? . . . I feel .
      . . so . . . er . . . er . . . unwell. . . . Drops! . . .”
    

      There was no answer. Silence reigned.
    

      “I beg you . . . do you understand? I beg you! Why this
      squeamishness, I can’t understand . . . especially when a man . . .
      is ill . . . How absurdly zierlich manierlich you are really . . .
      at your age. . . .”
    

      “I to your wife shall tell. . . . Will not leave an honest maiden in
      peace. . . . When I was at Baron Anzig’s, and the baron try to come
      to me for matches, I understand at once what his matches mean and tell to
      the baroness. . . . I am an honest maiden.”
    

      “Hang your honesty! I am ill I tell you . . . and asking you for
      drops. Do you understand? I’m ill!”
    

      “Your wife is an honest, good woman, and you ought her to love! Ja!
      She is noble! . . . I will not be her foe!”
    

      “You are a fool! simply a fool! Do you understand, a fool?”
    

      Vaxin leaned against the door-post, folded his arms and waited for his
      panic to pass off. To return to his room where the lamp flickered and his
      uncle stared at him from his frame was more than he could face, and to
      stand at the governess’s door in nothing but his night-shirt was
      inconvenient from every point of view. What could he do?
    

      It struck two o’clock and his terror had not left him. There was no
      light in the passage and something dark seemed to be peeping out from
      every corner. Vaxin turned so as to face the door-post, but at that
      instant it seemed as though somebody tweaked his night-shirt from behind
      and touched him on the shoulder.
    

      “Damnation! . . . Rosalia Karlovna!”
    

      No answer. Vaxin hesitatingly opened the door and peeped into the room.
      The virtuous German was sweetly slumbering. The tiny flame of a
      night-light threw her solid buxom person into relief. Vaxin stepped into
      the room and sat down on a wickerwork trunk near the door. He felt better
      in the presence of a living creature, even though that creature was
      asleep.
    

      “Let the German idiot sleep,” he thought, “I’ll
      sit here, and when it gets light I’ll go back. . . . It’s
      daylight early now.”
    

      Vaxin curled up on the trunk and put his arm under his head to await the
      coming of dawn.
    

      “What a thing it is to have nerves!” he reflected. “An
      educated, intelligent man! . . . Hang it all! . . . It’s a perfect
      disgrace!”
    

      As he listened to the gentle, even breathing of Rosalia Karlovna, he soon
      recovered himself completely.
    

      At six o’clock, Vaxin’s wife returned from the all-night
      service, and not finding her husband in their bedroom, went to the
      governess to ask her for some change for the cabman.
    

      On entering the German’s room, a strange sight met her eyes.
    

      On the bed lay stretched Rosalia Karlovna fast asleep, and a couple of
      yards from her was her husband curled up on the trunk sleeping the sleep
      of the just and snoring loudly.
    

      What she said to her husband, and how he looked when he woke, I leave to
      others to describe. It is beyond my powers.
    











      A WORK OF ART
    

SASHA SMIRNOV, the
      only son of his mother, holding under his arm, something wrapped up in No.
      223 of the Financial News, assumed a sentimental expression, and
      went into Dr. Koshelkov’s consulting-room.
    

      “Ah, dear lad!” was how the doctor greeted him. “Well!
      how are we feeling? What good news have you for me?”
    

      Sasha bKlinked, laid his hand on his heart and said in an agitated voice:
      “Mamma sends her greetings to you, Ivan Nikolaevitch, and told me to
      thank you. . . . I am the only son of my mother and you have saved my life
      . . . you have brought me through a dangerous illness and . . . we do not
      know how to thank you.”
    

      “Nonsense, lad!” said the doctor, highly delighted. “I
      only did what anyone else would have done in my place.”
    

      “I am the only son of my mother . . . we are poor people and cannot
      of course repay you, and we are quite ashamed, doctor, although, however,
      mamma and I . . . the only son of my mother, earnestly beg you to accept
      in token of our gratitude . . . this object, which . . . An object of
      great value, an antique bronze. . . . A rare work of art.”
    

      “You shouldn’t!” said the doctor, frowning. “What’s
      this for!”
    

      “No, please do not refuse,” Sasha went on muttering as he
      unpacked the parcel. “You will wound mamma and me by refusing. . . .
      It’s a fine thing . . . an antique bronze. . . . It was left us by
      my deceased father and we have kept it as a precious souvenir. My father
      used to buy antique bronzes and sell them to connoisseurs . . . Mamma and
      I keep on the business now.”
    

      Sasha undid the object and put it solemnly on the table. It was a not very
      tall candelabra of old bronze and artistic workmanship. It consisted of a
      group: on the pedestal stood two female figures in the costume of Eve and
      in attitudes for the description of which I have neither the courage nor
      the fitting temperament. The figures were smiling coquettishly and
      altogether looked as though, had it not been for the necessity of
      supporting the candlestick, they would have skipped off the pedestal and
      have indulged in an orgy such as is improper for the reader even to
      imagine.
    

      Looking at the present, the doctor slowly scratched behind his ear,
      cleared his throat and blew his nose irresolutely.
    

      “Yes, it certainly is a fine thing,” he muttered, “but .
      . . how shall I express it? . . . it’s . . . h’m . . . it’s
      not quite for family reading. It’s not simply decolletÃ© but beyond
      anything, dash it all. . . .”
    

      “How do you mean?”
    

      “The serpent-tempter himself could not have invented anything worse
      . . . . Why, to put such a phantasmagoria on the table would be defiling
      the whole flat.”
    

      “What a strange way of looking at art, doctor!” said Sasha,
      offended. “Why, it is an artistic thing, look at it! There is so
      much beauty and elegance that it fills one’s soul with a feeling of
      reverence and brings a lump into one’s throat! When one sees
      anything so beautiful one forgets everything earthly. . . . Only look, how
      much movement, what an atmosphere, what expression!”
    

      “I understand all that very well, my dear boy,” the doctor
      interposed, “but you know I am a family man, my children run in
      here, ladies come in.”
    

      “Of course if you look at it from the point of view of the crowd,”
      said Sasha, “then this exquisitely artistic work may appear in a
      certain light. . . . But, doctor, rise superior to the crowd, especially
      as you will wound mamma and me by refusing it. I am the only son of my
      mother, you have saved my life. . . . We are giving you the thing most
      precious to us and . . . and I only regret that I have not the pair to
      present to you. . . .”
    

      “Thank you, my dear fellow, I am very grateful . . . Give my
      respects to your mother but really consider, my children run in here,
      ladies come. . . . However, let it remain! I see there’s no arguing
      with you.”
    

      “And there is nothing to argue about,” said Sasha, relieved.
      “Put the candlestick here, by this vase. What a pity we have not the
      pair to it! It is a pity! Well, good-bye, doctor.”
    

      After Sasha’s departure the doctor looked for a long time at the
      candelabra, scratched behind his ear and meditated.
    

      “It’s a superb thing, there’s no denying it,” he
      thought, “and it would be a pity to throw it away. . . . But it’s
      impossible for me to keep it. . . . H’m! . . . Here’s a
      problem! To whom can I make a present of it, or to what charity can I give
      it?”
    

      After long meditation he thought of his good friend, the lawyer Uhov, to
      whom he was indebted for the management of legal business.
    

      “Excellent,” the doctor decided, “it would be awkward
      for him as a friend to take money from me, and it will be very suitable
      for me to present him with this. I will take him the devilish thing!
      Luckily he is a bachelor and easy-going.”
    

      Without further procrastination the doctor put on his hat and coat, took
      the candelabra and went off to Uhov’s.
    

      “How are you, friend!” he said, finding the lawyer at home.
      “I’ve come to see you . . . to thank you for your efforts. . .
      . You won’t take money so you must at least accept this thing here.
      . . . See, my dear fellow. . . . The thing is magnificent!”
    

      On seeing the bronze the lawyer was moved to indescribable delight.
    

      “What a specimen!” he chuckled. “Ah, deuce take it, to
      think of them imagining such a thing, the devils! Exquisite! Ravishing!
      Where did you get hold of such a delightful thing?”
    

      After pouring out his ecstasies the lawyer looked timidly towards the door
      and said: “Only you must carry off your present, my boy . . . . I
      can’t take it. . . .”
    

      “Why?” cried the doctor, disconcerted.
    

      “Why . . . because my mother is here at times, my clients . . .
      besides I should be ashamed for my servants to see it.”
    

      “Nonsense! Nonsense! Don’t you dare to refuse!” said the
      doctor, gesticulating. “It’s piggish of you! It’s a work
      of art! . . . What movement . . . what expression! I won’t even talk
      of it! You will offend me!”
    

      “If one could plaster it over or stick on fig-leaves . . .”
    

      But the doctor gesticulated more violently than before, and dashing out of
      the flat went home, glad that he had succeeded in getting the present off
      his hands.
    

      When he had gone away the lawyer examined the candelabra, fingered it all
      over, and then, like the doctor, racked his brains over the question what
      to do with the present.
    

      “It’s a fine thing,” he mused, “and it would be a
      pity to throw it away and improper to keep it. The very best thing would
      be to make a present of it to someone. . . . I know what! I’ll take
      it this evening to Shashkin, the comedian. The rascal is fond of such
      things, and by the way it is his benefit tonight.”
    

      No sooner said than done. In the evening the candelabra, carefully wrapped
      up, was duly carried to Shashkin’s. The whole evening the comic
      actor’s dressing-room was besieged by men coming to admire the
      present; the dressing-room was filled with the hum of enthusiasm and
      laughter like the neighing of horses. If one of the actresses approached
      the door and asked: “May I come in?” the comedian’s
      husky voice was heard at once: “No, no, my dear, I am not dressed!”
    

      After the performance the comedian shrugged his shoulders, flung up his
      hands and said: “Well what am I to do with the horrid thing? Why, I
      live in a private flat! Actresses come and see me! It’s not a
      photograph that you can put in a drawer!”
    

      “You had better sell it, sir,” the hairdresser who was
      disrobing the actor advised him. “There’s an old woman living
      about here who buys antique bronzes. Go and enquire for Madame Smirnov . .
      . everyone knows her.”
    

      The actor followed his advice. . . . Two days later the doctor was sitting
      in his consulting-room, and with his finger to his brow was meditating on
      the acids of the bile. All at once the door opened and Sasha Smirnov flew
      into the room. He was smiling, beaming, and his whole figure was radiant
      with happiness. In his hands he held something wrapped up in newspaper.
    

      “Doctor!” he began breathlessly, “imagine my delight!
      Happily for you we have succeeded in picking up the pair to your
      candelabra! Mamma is so happy. . . . I am the only son of my mother, you
      saved my life. . . .”
    

      And Sasha, all of a tremor with gratitude, set the candelabra before the
      doctor. The doctor opened his mouth, tried to say something, but said
      nothing: he could not speak.
    











      A JOKE
    

IT was a bright
      winter midday. . . . There was a sharp snapping frost and the curls on
      Nadenka’s temples and the down on her upper lip were covered with
      silvery frost. She was holding my arm and we were standing on a high hill.
      From where we stood to the ground below there stretched a smooth sloping
      descent in which the sun was reflected as in a looking-glass. Beside us
      was a little sledge lined with bright red cloth.
    

      “Let us go down, Nadyezhda Petrovna!” I besought her. “Only
      once! I assure you we shall be all right and not hurt.”
    

      But Nadenka was afraid. The slope from her little goloshes to the bottom
      of the ice hill seemed to her a terrible, immensely deep abyss. Her spirit
      failed her, and she held her breath as she looked down, when I merely
      suggested her getting into the sledge, but what would it be if she were to
      risk flying into the abyss! She would die, she would go out of her mind.
    

      “I entreat you!” I said. “You mustn’t be afraid!
      You know it’s poor-spirited, it’s cowardly!”
    

      Nadenka gave way at last, and from her face I saw that she gave way in
      mortal dread. I sat her in the sledge, pale and trembling, put my arm
      round her and with her cast myself down the precipice.
    

      The sledge flew like a bullet. The air cleft by our flight beat in our
      faces, roared, whistled in our ears, tore at us, nipped us cruelly in its
      anger, tried to tear our heads off our shoulders. We had hardly strength
      to breathe from the pressure of the wind. It seemed as though the devil
      himself had caught us in his claws and was dragging us with a roar to
      hell. Surrounding objects melted into one long furiously racing streak . .
      . another moment and it seemed we should perish.
    

      “I love you, Nadya!” I said in a low voice.
    

      The sledge began moving more and more slowly, the roar of the wind and the
      whirr of the runners was no longer so terrible, it was easier to breathe,
      and at last we were at the bottom. Nadenka was more dead than alive. She
      was pale and scarcely breathing. . . . I helped her to get up.
    

      “Nothing would induce me to go again,” she said, looking at me
      with wide eyes full of horror. “Nothing in the world! I almost died!”
    

      A little later she recovered herself and looked enquiringly into my eyes,
      wondering had I really uttered those four words or had she fancied them in
      the roar of the hurricane. And I stood beside her smoking and looking
      attentively at my glove.
    

      She took my arm and we spent a long while walking near the ice-hill. The
      riddle evidently would not let her rest. . . . Had those words been
      uttered or not? . . . Yes or no? Yes or no? It was the question of pride,
      or honour, of life—a very important question, the most important
      question in the world. Nadenka kept impatiently, sorrowfully looking into
      my face with a penetrating glance; she answered at random, waiting to see
      whether I would not speak. Oh, the play of feeling on that sweet face! I
      saw that she was struggling with herself, that she wanted to say
      something, to ask some question, but she could not find the words; she
      felt awkward and frightened and troubled by her joy. . . .
    

      “Do you know what,” she said without looking at me.
    

      “Well?” I asked.
    

      “Let us . . . slide down again.”
    

      We clambered up the ice-hill by the steps again. I sat Nadenka, pale and
      trembling, in the sledge; again we flew into the terrible abyss, again the
      wind roared and the runners whirred, and again when the flight of our
      sledge was at its swiftest and noisiest, I said in a low voice:
    

      “I love you, Nadenka!”
    

      When the sledge stopped, Nadenka flung a glance at the hill down which we
      had both slid, then bent a long look upon my face, listened to my voice
      which was unconcerned and passionless, and the whole of her little figure,
      every bit of it, even her muff and her hood expressed the utmost
      bewilderment, and on her face was written: “What does it mean? Who
      uttered those words? Did he, or did I only fancy it?”
    

      The uncertainty worried her and drove her out of all patience. The poor
      girl did not answer my questions, frowned, and was on the point of tears.
    

      “Hadn’t we better go home?” I asked.
    

      “Well, I . . . I like this tobogganning,” she said, flushing.
      “Shall we go down once more?”
    

      She “liked” the tobogganning, and yet as she got into the
      sledge she was, as both times before, pale, trembling, hardly able to
      breathe for terror.
    

      We went down for the third time, and I saw she was looking at my face and
      watching my lips. But I put my handkerchief to my lips, coughed, and when
      we reached the middle of the hill I succeeded in bringing out:
    

      “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      And the mystery remained a mystery! Nadenka was silent, pondering on
      something. . . . I saw her home, she tried to walk slowly, slackened her
      pace and kept waiting to see whether I would not say those words to her,
      and I saw how her soul was suffering, what effort she was making not to
      say to herself:
    

      “It cannot be that the wind said them! And I don’t want it to
      be the wind that said them!”
    

      Next morning I got a little note:
    

      “If you are tobogganning to-day, come for me.—N.”
    

      And from that time I began going every day tobogganning with Nadenka, and
      as we flew down in the sledge, every time I pronounced in a low voice the
      same words: “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      Soon Nadenka grew used to that phrase as to alcohol or morphia. She could
      not live without it. It is true that flying down the ice-hill terrified
      her as before, but now the terror and danger gave a peculiar fascination
      to words of love—words which as before were a mystery and tantalized
      the soul. The same two—the wind and I were still suspected. . . .
      Which of the two was making love to her she did not know, but apparently
      by now she did not care; from which goblet one drinks matters little if
      only the beverage is intoxicating.
    

      It happened I went to the skating-ground alone at midday; mingling with
      the crowd I saw Nadenka go up to the ice-hill and look about for me . . .
      then she timidly mounted the steps. . . . She was frightened of going
      alone—oh, how frightened! She was white as the snow, she was
      trembling, she went as though to the scaffold, but she went, she went
      without looking back, resolutely. She had evidently determined to put it
      to the test at last: would those sweet amazing words be heard when I was
      not there? I saw her, pale, her lips parted with horror, get into the
      sledge, shut her eyes and saying good-bye for ever to the earth, set off.
      . . . “Whrrr!” whirred the runners. Whether Nadenka heard
      those words I do not know. I only saw her getting up from the sledge
      looking faint and exhausted. And one could tell from her face that she
      could not tell herself whether she had heard anything or not. Her terror
      while she had been flying down had deprived of her all power of hearing,
      of discriminating sounds, of understanding.
    

      But then the month of March arrived . . . the spring sunshine was more
      kindly. . . . Our ice-hill turned dark, lost its brilliance and finally
      melted. We gave up tobogganning. There was nowhere now where poor Nadenka
      could hear those words, and indeed no one to utter them, since there was
      no wind and I was going to Petersburg—for long, perhaps for ever.
    

      It happened two days before my departure I was sitting in the dusk in the
      little garden which was separated from the yard of Nadenka’s house
      by a high fence with nails in it. . . . It was still pretty cold, there
      was still snow by the manure heap, the trees looked dead but there was
      already the scent of spring and the rooks were cawing loudly as they
      settled for their night’s rest. I went up to the fence and stood for
      a long while peeping through a chink. I saw Nadenka come out into the
      porch and fix a mournful yearning gaze on the sky. . . . The spring wind
      was blowing straight into her pale dejected face. . . . It reminded her of
      the wind which roared at us on the ice-hill when she heard those four
      words, and her face became very, very sorrowful, a tear trickled down her
      cheek, and the poor child held out both arms as though begging the wind to
      bring her those words once more. And waiting for the wind I said in a low
      voice:
    

      “I love you, Nadya!”
    

      Mercy! The change that came over Nadenka! She uttered a cry, smiled all
      over her face and looking joyful, happy and beautiful, held out her arms
      to meet the wind.
    

      And I went off to pack up. . . .
    

      That was long ago. Now Nadenka is married; she married—whether of
      her own choice or not does not matter—a secretary of the Nobility
      Wardenship and now she has three children. That we once went tobogganning
      together, and that the wind brought her the words “I love you,
      Nadenka,” is not forgotten; it is for her now the happiest, most
      touching, and beautiful memory in her life. . . .
    

      But now that I am older I cannot understand why I uttered those words,
      what was my motive in that joke. . . .
    











      A COUNTRY COTTAGE
    

Two young people
      who had not long been married were walking up and down the platform of a
      little country station. His arm was round her waist, her head was almost
      on his shoulder, and both were happy.
    

      The moon peeped up from the drifting cloudlets and frowned, as it seemed,
      envying their happiness and regretting her tedious and utterly superfluous
      virginity. The still air was heavy with the fragrance of lilac and wild
      cherry. Somewhere in the distance beyond the line a corncrake was calling.
    

      “How beautiful it is, Sasha, how beautiful!” murmured the
      young wife. “It all seems like a dream. See, how sweet and inviting
      that little copse looks! How nice those solid, silent telegraph posts are!
      They add a special note to the landscape, suggesting humanity,
      civilization in the distance. . . . Don’t you think it’s
      lovely when the wind brings the rushing sound of a train?”
    

      “Yes. . . . But what hot little hands you’ve got. . . That’s
      because you’re excited, Varya. . . . What have you got for our
      supper to-night?”
    

      “Chicken and salad. . . . It’s a chicken just big enough for
      two . . . . Then there is the salmon and sardines that were sent from
      town.”
    

      The moon as though she had taken a pinch of snuff hid her face behind a
      cloud. Human happiness reminded her of her own loneliness, of her solitary
      couch beyond the hills and dales.
    

      “The train is coming!” said Varya, “how jolly!”
    

      Three eyes of fire could be seen in the distance. The stationmaster came
      out on the platform. Signal lights flashed here and there on the line.
    

      “Let’s see the train in and go home,” said Sasha,
      yawning. “What a splendid time we are having together, Varya, it’s
      so splendid, one can hardly believe it’s true!”
    

      The dark monster crept noiselessly alongside the platform and came to a
      standstill. They caught glimpses of sleepy faces, of hats and shoulders at
      the dimly lighted windows.
    

      “Look! look!” they heard from one of the carriages. “Varya
      and Sasha have come to meet us! There they are! . . . Varya! . . . Varya.
      . . . Look!”
    

      Two little girls skipped out of the train and hung on Varya’s neck.
      They were followed by a stout, middle-aged lady, and a tall, lanky
      gentleman with grey whiskers; behind them came two schoolboys, laden with
      bags, and after the schoolboys, the governess, after the governess the
      grandmother.
    

      “Here we are, here we are, dear boy!” began the whiskered
      gentleman, squeezing Sasha’s hand. “Sick of waiting for us, I
      expect! You have been pitching into your old uncle for not coming down all
      this time, I daresay! Kolya, Kostya, Nina, Fifa . . . children! Kiss your
      cousin Sasha! We’re all here, the whole troop of us, just for three
      or four days. . . . I hope we shan’t be too many for you? You mustn’t
      let us put you out!”
    

      At the sight of their uncle and his family, the young couple were
      horror-stricken. While his uncle talked and kissed them, Sasha had a
      vision of their little cottage: he and Varya giving up their three little
      rooms, all the pillows and bedding to their guests; the salmon, the
      sardines, the chicken all devoured in a single instant; the cousins
      plucking the flowers in their little garden, spilling the ink, filled the
      cottage with noise and confusion; his aunt talking continually about her
      ailments and her papa’s having been Baron von Fintich. . . .
    

      And Sasha looked almost with hatred at his young wife, and whispered:
    

      “It’s you they’ve come to see! . . . Damn them!”
    

      “No, it’s you,” answered Varya, pale with anger. “They’re
      your relations! they’re not mine!”
    

      And turning to her visitors, she said with a smile of welcome: “Welcome
      to the cottage!”
    

      The moon came out again. She seemed to smile, as though she were glad she
      had no relations. Sasha, turning his head away to hide his angry
      despairing face, struggled to give a note of cordial welcome to his voice
      as he said:
    

      “It is jolly of you! Welcome to the cottage!”
    











      A BLUNDER
    

ILYA SERGEITCH
      PEPLOV and his wife Kleopatra Petrovna were standing at the door,
      listening greedily. On the other side in the little drawing-room a love
      scene was apparently taking place between two persons: their daughter
      Natashenka and a teacher of the district school, called Shchupkin.
    

      “He’s rising!” whispered Peplov, quivering with
      impatience and rubbing his hands. “Now, Kleopatra, mind; as soon as
      they begin talking of their feelings, take down the ikon from the wall and
      we’ll go in and bless them. . . . We’ll catch him. . . . A
      blessing with an ikon is sacred and binding. . . He couldn’t get out
      of it, if he brought it into court.”
    

      On the other side of the door this was the conversation:
    

      “Don’t go on like that!” said Shchupkin, striking a
      match against his checked trousers. “I never wrote you any letters!”
    

      “I like that! As though I didn’t know your writing!”
      giggled the girl with an affected shriek, continually peeping at herself
      in the glass. “I knew it at once! And what a queer man you are! You
      are a writing master, and you write like a spider! How can you teach
      writing if you write so badly yourself?”
    

      “H’m! . . . That means nothing. The great thing in writing
      lessons is not the hand one writes, but keeping the boys in order. You hit
      one on the head with a ruler, make another kneel down. . . . Besides,
      there’s nothing in handwriting! Nekrassov was an author, but his
      handwriting’s a disgrace, there’s a specimen of it in his
      collected works.”
    

      “You are not Nekrassov. . . .” (A sigh). “I should love
      to marry an author. He’d always be writing poems to me.”
    

      “I can write you a poem, too, if you like.”
    

      “What can you write about?”
    

      “Love—passion—your eyes. You’ll be crazy when you
      read it. It would draw a tear from a stone! And if I write you a real
      poem, will you let me kiss your hand?”
    

      “That’s nothing much! You can kiss it now if you like.”
    

      Shchupkin jumped up, and making sheepish eyes, bent over the fat little
      hand that smelt of egg soap.
    

      “Take down the ikon,” Peplov whispered in a fluster, pale with
      excitement, and buttoning his coat as he prodded his wife with his elbow.
      “Come along, now!”
    

      And without a second’s delay Peplov flung open the door.
    

      “Children,” he muttered, lifting up his arms and bKlinking
      tearfully, “the Lord bless you, my children. May you live—be
      fruitful—and multiply.”
    

      “And—and I bless you, too,” the mamma brought out,
      crying with happiness. “May you be happy, my dear ones! Oh, you are
      taking from me my only treasure!” she said to Shchupkin. “Love
      my girl, be good to her. . . .”
    

      Shchupkin’s mouth fell open with amazement and alarm. The parents’
      attack was so bold and unexpected that he could not utter a single word.
    

      “I’m in for it! I’m spliced!” he thought, going
      limp with horror. “It’s all over with you now, my boy! There’s
      no escape!”
    

      And he bowed his head submissively, as though to say, “Take me, I’m
      vanquished.”
    

      “Ble-blessings on you,” the papa went on, and he, too, shed
      tears. “Natashenka, my daughter, stand by his side. Kleopatra, give
      me the ikon.”
    

      But at this point the father suddenly left off weeping, and his face was
      contorted with anger.
    

      “You ninny!” he said angrily to his wife. “You are an
      idiot! Is that the ikon?”
    

      “Ach, saints alive!”
    

      What had happened? The writing master raised himself and saw that he was
      saved; in her flutter the mamma had snatched from the wall the portrait of
      Lazhetchnikov, the author, in mistake for the ikon. Old Peplov and his
      wife stood disconcerted in the middle of the room, holding the portrait
      aloft, not knowing what to do or what to say. The writing master took
      advantage of the general confusion and slipped away.
    











      FAT AND THIN
    

Two friends—one
      a fat man and the other a thin man—met at the Nikolaevsky station.
      The fat man had just dined in the station and his greasy lips shone like
      ripe cherries. He smelt of sherry and fleur d’orange. The
      thin man had just slipped out of the train and was laden with
      portmanteaus, bundles, and bandboxes. He smelt of ham and coffee grounds.
      A thin woman with a long chin, his wife, and a tall schoolboy with one eye
      screwed up came into view behind his back.
    

      “Porfiry,” cried the fat man on seeing the thin man. “Is
      it you? My dear fellow! How many summers, how many winters!”
    

      “Holy saints!” cried the thin man in amazement. “Misha!
      The friend of my childhood! Where have you dropped from?”
    

      The friends kissed each other three times, and gazed at each other with
      eyes full of tears. Both were agreeably astounded.
    

      “My dear boy!” began the thin man after the kissing. “This
      is unexpected! This is a surprise! Come have a good look at me! Just as
      handsome as I used to be! Just as great a darling and a dandy! Good
      gracious me! Well, and how are you? Made your fortune? Married? I am
      married as you see. . . . This is my wife Luise, her maiden name was
      Vantsenbach . . . of the Lutheran persuasion. . . . And this is my son
      Nafanail, a schoolboy in the third class. This is the friend of my
      childhood, Nafanya. We were boys at school together!”
    

      Nafanail thought a little and took off his cap.
    

      “We were boys at school together,” the thin man went on.
      “Do you remember how they used to tease you? You were nicknamed
      Herostratus because you burned a hole in a schoolbook with a cigarette,
      and I was nicknamed Ephialtes because I was fond of telling tales. Ho—ho!
      . . . we were children! . . . Don’t be shy, Nafanya. Go nearer to
      him. And this is my wife, her maiden name was Vantsenbach, of the Lutheran
      persuasion. . . .”
    

      Nafanail thought a little and took refuge behind his father’s back.
    

      “Well, how are you doing my friend?” the fat man asked,
      looking enthusiastically at his friend. “Are you in the service?
      What grade have you reached?”
    

      “I am, dear boy! I have been a collegiate assessor for the last two
      years and I have the Stanislav. The salary is poor, but that’s no
      great matter! The wife gives music lessons, and I go in for carving wooden
      cigarette cases in a private way. Capital cigarette cases! I sell them for
      a rouble each. If any one takes ten or more I make a reduction of course.
      We get along somehow. I served as a clerk, you know, and now I have been
      transferred here as a head clerk in the same department. I am going to
      serve here. And what about you? I bet you are a civil councillor by now?
      Eh?”
    

      “No dear boy, go higher than that,” said the fat man. “I
      have risen to privy councillor already . . . I have two stars.”
    

      The thin man turned pale and rigid all at once, but soon his face twisted
      in all directions in the broadest smile; it seemed as though sparks were
      flashing from his face and eyes. He squirmed, he doubled together,
      crumpled up. . . . His portmanteaus, bundles and cardboard boxes seemed to
      shrink and crumple up too. . . . His wife’s long chin grew longer
      still; Nafanail drew himself up to attention and fastened all the buttons
      of his uniform.
    

      “Your Excellency, I . . . delighted! The friend, one may say, of
      childhood and to have turned into such a great man! He—he!”
    

      “Come, come!” the fat man frowned. “What’s this
      tone for? You and I were friends as boys, and there is no need of this
      official obsequiousness!”
    

      “Merciful heavens, your Excellency! What are you saying. . . ?”
      sniggered the thin man, wriggling more than ever. “Your Excellency’s
      gracious attention is like refreshing manna. . . . This, your Excellency,
      is my son Nafanail, . . . my wife Luise, a Lutheran in a certain sense.”
    

      The fat man was about to make some protest, but the face of the thin man
      wore an expression of such reverence, sugariness, and mawkish
      respectfulness that the privy councillor was sickened. He turned away from
      the thin man, giving him his hand at parting.
    

      The thin man pressed three fingers, bowed his whole body and sniggered
      like a Chinaman: “He—he—he!” His wife smiled.
      Nafanail scraped with his foot and dropped his cap. All three were
      agreeably overwhelmed.
    











      THE DEATH OF A GOVERNMENT CLERK
    

ONE fine evening, a
      no less fine government clerk called Ivan Dmitritch Tchervyakov was
      sitting in the second row of the stalls, gazing through an opera glass at
      the Cloches de Corneville. He gazed and felt at the acme of bliss.
      But suddenly. . . . In stories one so often meets with this “But
      suddenly.” The authors are right: life is so full of surprises! But
      suddenly his face puckered up, his eyes disappeared, his breathing was
      arrested . . . he took the opera glass from his eyes, bent over and . . .
      “Aptchee!!” he sneezed as you perceive. It is not
      reprehensible for anyone to sneeze anywhere. Peasants sneeze and so do
      police superintendents, and sometimes even privy councillors. All men
      sneeze. Tchervyakov was not in the least confused, he wiped his face with
      his handkerchief, and like a polite man, looked round to see whether he
      had disturbed any one by his sneezing. But then he was overcome with
      confusion. He saw that an old gentleman sitting in front of him in the
      first row of the stalls was carefully wiping his bald head and his neck
      with his glove and muttering something to himself. In the old gentleman,
      Tchervyakov recognised Brizzhalov, a civilian general serving in the
      Department of Transport.
    

      “I have spattered him,” thought Tchervyakov, “he is not
      the head of my department, but still it is awkward. I must apologise.”
    

      Tchervyakov gave a cough, bent his whole person forward, and whispered in
      the general’s ear.
    

      “Pardon, your Excellency, I spattered you accidentally. . . .”
    

      “Never mind, never mind.”
    

      “For goodness sake excuse me, I . . . I did not mean to.”
    

      “Oh, please, sit down! let me listen!”
    

      Tchervyakov was embarrassed, he smiled stupidly and fell to gazing at the
      stage. He gazed at it but was no longer feeling bliss. He began to be
      troubled by uneasiness. In the interval, he went up to Brizzhalov, walked
      beside him, and overcoming his shyness, muttered:
    

      “I spattered you, your Excellency, forgive me . . . you see . . . I
      didn’t do it to . . . .”
    

      “Oh, that’s enough . . . I’d forgotten it, and you keep
      on about it!” said the general, moving his lower lip impatiently.
    

      “He has forgotten, but there is a fiendish light in his eye,”
      thought Tchervyakov, looking suspiciously at the general. “And he
      doesn’t want to talk. I ought to explain to him . . . that I really
      didn’t intend . . . that it is the law of nature or else he will
      think I meant to spit on him. He doesn’t think so now, but he will
      think so later!”
    

      On getting home, Tchervyakov told his wife of his breach of good manners.
      It struck him that his wife took too frivolous a view of the incident; she
      was a little frightened, but when she learned that Brizzhalov was in a
      different department, she was reassured.
    

      “Still, you had better go and apologise,” she said, “or
      he will think you don’t know how to behave in public.”
    

      “That’s just it! I did apologise, but he took it somehow
      queerly . . . he didn’t say a word of sense. There wasn’t time
      to talk properly.”
    

      Next day Tchervyakov put on a new uniform, had his hair cut and went to
      Brizzhalov’s to explain; going into the general’s reception
      room he saw there a number of petitioners and among them the general
      himself, who was beginning to interview them. After questioning several
      petitioners the general raised his eyes and looked at Tchervyakov.
    

      “Yesterday at the Arcadia, if you recollect, your Excellency,”
      the latter began, “I sneezed and . . . accidentally spattered . . .
      Exc. . . .”
    

      “What nonsense. . . . It’s beyond anything! What can I do for
      you,” said the general addressing the next petitioner.
    

      “He won’t speak,” thought Tchervyakov, turning pale;
      “that means that he is angry. . . . No, it can’t be left like
      this. . . . I will explain to him.”
    

      When the general had finished his conversation with the last of the
      petitioners and was turning towards his inner apartments, Tchervyakov took
      a step towards him and muttered:
    

      “Your Excellency! If I venture to trouble your Excellency, it is
      simply from a feeling I may say of regret! . . . It was not intentional if
      you will graciously believe me.”
    

      The general made a lachrymose face, and waved his hand.
    

      “Why, you are simply making fun of me, sir,” he said as he
      closed the door behind him.
    

      “Where’s the making fun in it?” thought Tchervyakov,
      “there is nothing of the sort! He is a general, but he can’t
      understand. If that is how it is I am not going to apologise to that fanfaron
      any more! The devil take him. I’ll write a letter to him, but I won’t
      go. By Jove, I won’t.”
    

      So thought Tchervyakov as he walked home; he did not write a letter to the
      general, he pondered and pondered and could not make up that letter. He
      had to go next day to explain in person.
    

      “I ventured to disturb your Excellency yesterday,” he
      muttered, when the general lifted enquiring eyes upon him, “not to
      make fun as you were pleased to say. I was apologising for having
      spattered you in sneezing. . . . And I did not dream of making fun of you.
      Should I dare to make fun of you, if we should take to making fun, then
      there would be no respect for persons, there would be. . . .”
    

      “Be off!” yelled the general, turning suddenly purple, and
      shaking all over.
    

      “What?” asked Tchervyakov, in a whisper turning numb with
      horror.
    

      “Be off!” repeated the general, stamping.
    

      Something seemed to give way in Tchervyakov’s stomach. Seeing
      nothing and hearing nothing he reeled to the door, went out into the
      street, and went staggering along. . . . Reaching home mechanically,
      without taking off his uniform, he lay down on the sofa and died.
    











      A PINK STOCKING
    

A DULL, rainy day.
      The sky is completely covered with heavy clouds, and there is no prospect
      of the rain ceasing. Outside sleet, puddles, and drenched jackdaws.
      Indoors it is half dark, and so cold that one wants the stove heated.
    

      Pavel Petrovitch Somov is pacing up and down his study, grumbling at the
      weather. The tears of rain on the windows and the darkness of the room
      make him depressed. He is insufferably bored and has nothing to do. . . .
      The newspapers have not been brought yet; shooting is out of the question,
      and it is not nearly dinner-time . . . .
    

      Somov is not alone in his study. Madame Somov, a pretty little lady in a
      light blouse and pink stockings, is sitting at his writing table. She is
      eagerly scribbling a letter. Every time he passes her as he strides up and
      down, Ivan Petrovitch looks over her shoulder at what she is writing. He
      sees big sprawling letters, thin and narrow, with all sorts of tails and
      flourishes. There are numbers of blots, smears, and finger-marks. Madame
      Somov does not like ruled paper, and every line runs downhill with horrid
      wriggles as it reaches the margin. . . .
    

      “Lidotchka, who is it you are writing such a lot to?” Somov
      inquires, seeing that his wife is just beginning to scribble the sixth
      page.
    

      “To sister Varya.”
    

      “Hm . . . it’s a long letter! I’m so bored—let me
      read it!”
    

      “Here, you may read it, but there’s nothing interesting in it.”
    

      Somov takes the written pages and, still pacing up and down, begins
      reading. Lidotchka leans her elbows on the back of her chair and watches
      the expression of his face. . . . After the first page his face lengthens
      and an expression of something almost like panic comes into it. . . . At
      the third page Somov frowns and scratches the back of his head. At the
      fourth he pauses, looks with a scared face at his wife, and seems to
      ponder. After thinking a little, he takes up the letter again with a sigh.
      . . . His face betrays perplexity and even alarm. . . .”
    

      “Well, this is beyond anything!” he mutters, as he finishes
      reading the letter and flings the sheets on the table, “It’s
      positively incredible!”
    

      “What’s the matter?” asks Lidotchka, flustered.
    

      “What’s the matter! You’ve covered six pages, wasted a
      good two hours scribbling, and there’s nothing in it at all! If
      there were one tiny idea! One reads on and on, and one’s brain is as
      muddled as though one were deciphering the Chinese wriggles on tea chests!
      Ough!”
    

      “Yes, that’s true, Vanya, . . .” says Lidotchka,
      reddening. “I wrote it carelessly. . . .”
    

      “Queer sort of carelessness! In a careless letter there is some
      meaning and style—there is sense in it—while yours . . .
      excuse me, but I don’t know what to call it! It’s absolute
      twaddle! There are words and sentences, but not the slightest sense in
      them. Your whole letter is exactly like the conversation of two boys:
      ‘We had pancakes to-day! And we had a soldier come to see us!’
      You say the same thing over and over again! You drag it out, repeat
      yourself . . . . The wretched ideas dance about like devils: there’s
      no making out where anything begins, where anything ends. . . . How can
      you write like that?”
    

      “If I had been writing carefully,” Lidotchka says in self
      defence, “then there would not have been mistakes. . . .”
    

      “Oh, I’m not talking about mistakes! The awful grammatical
      howlers! There’s not a line that’s not a personal insult to
      grammar! No stops nor commas—and the spelling . . . brrr! ‘Earth’
      has an a in it!! And the writing! It’s desperate! I’m
      not joking, Lida. . . . I’m surprised and appalled at your letter. .
      . . You mustn’t be angry, darling, but, really, I had no idea you
      were such a duffer at grammar. . . . And yet you belong to a cultivated,
      well-educated circle: you are the wife of a University man, and the
      daughter of a general! Tell me, did you ever go to school?”
    

      “What next! I finished at the Von Mebke’s boarding school. . .
      .”
    

      Somov shrugs his shoulders and continues to pace up and down, sighing.
      Lidotchka, conscious of her ignorance and ashamed of it, sighs too and
      casts down her eyes. . . . Ten minutes pass in silence.
    

      “You know, Lidotchka, it really is awful!” says Somov,
      suddenly halting in front of her and looking into her face with horror.
      “You are a mother . . . do you understand? A mother! How can you
      teach your children if you know nothing yourself? You have a good brain,
      but what’s the use of it if you have never mastered the very
      rudiments of knowledge? There—never mind about knowledge . . . the
      children will get that at school, but, you know, you are very shaky on the
      moral side too! You sometimes use such language that it makes my ears
      tingle!”
    

      Somov shrugs his shoulders again, wraps himself in the folds of his
      dressing-gown and continues his pacing. . . . He feels vexed and injured,
      and at the same time sorry for Lidotchka, who does not protest, but merely
      bKlinks. . . . Both feel oppressed and miserable . . . . Absorbed in their
      woes, they do not notice how time is passing and the dinner hour is
      approaching.
    

      Sitting down to dinner, Somov, who is fond of good eating and of eating in
      peace, drinks a large glass of vodka and begins talking about something
      else. Lidotchka listens and assents, but suddenly over the soup her eyes
      fill with tears and she begins whimpering.
    

      “It’s all mother’s fault!” she says, wiping away
      her tears with her dinner napkin. “Everyone advised her to send me
      to the high school, and from the high school I should have been sure to go
      on to the University!”
    

      “University . . . high school,” mutters Somov. “That’s
      running to extremes, my girl! What’s the good of being a blue
      stocking! A blue stocking is the very deuce! Neither man nor woman, but
      just something midway: neither one thing nor another. . . I hate blue
      stockings! I would never have married a learned woman. . . .”
    

      “There’s no making you out . . .”, says Lidotchka.
      “You are angry because I am not learned, and at the same time you
      hate learned women; you are annoyed because I have no ideas in my letter,
      and yet you yourself are opposed to my studying. . . .”
    

      “You do catch me up at a word, my dear,” yawns Somov, pouring
      out a second glass of vodka in his boredom.
    

      Under the influence of vodka and a good dinner, Somov grows more
      good-humoured, lively, and soft. . . . He watches his pretty wife making
      the salad with an anxious face and a rush of affection for her, of
      indulgence and forgiveness comes over him.
    

      “It was stupid of me to depress her, poor girl . . . ,” he
      thought. “Why did I say such a lot of dreadful things? She is silly,
      that’s true, uncivilised and narrow; but . . . there are two sides
      to the question, and audiatur et altera pars. . . . Perhaps people
      are perfectly right when they say that woman’s shallowness rests on
      her very vocation. Granted that it is her vocation to love her husband, to
      bear children, and to mix salad, what the devil does she want with
      learning? No, indeed!”
    

      At that point he remembers that learned women are usually tedious, that
      they are exacting, strict, and unyielding; and, on the other hand, how
      easy it is to get on with silly Lidotchka, who never pokes her nose into
      anything, does not understand so much, and never obtrudes her criticism.
      There is peace and comfort with Lidotchka, and no risk of being interfered
      with.
    

      “Confound them, those clever and learned women! It’s better
      and easier to live with simple ones,” he thinks, as he takes a plate
      of chicken from Lidotchka.
    

      He recollects that a civilised man sometimes feels a desire to talk and
      share his thoughts with a clever and well-educated woman. “What of
      it?” thinks Somov. “If I want to talk of intellectual
      subjects, I’ll go to Natalya Andreyevna . . . or to Marya
      Frantsovna. . . . It’s very simple! But no, I shan’t go. One
      can discuss intellectual subjects with men,” he finally decides.
    











      AT A SUMMER VILLA
    

“I LOVE YOU.
      You are my life, my happiness—everything to me! Forgive the avowal,
      but I have not the strength to suffer and be silent. I ask not for love in
      return, but for sympathy. Be at the old arbour at eight o’clock this
      evening. . . . To sign my name is unnecessary I think, but do not be
      uneasy at my being anonymous. I am young, nice-looking . . . what more do
      you want?”
    

      When Pavel Ivanitch Vyhodtsev, a practical married man who was spending
      his holidays at a summer villa, read this letter, he shrugged his
      shoulders and scratched his forehead in perplexity.
    

      “What devilry is this?” he thought. “I’m a married
      man, and to send me such a queer . . . silly letter! Who wrote it?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch turned the letter over and over before his eyes, read it
      through again, and spat with disgust.
    

      “‘I love you’” . . . he said jeeringly. “A
      nice boy she has pitched on! So I’m to run off to meet you in the
      arbour! . . . I got over all such romances and fleurs d’amour
      years ago, my girl. . . . Hm! She must be some reckless, immoral creature.
      . . . Well, these women are a set! What a whirligig—God forgive us!—she
      must be to write a letter like that to a stranger, and a married man, too!
      It’s real demoralisation!”
    

      In the course of his eight years of married life Pavel Ivanitch had
      completely got over all sentimental feeling, and he had received no
      letters from ladies except letters of congratulation, and so, although he
      tried to carry it off with disdain, the letter quoted above greatly
      intrigued and agitated him.
    

      An hour after receiving it, he was lying on his sofa, thinking:
    

      “Of course I am not a silly boy, and I am not going to rush off to
      this idiotic rendezvous; but yet it would be interesting to know who wrote
      it! Hm. . . . It is certainly a woman’s writing. . . . The letter is
      written with genuine feeling, and so it can hardly be a joke. . . . Most
      likely it’s some neurotic girl, or perhaps a widow . . . widows are
      frivolous and eccentric as a rule. Hm. . . . Who could it be?”
    

      What made it the more difficult to decide the question was that Pavel
      Ivanitch had not one feminine acquaintance among all the summer visitors,
      except his wife.
    

      “It is queer . . .” he mused. “‘I love you!’.
      . . When did she manage to fall in love? Amazing woman! To fall in love
      like this, apropos of nothing, without making any acquaintance and finding
      out what sort of man I am. . . . She must be extremely young and romantic
      if she is capable of falling in love after two or three looks at me. . . .
      But . . . who is she?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch suddenly recalled that when he had been walking among the
      summer villas the day before, and the day before that, he had several
      times been met by a fair young lady with a light blue hat and a turn-up
      nose. The fair charmer had kept looking at him, and when he sat down on a
      seat she had sat down beside him. . . .
    

      “Can it be she?” Vyhodtsev wondered. “It can’t be!
      Could a delicate ephemeral creature like that fall in love with a worn-out
      old eel like me? No, it’s impossible!”
    

      At dinner Pavel Ivanitch looked blankly at his wife while he meditated:
    

      “She writes that she is young and nice-looking. . . . So she’s
      not old. . . . Hm. . . . To tell the truth, honestly I am not so old and
      plain that no one could fall in love with me. My wife loves me! Besides,
      love is blind, we all know. . . .”
    

      “What are you thinking about?” his wife asked him.
    

      “Oh. . . my head aches a little. . .” Pavel Ivanitch said,
      quite untruly.
    

      He made up his mind that it was stupid to pay attention to such a
      nonsensical thing as a love-letter, and laughed at it and at its
      authoress, but—alas!—powerful is the “dacha” enemy
      of mankind! After dinner, Pavel Ivanitch lay down on his bed, and instead
      of going to sleep, reflected:
    

      “But there, I daresay she is expecting me to come! What a silly! I
      can just imagine what a nervous fidget she’ll be in and how her tournure
      will quiver when she does not find me in the arbour! I shan’t go,
      though. . . . Bother her!”
    

      But, I repeat, powerful is the enemy of mankind.
    

      “Though I might, perhaps, just out of curiosity . . .” he was
      musing, half an hour later. “I might go and look from a distance
      what sort of a creature she is. . . . It would be interesting to have a
      look at her! It would be fun, and that’s all! After all, why shouldn’t
      I have a little fun since such a chance has turned up?”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch got up from his bed and began dressing. “What are you
      getting yourself up so smartly for?” his wife asked, noticing that
      he was putting on a clean shirt and a fashionable tie.
    

      “Oh, nothing. . . . I must have a walk. . . . My head aches. . . .
      Hm.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch dressed in his best, and waiting till eight o’clock,
      went out of the house. When the figures of gaily dressed summer visitors
      of both sexes began passing before his eyes against the bright green
      background, his heart throbbed.
    

      “Which of them is it? . . .” he wondered, advancing
      irresolutely. “Come, what am I afraid of? Why, I am not going to the
      rendezvous! What . . . a fool! Go forward boldly! And what if I go into
      the arbour? Well, well . . . there is no reason I should.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch’s heart beat still more violently. . . .
      Involuntarily, with no desire to do so, he suddenly pictured to himself
      the half-darkness of the arbour. . . . A graceful fair girl with a little
      blue hat and a turn-up nose rose before his imagination. He saw her,
      abashed by her love and trembling all over, timidly approach him,
      breathing excitedly, and . . . suddenly clasping him in her arms.
    

      “If I weren’t married it would be all right . . .” he
      mused, driving sinful ideas out of his head. “Though . . . for once
      in my life, it would do no harm to have the experience, or else one will
      die without knowing what. . . . And my wife, what will it matter to her?
      Thank God, for eight years I’ve never moved one step away from her.
      . . . Eight years of irreproachable duty! Enough of her. . . . It’s
      positively vexatious. . . . I’m ready to go to spite her!”
    

      Trembling all over and holding his breath, Pavel Ivanitch went up to the
      arbour, wreathed with ivy and wild vine, and peeped into it . . . . A
      smell of dampness and mildew reached him. . . .
    

      “I believe there’s nobody . . .” he thought, going into
      the arbour, and at once saw a human silhouette in the corner.
    

      The silhouette was that of a man. . . . Looking more closely, Pavel
      Ivanitch recognised his wife’s brother, Mitya, a student, who was
      staying with them at the villa.
    

      “Oh, it’s you . . .” he growled discontentedly, as he
      took off his hat and sat down.
    

      “Yes, it’s I” . . . answered Mitya.
    

      Two minutes passed in silence.
    

      “Excuse me, Pavel Ivanitch,” began Mitya: “but might I
      ask you to leave me alone?? . . . I am thinking over the dissertation for
      my degree and . . . and the presence of anybody else prevents my thinking.”
    

      “You had better go somewhere in a dark avenue. . .” Pavel
      Ivanitch observed mildly. “It’s easier to think in the open
      air, and, besides, . . . er . . . I should like to have a little sleep
      here on this seat. . . It’s not so hot here. . . .”
    

      “You want to sleep, but it’s a question of my dissertation . .
      .” Mitya grumbled. “The dissertation is more important.”
    

      Again there was a silence. Pavel Ivanitch, who had given the rein to his
      imagination and was continually hearing footsteps, suddenly leaped up and
      said in a plaintive voice:
    

      “Come, I beg you, Mitya! You are younger and ought to consider me .
      . . . I am unwell and . . . I need sleep. . . . Go away!”
    

      “That’s egoism. . . . Why must you be here and not I? I won’t
      go as a matter of principle.”
    

      “Come, I ask you to! Suppose I am an egoist, a despot and a fool . .
      . but I ask you to go! For once in my life I ask you a favour! Show some
      consideration!”
    

      Mitya shook his head.
    

      “What a beast! . . .” thought Pavel Ivanitch. “That can’t
      be a rendezvous with him here! It’s impossible with him here!”
    

      “I say, Mitya,” he said, “I ask you for the last time. .
      . . Show that you are a sensible, humane, and cultivated man!”
    

      “I don’t know why you keep on so!” . . . said Mitya,
      shrugging his shoulders. “I’ve said I won’t go, and I
      won’t. I shall stay here as a matter of principle. . . .”
    

      At that moment a woman’s face with a turn-up nose peeped into the
      arbour. . . .
    

      Seeing Mitya and Pavel Ivanitch, it frowned and vanished.
    

      “She is gone!” thought Pavel Ivanitch, looking angrily at
      Mitya. “She saw that blackguard and fled! It’s all spoilt!”
    

      After waiting a little longer, he got up, put on his hat and said:
    

      “You’re a beast, a low brute and a blackguard! Yes! A beast!
      It’s mean . . . and silly! Everything is at an end between us!”
    

      “Delighted to hear it!” muttered Mitya, also getting up and
      putting on his hat. “Let me tell you that by being here just now you’ve
      played me such a dirty trick that I’ll never forgive you as long as
      I live.”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch went out of the arbour, and beside himself with rage,
      strode rapidly to his villa. Even the sight of the table laid for supper
      did not soothe him.
    

      “Once in a lifetime such a chance has turned up,” he thought
      in agitation; “and then it’s been prevented! Now she is
      offended . . . crushed!”
    

      At supper Pavel Ivanitch and Mitya kept their eyes on their plates and
      maintained a sullen silence. . . . They were hating each other from the
      bottom of their hearts.
    

      “What are you smiling at?” asked Pavel Ivanitch, pouncing on
      his wife. “It’s only silly fools who laugh for nothing!”
    

      His wife looked at her husband’s angry face, and went off into a
      peal of laughter.
    

      “What was that letter you got this morning?” she asked.
    

      “I? . . . I didn’t get one. . . .” Pavel Ivanitch was
      overcome with confusion. “You are inventing . . . imagination.”
    

      “Oh, come, tell us! Own up, you did! Why, it was I sent you that
      letter! Honour bright, I did! Ha ha!”
    

      Pavel Ivanitch turned crimson and bent over his plate. “Silly jokes,”
      he growled.
    

      “But what could I do? Tell me that. . . . We had to scrub the rooms
      out this evening, and how could we get you out of the house? There was no
      other way of getting you out. . . . But don’t be angry, stupid. . .
      . I didn’t want you to be dull in the arbour, so I sent the same
      letter to Mitya too! Mitya, have you been to the arbour?”
    

      Mitya grinned and left off glaring with hatred at his rival.
    
The House With The Mezzanine,

THE
      HOUSE WITH THE MEZZANINE
    

      (A PAINTER'S STORY)
    

IT happened nigh on seven years ago, when I was
      living in one of the districts of the J. province, on the estate of
      Bielokurov, a landowner, a young man who used to get up early, dress
      himself in a long overcoat, drink beer in the evenings, and all the while
      complain to me that he could nowhere find any one in sympathy with his
      ideas. He lived in a little house in the orchard, and I lived in the old
      manor-house, in a huge pillared hall where there was no furniture except a
      large divan, on which I slept, and a table at which I used to play
      patience. Even in calm weather there was always a moaning in the chimney,
      and in a storm the whole house would rock and seem as though it must
      split, and it was quite terrifying, especially at night, when all the ten
      great windows were suddenly lit up by a flash of lightning.
    

      Doomed by fate to permanent idleness, I did positively nothing. For hours
      together I would sit and look through the windows at the sky, the birds,
      the trees and read my letters over and over again, and then for hours
      together I would sleep. Sometimes I would go out and wander aimlessly
      until evening.
    

      Once on my way home I came unexpectedly on a strange farmhouse. The sun
      was already setting, and the lengthening shadows were thrown over the
      ripening corn. Two rows of closely planted tall fir-trees stood like two
      thick walls, forming a sombre, magnificent avenue. I climbed the fence and
      walked up the avenue, slipping on the fir needles which lay two inches
      thick on the ground. It was still, dark, and only here and there in the
      tops of the trees shimmered a bright gold light casting the colours of the
      rainbow on a spider's web. The smell of the firs was almost suffocating.
      Then I turned into an avenue of limes. And here too were desolation and
      decay; the dead leaves rustled mournfully beneath my feet, and there were
      lurking shadows among the trees. To the right, in an old orchard, a
      goldhammer sang a faint reluctant song, and he too must have been old. The
      lime-trees soon came to an end and I came to a white house with a terrace
      and a mezzanine, and suddenly a vista opened upon a farmyard with a pond
      and a bathing-shed, and a row of green willows, with a village beyond, and
      above it stood a tall, slender belfry, on which glowed a cross catching
      the light of the setting sun. For a moment I was possessed with a sense of
      enchantment, intimate, particular, as though I had seen the scene before
      in my childhood.
    

      By the white-stone gate surmounted with stone lions, which led from the
      yard into the field, stood two girls. One of them, the elder, thin, pale,
      very handsome, with masses of chestnut hair and a little stubborn mouth,
      looked rather prim and scarcely glanced at me; the other, who was quite
      young—seventeen or eighteen, no more, also thin and pale, with a big
      mouth and big eyes, looked at me in surprise, as I passed, said something
      in English and looked confused, and it seemed to me that I had always
      known their dear faces. And I returned home feeling as though I had awoke
      from a pleasant dream.
    

      Soon after that, one afternoon, when Bielokurov and I were walking near
      the house, suddenly there came into the yard a spring-carriage in which
      sat one of the two girls, the elder. She had come to ask for subscriptions
      to a fund for those who had suffered in a recent fire. Without looking at
      us, she told us very seriously how many houses had been burned down in
      Sianov, how many men, women, and children had been left without shelter,
      and what had been done by the committee of which she was a member. She
      gave us the list for us to write our names, put it away, and began to say
      good-bye.
    

      "You have completely forgotten us, Piotr Petrovich," she said to
      Bielokurov, as she gave him her hand. "Come and see us, and if Mr. N. (she
      said my name) would like to see how the admirers of his talent live and
      would care to come and see us, then mother and I would be very pleased."
    

      I bowed.
    

      When she had gone Piotr Petrovich began to tell me about her. The girl, he
      said, was of a good family and her name was Lydia Volchaninov, and the
      estate, on which she lived with her mother and sister, was called, like
      the village on the other side of the pond, Sholkovka. Her father had once
      occupied an eminent position in Moscow and died a privy councillor.
      Notwithstanding their large means, the Volchaninovs always lived in the
      village, summer and winter, and Lydia was a teacher in the Zemstvo School
      at Sholkovka and earned twenty-five roubles a month. She only spent what
      she earned on herself and was proud of her independence.
    

      "They are an interesting family," said Bielokurov. "We ought to go and see
      them. They will be very glad to see you."
    

      One afternoon, during a holiday, we remembered the Volchaninovs and went
      over to Sholkovka. They were all at home. The mother, Ekaterina Pavlovna,
      had obviously once been handsome, but now she was stouter than her age
      warranted, suffered from asthma, was melancholy and absent-minded as she
      tried to entertain me with talk about painting. When she heard from her
      daughter that I might perhaps come over to Sholkovka, she hurriedly called
      to mind a few of my landscapes which she had seen in exhibitions in
      Moscow, and now she asked what I had tried to express in them. Lydia, or
      as she was called at home, Lyda, talked more to Bielokurov than to me.
      Seriously and without a smile, she asked him why he did not work for the
      Zemstvo and why up till now he had never been to a Zemstvo meeting.
    

      "It is not right of you, Piotr Petrovich," she said reproachfully. "It is
      not right. It is a shame."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," said her mother. "It is not right."
    

      "All our district is in Balaguin's hands," Lyda went on, turning to me.
      "He is the chairman of the council and all the jobs in the district are
      given to his nephews and brothers-in-law, and he does exactly as he likes.
      We ought to fight him. The young people ought to form a strong party; but
      you see what our young men are like. It is a shame, Piotr Petrovich."
    

      The younger sister, Genya, was silent during the conversation about the
      Zemstvo. She did not take part in serious conversations, for by the family
      she was not considered grown-up, and they gave her her baby-name,
      Missyuss, because as a child she used to call her English governess that.
      All the time she examined me curiously and when I looked at the
      photograph-album she explained: "This is my uncle.... That is my
      godfather," and fingered the portraits, and at the same time touched me
      with her shoulder in a childlike way, and I could see her small,
      undeveloped bosom, her thin shoulders, her long, slim waist tightly drawn
      in by a belt.
    

      We played croquet and lawn-tennis, walked in the garden, had tea, and then
      a large supper. After the huge pillared hall, I felt out of tune in the
      small cosy house, where there were no oleographs on the walls and the
      servants were treated considerately, and everything seemed to me young and
      pure, through the presence of Lyda and Missyuss, and everything was decent
      and orderly. At supper Lyda again talked to Bielokurov about the Zemstvo,
      about Balaguin, about school libraries. She was a lively, sincere, serious
      girl, and it was interesting to listen to her, though she spoke at length
      and in a loud voice—perhaps because she was used to holding forth at
      school. On the other hand, Piotr Petrovich, who from his university days
      had retained the habit of reducing any conversation to a discussion, spoke
      tediously, slowly, and deliberately, with an obvious desire to be taken
      for a clever and progressive man. He gesticulated and upset the sauce with
      his sleeve and it made a large pool on the table-cloth, though nobody but
      myself seemed to notice it.
    

      When we returned home the night was dark and still.
    

      "I call it good breeding," said Bielokurov, with a sigh, "not so much not
      to upset the sauce on the table, as not to notice it when some one else
      has done it. Yes. An admirable intellectual family. I'm rather out of
      touch with nice people. Ah! terribly. And all through business, business,
      business!"
    

      He went on to say what hard work being a good farmer meant. And I thought:
      What a stupid, lazy lout! When we talked seriously he would drag it out
      with his awful drawl—er, er, er—and he works just as he talks—slowly,
      always behindhand, never up to time; and as for his being businesslike, I
      don't believe it, for he often keeps letters given him to post for weeks
      in his pocket.
    

      "The worst of it is," he murmured as he walked along by my side, "the
      worst of it is that you go working away and never get any sympathy from
      anybody."
    

      II
    

      I began to frequent the Volchaninovs' house. Usually I sat on the bottom
      step of the veranda. I was filled with dissatisfaction, vague discontent
      with my life, which had passed so quickly and uninterestingly, and I
      thought all the while how good it would be to tear out of my breast my
      heart which had grown so weary. There would be talk going on on the
      terrace, the rustling of dresses, the fluttering of the pages of a book. I
      soon got used to Lyda receiving the sick all day long, and distributing
      books, and I used often to go with her to the village, bareheaded, under
      an umbrella. And in the evening she would hold forth about the Zemstvo and
      schools. She was very handsome, subtle, correct, and her lips were thin
      and sensitive, and whenever a serious conversation started she would say
      to me drily:
    

      "This won't interest you."
    

      I was not sympathetic to her. She did not like me because I was a
      landscape-painter, and in my pictures did not paint the suffering of the
      masses, and I seemed to her indifferent to what she believed in. I
      remember once driving along the shore of the Baikal and I met a Bouryat
      girl, in shirt and trousers of Chinese cotton, on horseback: I asked her
      if she would sell me her pipe and, while we were talking, she looked with
      scorn at my European face and hat, and in a moment she got bored with
      talking to me, whooped and galloped away. And in exactly the same way Lyda
      despised me as a stranger. Outwardly she never showed her dislike of me,
      but I felt it, and, as I sat on the bottom step of the terrace, I had a
      certain irritation and said that treating the peasants without being a
      doctor meant deceiving them, and that it is easy to be a benefactor when
      one owns four thousand acres.
    

      Her sister, Missyuss, had no such cares and spent her time in complete
      idleness, like myself. As soon as she got up in the morning she would take
      a book and read it on the terrace, sitting far back in a lounge chair so
      that her feet hardly touched the ground, or she would hide herself with
      her book in the lime-walk, or she would go through the gate into the
      field. She would read all day long, eagerly poring over the book, and only
      through her looking fatigued, dizzy, and pale sometimes, was it possible
      to guess how much her reading exhausted her. When she saw me come she
      would blush a little and leave her book, and, looking into my face with
      her big eyes, she would tell me of things that had happened, how the
      chimney in the servants' room had caught fire, or how the labourer had
      caught a large fish in the pond. On week-days she usually wore a
      bright-coloured blouse and a dark-blue skirt. We used to go out together
      and pluck cherries for jam, in the boat, and when she jumped to reach a
      cherry, or pulled the oars, her thin, round arms would shine through her
      wide sleeves. Or I would make a sketch and she would stand and watch me
      breathlessly.
    

      One Sunday, at the end of June, I went over to the Volchaninovs in the
      morning about nine o'clock. I walked through the park, avoiding the house,
      looking for mushrooms, which were very plentiful that summer, and marking
      them so as to pick them later with Genya. A warm wind was blowing. I met
      Genya and her mother, both in bright Sunday dresses, going home from
      church, and Genya was holding her hat against the wind. They told me they
      were going to have tea on the terrace.
    

      As a man without a care in the world, seeking somehow to justify his
      constant idleness, I have always found such festive mornings in a country
      house universally attractive. When the green garden, still moist with dew,
      shines in the sun and seems happy, and when the terrace smells of
      mignonette and oleander, and the young people have just returned from
      church and drink tea in the garden, and when they are all so gaily dressed
      and so merry, and when you know that all these healthy, satisfied,
      beautiful people will do nothing all day long, then you long for all life
      to be like that. So I thought then as I walked through the garden, quite
      prepared to drift like that without occupation or purpose, all through the
      day, all through the summer.
    

      Genya carried a basket and she looked as though she knew that she would
      find me there. We gathered mushrooms and talked, and whenever she asked me
      a question she stood in front of me to see my face.
    

      "Yesterday," she said, "a miracle happened in our village. Pelagueya, the
      cripple, has been ill for a whole year, and no doctors or medicines were
      any good, but yesterday an old woman muttered over her and she got
      better."
    

      "That's nothing," I said. "One should not go to sick people and old women
      for miracles. Is not health a miracle? And life itself? A miracle is
      something incomprehensible."
    

      "And you are not afraid of the incomprehensible?"
    

      "No. I like to face things I do not understand and I do not submit to
      them. I am superior to them. Man must think himself higher than lions,
      tigers, stars, higher than anything in nature, even higher than that which
      seems incomprehensible and miraculous. Otherwise he is not a man, but a
      mouse which is afraid of everything."
    

      Genya thought that I, as an artist, knew a great deal and could guess what
      I did not know. She wanted me to lead her into the region of the eternal
      and the beautiful, into the highest world, with which, as she thought, I
      was perfectly familiar, and she talked to me of God, of eternal life, of
      the miraculous. And I, who did not admit that I and my imagination would
      perish for ever, would reply: "Yes. Men are immortal. Yes, eternal life
      awaits us." And she would listen and believe me and never asked for proof.
    

      As we approached the house she suddenly stopped and said:
    

      "Our Lyda is a remarkable person, isn't she? I love her dearly and would
      gladly sacrifice my life for her at any time. But tell me"—Genya
      touched my sleeve with her finger—"but tell me, why do you argue
      with her all the time? Why are you so irritated?"
    

      "Because she is not right."
    

      Genya shook her head and tears came to her eyes.
    

      "How incomprehensible!" she muttered.
    

      At that moment Lyda came out, and she stood by the balcony with a
      riding-whip in her hand, and looked very fine and pretty in the sunlight
      as she gave some orders to a farm-hand. Bustling about and talking loudly,
      she tended two or three of her patients, and then with a businesslike,
      preoccupied look she walked through the house, opening one cupboard after
      another, and at last went off to the attic; it took some time to find her
      for dinner and she did not come until we had finished the soup. Somehow I
      remember all these, little details and love to dwell on them, and I
      remember the whole of that day vividly, though nothing particular
      happened. After dinner Genya read, lying in her lounge chair, and I sat on
      the bottom step of the terrace. We were silent. The sky was overcast and a
      thin fine rain began to fall. It was hot, the wind had dropped, and it
      seemed the day would never end. Ekaterina Pavlovna came out on to the
      terrace with a fan, looking very sleepy.
    

      "O, mamma," said Genya, kissing her hand. "It is not good for you to sleep
      during the day."
    

      They adored each other. When one went into the garden, the other would
      stand on the terrace and look at the trees and call: "Hello!" "Genya!" or
      "Mamma, dear, where are you?" They always prayed together and shared the
      same faith, and they understood each other very well, even when they were
      silent. And they treated other people in exactly the same way. Ekaterina
      Pavlovna also soon got used to me and became attached to me, and when I
      did not turn up for a few days she would send to inquire if I was well.
      And she too used to look admiringly at my sketches, and with the same
      frank loquacity she would tell me things that happened, and she would
      confide her domestic secrets to me.
    

      She revered her elder daughter. Lyda never came to her for caresses, and
      only talked about serious things: she went her own way and to her mother
      and sister she was as sacred and enigmatic as the admiral, sitting in his
      cabin, to his sailors.
    

      "Our Lyda is a remarkable person," her mother would often say; "isn't
      she?"
    

      And, now, as the soft rain fell, we spoke of Lyda:
    

      "She is a remarkable woman," said her mother, and added in a low voice
      like a conspirator's as she looked round, "such as she have to be looked
      for with a lamp in broad daylight, though you know, I am beginning to be
      anxious. The school, pharmacies, books—all very well, but why go to
      such extremes? She is twenty-three and it is time for her to think
      seriously about herself. If she goes on with her books and her pharmacies
      she won't know how life has passed.... She ought to marry."
    

      Genya, pale with reading, and with her hair ruffled, looked up and said,
      as if to herself, as she glanced at her mother:
    

      "Mamma, dear, everything depends on the will of God."
    

      And once more she plunged into her book.
    

      Bielokurov came over in a poddiovka, wearing an embroidered shirt.
      We played croquet and lawn-tennis, and when it grew dark we had a long
      supper, and Lyda once more spoke of her schools and Balaguin, who had got
      the whole district into his own hands. As I left the Volchaninovs that
      night I carried away an impression of a long, long idle day, with a sad
      consciousness that everything ends, however long it may be. Genya took me
      to the gate, and perhaps, because she had spent the whole day with me from
      the beginning to end, I felt somehow lonely without her, and the whole
      kindly family was dear to me: and for the first time during the whole of
      that summer I had a desire to work.
    

      "Tell me why you lead such a monotonous life," I asked Bielokurov, as we
      went home. "My life is tedious, dull, monotonous, because I am a painter,
      a queer fish, and have been worried all my life with envy, discontent,
      disbelief in my work: I am always poor, I am a vagabond, but you are a
      wealthy, normal man, a landowner, a gentleman—why do you live so
      tamely and take so little from life? Why, for instance, haven't you fallen
      in love with Lyda or Genya?"
    

      "You forget that I love another woman," answered Bielokurov.
    

      He meant his mistress, Lyabor Ivanovna, who lived with him in the orchard
      house. I used to see the lady every day, very stout, podgy, pompous, like
      a fatted goose, walking in the garden in a Russian head-dress, always with
      a sunshade, and the servants used to call her to meals or tea. Three years
      ago she rented a part of his house for the summer, and stayed on to live
      with Bielokurov, apparently for ever. She was ten years older than he and
      managed him very strictly, so that he had to ask her permission to go out.
      She would often sob and make horrible noises like a man with a cold, and
      then I used to send and tell her that I'm if she did not stop I would go
      away. Then she would stop.
    

      When we reached home, Bielokurov sat down on the divan and frowned and
      brooded, and I began to pace up and down the hall, feeling a sweet
      stirring in me, exactly like the stirring of love. I wanted to talk about
      the Volchaninovs.
    

      "Lyda could only fall in love with a Zemstvo worker like herself, some one
      who is run off his legs with hospitals and schools," I said. "For the sake
      of a girl like that a man might not only become a Zemstvo worker, but
      might even become worn out, like the tale of the iron boots. And Missyuss?
      How charming Missyuss is!"
    

      Bielokurov began to talk at length and with his drawling er-er-ers of the
      disease of the century—pessimism. He spoke confidently and
      argumentatively. Hundreds of miles of deserted, monotonous, blackened
      steppe could not so forcibly depress the mind as a man like that, sitting
      and talking and showing no signs of going away.
    

      "The point is neither pessimism nor optimism," I said irritably, "but that
      ninety-nine out of a hundred have no sense."
    

      Bielokurov took this to mean himself, was offended, and went away.
    

      III
    

      "The Prince is on a visit to Malozyomov and sends you his regards," said
      Lyda to her mother, as she came in and took off her gloves. "He told me
      many interesting things. He promised to bring forward in the Zemstvo
      Council the question of a medical station at Malozyomov, but he says there
      is little hope." And turning to me, she said: "Forgive me, I keep
      forgetting that you are not interested."
    

      I felt irritated.
    

      "Why not?" I asked and shrugged my shoulders. "You don't care about my
      opinion, but I assure you, the question greatly interests me."
    

      "Yes?"
    

      "In my opinion there is absolutely no need for a medical station at
      Malozyomov."
    

      My irritation affected her: she gave a glance at me, half closed her eyes
      and said:
    

      "What is wanted then? Landscapes?"
    

      "Not landscapes either. Nothing is wanted there."
    

      She finished taking off her gloves and took up a newspaper which had just
      come by post; a moment later, she said quietly, apparently controlling
      herself:
    

      "Last week Anna died in childbirth, and if a medical man had been
      available she would have lived. However, I suppose landscape-painters are
      entitled to their opinions."
    

      "I have a very definite opinion, I assure you," said I, and she took
      refuge behind the newspaper, as though she did not wish to listen. "In my
      opinion medical stations, schools, libraries, pharmacies, under existing
      conditions, only lead to slavery. The masses are caught in a vast chain:
      you do not cut it but only add new links to it. That is my opinion."
    

      She looked at me and smiled mockingly, and I went on, striving to catch
      the thread of my ideas.
    

      "It does not matter that Anna should die in childbirth, but it does matter
      that all these Annas, Mavras, Pelagueyas, from dawn to sunset should be
      grinding away, ill from overwork, all their lives worried about their
      starving sickly children; all their lives they are afraid of death and
      disease, and have to be looking after themselves; they fade in youth, grow
      old very early, and die in filth and dirt; their children as they grow up
      go the same way and hundreds of years slip by and millions of people live
      worse than animals—in constant dread of never having a crust to eat;
      but the horror of their position is that they have no time to think of
      their souls, no time to remember that they are made in the likeness of
      God; hunger, cold, animal fear, incessant work, like drifts of snow block
      all the ways to spiritual activity, to the very thing that distinguishes
      man from the animals, and is the only thing indeed that makes life worth
      living. You come to their assistance with hospitals and schools, but you
      do not free them from their fetters; on the contrary, you enslave them
      even more, since by introducing new prejudices into their lives, you
      increase the number of their demands, not to mention the fact that they
      have to pay the Zemstvo for their drugs and pamphlets, and therefore, have
      to work harder than ever."
    

      "I will not argue with you," said Lyda. "I have heard all that." She put
      down her paper. "I will only tell you one thing, it is no good sitting
      with folded hands. It is true, we do not save mankind, and perhaps we do
      make mistakes, but we do what we can and we are right. The highest and
      most sacred truth for an educated being—is to help his neighbours,
      and we do what we can to help. You do not like it, but it is impossible to
      please everybody."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," said her mother.
    

      In Lyda's presence her courage always failed her, and as she talked she
      would look timidly at her, for she was afraid of saying something foolish
      or out of place: and she never contradicted, but would always agree:
      "True, Lyda, true."
    

      "Teaching peasants to read and write, giving them little moral pamphlets
      and medical assistance, cannot decrease either ignorance or mortality,
      just as the light from your windows cannot illuminate this huge garden," I
      said. "You give nothing by your interference in the lives of these people.
      You only create new demands, and a new compulsion to work."
    

      "Ah! My God, but we must do something!" said Lyda exasperatedly, and I
      could tell by her voice that she thought my opinions negligible and
      despised me.
    

      "It is necessary," I said, "to free people from hard physical work. It is
      necessary to relieve them of their yoke, to give them breathing space, to
      save them from spending their whole lives in the kitchen or the byre, in
      the fields; they should have time to take thought of their souls, of God
      and to develop their spiritual capacities. Every human being's salvation
      lies in spiritual activity—in his continual search for truth and the
      meaning of life. Give them some relief from rough, animal labour, let them
      feel free, then you will see how ridiculous at bottom your pamphlets and
      pharmacies are. Once a human being is aware of his vocation, then he can
      only be satisfied with religion, service, art, and not with trifles like
      that."
    

      "Free them from work?" Lyda gave a smile. "Is that possible?"
    

      "Yes.... Take upon yourself a part of their work. If we all, in town and
      country, without exception, agreed to share the work which is being spent
      by mankind in the satisfaction of physical demands, then none of us would
      have to work more than two or three hours a day. If all of us, rich and
      poor, worked three hours a day the rest of our time would be free. And
      then to be still less dependent on our bodies, we should invent machines
      to do the work and we should try to reduce our demands to the minimum. We
      should toughen ourselves and our children should not be afraid of hunger
      and cold, and we should not be anxious about their health, as Anna, Maria,
      Pelagueya were anxious. Then supposing we did not bother about doctors and
      pharmacies, and did away with tobacco factories and distilleries—what
      a lot of free time we should have! We should give our leisure to service
      and the arts. Just as peasants all work together to repair the roads, so
      the whole community would work together to seek truth and the meaning of
      life, and, I am sure of it—truth would be found very soon, man would
      get rid of his continual, poignant, depressing fear of death and even of
      death itself."
    

      "But you contradict yourself," said Lyda. "You talk about service and deny
      education."
    

      "I deny the education of a man who can only use it to read the signs on
      the public houses and possibly a pamphlet which he is incapable of
      understanding—the kind of education we have had from the time of
      Riurik: and village life has remained exactly as it was then. Not
      education is wanted but freedom for the full development of spiritual
      capacities. Not schools are wanted but universities."
    

      "You deny medicine too."
    

      "Yes. It should only be used for the investigation of diseases, as natural
      phenomenon, not for their cure. It is no good curing diseases if you don't
      cure their causes. Remove the chief cause—physical labour, and there
      will be no diseases. I don't acknowledge the science which cures," I went
      on excitedly. "Science and art, when they are true, are directed not to
      temporary or private purposes, but to the eternal and the general—they
      seek the truth and the meaning of life, they seek God, the soul, and when
      they are harnessed to passing needs and activities, like pharmacies and
      libraries, then they only complicate and encumber life. We have any number
      of doctors, pharmacists, lawyers, and highly educated people, but we have
      no biologists, mathematicians, philosophers, poets. All our intellectual
      and spiritual energy is wasted on temporary passing needs.... Scientists,
      writers, painters work and work, and thanks to them the comforts of life
      grow greater every day, the demands of the body multiply, but we are still
      a long way from the truth and man still remains the most rapacious and
      unseemly of animals, and everything tends to make the majority of mankind
      degenerate and more and more lacking in vitality. Under such conditions
      the life of an artist has no meaning and the more talented he is, the more
      strange and incomprehensible his position is, since it only amounts to his
      working for the amusement of the predatory, disgusting animal, man, and
      supporting the existing state of things. And I don't want to work and will
      not.... Nothing is wanted, so let the world go to hell."
    

      "Missyuss, go away," said Lyda to her sister, evidently thinking my words
      dangerous to so young a girl.
    

      Genya looked sadly at her sister and mother and went out.
    

      "People generally talk like that," said Lyda, "when they want to excuse
      their indifference. It is easier to deny hospitals and schools than to
      come and teach."
    

      "True, Lyda, true," her mother agreed.
    

      "You say you will not work," Lyda went on. "Apparently you set a high
      price on your work, but do stop arguing. We shall never agree, since I
      value the most imperfect library or pharmacy, of which you spoke so
      scornfully just now, more than all the landscapes in the world." And at
      once she turned to her mother and began to talk in quite a different tone:
      "The Prince has got very thin, and is much changed since the last time he
      was here. The doctors are sending him to Vichy."
    

      She talked to her mother about the Prince to avoid talking to me. Her face
      was burning, and, in order to conceal her agitation, she bent over the
      table as if she were short-sighted and made a show of reading the
      newspaper. My presence was distasteful to her. I took my leave and went
      home.
    

      IV
    

      All was quiet outside: the village on the other side of the pond was
      already asleep, not a single light was to be seen, and on the pond there
      was only the faint reflection of the stars. By the gate with the stone
      lions stood Genya, waiting to accompany me.
    

      "The village is asleep," I said, trying to see her face in the darkness,
      and I could see her dark sad eyes fixed on me. "The innkeeper and the
      horse-stealers are sleeping quietly, and decent people like ourselves
      quarrel and irritate each other."
    

      It was a melancholy August night—melancholy because it already
      smelled of the autumn: the moon rose behind a purple cloud and hardly
      lighted the road and the dark fields of winter corn on either side. Stars
      fell frequently, Genya walked beside me on the road and tried not to look
      at the sky, to avoid seeing the falling stars, which somehow frightened
      her.
    

      "I believe you are right," she said, trembling in the evening chill. "If
      people could give themselves to spiritual activity, they would soon burst
      everything."
    

      "Certainly. We are superior beings, and if we really knew all the power of
      the human genius and lived only for higher purposes then we should become
      like gods. But this will never be. Mankind will degenerate and of their
      genius not a trace will be left."
    

      When the gate was out of sight Genya stopped and hurriedly shook my hand.
    

      "Good night," she said, trembling; her shoulders were covered only with a
      thin blouse and she was shivering with cold. "Come to-morrow."
    

      I was filled with a sudden dread of being left alone with my inevitable
      dissatisfaction with myself and people, and I, too, tried not to see the
      falling stars.
    

      "Stay with me a little longer," I said. "Please."
    

      I loved Genya, and she must have loved me, because she used to meet me and
      walk with me, and because she looked at me with tender admiration. How
      thrillingly beautiful her pale face was, her thin nose, her arms, her
      slenderness, her idleness, her constant reading. And her mind? I suspected
      her of having an unusual intellect: I was fascinated by the breadth of her
      views, perhaps because she thought differently from the strong, handsome
      Lyda, who did not love me. Genya liked me as a painter, I had conquered
      her heart by my talent, and I longed passionately to paint only for her,
      and I dreamed of her as my little queen, who would one day possess with me
      the trees, the fields, the river, the dawn, all Nature, wonderful and
      fascinating, with whom, as with them, I have felt helpless and useless.
    

      "Stay with me a moment longer," I called. "I implore you."
    

      I took off my overcoat and covered her childish shoulders. Fearing that
      she would look queer and ugly in a man's coat, she began to laugh and
      threw it off, and as she did so, I embraced her and began to cover her
      face, her shoulders, her arms with kisses.
    

      "Till to-morrow," she whispered timidly as though she was afraid to break
      the stillness of the night. She embraced me: "We have no secrets from one
      another. I must tell mamma and my sister.... Is it so terrible? Mamma will
      be pleased. Mamma loves you, but Lyda!"
    

      She ran to the gates.
    

      "Good-bye," she called out.
    

      For a couple of minutes I stood and heard her running. I had no desire to
      go home, there was nothing there to go for. I stood for a while lost in
      thought, and then quietly dragged myself back, to have one more look at
      the house in which she lived, the dear, simple, old house, which seemed to
      look at me with the windows of the mezzanine for eyes, and to understand
      everything. I walked past the terrace, sat down on a bench by the
      lawn-tennis court, in the darkness under an old elm-tree, and looked at
      the house. In the windows of the mezzanine, where Missyuss had her room,
      shone a bright light, and then a faint green glow. The lamp had been
      covered with a shade. Shadows began to move.... I was filled with
      tenderness and a calm satisfaction, to think that I could let myself be
      carried away and fall in love, and at the same time I felt uneasy at the
      thought that only a few yards away in one of the rooms of the house lay
      Lyda who did not love me, and perhaps hated me. I sat and waited to see if
      Genya would come out. I listened attentively and it seemed to me they were
      sitting in the mezzanine.
    

      An hour passed. The green light went out, and the shadows were no longer
      visible. The moon hung high above the house and lit the sleeping garden
      and the avenues: I could distinctly see the dahlias and roses in the
      flower-bed in front of the house, and all seemed to be of one colour. It
      was very cold. I left the garden, picked up my overcoat in the road, and
      walked slowly home.
    

      Next day after dinner when I went to the Volchaninovs', the glass door was
      wide open. I sat down on the terrace expecting Genya to come from behind
      the flower-bed or from one of the avenues, or to hear her voice come from
      out of the rooms; then I went into the drawing-room and the dining-room.
      There was not a soul to be seen. From the dining-room I went down a long
      passage into the hall, and then back again. There were several doors in
      the passage and behind one of them I could hear Lyda's voice:
    

      "To the crow somewhere ... God ..."—she spoke slowly and distinctly,
      and was probably dictating—" ... God sent a piece of cheese.... To
      the crow ... somewhere.... Who is there?" she called out suddenly as she
      heard my footsteps.
    

      "It is I."
    

      "Oh! excuse me. I can't come out just now. I am teaching Masha."
    

      "Is Ekaterina Pavlovna in the garden?"
    

      "No. She and my sister left to-day for my Aunt's in Penga, and in the
      winter they are probably going abroad." She added after a short silence:
      "To the crow somewhere God sent a pi-ece of cheese. Have you got that?"
    

      I went out into the hall, and, without a thought in my head, stood and
      looked out at the pond and the village, and still I heard:
    

      "A piece of cheese.... To the crow somewhere God sent a piece of cheese."
    

      And I left the house by the way I had come the first time, only reversing
      the order, from the yard into the garden, past the house, then along the
      lime-walk. Here a boy overtook me and handed me a note: "I have told my
      sister everything and she insists on my parting from you," I read. "I
      could not hurt her by disobeying. God will give you happiness. If you knew
      how bitterly mamma and I have cried."
    

      Then through the fir avenue and the rotten fence....Over the fields where
      the corn was ripening and the quails screamed, cows and shackled horses
      now were browsing. Here and there on the hills the winter corn was already
      showing green. A sober, workaday mood possessed me and I was ashamed of
      all I had said at the Volchaninovs', and once more it became tedious to go
      on living. I went home, packed my things, and left that evening for
      Petersburg.
    

      I never saw the Volchaninovs again. Lately on my way to the Crimea I met
      Bielokurov at a station. As of old he was in a poddiovka, wearing
      an embroidered shirt, and when I asked after his health, he replied:
      "Quite well, thanks be to God." He began to talk. He had sold his estate
      and bought another, smaller one in the name of Lyabov Ivanovna. He told me
      a little about the Volchaninovs. Lyda, he said, still lived at Sholkovka
      and taught the children in the school; little by little she succeeded in
      gathering round herself a circle of sympathetic people, who formed a
      strong party, and at the last Zemstvo election they drove out Balaguin,
      who up till then had had the whole district in his hands. Of Genya
      Bielokurov said that she did not live at home and he did not know where
      she was.
    

      I have already begun to forget about the house with the mezzanine, and
      only now and then, when I am working or reading, suddenly—without
      rhyme or reason—I remember the green light in the window, and the
      sound of my own footsteps as I walked through the fields that night, when
      I was in love, rubbing my hands to keep them warm. And even more rarely,
      when I am sad and lonely, I begin already to recollect and it seems to me
      that I, too, am being remembered and waited for, and that we shall
      meet....
    

      Missyuss, where are you?
    

TYPHUS
    

IN a smoking-compartment of the mail-train from
      Petrograd to Moscow sat a young lieutenant, Klimov by name. Opposite him
      sat an elderly man with a clean-shaven, shipmaster's face, to all
      appearances a well-to-do Finn or Swede, who all through the journey smoked
      a pipe and talked round and round the same subject.
    

      "Ha! you are an officer! My brother is also an officer, but he is a
      sailor. He is a sailor and is stationed at Kronstadt. Why are you going to
      Moscow?"
    

      "I am stationed there."
    

      "Ha! Are you married?"
    

      "No. I live with my aunt and sister."
    

      "My brother is also an officer, but he is married and has a wife and three
      children. Ha!"
    

      The Finn looked surprised at something, smiled broadly and fatuously as he
      exclaimed, "Ha," and every now and then blew through the stem of his pipe.
      Klimov, who was feeling rather unwell, and not at all inclined to answer
      questions, hated him with all his heart. He thought how good it would be
      to snatch his gurgling pipe out of his hands and throw it under the seat
      and to order the Finn himself into another car.
    

      "They are awful people, these Finns and ... Greeks," he thought. "Useless,
      good-for-nothing, disgusting people. They only cumber the earth. What is
      the good of them?"
    

      And the thought of Finns and Greeks filled him with a kind of nausea. He
      tried to compare them with the French and the Italians, but the idea of
      those races somehow roused in him the notion of organ-grinders, naked
      women, and the foreign oleographs which hung over the chest of drawers in
      his aunt's house.
    

      The young officer felt generally out of sorts. There seemed to be no room
      for his arms and legs, though he had the whole seat to himself; his mouth
      was dry and sticky, his head was heavy and his clouded thoughts seemed to
      wander at random, not only in his head, but also outside it among the
      seats and the people looming in the darkness. Through the turmoil in his
      brain, as through a dream, he heard the murmur of voices, the rattle of
      the wheels, the slamming of doors. Bells, whistles, conductors, the tramp
      of the people on the platforms came oftener than usual. The time slipped
      by quickly, imperceptibly, and it seemed that the train stopped every
      minute at a station as now and then there would come up the sound of
      metallic voices:
    

      "Is the post ready?"
    

      "Ready."
    

      It seemed to him that the stove-neater came in too often to look at the
      thermometer, and that trains never stopped passing and his own train was
      always roaring over bridges. The noise, the whistle, the Finn, the tobacco
      smoke—all mixed with the ominous shifting of misty shapes, weighed
      on Klimov like an intolerable nightmare. In terrible anguish he lifted up
      his aching head, looked at the lamp whose light was encircled with shadows
      and misty spots; he wanted to ask for water, but his dry tongue would
      hardly move, and he had hardly strength enough to answer the Finn's
      questions. He tried to lie down more comfortably and sleep, but he could
      not succeed; the Finn fell asleep several times, woke up and lighted his
      pipe, talked to him with his "Ha!" and went to sleep again; and the
      lieutenant could still not find room for his legs on the seat, and all the
      while the ominous figures shifted before his eyes.
    

      At Spirov he got out to have a drink of water. He saw some people sitting
      at a table eating hurriedly.
    

      "How can they eat?" he thought, trying to avoid the smell of roast meat in
      the air and seeing the chewing mouths, for both seemed to him utterly
      disgusting and made him feel sick.
    

      A handsome lady was talking to a military man in a red cap, and she showed
      magnificent white teeth when she smiled; her smile, her teeth, the lady
      herself produced in Klimov the same impression of disgust as the ham and
      the fried cutlets. He could not understand how the military man in the red
      cap could bear to sit near her and look at her healthy smiling face.
    

      After he had drunk some water, he went back to his place. The Finn sat and
      smoked. His pipe gurgled and sucked like a galoche full of holes in dirty
      weather.
    

      "Ha!" he said with some surprise. "What station is this?"
    

      "I don't know," said Klimov, lying down and shutting his mouth to keep out
      the acrid tobacco smoke.
    

      "When do we get to Tver."
    

      "I don't know. I am sorry, I ... I can't talk. I am not well. I have a
      cold."
    

      The Finn knocked out his pipe against the window-frame and began to talk
      of his brother, the sailor. Klimov paid no more attention to him and
      thought in agony of his soft, comfortable bed, of the bottle of cold
      water, of his sister Katy, who knew so well how to tuck him up and cosset
      him. He even smiled when there flashed across his mind his soldier-servant
      Pavel, taking off his heavy, close-fitting boots and putting water on the
      table. It seemed to him that he would only have to lie on his bed and
      drink some water and his nightmare would give way to a sound, healthy
      sleep.
    

      "Is the post ready?" came a dull voice from a distance.
    

      "Ready," answered a loud, bass voice almost by the very window.
    

      It was the second or third station from Spirov.
    

      Time passed quickly, seemed to gallop along, and there would be no end to
      the bells, whistles, and stops. In despair Klimov pressed his face into
      the corner of the cushion, held his head in his hands, and again began to
      think of his sister Katy and his orderly Pavel; but his sister and his
      orderly got mixed up with the looming figures and whirled about and
      disappeared. His breath, thrown back from the cushion, burned his face,
      and his legs ached and a draught from the window poured into his back,
      but, painful though it was, he refused to change his position.... A heavy,
      drugging torpor crept over him and chained his limbs.
    

      When at length he raised his head, the car was quite light. The passengers
      were putting on their overcoats and moving about. The train stopped.
      Porters in white aprons and number-plates bustled about the passengers and
      seized their boxes. Klimov put on his greatcoat mechanically and left the
      train, and he felt as though it were not himself walking, but some one
      else, a stranger, and he felt that he was accompanied by the heat of the
      train, his thirst, and the ominous, lowering figures which all night long
      had prevented his sleeping. Mechanically he got his luggage and took a
      cab. The cabman charged him one rouble and twenty-five copecks for driving
      him to Povarska Street, but he did not haggle and submissively took his
      seat in the sledge. He could still grasp the difference in numbers, but
      money had no value to him whatever.
    

      At home Klimov was met by his aunt and his sister Katy, a girl of
      eighteen. Katy had a copy-book and a pencil in her hands as she greeted
      him, and he remembered that she was preparing for a teacher's examination.
      He took no notice of their greetings and questions, but gasped from the
      heat, and walked aimlessly through the rooms until he reached his own, and
      then he fell prone on the bed. The Finn, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the smell of roast meat, the shifting spot in the lamp,
      filled his mind and he lost consciousness and did not hear the frightened
      voices near him.
    

      When he came to himself he found himself in bed, undressed, and noticed
      the water-bottle and Pavel, but it did not make him any more comfortable
      nor easy. His legs and arms, as before, felt cramped, his tongue clove to
      his palate, and he could hear the chuckle of the Finn's pipe.... By the
      bed, growing out of Pavel's broad back, a stout, black-bearded doctor was
      bustling.
    

      "All right, all right, my lad," he murmured. "Excellent, excellent....
      Jist so, jist so...."
    

      The doctor called Klimov "my lad." Instead of "just so," he said "jist
      saow," and instead of "yes," "yies."
    

      "Yies, yies, yies," he said. "Jist saow, jist saow.... Don't be
      downhearted!"
    

      The doctor's quick, careless way of speaking, his well-fed face, and the
      condescending tone in which he said "my lad" exasperated Klimov.
    

      "Why do you call me 'my lad'?" he moaned. "Why this familiarity, damn it
      all?"
    

      And he was frightened by the sound of his own voice. It was so dry, weak,
      and hollow that he could hardly recognise it.
    

      "Excellent, excellent," murmured the doctor, not at all offended. "Yies,
      yies. You mustn't be cross."
    

      And at home the time galloped away as alarmingly quickly as in the
      train.... The light of day in his bedroom was every now and then changed
      to the dim light of evening.... The doctor never seemed to leave the
      bedside, and his "Yies, yies, yies," could be heard at every moment.
      Through the room stretched an endless row of faces; Pavel, the Finn,
      Captain Taroshevich, Sergeant Maximenko, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the doctor. All of them talked, waved their hands, smoked,
      ate. Once in broad daylight Klimov saw his regimental priest, Father
      Alexander, in his stole and with the host in his hands, standing by the
      bedside and muttering something with such a serious expression as Klimov
      had never seen him wear before. The lieutenant remembered that Father
      Alexander used to call all the Catholic officers Poles, and wishing to
      make the priest laugh, he exclaimed:
    

      "Father Taroshevich, the Poles have fled to the woods."
    

      But Father Alexander, usually a gay, light-hearted man, did not laugh and
      looked even more serious, and made the sign of the cross over Klimov. At
      night, one after the other, there would come slowly creeping in and out
      two shadows. They were his aunt and his sister. The shadow of his sister
      would kneel down and pray; she would bow to the ikon, and her grey shadow
      on the wall would bow, too, so that two shadows prayed to God. And all the
      time there was a smell of roast meat and of the Finn's pipe, but once
      Klimov could detect a distinct smell of incense. He nearly vomited and
      cried:
    

      "Incense! Take it away."
    

      There was no reply. He could only hear priests chanting in an undertone
      and some one running on the stairs.
    

      When Klimov recovered from his delirium there was not a soul in the
      bedroom. The morning sun flared through the window and the drawn curtains,
      and a trembling beam, thin and keen as a sword, played on the
      water-bottle. He could hear the rattle of wheels—that meant there
      was no more snow in the streets. The lieutenant looked at the sunbeam, at
      the familiar furniture and the door, and his first inclination was to
      laugh. His chest and stomach trembled with a sweet, happy, tickling
      laughter. From head to foot his whole body was filled with a feeling of
      infinite happiness, like that which the first man must have felt when he
      stood erect and beheld the world for the first time. Klimov had a
      passionate longing for people, movement, talk. His body lay motionless; he
      could only move his hands, but he hardly noticed it, for his whole
      attention was fixed on little things. He was delighted with his breathing
      and with his laughter; he was delighted with the existence of the
      water-bottle, the ceiling, the sunbeam, the ribbon on the curtain. God's
      world, even in such a narrow corner as his bedroom, seemed to him
      beautiful, varied, great. When the doctor appeared the lieutenant thought
      how nice his medicine was, how nice and sympathetic the doctor was, how
      nice and interesting people were, on the whole.
    

      "Yies, yies, yies," said the doctor. "Excellent, excellent. Now we are
      well again. Jist saow. Jist saow."
    

      The lieutenant listened and laughed gleefully. He remembered the Finn, the
      lady with the white teeth, the train, and he wanted to eat and smoke.
    

      "Doctor," he said, "tell them to bring me a slice of rye bread and salt,
      and some sardines...."
    

      The doctor refused. Pavel did not obey his order and refused to go for
      bread. The lieutenant could not bear it and began to cry like a thwarted
      child.
    

      "Ba-by," the doctor laughed. "Mamma! Hush-aby!"
    

      Klimov also began to laugh, and when the doctor had gone, he fell sound
      asleep. He woke up with the same feeling of joy and happiness. His aunt
      was sitting by his bed.
    

      "Oh, aunty!" He was very happy. "What has been the matter with me?"
    

      "Typhus."
    

      "I say! And now I am well, quite well! Where is Katy?"
    

      "She is not at home. She has probably gone to see some one after her
      examination."
    

      The old woman bent over her stocking as she said this; her lips began to
      tremble; she turned her face away and suddenly began to sob. In her grief,
      she forgot the doctor's orders and cried:
    

      "Oh! Katy! Katy! Our angel is gone from us! She is gone!"
    

      She dropped her stocking and stooped down for it, and her cap fell off her
      head. Klimov stared at her grey hair, could not understand, was alarmed
      for Katy, and asked:
    

      "But where is she, aunty?"
    

      The old woman, who had already forgotten Klimov and remembered only her
      grief, said:
    

      "She caught typhus from you and ... and died. She was buried the day
      before yesterday."
    

      This sudden appalling piece of news came home to Klimov's mind, but
      dreadful and shocking though it was it could not subdue the animal joy
      which thrilled through the convalescent lieutenant. He cried, laughed, and
      soon began to complain that he was given nothing to eat.
    

      Only a week later, when, supported by Pavel, he walked in a dressing-gown
      to the window, and saw the grey spring sky and heard the horrible rattle
      of some old rails being carried by on a lorry, then his heart ached with
      sorrow and he began to weep and pressed his forehead against the
      window-frame.
    

      "How unhappy I am!" he murmured. "My God, how unhappy I am!"
    

      And joy gave way to his habitual weariness and a sense of his irreparable
      loss.
    

GOOSEBERRIES
    

FROM early morning the sky had been overcast with
      clouds; the day was still, cool, and wearisome, as usual on grey, dull
      days when the clouds hang low over the fields and it looks like rain,
      which never comes. Ivan Ivanich, the veterinary surgeon, and Bourkin, the
      schoolmaster, were tired of walking and the fields seemed endless to them.
      Far ahead they could just see the windmills of the village of Mirousky, to
      the right stretched away to disappear behind the village a line of hills,
      and they knew that it was the bank of the river; meadows, green willows,
      farmhouses; and from one of the hills there could be seen a field as
      endless, telegraph-posts, and the train, looking from a distance like a
      crawling caterpillar, and in clear weather even the town. In the calm
      weather when all Nature seemed gentle and melancholy, Ivan Ivanich and
      Bourkin were filled with love for the fields and thought how grand and
      beautiful the country was.
    

      "Last time, when we stopped in Prokofyi's shed," said Bourkin, "you were
      going to tell me a story."
    

      "Yes. I wanted to tell you about my brother."
    

      Ivan Ivanich took a deep breath and lighted his pipe before beginning his
      story, but just then the rain began to fall. And in about five minutes it
      came pelting down and showed no signs of stopping. Ivan Ivanich stopped
      and hesitated; the dogs, wet through, stood with their tails between their
      legs and looked at them mournfully.
    

      "We ought to take shelter," said Bourkin. "Let us go to Aliokhin. It is
      close by."
    

      "Very well."
    

      They took a short cut over a stubble-field and then bore to the right,
      until they came to the road. Soon there appeared poplars, a garden, the
      red roofs of granaries; the river began to glimmer and they came to a wide
      road with a mill and a white bathing-shed. It was Sophino, where Aliokhin
      lived.
    

      The mill was working, drowning the sound of the rain, and the dam shook.
      Round the carts stood wet horses, hanging their heads, and men were
      walking about with their heads covered with sacks. It was wet, muddy, and
      unpleasant, and the river looked cold and sullen. Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin
      felt wet and uncomfortable through and through; their feet were tired with
      walking in the mud, and they walked past the dam to the barn in silence as
      though they were angry with each other.
    

      In one of the barns a winnowing-machine was working, sending out clouds of
      dust. On the threshold stood Aliokhin himself, a man of about forty, tall
      and stout, with long hair, more like a professor or a painter than a
      farmer. He was wearing a grimy white shirt and rope belt, and pants
      instead of trousers; and his boots were covered with mud and straw. His
      nose and eyes were black with dust. He recognised Ivan Ivanich and was
      apparently very pleased.
    

      "Please, gentlemen," he said, "go to the house. I'll be with you in a
      minute."
    

      The house was large and two-storied. Aliokhin lived down-stairs in two
      vaulted rooms with little windows designed for the farm-hands; the
      farmhouse was plain, and the place smelled of rye bread and vodka, and
      leather. He rarely used the reception-rooms, only when guests arrived.
      Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin were received by a chambermaid; such a pretty
      young woman that both of them stopped and exchanged glances.
    

      "You cannot imagine how glad I am to see you, gentlemen," said Aliokhin,
      coming after them into the hall. "I never expected you. Pelagueya," he
      said to the maid, "give my friends a change of clothes. And I will change,
      too. But I must have a bath. I haven't had one since the spring. Wouldn't
      you like to come to the bathing-shed? And meanwhile our things will be got
      ready."
    

      Pretty Pelagueya, dainty and sweet, brought towels and soap, and Aliokhin
      led his guests to the bathing-shed.
    

      "Yes," he said, "it is a long time since I had a bath. My bathing-shed is
      all right, as you see. My father and I put it up, but somehow I have no
      time to bathe."
    

      He sat down on the step and lathered his long hair and neck, and the water
      round him became brown.
    

      "Yes. I see," said Ivan Ivanich heavily, looking at his head.
    

      "It is a long time since I bathed," said Aliokhin shyly, as he soaped
      himself again, and the water round him became dark blue, like ink.
    

      Ivan Ivanich came out of the shed, plunged into the water with a splash,
      and swam about in the rain, flapping his arms, and sending waves back, and
      on the waves tossed white lilies; he swam out to the middle of the pool
      and dived, and in a minute came up again in another place and kept on
      swimming and diving, trying to reach the bottom. "Ah! how delicious!" he
      shouted in his glee. "How delicious!" He swam to the mill, spoke to the
      peasants, and came back, and in the middle of the pool he lay on his back
      to let the rain fall on his face. Bourkin and Aliokhin were already
      dressed and ready to go, but he kept on swimming and diving.
    

      "Delicious," he said. "Too delicious!"
    

      "You've had enough," shouted Bourkin.
    

      They went to the house. And only when the lamp was lit in the large
      drawing-room up-stairs, and Bourkin and Ivan Ivanich, dressed in silk
      dressing-gowns and warm slippers, lounged in chairs, and Aliokhin himself,
      washed and brushed, in a new frock coat, paced up and down evidently
      delighting in the warmth and cleanliness and dry clothes and slippers, and
      pretty Pelagueya, noiselessly tripping over the carpet and smiling
      sweetly, brought in tea and jam on a tray, only then did Ivan Ivanich
      begin his story, and it was as though he was being listened to not only by
      Bourkin and Aliokhin, but also by the old and young ladies and the officer
      who looked down so staidly and tranquilly from the golden frames.
    

      "We are two brothers," he began, "I, Ivan Ivanich, and Nicholai Ivanich,
      two years younger. I went in for study and became a veterinary surgeon,
      while Nicholai was at the Exchequer Court when he was nineteen. Our
      father, Tchimasha-Himalaysky, was a cantonist, but he died with an
      officer's rank and left us his title of nobility and a small estate. After
      his death the estate went to pay his debts. However, we spent our
      childhood there in the country. We were just like peasant's children,
      spent days and nights in the fields and the woods, minded the house,
      barked the lime-trees, fished, and so on.... And you know once a man has
      fished, or watched the thrushes hovering in flocks over the village in the
      bright, cool, autumn days, he can never really be a townsman, and to the
      day of his death he will be drawn to the country. My brother pined away in
      the Exchequer. Years passed and he sat in the same place, wrote out the
      same documents, and thought of one thing, how to get back to the country.
      And little by little his distress became a definite disorder, a fixed idea—to
      buy a small farm somewhere by the bank of a river or a lake.
    

      "He was a good fellow and I loved him, but I never sympathised with the
      desire to shut oneself up on one's own farm. It is a common saying that a
      man needs only six feet of land. But surely a corpse wants that, not a
      man. And I hear that our intellectuals have a longing for the land and
      want to acquire farms. But it all comes down to the six feet of land. To
      leave town, and the struggle and the swim of life, and go and hide
      yourself in a farmhouse is not life—it is egoism, laziness; it is a
      kind of monasticism, but monasticism without action. A man needs, not six
      feet of land, not a farm, but the whole earth, all Nature, where in full
      liberty he can display all the properties and qualities of the free
      spirit.
    

      "My brother Nicholai, sitting in his office, would dream of eating his own
      schi, with its savoury smell floating across the farmyard; and of
      eating out in the open air, and of sleeping in the sun, and of sitting for
      hours together on a seat by the gate and gazing at the field and the
      forest. Books on agriculture and the hints in almanacs were his joy, his
      favourite spiritual food; and he liked reading newspapers, but only the
      advertisements of land to be sold, so many acres of arable and grass land,
      with a farmhouse, river, garden, mill, and mill-pond. And he would dream
      of garden-walls, flowers, fruits, nests, carp in the pond, don't you know,
      and all the rest of it. These fantasies of his used to vary according to
      the advertisements he found, but somehow there was always a
      gooseberry-bush in every one. Not a house, not a romantic spot could he
      imagine without its gooseberry-bush.
    

      "'Country life has its advantages,' he used to say. 'You sit on the
      veranda drinking tea and your ducklings swim on the pond, and everything
      smells good ... and there are gooseberries.'
    

      "He used to draw out a plan of his estate and always the same things were
      shown on it: (a) Farmhouse, (b) cottage, (c)
      vegetable garden, (d) gooseberry-bush. He used to live meagrely and
      never had enough to eat and drink, dressed God knows how, exactly like a
      beggar, and always saved and put his money into the bank. He was terribly
      stingy. It used to hurt me to see him, and I used to give him money to go
      away for a holiday, but he would put that away, too. Once a man gets a
      fixed idea, there's nothing to be done.
    

      "Years passed; he was transferred to another province. He completed his
      fortieth year and was still reading advertisements in the papers and
      saving up his money. Then I heard he was married. Still with the same idea
      of buying a farmhouse with a gooseberry-bush, he married an elderly, ugly
      widow, not out of any feeling for her, but because she had money. With her
      he still lived stingily, kept her half-starved, and put the money into the
      bank in his own name. She had been the wife of a postmaster and was used
      to good living, but with her second husband she did not even have enough
      black bread; she pined away in her new life, and in three years or so gave
      up her soul to God. And my brother never for a moment thought himself to
      blame for her death. Money, like vodka, can play queer tricks with a man.
      Once in our town a merchant lay dying. Before his death he asked for some
      honey, and he ate all his notes and scrip with the honey so that nobody
      should get it. Once I was examining a herd of cattle at a station and a
      horse-jobber fell under the engine, and his foot was cut off. We carried
      him into the waiting-room, with the blood pouring down—a terrible
      business—and all the while he kept on asking anxiously for his foot;
      he had twenty-five roubles in his boot and did not want to lose them."
    

      "Keep to your story," said Bourkin.
    

      "After the death of his wife," Ivan Ivanich continued, after a long pause,
      "my brother began to look out for an estate. Of course you may search for
      five years, and even then buy a pig in a poke. Through an agent my brother
      Nicholai raised a mortgage and bought three hundred acres with a
      farmhouse, a cottage, and a park, but there was no orchard, no
      gooseberry-bush, no duck-pond; there was a river but the water in it was
      coffee-coloured because the estate lay between a brick-yard and a gelatine
      factory. But my brother Nicholai was not worried about that; he ordered
      twenty gooseberry-bushes and settled down to a country life.
    

      "Last year I paid him a visit. I thought I'd go and see how things were
      with him. In his letters my brother called his estate Tchimbarshov Corner,
      or Himalayskoe. I arrived at Himalayskoe in the afternoon. It was hot.
      There were ditches, fences, hedges, rows of young fir-trees, trees
      everywhere, and there was no telling how to cross the yard or where to put
      your horse. I went to the house and was met by a red-haired dog, as fat as
      a pig. He tried to bark but felt too lazy. Out of the kitchen came the
      cook, barefooted, and also as fat as a pig, and said that the master was
      having his afternoon rest. I went in to my brother and found him sitting
      on his bed with his knees covered with a blanket; he looked old, stout,
      flabby; his cheeks, nose, and lips were pendulous. I half expected him to
      grunt like a pig.
    

      "We embraced and shed a tear of joy and also of sadness to think that we
      had once been young, but were now both going grey and nearing death. He
      dressed and took me to see his estate.
    

      "'Well? How are you getting on?' I asked.
    

      "'All right, thank God. I am doing very well.'
    

      "He was no longer the poor, tired official, but a real landowner and a
      person of consequence. He had got used to the place and liked it, ate a
      great deal, took Russian baths, was growing fat, had already gone to law
      with the parish and the two factories, and was much offended if the
      peasants did not call him 'Your Lordship.' And, like a good landowner, he
      looked after his soul and did good works pompously, never simply. What
      good works? He cured the peasants of all kinds of diseases with soda and
      castor-oil, and on his birthday he would have a thanksgiving service held
      in the middle of the village, and would treat the peasants to half a
      bucket of vodka, which he thought the right thing to do. Ah! Those
      horrible buckets of vodka. One day a greasy landowner will drag the
      peasants before the Zembro Court for trespass, and the next, if it's a
      holiday, he will give them a bucket of vodka, and they drink and shout
      Hooray! and lick his boots in their drunkenness. A change to good eating
      and idleness always fills a Russian with the most preposterous
      self-conceit. Nicholai Ivanich who, when he was in the Exchequer, was
      terrified to have an opinion of his own, now imagined that what he said
      was law. 'Education is necessary for the masses, but they are not fit for
      it.' 'Corporal punishment is generally harmful, but in certain cases it is
      useful and indispensable.'
    

      "'I know the people and I know how to treat them,' he would say. 'The
      people love me. I have only to raise my finger and they will do as I
      wish.'
    

      "And all this, mark you, was said with a kindly smile of wisdom. He was
      constantly saying: 'We noblemen,' or 'I, as a nobleman.' Apparently he had
      forgotten that our grandfather was a peasant and our father a common
      soldier. Even our family name, Tchimacha-Himalaysky, which is really an
      absurd one, seemed to him full-sounding, distinguished, and very pleasing.
    

      "But my point does not concern him so much as myself. I want to tell you
      what a change took place in me in those few hours while I was in his
      house. In the evening, while we were having tea, the cook laid a plateful
      of gooseberries on the table. They had not been bought, but were his own
      gooseberries, plucked for the first time since the bushes were planted.
      Nicholai Ivanich laughed with joy and for a minute or two he looked in
      silence at the gooseberries with tears in his eyes. He could not speak for
      excitement, then put one into his mouth, glanced at me in triumph, like a
      child at last being given its favourite toy, and said:
    

      "'How good they are!'
    

      "He went on eating greedily, and saying all the while:
    

      "'How good they are! Do try one!'
    

      "It was hard and sour, but, as Poushkin said, the illusion which exalts us
      is dearer to us than ten thousand truths. I saw a happy man, one whose
      dearest dream had come true, who had attained his goal in life, who had
      got what he wanted, and was pleased with his destiny and with himself. In
      my idea of human life there is always some alloy of sadness, but now at
      the sight of a happy man I was filled with something like despair. And at
      night it grew on me. A bed was made up for me in the room near my
      brother's and I could hear him, unable to sleep, going again and again to
      the plate of gooseberries. I thought: 'After all, what a lot of contented,
      happy people there must be! What an overwhelming power that means! I look
      at this life and see the arrogance and the idleness of the strong, the
      ignorance and bestiality of the weak, the horrible poverty everywhere,
      overcrowding, drunkenness, hypocrisy, falsehood.... Meanwhile in all the
      houses, all the streets, there is peace; out of fifty thousand people who
      live in our town there is not one to kick against it all. Think of the
      people who go to the market for food: during the day they eat; at night
      they sleep, talk nonsense, marry, grow old, piously follow their dead to
      the cemetery; one never sees or hears those who suffer, and all the horror
      of life goes on somewhere behind the scenes. Everything is quiet,
      peaceful, and against it all there is only the silent protest of
      statistics; so many go mad, so many gallons are drunk, so many children
      die of starvation.... And such a state of things is obviously what we
      want; apparently a happy man only feels so because the unhappy bear their
      burden in silence, but for which happiness would be impossible. It is a
      general hypnosis. Every happy man should have some one with a little
      hammer at his door to knock and remind him that there are unhappy people,
      and that, however happy he may be, life will sooner or later show its
      claws, and some misfortune will befall him—illness, poverty, loss,
      and then no one will see or hear him, just as he now neither sees nor
      hears others. But there is no man with a hammer, and the happy go on
      living, just a little fluttered with the petty cares of every day, like an
      aspen-tree in the wind—and everything is all right.'
    

      "That night I was able to understand how I, too, had been content and
      happy," Ivan Ivanich went on, getting up. "I, too, at meals or out
      hunting, used to lay down the law about living, and religion, and
      governing the masses. I, too, used to say that teaching is light, that
      education is necessary, but that for simple folk reading and writing is
      enough for the present. Freedom is a boon, I used to say, as essential as
      the air we breathe, but we must wait. Yes—I used to say so, but now
      I ask: 'Why do we wait?'" Ivan Ivanich glanced angrily at Bourkin. "Why do
      we wait, I ask you? What considerations keep us fast? I am told that we
      cannot have everything at once, and that every idea is realised in time.
      But who says so? Where is the proof that it is so? You refer me to the
      natural order of things, to the law of cause and effect, but is there
      order or natural law in that I, a living, thinking creature, should stand
      by a ditch until it fills up, or is narrowed, when I could jump it or
      throw a bridge over it? Tell me, I say, why should we wait? Wait, when we
      have no strength to live, and yet must live and are full of the desire to
      live!
    

      "I left my brother early the next morning, and from that time on I found
      it impossible to live in town. The peace and the quiet of it oppress me. I
      dare not look in at the windows, for nothing is more dreadful to see than
      the sight of a happy family, sitting round a table, having tea. I am an
      old man now and am no good for the struggle. I commenced late. I can only
      grieve within my soul, and fret and sulk. At night my head buzzes with the
      rush of my thoughts and I cannot sleep.... Ah! If I were young!"
    

      Ivan Ivanich walked excitedly up and down the room and repeated:
    

      "If I were young."
    

      He suddenly walked up to Aliokhin and shook him first by one hand and then
      by the other.
    

      "Pavel Konstantinich," he said in a voice of entreaty, "don't be
      satisfied, don't let yourself be lulled to sleep! While you are young,
      strong, wealthy, do not cease to do good! Happiness does not exist, nor
      should it, and if there is any meaning or purpose in life, they are not in
      our peddling little happiness, but in something reasonable and grand. Do
      good!"
    

      Ivan Ivanich said this with a piteous supplicating smile, as though he
      were asking a personal favour.
    

      Then they all three sat in different corners of the drawing-room and were
      silent. Ivan Ivanich's story had satisfied neither Bourkin nor Aliokhin.
      With the generals and ladies looking down from their gilt frames, seeming
      alive in the firelight, it was tedious to hear the story of a miserable
      official who ate gooseberries.... Somehow they had a longing to hear and
      to speak of charming people, and of women. And the mere fact of sitting in
      the drawing-room where everything—the lamp with its coloured shade,
      the chairs, and the carpet under their feet—told how the very people
      who now looked down at them from their frames once walked, and sat and had
      tea there, and the fact that pretty Pelagueya was near—was much
      better than any story.
    

      Aliokhin wanted very much to go to bed; he had to get up for his work very
      early, about two in the morning, and now his eyes were closing, but he was
      afraid of his guests saying something interesting without his hearing it,
      so he would not go. He did not trouble to think whether what Ivan Ivanich
      had been saying was clever or right; his guests were talking of neither
      groats, nor hay, nor tar, but of something which had no bearing on his
      life, and he liked it and wanted them to go on....
    

      "However, it's time to go to bed," said Bourkin, getting up. "I will wish
      you good night."
    

      Aliokhin said good night and went down-stairs, and left his guests. Each
      had a large room with an old wooden bed and carved ornaments; in the
      corner was an ivory crucifix; and their wide, cool beds, made by pretty
      Pelagueya, smelled sweetly of clean linen.
    

      Ivan Ivanich undressed in silence and lay down.
    

      "God forgive me, a wicked sinner," he murmured, as he drew the clothes
      over his head.
    

      A smell of burning tobacco came from his pipe which lay on the table, and
      Bourkin could not sleep for a long time and was worried because he could
      not make out where the unpleasant smell came from.
    

      The rain beat against the windows all night long.
    

IN EXILE
    

OLD Simeon, whose nickname was Brains, and a young
      Tartar, whose name nobody knew, were sitting on the bank of the river by a
      wood-fire. The other three ferrymen were in the hut. Simeon who was an old
      man of about sixty, skinny and toothless, but broad-shouldered and
      healthy, was drunk. He would long ago have gone to bed, but he had a
      bottle in his pocket and was afraid of his comrades asking him for vodka.
      The Tartar was ill and miserable, and, pulling his rags about him, he went
      on talking about the good things in the province of Simbirsk, and what a
      beautiful and clever wife he had left at home. He was not more than
      twenty-five, and now, by the light of the wood-fire, with his pale,
      sorrowful, sickly face, he looked a mere boy.
    

      "Of course, it is not a paradise here," said Brains, "you see, water, the
      bare bushes by the river, clay everywhere—nothing else.... It is
      long past Easter and there is still ice on the water and this morning
      there was snow...."
    

      "Bad! Bad!" said the Tartar with a frightened look.
    

      A few yards away flowed the dark, cold river, muttering, dashing against
      the holes in the clayey banks as it tore along to the distant sea. By the
      bank they were sitting on, loomed a great barge, which the ferrymen call a
      karbass. Far away and away, flashing out, flaring up, were fires
      crawling like snakes—last year's grass being burned. And behind the
      water again was darkness. Little banks of ice could be heard knocking
      against the barge.... It was very damp and cold....
    

      The Tartar glanced at the sky. There were as many stars as at home, and
      the darkness was the same, but something was missing. At home in the
      Simbirsk province the stars and the sky were altogether different.
    

      "Bad! Bad!" he repeated.
    

      "You will get used to it," said Brains with a laugh. "You are young yet
      and foolish; the milk is hardly dry on your lips, and in your folly you
      imagine that there is no one unhappier than you, but there will come a
      time when you will say: God give every one such a life! Just look at me.
      In a week's time the floods will be gone, and we will fix the ferry here,
      and all of you will go away into Siberia and I shall stay here, going to
      and fro. I have been living thus for the last two-and-twenty years, but,
      thank God, I want nothing. God give everybody such a life."
    

      The Tartar threw some branches onto the fire, crawled near to it and said:
    

      "My father is sick. When he dies, my mother and my wife have promised to
      come here."
    

      "What do you want your mother and your wife for?" asked Brains. "Just
      foolishness, my friend. It's the devil tempting you, plague take him.
      Don't listen to the Evil One. Don't give way to him. When he talks to you
      about women you should answer him sharply: 'I don't want them!' When he
      talks of freedom, you should stick to it and say: 'I don't want it. I want
      nothing! No father, no mother, no wife, no freedom, no home, no love! I
      want nothing.' Plague take 'em all."
    

      Brains took a swig at his bottle and went on:
    

      "My brother, I am not an ordinary peasant. I don't come from the servile
      masses. I am the son of a deacon, and when I was a free man at Rursk, I
      used to wear a frock coat, and now I have brought myself to such a point
      that I can sleep naked on the ground and eat grass. God give such a life
      to everybody. I want nothing. I am afraid of nobody and I think there is
      no man richer or freer than I. When they sent me here from Russia I set my
      teeth at once and said: 'I want nothing!' The devil whispers to me about
      my wife and my kindred, and about freedom and I say to him: 'I want
      nothing!' I stuck to it, and, you see, I live happily and have nothing to
      grumble at. If a man gives the devil the least opportunity and listens to
      him just once, then he is lost and has no hope of salvation: he will be
      over ears in the mire and will never get out. Not only peasants the like
      of you are lost, but the nobly born and the educated also. About fifteen
      years ago a certain nobleman was sent here from Russia. He had had some
      trouble with his brothers and had made a forgery in a will. People said he
      was a prince or a baron, but perhaps he was only a high official—who
      knows? Well, he came here and at once bought a house and land in
      Moukhzyink. 'I want to live by my own work,' said he, 'in the sweat of my
      brow, because I am no longer a nobleman but an exile.' 'Why,' said I. 'God
      help you, for that is good.' He was a young man then, ardent and eager; he
      used to mow and go fishing, and he would ride sixty miles on horseback.
      Only one thing was wrong; from the very beginning he was always driving to
      the post-office at Guyrin. He used to sit in my boat and sigh: 'Ah!
      Simeon, it is a long time since they sent me any money from home.' 'You
      are better without money, Vassili Sergnevich,' said I. 'What's the good of
      it? You just throw away the past, as though it had never happened, as
      though it were only a dream, and start life afresh. Don't listen to the
      devil,' I said, 'he won't do you any good, and he will only tighten the
      noose. You want money now, but in a little while you will want something
      else, and then more and more. If,' said I, 'you want to be happy you must
      want nothing. Exactly.... If,' I said, 'fate has been hard on you and me,
      it is no good asking her for charity and falling at her feet. We must
      ignore her and laugh at her.' That's what I said to him.... Two years
      later I ferried him over and he rubbed his hands and laughed. 'I'm going,'
      said he, 'to Guyrin to meet my wife. She has taken pity on me, she says,
      and she is coming here. She is very kind and good.' And he gave a gasp of
      joy. Then one day he came with his wife, a beautiful young lady with a
      little girl in her arms and a lot of luggage. And Vassili Andreich kept
      turning and looking at her and could not look at her or praise her enough.
      'Yes, Simeon, my friend, even in Siberia people live.' Well, thought I,
      all right, you won't be content. And from that time on, mark you, he used
      to go to Guyrin every week to find out if money had been sent from Russia.
      A terrible lot of money was wasted. 'She stays here,' said he, 'for my
      sake, and her youth and beauty wither away here in Siberia. She shares my
      bitter lot with me,' said he, 'and I must give her all the pleasure I can
      for it....' To make his wife happier he took up with the officials and any
      kind of rubbish. And they couldn't have company without giving food and
      drink, and they must have a piano and a fluffy little dog on the sofa—bad
      cess to it.... Luxury, in a word, all kinds of tricks. My lady did not
      stay with him long. How could she? Clay, water, cold, no vegetables, no
      fruit; uneducated people and drunkards, with no manners, and she was a
      pretty pampered young lady from the metropolis.... Of course she got
      bored. And her husband was no longer a gentleman, but an exile—quite
      a different matter. Three years later, I remember, on the eve of the
      Assumption, I heard shouts from the other bank. I went over in the ferry
      and saw my lady, all wrapped up, with a young gentleman, a government
      official, in a troika.... I ferried them across, they got into the
      carriage and disappeared, and I saw no more of them. Toward the morning
      Vassili Andreich came racing up in a coach and pair. 'Has my wife been
      across, Simeon, with a gentleman in spectacles?' 'She has,' said I, 'but
      you might as well look for the wind in the fields.' He raced after them
      and kept it up for five days and nights. When he came back he jumped on to
      the ferry and began to knock his head against the side and to cry aloud.
      'You see,' said I, 'there you are.' And I laughed and reminded him: 'Even
      in Siberia people live.' But he went on beating his head harder than
      ever.... Then he got the desire for freedom. His wife had gone to Russia
      and he longed to go there to see her and take her away from her lover. And
      he began to go to the post-office every day, and then to the authorities
      of the town. He was always sending applications or personally handing them
      to the authorities, asking to have his term remitted and to be allowed to
      go, and he told me that he had spent over two hundred roubles on
      telegrams. He sold his land and mortgaged his house to the money-lenders.
      His hair went grey, he grew round-shouldered, and his face got yellow and
      consumptive-looking. He used to cough whenever he spoke and tears used to
      come to his eyes. He spent eight years on his applications, and at last he
      became happy again and lively: he had thought of a new dodge. His
      daughter, you see, had grown up. He doted on her and could never take his
      eyes off her. And, indeed, she was very pretty, dark and clever. Every
      Sunday he used to go to church with her at Guyrin. They would stand side
      by side on the ferry, and she would smile and he would devour her with his
      eyes. 'Yes, Simeon,' he would say. 'Even in Siberia people live. Even in
      Siberia there is happiness. Look what a fine daughter I have. You wouldn't
      find one like her in a thousand miles' journey.' 'She's a nice girl,' said
      I. 'Oh, yes.' ... And I thought to myself: 'You wait.... She is young.
      Young blood will have its way; she wants to live and what life is there
      here?' And she began to pine away.... Wasting, wasting away, she withered
      away, fell ill and had to keep to her bed.... Consumption. That's Siberian
      happiness, plague take it; that's Siberian life.... He rushed all over the
      place after the doctors and dragged them home with him. If he heard of a
      doctor or a quack three hundred miles off he would rush off after him. He
      spent a terrific amount of money on doctors and I think it would have been
      much better spent on drink. All the same she had to die. No help for it.
      Then it was all up with him. He thought of hanging himself, and of trying
      to escape to Russia. That would be the end of him. He would try to escape:
      he would be caught, tried, penal servitude, flogging."
    

      "Good! Good!" muttered the Tartar with a shiver.
    

      "What is good?" asked Brains.
    

      "Wife and daughter. What does penal servitude and suffering matter? He saw
      his wife and his daughter. You say one should want nothing. But nothing—is
      evil! His wife spent three years with him. God gave him that. Nothing is
      evil, and three years is good. Why don't you understand that?"
    

      Trembling and stammering as he groped for Russian words, of which he knew
      only a few, the Tartar began to say: "God forbid he should fall ill among
      strangers, and die and be buried in the cold sodden earth, and then, if
      his wife could come to him if only for one day or even for one hour, he
      would gladly endure any torture for such happiness, and would even thank
      God. Better one day of happiness than nothing."
    

      Then once more he said what a beautiful clever wife he had left at home,
      and with his head in his hands he began to cry and assured Simeon that he
      was innocent, and had been falsely accused. His two brothers and his uncle
      had stolen some horses from a peasant and beat the old man nearly to
      death, and the community never looked into the matter at all, and judgment
      was passed by which all three brothers were exiled to Siberia, while his
      uncle, a rich man, remained at home.
    

      "You will get used to it," said Simeon.
    

      The Tartar relapsed into silence and stared into the fire with his eyes
      red from weeping; he looked perplexed and frightened, as if he could not
      understand why he was in the cold and the darkness, among strangers, and
      not in the province of Simbirsk. Brains lay down near the fire, smiled at
      something, and began to say in an undertone:
    

      "But what a joy she must be to your father," he muttered after a pause.
      "He loves her and she is a comfort to him, eh? But, my man, don't tell me.
      He is a strict, harsh old man. And girls don't want strictness; they want
      kisses and laughter, scents and pomade. Yes.... Ah! What a life!" Simeon
      swore heavily. "No more vodka! That means bedtime. What? I'm going, my
      man."
    

      Left alone, the Tartar threw more branches on the fire, lay down, and,
      looking into the blaze, began to think of his native village and of his
      wife; if she could come if only for a month, or even a day, and then, if
      she liked, go back again! Better a month or even a day, than nothing. But
      even if his wife kept her promise and came, how could he provide for her?
      Where was she to live?
    

      "If there is nothing to eat; how are we to live?" asked the Tartar aloud.
    

      For working at the oars day and night he was paid two copecks a day; the
      passengers gave tips, but the ferrymen shared them out and gave nothing to
      the Tartar, and only laughed at him. And he was poor, cold, hungry, and
      fearful.... With his whole body aching and shivering he thought it would
      be good to go into the hut and sleep; but there was nothing to cover
      himself with, and it was colder there than on the bank. He had nothing to
      cover himself with there, but he could make up a fire....
    

      In a week's time, when the floods had subsided and the ferry would be
      fixed up, all the ferrymen except Simeon would not be wanted any longer
      and the Tartar would have to go from village to village, begging and
      looking for work. His wife was only seventeen; beautiful, soft, and
      shy.... Could she go unveiled begging through the villages? No. The idea
      of it was horrible.
    

      It was already dawn. The barges, the bushy willows above the water, the
      swirling flood began to take shape, and up above in a clayey cliff a hut
      thatched with straw, and above that the straggling houses of the village,
      where the cocks had begun to crow.
    

      The ginger-coloured clay cliff, the barge, the river, the strange wild
      people, hunger, cold, illness—perhaps all these things did not
      really exist. Perhaps, thought the Tartar, it was only a dream. He felt
      that he must be asleep, and he heard his own snoring.... Certainly he was
      at home in the Simbirsk province; he had but to call his wife and she
      would answer; and his mother was in the next room.... But what awful
      dreams there are! Why? The Tartar smiled and opened his eyes. What river
      was that? The Volga?
    

      It was snowing.
    

      "Hi! Ferry!" some one shouted on the other bank. "Karba-a-ass!"
    

      The Tartar awoke and went to fetch his mates to row over to the other
      side. Hurrying into their sheepskins, swearing sleepily in hoarse voices,
      and shivering from the cold, the four men appeared on the bank. After
      their sleep, the river from which there came a piercing blast, seemed to
      them horrible and disgusting. They stepped slowly into the barge.... The
      Tartar and the three ferrymen took the long, broad-bladed oars, which in
      the dim light looked like a crab's claw, and Simeon flung himself with his
      belly against the tiller. And on the other side the voice kept on
      shouting, and a revolver was fired twice, for the man probably thought the
      ferrymen were asleep or gone to the village inn.
    

      "All right. Plenty of time!" said Brains in the tone of one who was
      convinced that there is no need for hurry in this world—and indeed
      there is no reason for it.
    

      The heavy, clumsy barge left the bank and heaved through the willows, and
      by the willows slowly receding it was possible to tell that the barge was
      moving. The ferrymen plied the oars with a slow measured stroke; Brains
      hung over the tiller with his stomach pressed against it and swung from
      side to side. In the dim light they looked like men sitting on some
      antediluvian animal with long limbs, swimming out to a cold dismal
      nightmare country.
    

      They got clear of the willows and swung out into mid-stream. The thud of
      the oars and the splash could be heard on the other bank and shouts came:
      "Quicker! Quicker!" After another ten minutes the barge bumped heavily
      against the landing-stage.
    

      "And it is still snowing, snowing all the time," Simeon murmured, wiping
      the snow off his face. "God knows where it comes from!"
    

      On the other side a tall, lean old man was waiting in a short fox-fur coat
      and a white astrachan hat. He was standing some distance from his horses
      and did not move; he had a stern concentrated expression as if he were
      trying to remember something and were furious with his recalcitrant
      memory. When Simeon went up to him and took off his hat with a smile he
      said:
    

      "I'm in a hurry to get to Anastasievka. My daughter is worse again and
      they tell me there's a new doctor at Anastasievka."
    

      The coach was clamped onto the barge and they rowed back. All the while as
      they rowed the man, whom Simeon called Vassili Andreich, stood motionless,
      pressing his thick lips tight and staring in front of him. When the driver
      craved leave to smoke in his presence, he answered nothing, as if he did
      not hear. And Simeon hung over the rudder and looked at him mockingly and
      said:
    

      "Even in Siberia people live. L-i-v-e!"
    

      On Brains's face was a triumphant expression as if he were proving
      something, as if pleased that things had happened just as he thought they
      would. The unhappy, helpless look of the man in the fox-fur coat seemed to
      give him great pleasure.
    

      "The roads are now muddy, Vassili Andreich," he said, when the horses had
      been harnessed on the bank. "You'd better wait a couple of weeks, until it
      gets dryer.... If there were any point in going—but you know
      yourself that people are always on the move day and night and there's no
      point in it. Sure!"
    

      Vassili Andreich said nothing, gave him a tip, took his seat in the coach
      and drove away.
    

      "Look! He's gone galloping after the doctor!" said Simeon, shivering in
      the cold. "Yes. To look for a real doctor, trying to overtake the wind in
      the fields, and catch the devil by the tail, plague take him! What queer
      fish there are! God forgive me, a miserable sinner."
    

      The Tartar went up to Brains, and, looking at him with mingled hatred and
      disgust, trembling, and mixing Tartar words up with his broken Russian,
      said:
    

      "He good ... good. And you ... bad! You are bad! The gentleman is a good
      soul, very good, and you are a beast, you are bad! The gentleman is alive
      and you are dead.... God made man that he should be alive, that he should
      have happiness, sorrow, grief, and you want nothing, so you are not alive,
      but a stone! A stone wants nothing and so do you.... You are a stone—and
      God does not love you and the gentleman he does."
    

      They all began to laugh: the Tartar furiously knit his brows, waved his
      hand, drew his rags round him and went to the fire. The ferrymen and
      Simeon went slowly to the hut.
    

      "It's cold," said one of the ferrymen hoarsely, as he stretched himself on
      the straw with which the damp, clay floor was covered.
    

      "Yes. It's not warm," another agreed.... "It's a hard life."
    

      All of them lay down. The wind blew the door open. The snow drifted into
      the hut. Nobody could bring himself to get up and shut the door; it was
      cold, but they put up with it.
    

      "And I am happy," muttered Simeon as he fell asleep. "God give such a life
      to everybody."
    

      "You certainly are the devil's own. Even the devil don't need to take
      you."
    

      Sounds like the barking of a dog came from outside.
    

      "Who is that? Who is there?"
    

      "It's the Tartar crying."
    

      "Oh! he's a queer fish."
    

      "He'll get used to it!" said Simeon, and at once he fell asleep. Soon the
      others slept too and the door was left open.
    

THE
      LADY WITH THE TOY DOG
    

IT was reported that a new face had been seen on
      the quay; a lady with a little dog. Dimitri Dimitrich Gomov, who had been
      a fortnight at Talta and had got used to it, had begun to show an interest
      in new faces. As he sat in the pavilion at Verné's he saw a young
      lady, blond and fairly tall, and wearing a broad-brimmed hat, pass along
      the quay. After her ran a white Pomeranian.
    

      Later he saw her in the park and in the square several times a day. She
      walked by herself, always in the same broad-brimmed hat, and with this
      white dog. Nobody knew who she was, and she was spoken of as the lady with
      the toy dog.
    

      "If," thought Gomov, "if she is here without a husband or a friend, it
      would be as well to make her acquaintance."
    

      He was not yet forty, but he had a daughter of twelve and two boys at
      school. He had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      now his wife seemed half as old again as himself. She was a tall woman,
      with dark eyebrows, erect, grave, stolid, and she thought herself an
      intellectual woman. She read a great deal, called her husband not Dimitri,
      but Demitri, and in his private mind he thought her short-witted,
      narrow-minded, and ungracious. He was afraid of her and disliked being at
      home. He had begun to betray her with other women long ago, betrayed her
      frequently, and, probably for that reason nearly always spoke ill of
      women, and when they were discussed in his presence he would maintain that
      they were an inferior race.
    

      It seemed to him that his experience was bitter enough to give him the
      right to call them any name he liked, but he could not live a couple of
      days without the "inferior race." With men he was bored and ill at ease,
      cold and unable to talk, but when he was with women, he felt easy and knew
      what to talk about, and how to behave, and even when he was silent with
      them he felt quite comfortable. In his appearance as in his character,
      indeed in his whole nature, there was something attractive, indefinable,
      which drew women to him and charmed them; he knew it, and he, too, was
      drawn by some mysterious power to them.
    

      His frequent, and, indeed, bitter experiences had taught him long ago that
      every affair of that kind, at first a divine diversion, a delicious smooth
      adventure, is in the end a source of worry for a decent man, especially
      for men like those at Moscow who are slow to move, irresolute,
      domesticated, for it becomes at last an acute and extraordinary
      complicated problem and a nuisance. But whenever he met and was interested
      in a new woman, then his experience would slip away from his memory, and
      he would long to live, and everything would seem so simple and amusing.
    

      And it so happened that one evening he dined in the gardens, and the lady
      in the broad-brimmed hat came up at a leisurely pace and sat at the next
      table. Her expression, her gait, her dress, her coiffure told him that she
      belonged to society, that she was married, that she was paying her first
      visit to Talta, that she was alone, and that she was bored.... There is a
      great deal of untruth in the gossip about the immorality of the place. He
      scorned such tales, knowing that they were for the most part concocted by
      people who would be only too ready to sin if they had the chance, but when
      the lady sat down at the next table, only a yard or two away from him, his
      thoughts were filled with tales of easy conquests, of trips to the
      mountains; and he was suddenly possessed by the alluring idea of a quick
      transitory liaison, a moment's affair with an unknown woman whom he knew
      not even by name.
    

      He beckoned to the little dog, and when it came up to him, wagged his
      finger at it. The dog began to growl. Gomov again wagged his finger.
    

      The lady glanced at him and at once cast her eyes down.
    

      "He won't bite," she said and blushed.
    

      "May I give him a bone?"—and when she nodded emphatically, he asked
      affably: "Have you been in Talta long?"
    

      "About five days."
    

      "And I am just dragging through my second week."
    

      They were silent for a while.
    

      "Time goes quickly," she said, "and it is amazingly boring here."
    

      "It is the usual thing to say that it is boring here. People live quite
      happily in dull holes like Bieliev or Zhidra, but as soon as they come
      here they say: 'How boring it is! The very dregs of dullness!' One would
      think they came from Spain."
    

      She smiled. Then both went on eating in silence as though they did not
      know each other; but after dinner they went off together—and then
      began an easy, playful conversation as though they were perfectly happy,
      and it was all one to them where they went or what they talked of. They
      walked and talked of how the sea was strangely luminous; the water lilac,
      so soft and warm, and athwart it the moon cast a golden streak. They said
      how stifling it was after the hot day. Gomov told her how he came from
      Moscow and was a philologist by education, but in a bank by profession;
      and how he had once wanted to sing in opera, but gave it up; and how he
      had two houses in Moscow.... And from her he learned that she came from
      Petersburg, was born there, but married at S. where she had been living
      for the last two years; that she would stay another month at Talta, and
      perhaps her husband would come for her, because, he too, needed a rest.
      She could not tell him what her husband was—Provincial
      Administration or Zemstvo Council—and she seemed to think it funny.
      And Gomov found out that her name was Anna Sergueyevna.
    

      In his room at night, he thought of her and how they would meet next day.
      They must do so. As he was going to sleep, it struck him that she could
      only lately have left school, and had been at her lessons even as his
      daughter was then; he remembered how bashful and gauche she was when she
      laughed and talked with a stranger—it must be, he thought, the first
      time she had been alone, and in such a place with men walking after her
      and looking at her and talking to her, all with the same secret purpose
      which she could not but guess. He thought of her slender white neck and
      her pretty, grey eyes.
    

      "There is something touching about her," he thought as he began to fall
      asleep.
    

      II
    

      A week passed. It was a blazing day. Indoors it was stifling, and in the
      streets the dust whirled along. All day long he was plagued with thirst
      and he came into the pavilion every few minutes and offered Anna
      Sergueyevna an iced drink or an ice. It was impossibly hot.
    

      In the evening, when the air was fresher, they walked to the jetty to see
      the steamer come in. There was quite a crowd all gathered to meet
      somebody, for they carried bouquets. And among them were clearly marked
      the peculiarities of Talta: the elderly ladies were youngly dressed and
      there were many generals.
    

      The sea was rough and the steamer was late, and before it turned into the
      jetty it had to do a great deal of manœuvring. Anna Sergueyevna
      looked through her lorgnette at the steamer and the passengers as though
      she were looking for friends, and when she turned to Gomov, her eyes
      shone. She talked much and her questions were abrupt, and she forgot what
      she had said; and then she lost her lorgnette in the crowd.
    

      The well-dressed people went away, the wind dropped, and Gomov and Anna
      Sergueyevna stood as though they were waiting for somebody to come from
      the steamer. Anna Sergueyevna was silent. She smelled her flowers and did
      not look at Gomov.
    

      "The weather has got pleasanter toward evening," he said. "Where shall we
      go now? Shall we take a carriage?"
    

      She did not answer.
    

      He fixed his eyes on her and suddenly embraced her and kissed her lips,
      and he was kindled with the perfume and the moisture of the flowers; at
      once he started and looked round; had not some one seen?
    

      "Let us go to your—" he murmured.
    

      And they walked quickly away.
    

      Her room was stifling, and smelled of scents which she had bought at the
      Japanese shop. Gomov looked at her and thought: "What strange chances
      there are in life!" From the past there came the memory of earlier
      good-natured women, gay in their love, grateful to him for their
      happiness, short though it might be; and of others—like his wife—who
      loved without sincerity, and talked overmuch and affectedly, hysterically,
      as though they were protesting that it was not love, nor passion, but
      something more important; and of the few beautiful cold women, into whose
      eyes there would flash suddenly a fierce expression, a stubborn desire to
      take, to snatch from life more than it can give; they were no longer in
      their first youth, they were capricious, unstable, domineering, imprudent,
      and when Gomov became cold toward them then their beauty roused him to
      hatred, and the lace on their lingerie reminded him of the scales of fish.
    

      But here there was the shyness and awkwardness of inexperienced youth, a
      feeling of constraint; an impression of perplexity and wonder, as though
      some one had suddenly knocked at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, "the lady
      with the toy dog" took what had happened somehow seriously, with a
      particular gravity, as though thinking that this was her downfall and very
      strange and improper. Her features seemed to sink and wither, and on
      either side of her face her long hair hung mournfully down; she sat
      crestfallen and musing, exactly like a woman taken in sin in some old
      picture.
    

      "It is not right," she said. "You are the first to lose respect for me."
    

      There was a melon on the table. Gomov cut a slice and began to eat it
      slowly. At least half an hour passed in silence.
    

      Anna Sergueyevna was very touching; she irradiated the purity of a simple,
      devout, inexperienced woman; the solitary candle on the table hardly
      lighted her face, but it showed her very wretched.
    

      "Why should I cease to respect you?" asked Gomov. "You don't know what you
      are saying."
    

      "God forgive me!" she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "It is
      horrible."
    

      "You seem to want to justify yourself."
    

      "How can I justify myself? I am a wicked, low woman and I despise myself.
      I have no thought of justifying myself. It is not my husband that I have
      deceived, but myself. And not only now but for a long time past. My
      husband may be a good honest man, but he is a lackey. I do not know what
      work he does, but I do know that he is a lackey in his soul. I was twenty
      when I married him. I was overcome by curiosity. I longed for something.
      'Surely,' I said to myself, 'there is another kind of life.' I longed to
      live! To live, and to live.... Curiosity burned me up.... You do not
      understand it, but I swear by God, I could no longer control myself.
      Something strange was going on in me. I could not hold myself in. I told
      my husband that I was ill and came here.... And here I have been walking
      about dizzily, like a lunatic.... And now I have become a low, filthy
      woman whom everybody may despise."
    

      Gomov was already bored; her simple words irritated him with their
      unexpected and inappropriate repentance; but for the tears in her eyes he
      might have thought her to be joking or playing a part.
    

      "I do not understand," he said quietly. "What do you want?"
    

      She hid her face in his bosom and pressed close to him.
    

      "Believe, believe me, I implore you," she said. "I love a pure, honest
      life, and sin is revolting to me. I don't know myself what I am doing.
      Simple people say: 'The devil entrapped me,' and I can say of myself: 'The
      Evil One tempted me.'"
    

      "Don't, don't," he murmured.
    

      He looked into her staring, frightened eyes, kissed her, spoke quietly and
      tenderly, and gradually quieted her and she was happy again, and they both
      began to laugh.
    

      Later, when they went out, there was not a soul on the quay; the town with
      its cypresses looked like a city of the dead, but the sea still roared and
      broke against the shore; a boat swung on the waves; and in it sleepily
      twinkled the light of a lantern.
    

      They found a cab and drove out to the Oreanda.
    

      "Just now in the hall," said Gomov, "I discovered your name written on the
      board—von Didenitz. Is your husband a German?"
    

      "No. His grandfather, I believe, was a German, but he himself is an
      Orthodox Russian."
    

      At Oreanda they sat on a bench, not far from the church, looked down at
      the sea and were silent. Talta was hardly visible through the morning
      mist. The tops of the hills were shrouded in motionless white clouds. The
      leaves of the trees never stirred, the cicadas trilled, and the monotonous
      dull sound of the sea, coming up from below, spoke of the rest, the
      eternal sleep awaiting us. So the sea roared when there was neither Talta
      nor Oreanda, and so it roars and will roar, dully, indifferently when we
      shall be no more. And in this continual indifference to the life and death
      of each of us, lives pent up, the pledge of our eternal salvation, of the
      uninterrupted movement of life on earth and its unceasing perfection.
      Sitting side by side with a young woman, who in the dawn seemed so
      beautiful, Gomov, appeased and enchanted by the sight of the fairy scene,
      the sea, the mountains, the clouds, the wide sky, thought how at bottom,
      if it were thoroughly explored, everything on earth was beautiful,
      everything, except what we ourselves think and do when we forget the
      higher purposes of life and our own human dignity.
    

      A man came up—a coast-guard—gave a look at them, then went
      away. He, too, seemed mysterious and enchanted. A steamer came over from
      Feodossia, by the light of the morning star, its own lights already put
      out.
    

      "There is dew on the grass," said Anna Sergueyevna after a silence.
    

      "Yes. It is time to go home."
    

      They returned to the town.
    

      Then every afternoon they met on the quay, and lunched together, dined,
      walked, enjoyed the sea. She complained that she slept badly, that her
      heart beat alarmingly. She would ask the same question over and over
      again, and was troubled now by jealousy, now by fear that he did not
      sufficiently respect her. And often in the square or the gardens, when
      there was no one near, he would draw her close and kiss her passionately.
      Their complete idleness, these kisses in the full daylight, given timidly
      and fearfully lest any one should see, the heat, the smell of the sea and
      the continual brilliant parade of leisured, well-dressed, well-fed people
      almost regenerated him. He would tell Anna Sergueyevna how delightful she
      was, how tempting. He was impatiently passionate, never left her side, and
      she would often brood, and even asked him to confess that he did not
      respect her, did not love her at all, and only saw in her a loose woman.
      Almost every evening, rather late, they would drive out of the town, to
      Oreanda, or to the waterfall; and these drives were always delightful, and
      the impressions won during them were always beautiful and sublime.
    

      They expected her husband to come. But he sent a letter in which he said
      that his eyes were bad and implored his wife to come home. Anna
      Sergueyevna began to worry.
    

      "It is a good thing I am going away," she would say to Gomov. "It is
      fate."
    

      She went in a carriage and he accompanied her. They drove for a whole day.
      When she took her seat in the car of an express-train and when the second
      bell sounded, she said:
    

      "Let me have another look at you.... Just one more look. Just as you are."
    

      She did not cry, but was sad and low-spirited, and her lips trembled.
    

      "I will think of you—often," she said. "Good-bye. Good-bye. Don't
      think ill of me. We part for ever. We must, because we ought not to have
      met at all. Now, good-bye."
    

      The train moved off rapidly. Its lights disappeared, and in a minute or
      two the sound of it was lost, as though everything were agreed to put an
      end to this sweet, oblivious madness. Left alone on the platform, looking
      into the darkness, Gomov heard the trilling of the grasshoppers and the
      humming of the telegraph-wires, and felt as though he had just woke up.
      And he thought that it had been one more adventure, one more affair, and
      it also was finished and had left only a memory. He was moved, sad, and
      filled with a faint remorse; surely the young woman, whom he would never
      see again, had not been happy with him; he had been kind to her, friendly,
      and sincere, but still in his attitude toward her, in his tone and
      caresses, there had always been a thin shadow of raillery, the rather
      rough arrogance of the successful male aggravated by the fact that he was
      twice as old as she. And all the time she had called him kind, remarkable,
      noble, so that he was never really himself to her, and had involuntarily
      deceived her....
    

      Here at the station, the smell of autumn was in the air, and the evening
      was cool.
    

      "It is time for me to go North," thought Gomov, as he left the platform.
      "It is time."
    

      III
    

      At home in Moscow, it was already like winter; the stoves were heated, and
      in the mornings, when the children were getting ready to go to school, and
      had their tea, it was dark and their nurse lighted the lamp for a short
      while. The frost had already begun. When the first snow falls, the first
      day of driving in sledges, it is good to see the white earth, the white
      roofs; one breathes easily, eagerly, and then one remembers the days of
      youth. The old lime-trees and birches, white with hoarfrost, have a kindly
      expression; they are nearer to the heart than cypresses and palm-trees,
      and with the dear familiar trees there is no need to think of mountains
      and the sea.
    

      Gomov was a native of Moscow. He returned to Moscow on a fine frosty day,
      and when he donned his fur coat and warm gloves, and took a stroll through
      Petrovka, and when on Saturday evening he heard the church-bells ringing,
      then his recent travels and the places he had visited lost all their
      charm. Little by little he sank back into Moscow life, read eagerly three
      newspapers a day, and said that he did not read Moscow papers as a matter
      of principle. He was drawn into a round of restaurants, clubs,
      dinner-parties, parties, and he was flattered to have his house frequented
      by famous lawyers and actors, and to play cards with a professor at the
      University club. He could eat a whole plateful of hot sielianka.
    

      So a month would pass, and Anna Sergueyevna, he thought, would be lost in
      the mists of memory and only rarely would she visit his dreams with her
      touching smile, just as other women had done. But more than a month
      passed, full winter came, and in his memory everything was clear, as
      though he had parted from Anna Sergueyevna only yesterday. And his memory
      was lit by a light that grew ever stronger. No matter how, through the
      voices of his children saying their lessons, penetrating to the evening
      stillness of his study, through hearing a song, or the music in a
      restaurant, or the snow-storm howling in the chimney, suddenly the whole
      thing would come to life again in his memory: the meeting on the jetty,
      the early morning with the mists on the mountains, the steamer from
      Feodossia and their kisses. He would pace up and down his room and
      remember it all and smile, and then his memories would drift into dreams,
      and the past was confused in his imagination with the future. He did not
      dream at night of Anna Sergueyevna, but she followed him everywhere, like
      a shadow, watching him. As he shut his eyes, he could see her, vividly,
      and she seemed handsomer, tenderer, younger than in reality; and he seemed
      to himself better than he had been at Talta. In the evenings she would
      look at him from the bookcase, from the fireplace, from the corner; he
      could hear her breathing and the soft rustle of her dress. In the street
      he would gaze at women's faces to see if there were not one like her....
    

      He was filled with a great longing to share his memories with some one.
      But at home it was impossible to speak of his love, and away from home—there
      was no one. Impossible to talk of her to the other people in the house and
      the men at the bank. And talk of what? Had he loved then? Was there
      anything fine, romantic, or elevating or even interesting in his relations
      with Anna Sergueyevna? And he would speak vaguely of love, of women, and
      nobody guessed what was the matter, and only his wife would raise her dark
      eyebrows and say:
    

      "Demitri, the rôle of coxcomb does not suit you at all."
    

      One night, as he was coming out of the club with his partner, an official,
      he could not help saying:
    

      "If only I could tell what a fascinating woman I met at Talta."
    

      The official seated himself in his sledge and drove off, but suddenly
      called:
    

      "Dimitri Dimitrich!"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "You were right. The sturgeon was tainted."
    

      These banal words suddenly roused Gomov's indignation. They seemed to him
      degrading and impure. What barbarous customs and people!
    

      What preposterous nights, what dull, empty days! Furious card-playing,
      gourmandising, drinking, endless conversations about the same things,
      futile activities and conversations taking up the best part of the day and
      all the best of a man's forces, leaving only a stunted, wingless life,
      just rubbish; and to go away and escape was impossible—one might as
      well be in a lunatic asylum or in prison with hard labour.
    

      Gomov did not sleep that night, but lay burning with indignation, and then
      all next day he had a headache. And the following night he slept badly,
      sitting up in bed and thinking, or pacing from corner to corner of his
      room. His children bored him, the bank bored him, and he had no desire to
      go out or to speak to any one.
    

      In December when the holidays came he prepared to go on a journey and told
      his wife he was going to Petersburg to present a petition for a young
      friend of his—and went to S. Why? He did not know. He wanted to see
      Anna Sergueyevna, to talk to her, and if possible to arrange an
      assignation.
    

      He arrived at S. in the morning and occupied the best room in the hotel,
      where the whole floor was covered with a grey canvas, and on the table
      there stood an inkstand grey with dust, adorned with a horseman on a
      headless horse holding a net in his raised hand. The porter gave him the
      necessary information: von Didenitz; Old Goucharno Street, his own house—not
      far from the hotel; lives well, has his own horses, every one knows him.
    

      Gomov walked slowly to Old Goucharno Street and found the house. In front
      of it was a long, grey fence spiked with nails.
    

      "No getting over a fence like that," thought Gomov, glancing from the
      windows to the fence.
    

      He thought: "To-day is a holiday and her husband is probably at home.
      Besides it would be tactless to call and upset her. If he sent a note then
      it might fall into her husband's hands and spoil everything. It would be
      better to wait for an opportunity." And he kept on walking up and down the
      street, and round the fence, waiting for his opportunity. He saw a beggar
      go in at the gate and the dogs attack him. He heard a piano and the sounds
      came faintly to his ears. It must be Anna Sergueyevna playing. The door
      suddenly opened and out of it came an old woman, and after her ran the
      familiar white Pomeranian. Gomov wanted to call the dog, but his heart
      suddenly began to thump and in his agitation he could not remember the
      dog's name.
    

      He walked on, and more and more he hated the grey fence and thought with a
      gust of irritation that Anna Sergueyevna had already forgotten him, and
      was perhaps already amusing herself with some one else, as would be only
      natural in a young woman forced from morning to night to behold the
      accursed fence. He returned to his room and sat for a long time on the
      sofa, not knowing what to do. Then he dined and afterward slept for a long
      while.
    

      "How idiotic and tiresome it all is," he thought as he awoke and saw the
      dark windows; for it was evening. "I've had sleep enough, and what shall I
      do to-night?"
    

      He sat on his bed which was covered with a cheap, grey blanket, exactly
      like those used in a hospital, and tormented himself.
    

      "So much for the lady with the toy dog.... So much for the great
      adventure.... Here you sit."
    

      However, in the morning, at the station, his eye had been caught by a
      poster with large letters: "First Performance of 'The Geisha.'" He
      remembered that and went to the theatre.
    

      "It is quite possible she will go to the first performance," he thought.
    

      The theatre was full and, as usual in all provincial theatres, there was a
      thick mist above the lights, the gallery was noisily restless; in the
      first row before the opening of the performance stood the local dandies
      with their hands behind their backs, and there in the governor's box, in
      front, sat the governor's daughter, and the governor himself sat modestly
      behind the curtain and only his hands were visible. The curtain quivered;
      the orchestra tuned up for a long time, and while the audience were coming
      in and taking their seats, Gomov gazed eagerly round.
    

      At last Anna Sergueyevna came in. She took her seat in the third row, and
      when Gomov glanced at her his heart ached and he knew that for him there
      was no one in the whole world nearer, dearer, and more important than she;
      she was lost in this provincial rabble, the little undistinguished woman,
      with a common lorgnette in her hands, yet she filled his whole life; she
      was his grief, his joy, his only happiness, and he longed for her; and
      through the noise of the bad orchestra with its tenth-rate fiddles, he
      thought how dear she was to him. He thought and dreamed.
    

      With Anna Sergueyevna there came in a young man with short side-whiskers,
      very tall, stooping; with every movement he shook and bowed continually.
      Probably he was the husband whom in a bitter mood at Talta she had called
      a lackey. And, indeed, in his long figure, his side-whiskers, the little
      bald patch on the top of his head, there was something of the lackey; he
      had a modest sugary smile and in his buttonhole he wore a University badge
      exactly like a lackey's number.
    

      In the first entr'acte the husband went out to smoke, and she was left
      alone. Gomov, who was also in the pit, came up to her and said in a
      trembling voice with a forced smile:
    

      "How do you do?"
    

      She looked up at him and went pale. Then she glanced at him again in
      terror, not believing her eyes, clasped her fan and lorgnette tightly
      together, apparently struggling to keep herself from fainting. Both were
      silent. She sat, he stood; frightened by her emotion, not daring to sit
      down beside her. The fiddles and flutes began to play and suddenly it
      seemed to them as though all the people in the boxes were looking at them.
      She got up and walked quickly to the exit; he followed, and both walked
      absently along the corridors, down the stairs, up the stairs, with the
      crowd shifting and shimmering before their eyes; all kinds of uniforms,
      judges, teachers, crown-estates, and all with badges; ladies shone and
      shimmered before them, like fur coats on moving rows of clothes-pegs, and
      there was a draught howling through the place laden with the smell of
      tobacco and cigar-ends. And Gomov, whose heart was thudding wildly,
      thought:
    

      "Oh, Lord! Why all these men and that beastly orchestra?"
    

      At that very moment he remembered how when he had seen Anna Sergueyevna
      off that evening at the station he had said to himself that everything was
      over between them, and they would never meet again. And now how far off
      they were from the end!
    

      On a narrow, dark staircase over which was written: "This Way to the
      Amphitheatre," she stopped:
    

      "How you frightened me!" she said, breathing heavily, still pale and
      apparently stupefied. "Oh! how you frightened me! I am nearly dead. Why
      did you come? Why?"
    

      "Understand me, Anna," he whispered quickly. "I implore you to
      understand...."
    

      She looked at him fearfully, in entreaty, with love in her eyes, gazing
      fixedly to gather up in her memory every one of his features.
    

      "I suffer so!" she went on, not listening to him. "All the time, I thought
      only of you. I lived with thoughts of you.... And I wanted to forget, to
      forget, but why, why did you come?"
    

      A little above them, on the landing, two schoolboys stood and smoked and
      looked down at them, but Gomov did not care. He drew her to him and began
      to kiss her cheeks, her hands.
    

      "What are you doing? What are you doing?" she said in terror, thrusting
      him away.... "We were both mad. Go away to-night. You must go away at
      once.... I implore you, by everything you hold sacred, I implore you....
      The people are coming——-"
    

      Some one passed them on the stairs.
    

      "You must go away," Anna Sergueyevna went on in a whisper. "Do you hear,
      Dimitri Dimitrich? I'll come to you in Moscow. I never was happy. Now I am
      unhappy and I shall never, never be happy, never! Don't make me suffer
      even more! I swear, I'll come to Moscow. And now let us part. My dear,
      dearest darling, let us part!"
    

      She pressed his hand and began to go quickly down-stairs, all the while
      looking back at him, and in her eyes plainly showed that she was most
      unhappy. Gomov stood for a while, listened, then, when all was quiet he
      found his coat and left the theatre.
    

      IV
    

      And Anna Sergueyevna began to come to him in Moscow. Once every two or
      three months she would leave S., telling her husband that she was going to
      consult a specialist in women's diseases. Her husband half believed and
      half disbelieved her. At Moscow she would stay at the "Slaviansky Bazaar"
      and send a message at once to Gomov. He would come to her, and nobody in
      Moscow knew.
    

      Once as he was going to her as usual one winter morning—he had not
      received her message the night before—he had his daughter with him,
      for he was taking her to school which was on the way. Great wet flakes of
      snow were falling.
    

      "Three degrees above freezing," he said, "and still the snow is falling.
      But the warmth is only on the surface of the earth. In the upper strata of
      the atmosphere there is quite a different temperature."
    

      "Yes, papa. Why is there no thunder in winter?"
    

      He explained this too, and as he spoke he thought of his assignation, and
      that not a living soul knew of it, or ever would know. He had two lives;
      one obvious, which every one could see and know, if they were sufficiently
      interested, a life full of conventional truth and conventional fraud,
      exactly like the lives of his friends and acquaintances; and another,
      which moved underground. And by a strange conspiracy of circumstances,
      everything that was to him important, interesting, vital, everything that
      enabled him to be sincere and denied self-deception and was the very core
      of his being, must dwell hidden away from others, and everything that made
      him false, a mere shape in which he hid himself in order to conceal the
      truth, as for instance his work in the bank, arguments at the club, his
      favourite gibe about women, going to parties with his wife—all this
      was open. And, judging others by himself, he did not believe the things he
      saw, and assumed that everybody else also had his real vital life passing
      under a veil of mystery as under the cover of the night. Every man's
      intimate existence is kept mysterious, and perhaps, in part, because of
      that civilised people are so nervously anxious that a personal secret
      should be respected.
    

      When he had left his daughter at school, Gomov went to the "Slaviansky
      Bazaar." He took off his fur coat down-stairs, went up and knocked quietly
      at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, wearing his favourite grey dress, tired by
      the journey, had been expecting him to come all night. She was pale, and
      looked at him without a smile, and flung herself on his breast as soon as
      he entered. Their kiss was long and lingering as though they had not seen
      each other for a couple of years.
    

      "Well, how are you getting on down there?" he asked. "What is your news?"
    

      "Wait. I'll tell you presently.... I cannot."
    

      She could not speak, for she was weeping. She turned her face from him and
      dried her eyes.
    

      "Well, let her cry a bit.... I'll wait," he thought, and sat down.
    

      Then he rang and ordered tea, and then, as he drank it, she stood and
      gazed out of the window.... She was weeping in distress, in the bitter
      knowledge that their life had fallen out so sadly; only seeing each other
      in secret, hiding themselves away like thieves! Was not their life
      crushed?
    

      "Don't cry.... Don't cry," he said.
    

      It was clear to him that their love was yet far from its end, which there
      was no seeing. Anna Sergueyevna was more and more passionately attached to
      him; she adored him and it was inconceivable that he should tell her that
      their love must some day end; she would not believe it.
    

      He came up to her and patted her shoulder fondly and at that moment he saw
      himself in the mirror.
    

      His hair was already going grey. And it seemed strange to him that in the
      last few years he should have got so old and ugly. Her shoulders were warm
      and trembled to his touch. He was suddenly filled with pity for her life,
      still so warm and beautiful, but probably beginning to fade and wither,
      like his own. Why should she love him so much? He always seemed to women
      not what he really was, and they loved in him, not himself, but the
      creature of their imagination, the thing they hankered for in life, and
      when they had discovered their mistake, still they loved him. And not one
      of them was happy with him. Time passed; he met women and was friends with
      them, went further and parted, but never once did he love; there was
      everything but love.
    

      And now at last when his hair was grey he had fallen in love, real love—for
      the first time in his life.
    

      Anna Sergueyevna and he loved one another, like dear kindred, like husband
      and wife, like devoted friends; it seemed to them that Fate had destined
      them for one another, and it was inconceivable that he should have a wife,
      she a husband; they were like two birds of passage, a male and a female,
      which had been caught and forced to live in separate cages. They had
      forgiven each other all the past of which they were ashamed; they forgave
      everything in the present, and they felt that their love had changed both
      of them.
    

      Formerly, when he felt a melancholy compunction, he used to comfort
      himself with all kinds of arguments, just as they happened to cross his
      mind, but now he was far removed from any such ideas; he was filled with a
      profound pity, and he desired to be tender and sincere....
    

      "Don't cry, my darling," he said. "You have cried enough.... Now let us
      talk and see if we can't find some way out."
    

      Then they talked it all over, and tried to discover some means of avoiding
      the necessity for concealment and deception, and the torment of living in
      different towns, and of not seeing each other for a long time. How could
      they shake off these intolerable fetters?
    

      "How? How?" he asked, holding his head in his hands. "How?"
    

      And it seemed that but a little while and the solution would be found and
      there would begin a lovely new life; and to both of them it was clear that
      the end was still very far off, and that their hardest and most difficult
      period was only just beginning.
    

GOUSSIEV
    

IT was already dark and would soon be night.
    

      Goussiev, a private on long leave, raised himself a little in his hammock
      and said in a whisper:
    

      "Can you hear me, Pavel Ivanich? A soldier at Souchan told me that their
      boat ran into an enormous fish and knocked a hole in her bottom."
    

      The man of condition unknown whom he addressed, and whom everybody in the
      hospital-ship called Pavel Ivanich, was silent, as if he had not heard.
    

      And once more there was silence.... The wind whistled through the rigging,
      the screw buzzed, the waves came washing, the hammocks squeaked, but to
      all these sounds their ears were long since accustomed and it seemed as
      though everything were wrapped in sleep and silence. It was very
      oppressive. The three patients—two soldiers and a sailor—who
      had played cards all day were now asleep and tossing to and fro.
    

      The vessel began to shake. The hammock under Goussiev slowly heaved up and
      down, as though it were breathing—one, two, three.... Something
      crashed on the floor and began to tinkle: the jug must have fallen down.
    

      "The wind has broken loose...." said Goussiev, listening attentively.
    

      This time Pavel Ivanich coughed and answered irritably:
    

      "You spoke just now of a ship colliding with a large fish, and now you
      talk of the wind breaking loose.... Is the wind a dog to break loose?"
    

      "That's what people say."
    

      "Then people are as ignorant as you.... But what do they not say? You
      should keep a head on your shoulders and think. Silly idiot!"
    

      Pavel Ivanich was subject to seasickness. When the ship rolled he would
      get very cross, and the least trifle would upset him, though Goussiev
      could never see anything to be cross about. What was there unusual in his
      story about the fish or in his saying that the wind had broken loose?
      Suppose the fish were as big as a mountain and its back were as hard as a
      sturgeon's, and suppose that at the end of the wood there were huge stone
      walls with the snarling winds chained up to them.... If they do not break
      loose, why then do they rage over the sea as though they were possessed,
      and rush about like dogs? If they are not chained, what happens to them
      when it is calm?
    

      Goussiev thought for a long time of a fish as big as a mountain, and of
      thick rusty chains; then he got tired of that and began to think of his
      native place whither he was returning after five years' service in the Far
      East. He saw with his mind's eye the great pond covered with snow.... On
      one side of the pond was a brick-built pottery, with a tall chimney
      belching clouds of black smoke, and on the other side was the village....
      From the yard of the fifth house from the corner came his brother Alency
      in a sledge; behind him sat his little son Vanka in large felt boots, and
      his daughter Akulka, also in felt boots. Alency is tipsy, Vanka laughs,
      and Akulka's face is hidden—she is well wrapped up.
    

      "The children will catch cold ..." thought Goussiev. "God grant them," he
      whispered, "a pure right mind that they may honour their parents and be
      better than their father and mother...."
    

      "The boots want soling," cried the sick sailor in a deep voice. "Aye,
      aye."
    

      The thread of Goussiev's thoughts was broken, and instead of the pond,
      suddenly—without rhyme or reason—he saw a large bull's head
      without eyes, and the horse and sledge did not move on, but went round and
      round in a black mist. But still he was glad he had seen his dear ones. He
      gasped for joy, and his limbs tingled and his fingers throbbed.
    

      "God suffered me to see them!" he muttered, and opened his eyes and looked
      round in the darkness for water.
    

      He drank, then lay down again, and once more the sledge skimmed along, and
      he saw the bull's head without eyes, black smoke, clouds of it. And so on
      till dawn.
    

      II
    

      At first through the darkness there appeared only a blue circle, the
      port-hole, then Goussiev began slowly to distinguish the man in the next
      hammock, Pavel Ivanich. He was sleeping in a sitting position, for if he
      lay down he could not breathe. His face was grey; his nose long and sharp,
      and his eyes were huge, because he was so thin; his temples were sunk, his
      beard scanty, the hair on his head long.... By his face it was impossible
      to tell his class: gentleman, merchant, or peasant; judging by his
      appearance and long hair he looked almost like a recluse, a lay-brother,
      but when he spoke—he was not at all like a monk. He was losing
      strength through his cough and his illness and the suffocating heat, and
      he breathed heavily and was always moving his dry lips. Noticing that
      Goussiev was looking at him, he turned toward him and said:
    

      "I'm beginning to understand.... Yes.... Now I understand."
    

      "What do you understand, Pavel Ivanich?"
    

      "Yes.... It was strange to me at first, why you sick men, instead of being
      kept quiet, should be on this steamer, where the heat is stifling, and
      stinking, and pitching and tossing, and must be fatal to you; but now it
      is all clear to me.... Yes. The doctors sent you to the steamer to get rid
      of you. They got tired of all the trouble you gave them, brutes like you.
    

      ...You don't pay them; you only give a lot of trouble, and if you die you
      spoil their reports. Therefore you are just cattle, and there is no
      difficulty in getting rid of you.... They only need to lack conscience and
      humanity, and to deceive the owners of the steamer. We needn't worry about
      the first, they are experts by nature; but the second needs a certain
      amount of practice. In a crowd of four hundred healthy soldiers and
      sailors—five sick men are never noticed; so you were carried up to
      the steamer, mixed with a healthy lot who were counted in such a hurry
      that nothing wrong was noticed, and when the steamer got away they saw
      fever-stricken and consumptive men lying helpless on the deck...."
    

      Goussiev could not make out what Pavel Ivanich was talking about; thinking
      he was being taken to task, he said by way of excusing himself:
    

      "I lay on the deck because when we were taken off the barge I caught a
      chill."
    

      "Shocking!" said Pavel Ivanich. "They know quite well that you can't last
      out the voyage, and yet they send you here! You may get as far as the
      Indian Ocean, but what then? It is awful to think of.... And that's all
      the return you get for faithful unblemished service!"
    

      Pavel Ivanich looked very angry, and smote his forehead and gasped:
    

      "They ought to be shown up in the papers. There would be an awful row."
    

      The two sick soldiers and the sailor were already up and had begun to play
      cards, the sailor propped up in his hammock, and the soldiers squatting
      uncomfortably on the floor. One soldier had his right arm in a sling and
      his wrist was tightly bandaged so that he had to hold the cards in his
      left hand or in the crook of his elbow. The boat was rolling violently so
      that it was impossible to get up or to drink tea or to take medicine.
    

      "You were an orderly?" Pavel Ivanich asked Goussiev.
    

      "That's it. An orderly."
    

      "My God, my God!" said Pavel Ivanich sorrowfully. "To take a man from his
      native place, drag him fifteen thousand miles, drive him into consumption
      ... and what for? I ask you. To make him an orderly to some Captain
      Farthing or Midshipman Hole! Where's the sense of it?"
    

      "It's not a bad job, Pavel Ivanich. You get up in the morning, clean the
      boots, boil the samovar, tidy up the room, and then there is nothing to
      do. The lieutenant draws plans all day long, and you can pray to God if
      you like—or read books—or go out into the streets. It's a good
      enough life."
    

      "Yes. Very good! The lieutenant draws plans, and you stay in the kitchen
      all day long and suffer from homesickness.... Plans.... Plans don't
      matter. It's human life that matters! Life doesn't come again. One should
      be sparing of it."
    

      "Certainly Pavel Ivanich. A bad man meets no quarter, either at home, or
      in the army, but if you live straight, and do as you are told, then no one
      will harm you. They are educated and they understand.... For five years
      now I've never been in the cells and I've only been thrashed once—touch
      wood!"
    

      "What was that for?"
    

      "Fighting. I have a heavy fist, Pavel Ivanich. Four Chinamen came into our
      yard: they were carrying wood, I think, but I don't remember. Well, I was
      bored. I went for them and one of them got a bloody nose. The lieutenant
      saw it through the window and gave me a thick ear."
    

      "You poor fool," muttered Pavel Ivanich. "You don't understand anything."
    

      He was completely exhausted with the tossing of the boat and shut his
      eyes; his head fell back and then flopped forward onto his chest. He tried
      several times to lie down, but in vain, for he could not breathe.
    

      "And why did you go for the four Chinamen?" he asked after a while.
    

      "For no reason. They came into the yard and I went for them."
    

      Silence fell.... The gamblers played for a couple of hours, absorbed and
      cursing, but the tossing of the ship tired even them; they threw the cards
      away and laid down. Once more Goussiev thought of the big pond, the
      pottery, the village. Once more the sledges skimmed along, once more Vanka
      laughed, and that fool of an Akulka opened her fur coat, and stretched out
      her feet; look, she seemed to say, look, poor people, my felt boots are
      new and not like Vanka's.
    

      "She's getting on for six and still she has no sense!" said Goussiev.
      "Instead of showing your boots off, why don't you bring some water to your
      soldier-uncle? I'll give you a present."
    

      Then came Andrea, with his firelock on his shoulder, carrying a hare he
      had shot, and he was followed by Tsaichik the cripple, who offered him a
      piece of soap for the hare; and there was the black heifer in the yard,
      and Domna sewing a shirt and crying over something, and there was the
      eyeless bull's head and the black smoke....
    

      Overhead there was shouting, sailors running; the sound of something heavy
      being dragged along the deck, or something had broken.... More running.
      Something wrong? Goussiev raised his head, listened and saw the two
      soldiers and the sailor playing cards again; Pavel Ivanich sitting up and
      moving his lips. It was very close, he could hardly breathe, he wanted a
      drink, but the water was warm and disgusting.... The pitching of the boat
      was now better.
    

      Suddenly something queer happened to one of the soldiers.... He called ace
      of diamonds, lost his reckoning and dropped his cards. He started and
      laughed stupidly and looked round.
    

      "In a moment, you fellows," he said and lay down on the floor.
    

      All were at a loss. They shouted at him but he made no reply.
    

      "Stiepan, are you ill?" asked the other soldier with the bandaged hand.
      "Perhaps we'd better call the priest, eh?"
    

      "Stiepan, drink some water," said the sailor. "Here, mate, have a drink."
    

      "What's the good of breaking his teeth with the jug," shouted Goussiev
      angrily. "Don't you see, you fatheads?"
    

      "What."
    

      "What!" cried Goussiev. "He's snuffed it, dead. That's what! Good God,
      what fools!..."
    

      III
    

      The rolling stopped and Pavel Ivanich cheered up. He was no longer
      peevish. His face had an arrogant, impetuous, and mocking expression. He
      looked as if he were on the point of saying: "I'll tell you a story that
      will make you die of laughter." Their port-hole was open and a soft wind
      blew in on Pavel Ivanich. Voices could be heard and the splash of oars in
      the water.... Beneath the window some one was howling in a thin, horrible
      voice; probably a Chinaman singing.
    

      "Yes. We are in harbour," said Pavel Ivanich, smiling mockingly. "Another
      month and we shall be in Russia. It's true; my gallant warriors, I shall
      get to Odessa and thence I shall go straight to Kharkhov. At Kharkhov I
      have a friend, a literary man. I shall go to him and I shall say, 'now, my
      friend, give up your rotten little love-stories and descriptions of
      nature, and expose the vileness of the human biped.... There's a subject
      for you.'"
    

      He thought for a moment and then he said:
    

      "Goussiev, do you know how I swindled them?"
    

      "Who, Pavel Ivanich?"
    

      "The lot out there.... You see there's only first and third class on the
      steamer, and only peasants are allowed to go third. If you have a decent
      suit, and look like a nobleman or a bourgeois, at a distance, then you
      must go first. It may break you, but you have to lay down your five
      hundred roubles. 'What's the point of such an arrangement?' I asked. 'Is
      it meant to raise the prestige of Russian intellectuals?' 'Not a bit,'
      said they. 'We don't let you go, simply because it is impossible for a
      decent man to go third. It is so vile and disgusting.' 'Yes,' said I.
      'Thanks for taking so much trouble about decent people. Anyhow, bad or no,
      I haven't got five hundred roubles as I have neither robbed the treasury
      nor exploited foreigners, nor dealt in contraband, nor flogged any one to
      death, and, therefore, I think I have a right to go first-class and to
      take rank with the intelligentsia of Russia.' But there's no convincing
      them by logic.... I had to try fraud. I put on a peasant's coat and long
      boots, and a drunken, stupid expression and went to the agent and said:
      'Give me a ticket, your Honour.'
    

      "'What's your position?' says the agent.
    

      "'Clerical,' said I. 'My father was an honest priest. He always told the
      truth to the great ones of the earth, and so he suffered much.'"
    

      Pavel Ivanich got tired with talking, and his breath failed him, but he
      went on:
    

      "Yes. I always tell the truth straight out.... I am afraid of nobody and
      nothing. There's a great difference between myself and you in that
      respect. You are dull, blind, stupid, you see nothing, and you don't
      understand what you do see. You are told that the wind breaks its chain,
      that you are brutes and worse, and you believe; you are thrashed and you
      kiss the hand that thrashes you; a swine in a raccoon pelisse robs you,
      and throws you sixpence for tea, and you say: 'Please, your Honour, let me
      kiss your hand.' You are pariahs, skunks.... I am different. I live
      consciously. I see everything, as an eagle or a hawk sees when it hovers
      over the earth, and I understand everything. I am a living protest. I see
      injustice—I protest; I see bigotry and hypocrisy—I protest; I
      see swine triumphant—I protest, and I am unconquerable. No Spanish
      inquisition can make me hold my tongue. Aye.... Cut my tongue out. I'll
      protest by gesture.... Shut me up in a dungeon—I'll shout so loud
      that I shall be heard for a mile round, or I'll starve myself, so that
      there shall be a still heavier weight on their black consciences. Kill me—and
      my ghost will return. All my acquaintances tell me: 'You are a most
      insufferable man, Pavel Ivanich!' I am proud of such a reputation. I
      served three years in the Far East, and have got bitter memories enough
      for a hundred years. I inveighed against it all. My friends write from
      Russia: 'Do not come.' But I'm going, to spite them.... Yes.... That is
      life. I understand. You can call that life."
    

      Goussiev was not listening, but lay looking out of the port-hole; on the
      transparent lovely turquoise water swung a boat all shining in the
      shimmering light; a fat Chinaman was sitting in it eating rice with
      chop-sticks. The water murmured softly, and over it lazily soared white
      sea-gulls.
    

      "It would be fun to give that fat fellow one on the back of his neck...."
      thought Goussiev, watching the fat Chinaman and yawning.
    

      He dozed, and it seemed to him that all the world was slumbering. Time
      slipped swiftly away. The day passed imperceptibly; imperceptibly the
      twilight fell.... The steamer was still no longer but was moving on.
    

      IV
    

      Two days passed. Pavel Ivanich no longer sat up, but lay full length; his
      eyes were closed and his nose seemed to be sharper than ever.
    

      "Pavel Ivanich!" called Goussiev, "Pavel Ivanich."
    

      Pavel Ivanich opened his eyes and moved his lips.
    

      "Aren't you well?"
    

      "It's nothing," answered Pavel Ivanich, breathing heavily. "It's nothing.
      No. I'm much better. You see I can lie down now. I'm much better."
    

      "Thank God for it, Pavel Ivanich."
    

      "When I compare myself with you, I am sorry for you ... poor devils. My
      lungs are all right; my cough comes from indigestion ... I can endure this
      hell, not to mention the Red Sea! Besides, I have a critical attitude
      toward my illness, as well as to my medicine. But you ... you are
      ignorant.... It's hard lines on you, very hard."
    

      The ship was running smoothly; it was calm but still stifling and hot as a
      Turkish bath; it was hard not only to speak but even to listen without an
      effort. Goussiev clasped his knees, leaned his head on them and thought of
      his native place. My God, in such heat it was a pleasure to think of snow
      and cold! He saw himself driving on a sledge, and suddenly the horses were
      frightened and bolted.... Heedless of roads, dikes, ditches they rushed
      like mad through the village, across the pond, past the works, through the
      fields.... "Hold them in!" cried the women and the passers-by. "Hold them
      in!" But why hold them in? Let the cold wind slap your face and cut your
      hands; let the lumps of snow thrown up by the horses' hoofs fall on your
      hat, down your neck and chest; let the runners of the sledge be buckled,
      and the traces and harness be torn and be damned to it! What fun when the
      sledge topples over and you are flung hard into a snow-drift; with your
      face slap into the snow, and you get up all white with your moustaches
      covered with icicles, hatless, gloveless, with your belt undone.... People
      laugh and dogs bark....
    

      Pavel Ivanich, with one eye half open looked at Goussiev and asked
      quietly:
    

      "Goussiev, did your commander steal?"
    

      "How do I know, Pavel Ivanich? The likes of us don't hear of it."
    

      A long time passed in silence. Goussiev thought, dreamed, drank water; it
      was difficult to speak, difficult to hear, and he was afraid of being
      spoken to. One hour passed, a second, a third; evening came, then night;
      but he noticed nothing as he sat dreaming of the snow.
    

      He could hear some one coming into the ward; voices, but five minutes
      passed and all was still.
    

      "God rest his soul!" said the soldier with the bandaged hand. "He was a
      restless man."
    

      "What?" asked Goussiev. "Who?"
    

      "He's dead. He has just been taken up-stairs."
    

      "Oh, well," muttered Goussiev with a yawn. "God rest his soul."
    

      "What do you think, Goussiev?" asked the bandaged soldier after some time.
      "Will he go to heaven?"
    

      "Who?"
    

      "Pavel Ivanich."
    

      "He will. He suffered much. Besides, he was a priest's son, and priests
      have many relations. They will pray for his soul."
    

      The bandaged soldier sat down on Goussiev's hammock and said in an
      undertone:
    

      "You won't live much longer, Goussiev. You'll never see Russia."
    

      "Did the doctor or the nurse tell you that?" asked Goussiev.
    

      "No one told me, but I can see it. You can always tell when a man is going
      to die soon. You neither eat nor drink, and you have gone very thin and
      awful to look at. Consumption. That's what it is. I'm not saying this to
      make you uneasy, but because I thought you might like to have the last
      sacrament. And if you have any money, you had better give it to the senior
      officer."
    

      "I have not written home," said Goussiev. "I shall die and they will never
      know."
    

      "They will know," said the sailor in his deep voice. "When you die they
      will put you down in the log, and at Odessa they will give a note to the
      military governor, and he will send it to your parish or wherever it
      is...."
    

      This conversation made Goussiev begin to feel unhappy and a vague desire
      began to take possession of him. He drank water—it was not that; he
      stretched out to the port-hole and breathed the hot, moist air—it
      was not that; he tried to think of his native place and the snow—it
      was not that.... At last he felt that he would choke if he stayed a moment
      longer in the hospital.
    

      "I feel poorly, mates," he said. "I want to go on deck. For Christ's sake
      take me on deck."
    

      Goussiev flung his arms round the soldier's neck and the soldier held him
      with his free arm and supported him up the gangway. On deck there were
      rows and rows of sleeping soldiers and sailors; so many of them that it
      was difficult to pick a way through them.
    

      "Stand up," said the bandaged soldier gently. "Walk after me slowly and
      hold on to my shirt...."
    

      It was dark. There was no light on deck or on the masts or over the sea.
      In the bows a sentry stood motionless as a statue, but he looked as if he
      were asleep. It was as though the steamer had been left to its own sweet
      will, to go where it liked.
    

      "They are going to throw Pavel Ivanich into the sea," said the bandaged
      soldier. "They will put him in a sack and throw him overboard."
    

      "Yes. That's the way they do."
    

      "But it's better to lie at home in the earth. Then the mother can go to
      the grave and weep over it."
    

      "Surely."
    

      There was a smell of dung and hay. With heads hanging there were oxen
      standing by the bulwark—one, two, three ... eight beasts. And there
      was a little horse. Goussiev put out his hand to pat it, but it shook its
      head, showed its teeth and tried to bite his sleeve.
    

      "Damn you," said Goussiev angrily.
    

      He and the soldier slowly made their way to the bows and stood against the
      bulwark and looked silently up and down. Above them was the wide sky,
      bright with stars, peace and tranquillity—exactly as it was at home
      in his village; but below—darkness and turbulence. Mysterious
      towering waves. Each wave seemed to strive to rise higher than the rest;
      and they pressed and jostled each other and yet others came, fierce and
      ugly, and hurled themselves into the fray.
    

      There is neither sense nor pity in the sea. Had the steamer been smaller,
      and not made of tough iron, the waves would have crushed it remorselessly
      and all the men in it, without distinction of good and bad. The steamer
      too seemed cruel and senseless. The large-nosed monster pressed forward
      and cut its way through millions of waves; it was afraid neither of
      darkness, nor of the wind, nor of space, nor of loneliness; it cared for
      nothing, and if the ocean had its people, the monster would crush them
      without distinction of good and bad.
    

      "Where are we now?" asked Goussiev.
    

      "I don't know. Must be the ocean."
    

      "There's no land in sight."
    

      "Why, they say we shan't see land for another seven days."
    

      The two soldiers looked at the white foam gleaming with phosphorescence.
      Goussiev was the first to break the silence.
    

      "Nothing is really horrible," he said. "You feel uneasy, as if you were in
      a dark forest. Suppose a boat were lowered and I was ordered to go a
      hundred miles out to sea to fish—I would go. Or suppose I saw a soul
      fall into the water—I would go in after him. I wouldn't go in for a
      German or a Chinaman, but I'd try to save a Russian."
    

      "Aren't you afraid to die?"
    

      "Yes. I'm afraid. I'm sorry for the people at home. I have a brother at
      home, you know, and he is not steady; he drinks, beats his wife for
      nothing at all, and my old father and mother may be brought to ruin. But
      my legs are giving way, mate, and it is hot here.... Let me go to bed."
    

      V
    

      Goussiev went back to the ward and lay down in his hammock. As before, a
      vague desire tormented him and he could not make out what it was. There
      was a congestion in his chest; a noise in his head, and his mouth was so
      dry that he could hardly move his tongue. He dozed and dreamed, and,
      exhausted by the heat, his cough and the nightmares that haunted him,
      toward morning he fell into a deep sleep. He dreamed he was in barracks,
      and the bread had just been taken out of the oven, and he crawled into the
      oven and lathered himself with a birch broom. He slept for two days and on
      the third day in the afternoon two sailors came down and carried him out
      of the ward.
    

      He was sewn up in sail-cloth, and to make him heavier two iron bars were
      sewn up with him. In the sail-cloth he looked like a carrot or a radish,
      broad at the top, narrow at the bottom.... Just before sunset he was taken
      on deck and laid on a board one end of which lay on the bulwark, the other
      on a box, raised up by a stool. Round him stood the invalided soldiers.
    

      "Blessed is our God," began the priest; "always, now and for ever and
      ever."
    

      "Amen!" said three sailors.
    

      The soldiers and the crew crossed themselves and looked askance at the
      waves. It was strange that a man should be sewn up in sail-cloth and
      dropped into the sea. Could it happen to any one?
    

      The priest sprinkled Goussiev with earth and bowed. A hymn was sung.
    

      The guard lifted up the end of the board, Goussiev slipped down it; shot
      headlong, turned over in the air, then plop! The foam covered him, for a
      moment it looked as though he was swathed in lace, but the moment passed—and
      he disappeared beneath the waves.
    

      He dropped down to the bottom. Would he reach it? The bottom is miles
      down, they say. He dropped down almost sixty or seventy feet, then began
      to go slower and slower, swung to and fro as though he were thinking;
      then, borne along by the current; he moved more sideways than downward.
    

      But soon he met a shoal of pilot-fish. Seeing a dark body, the fish
      stopped dead and sudden, all together, turned and went back. Less than a
      minute later, like arrows they darted at Goussiev, zigzagging through the
      water around him....
    

      Later came another dark body, a shark. Gravely and leisurely, as though it
      had not noticed Goussiev, it swam up under him, and he rolled over on its
      back; it turned its belly up, taking its ease in the warm, translucent
      water, and slowly opened its mouth with its two rows of teeth. The
      pilot-fish were wildly excited; they stopped to see what was going to
      happen. The shark played with the body, then slowly opened its mouth under
      it, touched it with its teeth, and the sail-cloth was ripped open from
      head to foot; one of the bars fell out, frightening the pilot-fish and
      striking the shark on its side, and sank to the bottom.
    

      And above the surface, the clouds were huddling up about the setting sun;
      one cloud was like a triumphal arch, another like a lion, another like a
      pair of scissors.... From behind the clouds came a broad green ray
      reaching up to the very middle of the sky; a little later a violet ray was
      flung alongside this, and then others gold and pink.... The sky was soft
      and lilac, pale and tender. At first beneath the lovely, glorious sky the
      ocean frowned, but soon the ocean also took on colour—sweet, joyful,
      passionate colours, almost impossible to name in human language.
    

MY LIFE
    

      THE STORY OF A PROVINCIAL
    

THE director said to me: "I only keep you out of
      respect for your worthy father, or you would have gone long since." I
      replied: "You flatter me, your Excellency, but I suppose I am in a
      position to go." And then I heard him saying: "Take the fellow away, he is
      getting on my nerves."
    

      Two days later I was dismissed. Ever since I had been grown up, to the
      great sorrow of my father, the municipal architect, I had changed my
      position nine times, going from one department to another, but all the
      departments were as like each other as drops of water; I had to sit and
      write, listen to inane and rude remarks, and just wait until I was
      dismissed.
    

      When I told my father, he was sitting back in his chair with his eyes
      shut. His thin, dry face, with a dove-coloured tinge where he shaved (his
      face was like that of an old Catholic organist), wore an expression of
      meek submission. Without answering my greeting or opening his eyes, he
      said:
    

      "If my dear wife, your mother, were alive, your life would be a constant
      grief to her. I can see the hand of Providence in her untimely death. Tell
      me, you unhappy boy," he went on, opening his eyes, "what am I to do with
      you?"
    

      When I was younger my relations and friends knew what to do with me; some
      advised me to go into the army as a volunteer, others were for pharmacy,
      others for the telegraph service; but now that I was twenty-four and was
      going grey at the temples and had already tried the army and pharmacy and
      the telegraph service, and every possibility seemed to be exhausted, they
      gave me no more advice, but only sighed and shook their heads.
    

      "What do you think of yourself?" my father went on. "At your age other
      young men have a good social position, and just look at yourself: a lazy
      lout, a beggar, living on your father!"
    

      And, as usual, he went on to say that young men were going to the dogs
      through want of faith, materialism, and conceit, and that amateur
      theatricals should be prohibited because they seduce young people from
      religion and their duty.
    

      "To-morrow we will go together, and you shall apologise to the director
      and promise to do your work conscientiously," he concluded. "You must not
      be without a position in society for a single day."
    

      "Please listen to me," said I firmly, though I did not anticipate gaining
      anything by speaking. "What you call a position in society is the
      privilege of capital and education. But people who are poor and uneducated
      have to earn their living by hard physical labour, and I see no reason why
      I should be an exception."
    

      "It is foolish and trivial of you to talk of physical labour," said my
      father with some irritation. "Do try to understand, you idiot, and get it
      into your brainless head, that in addition to physical strength you have a
      divine spirit; a sacred fire, by which you are distinguished from an ass
      or a reptile and bringing you nigh to God. This sacred fire has been kept
      alight for thousands of years by the best of mankind. Your
      great-grandfather, General Pologniev, fought at Borodino; your grandfather
      was a poet, an orator, and a marshal of the nobility; your uncle was an
      educationalist; and I, your father, am an architect! Have all the
      Polognievs kept the sacred fire alight for you to put it out?"
    

      "There must be justice," said I. "Millions of people have to do manual
      labour."
    

      "Let them. They can do nothing else! Even a fool or a criminal can do
      manual labour. It is the mark of a slave and a barbarian, whereas the
      sacred fire is given only to a few!"
    

      It was useless to go on with the conversation. My father worshipped
      himself and would not be convinced by anything unless he said it himself.
      Besides, I knew quite well that the annoyance with which he spoke of
      unskilled labour came not so much from any regard for the sacred fire, as
      from a secret fear that I should become a working man and the talk of the
      town. But the chief thing was that all my schoolfellows had long ago gone
      through the University and were making careers for themselves, and the son
      of the director of the State Bank was already a collegiate assessor, while
      I, an only son, was nothing! It was useless and unpleasant to go on with
      the conversation, but I still sat there and raised objections in the hope
      of making myself understood. The problem was simple and clear: how was I
      to earn my living? But he could not see its simplicity and kept on talking
      with sugary rounded phrases about Borodino and the sacred fire, and my
      uncle, and the forgotten poet who wrote bad, insincere verses, and he
      called me a brainless fool. But how I longed to be understood! In spite of
      everything, I loved my father and my sister, and from boyhood I have had a
      habit of considering them, so strongly rooted that I shall probably never
      get rid of it; whether I am right or wrong I am always afraid of hurting
      them, and go in terror lest my father's thin neck should go red with anger
      and he should have an apoplectic fit.
    

      "It is shameful and degrading for a man of my age to sit in a stuffy room
      and compete with a typewriting-machine," I said. "What has that to do with
      the sacred fire?"
    

      "Still, it is intellectual work," said my father. "But that's enough. Let
      us drop the conversation and I warn you that if you refuse to return to
      your office and indulge your contemptible inclinations, then you will lose
      my love and your sister's. I shall cut you out of my will—that I
      swear, by God!"
    

      With perfect sincerity, in order to show the purity of my motives, by
      which I hope to be guided all through my life, I said:
    

      "The matter of inheritance does not strike me as important. I renounce any
      rights I may have."
    

      For some unexpected reason these words greatly offended my father. He went
      purple in the face.
    

      "How dare you talk to me like that, you fool!" he cried to me in a thin,
      shrill voice. "You scoundrel!" And he struck me quickly and dexterously
      with a familiar movement; once—twice. "You forget yourself!"
    

      When I was a boy and my father struck me, I used to stand bolt upright
      like a soldier and look him straight in the face; and, exactly as if I
      were still a boy, I stood erect, and tried to look into his eyes. My
      father was old and very thin, but his spare muscles must have been as
      strong as whip-cord, for he hit very hard.
    

      I returned to the hall, but there he seized his umbrella and struck me
      several times over the head and shoulders; at that moment my sister opened
      the drawing-room door to see what the noise was, but immediately drew back
      with an expression of pity and horror, and said not one word in my
      defence.
    

      My intention not to return to the office, but to start a new working life,
      was unshakable. It only remained to choose the kind of work—and
      there seemed to be no great difficulty about that, because I was strong,
      patient, and willing. I was prepared to face a monotonous, laborious life,
      of semi-starvation, filth, and rough surroundings, always overshadowed
      with the thought of finding a job and a living. And—who knows—returning
      from work in the Great Gentry Street, I might often envy Dolyhikov, the
      engineer, who lives by intellectual work, but I was happy in thinking of
      my coming troubles. I used to dream of intellectual activity, and to
      imagine myself a teacher, a doctor, a writer, but my dreams remained only
      dreams. A liking for intellectual pleasures—like the theatre and
      reading—grew into a passion with me, but I did not know whether I
      had any capacity for intellectual work. At school I had an unconquerable
      aversion for the Greek language, so that I had to leave when I was in the
      fourth class. Teachers were got to coach me up for the fifth class, and
      then I went into various departments, spending most of my time in perfect
      idleness, and this, I was told, was intellectual work.
    

      My activity in the education department or in the municipal office
      required neither mental effort, nor talent, nor personal ability, nor
      creative spiritual impulse; it was purely mechanical, and such
      intellectual work seemed to me lower than manual labour. I despise it and
      I do not think that it for a moment justifies an idle, careless life,
      because it is nothing but a swindle, and only a kind of idleness. In all
      probability I have never known real intellectual work.
    

      It was evening. We lived in Great Gentry Street—the chief street in
      the town—and our rank and fashion walked up and down it in the
      evenings, as there were no public gardens. The street was very charming,
      and was almost as good as a garden, for it had two rows of poplar-trees,
      which smelt very sweet, especially after rain, and acacias, and tall
      trees, and apple-trees hung over the fences and hedges. May evenings, the
      scent of the lilac, the hum of the cockchafers, the warm, still air—how
      new and extraordinary it all is, though spring comes every year! I stood
      by the gate and looked at the passers-by. With most of them I had grown up
      and had played with them, but now my presence might upset them, because I
      was poorly dressed, in unfashionable clothes, and people made fun of my
      very narrow trousers and large, clumsy boots, and called them
      macaroni-on-steamboats. And I had a bad reputation in the town because I
      had no position and went to play billiards in low cafés, and had
      once been taken up, for no particular offence, by the political police.
    

      In a large house opposite, Dolyhikov's, the engineer's, some one was
      playing the piano. It was beginning to get dark and the stars were
      beginning to shine. And slowly, answering people's salutes, my father
      passed with my sister on his arm. He was wearing an old top hat with a
      broad curly brim.
    

      "Look!" he said to my sister, pointing to the sky with the very umbrella
      with which he had just struck me. "Look at the sky! Even the smallest
      stars are worlds! How insignificant man is in comparison with the
      universe."
    

      And he said this in a tone that seemed to convey that he found it
      extremely flattering and pleasant to be so insignificant. What an
      untalented man he was! Unfortunately, he was the only architect in the
      town, and during the last fifteen or twenty years I could not remember one
      decent house being built. When he had to design a house, as a rule he
      would draw first the hall and the drawing-room; as in olden days
      schoolgirls could only begin to dance by the fireplace, so his artistic
      ideas could only evolve from the hall and drawing-room. To them he would
      add the dining-room, nursery, study, connecting them with doors, so that
      in the end they were just so many passages, and each room had two or three
      doors too many. His houses were obscure, extremely confused, and limited.
      Every time, as though he felt something was missing, he had recourse to
      various additions, plastering them one on top of the other, and there
      would be various lobbies, and passages, and crooked staircases leading to
      the entresol, where it was only possible to stand in a stooping position,
      and where instead of a floor there would be a thin flight of stairs like a
      Russian bath, and the kitchen would always be under the house with a
      vaulted ceiling and a brick floor. The front of his houses always had a
      hard, stubborn expression, with stiff, French lines, low, squat roofs, and
      fat, pudding-like chimneys surmounted with black cowls and squeaking
      weathercocks. And somehow all the houses built by my father were like each
      other, and vaguely reminded me of a top hat, and the stiff, obstinate back
      of his head. In the course of time the people of the town grew used to my
      father's lack of talent, which took root and became our style.
    

      My father introduced the style into my sister's life. To begin with, he
      gave her the name of Cleopatra (and he called me Misail). When she was a
      little girl he used to frighten her by telling her about the stars and our
      ancestors; and explained the nature of life and duty to her at great
      length; and now when she was twenty-six he went on in the same way,
      allowing her to take no one's arm but his own, and somehow imagining that
      sooner or later an ardent young man would turn up and wish to enter into
      marriage with her out of admiration for his qualities. And she adored my
      father, was afraid of him, and believed in his extraordinary intellectual
      powers.
    

      It got quite dark and the street grew gradually empty. In the house
      opposite the music stopped. The gate was wide open and out into the
      street, careering with all its bells jingling, came a troika. It was the
      engineer and his daughter going for a drive. Time to go to bed!
    

      I had a room in the house, but I lived in the courtyard in a hut, under
      the same roof as the coach-house, which had been built probably as a
      harness-room—for there were big nails in the walls—but now it
      was not used, and my father for thirty years had kept his newspapers
      there, which for some reason he had bound half-yearly and then allowed no
      one to touch. Living there I was less in touch with my father and his
      guests, and I used to think that if I did not live in a proper room and
      did not go to the house every day for meals, my father's reproach that I
      was living on him lost some of its sting.
    

      My sister was waiting for me. She had brought me supper unknown to my
      father; a small piece of cold veal and a slice of bread. In the family
      there were sayings: "Money loves an account," or "A copeck saves a
      rouble," and so on, and my sister, impressed by such wisdom, did her best
      to cut down expenses and made us feed rather meagrely. She put the plate
      on the table, sat on my bed, and began to cry.
    

      "Misail," she said, "what are you doing to us?"
    

      She did not cover her face, her tears ran down her cheeks and hands, and
      her expression was sorrowful. She fell on the pillow, gave way to her
      tears, trembling all over and sobbing.
    

      "You have left your work again!" she said. "How awful!"
    

      "Do try to understand, sister!" I said, and because she cried I was filled
      with despair.
    

      As though it were deliberately arranged, the paraffin in my little lamp
      ran out, and the lamp smoked and guttered, and the old hooks in the wall
      looked terrible and their shadows flickered.
    

      "Spare us!" said my sister, rising up. "Father is in an awful state, and I
      am ill. I shall go mad. What will become of you?" she asked, sobbing and
      holding out her hands to me. "I ask you, I implore you, in the name of our
      dear mother, to go back to your work."
    

      "I cannot, Cleopatra," I said, feeling that only a little more would make
      me give in. "I cannot."
    

      "Why?" insisted my sister, "why? If you have not made it up with your
      chief, look for another place. For instance, why shouldn't you work on the
      railway? I have just spoken to Aniuta Blagovo, and she assures me you
      would be taken on, and she even promised to do what she could for you. For
      goodness sake, Misail, think! Think it over, I implore you!"
    

      We talked a little longer and I gave in. I said that the thought of
      working on the railway had never come into my head, and that I was ready
      to try.
    

      She smiled happily through her tears and clasped my hand, and still she
      cried, because she could not stop, and I went into the kitchen for
      paraffin.
    

      II
    

      Among the supporters of amateur theatricals, charity concerts, and tableaux
      vivants the leaders were the Azhoguins, who lived in their own house
      in Great Gentry house the Street. They used to lend their house and assume
      the necessary trouble and expense. They were a rich landowning family, and
      had about three thousand urskins, with a magnificent farm in the
      neighbourhood, but they did not care for village life and lived in the
      town summer and winter. The family consisted of a mother, a tall, spare,
      delicate lady, who had short hair, wore a blouse and a plain skirt
      à l'Anglais, and three daughters, who were spoken of, not by their
      names, but as the eldest, the middle, and the youngest; they all had ugly,
      sharp chins, and they were short-sighted, high-shouldered, dressed in the
      same style as their mother, had an unpleasant lisp, and yet they always
      took part in every play and were always doing something for charity—acting,
      reciting, singing. They were very serious and never smiled, and even in
      burlesque operettas they acted without gaiety and with a businesslike air,
      as though they were engaged in bookkeeping.
    

      I loved our plays, especially the rehearsals, which were frequent, rather
      absurd, and noisy, and we were always given supper after them. I had no
      part in the selection of the pieces and the casting of the characters. I
      had to look after the stage. I used to design the scenery and copy out the
      parts, and prompt and make up. And I also had to look after the various
      effects such as thunder, the singing of a nightingale, and so on. Having
      no social position, I had no decent clothes, and during rehearsals had to
      hold aloof from the others in the darkened wings and shyly say nothing.
    

      I used to paint the scenery in the Azhoguins' coach-house or yard. I was
      assisted by a house-painter, or, as he called himself, a decorating
      contractor, named Andrey Ivanov, a man of about fifty, tall and very thin
      and pale, with a narrow chest, hollow temples, and dark rings under his
      eyes, he was rather awful to look at. He had some kind of wasting disease,
      and every spring and autumn he was said to be on the point of death, but
      he would go to bed for a while and then get up and say with surprise: "I'm
      not dead this time!"
    

      In the town he was called Radish, and people said it was his real name. He
      loved the theatre as much as I, and no sooner did he hear that a play was
      in hand than he gave up all his work and went to the Azhoguins' to paint
      scenery.
    

      The day after my conversation with my sister I worked from morning till
      night at the Azhoguins'. The rehearsal was fixed for seven o'clock, and an
      hour before it began all the players were assembled, and the eldest, the
      middle, and the youngest Miss Azhoguin were reading their parts on the
      stage. Radish, in a long, brown overcoat with a scarf wound round his
      neck, was standing, leaning with his head against the wall, looking at the
      stage with a rapt expression. Mrs. Azhoguin went from guest to guest
      saying something pleasant to every one. She had a way of gazing into one's
      face and speaking in a hushed voice as though she were telling a secret.
    

      "It must be difficult to paint scenery," she said softly, coming up to me.
      "I was just talking to Mrs. Mufke about prejudice when I saw you come in.
      Mon Dieu! All my life I have struggled against prejudice. To convince the
      servants that all their superstitions are nonsense I always light three
      candles, and I begin all my important business on the thirteenth."
    

      The daughter of Dolyhikov, the engineer, was there, a handsome, plump,
      fair girl, dressed, as people said in our town, in Parisian style. She did
      not act, but at rehearsals a chair was put for her on the stage, and the
      plays did not begin until she appeared in the front row, to astonish
      everybody with the brilliance of her clothes. As coming from the
      metropolis, she was allowed to make remarks during rehearsals, and she did
      so with an affable, condescending smile, and it was clear that she
      regarded our plays as a childish amusement. It was said that she had
      studied singing at the Petersburg conservatoire and had sung for a winter
      season in opera. I liked her very much, and during rehearsals or the
      performance, I never took my eyes off her.
    

      I had taken the book and began to prompt when suddenly my sister appeared.
      Without taking off her coat and hat she came up to me and said:
    

      "Please come!"
    

      I went. Behind the stage in the doorway stood Aniuta Blagovo, also wearing
      a hat with a dark veil. She was the daughter of the vice-president of the
      Court, who had been appointed to our town years ago, almost as soon as the
      High Court was established. She was tall and had a good figure, and was
      considered indispensable for the tableaux vivants, and when she
      represented a fairy or a muse, her face would burn with shame; but she
      took no part in the plays, and would only look in at rehearsals, on some
      business, and never enter the hall. And it was evident now that she had
      only looked in for a moment.
    

      "My father has mentioned you," she said drily, not looking at me and
      blushing.... "Dolyhikov has promised to find you something to do on the
      railway. If you go to his house to-morrow, he will see you."
    

      I bowed and thanked her for her kindness.
    

      "And you must leave this," she said, pointing to my book.
    

      She and my sister went up to Mrs. Azhoguin and began to whisper, looking
      at me.
    

      "Indeed," said Mrs. Azhoguin, coming up to me, and gazing into my face.
      "Indeed, if it takes you from your more serious business"—she took
      the book out of my hands—"then you must hand it over to some one
      else. Don't worry, my friend. It will be all right."
    

      I said good-bye and left in some confusion. As I went down-stairs I saw my
      sister and Aniuta Blagovo going away; they were talking animatedly, I
      suppose about my going on the railway, and they hurried away. My sister
      had never been to a rehearsal before, and she was probably tortured by her
      conscience and by her fear of my father finding out that she had been to
      the Azhoguins' without permission.
    

      The next day I went to see Dolyhikov at one o'clock. The man servant
      showed me into a charming room, which was the engineer's drawing-room and
      study. Everything in it was charming and tasteful, and to a man like
      myself, unused to such things, very strange. Costly carpets, huge chairs,
      bronzes, pictures in gold and velvet frames; photographs on the walls of
      beautiful women, clever, handsome faces, and striking attitudes; from the
      drawing-room a door led straight into the garden, by a veranda, and I saw
      lilac and a table laid for breakfast, rolls, and a bunch of roses; and
      there was a smell of spring, and good cigars, and happiness—and
      everything seemed to say, here lives a man who has worked and won the
      highest happiness here on earth. At the table the engineer's daughter was
      sitting reading a newspaper.
    

      "Do you want my father?" she asked. "He is having a shower-bath. He will
      be down presently. Please take a chair."
    

      I sat down.
    

      "I believe you live opposite?" she asked after a short silence.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "When I have nothing to do I look out of the window. You must excuse me,"
      she added, turning to her newspaper, "and I often see you and your sister.
      She has such a kind, wistful expression."
    

      Dolyhikov came in. He was wiping his neck with a towel.
    

      "Papa, this is Mr. Pologniev," said his daughter.
    

      "Yes, yes. Blagovo spoke to me." He turned quickly to me, but did not hold
      out his hand. "But what do you think I can give you? I'm not bursting with
      situations. You are queer people!" he went on in a loud voice and as
      though he were scolding me. "I get about twenty people every day, as
      though I were a Department of State. I run a railway, sir. I employ hard
      labour; I need mechanics, navvies, joiners, well-sinkers, and you can only
      sit and write. That's all! You are all clerks!"
    

      And he exhaled the same air of happiness as his carpets and chairs. He was
      stout, healthy, with red cheeks and a broad chest; he looked clean in his
      pink shirt and wide trousers, just like a china figure of a post-boy. He
      had a round, bristling beard—and not a single grey hair—and a
      nose with a slight bridge, and bright, innocent, dark eyes.
    

      "What can you do?" he went on. "Nothing! I am an engineer and well-to-do,
      but before I was given this railway I worked very hard for a long time. I
      was an engine-driver for two years, I worked in Belgium as an ordinary
      lubricator. Now, my dear man, just think—what work can I offer you?"
    

      "I quite agree," said I, utterly abashed, not daring to meet his bright,
      innocent eyes.
    

      "Are you any good with the telegraph?" he asked after some thought.
    

      "Yes. I have been in the telegraph service."
    

      "Hm.... Well, we'll see. Go to Dubechnia. There's a fellow there already.
      But he is a scamp."
    

      "And what will my duties be?" I asked.
    

      "We'll see to that later. Go there now. I'll give orders. But please don't
      drivel and don't bother me with petitions or I'll kick you out."
    

      He turned away from me without even a nod. I bowed to him and his
      daughter, who was reading the newspaper, and went out. I felt so miserable
      that when my sister asked how the engineer had received me, I could not
      utter a single word.
    

      To go to Dubechnia I got up early in the morning at sunrise. There was not
      a soul in the street, the whole town was asleep, and my footsteps rang out
      with a hollow sound. The dewy poplars filled the air with a soft scent. I
      was sad and had no desire to leave the town. It seemed so nice and warm! I
      loved the green trees, the quiet sunny mornings, the ringing of the bells,
      but the people in the town were alien to me, tiresome and sometimes even
      loathsome. I neither liked nor understood them.
    

      I did not understand why or for what purpose those thirty-five thousand
      people lived. I knew that Kimry made a living by manufacturing boots, that
      Tula made samovars and guns, that Odessa was a port; but I did not know
      what our town was or what it did. The people in Great Gentry Street and
      two other clean streets had independent means and salaries paid by the
      Treasury, but how the people lived in the other eight streets which
      stretched parallel to each other for three miles and then were lost behind
      the hill—that was always an insoluble problem to me. And I am
      ashamed to think of the way they lived. They had neither public gardens,
      nor a theatre, nor a decent orchestra; the town and club libraries are
      used only by young Jews, so that books and magazines would lie for months
      uncut. The rich and the intelligentsia slept in close, stuffy bedrooms,
      with wooden beds infested with bugs; the children were kept in filthy,
      dirty rooms called nurseries, and the servants, even when they were old
      and respectable, slept on the kitchen floor and covered themselves with
      rags. Except in Lent all the houses smelt of bortsch, and during
      Lent of sturgeon fried in sunflower oil. The food was unsavoury, the water
      unwholesome. On the town council, at the governor's, at the archbishop's,
      everywhere there had been talk for years about there being no good, cheap
      water-supply and of borrowing two hundred thousand roubles from the
      Treasury. Even the very rich people, of whom there were about thirty in
      the town, people who would lose a whole estate at cards, used to drink the
      bad water and talk passionately about the loan—and I could never
      understand this, for it seemed to me it would be simpler for them to pay
      up the two hundred thousand.
    

      I did not know a single honest man in the whole town. My father took
      bribes, and imagined they were given to him out of respect for his
      spiritual qualities; the boys at the high school, in order to be promoted,
      went to lodge with the masters and paid them large sums; the wife of the
      military commandant took levies from the recruits during the recruiting,
      and even allowed them to stand her drinks, and once she was so drunk in
      church that she could not get up from her knees; during the recruiting the
      doctors also took bribes, and the municipal doctor and the veterinary
      surgeon levied taxes on the butcher shops and public houses; the district
      school did a trade in certificates which gave certain privileges in the
      civil service; the provosts took bribes from the clergy and church-wardens
      whom they controlled, and on the town council and various committees every
      one who came before them was pursued with: "One expects thanks!"—and
      thereby forty copecks had to change hands. And those who did not take
      bribes, like the High Court officials, were stiff and proud, and shook
      hands with two fingers, and were distinguished by their indifference and
      narrow-mindedness. They drank and played cards, married rich women, and
      always had a bad, insidious influence on those round them. Only the girls
      had any moral purity; most of them had lofty aspirations and were pure and
      honest at heart; but they knew nothing of life, and believed that bribes
      were given to honour spiritual qualities; and when they married, they soon
      grew old and weak, and were hopelessly lost in the mire of that vulgar,
      bourgeois existence.
    

      III
    

      A railway was being built in our district. On holidays and thereabouts the
      town was filled with crowds of ragamuffins called "railies," of whom the
      people were afraid. I used often to see a miserable wretch with a bloody
      face, and without a hat, being dragged off by the police, and behind him
      was the proof of his crime, a samovar or some wet, newly washed linen. The
      "railies" used to collect near the public houses and on the squares; and
      they drank, ate, and swore terribly, and whistled after the town
      prostitutes. To amuse these ruffians our shopkeepers used to make the cats
      and dogs drink vodka, or tie a kerosene-tin to a dog's tail, and whistle
      to make the dog come tearing along the street with the tin clattering
      after him, and making him squeal with terror and think he had some
      frightful monster hard at his heels, so that he would rush out of the town
      and over the fields until he could run no more. We had several dogs in the
      town which were left with a permanent shiver and used to crawl about with
      their tails between their legs, and people said that they could not stand
      such tricks and had gone mad.
    

      The station was being built five miles from the town. It was said that the
      engineer had asked for a bribe of fifty thousand roubles to bring the
      station nearer, but the municipality would only agree to forty; they would
      not give in to the extra ten thousand, and now the townspeople are sorry
      because they had to make a road to the station which cost them more.
      Sleepers and rails were fixed all along the line, and service-trains were
      running to carry building materials and labourers, and they were only
      waiting for the bridges upon which Dolyhikov was at work, and here and
      there the stations were not ready.
    

      Dubechnia—the name of our first station—was seventeen versts
      from the town. I went on foot. The winter and spring corn was bright
      green, shining in the morning sun. The road was smooth and bright, and in
      the distance I could see in outline the station, the hills, and the remote
      farmhouses.... How good it was out in the open! And how I longed to be
      filled with the sense of freedom, if only for that morning, to stop
      thinking of what was going on in the town, or of my needs, or even of
      eating! Nothing has so much prevented my living as the feeling of acute
      hunger, which make my finest thoughts get mixed up with thoughts of
      porridge, cutlets, and fried fish. When I stand alone in the fields and
      look up at the larks hanging marvellously in the air, and bursting with
      hysterical song, I think: "It would be nice to have some bread and
      butter." Or when I sit in the road and shut my eyes and listen to the
      wonderful sounds of a May-day, I remember how good hot potatoes smell.
      Being big and of a strong constitution I never have quite enough to eat,
      and so my chief sensation during the day is hunger, and so I can
      understand why so many people who are working for a bare living, can talk
      of nothing but food.
    

      At Dubechnia the station was being plastered inside, and the upper story
      of the water-tank was being built. It was close and smelt of lime, and the
      labourers were wandering lazily over piles of chips and rubbish. The
      signalman was asleep near his box with the sun pouring straight into his
      face. There was not a single tree. The telephone gave a faint hum, and
      here and there birds had alighted on it. I wandered over the heaps, not
      knowing what to do, and remembered how when I asked the engineer what my
      duties would be, he had replied: "We will see there." But what was there
      to see in such a wilderness? The plasterers were talking about the foreman
      and about one Fedot Vassilievich. I could not understand and was filled
      with embarrassment—physical embarrassment. I felt conscious of my
      arms and legs, and of the whole of my big body, and did not know what to
      do with them or where to go.
    

      After walking for at least a couple of hours I noticed that from the
      station to the right of the line there were telegraph-poles which after
      about one and a half or two miles ended in a white stone wall. The
      labourers said it was the office, and I decided at last that I must go
      there.
    

      It was a very old farmhouse, long unused. The wall of rough, white stone
      was decayed, and in places had crumbled away, and the roof of the wing,
      the blind wall of which looked toward the railway, had perished, and was
      patched here and there with tin. Through the gates there was a large yard,
      overgrown with tall grass, and beyond that, an old house with Venetian
      blinds in the windows, and a high roof, brown with rot. On either side of
      the house, to right and left, were two symmetrical wings; the windows of
      one were boarded up, while by the other, the windows of which were open,
      there were a number of calves grazing. The last telegraph-pole stood in
      the yard, and the wire went from it to the wing with the blind wall. The
      door was open and I went in. By the table at the telegraph was sitting a
      man with a dark, curly head in a canvas coat; he glared at me sternly and
      askance, but he immediately smiled and said:
    

      "How do you do, Profit?"
    

      It was Ivan Cheprakov, my school friend, who was expelled, when he was in
      the second class, for smoking. Once, during the autumn, we were out
      catching goldfinches, starlings, and hawfinches, to sell them in the
      market early in the morning when our parents were still asleep.
    

      We beat up flocks of starlings and shot at them with pellets, and then
      picked up the wounded, and some died in terrible agony—I can still
      remember how they moaned at night in my case—and some recovered. And
      we sold them, and swore black and blue that they were male birds. Once in
      the market I had only one starling left, which I hawked about and finally
      sold for a copeck. "A little profit!" I said to console myself, and from
      that time at school I was always known as "Little Profit," and even now,
      schoolboys and the townspeople sometimes use the name to tease me, though
      no one but myself remembers how it came about.
    

      Cheprakov never was strong. He was narrow-chested, round-shouldered,
      long-legged. His tie looked like a piece of string, he had no waistcoat,
      and his boots were worse than mine—with the heels worn down. He
      blinked with his eyes and had an eager expression as though he were trying
      to catch something and he was in a constant fidget.
    

      "You wait," he said, bustling about. "Look here!... What was I saying just
      now?"
    

      We began to talk. I discovered that the estate had till recently belonged
      to the Cheprakovs and only the previous autumn had passed to Dolyhikov,
      who thought it more profitable to keep his money in land than in shares,
      and had already bought three big estates in our district with the transfer
      of all mortgages. When Cheprakov's mother sold, she stipulated for the
      right to live in one of the wings for another two years and got her son a
      job in the office.
    

      "Why shouldn't he buy?" said Cheprakov of the engineer. "He gets a lot
      from the contractors. He bribes them all."
    

      Then he took me to dinner, deciding in his emphatic way that I was to live
      with him in the wing and board with his mother.
    

      "She is a screw," he said, "but she will not take much from you."
    

      In the small rooms where his mother lived there was a queer jumble; even
      the hall and the passage were stacked with furniture, which had been taken
      from the house after the sale of the estate; and the furniture was old,
      and of redwood. Mrs. Cheprakov, a very stout elderly lady, with slanting,
      Chinese eyes, sat by the window, in a big chair, knitting a stocking. She
      received me ceremoniously.
    

      "It is Pologniev, mother," said Cheprakov, introducing me. "He is going to
      work here."
    

      "Are you a nobleman?" she asked in a strange, unpleasant voice as though
      she had boiling fat in her throat.
    

      "Yes," I answered.
    

      "Sit down."
    

      The dinner was bad. It consisted only of a pie with unsweetened curds and
      some milk soup. Elena Nikifirovna, my hostess, was perpetually winking,
      first with one eye, then with the other. She talked and ate, but in her
      whole aspect there was a deathlike quality, and one could almost detect
      the smell of a corpse. Life hardly stirred in her, yet she had the air of
      being the lady of the manor, who had once had her serfs, and was the wife
      of a general, whose servants had to call him "Your Excellency," and when
      these miserable embers of life flared up in her for a moment, she would
      say to her son:
    

      "Ivan, that is not the way to hold your knife!"
    

      Or she would say, gasping for breath, with the preciseness of a hostess
      labouring to entertain her guest:
    

      "We have just sold our estate, you know. It is a pity, of course, we have
      got so used to being here, but Dolyhikov promised to make Ivan
      station-master at Dubechnia, so that we shan't have to leave. We shall
      live here on the station, which is the same as living on the estate. The
      engineer is such a nice man! Don't you think him very handsome?"
    

      Until recently the Cheprakovs had been very well-to-do, but with the
      general's death everything changed. Elena Nikifirovna began to quarrel
      with the neighbours and to go to law, and she did not pay her bailiffs and
      labourers; she was always afraid of being robbed—and in less than
      ten years Dubechnia changed completely.
    

      Behind the house there was an old garden run wild, overgrown with tall
      grass and brushwood. I walked along the terrace which was still well-kept
      and beautiful; through the glass door I saw a room with a parquet floor,
      which must have been the drawing-room. It contained an ancient piano, some
      engravings in mahogany frames on the walls—and nothing else. There
      was nothing left of the flower-garden but peonies and poppies, rearing
      their white and scarlet heads above the ground; on the paths, all huddled
      together, were young maples and elm-trees, which had been stripped by the
      cows. The growth was dense and the garden seemed impassable, and only near
      the house, where there still stood poplars, firs, and some old bricks,
      were there traces of the former avenues, and further on the garden was
      being cleared for a hay-field, and here it was no longer allowed to run
      wild, and one's mouth and eyes were no longer filled with spiders' webs,
      and a pleasant air was stirring. The further out one went, the more open
      it was, and there were cherry-trees, plum-trees, wide-spreading old
      apple-trees, lichened and held up with props, and the pear-trees were so
      tall that it was incredible that there could be pears on them. This part
      of the garden was let to the market-women of our town, and it was guarded
      from thieves and starlings by a peasant—an idiot who lived in a hut.
    

      The orchard grew thinner and became a mere meadow running down to the
      river, which was overgrown with reeds and withy-beds. There was a pool by
      the mill-dam, deep and full of fish, and a little mill with a straw roof
      ground and roared, and the frogs croaked furiously. On the water, which
      was as smooth as glass, circles appeared from time to time, and
      water-lilies trembled on the impact of a darting fish. The village of
      Dubechnia was on the other side of the river. The calm, azure pool was
      alluring with its promise of coolness and rest. And now all this, the
      pool, the mill, the comfortable banks of the river, belonged to the
      engineer!
    

      And here my new work began. I received and despatched telegrams, I wrote
      out various accounts and copied orders, claims, and reports, sent in to
      the office by our illiterate foremen and mechanics. But most of the day I
      did nothing, walking up and down the room waiting for telegrams, or I
      would tell the boy to stay in the wing, and go into the garden until the
      boy came to say the bell was ringing. I had dinner with Mrs. Cheprakov.
      Meat was served very rarely; most of the dishes were made of milk, and on
      Wednesdays and Fridays we had Lenten fare, and the food was served in pink
      plates, which were called Lenten. Mrs. Cheprakov was always blinking—the
      habit grew on her, and I felt awkward and embarrassed in her presence.
    

      As there was not enough work for one, Cheprakov did nothing, but slept or
      went down to the pool with his gun to shoot ducks. In the evenings he got
      drunk in the village, or at the station, and before going to bed he would
      look in the glass and say:
    

      "How are you, Ivan Cheprakov?"
    

      When he was drunk, he was very pale and used to rub his hands and laugh,
      or rather neigh, He-he-he! Out of bravado he would undress himself and run
      naked through the fields, and he used to eat flies and say they were a bit
      sour.
    

      IV
    

      Once after dinner he came running into the wing, panting, to say:
    

      "Your sister has come to see you."
    

      I went out and saw a fly standing by the steps of the house. My sister had
      brought Aniuta Blagovo and a military gentleman in a summer uniform. As I
      approached I recognised the military gentleman as Aniuta's brother, the
      doctor.
    

      "We've come to take you for a picnic," he said, "if you've no objection."
    

      My sister and Aniuta wanted to ask how I was getting on, but they were
      both silent and only looked at me. They felt that I didn't like my job,
      and tears came into my sister's eyes and Aniuta Blagovo blushed. We went
      into the orchard, the doctor first, and he said ecstatically:
    

      "What air! By Jove, what air!"
    

      He was just a boy to look at. He talked and walked like an undergraduate,
      and the look in his grey eyes was as lively, simple, and frank as that of
      a nice boy. Compared with his tall, handsome sister he looked weak and
      slight, and his little beard was thin and so was his voice—a thin
      tenor, though quite pleasant. He was away somewhere with his regiment and
      had come home on leave, and said that he was going to Petersburg in the
      autumn to take his M.D. He already had a family—a wife and three
      children; he had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      people said he was unhappily married and was not living with his wife.
    

      "What is the time?" My sister was uneasy. "We must go back soon, for my
      father would only let me have until six o'clock."
    

      "Oh, your father," sighed the doctor.
    

      I made tea, and we drank it sitting on a carpet in front of the terrace,
      and the doctor, kneeling, drank from his saucer, and said that he was
      perfectly happy. Then Cheprakov fetched the key and unlocked the glass
      door and we all entered the house. It was dark and mysterious and smelled
      of mushrooms, and our footsteps made a hollow sound as though there were a
      vault under the floor. The doctor stopped by the piano and touched the
      keys and it gave out a faint, tremulous, cracked but still melodious
      sound. He raised his voice and began to sing a romance, frowning and
      impatiently stamping his foot when he touched a broken key. My sister
      forgot about going home, but walked agitatedly up and down the room and
      said:
    

      "I am happy! I am very, very happy!"
    

      There was a note of surprise in her voice as though it seemed impossible
      to her that she should be happy. It was the first time in my life that I
      had seen her so gay. She even looked handsome. Her profile was not good,
      her nose and mouth somehow protruded and made her look as if she was
      always blowing, but she had beautiful, dark eyes, a pale, very delicate
      complexion, and a touching expression of kindness and sadness, and when
      she spoke she seemed very charming and even beautiful. Both she and I took
      after our mother; we were broad-shouldered, strong, and sturdy, but her
      paleness was a sign of sickness, she often coughed, and in her eyes I
      often noticed the expression common to people who are ill, but who for
      some reason conceal it. In her present cheerfulness there was something
      childish and naïve, as though all the joy which had been suppressed
      and dulled during our childhood by a strict upbringing, had suddenly
      awakened in her soul and rushed out into freedom.
    

      But when evening came and the fly was brought round, my sister became very
      quiet and subdued, and sat in the fly as though it were a prison-van.
    

      Soon they were all gone. The noise of the fly died away.... I remembered
      that Aniuta Blagovo had said not a single word to me all day.
    

      "A wonderful girl!" I thought "A wonderful girl."
    

      Lent came and every day we had Lenten dishes. I was greatly depressed by
      my idleness and the uncertainty of my position, and, slothful, hungry,
      dissatisfied with myself, I wandered over the estate and only waited for
      an energetic mood to leave the place.
    

      Once in the afternoon when Radish was sitting in our wing, Dolyhikov
      entered unexpectedly, very sunburnt, and grey with dust. He had been out
      on the line for three days and had come to Dubechnia on a locomotive and
      walked over. While he waited for the carriage which he had ordered to come
      out to meet him he went over the estate with his bailiff, giving orders in
      a loud voice, and then for a whole hour he sat in our wing and wrote
      letters. When telegrams came through for him, he himself tapped out the
      answers, while we stood there stiff and silent.
    

      "What a mess!" he said, looking angrily through the accounts. "I shall
      transfer the office to the station in a fortnight and I don't know what I
      shall do with you then."
    

      "I've done my best, sir," said Cheprakov.
    

      "Quite so. I can see what your best is. You can only draw your wages." The
      engineer looked at me and went on. "You rely on getting introductions to
      make a career for yourself with as little trouble as possible. Well, I
      don't care about introductions. Nobody helped me. Before I had this line,
      I was an engine-driver. I worked in Belgium as an ordinary lubricator. And
      what are you doing here, Panteley?" he asked, turning to Radish. "Going
      out drinking?"
    

      For some reason or other he called all simple people Panteley, while he
      despised men like Cheprakov and myself, and called us drunkards, beasts,
      canaille. As a rule he was hard on petty officials, and paid and dismissed
      them ruthlessly without any explanation.
    

      At last the carriage came for him. When he left he promised to dismiss us
      all in a fortnight; called the bailiff a fool, stretched himself out
      comfortably in the carriage, and drove away.
    

      "Andrey Ivanich," I said to Radish, "will you take me on as a labourer?"
    

      "What! Why?"
    

      We went together toward the town, and when the station and the farm were
      far behind us, I asked:
    

      "Andrey Ivanich, why did you come to Dubechnia?"
    

      "Firstly because some of my men are working on the line, and secondly to
      pay interest to Mrs. Cheprakov. I borrowed fifty roubles from her last
      summer, and now I pay her one rouble a month."
    

      The decorator stopped and took hold of my coat.
    

      "Misail Alereich, my friend," he went on, "I take it that if a common man
      or a gentleman takes interest, he is a wrong-doer. The truth is not in
      him."
    

      Radish, looking thin, pale, and rather terrible, shut his eyes, shook his
      head, and muttered in a philosophic tone:
    

      "The grub eats grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul. God save us
      miserable sinners!"
    

      V
    

      Radish was unpractical and he was no business man; he undertook more work
      than he could do, and when he came to payment he always lost his reckoning
      and so was always out on the wrong side. He was a painter, a glazier, a
      paper-hanger, and would even take on tiling, and I remember how he used to
      run about for days looking for tiles to make an insignificant profit. He
      was an excellent workman and would sometimes earn ten roubles a day, and
      but for his desire to be a master and to call himself a contractor, he
      would probably have made quite a lot of money.
    

      He himself was paid by contract and paid me and the others by the day,
      between seventy-five copecks and a rouble per day. When the weather was
      hot and dry he did various outside jobs, chiefly painting roofs. Not being
      used to it, my feet got hot, as though I were walking over a red-hot oven,
      and when I wore felt boots my feet swelled. But this was only at the
      beginning. Later on I got used to it and everything went all right. I
      lived among the people, to whom work was obligatory and unavoidable,
      people who worked like dray-horses, and knew nothing of the moral value of
      labour, and never even used the word "labour" in their talk. Among them I
      also felt like a dray-horse, more and more imbued with the necessity and
      inevitability of what I was doing, and this made my life easier, and saved
      me from doubt.
    

      At first everything amused me, everything was new. It was like being born
      again. I could sleep on the ground and go barefoot—and found it
      exceedingly pleasant. I could stand in a crowd of simple folks, without
      embarrassing them, and when a cab-horse fell down in the street, I used to
      run and help it up without being afraid of soiling my clothes. But, best
      of all, I was living independently and was not a burden on any one.
    

      The painting of roofs, especially when we mixed our own paint, was
      considered a very profitable business, and, therefore, even such good
      workmen as Radish did not shun this rough and tiresome work. In short
      trousers, showing his lean, muscular legs, he used to prowl over the roof
      like a stork, and I used to hear him sigh wearily as he worked his brush:
    

      "Woe, woe to us, miserable sinners!"
    

      He could walk as easily on a roof as on the ground. In spite of his
      looking so ill and pale and corpse-like, his agility was extraordinary;
      like any young man he would paint the cupola and the top of the church
      without scaffolding, using only ladders and a rope, and it was queer and
      strange when, standing there, far above the ground, he would rise to his
      full height and cry to the world at large:
    

      "Grubs eat grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul!"
    

      Or, thinking of something, he would suddenly answer his own thought:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      When I went home from work all the people sitting outside their doors, the
      shop assistants, dogs, and their masters, used to shout after me and jeer
      spitefully, and at first it seemed monstrous and distressed me greatly.
    

      "Little Profit," they used to shout. "House-painter! Yellow ochre!"
    

      And no one treated me so unmercifully as those who had only just risen
      above the people and had quite recently had to work for their living. Once
      in the market-place as I passed the ironmonger's a can of water was
      spilled over me as if by accident, and once a stick was thrown at me. And
      once a fishmonger, a grey-haired old man, stood in my way and looked at me
      morosely and said:
    

      "It isn't you I'm sorry for, you fool, it's your father."
    

      And when my acquaintances met me they got confused. Some regarded me as a
      queer fish and a fool, and they were sorry for me; others did not know how
      to treat me and it was difficult to understand them. Once, in the daytime,
      in one of the streets off Great Gentry Street, I met Aniuta Blagovo. I was
      on my way to my work and was carrying two long brushes and a pot of paint.
      When she recognised me, Aniuta blushed.
    

      "Please do not acknowledge me in the street," she said nervously, sternly,
      in a trembling voice, without offering to shake hands with me, and tears
      suddenly gleamed in her eyes. "If you must be like this, then, so—so
      be it, but please avoid me in public!"
    

      I had left Great Gentry Street and was living in a suburb called Makarikha
      with my nurse Karpovna, a good-natured but gloomy old woman who was always
      looking for evil, and was frightened by her dreams, and saw omens and ill
      in the bees and wasps which flew into her room. And in her opinion my
      having become a working man boded no good.
    

      "You are lost!" she said mournfully, shaking her head. "Lost!"
    

      With her in her little house lived her adopted son, Prokofyi, a butcher, a
      huge, clumsy fellow, of about thirty, with ginger hair and scrubby
      moustache. When he met me in the hall, he would silently and respectfully
      make way for me, and when he was drunk he would salute me with his whole
      hand. In the evenings he used to have supper, and through the wooden
      partition I could hear him snorting and snuffling as he drank glass after
      glass.
    

      "Mother," he would say in an undertone.
    

      "Well," Karpovna would reply. She was passionately fond of him. "What is
      it, my son?"
    

      "I'll do you a favour, mother. I'll feed you in your old age in this vale
      of tears, and when you die I'll bury you at my own expense. So I say and
      so I'll do."
    

      I used to get up every day before sunrise and go to bed early. We painters
      ate heavily and slept soundly, and only during the night would we have any
      excitement. I never quarrelled with my comrades. All day long there was a
      ceaseless stream of abuse, cursing and hearty good wishes, as, for
      instance, that one's eyes should burst, or that one might be carried off
      by cholera, but, all the same, among ourselves we were very friendly. The
      men suspected me of being a religious crank and used to laugh at me
      good-naturedly, saying that even my own father denounced me, and they used
      to say that they very seldom went to church and that many of them had not
      been to confession for ten years, and they justified their laxness by
      saying that a decorator is among men like a jackdaw among birds.
    

      My mates respected me and regarded me with esteem; they evidently liked my
      not drinking or smoking, and leading a quiet, steady life. They were only
      rather disagreeably surprised at my not stealing the oil, or going with
      them to ask our employers for a drink. The stealing of the employers' oil
      and paint was a custom with house-painters, and was not regarded as theft,
      and it was remarkable that even so honest a man as Radish would always
      come away from work with some white lead and oil. And even respectable old
      men who had their own houses in Makarikha were not ashamed to ask for
      tips, and when the men, at the beginning or end of a job, made up to some
      vulgar fool and thanked him humbly for a few pence, I used to feel sick
      and sorry.
    

      With the customers they behaved like sly courtiers, and almost every day I
      was reminded of Shakespeare's Polonius.
    

      "There will probably be rain," a customer would say, staring at the sky.
    

      "It is sure to rain," the painters would agree.
    

      "But the clouds aren't rain-clouds. Perhaps it won't rain."
    

      "No, sir. It won't rain. It won't rain, sure."
    

      Behind their backs they generally regarded the customers ironically, and
      when, for instance, they saw a gentleman sitting on his balcony with a
      newspaper, they would say:
    

      "He reads newspapers, but he has nothing to eat."
    

      I never visited my people. When I returned from work I often found short,
      disturbing notes from my sister about my father; how he was very
      absent-minded at dinner, and then slipped away and locked himself in his
      study and did not come out for a long time. Such news upset me. I could
      not sleep, and I would go sometimes at night and walk along Great Gentry
      Street by our house, and look up at the dark windows, and try to guess if
      all was well within. On Sundays my sister would come to see me, but by
      stealth, as though she came not to see me, but my nurse. And if she came
      into my room she would look pale, with her eyes red, and at once she would
      begin to weep.
    

      "Father cannot bear it much longer," she would say. "If, as God forbid,
      something were to happen to him, it would be on your conscience all your
      life. It is awful, Misail! For mother's sake I implore you to mend your
      ways."
    

      "My dear sister," I replied. "How can I reform when I am convinced that I
      am acting according to my conscience? Do try to understand me!"
    

      "I know you are obeying your conscience, but it ought to be possible to do
      so without hurting anybody."
    

      "Oh, saints above!" the old woman would sigh behind the door. "You are
      lost. There will be a misfortune, my dear. It is bound to come."
    

      VI
    

      On Sunday, Doctor Blagovo came to see me unexpectedly. He was wearing a
      white summer uniform over a silk shirt, and high glacé boots.
    

      "I came to see you!" he began, gripping my hand in his hearty,
      undergraduate fashion. "I hear of you every day and I have long intended
      to go and see you to have a heart-to-heart, as they say. Things are
      awfully boring in the town; there is not a living soul worth talking to.
      How hot it is, by Jove!" he went on, taking off his tunic and standing in
      his silk shirt. "My dear fellow, let us have a talk."
    

      I was feeling bored and longing for other society than that of the
      decorators. I was really glad to see him.
    

      "To begin with," he said, sitting on my bed, "I sympathise with you
      heartily, and I have a profound respect for your present way of living. In
      the town you are misunderstood and there is nobody to understand you,
      because, as you know, it is full of Gogolian pig-faces. But I guessed what
      you were at the picnic. You are a noble soul, an honest, high-minded man!
      I respect you and think it an honour to shake hands with you. To change
      your life so abruptly and suddenly as you did, you must have passed
      through a most trying spiritual process, and to go on with it now, to live
      scrupulously by your convictions, you must have to toil incessantly both
      in mind and in heart. Now, please tell me, don't you think that if you
      spent all this force of will, intensity, and power on something else, like
      trying to be a great scholar or an artist, that your life would be both
      wider and deeper, and altogether more productive?"
    

      We talked and when we came to speak of physical labour, I expressed this
      idea: that it was necessary that the strong should not enslave the weak,
      and that the minority should not be a parasite on the majority, always
      sucking up the finest sap, i. e., it was necessary that all without
      exception—the strong and the weak, the rich and the poor—should
      share equally in the struggle for existence, every man for himself, and in
      that respect there was no better means of levelling than physical labour
      and compulsory service for all.
    

      "You think, then," said the doctor, "that all, without, exception, should
      be employed in physical labour?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "But don't you think that if everybody, including the best people,
      thinkers and men of science, were to take part in the struggle for
      existence, each man for himself, and took to breaking stones and painting
      roofs, it would be a serious menace to progress?"
    

      "Where is the danger?" I asked. "Progress consists in deeds of love, in
      the fulfilment of the moral law. If you enslave no one, and are a burden
      upon no one, what further progress do you want?"
    

      "But look here!" said Blagovo, suddenly losing his temper and getting up.
      "I say! If a snail in its shell is engaged in self-perfection in obedience
      to the moral law—would you call that progress?"
    

      "But why?" I was nettled. "If you make your neighbours feed you, clothe
      you, carry you, defend you from your enemies, their life is built up on
      slavery, and that is not progress. My view is that that is the most real
      and, perhaps, the only possible, the only progress necessary."
    

      "The limits of universal progress, which is common to all men, are in
      infinity, and it seems to me strange to talk of a 'possible' progress
      limited by our needs and temporal conceptions."
    

      "If the limits of peoples are in infinity, as you say, then it means that
      its goal is indefinite," I said. "Think of living without knowing
      definitely what for!"
    

      "Why not? Your 'not knowing' is not so boring as your 'knowing.' I am
      walking up a ladder which is called progress, civilisation, culture. I go
      on and on, not knowing definitely where I am going to, but surely it is
      worth while living for the sake of the wonderful ladder alone. And you
      know exactly what you are living for—that some should not enslave
      others, that the artist and the man who mixes his colours for him should
      dine together. But that is the bourgeois, kitchen side of life, and isn't
      it disgusting only to live for that? If some insects devour others, devil
      take them, let them! We need not think of them, they will perish and rot,
      however you save them from slavery—we must think of that great Cross
      which awaits all mankind in the distant future."
    

      Blagovo argued hotly with me, but it was noticeable that he was disturbed
      by some outside thought.
    

      "Your sister is not coming," he said, consulting his watch. "Yesterday she
      was at our house and said she was going to see you. You go on talking
      about slavery, slavery," he went on, "but it is a special question, and
      all these questions are solved by mankind gradually."
    

      We began to talk of evolution. I said that every man decides the question
      of good and evil for himself, and does not wait for mankind to solve the
      question by virtue of gradual development. Besides, evolution is a stick
      with two ends. Side by side with the gradual development of humanitarian
      ideas, there is the gradual growth of ideas of a different kind. Serfdom
      is past, and capitalism is growing. And with ideas of liberation at their
      height the majority, just as in the days of Baty, feeds, clothes, and
      defends the minority; and is left hungry, naked, and defenceless. The
      state of things harmonises beautifully with all your tendencies and
      movements, because the art of enslaving is also being gradually developed.
      We no longer flog our servants in the stables, but we give slavery more
      refined forms; at any rate, we are able to justify it in each separate
      case. Ideas remain ideas with us, but if we could, now, at the end of the
      nineteenth century, throw upon the working classes all our most unpleasant
      physiological functions, we should do so, and, of course, we should
      justify ourselves by saying that if the best people, thinkers and great
      scholars, had to waste their time on such functions, progress would be in
      serious jeopardy.
    

      Just then my sister entered. When she saw the doctor, she was flurried and
      excited, and at once began to say that it was time for her to go home to
      her father.
    

      "Cleopatra Alexeyevna," said Blagovo earnestly, laying his hands on his
      heart, "what will happen to your father if you spend half an hour with
      your brother and me?"
    

      He was a simple kind of man and could communicate his cheerfulness to
      others. My sister thought for a minute and began to laugh, and suddenly
      got very happy, suddenly, unexpectedly, just as she did at the picnic. We
      went out into the fields and lay on the grass, and went on with our
      conversation and looked at the town, where all the windows facing the west
      looked golden in the setting sun.
    

      After that Blagovo appeared every time my sister came to see me, and they
      always greeted each other as though their meeting was unexpected. My
      sister used to listen while the doctor and I argued, and her face was
      always joyful and rapturous, admiring and curious, and it seemed to me
      that a new world was slowly being discovered before her eyes, a world
      which she had not seen before even in her dreams, which now she was trying
      to divine; when the doctor was not there she was quiet and sad, and if, as
      she sat on my bed, she sometimes wept, it was for reasons of which she did
      not speak.
    

      In August Radish gave us orders to go to the railway. A couple of days
      before we were "driven" out of town, my father came to see me. He sat down
      and, without looking at me, slowly wiped his red face, then took out of
      his pocket our local paper and read out with deliberate emphasis on each
      word that a schoolfellow of my own age, the son of the director of the
      State Bank, had been appointed chief clerk of the Court of the Exchequer.
    

      "And now, look at yourself," he said, folding up the newspaper. "You are a
      beggar, a vagabond, a scoundrel! Even the bourgeoisie and other peasants
      get education to make themselves decent people, while you, a Pologniev,
      with famous, noble ancestors, go wallowing in the mire! But I did not come
      here to talk to you. I have given you up already." He went on in a choking
      voice, as he stood up: "I came here to find out where your sister is, you
      scoundrel! She left me after dinner. It is now past seven o'clock and she
      is not in. She has been going out lately without telling me, and she has
      been disrespectful—and I see your filthy, abominable influence at
      work. Where is she?"
    

      He had in his hands the familiar umbrella, and I was already taken aback,
      and I stood stiff and erect, like a schoolboy, waiting for my father to
      thrash me, but he saw the glance I cast at the umbrella and this probably
      checked him.
    

      "Live as you like!" he said. "My blessing is gone from you."
    

      "Good God!" muttered my old nurse behind the door. "You are lost. Oh! my
      heart feels some misfortune coming. I can feel it."
    

      I went to work on the railway. During the whole of August there was wind
      and rain. It was damp and cold; the corn had now been gathered in the
      fields, and on the big farms where the reaping was done with machines, the
      wheat lay not in stacks, but in heaps; and I remember how those melancholy
      heaps grew darker and darker every day, and the grain sprouted. It was
      hard work; the pouring rain spoiled everything that we succeeded in
      finishing. We were not allowed either to live or to sleep in the station
      buildings and had to take shelter in dirty, damp, mud huts where the
      "railies" had lived during the summer, and at night I could not sleep from
      the cold and the bugs crawling over my face and hands. And when we were
      working near the bridges, then the "railies" used to come out in a crowd
      to fight the painters—which they regarded as sport. They used to
      thrash us, steal our trousers, and to infuriate us and provoke us to a
      fight; they used to spoil our work, as when they smeared the signal-boxes
      with green paint. To add to all our miseries Radish began to pay us very
      irregularly. All the painting on the line was given to one contractor, who
      subcontracted with another, and he again with Radish, stipulating for
      twenty per cent commission. The job itself was unprofitable; then came the
      rains; time was wasted; we did no work and Radish had to pay his men every
      day. The starving painters nearly came to blows with him, called him a
      swindler, a bloodsucker, a Judas, and he, poor man, sighed and in despair
      raised his hands to the heavens and was continually going to Mrs.
      Cheprakov to borrow money.
    

      VII
    

      Came the rainy, muddy, dark autumn, bringing a slack time, and I used to
      sit at home three days in the week without work, or did various jobs
      outside painting; such as digging earth for ballast for twenty copecks a
      day. Doctor Blagovo had gone to Petersburg. My sister did not come to see
      me. Radish lay at home ill, expecting to die every day.
    

      And my mood was also autumnal; perhaps because when I became a working man
      I saw only the seamy side of the life of our town, and every day made
      fresh discoveries which brought me to despair. My fellow townsmen, both
      those of whom I had had a low opinion before, and those whom I had thought
      fairly decent, now seemed to me base, cruel, and up to any dirty trick. We
      poor people were tricked and cheated in the accounts, kept waiting for
      hours in cold passages or in the kitchen, and we were insulted and
      uncivilly treated. In the autumn I had to paper the library and two rooms
      at the club. I was paid seven copecks a piece, but was told to give a
      receipt for twelve copecks, and when I refused to do it, a respectable
      gentleman in gold spectacles, one of the stewards of the club, said to me:
    

      "If you say another word, you scoundrel, I'll knock you down."
    

      And when a servant whispered to him that I was the son of Pologniev, the
      architect, then I got flustered and blushed, but he recovered himself at
      once and said:
    

      "Damn him."
    

      In the shops we working men were sold bad meat, musty flour, and coarse
      tea. In church we were jostled by the police, and in the hospitals we were
      mulcted by the assistants and nurses, and if we could not give them bribes
      through poverty, we were given food in dirty dishes. In the post-office
      the lowest official considered it his duty to treat us as animals and to
      shout rudely and insolently: "Wait! Don't you come pushing your way in
      here!" Even the dogs, even they were hostile to us and hurled themselves
      at us with a peculiar malignancy. But what struck me most of all in my new
      position was the entire lack of justice, what the people call "forgetting
      God." Rarely a day went by without some swindle. The shopkeeper, who sold
      us oil, the contractor, the workmen, the customers themselves, all
      cheated. It was an understood thing that our rights were never considered,
      and we always had to pay for the money we had earned, going with our hats
      off to the back door.
    

      I was paper-hanging in one of the club-rooms, next the library, when, one
      evening as I was on the point of leaving, Dolyhikov's daughter came into
      the room carrying a bundle of books.
    

      I bowed to her.
    

      "Ah! How are you?" she said, recognising me at once and holding out her
      hand. "I am very glad to see you."
    

      She smiled and looked with a curious puzzled expression at my blouse and
      the pail of paste and the papers lying on the floor; I was embarrassed and
      she also felt awkward.
    

      "Excuse my staring at you," she said. "I have heard so much about you.
      Especially from Doctor Blagovo. He is enthusiastic about you. I have met
      your sister; she is a dear, sympathetic girl, but I could not make her see
      that there is nothing awful in your simple life. On the contrary, you are
      the most interesting man in the town."
    

      Once more she glanced at the pail of paste and the paper and said:
    

      "I asked Doctor Blagovo to bring us together, but he either forgot or had
      no time. However, we have met now. I should be very pleased if you would
      call on me. I do so want to have a talk. I am a simple person," she said,
      holding out her hand, "and I hope you will come and see me without
      ceremony. My father is away, in Petersburg."
    

      She went into the reading-room, with her dress rustling, and for a long
      time after I got home I could not sleep.
    

      During that autumn some kind soul, wishing to relieve my existence, sent
      me from time to time presents of tea and lemons, or biscuits, or roast
      pigeons. Karpovna said the presents were brought by a soldier, though from
      whom she did not know; and the soldier used to ask if I was well, if I had
      dinner every day, and if I had warm clothes. When the frost began the
      soldier came while I was out and brought a soft knitted scarf, which gave
      out a soft, hardly perceptible scent, and I guessed who my good fairy had
      been. For the scarf smelled of lily-of-the-valley, Aniuta Blagovo's
      favourite scent.
    

      Toward winter there was more work and things became more cheerful. Radish
      came to life again and we worked together in the cemetery church, where we
      scraped the holy shrine for gilding. It was a clean, quiet, and, as our
      mates said, a specially good job. We could do a great deal in one day, and
      so time passed quickly, imperceptibly. There was no swearing, nor
      laughing, nor loud altercations. The place compelled quiet and decency,
      and disposed one for tranquil, serious thoughts. Absorbed in our work, we
      stood or sat immovably, like statues; there was a dead silence, very
      proper to a cemetery, so that if a tool fell down, or the oil in the lamp
      spluttered, the sound would be loud and startling, and we would turn to
      see what it was. After a long silence one could hear a humming like that
      of a swarm of bees; in the porch, in an undertone, the funeral service was
      being read over a dead baby; or a painter painting a moon surrounded with
      stars on the cupola would begin to whistle quietly, and remembering
      suddenly that he was in a church, would stop; or Radish would sigh at his
      own thoughts: "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!" or above our
      heads there would be the slow, mournful tolling of a bell, and the
      painters would say it must be a rich man being brought to the church....
    

      The days I spent in the peace of the little church, and during the
      evenings I played billiards, or went to the gallery of the theatre in the
      new serge suit I had bought with my own hard-earned money. They were
      already beginning plays and concerts at the Azhoguins', and Radish did the
      scenery by himself. He told me about the plays and tableaux vivants at the
      Azhoguins', and I listened to him enviously. I had a great longing to take
      part in the rehearsals, but I dared not go to the Azhoguins'.
    

      A week before Christmas Doctor Blagovo arrived, and we resumed our
      arguments and played billiards in the evenings. When he played billiards
      he used to take off his coat, and unfasten his shirt at the neck, and
      generally try to look like a debauchee. He drank a little, but rowdily,
      and managed to spend in a cheap tavern like the Volga as much as twenty
      roubles in an evening.
    

      Once more my sister came to see me, and when they met they expressed
      surprise, but I could see by her happy, guilty face that these meetings
      were not accidental. One evening when we were playing billiards the doctor
      said to me:
    

      "I say, why don't you call on Miss Dolyhikov? You don't know Maria
      Victorovna. She is a clever, charming, simple creature."
    

      I told him how the engineer had received me in the spring.
    

      "Nonsense!" laughed the doctor. "The engineer is one thing and she is
      another. Really, my good fellow, you mustn't offend her. Go and see her
      some time. Let us go to-morrow evening. Will you?"
    

      He persuaded me. Next evening I donned my serge suit and with some
      perturbation set out to call on Miss Dolyhikov. The footman did not seem
      to me so haughty and formidable, or the furniture so oppressive, as on the
      morning when I had come to ask for work. Maria Victorovna was expecting me
      and greeted me as an old friend and gave my hand a warm, friendly grip.
      She was wearing a grey dress with wide sleeves, and had her hair done in
      the style which when it became the fashion a year later in our town, was
      called "dog's ears." The hair was combed back over the ears, and it made
      Maria Victorovna's face look broader, and she looked very like her father,
      whose face was broad and red and rather like a coachman's. She was
      handsome and elegant, but not young; about thirty to judge by her
      appearance, though she was not more than twenty-five.
    

      "Dear doctor!" she said, making me sit down. "How grateful I am to him.
      But for him, you would not have come. I am bored to death! My father has
      gone and left me alone, and I do not know what to do with myself."
    

      Then she began to ask where I was working, how much I got, and where I
      lived.
    

      "Do you only spend what you earn on yourself?" she asked.
    

      "Yes."
    

      "You are a happy man," she replied. "All the evil in life, it seems to me,
      comes from boredom and idleness, and spiritual emptiness, which are
      inevitable when one lives at other people's expense. Don't think I'm
      showing off. I mean it sincerely. It is dull and unpleasant to be rich.
      Win friends by just riches, they say, because as a rule there is and can
      be no such thing as just riches."
    

      She looked at the furniture with a serious, cold expression, as though she
      was making an inventory of it, and went on:
    

      "Ease and comfort possess a magic power. Little by little they seduce even
      strong-willed people. Father and I used to live poorly and simply, and now
      you see how we live. Isn't it strange?" she said with a shrug. "We spend
      twenty thousand roubles a year! In the provinces!"
    

      "Ease and comfort must not be regarded as the inevitable privilege of
      capital and education," I said. "It seems to me possible to unite the
      comforts of life with work, however hard and dirty it may be. Your father
      is rich, but, as he says, he used to be a mechanic, and just a
      lubricator."
    

      She smiled and shook her head thoughtfully.
    

      "Papa sometimes eats tiurya," she said, "but only out of caprice."
    

      A bell rang and she got up.
    

      "The rich and the educated ought to work like the rest," she went on, "and
      if there is to be any comfort, it should be accessible to all. There
      should be no privileges. However, that's enough philosophy. Tell me
      something cheerful. Tell me about the painters. What are they like?
      Funny?"
    

      The doctor came. I began to talk about the painters, but, being unused to
      it, I felt awkward and talked solemnly and ponderously like an
      ethnographist. The doctor also told a few stories about working people. He
      rocked to and fro and cried, and fell on his knees, and when he was
      depicting a drunkard, lay flat on the floor. It was as good as a play, and
      Maria Victorovna laughed until she cried. Then he played the piano and
      sang in his high-pitched tenor, and Maria Victorovna stood by him and told
      him what to sing and corrected him when he made a mistake.
    

      "I hear you sing, too," said I.
    

      "Too?" cried the doctor. "She is a wonderful singer, an artist, and you
      say—too! Careful, careful!"
    

      "I used to study seriously," she replied, "but I have given it up now."
    

      She sat on a low stool and told us about her life in Petersburg, and
      imitated famous singers, mimicking their voices and mannerisms; then she
      sketched the doctor and myself in her album, not very well, but both were
      good likenesses. She laughed and made jokes and funny faces, and this
      suited her better than talking about unjust riches, and it seemed to me
      that what she had said about "riches and comfort" came not from herself,
      but was just mimicry. She was an admirable comedian. I compared her
      mentally with the girls of our town, and not even the beautiful, serious
      Aniuta Blagovo could stand up against her; the difference was as vast as
      that between a wild and a garden rose.
    

      We stayed to supper. The doctor and Maria Victorovna drank red wine,
      champagne, and coffee with cognac; they touched glasses and drank to
      friendship, to wit, to progress, to freedom, and never got drunk, but went
      rather red and laughed for no reason until they cried. To avoid being out
      of it I, too, drank red wine.
    

      "People with talent and with gifted natures," said Miss Dolyhikov, "know
      how to live and go their own way; but ordinary people like myself know
      nothing and can do nothing by themselves; there is nothing for them but to
      find some deep social current and let themselves be borne along by it."
    

      "Is it possible to find that which does not exist?" asked the doctor.
    

      "It doesn't exist because we don't see it."
    

      "Is that so? Social currents are the invention of modern literature. They
      don't exist here."
    

      A discussion began.
    

      "We have no profound social movements; nor have we had them," said the
      doctor. "Modern literature has invented a lot of things, and modern
      literature invented intellectual working men in village life, but go
      through all our villages and you will only find Mr. Cheeky Snout in a
      jacket or black frock coat, who will make four mistakes in the word 'one.'
      Civilised life has not begun with us yet. We have the same savagery, the
      same slavery, the same nullity as we had five hundred years ago.
      Movements, currents—all that is so wretched and puerile mixed up
      with such vulgar, catch-penny interests—and one cannot take it
      seriously. You may think you have discovered a large social movement, and
      you may follow it and devote your life in the modern fashion to such
      problems as the liberation of vermin from slavery, or the abolition of
      meat cutlets—and I congratulate you, madam. But we have to learn,
      learn, learn, and there will be plenty of time for social movements; we
      are not up to them yet, and upon my soul, we don't understand anything at
      all about them."
    

      "You don't understand, but I do," said Maria Victorovna. "Good Heavens!
      What a bore you are to-night."
    

      "It is our business to learn and learn, to try and accumulate as much
      knowledge as possible, because serious social movements come where there
      is knowledge, and the future happiness of mankind lies in science. Here's
      to science!"
    

      "One thing is certain. Life must somehow be arranged differently," said
      Maria Victorovna, after some silence and deep thought, "and life as it has
      been up to now is worthless. Don't let us talk about it."
    

      When we left her the Cathedral clock struck two.
    

      "Did you like her?" asked the doctor. "Isn't she a dear girl?"
    

      We had dinner at Maria Victorovna's on Christmas Day, and then we went to
      see her every day during the holidays. There was nobody besides ourselves,
      and she was right when she said she had no friends in the town but the
      doctor and me. We spent most of the time talking, and sometimes the doctor
      would bring a book or a magazine and read aloud. After all, he was the
      first cultivated man I had met. I could not tell if he knew much, but he
      was always generous with his knowledge because he wished others to know
      too. When he talked about medicine, he was not like any of our local
      doctors, but he made a new and singular impression, and it seemed to me
      that if he had wished he could have become a genuine scientist. And
      perhaps he was the only person at that time who had any real influence
      over me. Meeting him and reading the books he gave me, I began gradually
      to feel a need for knowledge to inspire the tedium of my work. It seemed
      strange to me that I had not known before such things as that the whole
      world consisted of sixty elements. I did not know what oil or paint was,
      and I could do without knowing. My acquaintance with the doctor raised me
      morally too. I used to argue with him, and though I usually stuck to my
      opinion, yet, through him, I came gradually to perceive that everything
      was not clear to me, and I tried to cultivate convictions as definite as
      possible so that the promptings of my conscience should be precise and
      have nothing vague about them. Nevertheless, educated and fine as he was,
      far and away the best man in the town, he was by no means perfect. There
      was something rather rude and priggish in his ways and in his trick of
      dragging talk down to discussion, and when he took off his coat and sat in
      his shirt and gave the footman a tip, it always seemed to me that culture
      was just a part of him, with the rest untamed Tartar.
    

      After the holidays he left once more for Petersburg. He went in the
      morning and after dinner my sister came to see me. Without taking off her
      furs, she sat silent, very pale, staring in front of her. She began to
      shiver and seemed to be fighting against some illness.
    

      "You must have caught a cold," I said.
    

      Her eyes filled with tears. She rose and went to Karpovna without a word
      to me, as though I had offended her. And a little later I heard her
      speaking in a tone of bitter reproach.
    

      "Nurse, what have I been living for, up to now? What for? Tell me; haven't
      I wasted my youth? During the last years I have had nothing but making up
      accounts, pouring out tea, counting the copecks, entertaining guests,
      without a thought that there was anything better in the world! Nurse, try
      to understand me, I too have human desires and I want to live and they
      have made a housekeeper of me. It is awful, awful!"
    

      She flung her keys against the door and they fell with a clatter in my
      room. They were the keys of the side-board, the larder, the cellar, and
      the tea-chest—the keys my mother used to carry.
    

      "Oh! Oh! Saints above!" cried my old nurse in terror. "The blessed
      saints!"
    

      When she left, my sister came into my room for her keys and said:
    

      "Forgive me. Something strange has been going on in me lately."
    

      VIII
    

      One evening when I came home late from Maria Victorovna's I found a young
      policeman in a new uniform in my room; he was sitting by the table
      reading.
    

      "At last!" he said getting up and stretching himself. "This is the third
      time I have been to see you. The governor has ordered you to go and see
      him to-morrow at nine o'clock sharp. Don't be late."
    

      He made me give him a written promise to comply with his Excellency's
      orders and went away. This policeman's visit and the unexpected invitation
      to see the governor had a most depressing effect on me. From my early
      childhood I have had a dread of gendarmes, police, legal officials, and I
      was tormented with anxiety as though I had really committed a crime and I
      could not sleep. Nurse and Prokofyi were also upset and could not sleep.
      And, to make things worse, nurse had an earache, and moaned and more than
      once screamed out. Hearing that I could not sleep Prokofyi came quietly
      into my room with a little lamp and sat by the table.
    

      "You should have a drop of pepper-brandy...." he said after some thought.
      "In this vale of tears things go on all right when you take a drop. And if
      mother had some pepper-brandy poured into her ear she would be much
      better."
    

      About three he got ready to go to the slaughter-house to fetch some meat.
      I knew I should not sleep until morning, and to use up the time until
      nine, I went with him. We walked with a lantern, and his boy, Nicolka, who
      was about thirteen, and had blue spots on his face and an expression like
      a murderer's, drove behind us in a sledge, urging the horse on with hoarse
      cries.
    

      "You will probably be punished at the governor's," said Prokofyi as we
      walked. "There is a governor's rank, and an archimandrite's rank, and an
      officer's rank, and a doctor's rank, and every profession has its own
      rank. You don't keep to yours and they won't allow it."
    

      The slaughter-house stood behind the cemetery, and till then I had only
      seen it at a distance. It consisted of three dark sheds surrounded by a
      grey fence, from which, when the wind was in that direction in summer,
      there came an overpowering stench. Now, as I entered the yard, I could not
      see the sheds in the darkness; I groped through horses and sledges, both
      empty and laden with meat; and there were men walking about with lanterns
      and swearing disgustingly. Prokofyi and Nicolka swore as filthily and
      there was a continuous hum from the swearing and coughing and the neighing
      of the horses.
    

      The place smelled of corpses and offal, the snow was thawing and already
      mixed with mud, and in the darkness it seemed to me that I was walking
      through a pool of blood.
    

      When we had filled the sledge with meat, we went to the butcher's shop in
      the market-place. Day was beginning to dawn. One after another the cooks
      came with baskets and old women in mantles. With an axe in his hand,
      wearing a white, blood-stained apron, Prokofyi swore terrifically and
      crossed himself, turning toward the church, and shouted so loud that he
      could be heard all over the market, avowing that he sold his meat at cost
      price and even at a loss. He cheated in weighing and reckoning, the cooks
      saw it, but, dazed by his shouting, they did not protest, but only called
      him a gallows-bird.
    

      Raising and dropping his formidable axe, he assumed picturesque attitudes
      and constantly uttered the sound "Hak!" with a furious expression, and I
      was really afraid of his cutting off some one's head or hand.
    

      I stayed in the butcher's shop the whole morning, and when at last I went
      to the governor's my fur coat smelled of meat and blood. My state of mind
      would have been appropriate for an encounter with a bear armed with no
      more than a staff. I remember a long staircase with a striped carpet, and
      a young official in a frock coat with shining buttons, who silently
      indicated the door with both hands and went in to announce me. I entered
      the hall, where the furniture was most luxurious, but cold and tasteless,
      forming a most unpleasant impression—the tall, narrow pier-glasses,
      and the bright, yellow hangings over the windows; one could see that,
      though governors changed, the furniture remained the same. The young
      official again pointed with both hands to the door and went toward a
      large, green table, by which stood a general with the Order of Vladimir at
      his neck.
    

      "Mr. Pologniev," he began, holding a letter in his hand and opening his
      mouth wide so that it made a round O. "I asked you to come to say this to
      you: 'Your esteemed father has applied verbally and in writing to the
      provincial marshal of nobility, to have you summoned and made to see the
      incongruity of your conduct with the title of nobleman which you have the
      honour to bear. His Excellency Alexander Pavlovich, justly thinking that
      your conduct may be subversive, and finding that persuasion may not be
      sufficient, without serious intervention on the part of the authorities,
      has given me his decision as to your case, and I agree with him.'"
    

      He said this quietly, respectfully, standing erect as if I was his
      superior, and his expression was not at all severe. He had a flabby, tired
      face, covered with wrinkles, with pouches under his eyes; his hair was
      dyed, and it was hard to guess his age from his appearance—fifty or
      sixty.
    

      "I hope," he went on, "that you will appreciate Alexander Pavlovich's
      delicacy in applying to me, not officially, but privately. I have invited
      you unofficially not as a governor, but as a sincere admirer of your
      father's. And I ask you to change your conduct and to return to the duties
      proper to your rank, or, to avoid the evil effects of your example, to go
      to some other place where you are not known and where you may do what you
      like. Otherwise I shall have to resort to extreme measures."
    

      For half a minute he stood in silence staring at me open-mouthed.
    

      "Are you a vegetarian?" he asked.
    

      "No, your Excellency, I eat meat."
    

      He sat down and took up a document, and I bowed and left.
    

      It was not worth while going to work before dinner. I went home and tried
      to sleep, but could not because of the unpleasant, sickly feeling from the
      slaughter-house and my conversation with the governor. And so I dragged
      through till the evening and then, feeling gloomy and out of sorts, I went
      to see Maria Victorovna. I told her about my visit to the governor and she
      looked at me in bewilderment, as if she did not believe me, and suddenly
      she began to laugh merrily, heartily, stridently, as only good-natured,
      light-hearted people can.
    

      "If I were to tell this in Petersburg!" she cried, nearly dropping with
      laughter, bending over the table. "If I could tell them in Petersburg!"
    

      IX
    

      Now we saw each other often, sometimes twice a day. Almost every day,
      after dinner, she drove up to the cemetery and, as she waited for me, read
      the inscriptions on the crosses and monuments. Sometimes she came into the
      church and stood by my side and watched me working. The silence, the
      simple industry of the painters and gilders, Radish's good sense, and the
      fact that outwardly I was no different from the other artisans and worked
      as they did, in a waistcoat and old shoes, and that they addressed me
      familiarly—were new to her, and she was moved by it all. Once in her
      presence a painter who was working, at a door on the roof, called down to
      me:
    

      "Misail, fetch me the white lead."
    

      I fetched him the white lead and as I came down the scaffolding she was
      moved to tears and looked at me and smiled:
    

      "What a dear you are!" she said.
    

      I have always remembered how when I was a child a green parrot got out of
      its cage in one of the rich people's houses and wandered about the town
      for a whole month, flying from one garden to another, homeless and lonely.
      And Maria Victorovna reminded me of the bird.
    

      "Except to the cemetery," she said with a laugh, "I have absolutely
      nowhere to go. The town bores me to tears. People read, sing, and twitter
      at the Azhoguins', but I cannot bear them lately. Your sister is shy, Miss
      Blagovo for some reason hates me. I don't like the theatre. What can I do
      with myself?"
    

      When I was at her house I smelled of paint and turpentine, and my hands
      were stained. She liked that. She wanted me to come to her in my ordinary
      working-clothes; but I felt awkward in them in her drawing-room, and as if
      I were in uniform, and so I always wore my new serge suit. She did not
      like that.
    

      "You must confess," she said once, "that you have not got used to your new
      rôle. A working-man's suit makes you feel awkward and embarrassed.
      Tell me, isn't it because you are not sure of yourself and are
      unsatisfied? Does this work you have chosen, this painting of yours,
      really satisfy you?" she asked merrily. "I know paint makes things look
      nicer and wear better, but the things themselves belong to the rich and
      after all they are a luxury. Besides you have said more than once that
      everybody should earn his living with his own hands and you earn money,
      not bread. Why don't you keep to the exact meaning of what you say? You
      must earn bread, real bread, you must plough, sow, reap, thrash, or do
      something which has to do directly with agriculture, such as keeping cows,
      digging, or building houses...."
    

      She opened a handsome bookcase which stood by the writing-table and said:
    

      "I'm telling you all this because I'm going to let you into my secret.
      Voilà. This is my agricultural library. Here are books on arable
      land, vegetable-gardens, orchard-keeping, cattle-keeping, bee-keeping: I
      read them eagerly and have studied the theory of everything thoroughly. It
      is my dream to go to Dubechnia as soon as March begins. It is wonderful
      there, amazing; isn't it? The first year I shall only be learning the work
      and getting used to it, and in the second year I shall begin to work
      thoroughly, without sparing myself. My father promised to give me
      Dubechnia as a present, and I am to do anything I like with it."
    

      She blushed and with mingled laughter and tears she dreamed aloud of her
      life at Dubechnia and how absorbing it would be. And I envied her. March
      would soon be here. The days were drawing out, and in the bright sunny
      afternoons the snow dripped from the roofs, and the smell of spring was in
      the air. I too longed for the country.
    

      And when she said she was going to live at Dubechnia, I saw at once that I
      should be left alone in the town, and I felt jealous of the bookcase with
      her books about farming. I knew and cared nothing about farming and I was
      on the point of telling her that agriculture was work for slaves, but I
      recollected that my father had once said something of the sort and I held
      my peace.
    

      Lent began. The engineer, Victor Ivanich, came home from Petersburg. I had
      begun to forget his existence. He came unexpectedly, not even sending a
      telegram. When I went there as usual in the evening, he was walking up and
      down the drawing-room, after a bath, with his hair cut, looking ten years
      younger, and talking. His daughter was kneeling by his trunks and taking
      out boxes, bottles, books, and handing them to Pavel the footman. When I
      saw the engineer, I involuntarily stepped back and he held out both his
      hands and smiled and showed his strong, white, cab-driver's teeth.
    

      "Here he is! Here he is! I'm very pleased to see you, Mr. House-painter!
      Maria told me all about you and sang your praises. I quite understand you
      and heartily approve." He took me by the arm and went on: "It is much
      cleverer and more honest to be a decent workman than to spoil State paper
      and to wear a cockade. I myself worked with my hands in Belgium. I was an
      engine-driver for five years...."
    

      He was wearing a short jacket and comfortable slippers, and he shuffled
      along like a gouty man waving and rubbing his hands; humming and buzzing
      and shrugging with pleasure at being at home again with his favourite
      shower-bath.
    

      "There's no denying," he said at supper, "there's no denying that you are
      kind, sympathetic people, but somehow as soon as you gentlefolk take on
      manual labour or try to spare the peasants, you reduce it all to
      sectarianism. You are a sectarian. You don't drink vodka. What is that but
      sectarianism?"
    

      To please him I drank vodka. I drank wine, too. We ate cheese, sausages,
      pastries, pickles, and all kinds of dainties that the engineer had brought
      with him, and we sampled wines sent from abroad during his absence. They
      were excellent. For some reason the engineer had wines and cigars sent
      from abroad—duty free; somebody sent him caviare and baliki
      gratis; he did not pay rent for his house because his landlord supplied
      the railway with kerosene, and generally he and his daughter gave me the
      impression of having all the best things in the world at their service
      free of charge.
    

      I went on visiting them, but with less pleasure than before. The engineer
      oppressed me and I felt cramped in his presence. I could not endure his
      clear, innocent eyes; his opinions bored me and were offensive to me, and
      I was distressed by the recollection that I had so recently been
      subordinate to this ruddy, well-fed man, and that he had been mercilessly
      rude to me. True he would put his arm round my waist and clap me kindly on
      the shoulder and approve of my way of living, but I felt that he despised
      my nullity just as much as before and only suffered me to please his
      daughter, but I could no longer laugh and talk easily, and I thought
      myself ill-mannered, and all the time was expecting him to call me
      Panteley as he did his footman Pavel. How my provincial, bourgeois pride
      rode up against him! I, a working man, a painter, going every day to the
      house of rich strangers, whom the whole town regarded as foreigners, and
      drinking their expensive wines and outlandish dishes! I could not
      reconcile this with my conscience. When I went to see them I sternly
      avoided those whom I met on the way, and looked askance at them like a
      real sectarian, and when I left the engineer's house I was ashamed of
      feeling so well-fed.
    

      But chiefly I was afraid of falling in love. Whether walking in the
      street, or working, or talking to my mates, I thought all the time of
      going to Maria Victorovna's in the evening, and always had her voice, her
      laughter, her movements with me. And always as I got ready to go to her, I
      would stand for a long time in front of the cracked mirror tying my
      necktie; my serge suit seemed horrible to me, and I suffered, but at the
      same time, despised myself for feeling so small. When she called to me
      from another room to say that she was not dressed yet and to ask me to
      wait a bit, and I could hear her dressing, I was agitated and felt as
      though the floor was sinking under me. And when I saw a woman in the
      street, even at a distance, I fell to comparing her figure with hers, and
      it seemed to me that all our women and girls were vulgar, absurdly
      dressed, and without manners; and such comparisons roused in me a feeling
      of pride; Maria Victorovna was better than all of them. And at night I
      dreamed of her and myself.
    

      Once at supper the engineer and I ate a whole lobster. When I reached home
      I remember that the engineer had twice called me "my dear fellow," and I
      thought that they treated me as they might have done a big, unhappy dog,
      separated from his master, and that they were amusing themselves with me,
      and that they would order me away like a dog when they were bored with me.
      I began to feel ashamed and hurt; went to the point of tears, as though I
      had been insulted, and, raising my eyes to the heavens, I vowed to put an
      end to it all.
    

      Next day I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. Late at night, when it was quite
      dark and pouring with rain, I walked up and down Great Gentry Street,
      looking at the windows. At the Azhoguins' everybody was asleep and the
      only light was in one of the top windows; old Mrs. Azhoguin was sitting in
      her room embroidering by candle-light and imagining herself to be fighting
      against prejudice. It was dark in our house and opposite, at the
      Dolyhikovs' the windows were lit up, but it was impossible to see anything
      through the flowers and curtains. I kept on walking up and down the
      street; I was soaked through with the cold March rain. I heard my father
      come home from the club; he knocked at the door; in a minute a light
      appeared at a window and I saw my sister walking quickly with her lamp and
      hurriedly arranging her thick hair. Then my father paced up and down the
      drawing-room, talking and rubbing his hands, and my sister sat still in a
      corner, lost in thought, not listening to him....
    

      But soon they left the room and the light was put out.... I looked at the
      engineer's house and that too was now dark. In the darkness and the rain I
      felt desperately lonely. Cast out at the mercy of Fate, and I felt how,
      compared with my loneliness, and my suffering, actual and to come, all my
      work and all my desires and all that I had hitherto thought and read, were
      vain and futile. Alas! The activities and thoughts of human beings are not
      nearly so important as their sorrows! And not knowing exactly what I was
      doing I pulled with all my might at the bell at the Dolyhikovs' gate,
      broke it, and ran away down the street like a little boy, full of fear,
      thinking they would rush out at once and recognise me. When I stopped to
      take breath at the end of the street, I could hear nothing but the falling
      rain and far away a night-watchman knocking on a sheet of iron.
    

      For a whole week I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. I sold my serge suit. I
      had no work and I was once more half-starved, earning ten or twenty
      copecks a day, when possible, by disagreeable work. Floundering knee-deep
      in the mire, putting out all my strength, I tried to drown my memories and
      to punish myself for all the cheeses and pickles to which I had been
      treated at the engineer's. Still, no sooner did I go to bed, wet and
      hungry, than my untamed imagination set to work to evolve wonderful,
      alluring pictures, and to my amazement I confessed that I was in love,
      passionately in love, and I fell sound asleep feeling that the hard life
      had only made my body stronger and younger.
    

      One evening it began, most unseasonably, to snow, and the wind blew from
      the north, exactly as if winter had begun again. When I got home from work
      I found Maria Victorovna in my room. She was in her furs with her hands in
      her muff.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she asked, looking at me with her bright
      sagacious eyes, and I was overcome with joy and stood stiffly in front of
      her, just as I had done with my father when he was going to thrash me; she
      looked straight into my face and I could see by her eyes that she
      understood why I was overcome.
    

      "Why don't you come to see me?" she repeated. "You don't want to come? I
      had to come to you."
    

      She got up and came close to me.
    

      "Don't leave me," she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "I am lonely,
      utterly lonely."
    

      She began to cry and said, covering her face with her muff:
    

      "Alone! Life is hard, very hard, and in the whole world I have no one but
      you. Don't leave me!"
    

      Looking for her handkerchief to dry her tears, she gave a smile; we were
      silent for some time, then I embraced and kissed her, and the pin in her
      hat scratched my face and drew blood.
    

      And we began to talk as though we had been dear to each other for a long,
      long time.
    

      X
    

      In a couple of days she sent me to Dubechnia and I was beyond words
      delighted with it. As I walked to the station, and as I sat in the train,
      I laughed for no reason and people thought me drunk. There were snow and
      frost in the mornings still, but the roads were getting dark, and there
      were rooks cawing above them.
    

      At first I thought of arranging the side wing opposite Mrs. Cheprakov's
      for myself and Masha, but it appeared that doves and pigeons had taken up
      their abode there and it would be impossible to cleanse it without
      destroying a great number of nests. We would have to live willy-nilly in
      the uncomfortable rooms with Venetian blinds in the big house. The
      peasants called it a palace; there were more than twenty rooms in it, and
      the only furniture was a piano and a child's chair, lying in the attic,
      and even if Masha brought all her furniture from town we should not
      succeed in removing the impression of frigid emptiness and coldness. I
      chose three small rooms with windows looking on to the garden, and from
      early morning till late at night I was at work in them, glazing the
      windows, hanging paper, blocking up the chinks and holes in the floor. It
      was an easy, pleasant job. Every now and then I would run to the river to
      see if the ice was breaking and all the while I dreamed of the starlings
      returning. And at night when I thought of Masha I would be filled with an
      inexpressibly sweet feeling of an all-embracing joy to listen to the rats
      and the wind rattling and knocking above the ceiling; it was like an old
      hobgoblin coughing in the attic.
    

      The snow was deep; there was a heavy fall at the end of March, but it
      thawed rapidly, as if by magic, and the spring floods rushed down so that
      by the beginning of April the starlings were already chattering and yellow
      butterflies fluttered in the garden. The weather was wonderful. Every day
      toward evening I walked toward the town to meet Masha, and how delightful
      it was to walk along the soft, drying road with bare feet! Half-way I
      would sit down and look at the town, not daring to go nearer. The sight of
      it upset me, I was always wondering how my acquaintances would behave
      toward me when they heard of my love. What would my father say? I was
      particularly worried by the idea that my life was becoming more
      complicated, and that I had entirely lost control of it, and that she was
      carrying me off like a balloon, God knows whither. I had already given up
      thinking how to make a living, and I thought—indeed, I cannot
      remember what I thought.
    

      Masha used to come in a carriage. I would take a seat beside her and
      together, happy and free, we used to drive to Dubechnia. Or, having waited
      till sunset, I would return home, weary and disconsolate, wondering why
      Masha had not come, and then by the gate or in the garden I would find my
      darling. She would come by the railway and walk over from the station.
      What a triumph she had then! In her plain, woollen dress, with a simple
      umbrella, but keeping a trim, fashionable figure and expensive, Parisian
      boots—she was a gifted actress playing the country girl. We used to
      go over the house, and plan out the rooms, and the paths, and the
      vegetable-garden, and the beehives. We already had chickens and ducks and
      geese which we loved because they were ours. We had oats, clover,
      buckwheat, and vegetable seeds all ready for sowing, and we used to
      examine them all and wonder what the crops would be like, and everything
      Masha said to me seemed extraordinarily clever and fine. This was the
      happiest time of my life.
    

      Soon after Easter we were married in the parish church in the village of
      Kurilovka three miles from Dubechnia. Masha wanted everything to be
      simple; by her wish our bridesmen were peasant boys, only one deacon sang,
      and we returned from the church in a little, shaky cart which she drove
      herself. My sister was the only guest from the town. Masha had sent her a
      note a couple of days before the wedding. My sister wore a white dress and
      white gloves.... During the ceremony she cried softly for joy and emotion,
      and her face had a maternal expression of infinite goodness. She was
      intoxicated with our happiness and smiled as though she were breathing a
      sweet perfume, and when I looked at her I understood that there was
      nothing in the world higher in her eyes than love, earthly love, and that
      she was always dreaming of love, secretly, timidly, yet passionately. She
      embraced Masha and kissed her, and, not knowing how to express her
      ecstasy, she said to her of me:
    

      "He is a good man! A very good man."
    

      Before she left us, she put on her ordinary clothes, and took me into the
      garden to have a quiet talk.
    

      "Father is very hurt that you have not written to him," she said. "You
      should have asked for his blessing. But, at heart, he is very pleased. He
      says that this marriage will raise you in the eyes of society, and that
      under Maria Victorovna's influence you will begin to adopt a more serious
      attitude toward life. In the evening now we talk about nothing but you;
      and yesterday he even said, 'our Misail.' I was delighted. He has
      evidently thought of a plan and I believe he wants to set you an example
      of magnanimity, and that he will be the first to talk of reconciliation.
      It is quite possible that one of these days he will come and see you
      here."
    

      She made the sign of the cross over me and said:
    

      "Well, God bless you. Be happy. Aniuta Blagovo is a very clever girl. She
      says of your marriage that God has sent you a new ordeal. Well? Married
      life is not made up only of joy but of suffering as well. It is impossible
      to avoid it."
    

      Masha and I walked about three miles with her, and then walked home
      quietly and silently, as though it were a rest for both of us. Masha had
      her hand on my arm. We were at peace and there was no need to talk of
      love; after the wedding we grew closer to each other and dearer, and it
      seemed as though nothing could part us.
    

      "Your sister is a dear, lovable creature," said Masha, "but looks as
      though she had lived in torture. Your father must be a terrible man."
    

      I began to tell her how my sister and I had been brought up and how absurd
      and full of torture our childhood had been. When she heard that my father
      had thrashed me quite recently she shuddered and clung to me:
    

      "Don't tell me any more," she said. "It is too horrible."
    

      And now she did not leave me. We lived in the big house, in three rooms,
      and in the evenings we bolted the door that led to the empty part of the
      house, as though some one lived there whom we did not know and feared. I
      used to get up early, at dawn, and begin working. I repaired the carts;
      made paths in the garden, dug the beds, painted the roofs. When the time
      came to sow oats, I tried to plough and harrow, and sow and did it all
      conscientiously, and did not leave it all to the labourer. I used to get
      tired, and my face and feet used to burn with the rain and the sharp cold
      wind. But work in the fields did not attract me. I knew nothing about
      agriculture and did not like it; perhaps because my ancestors were not
      tillers of the soil and pure town blood ran in my veins. I loved nature
      dearly; I loved the fields and the meadows and the garden, but the peasant
      who turns the earth with his plough, shouting at his miserable horse,
      ragged and wet, with bowed shoulders, was to me an expression of wild,
      rude, ugly force, and as I watched his clumsy movements I could not help
      thinking of the long-passed legendary life, when men did not yet know the
      use of fire. The fierce bull which led the herd, and the horses that
      stampeded through the village, filled me with terror, and all the large
      creatures, strong and hostile, a ram with horns, a gander, or a watch-dog
      seemed to me to be symbolical of some rough, wild force. These prejudices
      used to be particularly strong in me in bad weather, when heavy clouds
      hung over the black plough-lands. But worst of all was that when I was
      ploughing or sowing, and a few peasants stood and watched how I did it, I
      no longer felt the inevitability and necessity of the work and it seemed
      to me that I was trifling my time away.
    

      I used to go through the gardens and the meadow to the mill. It was leased
      by Stiepan, a Kurilovka peasant; handsome, swarthy, with a black beard—an
      athletic appearance. He did not care for mill work and thought it tiresome
      and unprofitable, and he only lived at the mill to escape from home. He
      was a saddler and always smelled of tan and leather. He did not like
      talking, was slow and immovable, and used to hum "U-lu-lu-lu," sitting on
      the bank or in the doorway of the mill. Sometimes his wife and
      mother-in-law used to come from Kurilovka to see him; they were both fair,
      languid, soft, and they used to bow to him humbly and call him Stiepan
      Petrovich. And he would not answer their greeting with a word or a sign,
      but would turn where he sat on the bank and hum quietly: "U-lu-lu-lu."
      There would be a silence for an hour or two. His mother-in-law and his
      wife would whisper to each other, get up and look expectantly at him for
      some time, waiting for him to look at them, and then they would bow humbly
      and say in sweet, soft voices:
    

      "Good-bye, Stiepan Petrovich."
    

      And they would go away. After that, Stiepan would put away the bundle of
      cracknels or the shirt they had left for him and sigh and give a wink in
      their direction and say:
    

      "The female sex!"
    

      The mill was worked with both wheels day and night. I used to help
      Stiepan, I liked it, and when he went away I was glad to take his place.
    

      XI
    

      After a spell of warm bright weather we had a season of bad roads. It
      rained and was cold all through May. The grinding of the millstones and
      the drip of the rain induced idleness and sleep. The floor shook, the
      whole place smelled of flour, and this too made one drowsy. My wife in a
      short fur coat and high rubber boots used to appear twice a day and she
      always said the same thing:
    

      "Call this summer! It is worse than October!"
    

      We used to have tea together and cook porridge, or sit together for hours
      in silence thinking the rain would never stop. Once when Stiepan went away
      to a fair, Masha stayed the night in the mill. When we got up we could not
      tell what time it was for the sky was overcast; the sleepy cocks at
      Dubechnia were crowing, and the corncrakes were trilling in the meadow; it
      was very, very early.... My wife and I walked down to the pool and drew up
      the bow-net that Stiepan had put out in our presence the day before. There
      was one large perch in it and a crayfish angrily stretched out his claws.
    

      "Let them go," said Masha. "Let them be happy too."
    

      Because we got up very early and had nothing to do, the day seemed very
      long, the longest in my life. Stiepan returned before dusk and I went back
      to the farmhouse.
    

      "Your father came here to-day," said Masha.
    

      "Where is he?"
    

      "He has gone. I did not receive him."
    

      Seeing my silence and feeling that I was sorry for my father, she said:
    

      "We must be logical. I did not receive him and sent a message to ask him
      not to trouble us again and not to come and see us."
    

      In a moment I was outside the gates, striding toward the town to make it
      up with my father. It was muddy, slippery, cold. For the first time since
      our marriage I suddenly felt sad, and through my brain, tired with the
      long day, there flashed the thought that perhaps I was not living as I
      ought; I got more and more tired and was gradually overcome with weakness,
      inertia; I had no desire to move or to think, and after walking for some
      time, I waved my hand and went home.
    

      In the middle of the yard stood the engineer in a leather coat with a
      hood. He was shouting:
    

      "Where's the furniture? There was some good Empire furniture, pictures,
      vases. There's nothing left! Damn it, I bought the place with the
      furniture!"
    

      Near him stood Moissey, Mrs. Cheprakov's bailiff, fumbling with his cap; a
      lank fellow of about twenty-five, with a spotty face and little, impudent
      eyes; one side of his face was larger than the other as though he had been
      lain on.
    

      "Yes, Right Honourable Sir, you bought it without the furniture," he said
      sheepishly. "I remember that clearly."
    

      "Silence!" shouted the engineer, going red in the face, and beginning to
      shake, and his shout echoed through the garden.
    

      XII
    

      When I was busy in the garden or the yard, Moissey would stand with his
      hands behind his back and stare at me impertinently with his little eyes.
      And this used to irritate me to such an extent that I would put aside my
      work and go away.
    

      We learned from Stiepan that Moissey had been Mrs. Cheprakov's lover. I
      noticed that when people went to her for money they used to apply to
      Moissey first, and once I saw a peasant, a charcoal-burner, black all
      over, grovel at his feet. Sometimes after a whispered conversation Moissey
      would hand over the money himself without saying anything to his mistress,
      from which I concluded that the transaction was settled on his own
      account.
    

      He used to shoot in our garden, under our very windows, steal food from
      our larder, borrow our horses without leave, and we were furious, feeling
      that Dubechnia was no longer ours, and Masha used to go pale and say:
    

      "Have we to live another year and a half with these creatures?"
    

      Ivan Cheprakov, the son, was a guard on the railway. During the winter he
      got very thin and weak, so that he got drunk on one glass of vodka, and
      felt cold out of the sun. He hated wearing his guard's uniform and was
      ashamed of it, but found his job profitable because he could steal candles
      and sell them. My new position gave him a mixed feeling of astonishment,
      envy, and vague hope that something of the sort might happen to him. He
      used to follow Masha with admiring eyes, and to ask me what I had for
      dinner nowadays, and his ugly, emaciated face used to wear a sweet, sad
      expression, and he used to twitch his fingers as though he could feel my
      happiness with them.
    

      "I say, Little Profit," he would say excitedly, lighting and relighting
      his cigarette; he always made a mess wherever he stood because he used to
      waste a whole box of matches on one cigarette. "I say, my life is about as
      beastly as it could be. Every little squirt of a soldier can shout: 'Here
      guard! Here!' I have such a lot in the trains and you know, mine's a
      rotten life! My mother has ruined me! I heard a doctor say in the train,
      if the parents are loose, their children become drunkards or criminals.
      That's it."
    

      Once he came staggering into the yard. His eyes wandered aimlessly and he
      breathed heavily; he laughed and cried, and said something in a kind of
      frenzy, and through his thickly uttered words I could only hear: "My
      mother? Where is my mother?" and he wailed like a child crying, because it
      has lost its mother in a crowd. I led him away into the garden and laid
      him down under a tree, and all that day and through the night Masha and I
      took it in turns to stay with him. He was sick and Masha looked with
      disgust at his pale, wet face and said:
    

      "Are we to have these creatures on the place for another year and a half?
      It is awful! Awful!"
    

      And what a lot of trouble the peasants gave us! How many disappointments
      we had at the outset, in the spring, when we so longed to be happy! My
      wife built a school. I designed the school for sixty boys, and the Zemstvo
      Council approved the design, but recommended our building the school at
      Kurilovka, the big village, only three miles away; besides the Kurilovka
      school, where the children of four villages, including that of Dubechnia,
      were taught, was old and inadequate and the floor was so rotten that the
      children were afraid to walk on it. At the end of March Masha, by her own
      desire, was appointed trustee of the Kurilovka school, and at the
      beginning of April we called three parish meetings and persuaded the
      peasants that the school was old and inadequate, and that it was necessary
      to build a new one. A member of the Zemstvo Council and the elementary
      school inspector came down too and addressed them. After each meeting we
      were mobbed and asked for a pail of vodka; we felt stifled in the crowd
      and soon got tired and returned home dissatisfied and rather abashed. At
      last the peasants allotted a site for the school and undertook to cart the
      materials from the town. And as soon as the spring corn was sown, on the
      very first Sunday, carts set out from Kurilovka and Dubechnia to fetch the
      bricks for the foundations. They went at dawn and returned late in the
      evening. The peasants were drunk and said they were tired out.
    

      The rain and the cold continued, as though deliberately, all through May.
      The roads were spoiled and deep in mud. When the carts came from town they
      usually drove to our horror, into our yard! A horse would appear in the
      gate, straddling its fore legs, with its big belly heaving; before it came
      into the yard it would strain and heave and after it would come a ten-yard
      beam in a four-wheeled wagon, wet and slimy; alongside it, wrapped up to
      keep the rain out, never looking where he was going and splashing through
      the puddles, a peasant would walk with the skirt of his coat tucked up in
      his belt. Another cart would appear with planks; then a third with a beam;
      then a fourth ... and the yard in front of the house would gradually be
      blocked up with horses, beams, planks. Peasants, men and women with their
      heads wrapped up and their skirts tucked up, would stare morosely at our
      windows, kick up a row and insist on the lady of the house coming out to
      them; and they would curse and swear. And in a corner Moissey would stand,
      and it seemed to us that he delighted in our discomfiture.
    

      "We won't cart any more!" the peasants shouted. "We are tired to death!
      Let her go and cart it herself!"
    

      Pale and scared, thinking they would any minute break into the house,
      Masha would send them money for a pail of vodka; after which the noise
      would die down and the long beams would go jolting out of the yard.
    

      When I went to look at the building my wife would get agitated and say:
    

      "The peasants are furious. They might do something to you. No. Wait. I'll
      go with you."
    

      We used to drive over to Kurilovka together and then the carpenters would
      ask for tips. The framework was ready for the foundations to be laid, but
      the masons never came and when at last the masons did come it was apparent
      that there was no sand; somehow it had been forgotten that sand was
      wanted. Taking advantage of our helplessness, the peasants asked thirty
      copecks a load, although it was less than a quarter of a mile from the
      building to the river where the sand was to be fetched, and more than five
      hundred loads were needed. There were endless misunderstandings, wrangles,
      and continual begging. My wife was indignant and the building contractor,
      Petrov, an old man of seventy, took her by the hand and said:
    

      "You look here! Look here! Just get me sand and I'll find ten men and have
      the work done in two days. Look here!"
    

      Sand was brought, but two, four days, a week passed and still there yawned
      a ditch where the foundations were to be.
    

      "I shall go mad," cried my wife furiously. "What wretches they are! What
      wretches!"
    

      During these disturbances Victor Ivanich used to come and see us. He used
      to bring hampers of wine and dainties, and eat for a long time, and then
      go to sleep on the terrace and snore so that the labourers shook their
      heads and said:
    

      "He's all right!"
    

      Masha took no pleasure in his visits. She did not believe in him, and yet
      she used to ask his advice; when, after a sound sleep after dinner, he got
      up out of humour, and spoke disparagingly of our domestic arrangements,
      and said he was sorry he had ever bought Dubechnia which had cost him so
      much, and poor Masha looked miserably anxious and complained to him, he
      would yawn and say the peasants ought to be flogged.
    

      He called our marriage and the life we were living a comedy, and used to
      say it was a caprice, a whimsy.
    

      "She did the same sort of thing once before," he told me. "She fancied
      herself as an opera singer, and ran away from me. It took me two months to
      find her, and my dear fellow, I wasted a thousand roubles on telegrams
      alone."
    

      He had dropped calling me a sectarian or the House-painter; and no longer
      approved of my life as a working man, but he used to say:
    

      "You are a queer fish! An abnormality. I don't venture to prophesy, but
      you will end badly!"
    

      Masha slept poorly at nights and would sit by the window of our bedroom
      thinking. She no longer laughed and made faces at supper. I suffered, and
      when it rained, every drop cut into my heart like a bullet, and I could
      have gone on my knees to Masha and apologised for the weather. When the
      peasants made a row in the yard, I felt that it was my fault. I would sit
      for hours in one place, thinking only how splendid and how wonderful Masha
      was. I loved her passionately, and I was enraptured by everything she did
      and said. Her taste was for quiet indoor occupation; she loved to read for
      hours and to study; she who knew about farm-work only from books,
      surprised us all by her knowledge and the advice she gave was always
      useful, and when applied was never in vain. And in addition she had the
      fineness, the taste, and the good sense, the very sound sense which only
      very well-bred people possess!
    

      To such a woman, with her healthy, orderly mind, the chaotic environment
      with its petty cares and dirty tittle-tattle, in which we lived, was very
      painful. I could see that, and I, too, could not sleep at night. My brain
      whirled and I could hardly choke back my tears. I tossed about, not
      knowing what to do.
    

      I used to rush to town and bring Masha books, newspapers, sweets, flowers,
      and I used to go fishing with Stiepan, dragging for hours, neck-deep in
      cold water, in the rain, to catch an eel by way of varying our fare. I
      used humbly to ask the peasants not to shout, and I gave them vodka,
      bribed them, promised them anything they asked. And what a lot of other
      foolish things I did!
    

      At last the rain stopped. The earth dried up. I used to get up in the
      morning and go into the garden—dew shining on the flowers, birds and
      insects shrilling, not a cloud in the sky, and the garden, the meadow, the
      river were so beautiful, perfect but for the memory of the peasants and
      the carts and the engineer. Masha and I used to drive out in a car to see
      how the oats were coming on. She drove and I sat behind; her shoulders
      were always a little hunched, and the wind would play with her hair.
    

      "Keep to the right!" she shouted to the passers-by.
    

      "You are like a coachman!" I once said to her.
    

      "Perhaps. My grandfather, my father's father, was a coachman. Didn't you
      know?" she asked, turning round, and immediately she began to mimic the
      way the coachmen shout and sing.
    

      "Thank God!" I thought, as I listened to her. "Thank God!"
    

      And again I remember the peasants, the carts, the engineer....
    

      XIII
    

      Doctor Blagovo came over on a bicycle. My sister began to come often. Once
      more we talked of manual labour and progress, and the mysterious Cross
      awaiting humanity in the remote future. The doctor did not like our life,
      because it interfered with our discussions and he said it was unworthy of
      a free man to plough, and reap, and breed cattle, and that in time all
      such elementary forms of the struggle for existence would be left to
      animals and machines, while men would devote themselves exclusively to
      scientific investigation. And my sister always asked me to let her go home
      earlier, and if she stayed late, or for the night, she was greatly
      distressed.
    

      "Good gracious, what a baby you are," Masha used to say reproachfully. "It
      is quite ridiculous."
    

      "Yes, it is absurd," my sister would agree. "I admit it is absurd, but
      what can I do if I have not the power to control myself. It always seems
      to me that I am doing wrong."
    

      During the haymaking my body, not being used to it, ached all over;
      sitting on the terrace in the evening, I would suddenly fall asleep and
      they would all laugh at me. They would wake me up and make me sit down to
      supper. I would be overcome with drowsiness and in a stupor saw lights,
      faces, plates, and heard voices without understanding what they were
      saying. And I used to get up early in the morning and take my scythe, or
      go to the school and work there all day.
    

      When I was at home on holidays I noticed that my wife and sister were
      hiding something from me and even seemed to be avoiding me. My wife was
      tender with me as always, but she had some new thought of her own which
      she did not communicate to me. Certainly her exasperation with the
      peasants had increased and life was growing harder and harder for her, but
      she no longer complained to me. She talked more readily to the doctor than
      to me, and I could not understand why.
    

      It was the custom in our province for the labourers to come to the farm in
      the evenings to be treated to vodka, even the girls having a glass. We did
      not keep the custom; the haymakers and the women used to come into the
      yard and stay until late in the evening, waiting for vodka, and then they
      went away cursing. And then Masha used to frown and relapse into silence
      or whisper irritably to the doctor:
    

      "Savages! Barbarians!"
    

      Newcomers to the villages were received ungraciously, almost with
      hostility; like new arrivals at a school. At first we were looked upon as
      foolish, soft-headed people who had bought the estate because we did not
      know what to do with our money. We were laughed at. The peasants grazed
      their cattle in our pasture and even in our garden, drove our cows and
      horses into the village and then came and asked for compensation. The
      whole village used to come into our yard and declare loudly that in mowing
      we had cut the border of common land which did not belong to us; and as we
      did not know our boundaries exactly we used to take their word for it and
      pay a fine. But afterward it appeared that we had been in the right. They
      used to bark the young lime-trees in our woods. A Dubechnia peasant, a
      money-lender, who sold vodka without a licence, bribed our labourers to
      help him cheat us in the most treacherous way; he substituted old wheels
      for the new on our wagons, stole our ploughing yokes and sold them back to
      us, and so on. But worst of all was the building at Kurilovka. There the
      women at night stole planks, bricks, tiles, iron; the bailiff and his
      assistants made a search; the women were each fined two roubles by the
      village council, and then the whole lot of them got drunk on the money.
    

      When Masha found out, she would say to the doctor and my sister:
    

      "What beasts! It is horrible! Horrible!"
    

      And more than once I heard her say she was sorry she had decided to build
      the school.
    

      "You must understand," the doctor tried to point out, "that if you build a
      school or undertake any good work, it is not for the peasants, but for the
      sake of culture and the future. The worse the peasants are the more reason
      there is for building a school. Do understand!"
    

      There was a loss of confidence in his voice, and it seemed to me that he
      hated the peasants as much as Masha.
    

      Masha used often to go to the mill with my sister and they would say
      jokingly that they were going to have a look at Stiepan because he was so
      handsome. Stiepan it appeared was reserved and silent only with men, and
      in the company of women was free and talkative. Once when I went down to
      the river to bathe I involuntarily overheard a conversation. Masha and
      Cleopatra, both in white, were sitting on the bank under the broad shade
      of a willow and Stiepan was standing near with his hands behind his back,
      saying:
    

      "But are peasants human beings? Not they; they are, excuse me, brutes,
      beasts, and thieves. What does a peasant's life consist of? Eating and
      drinking, crying for cheaper food, bawling in taverns, without decent
      conversation, or behaviour or manners. Just an ignorant beast! He lives in
      filth, his wife and children live in filth; he sleeps in his clothes;
      takes the potatoes out of the soup with his fingers, drinks down a black
      beetle with his kvass—because he won't trouble to fish it
      out!"
    

      "It is because of their poverty!" protested my sister.
    

      "What poverty? Of course there is want, but there are different kinds of
      necessity. If a man is in prison, or is blind, say, or has lost his legs,
      then he is in a bad way and God help him; but if he is at liberty and in
      command of his senses, if he has eyes and hands and strength, then, good
      God, what more does he want? It is lamentable, my lady, ignorance, but not
      poverty. If you kind people, with your education, out of charity try to
      help him, then he will spend your money in drink, like the swine he is, or
      worse still, he will open a tavern and begin to rob the people on the
      strength of your money. You say—poverty. But does a rich peasant
      live any better? He lives like a pig, too, excuse me, a clodhopper, a
      blusterer, a big-bellied blockhead, with a swollen red mug—makes me
      want to hit him in the eye, the blackguard. Look at Larion of Dubechnia—he
      is rich, but all the same he barks the trees in your woods just like the
      poor; and he is a foul-mouthed brute, and his children are foul-mouthed,
      and when he is drunk he falls flat in the mud and goes to sleep. They are
      all worthless, my lady. It is just hell to live with them in the village.
      The village sticks in my gizzard, and I thank God, the King of heaven,
      that I am well fed and clothed, and that I am a free man; I can live where
      I like, I don't want to live in the village and nobody can force me to do
      it. They say: 'You have a wife.' They say: 'You are obliged to live at
      home with your wife.' Why? I have not sold myself to her."
    

      "Tell me, Stiepan. Did you marry for love?" asked Masha.
    

      "What love is there in a village?" Stiepan answered with a smile. "If you
      want to know, my lady, it is my second marriage. I do not come from
      Kurilovka, but from Zalegosch, and I went to Kurilovka when I married. My
      father did not want to divide the land up between us—there are five
      of us. So I bowed to it and cut adrift and went to another village to my
      wife's family. My first wife died when she was young."
    

      "What did she die of?"
    

      "Foolishness. She used to sit and cry. She was always crying for no reason
      at all and so she wasted away. She used to drink herbs to make herself
      prettier and it must have ruined her inside. And my second wife at
      Kurilovka—what about her? A village woman, a peasant; that's all.
      When the match was being made I was nicely had; I thought she was young,
      nice to look at and clean. Her mother was clean enough, drank coffee and,
      chiefly because they were a clean lot, I got married. Next day we sat down
      to dinner and I told my mother-in-law to fetch me a spoon. She brought me
      a spoon and I saw her wipe it with her finger. So that, thought I, is
      their cleanliness! I lived with them for a year and went away. Perhaps I
      ought to have married a town girl"—he went on after a silence. "They
      say a wife is a helpmate to her husband. What do I want with a helpmate? I
      can look after myself. But you talk to me sensibly and soberly, without
      giggling all the while. He—he—he! What is life without a good
      talk?"
    

      Stiepan suddenly stopped and relapsed into his dreary, monotonous
      "U-lu-lu-lu." That meant that he had noticed me.
    

      Masha used often to visit the mill, she evidently took pleasure in her
      talks with Stiepan; he abused the peasants so sincerely and convincingly—and
      this attracted her to him. When she returned from the mill the idiot who
      looked after the garden used to shout after her:
    

      "Paloshka! Hullo, Paloshka!" And he would bark at her like a dog: "Bow,
      wow!"
    

      And she would stop and stare at him as if she found in the idiot's barking
      an answer to her thought, and perhaps he attracted her as much as
      Stiepan's abuse. And at home she would find some unpleasant news awaiting
      her, as that the village geese had ruined the cabbages in the
      kitchen-garden, or that Larion had stolen the reins, and she would shrug
      her shoulders with a smile and say:
    

      "What can you expect of such people?"
    

      She was exasperated and a fury was gathering in her soul, and I, on the
      other hand, was getting used to the peasants and more and more attracted
      to them. For the most part, they were nervous, irritable, absurd people;
      they were people with suppressed imaginations, ignorant, with a bare, dull
      outlook, always dazed by the same thought of the grey earth, grey days,
      black bread; they were people driven to cunning, but, like birds, they
      only hid their heads behind the trees—they could not reason. They
      did not come to us for the twenty roubles earned by haymaking, but for the
      half-pail of vodka, though they could buy four pails of vodka for the
      twenty roubles. Indeed they were dirty, drunken, and dishonest, but for
      all that one felt that the peasant life as a whole was sound at the core.
      However clumsy and brutal the peasant might look as he followed his
      antiquated plough, and however he might fuddle himself with vodka, still,
      looking at him more closely, one felt that there was something vital and
      important in him, something that was lacking in Masha and the doctor, for
      instance, namely, that he believes that the chief thing on earth is truth,
      that his and everybody's salvation lies in truth, and therefore above all
      else on earth he loves justice. I used to say to my wife that she was
      seeing the stain on the window, but not the glass itself; and she would be
      silent or, like Stiepan, she would hum, "U-lu-lu-lu...." When she, good,
      clever actress that she was, went pale with fury and then harangued the
      doctor in a trembling voice about drunkenness and dishonesty; her
      blindness confounded and appalled me. How could she forget that her
      father, the engineer, drank, drank heavily, and that the money with which
      he bought Dubechnia was acquired by means of a whole series of impudent,
      dishonest swindles? How could she forget?
    

      XIV
    

      And my sister, too, was living with her own private thoughts which she hid
      from me. She used often to sit whispering with Masha. When I went up to
      her, she would shrink away, and her eyes would look guilty and full of
      entreaty. Evidently there was something going on in her soul of which she
      was afraid or ashamed. To avoid meeting me in the garden or being left
      alone with me she clung to Masha and I hardly ever had a chance to talk to
      her except at dinner.
    

      One evening, on my way home from the school, I came quietly through the
      garden. It had already begun to grow dark. Without noticing me or hearing
      footsteps, my sister walked round an old wide-spreading apple-tree,
      perfectly noiselessly like a ghost. She was in black, and walked very
      quickly, up and down, up and down, with her eyes on the ground. An apple
      fell from the tree, she started at the noise, stopped and pressed her
      hands to her temples. At that moment I went up to her.
    

      In an impulse of tenderness, which suddenly came rushing to my heart, with
      tears in my eyes, somehow remembering our mother and our childhood, I took
      hold of her shoulders and kissed her.
    

      "What is the matter?" I asked. "You are suffering. I have seen it for a
      long time now. Tell me, what is the matter?"
    

      "I am afraid...." she murmured, with a shiver.
    

      "What's the matter with you?" I inquired. "For God's sake, be frank!"
    

      "I will, I will be frank. I will tell you the whole truth. It is so hard,
      so painful to conceal anything from you!... Misail, I am in love." She
      went on in a whisper. "Love, love.... I am happy, but I am afraid."
    

      I heard footsteps and Doctor Blagovo appeared among the trees. He was
      wearing a silk shirt and high boots. Clearly they had arranged a
      rendezvous by the apple-tree. When she saw him she flung herself
      impulsively into his arms with a cry of anguish, as though he was being
      taken away from her:
    

      "Vladimir! Vladimir!"
    

      She clung to him, and gazed eagerly at him and only then I noticed how
      thin and pale she had become. It was especially noticeable through her
      lace collar, which I had known for years, for it now hung loosely about
      her slim neck. The doctor was taken aback, but controlled himself at once,
      and said, as he stroked her hair:
    

      "That's enough. Enough!... Why are you so nervous? You see, I have come."
    

      We were silent for a time, bashfully glancing at each other. Then we all
      moved away and I heard the doctor saying to me:
    

      "Civilised life has not yet begun with us. The old console themselves with
      saying that, if there is nothing now, there was something in the forties
      and the sixties; that is all right for the old ones, but we are young and
      our brains are not yet touched with senile decay. We cannot console
      ourselves with such illusions. The beginning of Russia was in 862, and
      civilised Russia, as I understand it, has not yet begun."
    

      But I could not bother about what he was saying. It was very strange, but
      I could not believe that my sister was in love, that she had just been
      walking with her hand on the arm of a stranger and gazing at him tenderly.
      My sister, poor, frightened, timid, downtrodden creature as she was, loved
      a man who was already married and had children! I was full of pity without
      knowing why; the doctor's presence was distasteful to me and I could not
      make out what was to come of such a love.
    

      XV
    

      Masha and I drove over to Kurilovka for the opening of the school.
    

      "Autumn, autumn, autumn...." said Masha, looking about her. Summer had
      passed. There were no birds and only the willows were green.
    

      Yes. Summer had passed. The days were bright and warm, but it was fresh in
      the mornings; the shepherds went out in their sheepskins, and the dew
      never dried all day on the asters in the garden. There were continual
      mournful sounds and it was impossible to tell whether it was a shutter
      creaking on its rusty hinges or the cranes flying—and one felt so
      well and so full of the desire for life!
    

      "Summer has passed...." said Masha. "Now we can both make up our accounts.
      We have worked hard and thought a great deal and we are the better for it—all
      honour and praise to us; we have improved ourselves; but have our
      successes had any perceptible influence on the life around us, have they
      been of any use to a single person? No! Ignorance, dirt, drunkenness, a
      terribly high rate of infant mortality—everything is just as it was,
      and no one is any the better for your having ploughed and sown and my
      having spent money and read books. Evidently we have only worked and
      broadened our minds for ourselves."
    

      I was abashed by such arguments and did not know what to think.
    

      "From beginning to end we have been sincere," I said, "and if a man is
      sincere, he is right."
    

      "Who denies that? We have been right but we have been wrong in our way of
      setting about it. First of all, are not our very ways of living wrong? You
      want to be useful to people, but by the mere fact of buying an estate you
      make it impossible to be so. Further, if you work, dress, and eat like a
      peasant you lend your authority and approval to the clumsy clothes, and
      their dreadful houses and their dirty beards.... On the other hand,
      suppose you work for a long, long time, all you life, and in the end
      obtain some practical results—what will your results amount to, what
      can they do against such elemental forces as wholesale ignorance, hunger,
      cold, and degeneracy? A drop in the ocean! Other methods of fighting are
      necessary, strong, bold, quick! If you want to be useful then you must
      leave the narrow circle of common activity and try to act directly on the
      masses! First of all, you need vigorous, noisy, propaganda. Why are art
      and music, for instance, so much alive and so popular and so powerful?
      Because the musician or the singer influences thousands directly. Art,
      wonderful art!" She looked wistfully at the sky and went on: "Art gives
      wings and carries you far, far away. If you are bored with dirt and
      pettifogging interests, if you are exasperated and outraged and indignant,
      rest and satisfaction are only to be found in beauty."
    

      As we approached Kurilovka the weather was fine, clear, and joyous. In the
      yards the peasants were thrashing and there was a smell of corn and straw.
      Behind the wattled hedges the fruit-trees were reddening and all around
      the trees were red or golden. In the church-tower the bells were ringing,
      the children were carrying ikons to the school and singing the Litany of
      the Virgin. And how clear the air was, and how high the doves soared!
    

      The Te Deum was sung in the schoolroom. Then the Kurilovka peasants
      presented Masha with an ikon, and the Dubechnia peasants gave her a large
      cracknel and a gilt salt-cellar. And Masha began to weep.
    

      "And if we have said anything out of the way or have been discontented,
      please forgive us," said an old peasant, bowing to us both.
    

      As we drove home Masha looked back at the school. The green roof which I
      had painted glistened in the sun, and we could see it for a long time. And
      I felt that Masha's glances were glances of farewell.
    

      XVI
    

      In the evening she got ready to go to town.
    

      She had often been to town lately to stay the night. In her absence I
      could not work, and felt listless and disheartened; our big yard seemed
      dreary, disgusting, and deserted; there were ominous noises in the garden,
      and without her the house, the trees, the horses were no longer "ours."
    

      I never went out but sat all the time at her writing-table among her books
      on farming and agriculture, those deposed favourites, wanted no more,
      which looked out at me so shamefacedly from the bookcase. For hours
      together, while it struck seven, eight, nine, and the autumn night crept
      up as black as soot to the windows, I sat brooding over an old glove of
      hers, or the pen she always used, and her little scissors. I did nothing
      and saw clearly that everything I had done before, ploughing, sowing, and
      felling trees, had only been because she wanted it. And if she told me to
      clean out a well, when I had to stand waist-deep in water, I would go and
      do it, without trying to find out whether the well wanted cleaning or not.
      And now, when she was away, Dubechnia with its squalor, its litter, its
      slamming shutters, with thieves prowling about it day and night, seemed to
      me like a chaos in which work was entirely useless. And why should I work,
      then? Why trouble and worry about the future, when I felt that the ground
      was slipping away from under me, that my position at Dubechnia was hollow,
      that, in a word, the same fate awaited me as had befallen the books on
      agriculture? Oh! what anguish it was at night, in the lonely hours, when I
      lay listening uneasily, as though I expected some one any minute to call
      out that it was time for me to go away. I was not sorry to leave
      Dubechnia, my sorrow was for my love, for which it seemed that autumn had
      already begun. What a tremendous happiness it is to love and to be loved,
      and what a horror it is to feel that you are beginning to topple down from
      that lofty tower!
    

      Masha returned from town toward evening on the following day. She was
      dissatisfied with something, but concealed it and said only: "Why have the
      winter windows been put in? It will be stifling." I opened two of the
      windows. We did not feel like eating, but we sat down and had supper.
    

      "Go and wash your hands," she said. "You smell of putty."
    

      She had brought some new illustrated magazines from town and we both read
      them after supper. They had supplements with fashion-plates and patterns.
      Masha just glanced at them and put them aside to look at them carefully
      later on; but one dress, with a wide, bell-shaped skirt and big sleeves
      interested her, and for a moment she looked at it seriously and
      attentively.
    

      "That's not bad," she said.
    

      "Yes, it would suit you very well," said I. "Very well."
    

      And I admired the dress, only because she liked it, and went on tenderly:
    

      "A wonderful, lovely dress! Lovely, wonderful, Masha. My dear Masha!"
    

      And tears began to drop on the fashion-plate.
    

      "Wonderful Masha...." I murmured. "Dear, darling Masha...."
    

      She went and lay down and I sat still for an hour and looked at the
      illustrations.
    

      "You should not have opened the windows," she called from the bedroom.
      "I'm afraid it will be cold. Look how the wind is blowing in!"
    

      I read the miscellany, about the preparation of cheap fish, and the size
      of the largest diamond in the world. Then I chanced on the picture of the
      dress she had liked and I imagined her at a ball, with a fan, and bare
      shoulders, a brilliant, dazzling figure, well up in music and painting and
      literature, and how insignificant and brief my share in her life seemed to
      be!
    

      Our coming together, our marriage, was only an episode, one of many in the
      life of this lively, highly gifted creature. All the best things in the
      world, as I have said, were at her service, and she had them for nothing;
      even ideas and fashionable intellectual movements served her pleasure, a
      diversion in her existence, and I was only the coachman who drove her from
      one infatuation to another. Now I was no longer necessary to her; she
      would fly away and I should be left alone.
    

      As if in answer to my thoughts a desperate scream suddenly came from the
      yard:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      It was a shrill female voice, and exactly as though it were trying to
      imitate it, the wind also howled dismally in the chimney. Half a minute
      passed and again it came through the sound of the wind, but as though from
      the other end of the yard:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      "Misail, did you hear that?" said my wife in a hushed voice. "Did you
      hear?"
    

      She came out of the bedroom in her nightgown, with her hair down, and
      stood listening and staring out of the dark window.
    

      "Somebody is being murdered!" she muttered. "It only wanted that!"
    

      I took my gun and went out; it was very dark outside; a violent wind was
      blowing so that it was hard to stand up. I walked to the gate and
      listened; the trees were moaning; the wind went whistling through them,
      and in the garden the idiot's dog was howling. Beyond the gate it was
      pitch dark; there was not a light on the railway. And just by the wing,
      where the offices used to be, I suddenly heard a choking cry:
    

      "Mur-der!"
    

      "Who is there?" I called.
    

      Two men were locked in a struggle. One had nearly thrown the other, who
      was resisting with all his might. And both were breathing heavily.
    

      "Let go!" said one of them and I recognised Ivan Cheprakov. It was he who
      had cried out in a thin, falsetto voice. "Let go, damn you, or I'll bite
      your hands!"
    

      The other man I recognised as Moissey. I parted them and could not resist
      hitting Moissey in the face twice. He fell down, then got up, and I struck
      him again.
    

      "He tried to kill me," he muttered. "I caught him creeping to his mother's
      drawer.... I tried to shut him up in the wing for safety."
    

      Cheprakov was drunk and did not recognise me. He stood gasping for breath
      as though trying to get enough wind to shriek again.
    

      I left them and went back to the house. My wife was lying on the bed,
      fully dressed. I told her what had happened in the yard and did not keep
      back the fact that I had struck Moissey.
    

      "Living in the country is horrible," she said. "And what a long night it
      is!"
    

      "Mur-der!" we heard again, a little later.
    

      "I'll go and part them," I said.
    

      "No. Let them kill each other," she said with an expression of disgust.
    

      She lay staring at the ceiling, listening, and I sat near her, not daring
      to speak and feeling that it was my fault that screams of "murder" came
      from the yard and the night was so long.
    

      We were silent and I waited impatiently for the light to peep in at the
      window. And Masha looked as though she had wakened from a long sleep and
      was astonished to find herself, so clever, so educated, so refined, cast
      away in this miserable provincial hole, among a lot of petty, shallow
      people, and to think that she could have so far forgotten herself as to
      have been carried away by one of them and to have been his wife for more
      than half a year. It seemed to me that we were all the same to her—myself,
      Moissey, Cheprakov; all swept together into the drunken, wild scream of
      "murder"—myself, our marriage, our work, and the muddy roads of
      autumn; and when she breathed or stirred to make herself more comfortable
      I could read in her eyes: "Oh, if the morning would come quicker!"
    

      In the morning she went away.
    

      I stayed at Dubechnia for another three days, waiting for her; then I
      moved all our things into one room, locked it, and went to town. When I
      rang the bell at the engineer's, it was evening, and the lamps were alight
      in Great Gentry Street. Pavel told me that nobody was at home; Victor
      Ivanich had gone to Petersburg and Maria Victorovna must be at a rehearsal
      at the Azhoguins'. I remember the excitement with which I went to the
      Azhoguins', and how my heart thumped and sank within me, as I went
      up-stairs and stood for a long while on the landing, not daring to enter
      that temple of the Muses! In the hall, on the table, on the piano, on the
      stage, there were candles burning; all in threes, for the first
      performance was fixed for the thirteenth, and the dress rehearsal was on
      Monday—the unlucky day. A fight against prejudice! All the lovers of
      dramatic art were assembled; the eldest, the middle, and the youngest Miss
      Azhoguin were walking about the stage, reading their parts. Radish was
      standing still in a corner all by himself, with his head against the wall,
      looking at the stage with adoring eyes, waiting for the beginning of the
      rehearsal. Everything was just the same!
    

      I went toward my hostess to greet her, when suddenly everybody began to
      say "Ssh" and to wave their hands to tell me not to make such a noise.
      There was a silence. The top of the piano was raised, a lady sat down,
      screwing up her short-sighted eyes at the music, and Masha stood by the
      piano, dressed up, beautiful, but beautiful in an odd new way, not at all
      like the Masha who used to come to see me at the mill in the spring. She
      began to sing:
    

      "Why do I love thee, straight night?"
    

      It was the first time since I had known her that I had heard her sing. She
      had a fine, rich, powerful voice, and to hear her sing was like eating a
      ripe, sweet-scented melon. She finished the song and was applauded. She
      smiled and looked pleased, made play with her eyes, stared at the music,
      plucked at her dress exactly like a bird which has broken out of its cage
      and preens its wings at liberty. Her hair was combed back over her ears,
      and she had a sly defiant expression on her face, as though she wished to
      challenge us all, or to shout at us, as though we were horses: "Gee up,
      old things!"
    

      And at that moment she must have looked very like her grandfather, the
      coachman.
    

      "You here, too?" she asked, giving me her hand. "Did you hear me sing? How
      did you like it?" And, without waiting for me to answer she went on: "You
      arrived very opportunely. I'm going to Petersburg for a short time
      to-night. May I?"
    

      At midnight I took her to the station. She embraced me tenderly, probably
      out of gratitude, because I did not pester her with useless questions, and
      she promised to write to me, and I held her hands for a long time and
      kissed them, finding it hard to keep back my tears, and not saying a word.
    

      And when the train moved, I stood looking at the receding lights, kissed
      her in my imagination and whispered:
    

      "Masha dear, wonderful Masha!..."
    

      I spent the night at Mikhokhov, at Karpovna's, and in the morning I worked
      with Radish, upholstering the furniture at a rich merchant's, who had
      married his daughter to a doctor.
    

      XVII
    

      On Sunday afternoon my sister came to see me and had tea with me.
    

      "I read a great deal now," she said, showing me the books she had got out
      of the town library on her way. "Thanks to your wife and Vladimir. They
      awakened my self-consciousness. They saved me and have made me feel that I
      am a human being. I used not to sleep at night for worrying: 'What a lot
      of sugar has been wasted during the week.' 'The cucumbers must not be
      oversalted!' I don't sleep now, but I have quite different thoughts. I am
      tormented with the thought that half my life has passed so foolishly and
      half-heartedly. I despise my old life. I am ashamed of it. And I regard my
      father now as an enemy. Oh, how grateful I am to your wife! And Vladimir.
      He is such a wonderful man! They opened my eyes."
    

      "It is not good that you can't sleep," I said.
    

      "You think I am ill? Not a bit. Vladimir sounded me and says I am
      perfectly healthy. But health is not the point. That doesn't matter so
      much.... Tell me, am I right?"
    

      She needed moral support. That was obvious. Masha had gone, Doctor Blagovo
      was in Petersburg, and there was no one except myself in the town, who
      could tell her that she was right. She fixed her eyes on me, trying to
      read my inmost thoughts, and if I were sad in her presence, she always
      took it upon herself and was depressed. I had to be continually on my
      guard, and when she asked me if she was right, I hastened to assure her
      that she was right and that I had a profound respect for her.
    

      "You know, they have given me a part at the Azhoguins'," she went on. "I
      wanted to act. I want to live. I want to drink deep of life; I have no
      talent whatever, and my part is only ten lines, but it is immeasurably
      finer and nobler than pouring out tea five times a day and watching to see
      that the cook does not eat the sugar left over. And most of all I want to
      let father see that I too can protest."
    

      After tea she lay down on my bed and stayed there for some time, with her
      eyes closed, and her face very pale.
    

      "Just weakness!" she said, as she got up. "Vladimir said all town girls
      and women are anæmic from lack of work. What a clever man Vladimir
      is! He is right; wonderfully right! We do need work!"
    

      Two days later she came to rehearsal at the Azhoguins' with her part in
      her hand. She was in black, with a garnet necklace, and a brooch that
      looked at a distance like a pasty, and she had enormous earrings, in each
      of which sparkled a diamond. I felt uneasy when I saw her; I was shocked
      by her lack of taste. The others noticed too that she was unsuitably
      dressed and that her earrings and diamonds were out of place. I saw their
      smiles and heard some one say jokingly:
    

      "Cleopatra of Egypt!"
    

      She was trying to be fashionable, and easy, and assured, and she seemed
      affected and odd. She lost her simplicity and her charm.
    

      "I just told father that I was going to a rehearsal," she began, coming up
      to me, "and he shouted that he would take his blessing from me, and he
      nearly struck me. Fancy," she added, glancing at her part, "I don't know
      my part. I'm sure to make a mistake. Well, the die is cast," she said
      excitedly; "the die is cast."
    

      She felt that all the people were looking at her and were all amazed at
      the important step she had taken and that they were all expecting
      something remarkable from her, and it was impossible to convince her that
      nobody took any notice of such small uninteresting persons as she and I.
    

      She had nothing to do until the third act, and her part, a guest, a
      country gossip, consisted only in standing by the door, as if she were
      overhearing something, and then speaking a short monologue. For at least
      an hour and a half before her cue, while the others were walking, reading,
      having tea, quarrelling, she never left me and kept on mumbling her part,
      and dropping her written copy, imagining that everybody was looking at
      her, and waiting for her to come on, and she patted her hair with a
      trembling hand and said:
    

      "I'm sure to make a mistake.... You don't know how awful I feel! I am as
      terrified as if I were going to the scaffold."
    

      At last her cue came.
    

      "Cleopatra Alexeyevna—your cue!" said the manager.
    

      She walked on to the middle of the stage with an expression of terror on
      her face; she looked ugly and stiff, and for half a minute was speechless,
      perfectly motionless, except for her large earrings which wabbled on
      either side of her face.
    

      "You can read your part, the first time," said some one.
    

      I could see that she was trembling so that she could neither speak nor
      open her part, and that she had entirely forgotten the words and I had
      just made up my mind to go up and say something to her when she suddenly
      dropped down on her knees in the middle of the stage and sobbed loudly.
    

      There was a general stir and uproar. And I stood quite still by the wings,
      shocked by what had happened, not understanding at all, not knowing what
      to do. I saw them lift her up and lead her away. I saw Aniuta Blagovo come
      up to me. I had not seen her in the hall before and she seemed to have
      sprung up from the floor. She was wearing a hat and veil, and as usual
      looked as if she had only dropped in for a minute.
    

      "I told her not to try to act," she said angrily, biting out each word,
      with her cheeks blushing. "It is folly! You ought to have stopped her!"
    

      Mrs. Azhoguin came up in a short jacket with short sleeves. She had
      tobacco ash on her thin, flat bosom.
    

      "My dear, it is too awful!" she said, wringing her hands, and as usual,
      staring into my face. "It is too awful!... Your sister is in a
      condition.... She is going to have a baby! You must take her away at
      once...."
    

      In her agitation she breathed heavily. And behind her, stood her three
      daughters, all thin and flat-chested like herself, and all huddled
      together in their dismay. They were frightened, overwhelmed just as if a
      convict had been caught in the house. What a shame! How awful! And this
      was the family that had been fighting the prejudices and superstitions of
      mankind all their lives; evidently they thought that all the prejudices
      and superstitions of mankind were to be found in burning three candles and
      in the number thirteen, or the unlucky day—Monday.
    

      "I must request ... request ..." Mrs. Azhoguin kept on saying, compressing
      her lips and accentuating the quest. "I must request you to take
      her away."
    

      XVIII
    

      A little later my sister and I were walking along the street. I covered
      her with the skirt of my overcoat; we hurried along through by-streets,
      where there were no lamps, avoiding the passers-by, and it was like a
      flight. She did not weep any more, but stared at me with dry eyes. It was
      about twenty minutes' walk to Mikhokhov, whither I was taking her, and in
      that short time we went over the whole of our lives, and talked over
      everything, and considered the position and pondered....
    

      We decided that we could not stay in the town, and that when I could get
      some money, we would go to some other place. In some of the houses the
      people were asleep already, and in others they were playing cards; we
      hated those houses, were afraid of them, and we talked of the fanaticism,
      callousness, and nullity of these respectable families, these lovers of
      dramatic art whom we had frightened so much, and I wondered how those
      stupid, cruel, slothful, dishonest people were better than the drunken and
      superstitious peasants of Kurilovka, or how they were better than animals,
      which also lose their heads when some accident breaks the monotony of
      their lives, which are limited by their instincts. What would happen to my
      sister if she stayed at home? What moral torture would she have to
      undergo, talking to my father and meeting acquaintances every day? I
      imagined it all and there came into my memory people I had known who had
      been gradually dropped by their friends and relations, and I remember the
      tortured dogs which had gone mad, and sparrows plucked alive and thrown
      into the water—and a whole long series of dull, protracted
      sufferings which I had seen going on in the town since my childhood; and I
      could not conceive what the sixty thousand inhabitants lived for, why they
      read the Bible, why they prayed, why they skimmed books and magazines.
      What good was all that had been written and said, if they were in the same
      spiritual darkness and had the same hatred of freedom, as if they were
      living hundreds and hundreds of years ago? The builder spends his time
      putting up houses all over the town, and yet would go down to his grave
      saying "galdary" for "gallery." And the sixty thousand inhabitants had
      read and heard of truth and mercy and freedom for generations, but to the
      bitter end they would go on lying from morning to night, tormenting one
      another, fearing and hating freedom as a deadly enemy.
    

      "And so, my fate is decided," said my sister when we reached home. "After
      what has happened I can never go there again. My God, how good it
      is! I feel at peace."
    

      She lay down at once. Tears shone on her eyelashes, but her expression was
      happy. She slept soundly and softly, and it was clear that her heart was
      easy and that she was at rest. For a long, long time she had not slept so
      well.
    

      So we began to live together. She was always singing and said she felt
      very well, and I took back the books we had borrowed from the library
      unread, because she gave up reading; she only wanted to dream and to talk
      of the future. She would hum as she mended my clothes or helped Karpovna
      with the cooking, or talk of her Vladimir, of his mind, and his goodness,
      and his fine manners, and his extraordinary learning. And I agreed with
      her, though I no longer liked the doctor. She wanted to work, to be
      independent, and to live by herself, and she said she would become a
      school-teacher or a nurse as soon as her health allowed, and she would
      scrub the floors and do her own washing. She loved her unborn baby
      passionately, and she knew already the colour of his eyes and the shape of
      his hands and how he laughed. She liked to talk of his upbringing, and
      since the best man on earth was Vladimir, all her ideas were reduced to
      making the boy as charming as his father. There was no end to her chatter,
      and everything she talked about filled her with a lively joy. Sometimes I,
      too, rejoiced, though I knew not why.
    

      She must have infected me with her dreaminess, for I, too, read nothing
      and just dreamed. In the evenings, in spite of being tired, I used to pace
      up and down the room with my hands in my pockets, talking about Masha.
    

      "When do you think she will return?" I used to ask my sister. "I think
      she'll be back at Christmas. Not later. What is she doing there?"
    

      "If she doesn't write to you, it means she must be coming soon."
    

      "True," I would agree, though I knew very well that there was nothing to
      make Masha return to our town.
    

      I missed her very much, but I could not help deceiving myself and wanted
      others to deceive me. My sister was longing for her doctor, I for Masha,
      and we both laughed and talked and never saw that we were keeping Karpovna
      from sleeping. She would lie on the stove and murmur:
    

      "The samovar tinkled this morning. Tink-led! That bodes nobody any good,
      my merry friends!"
    

      Nobody came to the house except the postman who brought my sister letters
      from the doctor, and Prokofyi, who used to come in sometimes in the
      evening and glance secretly at my sister, and then go into the kitchen and
      say:
    

      "Every class has its ways, and if you're too proud to understand that, the
      worse for you in this vale of tears."
    

      He loved the expression—vale of tears. And—about Christmas
      time—when I was going through the market, he called me into his
      shop, and without giving me his hand, declared that he had some important
      business to discuss. He was red in the face with the frost and with vodka;
      near him by the counter stood Nicolka of the murderous face, holding a
      bloody knife in his hand.
    

      "I want to be blunt with you," began Prokofyi. "This business must not
      happen because, as you know, people will neither forgive you nor us for
      such a vale of tears. Mother, of course, is too dutiful to say anything
      unpleasant to you herself, and tell you that your sister must go somewhere
      else because of her condition, but I don't want it either, because I do
      not approve of her behaviour."
    

      I understood and left the shop. That very day my sister and I went to
      Radish's. We had no money for a cab, so we went on foot; I carried a
      bundle with all our belongings on my back, my sister had nothing in her
      hands, and she was breathless and kept coughing and asking if we would
      soon be there.
    

      XIX
    

      At last there came a letter from Masha.
    

      "My dear, kind M. A.," she wrote, "my brave, sweet angel, as the old
      painter calls you, good-bye. I am going to America with my father for the
      exhibition. In a few days I shall be on the ocean—so far from
      Dubechnia. It is awful to think of! It is vast and open like the sky and I
      long for it and freedom. I rejoice and dance about and you see how
      incoherent my letter is. My dear Misail, give me my freedom. Quick, tear
      the thread which still holds and binds us. My meeting and knowing you was
      a ray from heaven, which brightened my existence. But, you know, my
      becoming your wife was a mistake, and the knowledge of the mistake weighs
      me down, and I implore you on my knees, my dear, generous friend, quick—quick—before
      I go over the sea—wire that you will agree to correct our mutual
      mistake, remove then the only burden on my wings, and my father, who will
      be responsible for the whole business, has promised me not to overwhelm
      you with formalities. So, then, I am free of the whole world? Yes?
    

      "Be happy. God bless you. Forgive my wickedness.
    

      "I am alive and well. I am squandering money on all sorts of follies, and
      every minute I thank God that such a wicked woman as I am has no children.
      I am singing and I am a success, but it is not a passing whim. No. It is
      my haven, my convent cell where I go for rest. King David had a ring with
      an inscription: 'Everything passes.' When one is sad, these words make one
      cheerful; and when one is cheerful, they make one sad. And I have got a
      ring with the words written in Hebrew, and this talisman will keep me from
      losing my heart and head. Or does one need nothing but consciousness of
      freedom, because, when one is free, one wants nothing, nothing, nothing.
      Snap the thread then. I embrace you and your sister warmly. Forgive and
      forget your M."
    

      My sister had one room. Radish, who had been ill and was recovering, was
      in the other. Just as I received this letter, my sister went into the
      painter's room and sat by his side and began to read to him. She read
      Ostrovsky or Gogol to him every day, and he used to listen, staring
      straight in front of him, never laughing, shaking his head, and every now
      and then muttering to himself:
    

      "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"
    

      If there was anything ugly in what she read, he would say vehemently,
      pointing to the book:
    

      "There it is! Lies! That's what lies do!"
    

      Stories used to attract him by their contents as well as by their moral
      and their skilfully complicated plot, and he used to marvel at him,
      though he never called him by his name.
    

      "How well he has managed it."
    

      Now my sister read a page quickly and then stopped, because her breath
      failed her. Radish held her hand, and moving his dry lips he said in a
      hoarse, hardly audible voice:
    

      "The soul of the righteous is white and smooth as chalk; and the soul of
      the sinner is as a pumice-stone. The soul of the righteous is clear oil,
      and the soul of the sinner is coal-tar. We must work and sorrow and pity,"
      he went on. "And if a man does not work and sorrow he will not enter the
      kingdom of heaven. Woe, woe to the well fed, woe to the strong, woe to the
      rich, woe to the usurers! They will not see the kingdom of heaven. Grubs
      eat grass, rust eats iron...."
    

      "And lies devour the soul," said my sister, laughing.
    

      I read the letter once more. At that moment the soldier came into the
      kitchen who had brought in twice a week, without saying from whom, tea,
      French bread, and pigeons, all smelling of scent. I had no work and used
      to sit at home for days together, and probably the person who sent us the
      bread knew that we were in want.
    

      I heard my sister talking to the soldier and laughing merrily. Then she
      lay down and ate some bread and said to me:
    

      "When you wanted to get away from the office and become a house-painter,
      Aniuta Blagovo and I knew from the very beginning that you were right, but
      we were afraid to say so. Tell me what power is it that keeps us from
      saying what we feel? There's Aniuta Blagovo. She loves you, adores you,
      and she knows that you are right. She loves me, too, like a sister, and
      she knows that I am right, and in her heart she envies me, but some power
      prevents her coming to see us. She avoids us. She is afraid."
    

      My sister folded her hands across her bosom and said rapturously:
    

      "If you only knew how she loves you! She confessed it to me and to no one
      else, very hesitatingly, in the dark. She used to take me out into the
      garden, into the dark, and begin to tell me in a whisper how dear you were
      to her. You will see that she will never marry because she loves you. Are
      you sorry for her?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "It was she sent the bread. She is funny. Why should she hide herself? I
      used to be silly and stupid, but I left all that and I am not afraid of
      any one, and I think and say aloud what I like—and I am happy. When
      I lived at home I had no notion of happiness, and now I would not change
      places with a queen."
    

      Doctor Blagovo came. He had got his diploma and was now living in the
      town, at his father's, taking a rest. After which he said he would go back
      to Petersburg. He wanted to devote himself to vaccination against typhus,
      and, I believe, cholera; he wanted to go abroad to increase his knowledge
      and then to become a University professor. He had already left the army
      and wore serge clothes, with well-cut coats, wide trousers, and expensive
      ties. My sister was enraptured with his pins and studs and his red-silk
      handkerchief, which, out of swagger, he wore in his outside breast-pocket.
      Once, when we had nothing to do, she and I fell to counting up his suits
      and came to the conclusion that he must have at least ten. It was clear
      that he still loved my sister, but never once, even in joke, did he talk
      of taking her to Petersburg or abroad with him, and I could not imagine
      what would happen to her if she lived, or what was to become of her child.
      But she was happy in her dreams and would not think seriously of the
      future. She said he could go wherever he liked and even cast her aside, if
      only he were happy himself, and what had been was enough for her.
    

      Usually when he came to see us he would sound her very carefully, and ask
      her to drink some milk with some medicine in it. He did so now. He sounded
      her and made her drink a glass of milk, and the room began to smell of
      creosote.
    

      "That's a good girl," he said, taking the glass from her. "You must not
      talk much, and you have been chattering like a magpie lately. Please, be
      quiet."
    

      She began to laugh and he came into Radish's room, where I was sitting,
      and tapped me affectionately on the shoulder.
    

      "Well, old man, how are you?" he asked, bending over the patient.
    

      "Sir," said Radish, only just moving his lips. "Sir, I make so bold.... We
      are all in the hands of God, and we must all die.... Let me tell you the
      truth, sir.... You will never enter the kingdom of heaven."
    

      And suddenly I lost consciousness and was caught up into a dream: it was
      winter, at night, and I was standing in the yard of the slaughter-house
      with Prokofyi by my side, smelling of pepper-brandy; I pulled myself
      together and rubbed my eyes and then I seemed to be going to the
      governor's for an explanation. Nothing of the kind ever happened to me,
      before or after, and I can only explain these strange dreams like
      memories, by ascribing them to overstrain of the nerves. I lived again
      through the scene in the slaughter-house and the conversation with the
      governor, and at the same time I was conscious of its unreality.
    

      When I came to myself I saw that I was not at home, but standing with the
      doctor by a lamp in the street.
    

      "It is sad, sad," he was saying with tears running down his cheeks. "She
      is happy and always laughing and full of hope. But, poor darling, her
      condition is hopeless. Old Radish hates me and keeps trying to make me
      understand that I have wronged her. In his way he is right, but I have my
      point of view, too, and I do not repent of what has happened. It is
      necessary to love. We must all love. That's true, isn't it? Without love
      there would be no life, and a man who avoids and fears love is not free."
    

      We gradually passed to other subjects. He began to speak of science and
      his dissertation which had been very well received in Petersburg. He spoke
      enthusiastically and thought no more of my sister, or of his going, or of
      myself. Life was carrying him away. She has America and a ring with an
      inscription, I thought, and he has his medical degree and his scientific
      career, and my sister and I are left with the past.
    

      When we parted I stood beneath the lamp and read my letter again. And I
      remembered vividly how she came to me at the mill that spring morning and
      lay down and covered herself with my fur coat—pretending to be just
      a peasant woman. And another time—also in the early morning—when
      we pulled the bow-net out of the water, and the willows on the bank
      showered great drops of water on us and we laughed....
    

      All was dark in our house in Great Gentry Street. I climbed the fence,
      and, as I used to do in old days, I went into the kitchen by the back door
      to get a little lamp. There was nobody in the kitchen. On the stove the
      samovar was singing merrily, all ready for my father. "Who pours out my
      father's tea now?" I thought. I took the lamp and went on to the shed and
      made a bed of old newspapers and lay down. The nails in the wall looked
      ominous as before and their shadows flickered. It was cold. I thought I
      saw my sister coming in with my supper, but I remembered at once that she
      was ill at Radish's, and it seemed strange to me that I should have
      climbed the fence and be lying in the cold shed. My mind was blurred and
      filled with fantastic imaginations.
    

      A bell rang; sounds familiar from childhood; first the wire rustled along
      the wall, and then there was a short, melancholy tinkle in the kitchen. It
      was my father returning from the club. I got up and went into the kitchen.
      Akhsinya, the cook, clapped her hands when she saw me and began to cry:
    

      "Oh, my dear," she said in a whisper. "Oh, my dear! My God!"
    

      And in her agitation she began to pluck at her apron. On the window-sill
      were two large bottles of berries soaking in vodka. I poured out a cup and
      gulped it down, for I was very thirsty. Akhsinya had just scrubbed the
      table and the chairs, and the kitchen had the good smell which kitchens
      always have when the cook is clean and tidy. This smell and the trilling
      of the cricket used to entice us into the kitchen when we were children,
      and there we used to be told fairy-tales, and we played at kings and
      queens....
    

      "And where is Cleopatra?" asked Akhsinya hurriedly, breathlessly. "And
      where is your hat, sir? And they say your wife has gone to Petersburg."
    

      She had been with us in my mother's time and used to bathe Cleopatra and
      me in a tub, and we were still children to her, and it was her duty to
      correct us. In a quarter of an hour or so she laid bare all her thoughts,
      which she had been storing up in her quiet kitchen all the time I had been
      away. She said the doctor ought to be made to marry Cleopatra—we
      would only have to frighten him a bit and make him send in a nicely
      written application, and then the archbishop would dissolve his first
      marriage, and it would be a good thing to sell Dubechnia without saying
      anything to my wife, and to bank the money in my own name; and if my
      sister and I went on our knees to our father and asked him nicely, then
      perhaps he would forgive us; and we ought to pray to the Holy Mother to
      intercede for us....
    

      "Now, sir, go and talk to him," she said, when we heard my father's cough.
      "Go, speak to him, and beg his pardon. He won't bite your head off."
    

      I went in. My father was sitting at his desk working on the plan of a
      bungalow with Gothic windows and a stumpy tower like the lookout of a
      fire-station—an immensely stiff and inartistic design. As I entered
      the study I stood so that I could not help seeing the plan. I did not know
      why I had come to my father, but I remember that when I saw his thin face,
      red neck, and his shadow on the wall, I wanted to throw my arms round him
      and, as Akhsinya had bid me, to beg his pardon humbly; but the sight of
      the bungalow with the Gothic windows and the stumpy tower stopped me.
    

      "Good evening," I said.
    

      He glanced at me and at once cast his eyes down on his plan.
    

      "What do you want?" he asked after a while.
    

      "I came to tell you that my sister is very ill. She is dying," I said
      dully.
    

      "Well?" My father sighed, took off his spectacles and laid them on the
      table. "As you have sown, so you must reap. I want you to remember how you
      came to me two years ago, and on this very spot I asked you to give up
      your delusions, and I reminded you of your honour, your duty, your
      obligations to your ancestors, whose traditions must be kept sacred. Did
      you listen to me? You spurned my advice and clung to your wicked opinions;
      furthermore, you dragged your sister into your abominable delusions and
      brought about her downfall and her shame. Now you are both suffering for
      it. As you have sown, so you must reap."
    

      He paced up and down the study as he spoke. Probably he thought that I had
      come to him to admit that I was wrong, and probably he was waiting for me
      to ask his help for my sister and myself. I was cold, but I shook as
      though I were in a fever, and I spoke with difficulty in a hoarse voice.
    

      "And I must ask you to remember," I said, "that on this very spot I
      implored you to try to understand me, to reflect, and to think what we
      were living for and to what end, and your answer was to talk about my
      ancestors and my grandfather who wrote verses. Now you are told that your
      only daughter is in a hopeless condition and you talk of ancestors and
      traditions!... And you can maintain such frivolity when death is near and
      you have only five or ten years left to live!"
    

      "Why did you come here?" asked my father sternly, evidently affronted at
      my reproaching him with frivolity.
    

      "I don't know. I love you. I am more sorry than I can say that we are so
      far apart. That is why I came. I still love you, but my sister has finally
      broken with you. She does not forgive you and will never forgive you. Your
      very name fills her with hatred of her past life."
    

      "And who is to blame?" cried my father. "You, you scoundrel!"
    

      "Yes. Say that I am to blame," I said. "I admit that I am to blame for
      many things, but why is your life, which you have tried to force on us, so
      tedious and frigid, and ungracious, why are there no people in any of the
      houses you have built during the last thirty years from whom I could learn
      how to live and how to avoid such suffering? These houses of yours are
      infernal dungeons in which mothers and daughters are persecuted, children
      are tortured.... My poor mother! My unhappy sister! One needs to drug
      oneself with vodka, cards, scandal; cringe, play the hypocrite, and go on
      year after year designing rotten houses, not to see the horror that lurks
      in them. Our town has been in existence for hundreds of years, and during
      the whole of that time it has not given the country one useful man—not
      one! You have strangled in embryo everything that was alive and joyous! A
      town of shopkeepers, publicans, clerks, and hypocrites, an aimless, futile
      town, and not a soul would be the worse if it were suddenly razed to the
      ground."
    

      "I don't want to hear you, you scoundrel," said my father, taking a ruler
      from his desk. "You are drunk! You dare come into your father's presence
      in such a state! I tell you for the last time, and you can tell this to
      your strumpet of a sister, that you will get nothing from me. I have torn
      my disobedient children out of my heart, and if they suffer through their
      disobedience and obstinacy I have no pity for them. You may go back where
      you came from! God has been pleased to punish me through you. I will
      humbly bear my punishment and, like Job, I find consolation in suffering
      and unceasing toil. You shall not cross my threshold until you have mended
      your ways. I am a just man, and everything I say is practical good sense,
      and if you had any regard for yourself, you would remember what I have
      said, and what I am saying now."
    

      I threw up my hands and went out; I do not remember what happened that
      night or next day.
    

      They say that I went staggering through the street without a hat, singing
      aloud, with crowds of little boys shouting after me:
    

      "Little Profit! Little Profit!"
    

      XX
    

      If I wanted to order a ring, I would have it inscribed: "Nothing passes."
      I believe that nothing passes without leaving some trace, and that every
      little step has some meaning for the present and the future life.
    

      What I lived through was not in vain. My great misfortunes, my patience,
      moved the hearts of the people of the town and they no longer call me
      "Little Profit," they no longer laugh at me and throw water over me as I
      walk through the market. They got used to my being a working man and see
      nothing strange in my carrying paint-pots and glazing windows; on the
      contrary, they give me orders, and I am considered a good workman and the
      best contractor, after Radish, who, though he recovered and still paints
      the cupolas of the church without scaffolding, is not strong enough to
      manage the men, and I have taken his place and go about the town touting
      for orders, and take on and sack the men, and lend money at exorbitant
      interest. And now that I am a contractor I can understand how it is
      possible to spend several days hunting through the town for slaters to
      carry out a trifling order. People are polite to me, and address me
      respectfully and give me tea in the houses where I work, and send the
      servant to ask me if I would like dinner. Children and girls often come
      and watch me with curious, sad eyes.
    

      Once I was working in the governor's garden, painting the summer-house
      marble. The governor came into the summer-house, and having nothing better
      to do, began to talk to me, and I reminded him how he had once sent for me
      to caution me. For a moment he stared at my face, opened his mouth like a
      round O, waved his hands, and said:
    

      "I don't remember."
    

      I am growing old, taciturn, crotchety, strict; I seldom laugh, and people
      say I am growing like Radish, and, like him, I bore the men with my
      aimless moralising.
    

      Maria Victorovna, my late wife, lives abroad, and her father is making a
      railway somewhere in the Eastern provinces and buying land there. Doctor
      Blagovo is also abroad. Dubechnia has passed to Mrs. Cheprakov, who bought
      it from the engineer after haggling him into a twenty-per-cent reduction
      in the price. Moissey walks about in a bowler hat; he often drives into
      town in a trap and stops outside the bank. People say he has already
      bought an estate on a mortgage, and is always inquiring at the bank about
      Dubechnia, which he also intends to buy. Poor Ivan Cheprakov used to hang
      about the town, doing nothing and drinking. I tried to give him a job in
      our business, and for a time he worked with us painting roofs and glazing,
      and he rather took to it, and, like a regular house-painter, he stole the
      oil, and asked for tips, and got drunk. But it soon bored him. He got
      tired of it and went back to Dubechnia, and some time later I was told by
      the peasants that he had been inciting them to kill Moissey one night and
      rob Mrs. Cheprakov.
    

      My father has got very old and bent, and just takes a little walk in the
      evening near his house.
    

      When we had the cholera, Prokofyi cured the shopkeepers with pepper-brandy
      and tar and took money for it, and as I read in the newspaper, he was
      flogged for libelling the doctors as he sat in his shop. His boy Nicolka
      died of cholera. Karpovna is still alive, and still loves and fears her
      Prokofyi. Whenever she sees me she sadly shakes her head and says with a
      sigh:
    

      "Poor thing. You are lost!"
    

      On week-days I am busy from early morning till late at night. And on
      Sundays and holidays I take my little niece (my sister expected a boy, but
      a girl was born) and go with her to the cemetery, where I stand or sit and
      look at the grave of my dear one, and tell the child that her mother is
      lying there.
    

      Sometimes I find Aniuta Blagovo by the grave. We greet each other and
      stand silently, or we talk of Cleopatra, and the child, and the sadness of
      this life. Then we leave the cemetery and walk in silence and she lags
      behind—on purpose, to avoid staying with me. The little girl,
      joyful, happy, with her eyes half-closed against the brilliant sunlight,
      laughs and holds out her little hands to her, and we stop and together we
      fondle the darling child.
    

      And when we reach the town, Aniuta Blagovo, blushing and agitated, says
      good-bye, and walks on alone, serious and circumspect.... And, to look at
      her, none of the passers-by could imagine that she had just been walking
      by my side and even fondling the child.
    



The Bet and Other Stories







      I
    

      It was a dark autumn night. The old banker was pacing from corner to
      corner of his study, recalling to his mind the party he gave in the autumn
      fifteen years ago. There were many clever people at the party and much
      interesting conversation. They talked among other things of capital
      punishment. The guests, among them not a few scholars and journalists, for
      the most part disapproved of capital punishment. They found it obsolete as
      a means of punishment, unfitted to a Christian State and immoral. Some of
      them thought that capital punishment should be replaced universally by
      life-imprisonment.
    

      "I don't agree with you," said the host. "I myself have experienced
      neither capital punishment nor life-imprisonment, but if one may judge a
      priori, then in my opinion capital punishment is more moral and more
      humane than imprisonment. Execution kills instantly, life-imprisonment
      kills by degrees. Who is the more humane executioner, one who kills you in
      a few seconds or one who draws the life out of you incessantly, for
      years?"
    

      "They're both equally immoral," remarked one of the guests, "because their
      purpose is the same, to take away life. The State is not God. It has no
      right to take away that which it cannot give back, if it should so
      desire."
    

      Among the company was a lawyer, a young man of about twenty-five. On being
      asked his opinion, he said:
    

      "Capital punishment and life-imprisonment are equally immoral; but if I
      were offered the choice between them, I would certainly choose the second.
      It's better to live somehow than not to live at all."
    

      There ensued a lively discussion. The banker who was then younger and more
      nervous suddenly lost his temper, banged his fist on the table, and
      turning to the young lawyer, cried out:
    

      "It's a lie. I bet you two millions you wouldn't stick in a cell even for
      five years."
    

      "If that's serious," replied the lawyer, "then I bet I'll stay not five
      but fifteen."
    

      "Fifteen! Done!" cried the banker. "Gentlemen, I stake two millions."
    

      "Agreed. You stake two millions, I my freedom," said the lawyer.
    

      So this wild, ridiculous bet came to pass. The banker, who at that time
      had too many millions to count, spoiled and capricious, was beside himself
      with rapture. During supper he said to the lawyer jokingly:
    

      "Come to your senses, young man, before it's too late. Two millions are
      nothing to me, but you stand to lose three or four of the best years of
      your life. I say three or four, because you'll never stick it out any
      longer. Don't forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary is much
      heavier than enforced imprisonment. The idea that you have the right to
      free yourself at any moment will poison the whole of your life in the
      cell. I pity you."
    

      And now the banker pacing from corner to corner, recalled all this and
      asked himself:
    

      "Why did I make this bet? What's the good? The lawyer loses fifteen years
      of his life and I throw away two millions. Will it convince people that
      capital punishment is worse or better than imprisonment for life. No, No!
      all stuff and rubbish. On my part, it was the caprice of a well-fed man;
      on the lawyer's, pure greed of gold."
    

      He recollected further what happened after the evening party. It was
      decided that the lawyer must undergo his imprisonment under the strictest
      observation, in a garden-wing of the banker's house. It was agreed that
      during the period he would be deprived of the right to cross the
      threshold, to see living people, to hear human voices, and to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was permitted to have a musical instrument, to
      read books, to write letters, to drink wine and smoke tobacco. By the
      agreement he could communicate, but only in silence, with the outside
      world through a little window specially constructed for this purpose.
      Everything necessary, books, music, wine, he could receive in any quantity
      by sending a note through the window. The agreement provided for all the
      minutest details, which made the confinement strictly solitary, and it
      obliged the lawyer to remain exactly fifteen years from twelve o'clock of
      November 14th 1870 to twelve o'clock of November 14th 1885. The least
      attempt on his part to violate the conditions, to escape if only for two
      minutes before the time freed the banker from the obligation to pay him
      the two millions.
    

      During the first year of imprisonment, the lawyer, as far as it was
      possible to judge from his short notes, suffered terribly from loneliness
      and boredom. From his wing day and night came the sound of the piano. He
      rejected wine and tobacco. "Wine," he wrote, "excites desires, and desires
      are the chief foes of a prisoner; besides, nothing is more boring than to
      drink good wine alone," and tobacco spoils the air in his room. During the
      first year the lawyer was sent books of a light character; novels with a
      complicated love interest, stories of crime and fantasy, comedies, and so
      on.
    

      In the second year the piano was heard no longer and the lawyer asked only
      for classics. In the fifth year, music was heard again, and the prisoner
      asked for wine. Those who watched him said that during the whole of that
      year he was only eating, drinking, and lying on his bed. He yawned often
      and talked angrily to himself. Books he did not read. Sometimes at nights
      he would sit down to write. He would write for a long time and tear it all
      up in the morning. More than once he was heard to weep.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year, the prisoner began zealously to
      study languages, philosophy, and history. He fell on these subjects so
      hungrily that the banker hardly had time to get books enough for him. In
      the space of four years about six hundred volumes were bought at his
      request. It was while that passion lasted that the banker received the
      following letter from the prisoner: "My dear gaoler, I am writing these
      lines in six languages. Show them to experts. Let them read them. If they
      do not find one single mistake, I beg you to give orders to have a gun
      fired off in the garden. By the noise I shall know that my efforts have
      not been in vain. The geniuses of all ages and countries speak in
      different languages; but in them all burns the same flame. Oh, if you knew
      my heavenly happiness now that I can understand them!" The prisoner's
      desire was fulfilled. Two shots were fired in the garden by the banker's
      order.
    

      Later on, after the tenth year, the lawyer sat immovable before his table
      and read only the New Testament. The banker found it strange that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred erudite volumes, should have
      spent nearly a year in reading one book, easy to understand and by no
      means thick. The New Testament was then replaced by the history of
      religions and theology.
    

      During the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an
      extraordinary amount, quite haphazard. Now he would apply himself to the
      natural sciences, then would read Byron or Shakespeare. Notes used to come
      from him in which he asked to be sent at the same time a book on
      chemistry, a text-book of medicine, a novel, and some treatise on
      philosophy or theology. He read as though he were swimming in the sea
      among the broken pieces of wreckage, and in his desire to save his life
      was eagerly grasping one piece after another.
    

      II
    

      The banker recalled all this, and thought:
    

      "To-morrow at twelve o'clock he receives his freedom. Under the agreement,
      I shall have to pay him two millions. If I pay, it's all over with me. I
      am ruined for ever...."
    

      Fifteen years before he had too many millions to count, but now he was
      afraid to ask himself which he had more of, money or debts. Gambling on
      the Stock-Exchange, risky speculation, and the recklessness of which he
      could not rid himself even in old age, had gradually brought his business
      to decay; and the fearless, self-confident, proud man of business had
      become an ordinary banker, trembling at every rise and fall in the market.
    

      "That cursed bet," murmured the old man clutching his head in despair....
      "Why didn't the man die? He's only forty years old. He will take away my
      last farthing, marry, enjoy life, gamble on the Exchange, and I will look
      on like an envious beggar and hear the same words from him every day: 'I'm
      obliged to you for the happiness of my life. Let me help you.' No, it's
      too much! The only escape from bankruptcy and disgrace—is that the
      man should die."
    

      The clock had just struck three. The banker was listening. In Ike house
      everyone was asleep, and one could hear only the frozen trees whining
      outside the windows. Trying to make no sound, he took out of his safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house. The garden was dark and cold. It was
      raining. A keen damp wind hovered howling over all the garden and gave the
      trees no rest. Though he strained his eyes, the banker could see neither
      the ground, nor the white statues, nor the garden-wing, nor the trees.
      Approaching the place where the garden wing stood, he called the watchman
      twice. There was no answer. Evidently the watchman had taken shelter from
      the bad weather and was now asleep somewhere in the kitchen or the
      greenhouse.
    

      "If I have the courage to fulfil my intention," thought the old man, "the
      suspicion will fall on the watchman first of all."
    

      In the darkness he groped for the stairs and the door and entered the hall
      of the gardenwing, then poked his way into a narrow passage and struck a
      match. Not a soul was there. Someone's bed, with no bedclothes on it,
      stood there, and an iron stove was dark in the corner. The seals on the
      door that led into the prisoner's room were unbroken.
    

      When the match went out, the old man, trembling from agitation, peeped
      into the little window.
    

      In the prisoner's room a candle was burning dim. The prisoner himself sat
      by the table. Only his back, the hair on his head and his hands were
      visible. On the table, the two chairs, the carpet by the table open books
      were strewn.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner never once stirred. Fifteen years
      confinement had taught him to sit motionless. The banker tapped on the
      window with his finger, but the prisoner gave no movement in reply. Then
      the banker cautiously tore the seals from the door and put the key into
      the lock. The rusty lock gave a hoarse groan and the door creaked. The
      banker expected instantly to hear a cry of surprise and the sound of
      steps. Three minutes passed and it was as quiet behind the door as it had
      been before. He made up his mind to enter. Before the table sat a man,
      unlike an ordinary human being. It was a skeleton, with tight-drawn skin,
      with a woman's long curly hair, and a shaggy beard. The colour of his face
      was yellow, of an earthy shade; the cheeks were sunken, the back long and
      narrow, and the hand upon which he leaned his hairy head was so lean and
      skinny that it was painful to look upon. His hair was already silvering
      with grey, and no one who glanced at the senile emaciation of the face
      would have believed that he was only forty years old. On the table, before
      his bended head, lay a sheet of paper on which something was written in a
      tiny hand.
    

      "Poor devil," thought the banker, "he's asleep and probably seeing
      millions in his dreams. I have only to take and throw this half-dead thing
      on the bed, smother him a moment with the pillow, and the most careful
      examination will find no trace of unnatural death. But, first, let us read
      what he has written here."
    

      The banker took the sheet from the table and read:
    

      "To-morrow at twelve o'clock midnight, I shall obtain my freedom and the
      right to mix with people. But before I leave this room and see the sun I
      think it necessary to say a few words to you. On my own clear conscience
      and before God who sees me I declare to you that I despise freedom, life,
      health, and all that your books call the blessings of the world.
    

      "For fifteen years I have diligently studied earthly life. True, I saw
      neither the earth nor the people, but in your books I drank fragrant wine,
      sang songs, hunted deer and wild boar in the forests, loved women.... And
      beautiful women, like clouds ethereal, created by the magic of your poets'
      genius, visited me by night and whispered me wonderful tales, which made
      my head drunken. In your books I climbed the summits of Elbruz and Mont
      Blanc and saw from thence how the sun rose in the morning, and in the
      evening overflowed the sky, the ocean and the mountain ridges with a
      purple gold. I saw from thence how above me lightnings glimmered cleaving
      the clouds; I saw green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, cities; I heard
      syrens singing, and the playing of the pipes of Pan; I touched the wings
      of beautiful devils who came flying to me to speak of God.... In your
      books I cast myself into bottomless abysses, worked miracles, burned
      cities to the ground, preached new religions, conquered whole
      countries....
    

      "Your books gave me wisdom. All that unwearying human thought created in
      the centuries is compressed to a little lump in my skull. I know that I am
      more clever than you all.
    

      "And I despise your books, despise all wordly blessings and wisdom.
      Everything is void, frail, visionary and delusive like a mirage. Though
      you be proud and wise and beautiful, yet will death wipe you from the face
      of the earth like the mice underground; and your posterity, your history,
      and the immortality of your men of genius will be as frozen slag, burnt
      down together with the terrestrial globe.
    

      "You are mad, and gone the wrong way. You take lie for truth and ugliness
      for beauty. You would marvel if by certain conditions there should
      suddenly grow on apple and orange trees, instead of fruit, frogs and
      lizards, and if roses should begin to breathe the odour of a sweating
      horse. So do I marvel at you, who have bartered heaven for earth. I do not
      want to understand you.
    

      "That I may show you in deed my contempt for that by which you live, I
      waive the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise, and which I
      now despise. That I may deprive myself of my right to them, I shall come
      out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
      violate the agreement."
    

      When he had read, the banker put the sheet on the table, kissed the head
      of the strange man, and began to weep. He went out of the wing. Never at
      any other time, not even after his terrible losses on the Exchange, had he
      felt such contempt for himself as now. Coming home, he lay down on his
      bed, but agitation and tears kept him long from sleep....
    

      The next morning the poor watchman came running to him and told him that
      they had seen the man who lived in the wing climbing through the window
      into the garden. He had gone to the gate and disappeared. Together with
      his servants the banker went instantly to the wing and established the
      escape of his prisoner. To avoid unnecessary rumours he took the paper
      with the renunciation from the table and, on his return, locked it in his
      safe.
    





      (FROM AN OLD MAN'S JOURNAL)
    

      I
    

      There lives in Russia an emeritus professor, Nicolai Stiepanovich ...
      privy councillor and knight. He has so many Russian and foreign Orders
      that when he puts them on the students call him "the holy picture." His
      acquaintance is most distinguished. Not a single famous scholar lived or
      died during the last twenty-five or thirty years but he was intimately
      acquainted with him. Now he has no one to be friendly with, but speaking
      of the past the long list of his eminent friends would end with such names
      as Pirogov, Kavelin, and the poet Nekrasov, who bestowed upon him their
      warmest and most sincere friendship. He is a member of all the Russian and
      of three foreign universities, et cetera, et cetera. All this, and a great
      deal besides, forms what is known as my name.
    

      This name of mine is very popular. It is known to every literate person in
      Russia; abroad it is mentioned from professorial chairs with the epithets
      "eminent and esteemed." It is reckoned among those fortunate names which
      to mention in vain or to abuse in public or in the Press is considered a
      mark of bad breeding. Indeed, it should be so; because with my name is
      inseparably associated the idea of a famous, richly gifted, and
      indubitably useful person. I am a steady worker, with the endurance of a
      camel, which is important. I am also endowed with talent, which is still
      more important. In passing, I would add that I am a well-educated, modest,
      and honest fellow. I have never poked my nose into letters or politics,
      never sought popularity in disputes with the ignorant, and made no
      speeches either at dinners or at my colleagues' funerals. Altogether there
      is not a single spot on my learned name, and it has nothing to complain
      of. It is fortunate.
    

      The bearer of this name, that is myself, is a man of sixty-two, with a
      bald head, false teeth and an incurable tic. My name is as brilliant and
      prepossessing, as I, myself am dull and ugly. My head and hands tremble
      from weakness; my neck, like that of one of Turgeniev's heroines,
      resembles the handle of a counter-bass; my chest is hollow and my back
      narrow. When I speak or read my mouth twists, and when I smile my whole
      face is covered with senile, deathly wrinkles. There is nothing imposing
      in my pitiable face, save that when I suffer from the tic, I have a
      singular expression which compels anyone who looks at me to think: "This
      man will die soon, for sure."
    

      I can still read pretty well; I can still hold the attention of my
      audience for two hours. My passionate manner, the literary form of my
      exposition and my humour make the defects of my voice almost unnoticeable,
      though it is dry, harsh, and hard like a hypocrite's. But I write badly.
      The part of my brain which governs the ability to write refused office. My
      memory has weakened, and my thoughts are too inconsequent; and when I
      expound them on paper, I always have a feeling that I have lost the sense
      of their organic connection. The construction is monotonous, and the
      sentence feeble and timid. I often do not write what I want to, and when I
      write the end I cannot remember the beginning. I often forget common
      words, and in writing a letter I always have to waste much energy in order
      to avoid superfluous sentences and unnecessary incidental statements; both
      bear clear witness of the decay of my intellectual activity. And it is
      remarkable that, the simpler the letter, the more tormenting is my effort.
      When writing a scientific article I fed much freer and much more
      intelligent than in writing a letter of welcome or a report. One thing
      more: it is easier for me to write German or English than Russian.
    

      As regards my present life, I must first of all note insomnia, from which
      I have begun to suffer lately. If I were asked: "What is now the chief and
      fundamental fact of your existence?" I would answer: "Insomnia." From
      habit, I still undress at midnight precisely and get into bed. I soon fall
      asleep but wake just after one with the feeling that I have not slept at
      all. I must get out of bed and light the lamp. For an hour or two I walk
      about the room from corner to corner and inspect the long familiar
      pictures. When I am weary of walking I sit down to the table. I sit
      motionless thinking of nothing, feeling no desires; if a book lies before
      me I draw it mechanically towards me and read without interest. Thus
      lately in one night I read mechanically a whole novel with a strange
      title, "Of What the Swallow Sang." Or in order to occupy my attention I
      make myself count to a thousand, or I imagine the face of some one of my
      friends, and begin to remember in what year and under what circumstances
      he joined the faculty. I love to listen to sounds. Now, two rooms away
      from me my daughter Liza will say something quickly, in her sleep; then my
      wife will walk through the drawing-room with a candle and infallibly drop
      the box of matches. Then the shrinking wood of the cupboard squeaks or the
      burner of the lamp tinkles suddenly, and all these sounds somehow agitate
      me.
    

      Not to sleep of nights confesses one abnormal; and therefore I wait
      impatiently for the morning and the day, when I have the right not to
      sleep. Many oppressive hours pass before the cock crows. He is my
      harbinger of good. As soon as he has crowed I know that in an hour's time
      the porter downstairs will awake and for some reason or other go up the
      stairs, coughing angrily; and later beyond the windows the air begins to
      pale gradually and voices echo in the street.
    

      The day begins with the coming of my wife. She comes in to me in a
      petticoat, with her hair undone, but already washed and smelling of eau de
      Cologne, and looking as though she came in by accident, saying the same
      thing every time: "Pardon, I came in for a moment. You haven't slept
      again?" Then she puts the lamp out, sits by the table and begins to talk.
      I am not a prophet but I know beforehand what the subject of conversation
      will be, every morning the same. Usually, after breathless inquiries after
      my health, she suddenly remembers our son, the officer, who is serving in
      Warsaw. On the twentieth of each month we send him fifty roubles. This is
      our chief subject of conversation.
    

      "Of course it is hard on us," my wife sighs. "But until he is finally
      settled we are obliged to help him. The boy is among strangers; the pay is
      small. But if you like, next month we'll send him forty roubles instead of
      fifty. What do you think?"
    

      Daily experience might have convinced my wife that expenses do not grow
      less by talking of them. But my wife does not acknowledge experience and
      speaks about our officer punctually every day, about bread, thank Heaven,
      being cheaper and sugar a half-penny dearer—and all this in a tone
      as though it were news to me.
    

      I listen and agree mechanically. Probably because I have not slept during
      the night strange idle thoughts take hold of me. I look at my wife and
      wonder like a child. In perplexity I ask myself: This old, stout, clumsy
      woman, with sordid cares and anxiety about bread and butter written in the
      dull expression of her face, her eyes tired with eternal thoughts of debts
      and poverty, who can talk only of expenses and smile only when things are
      cheap—was this once the slim Varya whom I loved passionately for her
      fine clear mind, her pure soul, her beauty, and as Othello loved
      Desdemona, for her "compassion" of my science? Is she really the same, my
      wife Varya, who bore me a son?
    

      I gaze intently into the fat, clumsy old woman's face. I seek in her my
      Varya; but from the past nothing remains but her fear for my health and
      her way of calling my salary "our" salary and my hat "our" hat. It pains
      me to look at her, and to console her, if only a little, I let her talk as
      she pleases, and I am silent even when she judges people unjustly, or
      scolds me because I do not practise and do not publish text-books.
    

      Our conversation always ends in the same way. My wife suddenly remembers
      that I have not yet had tea, and gives a start:
    

      "Why am I sitting down?" she says, getting up. "The samovar has been on
      the table a long while, and I sit chatting. How forgetful I am? Good
      gracious!"
    

      She hurries away, but stops at the door to say:
    

      "We owe Yegor five months' wages. Do you realise it? It's a bad thing to
      let the servants' wages run on. I've said so often. It's much easier to
      pay ten roubles every month than fifty for five!"
    

      Outside the door she stops again:
    

      "I pity our poor Liza more than anybody. The girl studies at the
      Conservatoire. She's always in good society, and the Lord only knows how
      she's dressed. That fur-coat of hers! It's a sin to show yourself in the
      street in it. If she had a different father, it would do, but everyone
      knows he is a famous professor, a privy councillor."
    

      So, having reproached me for my name and title, she goes away at last.
      Thus begins my day. It does not improve.
    

      When I have drunk my tea, Liza comes in, in a fur-coat and hat, with her
      music, ready to go to the Conservatoire. She is twenty-two. She looks
      younger. She is pretty, rather like my wife when she was young. She kisses
      me tenderly on my forehead and my hand.
    

      "Good morning, Papa. Quite well?"
    

      As a child she adored ice-cream, and I often had to take her to a
      confectioner's. Ice-cream was her standard of beauty. If she wanted to
      praise me, she used to say: "Papa, you are ice-creamy." One finger she
      called the pistachio, the other the cream, the third the raspberry finger
      and so on. And when she came to say good morning, I used to lift her on to
      my knees and kiss her fingers, and say:
    

      "The cream one, the pistachio one, the lemon one."
    

      And now from force of habit I kiss Liza's fingers and murmur:
    

      "Pistachio one, cream one, lemon one." But it does not sound the same. I
      am cold like the ice-cream and I feel ashamed. When my daughter comes in
      and touches my forehead with her lips I shudder as though a bee had stung
      my forehead, I smile constrainedly and turn away my face. Since my
      insomnia began a question has been driving like a nail into my brain. My
      daughter continually sees how terribly I, an old man, blush because I owe
      the servant his wages; she sees how often the worry of small debts forces
      me to leave my work and to pace the room from corner to corner for hours,
      thinking; but why hasn't she, even once, come to me without telling her
      mother and whispered: "Father, here's my watch, bracelets, earrings,
      dresses.... Pawn them all.... You need money"? Why, seeing how I and her
      mother try to hide our poverty, out of false pride—why does she not
      deny herself the luxury of music lessons? I would not accept the watch,
      the bracelets, or her sacrifices—God forbid!—I do not want
      that.
    

      Which reminds me of my son, the Warsaw officer. He is a clever, honest,
      and sober fellow. But that doesn't mean very much. If I had an old father,
      and I knew that there were moments when he was ashamed of his poverty, I
      think I would give up my commission to someone else and hire myself out as
      a navvy. These thoughts of the children poison me. What good are they?
      Only a mean and irritable person Can take refuge in thinking evil of
      ordinary people because they are not heroes. But enough of that.
    

      At a quarter to ten I have to go and lecture to my dear boys. I dress
      myself and walk the road I have known these thirty years. For me it has a
      history of its own. Here is a big grey building with a chemist's shop
      beneath. A tiny house once stood there, and it was a beer-shop. In this
      beer-shop I thought out my thesis, and wrote my first love-letter to
      Varya. I wrote it in pencil on a scrap of paper that began "Historia
      Morbi." Here is a grocer's shop. It used to belong to a little Jew who
      sold me cigarettes on credit, and later on to a fat woman who loved
      students "because every one of them had a mother." Now a red-headed
      merchant sits there, a very nonchalant man, who drinks tea from a copper
      tea-pot. And here are the gloomy gates of the University that have not
      been repaired for years; a weary porter in a sheepskin coat, a broom,
      heaps of snow ... Such gates cannot produce a good impression on a boy who
      comes fresh from the provinces and imagines that the temple of science is
      really a temple. Certainly, in the history of Russian pessimism, the age
      of university buildings, the dreariness of the corridors, the smoke-stains
      on the walls, the meagre light, the dismal appearance of the stairs, the
      clothes-pegs and the benches, hold one of the foremost places in the
      series of predisposing causes. Here is our garden. It does not seem to
      have grown any better or any worse since I was a student. I do not like
      it. It would be much more sensible if tall pine-trees and fine oaks grew
      there instead of consumptive lime-trees, yellow acacias and thin clipped
      lilac. The student's mood is created mainly by every one of the
      surroundings in which he studies; therefore he must see everywhere before
      him only what is great and strong and exquisite. Heaven preserve him from
      starveling trees, broken windows, and drab walls and doors covered with
      tom oilcloth.
    

      As I approach my main staircase the door is open wide. I am met by my old
      friend, of the same age and name as I, Nicolas the porter. He grunts as he
      lets me in:
    

      "It's frosty, Your Excellency."
    

      Or if my coat is wet:
    

      "It's raining a bit, Your Excellency."
    

      Then he runs in front of me and opens all the doors on my way. In the
      study he carefully takes off my coat and at the same time manages to tell
      me some university news. Because of the close acquaintance that exists
      between all the University porters and keepers, he knows all that happens
      in the four faculties, in the registry, in the chancellor's cabinet, and
      the library. He knows everything. When, for instance, the resignation of
      the rector or dean is under discussion, I hear him talking to the junior
      porters, naming candidates and explaining offhand that so and so will not
      be approved by the Minister, so and so will himself refuse the honour;
      then he plunges into fantastic details of some mysterious papers received
      in the registry, of a secret conversation which appears to have taken
      place between the Minister and the curator, and so on. These details
      apart, he is almost always right. The impressions he forms of each
      candidate are original, but also true. If you want to know who read his
      thesis, joined the staff, resigned or died in a particular year, then you
      must seek the assistance of this veteran's colossal memory. He will not
      only name you the year, month, and day, but give you the accompanying
      details of this or any other event. Such memory is the privilege of love.
    

      He is the guardian of the university traditions. From the porters before
      him he inherited many legends of the life of the university. He added to
      this wealth much of his own and if you like he will tell you many stories,
      long or short. He can tell you of extraordinary savants who knew everything,
      of remarkable scholars who did not sleep for weeks on end, of numberless
      martyrs to science; good triumphs over evil with him. The weak always
      conquer the strong, the wise man the fool, the modest the proud, the young
      the old. There is no need to take all these legends and stories for
      sterling; but filter them, and you will find what you want in your filter,
      a noble tradition and the names of true heroes acknowledged by all.
    

      In our society all the information about the learned world consists
      entirely of anecdotes of the extraordinary absent-mindedness of old
      professors, and of a handful of jokes, which are ascribed to Guber or to
      myself or to Baboukhin. But this is too little for an educated society. If
      it loved science, savants and students as Nicolas loves them, it would
      long ago have had a literature of whole epics, stories, and biographies.
      But unfortunately this is yet to be.
    

      The news told, Nicolas looks stem and we begin to talk business. If an
      outsider were then to hear how freely Nicolas uses the jargon, he would be
      inclined to think that he was a scholar, posing as a soldier. By the way,
      the rumours of the university-porter's erudition are very exaggerated. It
      is true that Nicolas knows more than a hundred Latin tags, can put a
      skeleton together and on occasion make a preparation, can make the
      students laugh with a long learned quotation, but the simple theory of the
      circulation of the blood is as dark to him now as it was twenty years ago.
    

      At the table in my room, bent low over a book or a preparation, sits my
      dissector, Peter Ignatievich. He is a hardworking, modest man of
      thirty-five without any gifts, already bald and with a big belly. He works
      from morning to night, reads tremendously and remembers everything he has
      read. In this respect he is not merely an excellent man, but a man of
      gold; but in all others he is a cart-horse, or if you like a learned
      blockhead. The characteristic traits of a cart-horse which distinguish him
      from a creature of talent are these. His outlook is narrow, absolutely
      bounded by his specialism. Apart from his own subject he is as naive as a
      child. I remember once entering the room and saying:
    

      "Think what bad luck! They say, Skobielev is dead."
    

      Nicolas crossed himself; but Peter Ignatievich turned to me:
    

      "Which Skobielev do you mean?"
    

      Another time,—some time earlier—I announced that Professor
      Pierov was dead. That darling Peter Ignatievich asked:
    

      "What was his subject?"
    

      I imagine that if Patti sang into his ear, or Russia were attacked by
      hordes of Chinamen, or there was an earthquake, he would not lift a
      finger, but would go on in the quietest way with his eye screwed over his
      microscope. In a word: "What's Hecuba to him?" I would give anything to
      see how this dry old stick goes to bed with his wife.
    

      Another trait: a fanatical belief in the infallibility of science, above
      all in everything that the Germans write. He is sure of himself and his
      preparations, knows the purpose of life, is absolutely ignorant of the
      doubts and disillusionments that turn talents grey,—a slavish
      worship of the authorities, and not a shadow of need to think for himself.
      It is hard to persuade him and quite impossible to discuss with him. Just
      try a discussion with a man who is profoundly convinced that the best
      science is medicine, the best men doctors, the best traditions—the
      medical! From the ugly past of medicine only one tradition has survived,—the
      white necktie that doctors wear still. For a learned, and more generally
      for an educated person there can exist only a general university
      tradition, without any division into traditions of medicine, of law, and
      so on. But it's quite impossible for Peter Ignatievich to agree with that;
      and he is ready to argue it with you till doomsday.
    

      His future is quite plain to me. During the whole of his life he will make
      several hundred preparations of extraordinary purity, will write any
      number of dry, quite competent, essays, will make about ten scrupulously
      accurate translations; but he won't invent gunpowder. For gunpowder,
      imagination is wanted, inventiveness, and a gift for divination, and Peter
      Ignatievich has nothing of the kind. In short, he is not a master of
      science but a labourer.
    

      Peter Ignatievich, Nicolas, and I whisper together. We are rather strange
      to ourselves. One feels something quite particular, when the audience
      booms like the sea behind the door. In thirty years I have not grown used
      to this feeling, and I have it every morning. I button up my frock-coat
      nervously, ask Nicolas unnecessary questions, get angry.... It is as
      though I were afraid; but it is not fear, but something else which I
      cannot name nor describe.
    

      Unnecessarily, I look at my watch and say:
    

      "Well, it's time to go."
    

      And we march in, in this order: Nicolas with the preparations or the
      atlases in front, myself next, and after me, the cart-horse, modestly
      hanging his head; or, if necessary, a corpse on a stretcher in front and
      behind the corpse Nicolas and so on. The students rise when I appear, then
      sit down and the noise of the sea is suddenly still. Calm begins.
    

      I know what I will lecture about, but I know nothing of how I will
      lecture, where I will begin and where I will end. There is not a single
      sentence ready in my brain. But as soon as I glance at the audience,
      sitting around me in an amphitheatre, and utter the stereotyped "In our
      last lecture we ended with...." and the sentences fly out of my soul in a
      long line—then it is full steam ahead. I speak with irresistible
      speed, and with passion, and it seems as though no earthly power could
      check the current of my speech. In order to lecture well, that is without
      being wearisome and to the listener's profit, besides talent you must have
      the knack of it and experience; you must have a clear idea both of your
      own powers, of the people to whom you are lecturing, and of the subject of
      your remarks. Moreover, you must be quick in the uptake, keep a sharp eye
      open, and never for a moment lose your field of vision.
    

      When he presents the composer's thought, a good conductor does twenty
      things at once. He reads the score, waves his baton, watches the singer
      makes a gesture now towards the drum, now to the double-bass, and so on.
      It is the same with me when lecturing. I have some hundred and fifty faces
      before me, quite unlike each other, and three hundred eyes staring me
      straight in the face. My purpose is to conquer this many-headed hydra. If
      I have a clear idea how far they are attending and how much they are
      comprehending every minute while I am lecturing, then the hydra is in my
      power. My other opponent is within me. This is the endless variety of
      forms, phenomena and laws, and the vast number of ideas, whether my own or
      others', which depend upon them. Every moment I must be skilful enough to
      choose what is most important and necessary from this enormous material,
      and just as swiftly as my speech flows to clothe my thought in a form
      which will penetrate the hydra's understanding and excite its attention.
      Besides I must watch carefully to see that my thoughts shall not be
      presented as they have been accumulated, but in a certain order, necessary
      for the correct composition of the picture which I wish to paint. Further,
      I endeavour to make my speech literary, my definitions brief and exact, my
      sentences as simple and elegant as possible. Every moment I must hold
      myself in and remember that I have only an hour and forty minutes to
      spend. In other words, it is a heavy labour. At one and the same time you
      have to be a savant, a schoolmaster, and an orator, and it is a failure if
      the orator triumphs over the schoolmaster in you or the schoolmaster over
      the orator.
    

      After lecturing for a quarter, for half an hour, I notice suddenly that
      the students have begun to stare at the ceiling or Peter Ignatievich. One
      will feel for his handkerchief, another settle himself comfortably,
      another smile at his own thoughts. This means their attention is tried. I
      must take steps. I seize the first opening and make a pun. All the hundred
      and fifty faces have a broad smile, their eyes flash merrily, and for a
      while you can hear the boom of the sea. I laugh too. Their attention is
      refreshed and I can go on.
    

      No sport, no recreation, no game ever gave me such delight as reading a
      lecture. Only in a lecture could I surrender myself wholly to passion and
      understand that inspiration is not a poet's fiction, but exists indeed.
      And I do not believe that Hercules, even after the most delightful of his
      exploits, felt such a pleasant weariness as I experienced every time after
      a lecture.
    

      This was in the past. Now at lectures I experience only torture. Not half
      an hour passes before I begin to feel an invincible weakness in my legs
      and shoulders. I sit down in my chair, but I am not used to lecture
      sitting. In a moment I am up again, and lecture standing. Then I sit down
      again. Inside my mouth is dry, my voice is hoarse, my head feels dizzy. To
      hide my state from my audience I drink some water now and then, cough,
      wipe my nose continually, as though I was troubled by a cold, make
      inopportune puns, and finally announce the interval earlier than I should.
      But chiefly I feel ashamed.
    

      Conscience and reason tell me that the best thing I could do now is to
      read my farewell lecture to the boys, give them my last word, bless them
      and give up my place to someone younger and stronger than I. But, heaven
      be my judge, I have not the courage to act up to my conscience.
    

      Unfortunately, I am neither philosopher nor theologian. I know quite well
      I have no more than six months to live; and it would seem that now I ought
      to be mainly occupied with questions of the darkness beyond the grave, and
      the visions which will visit my sleep in the earth. But somehow my soul is
      not curious of these questions, though my mind grants every atom of their
      importance. Now before my death it is just as it was twenty or thirty
      years ago. Only science interests me.—When I take my last breath I
      shall still believe that Science is the most important, the most
      beautiful, the most necessary thing in the life of man; that she has
      always been and always will be the highest manifestation of love, and that
      by her alone will man triumph over nature and himself. This faith is,
      perhaps, at bottom naive and unfair, but I am not to blame if this and not
      another is my faith. To conquer this faith within me is for me impossible.
    

      But this is beside the point. I only ask that you should incline to my
      weakness and understand that to tear a man who is more deeply concerned
      with the destiny of a brain tissue than the final goal of creation away
      from his rostrum and his students is like taking him and nailing him up in
      a coffin without waiting until he is dead.
    

      Because of my insomnia and the intense struggle with my increasing
      weakness a strange thing happens inside me. In the middle of my lecture
      tears rise to my throat, my eyes begin to ache, and I have a passionate
      and hysterical desire to stretch out my hands and moan aloud. I want to
      cry out that fate has doomed me, a famous man, to death; that in some six
      months here in the auditorium another will be master. I want to cry out
      that I am poisoned; that new ideas that I did not know before have
      poisoned the last days of my life, and sting my brain incessantly like
      mosquitoes. At that moment my position seems so terrible to me that I want
      all my students to be terrified, to jump from their seats and rush
      panic-stricken to the door, shrieking in despair.
    

      It is not easy to live through such moments.
    


      II
    

      After the lecture I sit at home and work. I read reviews, dissertations,
      or prepare for the next lecture, and sometimes I write something. I work
      with interruptions, since I have to receive visitors.
    

      The bell rings. It is a friend who has come to talk over some business. He
      enters with hat and stick. He holds them both in front of him and says:
    

      "Just a minute, a minute. Sit down, cher confrÃ¨re. Only a word or two."
    

      First we try to show each other that we are both extraordinarily polite
      and very glad to see each other. I make him sit down in the chair, and he
      makes me sit down; and then we touch each other's waists, and put our
      hands on each other's buttons, as though we were feeling each other and
      afraid to bum ourselves. We both laugh, though we say nothing funny.
      Sitting down, we bend our heads together and begin to whisper to each
      other. We must gild our conversation with such Chinese formalities as:
      "You remarked most justly" or "I have already had the occasion to say." We
      must giggle if either of us makes a pun, though it's a bad one. When we
      have finished with the business, my friend gets up with a rush, waves his
      hat towards my work, and begins to take his leave. We feel each other once
      more and laugh. I accompany him down to the hall. There I help my friend
      on with his coat, but he emphatically declines so great an honour. Then,
      when Yegor opens the door my friend assures me that I will catch cold, and
      I pretend to be ready to follow him into the street. And when I finally
      return to my study my face keeps smiling still, it must be from inertia.
    

      A little later another ring. Someone enters the hall, spends a long time
      taking off his coat and coughs. Yegor brings me word that a student has
      come. I tell him to show him up. In a minute a pleasant-faced young man
      appears. For a year we have been on these forced terms together. He sends
      in abominable answers at examinations, and I mark him gamma. Every year I
      have about seven of these people to whom, to use the students' slang, "I
      give a plough" or "haul them through." Those of them who fail because of
      stupidity or illness, usually bear their cross in patience and do not
      bargain with me; only sanguine temperaments, "open natures," bargain with
      me and come to my house, people whose appetite is spoiled or who are
      prevented from going regularly to the opera by a delay in their
      examinations. With the first I am over-indulgent; the second kind I keep
      on the run for a year.
    

      "Sit down," I say to my guest. "What was it you wished to say?"
    

      "Forgive me for troubling you, Professor...." he begins, stammering and
      never looking me in the face. "I would not venture to trouble you
      unless.... I was up for my examination before you for the fifth time ...
      and I failed. I implore you to be kind, and give me a 'satis,'
      because...."
    

      The defence which all idlers make of themselves is always the same. They
      have passed in every other subject with distinction, and failed only in
      mine, which is all the more strange because they had always studied my
      subject most diligently and know it thoroughly. They failed through some
      inconceivable misunderstanding.
    

      "Forgive me, my friend," I say to my guest. "But I can't give you a
      'satis'—impossible. Go and read your lectures again, and then come.
      Then we'll see."
    

      Pause. I get a desire to torment the student a little, because he prefers
      beer and the opera to science; and I say with a sigh:
    

      "In my opinion, the best thing for you now is to give up the Faculty of
      Medicine altogether. With your abilities, if you find it impossible to
      pass the examination, then it seems you have neither the desire nor the
      vocation to be a doctor."
    

      My sanguine friend's face grows grave.
    

      "Excuse me, Professor," he smiles, "but it would be strange, to say the
      least, on my part. Studying medicine for five years and suddenly—to
      throw it over."
    

      "Yes, but it's better to waste five years than to spend your whole life
      afterwards in an occupation which you dislike."
    

      Immediately I begin to feel sorry for him and hasten to say:
    

      "Well, do as you please. Read a little and come again."
    

      "When?" the idler asks, dully.
    

      "Whenever you like. To-morrow, even."
    

      And I read in his pleasant eyes. "I can come again; but you'll send me
      away again, you beast."
    

      "Of course," I say, "you won't become more learned because you have to
      come up to me fifteen times for examination; but this will form your
      character. You must be thankful for that."
    

      Silence. I rise and wait for my guest to leave. But he stands there,
      looking at the window, pulling at his little beard and thinking. It
      becomes tedious.
    

      My sanguine friend has a pleasant, succulent voice, clever, amusing eyes,
      a good-natured face, rather puffed by assiduity to beer and much resting
      on the sofa. Evidently he could tell me many interesting things about the
      opera, about his love affairs, about the friends he adores; but,
      unfortunately, it is not the thing. And I would so eagerly listen!
    

      "On my word of honour, Professor, if you give me a 'satis' I'll...."
    

      As soon as it gets to "my word of honour," I wave my hands and sit down to
      the table. The student thinks for a while and says, dejectedly:
    

      "In that case, good-bye.... Forgive me!"
    

      "Good-bye, my friend.... Good-bye!"
    

      He walks irresolutely into the hall, slowly puts on his coat, and, when he
      goes into the street, probably thinks again for a long while; having
      excogitated nothing better than "old devil" for me, he goes to a cheap
      restaurant to drink beer and dine, and then home to sleep. Peace be to
      your ashes, honest labourer!
    

      A third ring. Enters a young doctor in a new black suit, gold-rimmed
      spectacles and the inevitable white necktie. He introduces himself. I ask
      him to take a seat and inquire his business. The young priest of science
      begins to tell me, not without agitation, that he passed his doctor's
      examination this year, and now has only to write his dissertation. He
      would like to work with me, under my guidance; and I would do him a great
      kindness if I would suggest a subject for his dissertation.
    

      "I should be delighted to be of use to you, mon cher confrÃ¨re," I say.
      "But first of all, let us come to an agreement as to what is a
      dissertation. Generally we understand by this, work produced as the result
      of an independent creative power. Isn't that so? But a work written on
      another's subject, under another's guidance, has a different name."
    

      The aspirant is silent. I fire up and jump out of my seat. "Why do you all
      come to me? I can't understand," I cry out angrily. "Do I keep a shop? I
      don't sell theses across the counter. For the one thousandth time I ask
      you all to leave me alone. Forgive my rudeness, but I've got tired of it
      at last!"
    

      The aspirant is silent. Only, a tinge of colour shows on his cheek. His
      face expresses his profound respect for my famous name and my erudition,
      but I see in his eyes that he despises my voice, my pitiable figure, my
      nervous gestures. When I am angry I seem to him a very queer fellow.
    

      "I do not keep a shop," I storm. "It's an amazing business! Why don't you
      want to be independent? Why do you find freedom so objectionable?"
    

      I say a great deal, but he is silent. At last by degrees I grow calm, and,
      of course, surrender. The aspirant will receive a valueless subject from
      me, will write under my observation a needless thesis, will pass his
      tedious disputation cum laude and will get a useless and learned
      degree.
    

      The rings follow in endless succession, but here I confine myself to four.
      The fourth ring sounds, and I hear the familiar steps, the rustling dress,
      the dear voice.
    

      Eighteen years ago my dear friend, the oculist, died and left behind him a
      seven year old daughter, Katy, and sixty thousand roubles. By his will he
      made me guardian. Katy lived in my family till she was ten. Afterwards she
      was sent to College and lived with me only in her holidays in the summer
      months. I had no time to attend to her education. I watched only by fits
      and starts; so that I can say very little about her childhood.
    

      The chief thing I remember, the one I love to dwell upon in memory, is the
      extraordinary confidence which she had when she entered my house, when she
      had to have the doctor,—a confidence which was always shining in her
      darling face. She would sit in a corner somewhere with her face tied up,
      and would be sure to be absorbed in watching something. Whether she was
      watching me write and read books, or my wife bustling about, or the cook
      peeling the potatoes in the kitchen or the dog playing about—her
      eyes invariably expressed the same thing: "Everything that goes on in this
      world,—everything is beautiful and clever." She was inquisitive and
      adored to talk to me. She would sit at the table opposite me, watching my
      movements and asking questions. She is interested to know what I read,
      what I do at the University, if I'm not afraid of corpses, what I do with
      my money.
    

      "Do the students fight at the University?" she would ask.
    

      "They do, my dear."
    

      "You make them go down on their knees?"
    

      "I do."
    

      And it seemed funny to her that the students fought and that I made them
      go down on their knees, and she laughed. She was a gentle, good, patient
      child.
    

      Pretty often I happened to see how something was taken away from her, or
      she was unjustly punished, or her curiosity was not satisfied. At such
      moments sadness would be added to her permanent expression of confidence—nothing
      more. I didn't know how to take her part, but when I saw her sadness, I
      always had the desire to draw her close to me and comfort her in an old
      nurse's voice: "My darling little orphan!"
    

      I remember too she loved to be well dressed and to sprinkle herself with
      scents. In this she was like me. I also love good clothes and fine scents.
    

      I regret that I had neither the time nor the inclination to watch the
      beginnings and the growth of the passion which had completely taken hold
      of Katy when she was no more than fourteen or fifteen. I mean her
      passionate love for the theatre. When she used to come from the College
      for her holidays and live with us, nothing gave her such pleasure and
      enthusiasm to talk about as plays and actors. She used to tire us with her
      incessant conversation about the theatre. I alone hadn't the courage to
      deny her my attention. My wife and children did not listen to her. When
      she felt the desire to share her raptures she would come to my study and
      coax: "Nicolai Stiepanich, do let me speak to you about the theatre."
    

      I used to show her the time and say:
    

      "I'll give you half an hour. Fire away!"
    

      Later on she used to bring in pictures of the actors and actresses she
      worshipped—whole dozens of them. Then several times she tried to
      take part in amateur theatricals, and finally when she left College she
      declared to me she was born to be an actress.
    

      I never shared Katy's enthusiasms for the theatre. My opinion is that if a
      play is good then there's no need to trouble the actors for it to make the
      proper impression; you can be satisfied merely by reading it. If the play
      is bad, no acting will make it good.
    

      When I was young I often went to the theatre, and nowadays my family takes
      a box twice a year and carries me off for an airing there. Of course this
      is not enough to give me the right to pass verdicts on the theatre; but I
      will say a few words about it. In my opinion the theatre hasn't improved
      in the last thirty or forty years. I can't find any more than I did then,
      a glass of dean water, either in the corridors or the foyer. Just as they
      did then, the attendants fine me sixpence for my coat, though there's
      nothing illegal in wearing a warm coat in winter. Just as it did then, the
      orchestra plays quite unnecessarily in the intervals, and adds a new,
      gratuitous impression to the one received from the play. Just as they did
      then, men go to the bar in the intervals and drink spirits. If there is no
      perceptible improvement in little things, it will be useless to look for
      it in the bigger things. When an actor, hide-bound in theatrical
      traditions and prejudices, tries to read simple straightforward monologue:
      "To be or not to be," not at all simply, but with an incomprehensible and
      inevitable hiss and convulsions over his whole body, or when he tries to
      convince me that Chazky, who is always talking to fools and is in love
      with a fool, is a very clever man and that "The Sorrows of Knowledge" is
      not a boring play,—then I get from the stage a breath of the same
      old routine that exasperated me forty years ago when I was regaled with
      classical lamentation and beating on the breast. Every time I come out of
      the theatre a more thorough conservative than I went in.
    

      It's quite possible to convince the sentimental, self-confident crowd that
      the theatre in its present state is an education. But not a man who knows
      what true education is would swallow this. I don't know what it may be in
      fifty or a hundred years, but under present conditions the theatre can
      only be a recreation. But the recreation is too expensive for continual
      use, and robs the country of thousands of young, healthy, gifted men and
      women, who if they had not devoted themselves to the theatre would be
      excellent doctors, farmers, schoolmistresses, or officers. It robs the
      public of its evenings, the best time for intellectual work and friendly
      conversation. I pass over the waste of money and the moral injuries to the
      spectator when he sees murder, adultery, or slander wrongly treated on the
      stage.
    

      But Katy's opinion was quite the opposite. She assured me that even in its
      present state the theatre is above lecture-rooms and books, above
      everything else in the world. The theatre is a power that unites in itself
      all the arts, and the actors are men with a mission. No separate art or
      science can act on the human soul so strongly and truly as the stage; and
      therefore it is reasonable that a medium actor should enjoy much greater
      popularity than the finest scholar or painter. No public activity can give
      such delight and satisfaction as the theatrical.
    

      So one fine day Katy joined a theatrical company and went away, I believe,
      to Ufa, taking with her a lot of money, a bagful of rainbow hopes, and
      some very high-class views on the business.
    

      Her first letters on the journey were wonderful. When I read them I was
      simply amazed that little sheets of paper could contain so much youth,
      such transparent purity, such divine innocence, and at the same time so
      many subtle, sensible judgments, that would do honour to a sound masculine
      intelligence. The Volga, nature, the towns she visited, her friends, her
      successes and failures—she did not write about them, she sang. Every
      line breathed the confidence which I used to see in her face; and with all
      this a mass of grammatical mistakes and hardly a single stop.
    

      Scarce six months passed before I received a highly poetical enthusiastic
      letter, beginning, "I have fallen in love." She enclosed a photograph of a
      young man with a clean-shaven face, in a broad-brimmed hat, with a plaid
      thrown over his shoulders. The next letters were just as splendid, but
      stops already began to appear and the grammatical mistakes to vanish. They
      had a strong masculine scent. Katy began to write about what a good thing
      it would be to build a big theatre somewhere in the Volga, but on a
      cooperative basis, and to attract the rich business-men and shipowners to
      the undertaking. There would be plenty of money, huge receipts, and the
      actors would work in partnership.... Perhaps all this is really a good
      thing, but I can't help thinking such schemes could only come from a man's
      head.
    

      Anyhow for eighteen months or a couple of years everything seemed to be
      all right. Katy was in love, had her heart in her business and was happy.
      But later on I began to notice dear symptoms of a decline in her letters.
      It began with Katy complaining about her friends. This is the first and
      most ominous sign. If a young scholar or litterateur begins his career by
      complaining bitterly about other scholars or littÃ©rateurs, it means that
      he is tired already and not fit for his business. Katy wrote to me that
      her friends would not come to rehearsals and never knew their parts; that
      they showed an utter contempt for the public in the absurd plays they
      staged and the manner they behaved. To swell the box-office receipts—the
      only topic of conversation—serious actresses degrade themselves by
      singing sentimentalities, and tragic actors sing music-hall songs,
      laughing at husbands who are deceived and unfaithful wives who are
      pregnant. In short, it was amazing that the profession, in the provinces,
      was not absolutely dead. The marvel was that it could exist at all with
      such thin, rotten blood in its veins.
    

      In reply I sent Katy a long and, I confess, a very tedious letter. Among
      other things I wrote: "I used to talk fairly often to actors in the past,
      men of the noblest character, who honoured me with their friendship. From
      my conversations with them I understood that their activities were guided
      rather by the whim and fashion of society than by the free working of
      their own minds. The best of them in their lifetime had to play in
      tragedy, in musical comedy, in French farce, and in pantomime; yet all
      through they considered that they were treading the right path and being
      useful. You see that this means that you must look for the cause of the
      evil, not in the actors, but deeper down, in the art itself and the
      attitude of society towards it." This letter of mine only made Katy cross.
      "You and I are playing in different operas. I didn't write to you about
      men of the noblest character, but about a lot of sharks who haven't a
      spark of nobility in them. They are a horde of savages who came on the
      stage only because they wouldn't be allowed anywhere else. The only ground
      they have for calling themselves artists is their impudence. Not a single
      talent among them, but any number of incapables, drunkards, intriguers,
      and slanderers. I can't tell you how bitterly I feel it that the art I
      love so much is fallen into the hands of people I despise. It hurts me
      that the best men should be content to look at evil from a distance and
      not want to come nearer. Instead of taking an active part, they write
      ponderous platitudes and useless sermons...." and more in the same strain.
    

      A little while after I received the following: "I have been inhumanly
      deceived. I can't go on living any more. Do as you think fit with my
      money. I loved you as a father and as my only friend. Forgive me."
    

      So it appeared that he too belonged to the horde of savages. Later
      on, I gathered from various hints, that there was an attempt at suicide.
      Apparently, Katy tried to poison herself. I think she must have been
      seriously ill afterwards, for I got the following letter from Yalta, where
      most probably the doctors had sent her. Her last letter to me contained a
      request that I should send her at Yalta a thousand roubles, and it ended
      with the words: "Forgive me for writing such a sad letter. I buried my
      baby yesterday." After she had spent about a year in the Crimea she
      returned home.
    

      She had been travelling for about four years, and during these four years
      I confess that I occupied a strange and unenviable position in regard to
      her. When she announced to me that she was going on to the stage and
      afterwards wrote to me about her love; when the desire to spend took hold
      of her, as it did periodically, and I had to send her every now and then
      one or two thousand roubles at her request; when she wrote that she
      intended to die, and afterwards that her baby was dead,—-I was at a
      loss every time. All my sympathy with her fate consisted in thinking hard
      and writing long tedious letters which might as well never have been
      written. But then I was in loco parentis and I loved her as a
      daughter.
    

      Katy lives half a mile away from me now. She took a five-roomed house and
      furnished it comfortably, with the taste that was born in her. If anyone
      were to undertake to depict her surroundings, then the dominating mood of
      the picture would be indolence. Soft cushions, soft chairs for her
      indolent body; carpets for her indolent feet; faded, dim, dull colours for
      her indolent eyes; for her indolent soul, a heap of cheap fans and tiny
      pictures on the walls, pictures in which novelty of execution was more
      noticeable than content; plenty of little tables and stands, set out with
      perfectly useless and worthless things, shapeless scraps instead of
      curtains.... All this, combined with a horror of bright colours, of
      symmetry, and space, betokened a perversion of the natural taste as well
      as indolence of the soul. For whole days Katy lies on the sofa and reads
      books, mostly novels and stories. She goes outside her house but once in
      the day, to come and see me.
    

      I work. Katy sits on the sofa at my side. She is silent, and wraps herself
      up in her shawl as though she were cold. Either because she is sympathetic
      to me, or I because I had got used to her continual visits while she was
      still a little girl, her presence does not prevent me from concentrating
      on my work. At long intervals I ask her some question or other,
      mechanically, and she answers very curtly; or, for a moment's rest, I turn
      towards her and watch how she is absorbed in looking through some medical
      review or newspaper. And then I see that the old expression of confidence
      in her face is there no more. Her expression now is cold, indifferent,
      distracted, like that of a passenger who has to wait a long while for his
      train. She dresses as she used—well and simply, but carelessly.
      Evidently her clothes and her hair suffer not a little from the sofas and
      hammocks on which she lies for days together. And she is not curious any
      more. She doesn't ask me questions any more, as if she had experienced
      everything in life and did not expect to hear anything new.
    

      About four o'clock there is a sound of movement in the hall and the
      drawing-room. It's Liza come back from the Conservatoire, bringing her
      friends with her. You can hear them playing the piano, trying their voices
      and giggling. Yegor is laying the table in the dining-room and making a
      noise with the plates.
    

      "Good-bye," says Katy. "I shan't go in to see your people. They must
      excuse me. I haven't time. Come and see me."
    

      When I escort her into the hall, she looks me over sternly from head to
      foot, and says in vexation:
    

      "You get thinner and thinner. Why don't you take a cure? I'll go to
      Sergius Fiodorovich and ask him to come. You must let him see you."
    

      "It's not necessary, Katy."
    

      "I can't understand why your family does nothing. They're a nice lot."
    

      She puts on her jacket with her rush. Inevitably, two or three hair-pins
      fall out of her careless hair on to the floor. It's too much bother to
      tidy her hair now; besides she is in a hurry. She pushes the straggling
      strands of hair untidily under her hat and goes away.
    

      As soon as I come into the dining-room, my wife asks:
    

      "Was that Katy with you just now? Why didn't she come to see us. It really
      is extraordinary...."
    

      "Mamma!" says Liza reproachfully, "If she doesn't want to come, that's her
      affair. There's no need for us to go on our knees."
    

      "Very well; but it's insulting. To sit in the study for three hours,
      without thinking of us. But she can do as she likes."
    

      Varya and Liza both hate Katy. This hatred is unintelligible to me;
      probably you have to be a woman to understand it. I'll bet my life on it
      that you'll hardly find a single one among the hundred and fifty young men
      I see almost every day in my audience, or the hundred old ones I happen to
      meet every week, who would be able to understand why women hate and abhor
      Katy's past, her being pregnant and unmarried and her illegitimate child.
      Yet at the same time I cannot bring to mind a single woman or girl of my
      acquaintance who would not cherish such feelings, either consciously or
      instinctively. And it's not because women are purer and more virtuous than
      men. If virtue and purity are not free from evil feeling, there's precious
      little difference between them and vice. I explain it simply by the
      backward state of women's development. The sorrowful sense of compassion
      and the torment of conscience, which the modern man experiences when he
      sees distress have much more to tell me about culture and moral
      development than have hatred and repulsion. The modern woman is as
      lachrymose and as coarse in heart as she was in the middle ages. And in my
      opinion those who advise her to be educated like a man have wisdom on
      their side.
    

      But still my wife does not like Katy, because she was an actress, and for
      her ingratitude, her pride, her extravagances, and all the innumerable
      vices one woman can always discover in another.
    

      Besides myself and my family we have two or three of my daughter's girl
      friends to dinner and Alexander Adolphovich Gnekker, Liza's admirer and
      suitor. He is a fair young man, not more than thirty years old, of middle
      height, very fat, broad shouldered, with reddish hair round his ears and a
      little stained moustache, which give his smooth chubby face the look of a
      doll's. He wears a very short jacket, a fancy waistcoat, large-striped
      trousers, very full on the hip and very narrow in the leg, and brown boots
      without heels. His eyes stick out like a lobster's, his tie is like a
      lobster's tail, and I can't help thinking even that the smell of lobster
      soup clings about the whole of this young man. He visits us every day; but
      no one in the family knows where he comes from, where he was educated, or
      how he lives. He cannot play or sing, but he has a certain connection with
      music as well as singing, for he is agent for somebody's pianos, and is
      often at the Academy. He knows all the celebrities, and he manages
      concerts. He gives his opinion on music with great authority and I have
      noticed that everybody hastens to agree with him.
    

      Rich men always have parasites about them. So do the sciences and the
      arts. It seems that there is no science or art in existence, which is free
      from such "foreign bodies" as this Mr. Gnekker. I am not a musician and
      perhaps I am mistaken about Gnekker, besides I don't know him very well.
      But I can't help suspecting the authority and dignity with which he stands
      beside the piano and listens when anyone is singing or playing.
    

      You may be a gentleman and a privy councillor a hundred times over; but if
      you have a daughter you can't be guaranteed against the pettinesses that
      are so often brought into your house and into your own humour, by
      courtings, engagements, and weddings. For instance, I cannot reconcile
      myself to my wife's solemn expression every time Gnekker comes to our
      house, nor to those bottles of ChÃ¢teau Lafitte, port, and sherry which are
      put on the table only for him, to convince him beyond doubt of the
      generous luxury in which we live. Nor can I stomach the staccato laughter
      which Liza learned at the Academy, and her way of screwing up her eyes,
      when men are about the house. Above all, I can't understand why it is that
      such a creature should come to me every day and have dinner with me—a
      creature perfectly foreign to my habits, my science, and the whole tenour
      of my life, a creature absolutely unlike the men I love. My wife and the
      servants whisper mysteriously that that is "the bridegroom," but still I
      can't understand why he's there. It disturbs my mind just as much as if a
      Zulu were put next to me at table. Besides, it seems strange to me that my
      daughter whom I used to think of as a baby should be in love with that
      necktie, those eyes, those chubby cheeks.
    

      Formerly, I either enjoyed my dinner or was indifferent about it. Now it
      does nothing but bore and exasperate me. Since I was made an Excellency
      and Dean of the Faculty, for some reason or other my family found it
      necessary to make a thorough change in our menu and the dinner
      arrangements. Instead of the simple food I was used to as a student and a
      doctor, I am now fed on potage-puree, with some sossoulki swimming
      about in it, and kidneys in Madeira. The title of General and my renown
      have robbed me for ever of schi and savoury pies, and roast goose
      with apple sauce, and bream with kasha. They robbed me as well of
      my maid servant Agasha, a funny, talkative old woman, instead of whom I am
      now waited on by Yegor, a stupid, conceited fellow who always has a white
      glove in his right hand. The intervals between the courses are short, but
      they seem terribly long. There is nothing to fill them. We don't have any
      more of the old good-humour, the familiar conversations, the jokes and the
      laughter; no more mutual endearments, or the gaiety that used to animate
      my children, my wife, and myself when we met at the dinner table. For a
      busy man like me dinner was a time to rest and meet my friends, and a
      feast for my wife and children, not a very long feast, to be sure, but a
      gay and happy one, for they knew that for half an hour I did not belong to
      science and my students, but solely to them and to no one else. No more
      chance of getting tipsy on a single glass of wine, no more Agasha, no more
      bream with kasha, no more the old uproar to welcome our little contretemps
      at dinner, when the cat fought the dog under the table, or Katy's
      head-band fell down her cheek into her soup.
    

      Our dinner nowadays is as nasty to describe as to eat. On my wife's face
      there is pompousness, an assumed gravity, and the usual anxiety. She eyes
      our plates nervously: "I see you don't like the meat?... Honestly, don't
      you like it?" And I must answer, "Don't worry, my dear. The meat is very
      good." She: "You're always taking my part, Nicolai Stiepanich. You never
      tell the truth. Why has Alexander Adolphovich eaten so little?" and the
      same sort of conversation for the whole of dinner. Liza laughs staccato
      and screws up her eyes. I look at both of them, and at this moment at
      dinner here I can see quite clearly that their inner lives have slipped
      out of my observation long ago. I feel as though once upon a time I lived
      at home with a real family, but now I am dining as a guest with an unreal
      wife and looking at an unreal Liza. There has been an utter change in both
      of them, while I have lost sight of the long process that led up to the
      change. No wonder I don't understand anything. What was the reason of the
      change? I don't know. Perhaps the only trouble is that God did not give my
      wife and daughter the strength He gave me. From my childhood I have been
      accustomed to resist outside influences and have been hardened enough.
      Such earthly catastrophes as fame, being made General, the change from
      comfort to living above my means, acquaintance with high society, have
      scarcely touched me. I have survived safe and sound. But it all fell down
      like an avalanche on my weak, unhardened wife and Liza, and crushed them.
    

      Gnekker and the girls talk of fugues and counter-fugues; singers and
      pianists, Bach and Brahms, and my wife, frightened of being suspected of
      musical ignorance, smiles sympathetically and murmurs: "Wonderful.... Is
      it possible?... Why?..." Gnekker eats steadily, jokes gravely, and listens
      condescendingly to the ladies' remarks. Now and then he has the desire to
      talk bad French, and then he finds it necessary for some unknown reason to
      address me magnificently, "Votre Excellence."
    

      And I am morose. Apparently I embarrass them all and they embarrass me. I
      never had any intimate acquaintance with class antagonism before, but now
      something of the kind torments me indeed. I try to find only bad traits in
      Gnekker. It does not take long and then I am tormented because one of my
      friends has not taken his place as bridegroom. In another way too his
      presence has a bad effect upon me. Usually, when I am left alone with
      myself or when I am in the company of people I love, I never think of my
      merits; and if I begin to think about them they seem as trivial as though
      I had become a scholar only yesterday. But in the presence of a man like
      Gnekker my merits appear to me like an extremely high mountain, whose
      summit is lost in the clouds, while Gnekkers move about the foot, so small
      as hardly to be seen.
    

      After dinner I go up to my study and light my little pipe, the only one
      during the whole day, the sole survivor of my old habit of smoking from
      morning to night. My wife comes into me while I am smoking and sits down
      to speak to me. Just as in the morning, I know beforehand what the
      conversation will be.
    

      "We ought to talk seriously, Nicolai Stiepanovich," she begins. "I mean
      about Liza. Why won't you attend?"
    

      "Attend to what?"
    

      "You pretend you don't notice anything. It's not right: It's not right to
      be unconcerned. Gnekker has intentions about Liza. What do you say to
      that?"
    

      "I can't say he's a bad man, because I don't know him; but I've told you a
      thousand times already that I don't like him."
    

      "But that's impossible ... impossible...." She rises and walks about in
      agitation.
    

      "It's impossible to have such an attitude to a serious matter," she says.
      "When our daughter's happiness is concerned, we must put everything
      personal aside. I know you don't like him.... Very well.... But if we
      refuse him now and upset everything, how can you guarantee that Liza won't
      have a grievance against us for the rest of her life? Heaven knows there
      aren't many young men nowadays. It's quite likely there won't be another
      chance. He loves Liza very much and she likes him, evidently. Of course he
      hasn't a settled position. But what is there to do? Please God, he'll get
      a position in time. He comes of a good family, and he's rich."
    

      "How did you find that out?"
    

      "He said so himself. His father has a big house in Kharkov and an estate
      outside. You must certainly go to Kharkov."
    

      "Why?"
    

      "You'll find out there. You have acquaintances among the professors there.
      I'd go myself. But I'm a woman. I can't."
    

      "I will not go to Kharkov," I say morosely.
    

      My wife gets frightened; a tormented expression comes over her face.
    

      "For God's sake, Nicolai Stiepanich," she implores, sobbing, "For God's
      sake help me with this burden! It hurts me."
    

      It is painful to look at her.
    

      "Very well, Varya," I say kindly, "If you like—very well I'll go to
      Kharkov, and do everything you want."
    

      She puts her handkerchief to her eyes and goes to cry in her room. I am
      left alone.
    

      A little later they bring in the lamp. The familiar shadows that have
      wearied me for years fall from the chairs and the lamp-shade on to the
      walls and the floor. When I look at them it seems that it's night already,
      and the cursed insomnia has begun. I lie down on the bed; then I get up
      and walk about the room then lie down again. My nervous excitement
      generally reaches its highest after dinner, before the evening. For no
      reason I begin to cry and hide my head in the pillow. All the while I am
      afraid somebody may come in; I am afraid I shall die suddenly; I am
      ashamed of my tears; altogether, something intolerable is happening in my
      soul. I feel I cannot look at the lamp or the books or the shadows on the
      floor, or listen to the voices in the drawing-room any more. Some
      invisible, mysterious force pushes me rudely out of my house. I jump up,
      dress hurriedly, and go cautiously out into the street so that the
      household shall not notice me. Where shall I go?
    

      The answer to this question has long been there in my brain: "To Katy."
    


      III
    

      As usual she is lying on the Turkish divan or the couch and reading
      something. Seeing me she lifts her head languidly, sits down, and gives me
      her hand.
    

      "You are always lying down like that," I say after a reposeful silence.
      "It's unhealthy. You'd far better be doing something."
    

      "Ah?"
    

      "You'd far better be doing something, I say."
    

      "What?... A woman can be either a simple worker or an actress."
    

      "Well, then—if you can't become a worker, be an actress."
    

      She is silent.
    

      "You had better marry," I say, half-joking.
    

      "There's no one to marry: and no use if I did."
    

      "You can't go on living like this."
    

      "Without a husband? As if that mattered. There are as many men as you
      like, if you only had the will."
    

      "This isn't right, Katy."
    

      "What isn't right?"
    

      "What you said just now."
    

      Katy sees that I am chagrined, and desires to soften the bad impression.
    

      "Come. Let's come here. Here."
    

      She leads me into a small room, very cosy, and points to the writing
      table.
    

      "There. I made it for you. You'll work here. Come every day and bring your
      work with you. They only disturb you there at home.... Will you work here?
      Would you like to?"
    

      In order not to hurt her by refusing, I answer that I shall work with her
      and that I like the room immensely. Then we both sit down in the cosy room
      and begin to talk.
    

      The warmth, the cosy surroundings, the presence of a sympathetic being,
      rouses in me now not a feeling of pleasure as it used but a strong desire
      to complain and grumble. Anyhow it seems to me that if I moan and complain
      I shall feel better.
    

      "It's a bad business, my dear," I begin with a sigh. "Very bad."
    

      "What is the matter?"
    

      "I'll tell you what is the matter. The best and most sacred right of kings
      is the right to pardon. And I have always felt myself a king so long as I
      used this right prodigally. I never judged, I was compassionate, I
      pardoned everyone right and left. Where others protested and revolted I
      only advised and persuaded. All my life I've tried to make my society
      tolerable to the family of students, friends and servants. And this
      attitude of mine towards people, I know, educated every one who came into
      contact with me. But now I am king no more. There's something going on in
      me which belongs only to slaves. Day and night evil thoughts roam about in
      my head, and feelings which I never knew before have made their home in my
      soul. I hate and despise; I'm exasperated, disturbed, and afraid. I've
      become strict beyond measure, exacting, unkind, and suspicious. Even the
      things which in the past gave me the chance of making an extra pun, now
      bring me a feeling of oppression. My logic has changed too. I used to
      despise money alone; now I cherish evil feelings, not to money, but to the
      rich, as if they were guilty. I used to hate violence and arbitrariness;
      now I hate the people who employ violence, as if they alone are to blame
      and not all of us, who cannot educate one another. What does it all mean?
      If my new thoughts and feelings come from a change of my convictions,
      where could the change have come from? Has the world grown worse and I
      better, or was I blind and indifferent before? But if the change is due to
      the general decline of my physical and mental powers—I am sick and
      losing weight every day—then I'm in a pitiable position. It means
      that my new thoughts are abnormal and unhealthy, that I must be ashamed of
      them and consider them valueless...."
    

      "Sickness hasn't anything to do with it," Katy interrupts. "Your eyes are
      opened—that's all. You've begun to notice things you didn't want to
      notice before for some reason. My opinion is that you must break with your
      family finally first of all and then go away."
    

      "You're talking nonsense."
    

      "You don't love them any more. Then, why do you behave unfairly? And is it
      a family! Mere nobodies. If they died to-day, no one would notice their
      absence to-morrow."
    

      Katy despises my wife and daughter as much as they hate her. It's scarcely
      possible nowadays to speak of the right of people to despise one another.
      But if you accept Katy's point of view and own that such a right exists,
      you will notice that she has the same right to despise my wife and Liza as
      they have to hate her.
    

      "Mere nobodies!" she repeats. "Did you have any dinner to-day? It's a
      wonder they didn't forget to tell you dinner was ready. I don't know how
      they still remember that you exist."
    

      "Katy!" I say sternly. "Please be quiet."
    

      "You don't think it's fun for me to talk about them, do you? I wish I
      didn't know them at all. You listen to me, dear. Leave everything and go
      away: go abroad—the quicker, the better."
    

      "What nonsense! What about the University?"
    

      "And the University, too. What is it to you? There's no sense in it all.
      You've been lecturing for thirty years, and where are your pupils? Have
      you many famous scholars? Count them up. But to increase the number of
      doctors who exploit the general ignorance and make hundreds of thousands,—there's
      no need to be a good and gifted man. You aren't wanted."
    

      "My God, how bitter you are!" I get terrified. "How bitter you are. Be
      quiet, or I'll go away. I can't reply to the bitter things you say."
    

      The maid enters and calls us to tea. Thank God, our conversation changes
      round the samovar. I have made my moan, and now I want to indulge another
      senile weakness—reminiscences. I tell Katy about my past, to my
      great surprise with details that I never suspected I had kept safe in my
      memory. And she listens to me with emotion, with pride, holding her
      breath. I like particularly to tell how I once was a student at a seminary
      and how I dreamed of entering the University.
    

      "I used to walk in the seminary garden," I tell her, "and the wind would
      bring the sound of a song and the thrumming of an accordion from a distant
      tavern, or a troika with bells would pass quickly by the seminary
      fence. That would be quite enough to fill not only my breast with a sense
      of happiness, but my stomach, legs, and hands. As I heard the sound of the
      accordion or the bells fading away, I would see myself a doctor and paint
      pictures, one more glorious than another. And, you see, my dreams came
      true. There were more things I dared to dream of. I have been a favourite
      professor thirty years, I have had excellent friends and an honourable
      reputation. I loved and married when I was passionately in love. I had
      children. Altogether, when I look back the whole of my life seems like a
      nice, clever composition. The only thing I have to do now is not to spoil
      the finale. For this, I must die like a man. If death is really a
      danger then I must meet it as becomes a teacher, a scholar, and a citizen
      of a Christian State. But I am spoiling the finale. I am drowning,
      and I run to you and beg for help, and you say: 'Drown. It's your duty.'"
    

      At this point a ring at the bell sounds in the hall. Katy and I both
      recognise it and say:
    

      "That must be Mikhail Fiodorovich."
    

      And indeed in a minute Mikhail Fiodorovich, my colleague, the philologist,
      enters. He is a tall, well-built man about fifty years old, clean shaven,
      with thick grey hair and black eyebrows. He is a good man and an admirable
      friend. He belongs to an old aristocratic family, a prosperous and gifted
      house which has played a notable rÃ´le in the history of our
      literature and education. He himself is clever, gifted, and highly
      educated, but not without his eccentricities. To a certain extent we are
      all eccentric, queer fellows, but his eccentricities have an element of
      the exceptional, not quite safe for his friends. Among the latter I know
      not a few who cannot see his many merits clearly because of his
      eccentricities.
    

      As he walks in he slowly removes his gloves and says in his velvety bass:
    

      "How do you do? Drinking tea. Just in time. It's hellishly cold."
    

      Then he sits down at the table, takes a glass of tea and immediately
      begins to talk. What chiefly marks his way of talking is his invariably
      ironical tone, a mixture of philosophy and jest, like Shakespeare's
      grave-diggers. He always talks of serious matters; but never seriously.
      His opinions are always acid and provocative, but thanks to his tender,
      easy, jesting tone, it somehow happens that his acidity and
      provocativeness don't tire one's ears, and one very soon gets used to it.
      Every evening he brings along some half-dozen stories of the university
      life and generally begins with them when he sits down at the table.
    

      "O Lord," he sighs with an amusing movement of his black eyebrows, "there
      are some funny people in the world."
    

      "Who?" asks Katy.
    

      "I was coming down after my lecture to-day and I met that old idiot N——
      on the stairs. He walks along, as usual pushing out that horse jowl of
      his, looking for some one to bewail his headaches, his wife, and his
      students, who won't come to his lectures. 'Well,' I think to myself, 'he's
      seen me. It's all up—no hope for And so on in the same strain. Or he
      begins like this,
    

      "Yesterday I was at Z's public lecture. Tell it not in Gath, but I do
      wonder how our alma mater dares to show the public such an ass,
      such a double-dyed blockhead as Z. Why he's a European fool. Good Lord,
      you won't find one like him in all Europe—not even if you looked in
      daytime, and with a lantern. Imagine it: he lectures as though he were
      sucking a stick of barley-sugar—su—su—su. He gets a
      fright because he can't make out his manuscript. His little thoughts will
      only just keep moving, hardly moving, like a bishop riding a bicycle.
      Above all you can't make out a word he says. The flies die of boredom,
      it's so terrific. It can only be compared with the boredom in the great
      Hall at the Commemoration, when the traditional speech is made. To hell
      with it!"
    

      Immediately an abrupt change of subject.
    

      "I had to make the speech; three years ago. Nicolai Stiepanovich will
      remember. It was hot, close. My full uniform was tight under my arms,
      tight as death. I read for half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half, two
      hours. 'Well,' I thought, 'thank God I've only ten pages left.' And I had
      four pages of peroration that I needn't read at all. 'Only six pages
      then,' I thought. Imagine it. I just gave a glance in front of me and saw
      sitting next to each other in the front row a general with a broad ribbon
      and a bishop. The poor devils were bored stiff. They were staring about
      madly to stop themselves from going to sleep. For all that they are still
      trying to look attentive, to make some appearance of understanding what
      I'm reading, and look as though they like it. 'Well,' I thought, 'if you
      like it, then you shall have it. I'll spite you.' So I set to and read the
      four pages, every word."
    

      When he speaks only his eyes and eyebrows smile as it is generally with
      the ironical. At such moments there is no hatred or malice in his eyes but
      a great deal of acuteness and that peculiar fox-cunning which you can
      catch only in very observant people. Further, about his eyes I have
      noticed one more peculiarity. When he takes his glass from Katy, or
      listens to her remarks, or follows her with a glance as she goes out of
      the room for a little while, then I catch in his look something humble,
      prayerful, pure....
    

      The maid takes the samovar away and puts on the table a big piece of
      cheese, some fruit, and a bottle of Crimean champagne, a thoroughly bad
      wine which Katy got to like when she lived in the Crimea. Mikhail
      Fiodorovich takes two packs of cards from the shelves and sets them out
      for patience. If one may believe his assurances, some games of patience
      demand a great power of combination and concentration. Nevertheless while
      he sets out the cards he amuses himself by talking continually. Katy
      follows his cards carefully, helping him more by mimicry than words. In
      the whole evening she drinks no more than two small glasses of wine, I
      drink only a quarter of a glass, the remainder of the bottle falls to
      Mikhail Fiodorovich, who can drink any amount without ever getting drunk.
    

      During patience we solve all kinds of questions, mostly of the lofty
      order, and our dearest love, science, comes off second best.
    

      "Science, thank God, has had her day," says Mikhail Fiodorovich very
      slowly. "She has had her swan-song. Ye-es. Mankind has begun to feel the
      desire to replace her by something else. She was grown from the soil of
      prejudice, fed by prejudices, and is now the same quintessence of
      prejudices as were her bygone grandmothers: alchemy, metaphysics and
      philosophy. As between European scholars and the Chinese who have no
      sciences at all the difference is merely trifling, a matter only of
      externals. The Chinese had no scientific knowledge, but what have they
      lost by that?"
    

      "Flies haven't any scientific knowledge either," I say; "but what does
      that prove?"
    

      "It's no use getting angry, Nicolai Stiepanich. I say this only between
      ourselves. I'm more cautious than you think. I shan't proclaim it from the
      housetops, God forbid! The masses still keep alive a prejudice that
      science and art are superior to agriculture and commerce, superior to
      crafts. Our persuasion makes a living from this prejudice. It's not for
      you and me to destroy it. God forbid!"
    

      During patience the younger generation also comes in for it.
    

      "Our public is degenerate nowadays," Mikhail Fiodorovich sighs. "I don't
      speak of ideals and such things, I only ask that they should be able to
      work and think decently. 'Sadly I look at the men of our time'—it's
      quite true in this connection."
    

      "Yes, they're frightfully degenerate," Katy agrees. "Tell me, had you one
      single eminent person under you during the last five or ten years?"
    

      "I don't know how it is with the other professors,—but somehow I
      don't recollect that it ever happened to me."
    

      "In my lifetime I've seen a great many of your students and young
      scholars, a great many actors.... What happened? I never once had the luck
      to meet, not a hero or a man of talent, but an ordinarily interesting
      person. Everything's dull and incapable, swollen and pretentious...."
    

      All these conversations about degeneracy give me always the impression
      that I have unwittingly overheard an unpleasant conversation about my
      daughter. I feel offended because the indictments are made wholesale and
      are based upon such ancient hackneyed commonplaces and such penny-dreadful
      notions as degeneracy, lack of ideals, or comparisons with the glorious
      past. Any indictment, even if it's made in a company of ladies, should be
      formulated with all possible precision; otherwise it isn't an indictment,
      but an empty calumny, unworthy of decent people.
    

      I am an old man, and have served for the last thirty years; but I don't
      see any sign either of degeneracy or the lack of ideals. I don't find it
      any worse now than before. My porter, Nicolas, whose experience in this
      case has its value, says that students nowadays are neither better nor
      worse than their predecessors.
    

      If I were asked what was the thing I did not like about my present pupils,
      I wouldn't say offhand or answer at length, but with a certain precision.
      I know their defects and there's no need for me to take refuge in a mist
      of commonplaces. I don't like the way they smoke, and drink spirits, and
      marry late; or the way they are careless and indifferent to the point of
      allowing students to go hungry in their midst, and not paying their debts
      into "The Students' Aid Society." They are ignorant of modern languages
      and express themselves incorrectly in Russian. Only yesterday my
      colleague, the hygienist, complained to me that he had to lecture twice as
      often because of their incompetent knowledge of physics and their complete
      ignorance of meteorology. They are readily influenced by the most modern
      writers, and some of those not the best, but they are absolutely
      indifferent to classics like Shakespeare, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus and
      Pascal; and their worldly unpracticality shows itself mostly in their
      inability to distinguish between great and small. They solve all difficult
      questions which have a more or less social character (emigration, for
      instance) by getting up subscriptions, but not by the method of scientific
      investigation and experiment, though this is at their full disposal, and,
      above all, corresponds to their vocation. They readily become
      house-doctors, assistant house-doctors, clinical assistants, or consulting
      doctors, and they are prepared to keep these positions until they are
      forty, though independence, a sense of freedom, and personal initiative
      are quite as necessary in science, as, for instance, in art or commerce. I
      have pupils and listeners, but I have no helpers or successors. Therefore
      I love them and am concerned for them, but I'm not proud of them ... and
      so on.
    

      However great the number of such defects may be, it's only in a cowardly
      and timid person that they give rise to pessimism and distraction. All of
      them are by nature accidental and transitory, and are completely dependent
      on the conditions of life. Ten years will be enough for them to disappear
      or give place to new and different defects, which are quite indispensable,
      but will in their turn give the timid a fright. Students' shortcomings
      often annoy me, but the annoyance is nothing in comparison with the joy I
      have had these thirty years in speaking with my pupils, lecturing to them,
      studying their relations and comparing them with people of a different
      class.
    

      Mikhail Fiodorovich is a slanderer. Katy listens and neither of them
      notices how deep is the pit into which they are drawn by such an outwardly
      innocuous recreation as condemning one's neighbours. They don't realise
      how a simple conversation gradually turns into mockery and derision, or
      how they both begin even to employ the manners of calumny.
    

      "There are some queer types to be found," says Mikhail Fiodorovich.
      "Yesterday I went to see our friend Yegor Pietrovich. There I found a
      student, one of your medicos, a third-year man, I think. His face ...
      rather in the style of Dobroliubov—the stamp of profound thought on
      his brow. We began to talk. 'My dear fellow—an extraordinary
      business. I've just read that some German or other—can't remember
      his name—has extracted a new alkaloid from the human brain—idiotine.'
      Do you know he really believed it, and produced an expression of respect
      on his face, as much as to say, 'See, what a power we are.'"
    

      "The other day I went to the theatre. I sat down. Just in front of me in
      the next row two people were sitting: one, 'one of the chosen,' evidently
      a law student, the other a whiskery medico. The medico was as drunk as a
      cobbler. Not an atom of attention to the stage. Dozing and nodding. But
      the moment some actor began to deliver a loud monologue, or just raised
      his voice, my medico thrills, digs his neighbour in the ribs. 'What's he
      say? Something noble?' 'Noble,' answers 'the chosen.'
    

      "'Brrravo!' bawls the medico. 'No—ble. Bravo.' You see the drunken
      blockhead didn't come to the theatre for art, but for something noble. He
      wants nobility."
    

      Katy listens and laughs. Her laugh is rather strange. She breathes out in
      swift, rhythmic, and regular alternation with her inward breathing. It's
      as though she were playing an accordion. Of her face, only her nostrils
      laugh. My heart fails me. I don't know what to say. I lose my temper,
      crimson, jump up from my seat and cry:
    

      "Be quiet, won't you? Why do you sit here like two toads, poisoning the
      air with your breath? I've had enough."
    

      In vain I wait for them to stop their slanders. I prepare to go home. And
      it's time, too. Past ten o'clock.
    

      "I'll sit here a little longer," says Mikhail Fiodorovich, "if you give me
      leave, Ekaterina Vladimirovna?"
    

      "You have my leave," Katy answers.
    

      "Bene. In that case, order another bottle, please."
    

      Together they escort me to the hall with candles in their hands. While I'm
      putting on my overcoat, Mikhail Fiodorovich says:
    

      "You've grown terribly thin and old lately. Nicolai Stiepanovich. What's
      the matter with you? Ill?
    

      "Yes, a little."
    

      "And he will not look after himself," Katy puts in sternly.
    

      "Why don't you look after yourself? How can you go on like this? God helps
      those who help themselves, my dear man. Give my regards to your family and
      make my excuses for not coming. One of these days, before I go abroad,
      I'll come to say good-bye. Without fail. I'm off next week."
    

      I came away from Katy's irritated, frightened by the talk about my illness
      and discontented with myself. "And why," I ask myself, "shouldn't I be
      attended by one of my colleagues?" Instantly I see how my friend, after
      sounding me, will go to the window silently, think a little while, turn
      towards me and say, indifferently, trying to prevent me from reading the
      truth in his face: "At the moment I don't see anything particular; but
      still, cher confrÃ¨re, I would advise you to break off your work...." And
      that will take my last hope away.
    

      Who doesn't have hopes? Nowadays, when I diagnose and treat myself, I
      sometimes hope that my ignorance deceives me, that I am mistaken about the
      albumen and sugar which I find, as well as about my heart, and also about
      the anasarca which I have noticed twice in the morning. While I read over
      the therapeutic text-books again with the eagerness of a hypochondriac,
      and change the prescriptions every day, I still believe that I will come
      across something hopeful. How trivial it all is!
    

      Whether the sky is cloudy all over or the moon and stars are shining in
      it, every time I come back home I look at it and think that death will
      take me soon. Surely at that moment my thoughts should be as deep as the
      sky, as bright, as striking ... but no! I think of myself, of my wife,
      Liza, Gnekker, the students, people in general. My thoughts are not good,
      they are mean; I juggle with myself, and at this moment my attitude
      towards life can be expressed in the words the famous Arakheev wrote in
      one of his intimate letters: "All good in the world is inseparably linked
      to bad, and there is always more bad than good." Which means that
      everything is ugly, there's nothing to live for, and the sixty-two years I
      have lived out must be counted as lost. I surprise myself in these
      thoughts and try to convince myself they are accidental and temporary and
      not deeply rooted in me, but I think immediately:
    

      "If that's true, why am I drawn every evening to those two toads." And I
      swear to myself never to go to Katy any more, though I know I will go to
      her again to-morrow.
    

      As I pull my door bell and go upstairs, I feel already that I have no
      family and no desire to return to it. It is plain my new, Arakheev
      thoughts are not accidental or temporary in me, but possess my whole
      being. With a bad conscience, dull, indolent, hardly able to move my
      limbs, as though I had a ten ton weight upon me, I lie down in my bed and
      soon fall asleep.
    

      And then—insomnia.
    


      IV
    

      The summer comes and life changes.
    

      One fine morning Liza comes in to me and says in a joking tone:
    

      "Come, Your Excellency. It's all ready."
    

      They lead My Excellency into the street, put me into a cab and drive me
      away. For want of occupation I read the signboards backwards as I go. The
      word "Tavern" becomes "Nrevat." That would do for a baron's name: Baroness
      Nrevat. Beyond, I drive across the field by the cemetery, which produces
      no impression upon me whatever, though I'll soon lie there. After a two
      hours' drive, My Excellency is led into the ground-floor of the bungalow,
      and put into a small, lively room with a light-blue paper.
    

      Insomnia at night as before, but I am no more wakeful in the morning and
      don't listen to my wife, but lie in bed. I don't sleep, but I am in a
      sleepy state, half-forgetfulness, when you know you are not asleep, but
      have dreams. I get up in the afternoon, and sit down at the table by force
      of habit, but now I don't work any more but amuse myself with French
      yellow-backs sent me by Katy. Of course it would be more patriotic to read
      Russian authors, but to tell the truth I'm not particularly disposed to
      them. Leaving out two or three old ones, all the modern literature doesn't
      seem to me to be literature but a unique home industry which exists only
      to be encouraged, but the goods are bought with reluctance. The best of
      these homemade goods can't be called remarkable and it's impossible to
      praise it sincerely without a saving "but"; and the same must be said of
      all the literary novelties I've read during the last ten or fifteen years.
      Not one remarkable, and you can't dispense with "but." They have
      cleverness, nobility, and no talent; talent, nobility and no cleverness;
      or finally, talent, cleverness, but no nobility.
    

      I would not say that French books have talent, cleverness, and nobility.
      Nor do they satisfy me. But they are not so boring as the Russian; and it
      is not rare to find in them the chief constituent of creative genius—the
      sense of personal freedom, which is lacking to Russian authors. I do not
      recall one single new book in which from the very first page the author
      did not try to tie himself up in all manner of conventions and contracts
      with his conscience. One is frightened to speak of the naked body, another
      is bound hand and foot by psychological analysis, a third must have "a
      kindly attitude to his fellow-men," the fourth heaps up whole pages with
      descriptions of nature on purpose to avoid any suspicion of a tendency....
      One desires to be in his books a bourgeois at all costs, another at all
      costs an aristocrat. Deliberation, cautiousness, cunning: but no freedom,
      no courage to write as one likes, and therefore no creative genius.
    

      All this refers to belles-lettres, so-called.
    

      As for serious articles in Russian, on sociology, for instance, or art and
      so forth, I don't read them, simply out of timidity. For some reason in my
      childhood and youth I had a fear of porters and theatre attendants, and
      this fear has remained with me up till now. Even now I am afraid of them.
      It is said that only that which one cannot understand seems terrible. And
      indeed it is very difficult to understand why hall-porters and theatre
      attendants are so pompous and haughty and importantly polite. When I read
      serious articles, I have exactly the same indefinable fear. Their
      portentous gravity, their playfulness, like an archbishop's, their
      over-familiar attitude to foreign authors, their capacity for talking
      dignified nonsense—"filling a vacuum with emptiness"—it is all
      inconceivable to me and terrifying, and quite unlike the modesty and the
      calm and gentlemanly tone to which I am accustomed when reading our
      writers on medicine and the natural sciences. Not only articles; I have
      difficulty also in reading translations even when they are edited by
      serious Russians. The presumptuous benevolence of the prefaces, the
      abundance of notes by the translator (which prevents one from
      concentrating), the parenthetical queries and sics, which are so
      liberally scattered over the book or the article by the translator—seem
      to me an assault on the author's person, as well as on my independence as
      a reader.
    

      Once I was invited as an expert to the High Court. In the interval one of
      my fellow-experts called my attention to the rude behaviour of the public
      prosecutor to the prisoners, among whom were two women intellectuals. I
      don't think I exaggerated at all when I replied to my colleague that he
      was not behaving more rudely than authors of serious articles behave to
      one another. Indeed their behaviour is so rude that one speaks of them
      with bitterness. They behave to each other or to the writers whom they
      criticise either with too much deference, careless of their own dignity,
      or, on the other hand, they treat them much worse than I have treated
      Gnekker, my future son-in-law, in these notes and thoughts of mine.
      Accusations of irresponsibility, of impure intentions, of any kind of
      crime even, are the usual adornment of serious articles. And this, as our
      young medicos love to say in their little articles—quite ultima
      ratio. Such an attitude must necessarily be reflected in the character
      of the young generation of writers, and therefore I'm not at all surprised
      that in the new books which, have been added to our belles lettres
      in the last ten or fifteen years, the heroes drink a great deal of vodka
      and the heroines are not sufficiently chaste.
    

      I read French books and look out of the window, which is open—I see
      the pointed palings of my little garden, two or three skinny trees, and
      there, beyond the garden, the road, fields, then a wide strip of young
      pine-forest. I often delight in watching a little boy and girl, both
      white-haired and ragged, climb on the garden fence and laugh at my
      baldness. In their shining little eyes I read, "Come out, thou bald-head."
      These are almost the only people who don't care a bit about my reputation
      or my title.
    

      I don't have visitors everyday now. I'll mention only the visits of
      Nicolas and Piotr Ignatievich. Nicolas comes to me usually on holidays,
      pretending to come on business, but really to see me. He is very
      hilarious, a thing which never happens to him in the winter.
    

      "Well, what have you got to say?" I ask him, coming out into the passage.
    

      "Your Excellency!" he says, pressing his hand to his heart and looking at
      me with a lover's rapture. "Your Excellency! So help me God! God strike me
      where I stand! Gaudeamus igitur juvenestus."
    

      And he kisses me eagerly on the shoulders, on my sleeves, and buttons.
    

      "Is everything all right over there?" I ask.
    

      "Your Excellency! I swear to God...."
    

      He never stops swearing, quite unnecessarily, and I soon get bored, and
      send him to the kitchen, where they give him dinner. Piotr Ignatievich
      also comes on holidays specially to visit me and communicate his thoughts
      to me. He usually sits by the table in my room, modest, clean, judicious,
      without daring to cross his legs or lean his elbows on the table, all the
      while telling me in a quiet, even voice what he considers very piquant
      items of news gathered from journals and pamphlets.
    

      These items are all alike and can be reduced to the following type: A
      Frenchman made a discovery. Another—a German—exposed him by
      showing that this discovery had been made as long ago as 1870 by some
      American. Then a third—also a German—outwitted them both by
      showing that both of them had been confused, by taking spherules of air
      under a microscope for dark pigment. Even when he wants to make me laugh,
      Piotr Ignatievich tells his story at great length, very much as though he
      were defending a thesis, enumerating his literary sources in detail, with
      every effort to avoid mistakes in the dates, the particular number of the
      journal and the names. Moreover, he does not say Petit simply but
      inevitably, Jean Jacques Petit. If he happens to stay to dinner, he will
      tell the same sort of piquant stories and drive all the company to
      despondency. If Gnekker and Liza begin to speak of fugues and
      counter-fugues in his presence he modestly lowers his eyes, and his face
      falls. He is ashamed that such trivialities should be spoken of in the
      presence of such serious men as him and me.
    

      In my present state of mind five minutes are enough for him to bore me as
      though I had seen and listened to him for a whole eternity. I hate the
      poor man. I wither away beneath his quiet, even voice and his bookish
      language. His stories make me stupid.... He cherishes the kindliest
      feelings towards me and talks to me only to give me pleasure. I reward him
      by staring at his face as if I wanted to hypnotise him, and thinking "Go
      away. Go, go...." But he is proof against my mental suggestion and sits,
      sits, sits....
    

      While he sits with me I cannot rid myself of the idea: "When I die, it's
      quite possible that he will be appointed in my place." Then my poor
      audience appears to me as an oasis where the stream has dried, up, and I
      am unkind to Piotr Ignatievich, and silent and morose as if he were guilty
      of such thoughts and not I myself. When he begins, as usual, to glorify
      the German scholars, I no longer jest good-naturedly, but murmur sternly:
    

      "They're fools, your Germans...."
    

      It's like the late Professor Nikita Krylov when he was bathing with
      Pirogov at Reval. He got angry with the water, which was very cold, and
      swore about "These scoundrelly Germans." I behave badly to Piotr
      Ignatievich; and it's only when he is going away and I see through the
      window his grey hat disappearing behind the garden fence, that I want to
      call him back and say: "Forgive me, my dear fellow."
    

      The dinner goes yet more wearily than in winter. The same Gnekker, whom I
      now hate and despise, dines with me every day. Before, I used to suffer
      his presence in silence, but now I say biting things to him, which make my
      wife and Liza blush. Carried away by an evil feeling, I often say things
      that are merely foolish, end don't know why I say them. Thus it happened
      once that after looking at Gnekker contemptuously for a long while, I
      suddenly fired off, for no reason at all:
    

      "Eagles than barnyard-fowls may lower bend; But fowls shall never to
      the heav'ns ascend."


      More's the pity that the fowl Gnekker shows himself more clever than the
      eagle professor. Knowing my wife and daughter are on his side he maintains
      these tactics. He replies to my shafts with a condescending silence ("The
      old man's off his head.... What's the good of talking to him?"), or makes
      good-humoured fun of me. It is amazing to what depths of pettiness a man
      may descend. During the whole dinner I can dream how Gnekker will be shown
      to be an adventurer, how Liza and my wife will realise their mistake, and
      I will tease them—ridiculous dreams like these at a time when I have
      one foot in the grave.
    

      Now there occur misunderstandings, of a kind which I formerly knew only by
      hearsay. Though it is painful I will describe one which occurred after
      dinner the other day. I sit in my room smoking a little pipe. Enters my
      wife, as usual, sits down and begins to talk. What a good idea it would be
      to go to Kharkov now while the weather is warm and there is the time, and
      inquire what kind of man our Gnekker is.
    

      "Very well. I'll go," I agree.
    

      My wife gets up, pleased with me, and walks to the door; but immediately
      returns:
    

      "By-the bye, I've one more favour to ask. I know you'll be angry; but it's
      my duty to warn you.... Forgive me, Nicolai,—but all our neighbours
      have begun to talk about the way you go to Katy's continually. I don't
      deny that she's clever and educated. It's pleasant to spend the time with
      her. But at your age and in your position it's rather strange to find
      pleasure in her society.... Besides she has a reputation enough to...."
    

      All my blood rushes instantly from my brain. My eyes flash fire. I catch
      hold of my hair, and stamp and cry, in a voice that is not mine:
    

      "Leave me alone, leave me, leave me...."
    

      My face is probably terrible, and my voice strange, for my wife suddenly
      gets pale, and calls aloud, with a despairing voice, also not her own. At
      our cries rush in Liza and Gnekker, then Yegor.
    

      My feet grow numb, as though they did not exist. I feel that I am falling
      into somebody's arms. Then I hear crying for a little while and sink into
      a faint which lasts for two or three hours.
    

      Now for Katy. She comes to see me before evening every day, which of
      course must be noticed by my neighbours and my friends. After a minute she
      takes me with her for a drive. She has her own horse and a new buggy she
      bought this summer. Generally she lives like a princess. She has taken an
      expensive detached bungalow with a big garden, and put into it all her
      town furniture. She has two maids and a coachman. I often ask her:
    

      "Katy, what will you live on when you've spent all your father's money?"
    

      "We'll see, then," she answers.
    

      "But this money deserves to be treated more seriously, my dear. It was
      earned by a good man and honest labour."
    

      "You've told me that before. I know."
    

      First we drive by the field, then by a young pine forest, which you can
      see from my window. Nature seems to me as beautiful as she used, although
      the devil whispers to me that all these pines and firs, the birds and
      white clouds in the sky will not notice my absence in three or four months
      when I am dead. Katy likes to take the reins, and it is good that the
      weather is fine and I am sitting by her side. She is in a happy mood, and
      does not say bitter things.
    

      "You're a very good man, Nicolai," she says. "You are a rare bird. There's
      no actor who could play your part. Mine or Mikhail's, for instance—even
      a bad actor could manage, but yours—there's nobody. I envy you, envy
      you terribly I What am I? What?"
    

      She thinks for a moment, and asks:
    

      "I'm a negative phenomenon, aren't I?"
    

      "Yes," I answer.
    

      "H'm ... what's to be done then?"
    

      What answer can I give? It's easy to say "Work," or "Give your property to
      the poor," or "Know yourself," and because it's so easy to say this I
      don't know what to answer.
    

      My therapeutist colleagues, when teaching methods of cure, advise one "to
      individualise each particular case." This advice must be followed in order
      to convince one's self that the remedies recommended in the text-books as
      the best and most thoroughly suitable as a general rule, are quite
      unsuitable in particular cases. It applies to moral affections as well.
      But I must answer something. So I say:
    

      "You've too much time on your hands, my dear. You must take up
      something.... In fact, why shouldn't you go on the stage again, if you
      have a vocation."
    

      "I can't."
    

      "You have the manner and tone of a victim. I don't like it, my dear. You
      have yourself to blame. Remember, you began by getting angry with people
      and things in general; but you never did anything to improve either of
      them. You didn't put up a struggle against the evil. You got tired. You're
      not a victim of the struggle but of your own weakness. Certainly you were
      young then and inexperienced. But now everything can be different. Come
      on, be an actress. You will work; you will serve in the temple of art."...
    

      "Don't be so clever, Nicolai," she interrupts. "Let's agree once for all:
      let's speak about actors, actresses, writers, but let us leave art out of
      it. You're a rare and excellent man. But you don't understand enough about
      art to consider it truly sacred. You have no flair, no ear for art.
      You've been busy all your life, and you never had time to acquire the flair.
      Really ... I don't love these conversations about art!" she continues
      nervously. "I don't love them. They've vulgarised it enough already, thank
      you."
    

      "Who's vulgarised it?"
    

      "They vulgarised it by their drunkenness, newspapers by their
      over-familiarity, clever people by philosophy."
    

      "What's philosophy got to do with it?"
    

      "A great deal. If a man philosophises, it means he doesn't understand."
    

      So that it should not come to bitter words, I hasten to change the
      subject, and then keep silence for a long while. It's not till we come out
      of the forest and drive towards Katy's bungalow, I return to the subject
      and ask:
    

      "Still, you haven't answered me why you don't want to go on the stage?"
    

      "Really, it's cruel," she cries out, and suddenly blushes all over. "You
      want me to tell you the truth outright. Very well if ... if you will have
      it I I've no talent! No talent and ... much ambition! There you are!"
    

      After this confession, she turns her face away from me, and to hide the
      trembling of her hands, tugs at the reins.
    

      As we approach her bungalow, from a distance we see Mikhail already,
      walking about by the gate, impatiently awaiting us.
    

      "This Fiodorovich again," Katy says with annoyance. "Please take him away
      from me. I'm sick of him. He's flat.... Let him go to the deuce."
    

      Mikhail Fiodorovich ought to have gone abroad long ago, but he has
      postponed his departure every week. There have been some changes in him
      lately. He's suddenly got thin, begun to be affected by drink—a
      thing that never happened to him before, and his black eyebrows have begun
      to get grey. When our buggy stops at the gate he cannot hide his joy and
      impatience. Anxiously he helps Katy and me from the buggy, hastily asks us
      questions, laughs, slowly rubs his hands, and that gentle, prayerful, pure
      something that I used to notice only in his eyes is now poured over all
      his face. He is happy and at the same time ashamed of his happiness,
      ashamed of his habit of coming to Katy's every evening, and he finds it
      necessary to give a reason for his coming, some obvious absurdity, like:
      "I was passing on business, and I thought I'd just drop in for a second."
    

      All three of us go indoors. First we drink tea, then our old friends, the
      two packs of cards, appear on the table, with a big piece of cheese, some
      fruit, and a bottle of Crimean champagne. The subjects of conversation are
      not new, but all exactly the same as they were in the winter. The
      university, the students, literature, the theatre—all of them come
      in for it. The air thickens with slanders, and grows more dose. It is
      poisoned by the breath, not of two toads as in winter, but now by all
      three. Besides the velvety, baritone laughter and the accordion-like
      giggle, the maid who waits upon us hears also the unpleasant jarring laugh
      of a musical comedy general: "He, he, he!"
    


      V
    

      There sometimes come fearful nights with thunder, lightning, rain, and
      wind, which the peasants call "sparrow-nights." There was one such
      sparrow-night in my own personal life....
    

      I wake after midnight and suddenly leap out of bed. Somehow it seems to me
      that I am going to die immediately. I do not know why, for there is no
      single sensation in my body which points to a quick end; but a terror
      presses on my soul as though I had suddenly seen a huge, ill-boding fire
      in the sky.
    

      I light the lamp quickly and drink some water straight out of the
      decanter. Then I hurry to the window. The weather is magnificent. The air
      smells of hay and some delicious thing besides. I see the spikes of my
      garden fence, the sleepy starveling trees by the window, the road, the
      dark strip of forest. There is a calm and brilliant moon in the sky and
      not a single cloud. Serenity. Not a leaf stirs. To me it seems that
      everything is looking at me and listening for me to die.
    

      Dread seizes me. I shut the window and run to the bed, I feel for my
      pulse. I cannot find it in my wrist; I seek it in my temples, my chin, my
      hand again. They are all cold and slippery with sweat. My breathing comes
      quicker and quicker; my body trembles, all my bowels are stirred, and my
      face and forehead feel as though a cobweb had settled on them.
    

      What shall I do? Shall I call my family? No use. I do not know what my
      wife and Liza will do when they come in to me.
    

      I hide my head under the pillow, shut my eyes and wait, wait.... My spine
      is cold. It almost contracts within me. And I feel that death will
      approach me only from behind, very quietly.
    

      "Kivi, kivi." A squeak sounds in the stillness of the night. I do not know
      whether it is in my heart or in the street.
    

      God, how awful! I would drink some more water; but now I dread opening my
      eyes, and fear to raise my head. The terror is unaccountable, animal. I
      cannot understand why I am afraid. Is it because I want to live, or
      because a new and unknown pain awaits me?
    

      Upstairs, above the ceiling, a moan, then a laugh ... I listen. A little
      after steps sound on the staircase. Someone hurries down, then up again.
      In a minute steps sound downstairs again. Someone stops by my door and
      listens.
    

      "Who's there?" I call.
    

      The door opens. I open my eyes boldly and see my wife. Her face is pale
      and her eyes red with weeping.
    

      "You're not asleep, Nicolai Stiepanovich?" she asks.
    

      "What is it?"
    

      "For God's sake go down to Liza. Something is wrong with her."
    

      "Very well ... with pleasure," I murmur, very glad that I am not alone.
      "Very well ... immediately."
    

      As I follow my wife I hear what she tells me, and from agitation
      understand not a word. Bright spots from her candle dance over the steps
      of the stairs; our long shadows tremble; my feet catch in the skirts of my
      dressing-gown. My breath goes, and it seems to me that someone is chasing
      me, trying to seize my back. "I shall die here on the staircase, this
      second," I think, "this second." But we have passed the staircase, the
      dark hall with the Italian window and we go into Liza's room. She sits in
      bed in her chemise; her bare legs hang down and she moans.
    

      "Oh, my God ... oh, my God!" she murmurs, half shutting her eyes from our
      candles. "I can't, I can't."
    

      "Liza, my child," I say, "what's the matter?"
    

      Seeing me, she calls out and falls on my neck.
    

      "Papa darling," she sobs. "Papa dearest ... my sweet. I don't know what it
      is.... It hurts."
    

      She embraces me, kisses me and lisps endearments which I heard her lisp
      when she was still a baby.
    

      "Be calm, my child. God's with you," I say. "You mustn't cry. Something
      hurts me too."
    

      I try to cover her with the bedclothes; my wife gives her to drink; and
      both of us jostle in confusion round the bed. My shoulders push into hers,
      and at that moment I remember how we used to bathe our children.
    

      "But help her, help her!" my wife implores. "Do something!" And what can I
      do? Nothing. There is some weight on the girl's soul; but I understand
      nothing, know nothing and can only murmur:
    

      "It's nothing, nothing.... It will pass.... Sleep, sleep."
    

      As if on purpose a dog suddenly howls in the yard, at first low and
      irresolute, then aloud, in two voices. I never put any value on such signs
      as dogs' whining or screeching owls; but now my heart contracts painfully,
      and I hasten to explain the howling.
    

      "Nonsense," I think. "It's the influence of one organism on another. My
      great nervous strain was transmitted to my wife, to Liza, and to the dog.
      That's all. Such transmissions explain presentiments and previsions."
    

      A little later when I return to my room to write a prescription for Liza I
      no longer think that I shall die soon. My soul simply feels heavy and
      dull, so that I am even sad that I did not die suddenly. For a long while
      I stand motionless in the middle of the room, pondering what I shall
      prescribe for Liza; but the moans above the ceiling are silent and I
      decide not to write a prescription, but stand there still.
    

      There is a dead silence, a silence, as one man wrote, that rings in one's
      ears. The time goes slowly. The bars of moonshine on the windowsill do not
      move from their place, as though congealed.... The dawn is still far away.
    

      But the garden-gate creaks; someone steals in, and strips a twig from the
      starveling trees, and cautiously knocks with it on my window.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanovich!" I hear a whisper. "Nicolai Stiepanovich!"
    

      I open the window, and I think that I am dreaming. Under the window, close
      against the wall stands a woman in a blade dress. She is brightly lighted
      by the moon and looks at me with wide eyes. Her face is pale, stem and
      fantastic in the moon, like marble. Her chin trembles.
    

      "It is I...." she says, "I ... Katy!"
    

      In the moon all women's eyes are big and black, people are taller and
      paler. Probably that is the reason why I did not recognise her in the
      first moment.
    

      "What's the matter?"
    

      "Forgive me," she says. "I suddenly felt so dreary ... I could not bear
      it. So I came here. There's a light in your window ... and I decided to
      knock.... Forgive me.... Ah, if you knew how dreary I felt! What are you
      doing now?"
    

      "Nothing. Insomnia."
    

      Her eyebrows lift, her eyes shine with tears and all her face is illumined
      as with light, with the familiar, but long unseen, look of confidence.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanovich!" she says imploringly, stretching out both her
      hands to me. "Dear, I beg you ... I implore.... If you do not despise my
      friendship and my respect for you, then do what I implore you."
    

      "What is it?"
    

      "Take my money."
    

      "What next? What's the good of your money to me?"
    

      "You will go somewhere to be cured. You must cure yourself. You will take
      it? Yes? Dear ... Yes?"
    

      She looks into my face eagerly and repeats:
    

      "Yes? You will take it?"
    

      "No, my dear, I won't take it....", I say. "Thank you."
    

      She turns her back to me and lowers her head. Probably the tone of my
      refusal would not allow any further talk of money.
    

      "Go home to sleep," I say. "I'll see you to-morrow."
    

      "It means, you don't consider me your friend?" she asks sadly.
    

      "I don't say that. But your money is no good to me."
    

      "Forgive me," she says lowering her voice by a full octave. "I understand
      you. To be obliged to a person like me ... a retired actress... But
      good-bye."
    

      And she walks away so quickly that I have no time even to say "Good-bye."
    


      VI
    

      I am in Kharkov.
    

      Since it would be useless to fight against my present mood, and I have no
      power to do it, I made up my mind that the last days of my life shall be
      irreproachable, on the formal side. If I am not right with my family,
      which I certainly admit, I will try at least to do as it wishes. Besides I
      am lately become so indifferent that it's positively all the same, to me
      whether I go to Kharkov, or Paris, or Berditshev.
    

      I arrived here at noon and put up at a hotel not far from the cathedral.
      The train made me giddy, the draughts blew through me, and now I am
      sitting on the bed with my head in my hands waiting for the tic. I ought
      to go to my professor friends to-day, but I have neither the will nor the
      strength.
    

      The old hall-porter comes in to ask whether I have brought my own
      bed-clothes. I keep him about five minutes asking him questions about
      Gnekker, on whose account I came here. The porter happens to be
      Kharkov-born, and knows the town inside out; but he doesn't remember any
      family with the name of Gnekker. I inquire about the estate. The answer is
      the same.
    

      The clock in the passage strikes one,... two,... three.... The last months
      of my life, while I wait for death, seem to me far longer than my whole
      life. Never before could I reconcile myself to the slowness of time as I
      can now. Before, when I had to wait for a train at the station, or to sit
      at an examination, a quarter of an hour would seem an eternity. Now I can
      sit motionless in bed the whole night long, quite calmly thinking that
      there will be the same long, colourless night to-morrow, and the next
      day....
    

      In the passage the clock strikes five, six, seven.... It grows dark. There
      is dull pain in my cheek—the beginning of the tic. To occupy myself
      with thoughts, I return to my old point of view, when I was not
      indifferent, and ask: Why do I, a famous man, a privy councillor, sit in
      this little room, on this bed with a strange grey blanket? Why do I look
      at this cheap tin washstand and listen to the wretched clock jarring in
      the passage? Is all this worthy of my fame and my high position among
      people? And I answer these questions with a smile. My naÃ¯vetÃ© seems funny
      to me—the naÃ¯vetÃ© with which as a young man I exaggerated the
      value of fame and of the exclusive position which famous men enjoy. I am
      famous, my name is spoken with reverence. My portrait has appeared in
      "Niva" and in "The Universal Illustration." I've even read my biography in
      a German paper, but what of that? I sit lonely, by myself, in a strange
      city, on a strange bed, rubbing my aching cheek with my palm....
    

      Family scandals, the hardness of creditors, the rudeness of railway men,
      the discomforts of the passport system, the expensive and unwholesome food
      at the buffets, the general coarseness and roughness of people,—all
      this and a great deal more that would take too long to put down, concerns
      me as much as it concerns any bourgeois who is known only in his own
      little street. Where is the exclusiveness of my position then? We will
      admit that I am infinitely famous, that I am a hero of whom my country is
      proud. All the newspapers give bulletins of my illness, the post is
      already bringing in sympathetic addresses from my friends, my pupils, and
      the public. But all this will not save me from dying in anguish on a
      stranger's bed in utter loneliness. Of course there is no one to blame for
      this. But I must confess I do not like my popularity. I feel that it has
      deceived me.
    

      At about ten I fall asleep, and, in spite of the tic sleep soundly, and
      would sleep for a long while were I not awakened. Just after one there is
      a sudden knock on my door.
    

      "Who's there?"
    

      "A telegram."
    

      "You could have brought it to-morrow," I storm, as I take the telegram
      from the porter. "Now I shan't sleep again."
    

      "I'm sorry. There was a light in your room. I thought you were not
      asleep."
    

      I open the telegram and look first at the signature—my wife's. What
      does she want?
    

      "Gnekker married Liza secretly yesterday. Return."
    

      I read the telegram. For a long while I am not startled. Not Gnekker's or
      Liza's action frightens me, but the indifference with which I receive the
      news of their marriage. Men say that philosophers and true savants
      are indifferent. It is untrue. Indifference is the paralysis of the soul,
      premature death.
    

      I go to bed again and begin to ponder with what thoughts I can occupy
      myself. What on earth shall I think of? I seem to have thought over
      everything, and now there is nothing powerful enough to rouse my thought.
    

      When the day begins to dawn, I sit in bed clasping my knees and, for want
      of occupation I try to know myself. "Know yourself" is good, useful
      advice; but it is a pity that the ancients did not think of showing us the
      way to avail ourselves of it.
    

      Before, when I had the desire to understand somebody else, or myself, I
      used not to take into consideration actions, wherein everything is
      conditional, but desires. Tell me what you want, and I will tell you what
      you are.
    

      And now I examine myself. What do I want?
    

      I want our wives, children, friends, and pupils to love in us, not the
      name or the firm or the label, but the ordinary human beings. What
      besides? I should like to have assistants and successors. What more? I
      should like to wake in a hundred years' time, and take a look, if only
      with one eye, at what has happened to science. I should like to live ten
      years more.... What further?
    

      Nothing further. I think, think a long while and cannot make out anything
      else. However much I were to think, wherever my thoughts should stray, it
      is clear to me that the chief, all-important something is lacking in my
      desires. In my infatuation for science, my desire to live, my sitting here
      on a strange bed, my yearning to know myself, in all the thoughts,
      feelings, and ideas I form about anything, there is wanting the something
      universal which could bind all these together in one whole. Each feeling
      and thought lives detached in me, and in all my opinions about science,
      the theatre, literature, and my pupils, and in all the little pictures
      which my imagination paints, not even the most cunning analyst will
      discover what is called the general idea, or the god of the living man.
    

      And if this is not there, then nothing is there.
    

      In poverty such as this a serious infirmity, fear of death, influence of
      circumstances and people would have been enough to overthrow and shatter
      all that I formerly considered as my conception of the world, and all
      wherein I saw the meaning and joy of my life. Therefore, it is nothing
      strange that I have darkened the last months of my life by thoughts and
      feelings worthy of a slave or a savage, and that I am now indifferent and
      do not notice the dawn. If there is lacking in a man that which is higher
      and stronger than all outside influences, then verily a good cold in the
      head is enough to upset his balance and to make him see each bird an owl
      and hear a dog's whine in every sound; and all his pessimism or his
      optimism with their attendant thoughts, great and small, seem then to be
      merely symptoms and no more.
    

      I am beaten. Then it's no good going on thinking, no good talking. I shall
      sit and wait in silence for what will come.
    

      In the morning the porter brings me tea and the local paper. Mechanically
      I read the advertisements on the first page, the leader, the extracts from
      newspapers and magazines, the local news ... Among other things I find in
      the local news an item like this: "Our famous scholar, emeritus professor
      Nicolai Stiepanovich arrived in Kharkov yesterday by the express, and
      stayed at——hotel."
    

      Evidently big names are created to live detached from those who bear them.
      Now my name walks in Kharkov undisturbed. In some three months it will
      shine as bright as the sun itself, inscribed in letters of gold on my
      tombstone—at a time when I myself will be under the sod....
    

      A faint knock at the door. Somebody wants me.
    

      "Who's there? Come in!"
    

      The door opens. I step back in astonishment, and hasten to pull my
      dressing gown together. Before me stands Katy.
    

      "How do you do?" she says, panting from running up the stairs. "You didn't
      expect me? I ... I've come too."
    

      She sits down and continues, stammering and looking away from me. "Why
      don't you say 'Good morning'? I arrived too ... to-day. I found out you
      were at this hotel, and came to see you."
    

      "I'm delighted to see you," I say shrugging my shoulders. "But I'm
      surprised. You might have dropped straight from heaven. What are you doing
      here?"
    

      "I?... I just came."
    

      Silence. Suddenly she gets up impetuously and comes over to me.
    

      "Nicolai Stiepanich!" she says, growing pale and pressing her hands to her
      breast. "Nicolai Stiepanich! I can't go on like this any longer. I can't.
      For God's sake tell me now, immediately. What shall I do? Tell me, what
      shall I do?"
    

      "What can I say? I am beaten. I can say nothing."
    

      "But tell me, I implore you," she continues, out of breath and trembling
      all over her body. "I swear to you, I can't go on like this any longer. I
      haven't the strength."
    

      She drops into a chair and begins to sob. She throws her head back, wrings
      her hands, stamps with her feet; her hat falls from her head and dangles
      by its string, her hair is loosened.
    

      "Help me, help," she implores. "I can't bear it any more."
    

      She takes a handkerchief out of her little travelling bag and with it
      pulls out some letters which fall from her knees to the floor. I pick them
      up from the floor and recognise on one of them Mikhail Fiodorovich's
      hand-writing, and accidentally read part of a word: "passionat...."
    

      "There's nothing that I can say to you, Katy," I say.
    

      "Help me," she sobs, seizing my hand and kissing it. "You're my father, my
      only friend. You're wise and learned, and you've lived long! You were a
      teacher. Tell me what to do."
    

      I am bewildered and surprised, stirred by her sobbing, and I can hardly
      stand upright.
    

      "Let's have some breakfast, Katy," I say with a constrained smile.
    

      Instantly I add in a sinking voice:
    

      "I shall be dead soon, Katy...."
    

      "Only one word, only one word," she weeps and stretches out her hands to
      me. "What shall I do?"
    

      "You're a queer thing, really....", I murmur. "I can't understand it. Such
      a clever woman and suddenly—weeping...."
    

      Comes silence. Katy arranges her hair, puts on her hat, then crumples her
      letters and stuffs them in her little bag, all in silence and unhurried.
      Her face, her bosom and her gloves are wet with tears, but her expression
      is dry already, stern.... I look at her and am ashamed that I am happier
      than she. It was but a little while before my death, in the ebb of my
      life, that I noticed in myself the absence of what our friends the
      philosophers call the general idea; but this poor thing's soul has never
      known and never will know shelter all her life, all her life.
    

      "Katy, let's have breakfast," I say.
    

      "No, thank you," she answers coldly.
    

      One minute more passes in silence.
    

      "I don't like Kharkov," I say. "It's too grey. A grey city."
    

      "Yes ... ugly.... I'm not here for long.... On my way. I leave to-day."
    

      "For where?"
    

      "For the Crimea ... I mean, the Caucasus."
    

      "So. For long?"
    

      "I don't know."
    

      Katy gets up and gives me her hand with a cold smile, looking away from
      me.
    

      I would like to ask her: "That means you won't be at my funeral?" But she
      does not look at me; her hand is cold and like a stranger's. I escort her
      to the door in silenqe.... She goes out of my room and walks down the long
      passage, without looking back. She knows that my eyes are following her,
      and probably on the landing she will look back.
    

      No, she did not look back. The black dress showed for the last time, her
      steps were stilled.... Goodbye, my treasure!
    





      I
    

      The medical student Mayer, and Ribnikov, a student at the Moscow school of
      painting, sculpture, and architecture, came one evening to their friend
      Vassiliev, law student, and proposed that he should go with them to S——v
      Street. For a long while Vassiliev did not agree, but eventually dressed
      himself and went with them.
    

      Unfortunate women he knew only by hearsay and from books, and never once
      in his life had he been in the houses where they live. He knew there were
      immoral women who were forced by the pressure of disastrous circumstances—environment,
      bad up-bringing, poverty, and the like—to sell their honour for
      money. They do not know pure love, have no children and no legal rights;
      mothers and sisters mourn them for dead, science treats them as an evil,
      men are familiar with them. But notwithstanding all this they do not lose
      the image and likeness of God. They all acknowledge their sin and hope for
      salvation. They are free to avail themselves of every means of salvation.
      True, Society does not forgive people their past, but with God Mary of
      Egypt is not lower than the other saints. Whenever Vassiliev recognised an
      unfortunate woman in the street by her costume or her manner, or saw a
      picture of one in a comic paper, there came into his mind every time a
      story he once read somewhere: a pure and heroic young man falls in love
      with an unfortunate woman and asks her to be his wife, but she,
      considering herself unworthy of such happiness, poisons herself.
    

      Vassiliev lived in one of the streets off the Tverskoi boulevard. When he
      and his friends came out of the house it was about eleven o'clock—the
      first snow had just fallen and all nature was under the spell of this new
      snow; The air smelt of snow, the snow cracked softly under foot, the
      earth, the roofs, the trees, the benches on the boulevards—all were
      soft, white, and young. Owing to this the houses had a different look from
      yesterday, the lamps burned brighter, the air was more transparent, the
      clatter of the cabs was dulled and there entered into the soul with the
      fresh, easy, frosty air a feeling like the white, young, feathery snow.
      "To these sad shores unknowing" the medico began to sing in a pleasant
      tenor, "An unknown power entices...."
    

      "Behold the mill" ... the painter's voice took him up, "it is now fall'n
      to ruin."
    

      "Behold the mill, it is now fall'n to ruin," the medico repeated, raising
      his eyebrows and sadly shaking his head.
    

      He was silent for a while, passed his hand over his forehead trying to
      recall the words, and began to sing in a loud voice and so well that the
      passers-by looked back.
    

      "Here, long ago, came free, free love to me"...
    

      All three went into a restaurant and without taking off their coats they
      each had two thimblefuls of vodka at the bar. Before drinking the second,
      Vassiliev noticed a piece of cork in his Vodka, lifted the glass to his
      eye, looked at it for a long while with a short-sighted frown. The medico
      misunderstood his expression and said—
    

      "Well, what are you staring at? No philosophy, please. Vodka's made to be
      drunk, caviare to be eaten, women to sleep with, snow to walk on. Live
      like a man for one evening."
    

      "Well, I've nothing to say," said Vassiliev laughingly, "I'm not
      refusing?"
    

      The vodka warmed his breast. He looked at his friends, admired and envied
      them. How balanced everything is in these healthy, strong, cheerful
      people. Everything in their minds and souls is smooth and rounded off.
      They sing, have a passion for the theatre, paint, talk continually, and
      drink, and they never have a headache the next day. They are romantic and
      dissolute, sentimental and insolent; they can work and go on the loose and
      laugh at nothing and talk rubbish; they are hot-headed, honest, heroic and
      as human beings not a bit worse than Vassiliev, who watches his every step
      and word, who is careful, cautious, and able to give the smallest trifle
      the dignity of a problem. And he made tip his mind if only for one evening
      to live like his friends, to let himself go, and be free from his own
      control. Must he drink vodka? He'll drink, even if his head falls to
      pieces to-morrow. Must he be taken to women? He'll go. He'll laugh, play
      the fool, and give a joking answer to disapproving passers-by.
    

      He came out of the restaurant laughing. He liked his friends—one in
      a battered hat with a wide brim who aped aesthetic disorder; the other in
      a sealskin cap, not very poor, with a pretence of learned Bohemia. He
      liked the snow, the paleness, the lamp-lights, the dear black prints which
      the passers' feet left on the snow. He liked the air, and above all the
      transparent, tender, naive, virgin tone which can be seen in nature only
      twice in the year: when everything is covered in snow, on the bright days
      in spring, and on moonlight nights when the ice breaks on the river.
    

      "To these sad shores unknowing," he began to sing sotto-voce, "An
      unknown power entices."
    

      And all the way for some reason or other he and his friends had this
      melody on their lips. All three hummed it mechanically out of time with
      each other.
    

      Vassiliev Imagined how in about ten minutes he and his friends would knock
      at a door, how they would stealthily walk through-the narrow little
      passages and dark rooms to the women, how he would take advantage of the
      dark, suddenly strike a match, and see lit up a suffering face and a
      guilty smile. There he will surely find a fair or a dark woman in a white
      nightgown with her hair loose. She will be frightened of the light,
      dreadfully confused and say: "Good God! What are you doing? Blow it out!"
      All this was frightening, but curious and novel.
    


      II
    

      The friends turned out of Trubnoi Square into the Grachovka and soon
      arrived at the street which Vassiliev knew only from hearsay. Seeing two
      rows of houses with brightly lighted windows and wide open doors, and
      hearing the gay sound of pianos and fiddles—sounds which flew out of
      all the doors and mingled in a strange confusion, as if somewhere in the
      darkness over the roof-tops an unseen orchestra were tuning, Vassiliev was
      bewildered and said:
    

      "What a lot of houses!"
    

      "What's that?" said the medico. "There are ten times as many in London.
      There are a hundred thousand of these women there."
    

      The cabmen sat on their boxes quiet and indifferent as in other streets;
      on the pavement walked the same passers-by. No one was in a hurry; no one
      hid his face in his collar; no one shook his head reproachfully. And in
      this indifference, in the confused sound of the pianos and fiddles, in the
      bright windows and wide-open doors, something very free, impudent, bold
      and daring could be felt. It must have been the same as this in the old
      times on the slave-markets, as gay and as noisy; people looked and walked
      with the same indifference.
    

      "Let's begin right at the beginning," said the painter.
    

      The friends walked into a narrow little passage lighted by a single lamp
      with a reflector. When they opened the door a man in a black jacket rose
      lazily from the yellow sofa in the hall. He had an unshaven lackey's face
      and sleepy eyes. The place smelt like a laundry, and of vinegar. From the
      hall a door led into a brightly lighted room. The medico and the painter
      stopped in the doorway, stretched out their necks and peeped into the room
      together:
    

      "Buona sera, signore, Rigoletto—huguenote—traviata!—"
      the painter began, making a theatrical bow.
    

      "Havanna—blackbeetlano—pistoletto!" said the medico, pressing
      his hat to his heart and bowing low.
    

      Vassiliev kept behind them. He wanted to bow theatrically too and say
      something silly. But he only smiled, felt awkward and ashamed, and awaited
      impatiently what was to follow. In the door appeared a little fair girl of
      seventeen or eighteen, with short hair, wearing a short blue dress with a
      white bow on her breast.
    

      "What are you standing in the door for?" she said. "Take off your
      overcoats and come into the salon."
    

      The medico and the painter went into the salon, still speaking Italian.
      Vassiliev followed them irresolutely.
    

      "Gentlemen, take off your overcoats," said the lackey stiffly. "You're not
      allowed in as you are."
    

      Besides the fair girl there was another woman in the salon, very stout and
      tall, with a foreign face and bare arms. She sat by the piano, with a game
      of patience spread on her knees. She took no notice of the guests.
    

      "Where are the other girls?" asked the medico.
    

      "They're drinking tea," said the fair one. "Stiepan," she called out. "Go
      and tell the girls some students have come!"
    

      A little later a third girl entered, in a bright red dress with blue
      stripes. Her face was thickly and unskilfully painted. Her forehead was
      hidden under her hair. She stared with dull, frightened eyes. As she came
      she immediately began to sing in a strong hoarse contralto. After her a
      fourth girl. After her a fifth.
    

      In all this Vassiliev saw nothing new or curious. It seemed to him that he
      had seen before, and more than once, this salon, piano, cheap gilt mirror,
      the white bow, the dress with blue stripes and the stupid, indifferent
      faces. But of darkness, quiet, mystery, and guilty smile—of all he
      had expected to meet here and which frightened him—he did not see
      even a shadow.
    

      Everything was commonplace, prosaic, and dull. Only one thing provoked his
      curiosity a little, that was the terrible, as it were intentional lack of
      taste, which was seen in the overmantels, the absurd pictures, the dresses
      and the White bow. In this lack of taste there was something
      characteristic and singular.
    

      "How poor and foolish it all is!" thought Vassiliev. "What is there in all
      this rubbish to tempt a normal man, to provoke him into committing a
      frightful sin, to buy a living soul for a rouble? I can understand anyone
      sinning for the sake of splendour, beauty, grace, passion; but what is
      there here? What tempts people here? But ... it's no good thinking!"
    

      "Whiskers, stand me champagne." The fair one turned to him.
    

      Vassiliev suddenly blushed.
    

      "With pleasure," he said, bowing politely. "But excuse me if I ... I don't
      drink with you, I don't drink."
    

      Five minutes after the friends were off to another house.
    

      "Why did you order drinks?" stormed the medico. "What a millionaire,
      flinging six roubles into the gutter like that for nothing at all."
    

      "Why shouldn't I give her pleasure if she wants it?" said Vassiliev,
      justifying himself.
    

      "You didn't give her any pleasure. Madame got that. It's Madame who tells
      them to ask the guests for drinks. She makes by it."
    

      "Behold the mill," the painter began to sing, "Now fall'n to ruin...."
    

      When they came to another house the friends stood outside in the
      vestibule, but did not enter the salon. As in the first house, a figure
      rose up from the sofa in the hall, in a black jacket, with a sleepy
      lackey's face. As he looked at this lackey, at his face and shabby jacket,
      Vassiliev thought: "What must an ordinary simple Russian go through before
      Fate casts him up here? Where was he before, and what was he doing? What
      awaits him? Is he married, where's his mother, and does she know he's a
      lackey here?" Thenceforward in every house Vassiliev involuntarily turned
      his attention to the lackey first of all.
    

      In one of the houses, it seemed to be the fourth, the lackey was a dry
      little, puny fellow, with a chain across his waistcoat. He was reading a
      newspaper and took no notice of the guests at all. Glancing at his face,
      Vassiliev had the idea that a fellow with a face like that could steal and
      murder and perjure. And indeed the face was interesting: a big forehead,
      grey eyes, a flat little nose, small close-set teeth, and the expression
      on his face dull and impudent at once, like a puppy hard on a hare.
      Vassiliev had the thought that he would like to touch this lackey's hair:
      is it rough or soft f It must be rough like a dog's.
    


      III
    

      Because he had had two glasses the painter suddenly got rather drunk, and
      unnaturally lively.
    

      "Let's go to another place," he added, waving his hands. "I'll introduce
      you to the best!"
    

      When he had taken his friends into the house which was according to him
      the best, he proclaimed a persistent desire to dance a quadrille. The
      medico began to grumble that they would have to pay the musicians a rouble
      but agreed to be his vis-Ã -vis. The dance began.
    

      It was just as bad in the best house as in the worst. Just the same
      mirrors and pictures were here, the same coiffures and dresses. Looking
      round at the furniture and the costumes Vassiliev now understood that it
      was not lack of taste, but something that might be called the particular
      taste and style of S——v Street, quite impossible to find
      anywhere else, something complete, not accidental, evolved in time. After
      he had been to eight houses he no longer wondered at the colour of the
      dresses or the long trains, or at the bright bows, or the sailor dresses,
      or the thick violent painting of the cheeks; he understood that all this
      was in harmony, that if only one woman dressed herself humanly, or one
      decent print hung on the wall, then the general tone of the whole street
      would suffer.
    

      How badly they manage the business? Can't they really understand that vice
      is only fascinating when it is beautiful and secret, hidden under the
      cloak of virtue? Modest black dresses, pale faces, sad smiles, and
      darkness act more strongly than this clumsy tinsel. Idiots! If they don't
      understand it themselves, their guests ought to teach them....
    

      A girl in a Polish costume trimmed with white fur came up close to him and
      sat down by his side.
    

      "Why don't you dance, my brown-haired darling?" she asked. "What do you
      fed so bored about?"
    

      "Because it is boring."
    

      "Stand me a ChÃ¢teau Lafitte, then you won't be bored."
    

      Vassiliev made no answer. For a little while he was silent, then he asked:
    

      "What time do you go to bed as a rule?"
    

      "Six."
    

      "When do you get up?"
    

      "Sometimes two, sometimes three."
    

      "And after you get up what do you do?"
    

      "We drink coffee. We have dinner at seven."
    

      "And what do you have for dinner?"
    

      "Soup or schi as a rule, beef-steak, dessert. Our madame keeps the
      girls well. But what are you asking all this for?"
    

      "Just to have a talk...."
    

      Vassiliev wanted to ask about all sorts of things. He had a strong desire
      to find out where she came from, were her parents alive, and did they know
      she was here; how she got into the house; was she happy and contented, or
      gloomy and depressed with dark thoughts. Does she ever hope to escape....
      But he could not possibly think how to begin, or how to put his questions
      without seeming indiscreet. He thought for a long while and asked:
    

      "How old are you?"
    

      "Eighty," joked the girl, looking and laughing at the tricks the painter
      was doing with his hands and feet.
    

      She suddenly giggled and uttered a long filthy expression aloud so that
      every one could hear.
    

      Vassiliev, terrified, not knowing how to look, began to laugh uneasily. He
      alone smiled: all the others, his friends, the musicians and the women—paid
      no attention to his neighbour. They might never have heard.
    

      "Stand me a Lafitte," said the girl again.
    

      Vassiliev was suddenly repelled by her white trimming and her voice and
      left her. It seemed to him close and hot. His heart began to beat slowly
      and violently, like a hammer, one, two, three.
    

      "Let's get out of here," he said, pulling the painter's sleeve.
    

      "Wait. Let's finish it."
    

      While the medico and the painter were finishing their quadrille,
      Vassiliev, in order to avoid the women, eyed the musicians. The pianist
      was a nice old man with spectacles, with a face like Marshal Basin; the
      fiddler a young man with a short, fair beard dressed in the latest
      fashion. The young man was not stupid or starved, on the contrary he
      looked clever, young and fresh. He was dressed with a touch of
      originality, and played with emotion. Problem: how did he and the decent
      old man get here? Why aren't they ashamed to sit here? What do they think
      about when they look at the women?
    

      If the piano and the fiddle were played by ragged, hungry, gloomy, drunken
      creatures, with thin stupid faces, then their presence would perhaps be
      intelligible. As it was, Vassiliev could understand. nothing. Into his
      memory came the story that he had read about the unfortunate woman, and
      now he found that the human figure with the guilty smile had nothing to do
      with this. It seemed to him that they were not unfortunate women that he
      saw, but they belonged to another, utterly different world, foreign and
      inconceivable to him; if he had seen this world on the stage or read about
      it in a book he would never have believed it.... The girl with the white
      trimming giggled again and said something disgusting aloud. He felt sick,
      blushed, and went out:
    

      "Wait. We're coming too," cried the painter.
    


      IV
    

      "I had a talk with my mam'selle while we were dancing," said the
      medico when all three came into the street. "The subject was her first
      love. He was a bookkeeper in Smolensk with a wife and five
      children. She was seventeen and lived with her pa and ma who kept a soap
      and candle shop."
    

      "How did he conquer her heart?" asked Vassiliev.
    

      "He bought her fifty roubles'-worth of underclothes—Lord knows
      what!"
    

      "However could he get her love-story out of his girl?" thought Vassiliev.
      "I can't. My dear chaps, I'm off home," he said.
    

      "Why?"
    

      "Because I don't know how to get on here. I'm bored and disgusted. What is
      there amusing about it? If they were only human beings; but they're
      savages and beasts. I'm going, please."
    

      "Grisha darling, please," the painter said with a sob in his voice,
      pressing close to Vassiliev, "let's go to one more—then to Hell with
      them. Do come, Grigor."
    

      They prevailed on Vassiliev and led him up a staircase. The carpet and the
      gilded balustrade, the porter who opened the door, the panels which
      decorated the hall, were still in the same S——v Street style,
      but here it was perfected and imposing.
    

      "Really I'm going home," said Vassiliev, taking off his overcoat.
    

      "Darling, please, please," said the painter and kissed him on the neck.
      "Don't be so faddy, Grigri—be a pal. Together we came, together we
      go. What a beast you are though!"
    

      "I can wait for you in the street. My God, it's disgusting here."
    

      "Please, please.... You just look on, see, just look on."
    

      "One should look at things objectively," said the medico seriously.
    

      Vassiliev entered the salon and sat down. There were many more guests
      besides him and his friends: two infantry officers, a grey, bald-headed
      gentleman with gold spectacles, two young clean-shaven men from the
      Surveyors' Institute, and a very drunk man with an actor's face. All the
      girls were looking after these guests and took no notice of Vassiliev.
      Only one of them dressed like AÃ¯da glanced at him sideways, smiled at
      something and said with a yawn:
    

      "So the dark one's come."
    

      Vassiliev's heart was beating and his face was burning. He felt ashamed
      for being there, disgusted and tormented. He was tortured by the thought
      that he, a decent and affectionate man (so he considered himself up till
      now), despised these women and felt nothing towards them but repulsion. He
      could not feel pity for them or for the musicians or the lackeys.
    

      "It's because I don't try to understand them," he thought. "They're all
      more like beasts than human beings; but all the same they are human
      beings. They've got souls. One should understand them first, then judge
      them."
    

      "Grisha, don't go away. Wait for us," called the painter; and he
      disappeared somewhere.
    

      Soon the medico disappeared also.
    

      "Yes, one should try to understand. It's no good, otherwise," thought
      Vassiliev, and he began to examine intently the face of each girl, looking
      for the guilty smile. But whether he could not read faces or because none
      of these women felt guilty he saw in each face only a dull look of common,
      vulgar boredom and satiety. Stupid eyes, stupid smiles, harsh, stupid
      voices, impudent gestures—and nothing else. Evidently every woman
      had in her past a love romance with a bookkeeper and fifty roubles'-worth
      of underclothes. And in the present the only good things in life were
      coffee, a three-course dinner, wine, quadrilles, and sleeping till two in
      the afternoon....
    

      Finding not one guilty smile, Vassiliev began to examine them to see if
      even one looked clever and his attention was arrested by one pale, rather
      tired face. It was that of a dark woman no longer young, wearing a dress
      scattered with spangles. She sat in a chair staring at the floor and
      thinking of something. Vassiliev paced up and down and then sat down
      beside her as if by accident.
    

      "One must begin with something trivial," he thought, "and gradually pass
      on to serious conversation...."
    

      "What a beautiful little dress you have on," he said, and touched the gold
      fringe of her scarf with his finger.
    

      "It's all right," said the dark woman.
    

      "Where do you come from?"
    

      "I? A long way. From Tchernigov."
    

      "It's a nice part."
    

      "It always is, where you don't happen to be."
    

      "What a pity I can't describe nature," thought Vassiliev. "I'd move her by
      descriptions of Tchernigov. She must love it if she was born there."
    

      "Do you feel lonely here?" he asked.
    

      "Of course I'm lonely."
    

      "Why don't you go away from here, if you're lonely?"
    

      "Where shall I go to? Start begging, eh?"
    

      "It's easier to beg than to live here."
    

      "Where did you get that idea? Have you been a beggar?"
    

      "I begged, when I hadn't enough to pay my university fees; and even if I
      hadn't begged it's easy enough to understand. A beggar is a free man, at
      any rate, and you're a slave."
    

      The dark woman stretched herself, and followed with sleepy eyes the lackey
      who carried a tray of glasses and soda-water.
    

      "Stand us a champagne," she said, and yawned again.
    

      "Champagne," said Vassiliev. "What would happen if your mother or your
      brother suddenly came in? What would you say? And what would they say? You
      would say 'champagne' then."
    

      Suddenly the noise of crying was heard. From the next room where the
      lackey had carried the soda-water, a fair man rushed out with a red face
      and angry eyes. He was followed by the tall, stout madame, who screamed in
      a squeaky voice:
    

      "No one gave you permission to slap the girls in the face. Better class
      than you come here, and never slap a girl. You bounder!"
    

      Followed an uproar. Vassiliev was scared and went white. In the next room
      some one wept, sobbing, sincerely, as only the insulted weep. And he
      understood that indeed human beings lived here, actually human beings, who
      get offended, suffer, weep, and ask for help. The smouldering hatred, the
      feeling of repulsion, gave way to an acute sense of pity and anger against
      the wrong-doer. He rushed into the room from which the weeping came.
      Through the rows of bottles which stood on the marble table-top he saw a
      suffering tear-stained face, stretched out his hands towards this face,
      stepped to the table and instantly gave a leap back in terror. The sobbing
      woman was dead-drunk.
    

      As he made his way through the noisy crowd, gathered round the fair man,
      his heart failed him, he lost his courage like a boy, and it seemed to him
      that in this foreign, inconceivable world, they wanted to run after him,
      to beat him, to abuse him with foul words. He tore down his coat from the
      peg and rushed headlong down the stairs.
    


      V
    

      Pressing dose to the fence, he stood near to the house and waited for his
      friends to come out. The sounds of the pianos and fiddles, gay, bold,
      impudent and sad, mingled into chaos in the air, and this confusion was,
      as before, as if an unseen orchestra were tuning in the dark over the
      roof-tops. If he looked up towards the darkness, then all the background
      was scattered with white, moving points: it was snowing. The flakes,
      coming into the light, spun lazily in the air like feathers, and still
      more lazily fell. Flakes of snow crowded whirling about Vassiliev, and
      hung on his beard, his eyelashes, his eyebrows. The cabmen, the horses,
      and the passers-by, all were white.
    

      "How dare the snow fall in this street?" thought Vassiliev. "A curse on
      these houses."
    

      Because of his headlong rush down the staircase his feet failed him from
      weariness; he was out of breath as if he had climbed a mountain. His heart
      beat so loud that he could hear it. A longing came over him to get out of
      this street as soon as possible and go home; but still stronger was his
      desire to wait for his friends and to vent upon them his feeling of
      heaviness.
    

      He had not understood many things in the houses. The souls of the
      perishing women were to him a mystery as before; but it was dear to him
      that the business was much worse than one would have thought. If the
      guilty woman who poisoned herself was called a prostitute, then it was
      hard to find a suitable name for all these creatures, who danced to the
      muddling music and said long, disgusting phrases. They were not perishing;
      they were already done for.
    

      "Vice is here," he thought; "but there is neither confession of sin nor
      hope of salvation. They are bought and sold, drowned in wine and torpor,
      and they are dull and indifferent as sheep and do not understand. My God,
      my God!"
    

      It was so dear to him that all that which is called human dignity,
      individuality, the image and likeness of God, was here dragged down to the
      gutter, as they say of drunkards, and that not only the street and the
      stupid women were to blame for it.
    

      A crowd of students white with snow, talking and laughing gaily, passed
      by. One of them, a tall, thin man, peered into Vassiliev's face and said
      drunkenly, "He's one of ours. Logged, old man? Aha! my lad. Never mind.
      Walk up, never say die, uncle."
    

      He took Vassiliev by the shoulders and pressed his cold wet moustaches to
      his cheek, then slipped, staggered, brandished his arms, and cried out:
    

      "Steady there—don't fall."
    

      Laughing, he ran to join his comrades.
    

      Through the noise the painter's voice became audible.
    

      "You dare beat women! I won't have it. Go to Hell. You're regular swine."
    

      The medico appeared at the door of the house. He glanced round and on
      seeing Vassiliev, said in alarm:
    

      "Is that you? My God, it's simply impossible to go anywhere with Yegor. I
      can't understand a chap like that. He kicked up a row—can't you
      hear? Yegor," he called from the door. "Yegor!"
    

      "I won't have you hitting women." The painter's shrill voice was audible
      again from upstairs.
    

      Something heavy and bulky tumbled down the staircase. It was the painter
      coming head over heels. He had evidently been thrown out.
    

      He lifted himself up from the ground, dusted his hat, and with an angry
      indignant face, shook his fist at the upstairs.
    

      "Scoundrels! Butchers! Bloodsuckers! I won't have you hitting a weak,
      drunken woman. Ah, you...."
    

      "Yegor ... Yegor!" the medico began to implore, "I give my word I'll never
      go out with you again. Upon my honour, I won't."
    

      The painter gradually calmed, and the friends went home.
    

      "To these sad shores unknowing"—the medico began—"An unknown
      power entices...."
    

      "Behold the mill," the painter sang with him after a pause, "Now fallen
      into ruin." How the snow is falling, most Holy Mother. Why did you go
      away, Grisha? You're a coward; you're only an old woman."
    

      Vassiliev was walking behind his friends. He stared at their backs and
      thought: "One of two things: either prostitution only seems to us an evil
      and we exaggerate it, or if prostitution is really such an evil as is
      commonly thought, these charming friends of mine are just as much slavers,
      violators, and murderers as the inhabitants of Syria and Cairo whose
      photographs appear in 'The Field.' They're singing, laughing, arguing
      soundly now, but haven't they just been exploiting starvation, ignorance,
      and stupidity? They have, I saw them at it. Where does their humanity,
      their science, and their painting come in, then? The science, art, and
      lofty sentiments of these murderers remind me of the lump of fat in the
      story. Two robbers killed a beggar in a forest; they began to divide his
      clothes between themselves and found in his bag a lump of pork fat. 'In
      the nick of time,' said one of them. 'Let's have a bite!' 'How can you?'
      the other cried in terror. 'Have you forgotten to-day's Friday?' So they
      refrained from eating. After having cut the man's throat they walked out
      of the forest confident that they were pious fellows. These two are just
      the same. When they've paid for women they go and imagine they're painters
      and scholars....
    

      "Listen, you two," he said angrily and sharply. "Why do you go to those
      places? Can't you understand how horrible they are? Your medicine tells
      you every one of these women dies prematurely from consumption or
      something else; your arts tell you that she died morally still earlier.
      Each of them dies because during her lifetime she accepts on an average,
      let us say, five hundred men. Each of them is killed by five hundred men,
      and you're amongst the five hundred. Now if each of you comes here and to
      places like this two hundred and fifty times in his lifetime, then it
      means that between you you have killed one woman. Can't you understand
      that? Isn't it horrible?"
    

      "Ah, isn't this awful, my God?"
    

      "There, I knew it would end like this," said the painter frowning. "We
      oughtn't to have had anything to do with this fool of a blockhead. I
      suppose you think your head's full of great thoughts and great ideas now.
      Devil knows what they are, but they're not ideas. You're staring at me now
      with hatred and disgust; but if you want my opinion you'd better build
      twenty more of the houses than look like that. There's more vice in your
      look than in the whole street. Let's dear out, Volodya, damn him! He's a
      fool. He's a blockhead, and that's all he is."
    

      "Human beings are always killing each other," said the medico. "That is
      immoral, of course. But philosophy won't help you. Good-bye!"
    

      The friends parted at Trubnoi Square and went their way. Left alone,
      Vassiliev began to stride along the boulevard. He was frightened of the
      dark, frightened of the snow, which fell to the earth in little flakes,
      but seemed to long to cover the whole world; he was frightened of the
      street-lamps, which glimmered faintly through the clouds of snow. An
      inexplicable faint-hearted fear possessed his soul. Now and then people
      passed him; but he gave a start and stepped aside. It seemed to him that
      from everywhere there came and stared at him women, only women....
    

      "It's coming on," he thought, "I'm going to have a fit."
    


      VI
    

      At home he lay on his bed and began to talk, shivering all over his body.
    

      "Live women, live.... My God, they're alive."
    

      He sharpened the edge of his imagination in every possible way. Now he was
      the brother of an unfortunate, now her father. Now he was himself a fallen
      woman, with painted cheeks; and all this terrified him.
    

      It seemed to him somehow that he must solve this question immediately, at
      all costs, and that the problem was not strange to him, but was his own.
      He made a great effort, conquered his despair, and, sitting on the side of
      the bed, his head clutched in his hands, he began to think:
    

      How could all the women he had seen that night be saved? The process of
      solving a problem was familiar to him as to a learned person; and
      notwithstanding all his excitement he kept strictly to this process. He
      recalled to mind the history of the question, its literature, and just
      after three o'clock he was pacing up and down, trying to remember all the
      experiments which are practised nowadays for the salvation of women. He
      had a great many good friends who lived in furnished rooms, Falzfein,
      Galyashkin, Nechaiev, Yechkin ... not a few among them were honest and
      self-sacrificing, and some of them had attempted to save these women....
    

      All these few attempts, thought Vassiliev, rare attempts, may be divided
      into three groups. Some having rescued a woman from a brothel hired a room
      for her, bought her a sewing-machine and she became a dressmaker, and the
      man who saved her kept her for his mistress, openly or otherwise, but
      later when he had finished his studies and was going away, he would hand
      her over to another decent fellow. So the fallen woman remained fallen.
      Others after having bought her out also hired a room for her, bought the
      inevitable sewing-machine and started her off reading and writing and
      preached at her. The woman sits and sews as long as it is novel and
      amusing, but later, when she is bored, she begins to receive men secretly,
      or runs back to where she can sleep till three in the afternoon, drink
      coffee, and eat till she is full. Finally, the most ardent and
      self-sacrificing take a bold, determined step. They marry, and when the
      impudent, self-indulgent, stupefied creature becomes a wife, a lady of the
      house, and then a mother, her life and outlook are utterly changed, and in
      the wife and mother it is hard to recognise the unfortunate woman. Yes,
      marriage is the best, it may be the only, resource.
    

      "But it's impossible," Vassiliev said aloud and threw himself down on his
      bed. "First of all, I could not marry one. One would have to be a saint to
      be able to do it, unable to hate, not knowing disgust. But let us suppose
      that the painter, the medico, and I got the better of our feelings and
      married, that all these women got married, what is the result? What kind
      of effect follows? The result is that while the women get married here in
      Moscow, the Smolensk bookkeeper seduces a fresh lot, and these will pour
      into the empty places, together with women from Saratov, Nijni-Novgorod,
      Warsaw.... And what happens to the hundred thousand in London? What can be
      done with those in Hamburg?
    

      The oil in the lamp was used up and the lamp began to smell. Vassiliev did
      not notice it. Again he began to pace up and down, thinking. Now he put
      the question differently. What can be done to remove the demand for fallen
      women? For this it is necessary that the men who buy and kill them should
      at once begin to feel all the immorality of their rÃ´le of
      slave-owners, and this should terrify them. It is necessary to save the
      men.
    

      Science and art apparently won't do, thought Vassiliev. There is only one
      way out—to be an apostle.
    

      And he began to dream how he would stand to-morrow evening at the corner
      of the street and say to each passer-by: "Where are you going and what
      for? Fear God!"
    

      He would turn to the indifferent cabmen and say to them:
    

      "Why are you standing here? Why don't you revolt? You do believe in God,
      don't you? And you do know that this is a crime, and that people will go
      to Hell for this? Why do you keep quiet, then? True, the women are
      strangers to you, but they have fathers and brothers exactly the same as
      you...."
    

      Some friend of Vassiliev's once said of him that he was a man of talent.
      There is a talent for writing, for the theatre, for painting; but
      Vassiliev's was peculiar, a talent for humanity. He had a fine and noble
      flair for every kind of suffering. As a good actor reflects in
      himself the movement and voice of another, so Vassiliev could reflect in
      himself another's pain. Seeing tears, he wept. With a sick person, he
      himself became sick and moaned. If he saw violence done, it seemed to him
      that he was the victim. He was frightened like a child, and, frightened,
      ran for help. Another's pain roused him, excited him, threw him into a
      state of ecstasy....
    

      Whether the friend was right I do not know, but what happened to Vassiliev
      when it seemed to him that the question was solved was very much like an
      ecstasy. He sobbed, laughed, said aloud the things he would say to-morrow,
      felt a burning love for the men who would listen to him and stand by his
      side at the corner of the street, preaching. He sat down to write to them;
      he made vows.
    

      All this was the more like an ecstasy in that it did not last. Vassiliev
      was soon tired. The London women, the Hamburg women, those from Warsaw,
      crushed him with their mass, as the mountains crush the earth. He quailed
      before this mass; he lost himself; he remembered he had no gift for
      speaking, that he was timid and faint-hearted, that strange people would
      hardly want to listen to and understand him, a law-student in his third
      year, a frightened and insignificant figure. The true apostleship
      consisted, not only in preaching, but also in deeds....
    

      When daylight came and the carts rattled on the streets, Vassiliev lay
      motionless on the sofa, staring at one point. He did not think any more of
      women, or men, or apostles. All his attention was fixed on the pain of his
      soul which tormented him. It was a dull pain, indefinite, vague; it was
      like anguish and the most acute fear and despair. He could say where the
      pain was. It was in his breast, under the heart. It could not be compared
      to anything. Once on a time he used to have violent toothache. Once, he
      had pleurisy and neuralgia. But all these pains were as nothing beside the
      pain of his soul. Beneath this pain life seemed repulsive. The thesis, his
      brilliant work already written, the people he loved, the salvation of
      fallen women, all that which only yesterday he loved or was indifferent
      to, remembered now, irritated him in the same way as the noise of the
      carts, the running about of the porters and the daylight.... If someone
      now were to perform before his eyes a deed of mercy or an act of revolting
      violence, both would produce upon him an equally repulsive impression. Of
      all the thoughts which roved lazily in his head, two only did not irritate
      him: one—at any moment he had the power to kill himself, the other—that
      the pain would not last more than three days. The second he knew from
      experience.
    

      After having lain down for a while he got up and walked wringing his
      hands, not from corner to corner as usually, but in a square along the
      walls. He caught a glimpse of himself in the glass. His face was pale and
      haggard, his temples hollow, his eyes bigger, darker, more immobile, as if
      they were not his own, and they expressed the intolerable suffering of his
      soul.
    

      In the afternoon the painter knocked at the door.
    

      "Gregory, are you at home?" he asked.
    

      Receiving no answer, he stood musing for a while, and said to himself
      good-naturedly:
    

      "Out. He's gone to the University. Damn him."
    

      And went away.
    

      Vassiliev lay down on his bed and burying his head in the pillow he began
      to cry with the pain. But the faster his tears flowed, the more terrible
      was the pain. When it was dark, he got into his mind the idea of the
      horrible night which was awaiting him and awful despair seized him. He
      dressed quickly, ran out of his room, leaving the door wide open, and into
      the street without reason or purpose. Without asking himself where he was
      going, he walked quickly to Sadovaia Street.
    

      Snow was falling as yesterday. It was thawing. Putting his hands into his
      sleeves, shivering, and frightened of the noises and the bells of the
      trams and of passers-by, Vassiliev walked from Sadovaia to Sukhariev Tower
      then to the Red Gates, and from here he turned and went to Basmannaia. He
      went into a public-house and gulped down a big glass of vodka, but felt no
      better. Arriving at Razgoulyai, he turned to the right and began to stride
      down streets that he had never in his life been down before. He came to
      that old bridge under which the river Yaouza roars and from whence long
      rows of lights are seen in the windows of the Red Barracks. In order to
      distract the pain of his soul by a new sensation or another pain, not
      knowing what to do, weeping and trembling, Vassiliev unbuttoned his coat
      and jacket, baring his naked breast to the damp snow and the wind. Neither
      lessened the pain. Then he bent over the rail of the bridge and stared
      down at the black, turbulent Yaouza, and he suddenly wanted to throw
      himself head-first, not from hatred of life, not for the sake of suicide,
      but only to hurt himself and so to kill one pain by another. But the black
      water, the dark, deserted banks covered with snow were frightening. He
      shuddered and went on. He walked as far as the Red Barracks, then back and
      into a wood, from the wood to the bridge again.
    

      "No! Home, home," he thought. "At home I believe it's easier."
    

      And he went back. On returning home he tore off his wet clothes and hat,
      began to pace along the walls, and paced incessantly until the very
      morning.
    


      VII
    

      The next morning when the painter and the medico came to see him, they
      found him in a shirt torn to ribbons, his hands bitten all over, tossing
      about in the room and moaning with pain.
    

      "For God's sake!" he began to sob, seeing his comrades, "Take me anywhere
      you like, do what you like, but save me, for God's sake now, now! I'll
      kill myself."
    

      The painter went pale and was bewildered. The medico, too, nearly began to
      cry; but, believing that medical men must be cool and serious on every
      occasion of life, he said coldly:
    

      "It's a fit you've got. But never mind. Come to the doctor, at once."
    

      "Anywhere you like, but quickly, for God's sake!"
    

      "Don't be agitated. You must struggle with yourself."
    

      The painter and the medico dressed Vassiliev with trembling hands and led
      him into the street.
    

      "Mikhail Sergueyich has been wanting to make your acquaintance for a long
      while," the medico said on the way. "He's a very nice man, and knows his
      job splendidly. He took his degree in '82, and has got a huge practice
      already. He keeps friends with the students."
    

      "Quicker, quicker...." urged Vassiliev. Mikhail Sergueyich, a stout doctor
      with fair hair, received the friends politely, firmly, coldly, and smiled
      with one cheek only.
    

      "The painter and Mayer have told me of your disease already," he said.
      "Very glad to be of service to you. Well? Sit down, please."
    

      He made Vassiliev sit down in a big chair by the table, and put a box of
      cigarettes in front of him.
    

      "Well?" he began, stroking his knees. "Let's make a start. How old are
      you?"
    

      He put questions and the medico answered. He asked whether Vassiliev's
      father suffered from any peculiar diseases, if he had fits of drinking,
      was he distinguished by his severity or any other eccentricities. He asked
      the same questions about his grandfather, mother, sisters, and brothers.
      Having ascertained that his mother had a fine voice and occasionally
      appeared on the stage, he suddenly brightened up and asked:
    

      "Excuse me, but could you recall whether the theatre was not a passion
      with your mother?"
    

      About twenty minutes passed. Vassiliev was bored by the doctor stroking
      his knees and talking of the same thing all the while.
    

      "As far as I can understand your questions, Doctor," he said. "You want to
      know whether my disease is hereditary or not. It is not hereditary."
    

      The doctor went on to ask if Vassiliev had not any secret vices in his
      early youth, any blows on the head, any love passions, eccentricities, or
      exceptional infatuations. To half the questions habitually asked by
      careful doctors you may return no answer without any injury to your
      health; but Mikhail Sergueyich, the medico and the painter looked as
      though, if Vassiliev failed to answer even one single question, everything
      would be ruined. For some reason the doctor wrote down the answers he
      received on a scrap of paper. Discovering that Vassiliev had already
      passed through the faculty of natural science and was now in the Law
      faculty, the doctor began to be pensive....
    

      "He wrote a brilliant thesis last year...." said the medico.
    

      "Excuse me. You mustn't interrupt me; you prevent me from concentrating,"
      the doctor said, smiling with one cheek. "Yes, certainly that is important
      for the anamnesis.... Yes, yes.... And do you drink vodka?" he turned to
      Vassiliev.
    

      "Very rarely."
    

      Another twenty minutes passed. The medico began sotto voce to give
      his opinion of the immediate causes of the fit and told how he, the
      painter and Vassiliev went to S——v Street the day before
      yesterday.
    

      The indifferent, reserved, cold tone in which his friends and the doctor
      were speaking of the women and the miserable street seemed to him in the
      highest degree strange....
    

      "Doctor, tell me this one thing," he said, restraining himself from being
      rude. "Is prostitution an evil or not?"
    

      "My dear fellow, who disputes it?" the doctor said with an expression as
      though he had long ago solved all these questions for himself. "Who
      disputes it?"
    

      "Are you a psychiatrist?"
    

      "Yes-s, a psychiatrist."
    

      "Perhaps all of you are right," said Vassiliev, rising and beginning to
      walk from corner to corner. "It may be. But to me all this seems amazing.
      They see a great achievement in my having passed through two faculties at
      the university; they praise me to the skies because I have written a work
      that will be thrown away and forgotten in three years' time, but became I
      can't speak of prostitutes as indifferently as I can about these chairs,
      they send me to doctors, call me a lunatic, and pity me."
    

      For some reason Vassiliev suddenly began to feel an intolerable pity for
      himself, his friends, and everybody whom he had seen the day before
      yesterday, and for the doctor. He began to sob and fell into the chair.
    

      The friends looked interrogatively at the doctor. He, looking as though he
      magnificently understood the tears and the despair, and knew himself a
      specialist in this line, approached Vassiliev and gave him some drops to
      drink, and then when Vassiliev grew calm undressed him and began to
      examine the sensitiveness of his skin, of the knee reflexes....
    

      And Vassiliev felt better. When he was coming out of the doctor's he was
      already ashamed; the noise of the traffic did not seem irritating, and the
      heaviness beneath his heart became easier and easier as though it were
      thawing. In his hand were two prescriptions. One was for kali-bromatum,
      the other—morphia. He used to take both before.
    

      He stood still in the street for a while, pensive, and then, taking leave
      of his friends, lazily dragged on towards the university.
    





      Sophia Pietrovna, the wife of the solicitor Loubianzev, a handsome young
      woman of about twenty-five, was walking quickly along a forest path with
      her bungalow neighbour, the barrister Ilyin. It was just after four. In
      the distance, above the path, white feathery clouds gathered; from behind
      them some bright blue pieces of cloud showed through. The clouds were
      motionless, as if caught on the tops of the tall, aged fir trees. It was
      calm and warm.
    

      In the distance the path was cut across by a low railway embankment, along
      which at this hour, for some reason or other, a sentry strode. Just behind
      the embankment a big, six-towered church with a rusty roof shone white.
    

      "I did not expect to meet you here," Sophia Pietrovna was saying, looking
      down and touching the last year's leaves with the end of her parasol. "But
      now I am glad to have met you. I want to speak to you seriously and
      finally. Ivan Mikhailovich, if you really love and respect me I implore
      you to stop pursuing me i You follow me like a shadow—there's such a
      wicked look in your eye—you make love to me—write
      extraordinary letters and ... I don't know how all this is going to end—Good
      Heavens! What can all this lead to?"
    

      Ilyin was silent. Sophia Pietrovna took a few steps and continued:
    

      "And this sudden complete change has happened in two or three weeks after
      five years of friendship. I do not know you any more, Ivan Mikhailovich."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna glanced sideways at her companion. He was staring
      intently, screwing up his eyes at the feathery clouds. The expression of
      his face was angry, capricious and distracted, like that of a man who
      suffers and at the same time must listen to nonsense.
    

      "It is annoying that you yourself can't realise it!" Madame Loubianzev
      continued, shrugging her shoulders. "Please understand that you're not
      playing a very nice game. I am married, I love and respect my husband. I
      have a daughter. Don't you really care in the slightest for all this?
      Besides, as an old friend, you know my views on family life ... on the
      sanctity of the home, generally."
    

      Ilyin gave an angry grunt and sighed:
    

      "The sanctity of the home," he murmured, "Good Lord!"
    

      "Yes, yes. I love and respect my husband and at any rate the peace of my
      family life is precious to me. I'd sooner let myself be killed than be the
      cause of Andrey's or his daughter's unhappiness. So, please, Ivan
      Mikhailovich, for goodness' sake, leave me alone. Let us be good and dear
      friends, and give up these sighings and gaspings which don't suit you.
      It's settled and done with! Not another word about it. Let us talk of
      something else!"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna again glanced sideways at Ilyin. He was looking up. He
      was pale, and angrily he bit his trembling lips. Madame Loubianzev could
      not understand why he was disturbed and angry, but his pallor moved her.
    

      "Don't be cross. Let's be friends," she said, sweetly.
    

      "Agreed! Here is my hand."
    

      Ilyin took her tiny plump hand in both his, pressed it and slowly raised
      it to his lips.
    

      "I'm not a schoolboy," he murmured. "I'm not in the least attracted by the
      idea of friendship with the woman I love."
    

      "That's enough. Stop! It is all settled and done with. We have come as far
      as the bench. Let us sit down...."
    

      A sweet sense of repose filled Sophia Pietrovna's soul. The most difficult
      and delicate thing was already said. The tormenting question was settled
      and done with. Now she could breathe easily and look straight at Ilyin.
      She looked at him, and the egotistical sense of superiority that a woman
      feels over her lover caressed her pleasantly. She liked the way this big
      strong man with a virile angry face and a huge black beard sat obediently
      at her side and hung his head. They were silent for a little while.
      "Nothing is yet settled and done with," Ilyin began. "You are reading me a
      sermon. 'I love and respect my husband ... the sanctity of the home....' I
      know all that for myself and I can tell you more. Honestly and sincerely I
      confess that I consider my conduct as criminal and immoral. What else? But
      why say what is known already? Instead of sermonizing you had far better
      tell me what I am to do."
    

      "I have already told you. Go away."
    

      "I have gone. You know quite well. I have started five times and half-way
      there I have come back again. I can show you the through tickets. I have
      kept them all safe. But I haven't the power to run away from you. I
      struggle frightfully, but what in Heaven's name is the use? If I cannot
      harden myself, if I'm weak and faint-hearted. I can't fight nature. Do you
      understand? I cannot! I run away from her and she holds me back by my
      coattails. Vile, vulgar weakness."
    

      Ilyin blushed, got up, and began walking by the bench:
    

      "How I hate and despise myself. Good Lord, I'm like a vicious boy—running
      after another man's wife, writing idiotic letters, degrading myself. Ach!"
      He clutched his head, grunted and sit down.
    

      "And now comes your lack of sincerity into the bargain," he continued with
      bitterness. "If you don't think I am playing a nice game—why are you
      here? What drew you? In my letters I only ask you for a straightforward
      answer: Yes, or No; and instead of giving it me, every day you contrive
      that we shall meet 'by chance' and you treat me to quotations from a moral
      copy-book."
    

      Madame Loubianzev reddened and got frightened. She suddenly felt the kind
      of awkwardness that a modest woman would feel at being suddenly discovered
      naked.
    

      "You seem to suspect some deceit on my side," she murmured. "I have always
      given you a straight answer; and I asked you for one to-day."
    

      "Ah, does one ask such things? If you had said to me at once 'Go away,' I
      would have gone long ago, but you never told me to. Never once have you
      been frank. Strange irresolution. My God, either you're playing with me,
      or...."
    

      Ilyin did not finish, and rested his head in his hands. Sophia Pietrovna
      recalled her behaviour all through. She remembered that she had felt all
      these days not only in deed but even in her most intimate thoughts opposed
      to Ilyin's love. But at the same moment she knew that there was a grain of
      truth in the barrister's words. And not knowing what kind of truth it was
      she could not think, no matter how much she thought about it, what to say
      to him in answer to his complaint. It was awkward being silent, so she
      said shrugging her shoulders:
    

      "So I'm to blame for that too?"
    

      "I don't blame you for your insincerity," sighed Ilyin. "It slipped out
      unconsciously. Your insincerity is natural to you, in the natural order of
      things as well. If all mankind were to agree suddenly to become serious,
      everything would go to the Devil, to ruin."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna was not in the mood for philosophy; but she was glad of
      the opportunity to change the conversation and asked:
    

      "Why indeed?"
    

      "Because only savages and animals are sincere. Since civilisation
      introduced into society the demand, for instance, for such a luxury as
      woman's virtue, sincerity has been out of place."
    

      Angrily Ilyin began to thrust his stick into the sand. Madame Loubianzev
      listened without understanding much of it; she liked the conversation.
      First of all, she was pleased that a gifted man should speak to her, an
      average woman, about intellectual things; also it gave her great pleasure
      to watch how the pale, lively, still angry, young face was working. Much
      she did not understand; but the fine courage of modern man was revealed to
      her, the courage by which he without reflection or surmise solves the
      great questions and constructs his simple conclusions.
    

      Suddenly she discovered that she was admiring him, and it frightened her.
    

      "Pardon, but I don't really understand," she hastened to say. "Why did you
      mention insincerity? I entreat you once more, be a dear, good friend and
      leave me alone. Sincerely, I ask it."
    

      "Good—I'll do my best. But hardly anything will come of it. Either
      I'll put a bullet through my brains or ... I'll start drinking in the
      stupidest possible way. Things will end badly for me. Everything has its
      limit, even a struggle with nature. Tell me now, how can one struggle with
      madness? If you've drunk wine, how can you get over the excitement? What
      can I do if your image has grown into my soul, and stands incessantly
      before my eyes, night and day, as plain as that fir tree there? Tell me
      then what thing I must do to get out of this wretched, unhappy state, when
      all my thoughts, desires, and dreams belong, not to me, but to some devil
      that has got hold of me? I love you, I love you so much that I've turned
      away from my path, given up my career and my closest friends, forgot my
      God. Never in my life have I loved so much."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, who was not expecting this turn, drew her body away from
      Ilyin, and glanced at him frightened. Tears shone in his eyes. His lips
      trembled, and a hungry, suppliant expression showed over all his face.
    

      "I love you," he murmured, bringing his own eyes near to her big,
      frightened ones. "You are so beautiful. I'm suffering now; but I swear I
      could remain so all my life, suffering and looking into your eyes, but....
      Keep silent, I implore you."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna as if taken unawares began, quickly, quickly, to think
      out words with which to stop him. "I shall go away," she decided, but no
      sooner had she moved to get up, than Ilyin was on his knees at her feet
      already. He embraced her knees, looked into her eyes and spoke
      passionately, ardently, beautifully. She did not hear his words, for her
      fear and agitation. Somehow now at this dangerous moment when her knees
      pleasantly contracted, as in a warm bath, she sought with evil intention
      to read some meaning into her sensation. She was angry because the whole
      of her instead of protesting virtue was filled with weakness, laziness,
      and emptiness, like a drunken man to whom the ocean is but knee-deep; only
      in the depths of her soul, a little remote malignant voice teased: "Why
      don't you go away? Then this is right, is it?"
    

      Seeking in herself an explanation she could not understand why she had not
      withdrawn the hand to which Ilyin's lips clung like a leech, nor why, at
      the same time as Ilyin, she looked hurriedly right and left to see that
      they were not observed.
    

      The fir-trees and the clouds stood motionless, and gazed at them severely
      like broken-down masters who see something going on, but have been bribed
      not to report to the head. The sentry on the embankment stood like a stick
      and seemed to be staring at the bench. "Let him look!" thought Sophia
      Pietrovna.
    

      "But ... But listen," she said at last with despair in her voice. "What
      will this lead to? What will happen afterwards?"
    

      "I don't know. I don't know," he began to whisper, waving these unpleasant
      questions aside.
    

      The hoarse, jarring whistle of a railway engine became audible. This cold,
      prosaic sound of the everyday world made Madame Loubianzev start.
    

      "It's time, I must go," she said, getting up quickly. "The train is
      coming. Audrey is arriving. He will want his dinner."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna turned her blazing cheeks to the embankment. First the
      engine came slowly into sight, after it the carriages. It was not a
      bungalow train, but a goods train. In a long row, one after another like
      the days of man's life, the cars drew past the white background of the
      church, and there seemed to be no end to them.
    

      But at last the train disappeared, and the end car with the guard and the
      lighted lamps disappeared into the green. Sophia Pietrovna turned sharply
      and not looking at Ilyin began to walk quickly back along the path. She
      had herself in control again. Red with shame, offended, not by Ilyin, no I
      but by the cowardice and shamelessness with which she, a good, respectable
      woman allowed a stranger to embrace her knees. She had only one thought
      now, to reach her bungalow and her family as quickly as possible. The
      barrister could hardly keep up with her. Turning from the path on to a
      little track, she glanced at him so quickly that she noticed only the sand
      on his knees, and she motioned with her hand at him to let her be.
    

      Running into the house Sophia Pietrovna stood for about five minutes
      motionless in her room, looking now at the window then at the writing
      table.... "You disgraceful woman," she scolded herself; "disgraceful!" In
      spite of herself she recollected every detail, hiding nothing, how all
      these days she had been against Ilyin's love-making, yet she was somehow
      drawn to meet him and explain; but besides this when he was lying at her
      feet she felt an extraordinary pleasure. She recalled everything, not
      sparing herself, and now, stifled with shame, she could have slapped her
      own face.
    

      "Poor Andrey," she thought, trying, as she remembered her husband, to give
      her face the tenderest possible expression—"Varya, my poor darling
      child, does not know what a mother she has. Forgive me, my dears. I love
      you very much ... very much!..."
    

      And wishing to convince herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      that corruption had not yet touched those "sanctities" of hers, of which
      she had spoken to Ilyin, Sophia Pietrovna ran into the kitchen and scolded
      the cook for not having laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She tried to
      imagine her husband's tired, hungry look, and pitying him aloud, she laid
      the table herself, a thing which she had never done before. Then she found
      her daughter Varya, lifted her up in her hands and kissed her
      passionately; the child seemed to her heavy and cold, but she would not
      own it to herself, and she began to tell her what a good, dear, splendid
      father she had.
    

      But when, soon after, Andrey. Ilyitch arrived, she barely greeted him. The
      flow of imaginary feelings had ebbed away without convincing her of
      anything; she was only exasperated and enraged by the lie. She sat at the
      window, suffered, and raged. Only in distress can people understand how
      difficult it is to master their thoughts and feelings. Sophia Pietrovna
      said afterwards a confusion was going on inside her as hard to define as
      to count a cloud of swiftly flying sparrows. Thus from the fact that she
      was delighted at her husband's arrival and pleased with the way he behaved
      at dinner, she suddenly concluded that she had begun to hate him. Andrey
      Ilyitch, languid with hunger and fatigue, while waiting for the soup, fell
      upon the sausage and ate it greedily, chewing loudly and moving his
      temples.
    

      "My God," thought Sophia Pietrovna. "I do love and respect him, but ...
      why does he chew so disgustingly."
    

      Her thoughts were no less disturbed than her feelings. Madame Loubianzev,
      like all who have no experience of the struggle with unpleasant thought,
      did her best not to think of her unhappiness, and the more zealously she
      tried, the more vivid Ilyin became to her imagination, the sand on his
      knees, the feathery clouds, the train....
    

      "Why did I—idiot—go to-day?" she teased herself. "And am I
      really a person who can't answer for herself?"
    

      Fear has big eyes. When Andrey Ilyitch had finished the last course, she
      had already resolved to tell him everything and so escape from danger.
    

      "Andrey, I want to speak to you seriously," she began after dinner, when
      her husband was taking off his coat and boots in order to have a lie down.
    

      "Well?"
    

      "Let's go away from here!"
    

      "How—where to? It's still too early to go to town."
    

      "No. Travel or something like that."
    

      "Travel," murmured the solicitor, stretching himself. "I dream of it
      myself, but where shall I get the money, and who'll look after my
      business."
    

      After a little reflection he added:
    

      "Yes, really you are bored. Go by yourself if you want to."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna agreed; but at the same time she saw that Ilyin would be
      glad of the opportunity to travel in the same train with her, in the same
      carriage....
    

      She pondered and looked at her husband, who was full fed but still
      languid. For some reason her eyes stopped on his feet, tiny, almost
      womanish, in stupid socks. On the toe of both socks little threads were
      standing out. Under the drawn blind a bumble bee was knocking against the
      window pane and buzzing. Sophia Pietrovna stared at the threads, listened
      to the bumble bee and pictured her journey.... Day and night Ilyin sits
      opposite, without taking his eyes from her, angry with his weakness and
      pale with the pain of his soul. He brands himself as a libertine, accuses
      her, tears his hair; but when the dark comes he seizes the chance when the
      passengers go to sleep or alight at a station and falls on his knees
      before her and clasps her feet, as he did by the bench....
    

      She realised that she was dreaming....
    

      "Listen. I am not going by myself," she said. "You must come, too!"
    

      "Sophochka, that's all imagination!" sighed Loubianzev. "You must be
      serious and only ask for the possible...."
    

      "You'll come when you And out!" thought Sophia Pietrovna.
    

      Having decided to go away at all costs, she began to feel free from
      danger; her thoughts fell gradually into order, she became cheerful and
      even allowed herself to think about everything. Whatever she may think or
      dream about, she is going all the same. While her husband still slept,
      little by little, evening came....
    

      She sat in the drawing-room playing the piano. Outside the window the
      evening animation, the sound of music, but chiefly the thought of her own
      cleverness in mastering her misery gave the final touch to her joy. Other
      women, her easy conscience told her, in a position like her own would
      surely not resist, they would spin round like a whirlwind; but she was
      nearly burnt up with shame, she suffered and now she had escaped from a
      danger which perhaps was nonexistent! Her virtue and resolution moved her
      so much that she even glanced at herself in the glass three times.
    

      When it was dark visitors came. The men sat down to cards in the
      dining-room, the ladies were in the drawing room and on the terrace. Ilyin
      came last, he was stem and gloomy and looked ill. He sat down on a corner
      of the sofa and did not get up for the whole evening. Usually cheerful and
      full of conversation, he was now silent, frowning, and rubbing his eyes.
      When he had to answer a question he smiled with difficulty and only with
      his upper lip, answering abruptly and spitefully. He made about five jokes
      in all, but his jokes seemed crude and insolent. It seemed to Sophia
      Pietrovna that he was on the brink of hysteria. But only now as she sat at
      the piano did she acknowledge that the unhappy man was not in the mood to
      joke, that he was sick in his soul, he could find no place for himself. It
      was for her sake he was ruining the best days of his career and his youth,
      wasting his last farthing on a bungalow, had left his mother and sisters
      uncared for, and, above all, was breaking down under the martyrdom of his
      struggle. From simple, common humanity she ought to take him seriously....
    

      All this was dear to her, even to paining her. If she were to go up to
      Ilyin now and say to him "No," there would be such strength in her voice
      that it would be hard to disobey. But she did not go up to him and she did
      not say it, did not even think it.... The petty selfishness of a young
      nature seemed never to have been revealed in her as strongly as that
      evening. She admitted that Byin was unhappy and that he sat on the sofa as
      if on hot coals. She was sorry for him, but at the same time the presence
      of the man who loved her so desperately filled her with a triumphant sense
      of her own power. She felt her youth, her beauty, her inaccessibility, and—since
      she had decided to go away—she gave herself full rein this evening.
      She coquetted, laughed continually, she sang with singular emotion, and as
      one inspired. Everything made her gay and everything seemed funny. It
      amused her to recall the incident of the bench, the sentry looking on. The
      visitors seemed funny to her, Ilyin's insolent jokes, his tie pin which
      she had never seen before. The pin was a little red snake with tiny
      diamond eyes; the snake seemed so funny that she was ready to kiss and
      kiss it.
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, nervously sang romantic songs, with a kind of
      half-intoxication, and as if jeering at another's sorrow she chose sad,
      melancholy songs that spoke of lost hopes, of the past, of old age....
      "And old age is approaching nearer and nearer," she sang. What had she to
      do with old age?
    

      "There's something wrong going on in me," she thought now and then through
      laughter and singing.
    

      At twelve o'clock the visitors departed. Ilyin was the last to go. She
      still felt warm enough about him to go with him to the lower step of the
      terrace. She had the idea of telling him that she was going away with her
      husband, just to see what effect this news would have upon him.
    

      The moon was hiding behind the clouds, but it was so bright that Sophia
      Pietrovna could see the wind playing with the tails of his overcoat and
      with the creepers on the terrace. It was also plain how pale Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper-lip, trying to smile. "Sonia, Sonichka, my
      dear little woman," he murmured, not letting her speak. "My darling, my
      pretty one."
    

      In a paroxysm of tenderness with tears in his voice, he showered her with
      endearing words each tenderer than the other, and was already speaking to
      her as if she were his wife or his mistress. Suddenly and unexpectedly to
      her, he put one arm round her and with the other hand he seized her elbow.
    

      "My dear one, my beauty," he began to whisper, kissing the nape of her
      neck; "be sincere, come to me now."
    

      She slipped out of his embrace and lifted her head to break out in
      indignation and revolt. But indignation did not come, and of all her
      praiseworthy virtue and purity, there was left only enough for her to say
      that which all average women say in similar circumstances:
    

      "You must be mad."
    

      "But really let us go," continued Ilyin. "Just now and over there by the
      bench I felt convinced that you, Sonia, were as helpless as myself. You
      too will be all the worse for it. You love me, and you are making a
      useless bargain with your conscience."
    

      Seeing that she was leaving him he seized her by her lace sleeve and ended
      quickly:
    

      "If not to-day, then to-morrow; but you will have to give in. What's the
      good of putting if off? My dear, my darling Sonia, the verdict has been
      pronounced. Why postpone the execution? Why deceive yourself?"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna broke away from him and suddenly disappeared inside the
      door. She returned to the drawing-room, shut the piano mechanically,
      stared for a long time at the cover of a music book, and sat down. She
      could neither stand nor think.... From her agitation and passion remained
      only an awful weakness mingled with laziness and tiredness. Her conscience
      whispered to her that she had behaved wickedly and foolishly to-night,
      like a madwoman; that just now she had been kissed on the terrace, and
      even now she had some strange sensation in her waist and in her elbow. Not
      a soul was in the drawing-room. Only a single candle was burning. Madame
      Loubianzev sat on a little round stool before the piano without stirring
      as if waiting for something, and as if taking advantage of her extreme
      exhaustion and the dark a heavy unconquerable desire began to possess her.
      Like a boa-constrictor, it enchained her limbs and soul. It grew every
      second and was no longer threatening, but stood clear before her in all
      its nakedness.
    

      She sat thus for half an hour, not moving, and not stopping herself from
      thinking of Ilyin. Then she got up lazily and went slowly into the
      bed-room. Andrey Ilyitch was in bed already. She sat by the window and
      gave herself to her desire. She felt no more "confusion." All her feelings
      and thoughts pressed lovingly round some clear purpose. She still had a
      mind to struggle, but instantly she waved her hand impotently, realising
      the strength and the determination of the foe. To fight him power and
      strength were necessary, but her birth, up-bringing and life had given her
      nothing on which to lean.
    

      "You're immoral, you're horrible," she tormented herself for her weakness.
      "You're a nice sort, you are!"
    

      So indignant was her insulted modesty at this weakness that she called
      herself all the bad names that she knew and she related to herself many
      insulting, degrading truths. Thus she told herself that she never was
      moral, and she had not fallen before only because there was no pretext,
      that her day-long struggle had been nothing but a game and a comedy....
    

      "Let us admit that I struggled," she thought, "but what kind of a fight
      was it? Even prostitutes struggle before they sell themselves, and still
      they do sell themselves. It's a pretty sort of fight. Like milk, turns in
      a day." She realised that it was not love that drew her from her home nor
      Ilyin's personality, but the sensations which await her.... A little
      week-end type like the rest of them.
    

      "When the young bird's mother was killed," a hoarse tenor finished
      singing.
    

      If I am going, it's time, thought Sophia Pietrovna. Her heart began to
      beat with a frightful force.
    

      "Andrey," she almost cried. "Listen. Shall we go away? Shall we? Yes?"
    

      "Yes.... I've told you already. You go alone."
    

      "But listen," she said, "if you don't come too, you may lose me. I seem to
      be in love already."
    

      "Who with?" Andrey Ilyitch asked.
    

      "It must be all the same for you, who with," Sophia Pietrovna cried out.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch got up, dangled his feet over the side of the bed, with a
      look of surprise at the dark form of his wife.
    

      "Imagination," he yawned.
    

      He could not believe her, but all the same he was frightened. After having
      thought for a while, and asked his wife some unimportant questions, he
      gave his views of the family, of infidelity.... He spoke sleepily for
      about ten minutes and then lay down again. His remarks had no success.
      There are a great many opinions in this world, and more than half of them
      belong to people who have never known misery.
    

      In spite of the late hour, the bungalow people were still moving behind
      their windows. Sophia Pietrovna put on a long coat and stood for a while,
      thinking. She still had force of mind to say to her sleepy husband:
    

      "Are you asleep? I'm going for a little walk. Would you like to come with
      me?"
    

      That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she walked out. It was breezy
      and cool. She did not feel the breeze or the darkness but walked on and
      on.... An irresistible power drove her, and it seemed to her that if she
      stopped that power would push her in the back. "You're an immoral woman,"
      she murmured mechanically. "You're horrible."
    

      She was choking for breath, burning with shame, did not feel her feet
      under her, for that which drove her along was stronger than her shame, her
      reason, her fear....
    





      Nadya Zelenina had just returned with her mother from the theatre, where
      they had been to see a performance of "Eugene Oniegin." Entering her room,
      she quickly threw off her dress, loosened her hair, and sat down hurriedly
      in her petticoat and a white blouse to write a letter in the style of
      Tatiana.
    

      "I love you,"—she wrote—"but you don't love me; no, you
      don't!"
    

      The moment she had written this, she smiled.
    

      She was only sixteen years old, and so far she had not been in love. She
      knew that Gorny, the officer, and Gronsdiev, the student, loved her; but
      now, after the theatre, she wanted to doubt their love. To be unloved and
      unhappy—how interesting. There is something beautiful, affecting,
      romantic in the fact that one loves deeply while the other is indifferent.
      Oniegin is interesting because he does not love at all, and Tatiana is
      delightful because she is very much in love; but if they loved each other
      equally and were happy, they would seem boring, instead.
    

      "Don't go on protesting that you love me," Nadya wrote on, thinking of
      Gorny, the officer, "I can't believe you. You're very clever, educated,
      serious; you have a great talent, and perhaps, a splendid future waiting,
      but I am an uninteresting poor-spirited girl, and you yourself know quite
      well that I shall only be a drag upon your life. It's true I carried you
      off your feet, and you thought you had met your ideal in me, but that was
      a mistake. Already you are asking yourself in despair, 'Why did I meet
      this girl?' Only your kindness prevents you from confessing it."
    

      Nadya pitied herself. She wept and went on.
    

      "If it were not so difficult for me to leave mother and brother I would
      put on a nun's gown and go where my eyes direct me. You would then be free
      to love another. If I were to die!"
    

      Through her tears she could not make out what she had written. Brief
      rainbows trembled on the table, on the floor and the ceiling, as though
      Nadya were looking through a prism. Impossible to write. She sank back in
      her chair and began to think of Gorny.
    

      Oh, how fascinating, how interesting men are! Nadya remembered the
      beautiful expression of Gorny's face, appealing, guilty, and tender, when
      someone discussed music with him,—the efforts he made to prevent the
      passion from sounding in his voice. Passion must be concealed in a society
      where cold reserve and indifference are the signs of good breeding. And he
      does try to conceal it, but he does not succeed, and everybody knows quite
      well that he has a passion for music. Never-ending discussions about
      music, blundering pronouncements by men who do not understand—keep
      him in incessant tension. He is scared, timid, silent. He plays superbly,
      as an ardent pianist. If he were not an officer, he would be a famous
      musician.
    

      The tears dried in her eyes. Nadya remembered how Gorny told her of his
      love at a symphony concert, and again downstairs by the cloak-room.
    

      "I am so glad you have at last made the acquaintance of the student
      Gronsdiev," she continued to write. "He is a very clever man, and you are
      sure to love him. Yesterday he was sitting with us till two o'clock in the
      morning. We were all so happy. I was sorry that you hadn't come to us. He
      said a lot of remarkable things."
    

      Nadya laid her hands on the table and lowered her head. Her hair covered
      the letter. She remembered that Gronsdiev also loved her, and that he had
      the same right to her letter as Gorny. Perhaps she had better write to
      Gronsdiev? For no cause, a happiness began to quicken in her breast. At
      first it was a little one, rolling about in her breast like a rubber ball.
      Then it grew broader and bigger, and broke forth like a wave. Nadya had
      already forgotten about Gorny and Gronsdiev. Her thoughts became confused.
      The happiness grew more and more. From her breast it ran into her arms and
      legs, and it seemed that a light fresh breeze blew over her head, stirring
      her hair. Her shoulders trembled with quiet laughter. The table and the
      lampglass trembled. Tears from her eyes splashed the letter. She was
      powerless to stop her laughter; and to convince herself that she had a
      reason for it, she hastened to remember something funny.
    

      "What a funny poodle!" she cried, feeling that she was choking with
      laughter. "What a funny poodle!"
    

      She remembered how Gronsdiev was playing with Maxim the poodle after tea
      yesterday; how he told a story afterwards of a very clever poodle who was
      chasing a crow in the yard. The crow gave him a look and said:
    

      "Oh, you swindler!"
    

      The poodle did not know he had to do with a learned crow. He was terribly
      confused, and ran away dumfounded. Afterwards he began to bark.
    

      "No, I'd better love Gronsdiev," Nadya decided and tore up the letter.
    

      She began to think of the student, of his love, of her own love, with the
      result that the thoughts in her head swam apart and she thought about
      everything, about her mother, the street, the pencil, the piano. She was
      happy thinking, and found that everything was good, magnificent. Her
      happiness told her that this was not all, that a little later it would be
      still better. Soon it will be spring, summer. They will go with mother to
      Gorbiki in the country. Gorny will come for his holidays. He will walk in
      the orchard with her, and make love to her. Gronsdiev will come too. He
      will play croquet with her and bowls. He will tell funny, wonderful
      stories. She passionately longed for the orchard, the darkness, the pure
      sky, the stars. Again her shoulders trembled with laughter and she seemed
      to awake to a smell of wormwood in the room; and a branch was tapping at
      the window.
    

      She went to her bed and sat down. She did not know what to do with her
      great happiness. It overwhelmed her. She stared at the crucifix which hung
      at the head of her bed and saying:
    

      "Dear God, dear God, dear God."
    





      Ivan Ivanich Lapkin, a pleasant looking young man, and Anna Zamblizky, a
      young girl with a little snub nose, walked down the sloping bank and sat
      down on the bench. The bench was close to the water's edge, among thick
      bushes of young willow. A heavenly spot! You sat down, and you were hidden
      from the world. Only the fish could see you and the catspaws which flashed
      over the water like lightning. The two young persons were equipped with
      rods, fish hooks, bags, tins of worms and everything else necessary. Once
      seated, they immediately began to fish.
    

      "I am glad that we're left alone at last," said Lapkin, looking round.
      I've got a lot to tell you, Anna—tremendous ... when I saw you for
      the first time ... you've got a nibble ... I understood then—why I
      am alive, I knew where my idol was, to whom I can devote my honest,
      hardworking life.... It must be a big one ... it is biting.... When I saw
      you—for the first time in my life I fell in love—fell in love
      passionately I Don't pull. Let it go on biting.... Tell me, darling, tell
      me—will you let me hope? No! I'm not worth it. I dare not even think
      of it—may I hope for.... Pull!
    

      Anna lifted her hand that held the rod—pulled, cried out. A silvery
      green fish shone in the air.
    

      "Goodness! it's a perch! Help—quick! It's slipping off." The perch
      tore itself from the hook—danced in the grass towards its native
      element and ... leaped into the water.
    

      But instead of the little fish that he was chasing, Lapkin quite by
      accident caught hold of Anna's hand—quite by accident pressed it to
      his lips. She drew back, but it was too late; quite by accident their lips
      met and kissed; yes, it was an absolute accident! They kissed and kissed.
      Then came vows and assurances.... Blissful moments! But there is no such
      thing as absolute happiness in this life. If happiness itself does not
      contain a poison, poison will enter in from without. Which happened this
      time. Suddenly, while the two were kissing, a laugh was heard. They looked
      at the river and were paralysed. The schoolboy Kolia, Anna's brother, was
      standing in the water, watching the young people and maliciously laughing.
    

      "Ah—ha! Kissing!" said he. "Right O, I'll tell Mother."
    

      "I hope that you—as a man of honour," Lapkin muttered, blushing.
      "It's disgusting to spy on us, it's loathsome to tell tales, it's rotten.
      As a man of honour...."
    

      "Give me a shilling, then I'll shut up!" the man of honour retorted. "If
      you don't, I'll tell."
    

      Lapkin took a shilling out of his pocket and gave it to Kolia, who
      squeezed it in his wet fist, whistled, and swam away. And the young people
      did not kiss any more just then.
    

      Next day Lapkin brought Kolia some paints and a ball from town, and his
      sister gave him all her empty pill boxes. Then they had to present him
      with a set of studs like dogs' heads. The wretched boy enjoyed this game
      immensely, and to keep it going he began to spy on them. Wherever Lapkin
      and Anna went, he was there too. He did not leave them alone for a single
      moment.
    

      "Beast!" Lapkin gnashed his teeth. "So young and yet such a full fledged
      scoundrel. What on earth will become of him later!"
    

      During the whole of July the poor lovers had no life apart from him. He
      threatened to tell on them; he dogged them and demanded more presents.
      Nothing satisfied him—finally he hinted at a gold watch. All right,
      they had to promise the watch.
    

      Once, at table, when biscuits were being handed round, he burst out
      laughing and said to Lapkin: "Shall I let on? Ah—ha!"
    

      Lapkin blushed fearfully and instead of a biscuit he began to chew his
      table napkin. Anna jumped up from the table and rushed out of the room.
    

      And this state of things went on until the end of August, up to the day
      when Lapkin at last proposed to Anna. Ah! What a happy day that was! When
      he had spoken to her parents and obtained their consent Lapkin rushed into
      the garden after Kolia. When he found him he nearly cried for joy and
      caught hold of the wretched boy by the ear. Anna, who was also looking for
      Kolia came running up and grabbed him by the other ear. You should have
      seen the happiness depicted on their faces while Kolia roared and begged
      them:
    

      "Darling, precious pets, I won't do it again. O-oh—O-oh! Forgive
      me!" And both of them confessed afterwards that during all the time they
      were in love with each other they never experienced such happiness, such
      overwhelming joy as during those moments when they pulled the wretched
      boy's ears.
    





      About ten o'clock of a dark September evening the Zemstvo doctor Kirilov's
      only son, six-year-old Andrey, died of diphtheria. As the doctor's wife
      dropped on to her knees before the dead child's cot and the first paroxysm
      of despair took hold of her, the bell rang sharply in the hall.
    

      When the diphtheria came all the servants were sent away from the house,
      that very morning. Kirilov himself went to the door, just as he was, in
      his shirt-sleeves with his waistcoat unbuttoned, without wiping his wet
      face or hands, which had been burnt with carbolic acid. It was dark in the
      hall, and of the person who entered could be distinguished only his middle
      height, a white scarf and a big, extraordinarily pale face, so pale that
      it seemed as though its appearance made the hall brighter....
    

      "Is the doctor in?" the visitor asked abruptly.
    

      "I'm at home," answered Kirilov. "What do you want?"
    

      "Oh, you're the doctor? I'm so glad!" The visitor was overjoyed and began
      to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness. He found it and squeezed it
      hard in his own. "I'm very ... very glad! We were introduced ... I am
      Aboguin ... had the pleasure of meeting you this summer at Mr. Gnouchev's.
      I am very glad to have found you at home.... For God's sake, don't say you
      won't come with me immediately.... My wife has been taken dangerously
      ill.... I have the carriage with me...."
    

      From the visitor's voice and movements it was evident that he had been in
      a state of violent agitation. Exactly as though he had been frightened by
      a fire or a mad dog, he could hardly restrain his hurried breathing, and
      he spoke quickly in a trembling voice. In his speech there sounded a note
      of real sincerity, of childish fright. Like all men who are frightened and
      dazed, he spoke in short, abrupt phrases and uttered many superfluous,
      quite unnecessary, words.
    

      "I was afraid I shouldn't find you at home," he continued. "While I was
      coming to you I suffered terribly.... Dress yourself and let us go, for
      God's sake.... It happened like this. Papchinsky came to me—Alexander
      Siemionovich, you know him.... We were chatting.... Then we sat down to
      tea. Suddenly my wife cries out, presses her hands to her heart, and falls
      back in her chair. We carried her off to her bed and ... and I rubbed her
      forehead with sal-volatile, and splashed her with water.... She lies like
      a corpse.... I'm afraid that her heart's failed.... Let us go.... Her
      father too died of heart-failure."
    

      Kirilov listened in silence as though he did not understand the Russian
      language.
    

      When Aboguin once more mentioned Papchinsky and his wife's father, and
      once more began to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness, the doctor
      shook his head and said, drawling each word listlessly:
    

      "Excuse me, but I can't go.... Five minutes ago my ... my son died."
    

      "Is that true?" Aboguin whispered, stepping back. "My God, what an awful
      moment to come! It's a terribly fated day ... terribly! What a coincidence
      ... and it might have been on purpose!"
    

      Aboguin took hold of the door handle and drooped his head in meditation.
      Evidently he was hesitating, not knowing whether to go away, or to ask the
      doctor once more.
    

      "Listen," he said eagerly, seizing Kirilov by the sleeve. "I fully
      understand your state! God knows I'm ashamed to try to hold your attention
      at such a moment, but what can I do? Think yourself—who can I go to?
      There isn't another doctor here besides you. For heaven's sake come. I'm
      not asking for myself. It's not I that's ill!"
    

      Silence began. Kirilov turned his back to Aboguin, stood still for a while
      and slowly went out of the hall into the drawing-room. To judge by his
      uncertain, machine-like movement, and by the attentiveness with which he
      arranged the hanging shade on the unlighted lamp in the drawing-room and
      consulted a thick book which lay on the table—at such a moment he
      had neither purpose nor desire, nor did he think of anything, and probably
      had already forgotten that there was a stranger standing in his hall. The
      gloom and the quiet of the drawing-room apparently increased his insanity.
      As he went from the drawing-room to his study he raised his right foot
      higher than he need, felt with his hands for the door-posts, and then one
      felt a certain perplexity in his whole figure, as though he had entered a
      strange house by chance, or for the first time in his life had got drunk,
      and now was giving himself up in bewilderment to the new sensation. A wide
      line of light stretched across the bookshelves on one wall of the study;
      this light, together with the heavy stifling smell of carbolic acid and
      ether came from the door ajar that led from the study into the
      bed-room.... The doctor sank into a chair before the table; for a while he
      looked drowsily at the shining books, then rose and went into the
      bed-room.
    

      Here, in the bed-room, dead quiet reigned. Everything, down to the last
      trifle, spoke eloquently of the tempest undergone, of weariness, and
      everything rested. The candle which stood among a close crowd of phials,
      boxes and jars on the stool and the big lamp on the chest of drawers
      brightly lit the room. On the bed, by the window, the boy lay open-eyed,
      with a look of wonder on his face. He did not move, but it seemed that his
      open eyes became darker and darker every second and sank into his skull.
      Having laid her hands on his body and hid her face in the folds of the
      bed-clothes, the mother now was on her knees before the bed. Like the boy
      she did not move, but how much living movement was felt in the coil of her
      body and in her hands! She was pressing close to the bed with her whole
      being, with eager vehemence, as though she were afraid to violate the
      quiet and comfortable pose which she had found at last for her weary body.
      Blankets, cloths, basins, splashes on the floor, brushes and spoons
      scattered everywhere, a white bottle of lime-water, the stifling heavy air
      itself—everything died away, and as it were plunged into quietude.
    

      The doctor stopped by his wife, thrust his hands into his trouser pockets
      and bending his head on one side looked fixedly at his son. His face
      showed indifference; only the drops which glistened on his beard revealed
      that he had been lately weeping.
    

      The repulsive terror of which we think when we speak of death was absent
      from the bed-room. In the pervading dumbness, in the mother's pose, in the
      indifference of the doctor's face was something attractive that touched
      the heart, the subtle and elusive beauty of human grief, which it will
      take men long to understand and describe, and only music, it seems, is
      able to express. Beauty too was felt in the stern stillness. Kirilov and
      his wife were silent and did not weep, as though they confessed all the
      poetry of their condition. As once the season of their youth passed away,
      so now in this boy their right to bear children had passed away, alas! for
      ever to eternity. The doctor is forty-four years old, already grey and
      looks like an old man; his faded sick wife is thirty-five. Audrey was not
      merely the only son but the last.
    

      In contrast to his wife the doctor's nature belonged to those which feel
      the necessity of movement when their soul is in pain. After standing by
      his wife for about five minutes, he passed from the bed-room, lifting his
      right foot too high, into a little room half filled with a big broad
      divan. From there he went to the kitchen. After wandering about the
      fireplace and the cook's bed, he stooped through a little door and came
      into the hall.
    

      Here he saw the white scarf and the pale face again.
    

      "At last," sighed Aboguin, seizing the doorhandle. "Let us go, please."
    

      The doctor shuddered, glanced at him and remembered.
    

      "Listen. I've told you already that I can't go," he said, livening. "What
      a strange idea!"
    

      "Doctor, I'm made of flesh and blood, too. I fully understand your
      condition. I sympathise with you," Aboguin said in an imploring voice,
      putting his hand to his scarf. "But I am not asking for myself. My wife is
      dying. If you had heard her cry, if you'd seen her face, you would
      understand my insistence! My God—and I thought that you'd gone to
      dress yourself. The time is precious, Doctor! Let us go, I beg of you."
    

      "I can't come," Kirilov said after a pause, and stepped into his
      drawing-room.
    

      Aboguin followed him and seized him by the sleeve.
    

      "You're in sorrow. I understand. But I'm not asking you to cure a
      toothache, or to give expert evidence,—but to save a human life." He
      went on imploring like a beggar. "This life is more than any personal
      grief. I ask you for courage, for a brave deed—in the name of
      humanity."
    

      "Humanity cuts both ways," Kirilov said irritably. "In the name of the
      same humanity I ask you not to take me away. My God, what a strange idea!
      I can hardly stand on my feet and you frighten me with humanity. I'm not
      fit for anything now. I won't go for anything. With whom shall I leave my
      wife? No, no...."
    

      Kirilov flung out his open hands and drew back.
    

      "And ... and don't ask me," he continued, disturbed. "I'm sorry.... Under
      the Laws, Volume XIII., I'm obliged to go and you have the right to drag
      me by the neck.... Well, drag me, but ... I'm not fit.... I'm not even
      able to speak. Excuse me."
    

      "It's quite unfair to speak to me in that tone, Doctor," said Aboguin,
      again taking the doctor by the sleeve. "The thirteenth volume be damned! I
      have no right to do violence to your will. If you want to, come; if you
      don't, then God be with you; but it's not to your will that I apply, but
      to your feelings. A young woman is dying! You say your son died just now.
      Who could understand my terror better than you?"
    

      Aboguin's voice trembled with agitation. His tremor and his tone were much
      more convincing than his words. Aboguin was sincere, but it is remarkable
      that every phrase he used came out stilted, soulless, inopportunely
      florid, and as it were insulted the atmosphere of the doctor's house and
      the woman who was dying. He felt it himself, and in his fear of being
      misunderstood he exerted himself to the utmost to make his voice soft and
      tender so as to convince by the sincerity of his tone at least, if not by
      his words. As a rule, however deep and beautiful the words they affect
      only the unconcerned. They cannot always satisfy those who are happy or
      distressed because the highest expression of happiness or distress is most
      often silence. Lovers understand each other best when they are silent, and
      a fervent passionate speech at the graveside affects only outsiders. To
      the widow and children it seems cold and trivial.
    

      Kirilov stood still and was silent. When Aboguin uttered some more words
      on the higher vocation of a doctor, and self-sacrifice, the doctor sternly
      asked:
    

      "Is it far?"
    

      "Thirteen or fourteen versts. I've got good horses, doctor. I give you my
      word of honour that I'll take you there and back in an hour. Only an
      hour."
    

      The last words impressed the doctor more strongly than the references to
      humanity or the doctor's vocation. He thought for a while and said with a
      sigh.
    

      "Well, let us go!"
    

      He went off quickly, with a step that was now sure, to his study and soon
      after returned in a long coat. Aboguin, delighted, danced impatiently
      round him, helped him on with his overcoat, and accompanied him out of the
      house.
    

      Outside it was dark, but brighter than in the hall. Now in the darkness
      the tall stooping figure of the doctor was clearly visible with the long,
      narrow beard and the aquiline nose. Besides his pale face Aboguin's big
      face could now be seen and a little student's cap which hardly covered the
      crown of his head. The scarf showed white only in front, but behind it was
      hid under his long hair.
    

      "Believe me, I'm able to appreciate your magnanimity," murmured Aboguin,
      as he helped the doctor to a seat in the carriage. "We'll whirl away.
      Luke, dear man, drive as fast as you can, do!"
    

      The coachman drove quickly. First appeared a row of bare buildings, which
      stood along the hospital yard. It was dark everywhere, save that at the
      end of the yard a bright light from someone's window broke through the
      garden fence, and three windows in the upper story of the separate house
      seemed to be paler than the air. Then the carriage drove into dense
      obscurity where you could smell mushroom damp, and hear the whisper of the
      trees. The noise of the wheels awoke the rooks who began to stir in the
      leaves and raised a doleful, bewildered cry as if they knew that the
      doctor's son was dead and Aboguin's wife ill. Then began to appear
      separate trees, a shrub. Sternly gleamed the pond, where big black shadows
      slept. The carriage rolled along over an even plain. Now the cry of the
      rooks was but faintly heard far away behind. Soon it became completely
      still.
    

      Almost all the way Kirilov and Aboguin were silent; save that once Aboguin
      sighed profoundly and murmured.
    

      "It's terrible pain. One never loves his nearest so much as when there is
      the risk of losing them."
    

      And when the carriage was quietly passing through the river, Kirilov gave
      a sudden start, as though the dashing of the water frightened him, and he
      began to move impatiently.
    

      "Let me go," he said in anguish. "I'll come to you later. I only want to
      send the attendant to my wife. She is all alone."
    

      Aboguin was silent. The carriage, swaying and rattling against the stones,
      drove over the sandy bank and went on. Kirilov began to toss about in
      anguish, and glanced around. Behind the road was visible in the scant
      light of the stars and the willows that fringed the bank disappearing into
      the darkness. To the right the plain stretched smooth and boundless as
      heaven. On it in the distance here and there dim lights were burning,
      probably on the turf-pits. To the left, parallel with the road stretched a
      little hill, tufted with tiny shrubs, and on the hill a big half-moon
      stood motionless, red, slightly veiled with a mist, and surrounded with
      fine clouds which seemed to be gazing upon it from every side, and
      guarding it, lest it should disappear.
    

      In all nature one felt something hopeless and sick. Like a fallen woman
      who sits alone in a dark room trying not to think of her past, the earth
      languished with reminiscence of spring and summer and waited in apathy for
      ineluctable winter. Wherever one's glance turned nature showed everywhere
      like a dark, cold, bottomless pit, whence neither Kirilov nor Aboguin nor
      the red half-moon could escape....
    

      The nearer the carriage approached the destination the more impatient did
      Aboguin become. He moved about, jumped up and stared over the driver's
      shoulder in front of him. And when at last the carriage drew up at the
      foot of the grand staircase, nicely covered with a striped linen awning
      and he looked up at the lighted windows of the first floor one could hear
      his breath trembling.
    

      "If anything happens ... I shan't survive it," he said entering the hall
      with the doctor and slowly rubbing his hands in his agitation. "But I
      can't hear any noise. That means it's all right so far," he added,
      listening to the stillness.
    

      No voices or steps were heard in the hall. For all the bright illumination
      the whole house seemed asleep. Now the doctor and Aboguin who had been in
      darkness up till now could examine each other. The doctor was tall, with a
      stoop, slovenly dressed, and his face was plain. There was something
      unpleasantly sharp, ungracious, and severe in his thick negro lips, his
      aquiline nose and his faded, indifferent look. His tangled hair, his
      sunken temples, the early grey in his long thin beard, that showed his
      shining chin, his pale grey complexion and the slipshod awkwardness of his
      manners—the hardness of it all suggested to the mind bad times
      undergone, an unjust lot and weariness of life and men. To look at the
      hard figure of the man, you could not believe that he had a wife and could
      weep over his child. Aboguin revealed something different. He was robust,
      solid and fair-haired, with a big head and large, yet soft, features,
      exquisitely dressed in the latest fashion. In his carriage, his
      tight-buttoned coat and his mane of hair you felt something noble and
      leonine. He walked with his head straight and his chest prominent, he
      spoke in a pleasant baritone, and in his manner of removing his scarf or
      arranging his hair there appeared a subtle, almost feminine, elegance.
      Even his pallor and childish fear as he glanced upwards to the staircase
      while taking off his coat, did not disturb his carriage or take from the
      satisfaction, the health and aplomb which his figure breathed.
    

      "There's no one about, nothing I can hear," he said walking upstairs. "No
      commotion. May God be good!"
    

      He accompanied the doctor through the hall to a large salon, where a big
      piano showed dark and a lustre hung in a white cover. Thence they both
      passed into a small and beautiful drawing-room, very cosy, filled with a
      pleasant, rosy half-darkness.
    

      "Please sit here a moment, Doctor," said Aboguin, "I ... I won't be a
      second. I'll just have a look and tell them."
    

      Kirilov was left alone. The luxury of the drawing-room, the pleasant
      half-darkness, even his presence in a stranger's unfamiliar house
      evidently did not move him. He sat in a chair looking at his hands burnt
      with carbolic acid. He had no more than a glimpse of the bright red
      lampshade, the cello case, and when he looked sideways across the room to
      where the dock was ticking, he noticed a stuffed wolf, as solid and
      satisfied as Aboguin himself.
    

      It was still.... Somewhere far away in the other rooms someone uttered a
      loud "Ah!" A glass door, probably a cupboard door, rang, and again
      everything was still. After five minutes had passed, Kirilov did not look
      at his hands any more. He raised his eyes to the door through which
      Aboguin had disappeared.
    

      Aboguin was standing on the threshold, but not the same man as went out.
      The expression of satisfaction and subtle elegance had disappeared from
      him. His face and hands, the attitude of his body were distorted with a
      disgusting expression either of horror or of tormenting physical pain. His
      nose, lips, moustache, all his features were moving and as it were trying
      to tear themselves away from his face, but the eyes were as though
      laughing from pain.
    

      Aboguin took a long heavy step into the middle of the room, stooped,
      moaned, and shook his fists.
    

      "Deceived!" he cried, emphasising the syllable cei. "She deceived
      me! She's gone! She fell ill and sent me for the doctor only to run away
      with this fool Papchinsky. My God!" Aboguin stepped heavily towards the
      doctor, thrust his white soft fists before his face, and went on wailing,
      shaking his fists the while.
    

      "She's gone off! She's deceived me! But why this lie? My God, my God! Why
      this dirty, foul trick, this devilish, serpent's game? What have I done to
      her? She's gone off." Tears gushed from his eyes. He turned on his heel
      and began to pace the drawing-room. Now in his short jacket and his
      fashionable narrow trousers in which his legs seemed too thin for his
      body, he was extraordinarily like a lion. Curiosity kindled in the
      doctor's impassive face. He rose and eyed Aboguin.
    

      "Well, where's the patient?"
    

      "The patient, the patient," cried Aboguin, laughing, weeping, and still
      shaking his fists. "She's not ill, but accursed. Vile—dastardly. The
      Devil himself couldn't have planned a fouler trick. She sent me so that
      she could run away with a fool, an utter clown, an Alphonse! My God, far
      better she should have died. I'll not bear it. I shall not bear it."
    

      The doctor stood up straight. His eyes began to blink, filled with tears;
      his thin beard began to move with his jaw right and left.
    

      "What's this?" he asked, looking curiously about. "My child's dead. My
      wife in anguish, alone in all the house.... I can hardly stand on my feet,
      I haven't slept for three nights ... and I'm made to play in a vulgar
      comedy, to play the part of a stage property! I don't ... I don't
      understand it!"
    

      Aboguin opened one fist, flung a crumpled note on the floor and trod on
      it, as upon an insect he wished to crush.
    

      "And I didn't see ... didn't understand," he said through his set teeth,
      brandishing one fist round his head, with an expression as though someone
      had trod on a corn. "I didn't notice how he came to see us every day. I
      didn't notice that he came in a carriage to-day! What was the carriage
      for? And I didn't see! Innocent!"
    

      "I don't ... I don't understand," the doctor murmured. "What's it all
      mean? It's jeering at a man, laughing at a man's suffering! That's
      impossible.... I've never seen it in my life before!"
    

      With the dull bewilderment of a man who has just begun to understand that
      someone has bitterly offended him, the doctor shrugged his shoulders,
      waved his hands and not knowing what to say or do, dropped exhausted into
      a chair.
    

      "Well, she didn't love me any more. She loved another man. Very well. But
      why the deceit, why this foul treachery?" Aboguin spoke with tears in his
      voice. "Why, why? What have I done to you? Listen, doctor," he said
      passionately approaching Kirilov. "You were the unwilling witness of my
      misfortune, and I am not going to hide the truth from you. I swear I loved
      this woman. I loved her with devotion, like a slave. I sacrificed
      everything for her. I broke with my family, I gave up the service and my
      music. I forgave her things I could not have forgiven my mother and
      sister.... I never once gave her an angry look ... I never gave her any
      cause. Why this lie then? I do not demand love, but why this abominable
      deceit? If you don't love any more then speak out honestly, above all when
      you know what I feel about this matter...."
    

      With tears in his eyes and trembling in all his bones, Aboguin was pouring
      out his soul to the doctor. He spoke passionately, pressing both hands to
      his heart. He revealed all the family secrets without hesitation, as
      though he were glad that these secrets were being tom from his heart. Had
      he spoken thus for an hour or two and poured out all his soul, he would
      surely have been easier.
    

      Who can say whether, had the doctor listened and given him friendly
      sympathy, he would not, as so often happens, have been reconciled to his
      grief unprotesting, without turning to unprofitable follies? But it
      happened otherwise. While Aboguin was speaking the offended doctor changed
      countenance visibly. The indifference and amazement in his face gradually
      gave way to an expression of bitter outrage, indignation, and anger. His
      features became still sharper, harder, and more forbidding. When Aboguin
      put before his eyes the photograph of his young wife, with a pretty, but
      dry, inexpressive face like a nun's, and asked if it were possible to look
      at that face and grant that it could express a lie, the doctor suddenly
      started away, with flashing eyes, and said, coarsely forging out each
      several word:
    

      "Why do you tell me all this? I do not want to hear! I don't want to," he
      cried and banged his fist upon the table. "I don't want your trivial
      vulgar secrets—to Hell with them. You dare not tell me such
      trivialities. Or do you think I have not yet been insulted enough! That
      I'm a lackey to whom you can give the last insult? Yes?"
    

      Aboguin drew back from Kirilov and stared at him in surprise.
    

      "Why did you bring me here?" the doctor went on, shaking his beard. "You
      marry out of high spirits, get angry out of high spirits, and make a
      melodrama—but where do I come in? What have I got to do with your
      romances? Leave me alone I Get on with your noble grabbing, parade your
      humane ideas, play—" the doctor gave a side-glance at the cello-case—"the
      double-bass and the trombone, stuff yourselves like capons, but don't dare
      to jeer at a real man! If you can't respect him, then you can at least
      spare him your attentions."
    

      "What does all this mean?" Aboguin asked, blushing.
    

      "It means that it's vile and foul to play with a man I I'm a doctor. You
      consider doctors and all men who work and don't reek of scent and
      harlotry, your footmen, your mauvais tons. Very well, but no one
      gave you the right to turn a man who suffers into a property."
    

      "How dare you say that?" Aboguin asked quietly. Again his face began to
      twist about, this time in visible anger.
    

      "How dare you bring me here to listen to trivial rubbish, when you
      know that I'm in sorrow?" the doctor cried and banged his fists on the
      table once more. "Who gave you the right to jeer at another's grief?"
    

      "You're mad," cried Aboguin. "You're ungenerous. I too am deeply unhappy
      and ... and ..."
    

      "Unhappy"—the doctor gave a sneering laugh—"Don't touch the
      word, it's got nothing to do with you. Wasters who can't get money on a
      bill call themselves unhappy too. A capon's unhappy, oppressed with all
      its superfluous fat. You worthless lot!"
    

      "Sir, you're forgetting yourself," Aboguin gave a piercing scream. "For
      words like those, people are beaten. Do you understand?"
    

      Aboguin thrust his hand into his side pocket, took out a pocket-book,
      found two notes and flung them on the table.
    

      "There's your fee," he said, and his nostrils trembled. "You're paid."
    

      "You dare not offer me money," said the doctor, and brushed the notes from
      the table to the floor. "You don't settle an insult with money."
    

      Aboguin and the doctor stood face to face, heaping each other with
      undeserved insults. Never in their lives, even in a frenzy, had they said
      so much that was unjust and cruel and absurd. In both the selfishness of
      the unhappy is violently manifest. Unhappy men are selfish, wicked,
      unjust, and less able to understand each other than fools. Unhappiness
      does not unite people, but separates them; and just where one would
      imagine that people should be united by the community of grief, there is
      more injustice and cruelty done than among the comparatively contented.
    

      "Send me home, please," the doctor cried, out of breath.
    

      Aboguin rang the bell violently. Nobody came. He rang once more; then
      flung the bell angrily to the floor. It struck dully on the carpet and
      gave out a mournful sound like a death-moan. The footman appeared.
    

      "Where have you been hiding, damn you?" The master sprang upon him with
      clenched fists. "Where have you been just now? Go away and tell them to
      said the carriage round for this gentleman, and get the brougham ready for
      me. Wait," he called out as the footman turned to go. "Not a single
      traitor remains to-morrow. Pack off all of you! I will engage new ones ...
      Rabble!"
    

      While they waited Aboguin and the doctor were silent. Already the
      expression of satisfaction and the subtle elegance had returned to the
      former. He paced the drawing-room, shook his head elegantly and evidently
      was planning something. His anger was not yet cool, but he tried to make
      as if he did not notice his enemy.... The doctor stood with one hand on
      the edge of the table, looking at Aboguin with that deep, rather cynical,
      ugly contempt with which only grief and an unjust lot can look, when they
      see satiety and elegance before them.
    

      A little later, when the doctor took his seat in the carriage and drove
      away, his eyes still glanced contemptuously. It was dark, much darker than
      an hour ago. The red half-moon had now disappeared behind the little hill,
      and the clouds which watched it lay in dark spots round the stars. The
      brougham with the red lamps began to rattle on the road and passed the
      doctor. It was Aboguin on his way to protest, to commit all manner of
      folly.
    

      All the way the doctor thought not of his wife or Andrey, but only of
      Aboguin and those who lived in the house he just left. His thoughts were
      unjust, inhuman, and cruel. He passed sentence on Aboguin, his wife,
      Papchinsky, and all those who live in rosy semi-darkness and smell of
      scent. All the way he hated them, and his heart ached with his contempt
      for them. The conviction he formed about them would last his life long.
    

      Time will pass and Kirilov's sorrow, but this conviction, unjust and
      unworthy of the human heart, will not pass, but will remain in the
      doctor's mind until the grave.
    





      Nicolai Ilyich Byelyaev, a Petersburg landlord, very fond of the
      racecourse, a well fed, pink young man of about thirty-two, once called
      towards evening on Madame Irnin—Olga Ivanovna—with whom he had
      a liaison, or, to use his own phrase, spun out a long and tedious
      romance. And indeed the first pages of this romance, pages of interest and
      inspiration, had been read long ago; now they dragged on and on, and
      presented neither novelty nor interest.
    

      Finding that Olga Ivanovna was not at home, my hero lay down a moment on
      the drawing-room sofa and began to wait.
    

      "Good evening, Nicolai Ilyich," he suddenly heard a child's voice say.
      "Mother will be in in a moment. She's gone to the dressmaker's with
      Sonya."
    

      In the same drawing-room on the sofa lay Olga Vassilievna's son, Alyosha,
      a boy about eight years old, well built, well looked after, dressed up
      like a picture in a velvet jacket and long black stockings. He lay on a
      satin pillow, and apparently imitating an acrobat whom he had lately seen
      in the circus, lifted up first one leg then the other. When his elegant
      legs began to be tired, he moved his hands, or he jumped up impetuously
      and then went on all fours, trying to stand with his legs in the air. All
      this he did with a most serious face, breathing heavily, as if he himself
      found no happiness in God's gift of such a restless body.
    

      "Ah, how do you do, my friend?" said Byelyaev. "Is it you? I didn't notice
      you. Is your mother well?"
    

      At the moment Alyosha had just taken hold of the toe of his left foot in
      his right hand and got into a most awkward pose. He turned head over
      heels, jumped up, and glanced from under the big, fluffy lampshade at
      Byelyaev.
    

      "How can I put it?" he said, shrugging his shoulders. "As a matter of
      plain fact mother is never well. You see she's a woman, and women, Nicolai
      Ilyich, have always some pain or another."
    

      For something to do, Byelyaev began to examine Alyosha's face. All the
      time he had been acquainted with Olga Ivanovna he had never once turned
      his attention to the boy and had completely ignored his existence. A boy
      is stuck in front of your eyes, but what is he doing here, what is his rÃ´le?—you
      don't want to give a single thought to the question.
    

      In the evening dusk Alyosha's face with a pale forehead and steady black
      eyes unexpectedly reminded Byelyaev of Olga Vassilievna as she was in the
      first pages of the romance. He had the desire to be affectionate to the
      boy.
    

      "Come here, whipper-snapper," he said. "Come and let me have a good look
      at you, quite close."
    

      The boy jumped off the sofa and ran to Byelyaev.
    

      "Well?" Nicolai Ilyich began, putting his hand on the thin shoulders. "And
      how are things with you?"
    

      "How shall I put it?... They used to be much better before."
    

      "How?"
    

      "Quite simple. Before, Sonya and I only had to do music and reading, and
      now we're given French verses to learn. You've had your hair cut lately?"
    

      "Yes, just lately."
    

      "That's why I noticed it. Your beard's shorter. May I touch it ... doesn't
      it hurt?"
    

      "No, not a bit."
    

      "Why is it that it hurts if you pull one hair, and when you pull a whole
      lot, it doesn't hurt a bit? Ah, ah I You know it's a pity you don't have
      side-whiskers. You should shave here, and at the sides ... and leave the
      hair just here."
    

      The boy pressed close to Byelyaev and began to play with his watch-chain.
    

      "When I go to the gymnasium," he said, "Mother is going to buy me a watch.
      I'll ask her to buy me a chain just like this. What a fine locket I Father
      has one just the same, but yours has stripes, here, and his has got
      letters.... Inside it's mother's picture. Father has another chain now,
      not in links, but like a ribbon...."
    

      "How do you know? Do you see your father?"
    

      "I? Mm ... no ... I ..."
    

      Alyosha blushed and in the violent confusion of being detected in a lie
      began to scratch the locket busily with his finger-nail. Byelyaev looked
      steadily at his face and asked:
    

      "Do you see your father?"
    

      "No ... no!"
    

      "But, be honest—on your honour. By your face I can see you're not
      telling me the truth. If you made a slip of the tongue by mistake, what's
      the use of shuffling. Tell me, do you see him? As one friend to another."
    

      Alyosha mused.
    

      "And you won't tell Mother?" he asked.
    

      "What next."
    

      "On your word of honour."
    

      "My word of honour."
    

      "Swear an oath."
    

      "What a nuisance you are! What do you take me for?"
    

      Alyosha looked round, made big eyes and began to whisper.
    

      "Only for God's sake don't tell Mother! Never tell it to anyone at all,
      because it's a secret. God forbid that Mother should ever get to know;
      then I and Sonya and Pelagueia will pay for it.... Listen. Sonya and I
      meet Father every Tuesday and Friday. When Pelagueia takes us for a walk
      before dinner, we go into Apfel's sweet-shop and Father's waiting for us.
      He always sits in a separate room, you know, where there's a splendid
      marble table and an ash-tray shaped like a goose without a back...."
    

      "And what do you do there?"
    

      "Nothing!—First, we welcome one another, then we sit down at a
      little table and Father begins to treat us to coffee and cakes. You know,
      Sonya eats meat-pies, and I can't bear pies with meat in them! I like them
      made of cabbage and eggs. We eat so much that afterwards at dinner we try
      to eat as much as we possibly can so that Mother shan't notice."
    

      "What do you talk about there?"
    

      "To Father? About anything. He kisses us and cuddles us, tells us all
      kinds of funny stories. You know, he says that he will take us to live
      with him when we are grown up. Sonya doesn't want to go, but I say 'Yes.'
      Of course, it'll be lonely without Mother; but I'll write letters to her.
      How funny: we could go to her for our holidays then—couldn't we?
      Besides, Father says that he'll buy me a horse. He's a splendid man. I
      can't understand why Mother doesn't invite him to live with her or why she
      says we mustn't meet him. He loves Mother very much indeed. He's always
      asking us how she is and what she's doing. When she was ill, he took hold
      of his head like this ... and ran, ran, all the time. He is always telling
      us to obey and respect her. Tell me, is it true that we're unlucky?"
    

      "H'm ... how?"
    

      "Father says so. He says: 'You are unlucky children.' It's quite strange
      to listen to him. He says: 'You are unhappy, I'm unhappy, and Mother's
      unhappy.' He says: 'Pray to God for yourselves and for her.'" Alyosha's
      eyes rested upon the stuffed bird and he mused.
    

      "Exactly...." snorted Byelyaev. "This is what you do. You arrange
      conferences in sweet-shops. And your mother doesn't know?" "N—no....
      How could she know? Pelagueia won't tell for anything. The day before
      yesterday Father stood us pears. Sweet, like jam. I had two."
    

      "H'm ... well, now ... tell me, doesn't your father speak about me?"
    

      "About you? How shall I put it?" Alyosha gave a searching glance to
      Byelyaev's face and shrugged his shoulders.
    

      "He doesn't say anything in particular."
    

      "What does he say, for instance?"
    

      "You won't be offended?"
    

      "What next? Why, does he abuse me?"
    

      "He doesn't abuse you, but you know ... he is cross with you. He says that
      it's through you that Mother's unhappy and that you ... ruined Mother. But
      he is so queer! I explain to him that you are good and never shout at
      Mother, but he only shakes his head."
    

      "Does he say those very words: that I ruined her?"
    

      "Yes. Don't be offended, Nicolai Ilyich!"
    

      Byelyaev got up, stood still a moment, and then began to walk about the
      drawing-room.
    

      "This is strange, and ... funny," he murmured, shrugging his shoulders and
      smiling ironically. "He is to blame all round, and now I've ruined her,
      eh? What an innocent lamb! Did he say those very words to you: that I
      ruined your mother?"
    

      "Yes, but ... you said that you wouldn't get offended."
    

      "I'm not offended, and ... and it's none of your business! No, it ... it's
      quite funny though. I fell, into the trap, yet I'm to be blamed as well."
    

      The bell rang. The boy dashed from his place and ran out. In a minute a
      lady entered the room with a little girl. It was Olga Ivanovna, Alyosha's
      mother. After her, hopping, humming noisily, and waving his hands,
      followed Alyosha.
    

      "Of course, who is there to accuse except me?" he murmured, sniffing.
      "He's right, he's the injured husband."
    

      "What's the matter?" asked Olga Ivanovna.
    

      "What's the matter! Listen to the kind of sermon your dear husband
      preaches. It appears I'm a scoundrel and a murderer, I've ruined you and
      the children. All of you are unhappy, and only I am awfully happy!
      Awfully, awfully happy!"
    

      "I don't understand, Nicolai! What is it?"
    

      "Just listen to this young gentleman," Byelyaev said, pointing to Alyosha.
    

      Alyosha blushed, then became pale suddenly and his whole face was twisted
      in fright.
    

      "Nicolai Ilyich," he whispered loudly. "Shh!"
    

      Olga Ivanovna glanced in surprise at Alyosha, at Byelyaev, and then again
      at Alyosha.
    

      "Ask him, if you please," went on Byelyaev. "That stupid fool Pelagueia of
      yours, takes them to sweet-shops and arranges meetings with their dear
      father there. But that's not the point. The point is that the dear father
      is a martyr, and I'm a murderer, I'm a scoundrel, who broke the lives of
      both of you...."
    

      "Nicolai Ilyich!" moaned Alyosha. "You gave your word of honour!"
    

      "Ah, let me alone!" Byelyaev waved his hand. "This is something more
      important than any words of honour. The hypocrisy revolts me, the lie!"
    

      "I don't understand," muttered Olga Ivanovna, and tears began to glimmer
      in her eyes. "Tell me, Lyolka,"—she turned to her son, "Do you see
      your father?"
    

      Alyosha did not hear and looked with horror at Byelyaev.
    

      "It's impossible," said the mother. "I'll go and ask Pelagueia."
    

      Olga Ivanovna went out.
    

      "But, but you gave me your word of honour," Alyosha said trembling all
      over.
    

      Byelyaev waved his hand at him and went on walking up and down. He was
      absorbed in his insult, and now, as before, he did not notice the presence
      of the boy. He, a big serious man, had nothing to do with boys. And
      Alyosha sat down in a corner and in terror told Sonya how he had been
      deceived. He trembled, stammered, wept. This was the first time in his
      life that he had been set, roughly, face to face with a lie. He had never
      known before that in this world besides sweet pears and cakes and
      expensive watches, there exist many other things which have no name in
      children's language.
    





      When she came out of the hospital the charming Vanda, or, according to her
      passport, "the honourable lady-citizen Nastasya Kanavkina," found herself
      in a position in which she had never been before: without a roof and
      without a son. What was to be done?
    

      First of all, she went to a pawnshop to pledge her turquoise ring, her
      only jewellery. They gave her a rouble for the ring ... but what can you
      buy for a rouble? For that you can't get a short jacket Ã  la mode,
      or an elaborate hat, or a pair of brown shoes; yet without these things
      she felt naked. She felt as though, not only the people, but even the
      horses and dogs were staring at her and laughing at the plainness of her
      clothes. And her only thought was for her clothes; she did not care at all
      what she ate or where she slept.
    

      "If only I were to meet a gentleman friend...." she thought. "I could get
      some money ... Nobody would say 'No,' because...."
    

      But she came across no gentleman Mends. It's easy to find them of nights
      in the Renaissance, but they wouldn't let her go into the Renaissance
      in that plain dress and without a hat. What's to be done? After a long
      time of anguish, vexed and weary with walking, sitting, and thinking,
      Vanda made up her mind to play her last card: to go straight to the rooms
      of some gentleman friend and ask him for money.
    

      "But who shall I go to?" she pondered. "I can't possibly go to Misha ...
      he's got a family.... The ginger-headed old man is at his office...."
    

      Vanda recollected Finkel, the dentist, the converted Jew, who gave her a
      bracelet three months ago. Once she poured a glass of beer on his head at
      the German dub. She was awfully glad that she had thought of Finkel.
    

      "He'll be certain to give me some, if only I find him in..." she thought,
      on her way to him. "And if he won't, then I'll break every single thing
      there."
    

      She had her plan already prepared. She approached the dentist's door. She
      would run up the stairs, with a laugh, fly into his private room and ask
      for twenty-five roubles.... But when she took hold of the bell-pull, the
      plan went clean out of her head. Vanda suddenly began to be afraid and
      agitated, a thing which had never happened to her before. She was never
      anything but bold and independent in drunken company; but now, dressed in
      common clothes, and just like any ordinary person begging a favour, she
      felt timid and humble.
    

      "Perhaps he has forgotten me..." she thought, not daring to pull the bell.
      "And how can I go up to him in a dress like this? As if I were a pauper,
      or a dowdy respectable..."
    

      She rang the bell irresolutely.
    

      There were steps behind the door. It was the porter.
    

      "Is the doctor at home?" she asked.
    

      She would have been very pleased now if the porter had said "No," but
      instead of answering he showed her into the hall, and took her jacket. The
      stairs seemed to her luxurious and magnificent, but what she noticed first
      of all in all the luxury was a large mirror in which she saw a ragged
      creature without an elaborate hat, without a modish jacket, and without a
      pair of brown shoes. And Vanda found it strange that, now that she was
      poorly dressed and looking more like a seamstress or a washerwoman, for
      the first time she felt ashamed, and had no more assurance or boldness
      left. In her thoughts she began to call herself Nastya Kanavkina, instead
      of Vanda as she used.
    

      "This way, please!" said the maid-servant, leading her to the private
      room. "The doctor will be here immediately.... Please, take a seat."
    

      Vanda dropped into an easy chair.
    

      "I'll say: 'Lend me ...'" she thought. "That's the right thing, because we
      are acquainted. But the maid must go out of the room.... It's awkward in
      front of the maid.... What is she standing there for?"
    

      In five minutes the door opened and Finkel entered—a tall, swarthy,
      convert Jew, with fat cheeks and goggle-eyes. His cheeks, eyes, belly,
      fleshy hips—were all so full, repulsive, and coarse! At the Renaissance
      and the German club he used always to be a little drunk, to spend a lot of
      money on women, patiently put up with all their tricks—for instance,
      when Vanda poured the beer on his head, he only smiled and shook his
      finger at her—but now he looked dull and sleepy; he had the pompous,
      chilly expression of a superior, and he was chewing something.
    

      "What is the matter?" he asked, without looking at Vanda. Vanda glanced at
      the maid's serious face, at the blown-out figure of Finkel, who obviously
      did not recognise her, and she blushed.
    

      "What's the matter?" the dentist repeated, irritated.
    

      "To ... oth ache...." whispered Vanda.
    

      "Ah ... which tooth ... where?"
    

      Vanda remembered she had a tooth with a hole.
    

      "At the bottom ... to the right," she said.
    

      "H'm ... open your mouth."
    

      Finkel frowned, held his breath, and began to work the aching tooth loose.
    

      "Do you feel any pain?" he asked, picking at her tooth with some
      instrument.
    

      "Yes, I do...." Vanda lied. "Shall I remind him?" she thought, "he'll be
      sure to remember.... But ... the maid ... what is she standing there for?"
    

      Finkel suddenly snorted like a steam-engine straight into her mouth, and
      said:
    

      "I don't advise you to have a stopping.... Anyhow the tooth is quite
      useless."
    

      Again he picked at the tooth for a little, and soiled Vanda's lips and
      gums with his tobacco-stained fingers. Again he held his breath and dived
      into her mouth with something cold....
    

      Vanda suddenly felt a terrible pain, shrieked and seized Finkel's hand....
    

      "Never mind...." he murmured. "Don't be frightened.... This tooth isn't
      any use."
    

      And his tobacco-stained fingers, covered with blood, held up the extracted
      tooth before her eyes. The maid came forward and put a bowl to her lips.
    

      "Rinse your mouth with cold water at home," said Finkel. "That will make
      the blood stop."
    

      He stood before her in the attitude of a man impatient to be left alone at
      last.
    

      "Good-bye ..." she said, turning to the door.
    

      "H'm! And who's to pay me for the work?" Finkel asked laughingly.
    

      "Ah ... yes!" Vanda recollected, blushed and gave the dentist the rouble
      she had got for the turquoise ring.
    

      When she came into the street she felt still more ashamed than before, but
      she was not ashamed of her poverty any more. Nor did she notice any more
      that she hadn't an elaborate hat or a modish jacket. She walked along the
      street spitting blood and each red spittle told her about her life, a bad,
      hard life; about the insults she had suffered and had still to
      suffer-to-morrow, a week, a year hence—her whole life, till
      death....
    

      "Oh, how terrible it is!" she whispered. "My God, how terrible!"
    

      But the next day she was at the Renaissance and she danced there.
      She wore a new, immense red hat, a new jacket Ã  la mode and a pair
      of brown shoes. She was treated to supper by a young merchant from Kazan.