A GERM DESTROYER.
    

   Pleasant it is for the Little Tin Gods,
     When great Jove nods;
   But Little Tin Gods make their little mistakes
     In missing the hour when great Jove wakes.


      As a general rule, it is inexpedient to meddle with questions of State in
      a land where men are highly paid to work them out for you.
    

      This tale is a justifiable exception.
    

      Once in every five years, as you know, we indent for a new Viceroy; and
      each Viceroy imports, with the rest of his baggage, a Private Secretary,
      who may or may not be the real Viceroy, just as Fate ordains. Fate looks
      after the Indian Empire because it is so big and so helpless.
    

      There was a Viceroy once, who brought out with him a turbulent Private
      Secretary—a hard man with a soft manner and a morbid passion for
      work. This Secretary was called Wonder—John Fennil Wonder. The
      Viceroy possessed no name—nothing but a string of counties and
      two-thirds of the alphabet after them. He said, in confidence, that he was
      the electro-plated figurehead of a golden administration, and he watched
      in a dreamy, amused way Wonder's attempts to draw matters which were
      entirely outside his province into his own hands. “When we are all
      cherubims together,” said His Excellency once, “my dear, good friend
      Wonder will head the conspiracy for plucking out Gabriel's tail-feathers
      or stealing Peter's keys. THEN I shall report him.”
     

      But, though the Viceroy did nothing to check Wonder's officiousness, other
      people said unpleasant things. Maybe the Members of Council began it; but,
      finally, all Simla agreed that there was “too much Wonder, and too little
      Viceroy,” in that regime. Wonder was always quoting “His Excellency.” It
      was “His Excellency this,” “His Excellency that,” “In the opinion of His
      Excellency,” and so on. The Viceroy smiled; but he did not heed.
    

      He said that, so long as his old men squabbled with his “dear, good
      Wonder,” they might be induced to leave the “Immemorial East” in peace.
    

      “No wise man has a policy,” said the Viceroy. “A Policy is the blackmail
      levied on the Fool by the Unforeseen. I am not the former, and I do not
      believe in the latter.”
     

      I do not quite see what this means, unless it refers to an Insurance
      Policy. Perhaps it was the Viceroy's way of saying:—“Lie low.”
     

      That season, came up to Simla one of these crazy people with only a single
      idea. These are the men who make things move; but they are not nice to
      talk to. This man's name was Mellish, and he had lived for fifteen years
      on land of his own, in Lower Bengal, studying cholera. He held that
      cholera was a germ that propagated itself as it flew through a muggy
      atmosphere; and stuck in the branches of trees like a wool-flake. The germ
      could be rendered sterile, he said, by “Mellish's Own Invincible
      Fumigatory”—a heavy violet-black powder—“the result of fifteen
      years' scientific investigation, Sir!”
     

      Inventors seem very much alike as a caste. They talk loudly, especially
      about “conspiracies of monopolists;” they beat upon the table with their
      fists; and they secrete fragments of their inventions about their persons.
    

      Mellish said that there was a Medical “Ring” at Simla, headed by the
      Surgeon-General, who was in league, apparently, with all the Hospital
      Assistants in the Empire. I forget exactly how he proved it, but it had
      something to do with “skulking up to the Hills;” and what Mellish wanted
      was the independent evidence of the Viceroy—“Steward of our Most
      Gracious Majesty the Queen, Sir.” So Mellish went up to Simla, with
      eighty-four pounds of Fumigatory in his trunk, to speak to the Viceroy and
      to show him the merits of the invention.
    

      But it is easier to see a Viceroy than to talk to him, unless you chance
      to be as important as Mellishe of Madras. He was a six-thousand-rupee man,
      so great that his daughters never “married.” They “contracted alliances.”
       He himself was not paid. He “received emoluments,” and his journeys about
      the country were “tours of observation.” His business was to stir up the
      people in Madras with a long pole—as you stir up stench in a pond—and
      the people had to come up out of their comfortable old ways and gasp:—“This
      is Enlightenment and progress. Isn't it fine!” Then they gave Mellishe
      statues and jasmine garlands, in the hope of getting rid of him.
    

      Mellishe came up to Simla “to confer with the Viceroy.” That was one of
      his perquisites. The Viceroy knew nothing of Mellishe except that he was
      “one of those middle-class deities who seem necessary to the spiritual
      comfort of this Paradise of the Middle-classes,” and that, in all
      probability, he had “suggested, designed, founded, and endowed all the
      public institutions in Madras.” Which proves that His Excellency, though
      dreamy, had experience of the ways of six-thousand-rupee men.
    

      Mellishe's name was E. Mellishe and Mellish's was E. S. Mellish, and they
      were both staying at the same hotel, and the Fate that looks after the
      Indian Empire ordained that Wonder should blunder and drop the final “e;”
       that the Chaprassi should help him, and that the note which ran: “Dear Mr.
      Mellish.—Can you set aside your other engagements and lunch with us
      at two tomorrow? His Excellency has an hour at your disposal then,” should
      be given to Mellish with the Fumigatory. He nearly wept with pride and
      delight, and at the appointed hour cantered off to Peterhoff, a big
      paper-bag full of the Fumigatory in his coat-tail pockets. He had his
      chance, and he meant to make the most of it. Mellishe of Madras had been
      so portentously solemn about his “conference,” that Wonder had arranged
      for a private tiffin—no A.-D.-C.'s, no Wonder, no one but the
      Viceroy, who said plaintively that he feared being left alone with
      unmuzzled autocrats like the great Mellishe of Madras.
    

      But his guest did not bore the Viceroy. On the contrary, he amused him.
      Mellish was nervously anxious to go straight to his Fumigatory, and talked
      at random until tiffin was over and His Excellency asked him to smoke. The
      Viceroy was pleased with Mellish because he did not talk “shop.”
     

      As soon as the cheroots were lit, Mellish spoke like a man; beginning with
      his cholera-theory, reviewing his fifteen years' “scientific labors,” the
      machinations of the “Simla Ring,” and the excellence of his Fumigatory,
      while the Viceroy watched him between half-shut eyes and thought:
      “Evidently, this is the wrong tiger; but it is an original animal.”
       Mellish's hair was standing on end with excitement, and he stammered. He
      began groping in his coat-tails and, before the Viceroy knew what was
      about to happen, he had tipped a bagful of his powder into the big silver
      ash-tray.
    

      “J-j-judge for yourself, Sir,” said Mellish. “Y' Excellency shall judge
      for yourself! Absolutely infallible, on my honor.”
     

      He plunged the lighted end of his cigar into the powder, which began to
      smoke like a volcano, and send up fat, greasy wreaths of copper-colored
      smoke. In five seconds the room was filled with a most pungent and
      sickening stench—a reek that took fierce hold of the trap of your
      windpipe and shut it. The powder then hissed and fizzed, and sent out blue
      and green sparks, and the smoke rose till you could neither see, nor
      breathe, nor gasp. Mellish, however, was used to it.
    

      “Nitrate of strontia,” he shouted; “baryta, bone-meal, etcetera! Thousand
      cubic feet smoke per cubic inch. Not a germ could live—not a germ,
      Y' Excellency!”
     

      But His Excellency had fled, and was coughing at the foot of the stairs,
      while all Peterhoff hummed like a hive. Red Lancers came in, and the Head
      Chaprassi, who speaks English, came in, and mace-bearers came in, and
      ladies ran downstairs screaming “fire;” for the smoke was drifting through
      the house and oozing out of the windows, and bellying along the verandahs,
      and wreathing and writhing across the gardens. No one could enter the room
      where Mellish was lecturing on his Fumigatory, till that unspeakable
      powder had burned itself out.
    

      Then an Aide-de-Camp, who desired the V. C., rushed through the rolling
      clouds and hauled Mellish into the hall. The Viceroy was prostrate with
      laughter, and could only waggle his hands feebly at Mellish, who was
      shaking a fresh bagful of powder at him.
    

      “Glorious! Glorious!” sobbed his Excellency. “Not a germ, as you justly
      observe, could exist! I can swear it. A magnificent success!”
     

      Then he laughed till the tears came, and Wonder, who had caught the real
      Mellishe snorting on the Mall, entered and was deeply shocked at the
      scene. But the Viceroy was delighted, because he saw that Wonder would
      presently depart. Mellish with the Fumigatory was also pleased, for he
      felt that he had smashed the Simla Medical “Ring.”.........
    

      Few men could tell a story like His Excellency when he took the trouble,
      and the account of “my dear, good Wonder's friend with the powder” went
      the round of Simla, and flippant folk made Wonder unhappy by their
      remarks.
    

      But His Excellency told the tale once too often—for Wonder. As he
      meant to do. It was at a Seepee Picnic. Wonder was sitting just behind the
      Viceroy.
    

      “And I really thought for a moment,” wound up His Excellency, “that my
      dear, good Wonder had hired an assassin to clear his way to the throne!”
     

      Every one laughed; but there was a delicate subtinkle in the Viceroy's
      tone which Wonder understood. He found that his health was giving way; and
      the Viceroy allowed him to go, and presented him with a flaming
      “character” for use at Home among big people.
    

      “My fault entirely,” said His Excellency, in after seasons, with a
      twinkling in his eye. “My inconsistency must always have been distasteful
      to such a masterly man.”