A HUMBLE DRAMA
    

      Meetings that are unexpected constitute the charm of traveling. Who has
      not experienced the joy of suddenly coming across a Parisian, a college
      friend, or a neighbor, five hundred miles from home? Who has not passed a
      night awake in one of those small, rattling country stage-coaches, in
      regions where steam is still a thing unknown, beside a strange young
      woman, of whom one has caught only a glimpse in the dim light of the
      lantern, as she entered the carriage in front of a white house in some
      small country town?
    

      And the next morning, when one's head and ears feel numb with the
      continuous tinkling of the bells and the loud rattling of the windows,
      what a charming sensation it is to see your pretty neighbor open her eyes,
      startled, glance around her, arrange her rebellious hair with her slender
      fingers, adjust her hat, feel with sure hand whether her corset is still
      in place, her waist straight, and her skirt not too wrinkled.
    

      She glances at you coldly and curiously. Then she leans back and no longer
      seems interested in anything but the country.
    

      In spite of yourself, you watch her; and in spite of yourself you keep on
      thinking of her. Who is she? Whence does she come? Where is she going? In
      spite of yourself you spin a little romance around her. She is pretty; she
      seems charming! Happy he who . . . Life might be delightful with her. Who
      knows? She is perhaps the woman of our dreams, the one suited to our
      disposition, the one for whom our heart calls.
    

      And how delicious even the disappointment at seeing her get out at the
      gate of a country house! A man stands there, who is awaiting her, with two
      children and two maids. He takes her in his arms and kisses as he lifts
      her out. Then she stoops over the little ones, who hold up their hands to
      her; she kisses them tenderly; and then they all go away together, down a
      path, while the maids catch the packages which the driver throws down to
      them from the coach.
    

      Adieu! It is all over. You never will see her again! Adieu to the young
      woman who has passed the night by your side. You know her no more, you
      have not spoken to her; all the same, you feel a little sad to see her go.
      Adieu!
    

      I have had many of these souvenirs of travel, some joyous and some sad.
    

      Once I was in Auvergne, tramping through those delightful French
      mountains, that are not too high, not too steep, but friendly and
      familiar. I had climbed the Sancy, and entered a little inn, near a
      pilgrim's chapel called Notre-Dame de Vassiviere, when I saw a queer,
      ridiculous-looking old woman breakfasting alone at the end table.
    

      She was at least seventy years old, tall, skinny, and angular, and her
      white hair was puffed around her temples in the old-fashioned style. She
      was dressed like a traveling Englishwoman, in awkward, queer clothing,
      like a person who is indifferent to dress. She was eating an omelet and
      drinking water.
    

      Her face was peculiar, with restless eyes and the expression of one with
      whom fate has dealt unkindly. I watched her, in spite of myself, thinking:
      “Who is she? What is the life of this woman? Why is she wandering
      alone through these mountains?”
    

      She paid and rose to leave, drawing up over her shoulders an astonishing
      little shawl, the two ends of which hung over her arms. From a corner of
      the room she took an alpenstock, which was covered with names traced with
      a hot iron; then she went out, straight, erect, with the long steps of a
      letter-carrier who is setting out on his route.
    

      A guide was waiting for her at the door, and both went away. I watched
      them go down the valley, along the road marked by a line of high wooden
      crosses. She was taller than her companion, and seemed to walk faster than
      he.
    

      Two hours later I was climbing the edge of the deep funnel that incloses
      Lake Pavin in a marvelous and enormous basin of verdure, full of trees,
      bushes, rocks, and flowers. This lake is so round that it seems as if the
      outline had been drawn with a pair of compasses, so clear and blue that
      one might deem it a flood of azure come down from the sky, so charming
      that one would like to live in a hut on the wooded slope which dominates
      this crater, where the cold, still water is sleeping. The Englishwoman was
      standing there like a statue, gazing upon the transparent sheet down in
      the dead volcano. She was straining her eyes to penetrate below the
      surface down to the unknown depths, where monstrous trout which have
      devoured all the other fish are said to live. As I was passing close by
      her, it seemed to me that two big tears were brimming her eyes. But she
      departed at a great pace, to rejoin her guide, who had stayed behind in an
      inn at the foot of the path leading to the lake.
    

      I did not see her again that day.
    

      The next day, at nightfall, I came to the chateau of Murol. The old
      fortress, an enormous tower standing on a peak in the midst of a large
      valley, where three valleys intersect, rears its brown, uneven, cracked
      surface into the sky; it is round, from its large circular base to the
      crumbling turrets on its pinnacles.
    

      It astonishes the eye more than any other ruin by its simple mass, its
      majesty, its grave and imposing air of antiquity. It stands there, alone,
      high as a mountain, a dead queen, but still the queen of the valleys
      stretched out beneath it. You go up by a slope planted with firs, then you
      enter a narrow gate, and stop at the foot of the walls, in the first
      inclosure, in full view of the entire country.
    

      Inside there are ruined halls, crumbling stairways, unknown cavities,
      dungeons, walls cut through in the middle, vaulted roofs held up one knows
      not how, and a mass of stones and crevices, overgrown with grass, where
      animals glide in and out.
    

      I was exploring this ruin alone.
    

      Suddenly I perceived behind a bit of wall a being, a kind of phantom, like
      the spirit of this ancient and crumbling habitation.
    

      I was taken aback with surprise, almost with fear, when I recognized the
      old lady whom I had seen twice.
    

      She was weeping, with big tears in her eyes, and held her handkerchief in
      her hand.
    

      I turned around to go away, when she spoke to me, apparently ashamed to
      have been surprised in her grief.
    

      “Yes, monsieur, I am crying. That does not happen often to me.”
    

      “Pardon me, madame, for having disturbed you,” I stammered,
      confused, not knowing what to say. “Some misfortune has doubtless
      come to you.”
    

      “Yes. No—I am like a lost dog,” she murmured, and began
      to sob, with her handkerchief over her eyes.
    

      Moved by these contagious tears, I took her hand, trying to calm her. Then
      brusquely she told me her history, as if no longer ably to bear her grief
      alone.
    

      “Oh! Oh! Monsieur—if you knew—the sorrow in which I live—in
      what sorrow.
    

      “Once I was happy. I have a house down there—a home. I cannot
      go back to it any more; I shall never go back to it again, it is too hard
      to bear.
    

      “I have a son. It is he! it is he! Children don't know. Oh, one has
      such a short time to live! If I should see him now I should perhaps not
      recognize him. How I loved him? How I loved him! Even before he was born,
      when I felt him move. And after that! How I have kissed and caressed and
      cherished him! If you knew how many nights I have passed in watching him
      sleep, and how many in thinking of him. I was crazy about him. When he was
      eight years old his father sent him to boarding-school. That was the end.
      He no longer belonged to me. Oh, heavens! He came to see me every Sunday.
      That was all!
    

      “He went to college in Paris. Then he came only four times a year,
      and every time I was astonished to see how he had changed, to find him
      taller without having seen him grow. They stole his childhood from me, his
      confidence, and his love which otherwise would not have gone away from me;
      they stole my joy in seeing him grow, in seeing him become a little man.
    

      “I saw him four times a year. Think of it! And at every one of his
      visits his body, his eye, his movements, his voice his laugh, were no
      longer the same, were no longer mine. All these things change so quickly
      in a child; and it is so sad if one is not there to see them change; one
      no longer recognizes him.
    

      “One year he came with down on his cheek! He! my son! I was
      dumfounded —would you believe it? I hardly dared to kiss him. Was it
      really he, my little, little curly head of old, my dear; dear child, whom
      I had held in his diapers or my knee, and who had nursed at my breast with
      his little greedy lips—was it he, this tall, brown boy, who no
      longer knew how to kiss me, who seemed to love me as a matter of duty, who
      called me 'mother' for the sake of politeness, and who kissed me on the
      forehead, when I felt like crushing him in my arms?
    

      “My husband died. Then my parents, and then my two sisters. When
      Death enters a house it seems as if he were hurrying to do his utmost, so
      as not to have to return for a long time after that. He spares only one or
      two to mourn the others.
    

      “I remained alone. My tall son was then studying law. I was hoping
      to live and die near him, and I went to him so that we could live
      together. But he had fallen into the ways of young men, and he gave me to
      understand that I was in his way. So I left. I was wrong in doing so, but
      I suffered too much in feeling myself in his way, I, his mother! And I
      came back home.
    

      “I hardly ever saw him again.
    

      “He married. What a joy! At last we should be together for good. I
      should have grandchildren. His wife was an Englishwoman, who took a
      dislike to me. Why? Perhaps she thought that I loved him too much.
    

      “Again I was obliged to go away. And I was alone. Yes, monsieur.
    

      “Then he went to England, to live with them, with his wife's
      parents. Do you understand? They have him—they have my son for
      themselves. They have stolen him from me. He writes to me once a month. At
      first he came to see me. But now he no longer comes.
    

      “It is now four years since I saw him last. His face then was
      wrinkled and his hair white. Was that possible? This man, my son, almost
      an old man? My little rosy child of old? No doubt I shall never see him
      again.
    

      “And so I travel about all the year. I go east and west, as you see,
      with no companion.
    

      “I am like a lost dog. Adieu, monsieur! don't stay here with me for
      it hurts me to have told you all this.”
    

      I went down the hill, and on turning round to glance back, I saw the old
      woman standing on a broken wall, looking out upon the mountains, the long
      valley and Lake Chambon in the distance.
    

      And her skirt and the queer little shawl which she wore around her thin
      shoulders were fluttering tike a flag in the wind.