A LITTLE BROTHER OF THE BOOKS

 The new librarian entered upon her duties
bright and early Monday morning. She closed
with a quick snap the little wicket-gate that separated
the books from the outer vestibule, briskly
arranged her paste-tube, her dated stamp, and her
box of slips, and summoned her young assistant
sharply. The assistant was reading Molly Bawn and eating caramels, and she shut book and bag
quickly, wiping her mouth as she hurried to her
superior.

 "Now, Miss Mather, I expect to get fifty books
properly labelled and shelved before noon," said
the new librarian, "and there must be no time
wasted. If anyone wants me, I shall be in Section
K," and she turned to go.

 Section K was only a few feet from the registering-table,
but it pleased the new librarian to
assume the existence of long corridors of volumes, with dumb-waiters and gongs and bustling, basket-laden
attendants. So much majesty did she throw
into her sentence, indeed, that the young assistant,
who had always, under the old rgime, privately
referred to Section K as "those old religious
books," and advised the few persons interested in
them to "go right in behind and see if the book
you refer to is there," was staggered for a moment,
and involuntarily glanced behind her, to see
if there had been a recent addition to the building.

 The new librarian strode down between the
cases, glancing quickly from side to side to detect
mislaid or hastily shoved-in volumes. Suddenly
she stopped.

 "What are you doing in here, little boy?" she
said abruptly.

 In the angle of the case marked "Books of
Travel, Adventure, etc.," seated upon a pile of
encyclopdias, with his head leaning against Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea , was a
small boy. He was dark of eyes and hair, palely
sallow, ten or eleven years old, to appearance. By
his side leaned a crutch, and a clumsy wooden boot, built up several inches from the sole, explained
the need of this. A heavy, much-worn
book was spread across his little knees.

 He looked up vaguely, hardly seeming to see
the librarian.

 "What are you doing here? How did you get
in?" she repeated.

 "I'm reading," he replied, not offering to rise,
"I just came in."

 "But this isn't the place to read. You must go
in the reading-room," she admonished him.

 "I always read here. I'd rather," he said, pleasantly
enough, dropping his eyes to his book, as
if the matter were closed.

 Now the new librarian thoroughly disapproved
of the ancient custom that penned the books away
from all handling, and fully intended to throw
them open to the public in a few months' time,
when she should have them properly systematised;
but she resented this anticipation of what she intended
for a much-appreciated future privilege.

 "But why should you read in here, when none
of the other children can?" she demanded.

 The boy raised his eyes again.

 "Mr. Littlejohn lets me—I always do," he repeated.

 The new librarian pressed her lips together
with an air of highly creditable restraint.

 "Mr. Littlejohn allowed a great many irregularities
which have been stopped," she announced,
"and as there is no reason why you should do
what the other children cannot, you will have to
go. So hurry up, for I'm very busy this morning."

 She did not speak unkindly, but there was an
unmistakable decision in her tone, and the boy got
up awkwardly, tucked his crutch under his arm,
and laying the big book down with care, went out
in silence, his heavy boot echoing unevenly on the
hardwood floor. The librarian went on to Section
K.

 Presently the young assistant, who had been accustomed
to keep her crocheted lace-work on the
Philosophical shelf, directly behind the Critique of
Pure Reason , recollected that it would in all human
probability be discovered, on the removal of
that epoch-making treatise, and came hastily down to get it. Having concealed it safely in her pocket,
she paused.

 "That was Jimmy Reese you sent out—did you
know it?" she asked.

 "No, what of it?"

 "Why, nothing, only he's always read in here
ever since I came. Mr. Littlejohn was very fond
of him. He helped pick out some of the books.
He——"

 "Picked out the books—that child? Great
heavens!"

 "Well, he's read a good deal, Jimmy has," the
assistant contended. "It's all he does. He can't play
like the other children, he's so lame. He seems real
old, anyhow. And he's always been here. He helps
giving out the books, and helps the children pick
out. He was very convenient when Mr. Littlejohn
didn't like to be waked up."

 "Great heavens!" the librarian cried again.

 "I think you'll find he'll be missed, you being
so new," the assistant persevered.

 "I think I can manage to carry on the library,
Miss Mather," replied her superior coldly, "with out
any assistance from the children of the town.
Will you begin on that Fiction, please?"

 She walked on again, but paused to put away
the brown book, which lay where the intruder had
left it, a mute witness to the untidiness of the laity.
Opening it briskly, she glanced at the title:

 The 

AGE OF FABLE

 or

 Beauties of Mythology

 by

 Thomas Bulfinch

 Below was a verse of poetry in very fine print;
she read it mechanically.

   O, ye delicious fables! where the wave  And woods were peopled, and the air, with things  So lovely! why, ah! why has science grave  Scattered afar your sweet imaginings?  Barry Cornwall.



 It flashed into her mind that an absolutely
shameless subscriber had retained Miss Proctor's
collected poems for three weeks now, and she made
a hasty note of the fact on a small pad that hung
from her belt. Then she set the Age of Fable in its place and went on about her work, the incident
dismissed.

 The next afternoon as she was sorting out from
the department labelled, "Poetry, Miscellaneous
Matter, etc.," such books as Mr. Littlejohn had
found himself unable or unwilling to classify further,
shaking down much dust on the further side
of the shelves in the process, she was startled by a
faint sneeze. Her assistant was compiling a list of
fines at the desk, and this sneeze came from her
very elbow, it seemed, so she hastily dismounted
from her little ladder and peered around the rack.
There sat the little boy of yesterday, the same
brown book spread across his knees. She looked
severe.

 "Is this Jimmy Reese?" she inquired stiffly.

 "Yes'm," he answered, with a polite smile. He
had an air of absolute unconsciousness of any
offence.

 "Well, don't you remember what I told you
yesterday, Jimmy? This is not the reading-room.
Why don't you go there?"

 "I like it better here."

  The librarian sighed despairingly.

 "Perhaps you don't know who I am," she explained,
not crossly, but with that air of detachment
and finality that many people assume in
talking with children. "I am Miss Watkins, the
new librarian, and when I give an order here it
must be obeyed. When I tell any one to do anything,
I expect them to do it, because—because
they must," she concluded lamely, a little disconcerted
by the placid stare of the brown eyes. "You
see, if all the little boys came in here, there would
be no room for us to work."

 "But they don't—nobody comes but me," he reminded
her.

 "Suppose," she demanded, "that someone should
call for that book you are reading. I shouldn't
know where to look for it."

 "Nobody ever wants it but me," he assured her
again.

 "I have no time to argue," she said irritably,
"you must do as I tell you. Put the book up and
run away."

 Without another word he laid the book on the broad base-shelf, picked up his crutch, and went
out. As she watched his retreating figure, a little
uneasy feeling troubled her usual calm. He seemed
so small, so harmless a person.

 A little later it occurred to her to see how he had
entered the library, and stepping through the two
smaller rooms at the back, choked and dusty with
neglected piles of old magazines, she noticed a
door ajar. Picking her way through the chaos,
she pulled the knob, and saw that it gave on a
tiny back porch. On the steps sat the janitor, as
incompetent, from the librarian's point of view,
as his late employer.

 "I thought you were sweeping off the walks,
Thomas," she suggested, coughing as the wreaths
from his pipe reached her.

 "Well, yes, Miss Watkins, so I was. I just
stopped a minute to rest, you see," he explained,
eyeing her distrustfully. Since her advent life had
changed greatly for the janitor.

 "I see Thomas, does that little lame boy come
in this way?"

  "Jimmy? Yes, ma'am. 'Most always he does. In
fact, that's why I keep the door unlocked."

 "Well, after this I prefer that you should keep
it locked. There is no reason why he should have
a private entrance to the library that I can see;
and anyway it's not safe. Some one might——"

 "Oh, Lord, Miss Watkins, don't you worry.
Nobody ever came in here yet, and I've been here
eight years. Jimmy's all right. He's careful and
still's a mouse, and he won't do a mite of harm.
He comes in regular after school's out, and it's
just like a home to him, you may say. He's all
right."

 Miss Watkins frowned.

 "I have no doubt that he is a very estimable
little boy," she said; "but you will please see that
no one enters the library by this door. I see no
reason for favouritism. You understand me, I
hope."

 And she returned to her work. The assistant,
weary of her unprecedented labour, had laid aside
the list of fines, and was openly crocheting. No
sound of broom or lawn-mower proclaimed Thomas worthy of his hire, and Miss Watkins, vexed beyond
the necessity of the case, labelled Fiction
angrily, wondering why such a town as this needed
a library, anyway.

 Two little old ladies, plump and deprecatory,
entered in a swish of fresh, cambric morning-dresses.
One of them fumbled in her black-silk
bag for a book, and leaning on the little gate,
coughed lightly to attract the assistant's attention.

 "Yes, indeed, Miss Mather, a lovely day. Sister
and I enjoyed this very much. I don't know about
what we'll take, exactly; it's so hard to tell. I always
look and look, and the more I look the more
anxious I get. It always seems as if everything
was going to be too long, or else we've read it.
You see we read a good deal. I wonder—do you
know where the little boy is?"

 Miss Mather smiled triumphantly. "You'll have
to ask Miss Watkins," she said.

 "The new librarian, my dear? Oh, I hardly like
to disturb her. They say she's very strict. My
cousin told me she charged her nine cents for a book that was out too long. You ask her, my
dear!"

 "Miss Watkins," said the assistant meekly,
"there is a lady here would like to see Jimmy. Do
you know where he is?"

 "I do not," the librarian returned briefly. "Anything
I can do——"

 "Oh, no, not at all!" cried the flushed old lady,
"not for the world! Don't disturb yourself, please—Miss—Miss—I'll
just wait till he gets in. He
picked this out for me. You see, he knows pretty
well what we want. I always like something with
a little travel in it, and sister won't hear of a
book unless it ends well. And it spoils it so to look
ahead. So the little fellow looks at the end, and
sees if it's all right for sister, and then he assures
me as to the travel—I like European travel best—and
then we know it's all right. I'll just wait
for him."

 "I have no reason to suppose that he will be
here," Miss Watkins said crossly.

 "Oh, yes, he'll be here," the old lady returned
comfortably. "He'll be here soon. We can wait."

  The librarian pressed her lips together and retired
into her work. The minutes passed. Presently
the outer door opened softly, and the irregular tap
of a crutch was heard. Jimmy's head peered
around the partition into the ante-room. The old
ladies uttered a chirp of delight, and slipped out
into the hall for a brief, whispered consultation,
returning with a modest request for " Griffith
Gaunt , by Charles Reade." The elder of the two
shut it carefully into her bag, remarking sociably,
"I wanted to read the Cloister and the Hearth , by
the same author, I'd heard there was so much
travel in it, but he said sister never could bear
the ending."

 Going into the reading-room later, on some
errand, the librarian was surprised to find the
magazines neatly laid out in piles, the chairs
straightened, the shades pulled level, and a fresh
bunch of lilacs in the jar under the window. She
guessed who had done it, but Jimmy was not to
be seen. Once, during the next afternoon, she
thought she saw a small, grey jacket disappearing
into the waste-room, but much to her own surprise, forbore to make certain of it. During the
next few days, when her time was entirely taken
up with the catalogue in the front of the library,
and the assistant transacted all business among the
shelves, she was perfectly convinced that somewhere
between sections A and K a little boy with
a brown book was concealed, but found herself
too busy to rout him out.

 Even when a red-faced, liveried coachman presented
her with a note, directed in a sprawling,
childish hand to "Mr. Jimmy Reese, Esq.," she
only coughed and said severely, "There is no such
official in the library."

 "It's just the little boy, ma'am, that's meant,"
the man explained deferentially. "Master Clarence
is back for the summer—Mrs. Clarence Vanderhoof,
ma'am—and he always sends a note to the
little fellow. There was some book he mentioned
to him last year as likely that he would enjoy, and
Master Clarence wants it, if it's in. I was to give
him the note."

 "I will send a list of our juveniles to Mrs.
Vanderhoof," said the librarian, in her most busi ness-like
manner, "and I will give you, for Master
Clarence, the new Henty book. He will probably
like that."

 "I beg pardon, ma'am," persisted the coachman,
"but Master Clarence says that there was a book
that the little boy particularly recommended to
him, and I was to be very special about it. He
goes a good deal by the little fellow's judgment.
I'll call in again when he's here, after my other
errands."

 Miss Watkins sighed, and gave way. "Will you
see, Miss Mather, if Jimmy Reese is in the library?"
she inquired, and Miss Mather, smiling,
obeyed her.

 He was never formally enfranchised, but he
took up his place in the department of Travel
and Adventure, and held it unchallenged. All the
long, spring afternoons he sat there, throned on
the books, leaning against them, banked safely in
from the tumult of the world outside, a quiet little
shadow among the shadowy throngs that filled the
covers.

 Whatever he might read, for he turned to other books as one travels, for the joy of coming home
again, the old brown book lay open on his knees,
and he patted the pages with one hand, absently,
as his eyes travelled over the print. Sooner or
later he came back to the yellowed leaves—perhaps
to the story of Dryope.

 " Now there was nothing left of Dryope but her
face. Her tears still flowed and fell on her leaves,
and while she could, she spoke. 'I am not guilty.
I deserve not this fate. I have injured no one.
If I speak falsely, may my foliage perish with
drought and my trunk be cut down and burned.
Take this infant and give it to a nurse. Let it
often be brought and nursed under my branches,
and play in my shade; and when he is old enough
to talk, let him be taught to call me mother, and
to say with sadness, "My mother lies hid under this
bark." But bid him be careful of river-banks, and
beware how he plucks flowers, remembering that
every bush he sees may be a goddess in disguise.
Farewell, dear husband and sister and father. If
you retain any love for me, let not the axe wound
me nor the flocks bite and tear my branches. Since I cannot stoop to you, climb up hither and kiss
me; and while my lips continue to feel, lift up my
child, that I may kiss him. I can speak no more,
for already the bark advances up my neck, and
will soon shoot over me. You need not close my
eyes; the bark will soon close them without your
aid.' Then the lips ceased to move, and life was
extinct; but the branches retained, for some time
longer, the vital heat. "

 In fancy he walked by that fatal stream. He
saw the plant dripping blood—the flower that was
the poor nymph Lotis. The terrible, beautiful revenge,
the swift doom of those wonderful Greeks,
that delights even while it horrifies, he felt to the
fullest measure. He had no more need to read them
than a priest his breviary, for he knew them all,
but he followed the type in very delight of recognition.

 Through the window came the strong scent of
the purple lilacs, that grew all over the little New
England town. Faint cries of children playing
drifted in with the breeze. The organ in the church
nearby crooned and droned a continual fugue. Someone was always practising there. The deep,
bass notes jarred the air, even the little building
trembled to them at times. And since it had been
at this season of the year, when he had first found
the book, the lovely broken myths, elusive sometimes,
and as dim to his understanding as the marble
fragments that still bewilder the enchanted
artist, he always connected with that throbbing,
mournful melody, that haunting lilac
odour. Sometimes the organ swelled triumphantly
and cried out in a mighty chorus of tone: at those
times Ulysses shot down the false suitors, or Perseus,
hovering over the shrieking sea-beast, rescued
the white Andromeda. Sometimes a minor plaintive
strain troubled him vaguely, and then he listened
to poor Venus, bending in tears above the slain
Adonis.

 " 'Yet theirs shall be but a partial triumph;
memorials of my grief shall endure, and the spectacle
of your death, my Adonis, and of my lamentation,
shall be annually renewed. Your blood shall
be turned into a flower; that consolation none shall
envy me.' Thus speaking, she sprinkled nectar on the blood; and as they mingled, bubbles rose as in
a pool, on which rain-drops fall, and in an hour's
time there sprang up a flower of bloody hue, like
that of the pomegranate. But it is short-lived. "

 The peculiar odour of much leather on pine
shelves was confused, too, with the darling book.
He had never read it elsewhere; he had not money
enough for a library-ticket. Old Mr. Littlejohn,
quickly recognising the invaluable services that
this little acolyte might be counted upon to render,
had readily granted him the freedom of the
shelves, and smoked his pipe in peace for hours
together, thereafter, in the back room, sure of his
monitor in front.

 Miss Watkins needed no such assistance, but she
found herself, to her amazement, not wholly ungrateful
for the many steps saved her by Jimmy's
tactful service to the children. At first she would
have none of it, and groups of shy boys and girls
waited awkwardly and in vain before the little
gate, hoping for a glimpse of their kindly counsellor.
She thrust lists of juveniles into their
unwilling hands, led them cautiously into an in spection
of Nature Lessons for Little Learners,
displayed tempting rows of bound St. Nicholas —but
to no purpose.

 "Where's Jimmy?" they demanded stubbornly.

 "What on earth do they want of him?" she
asked of her assistant one day. "That stupid
Meadows child—is she going to ask his opinion
of the Dotty Dimple Books?"

 "Not at all," Miss Mather replied tranquilly.
"But he always gets her a Mary J. Holmes novel,
and I stamp it and let it go. You always argue
with her about it, and ask her if she wouldn't prefer
something else—which she never would."

 Little by little he grew to wait on the children
as a matter of course. He was even allowed to
keep the novels desired by the Meadows child
in the juvenile shelf, where he insisted they belonged.

 "Only the girls in Number Seven want 'em,"
he explained, when his superior complained of
his audacity in removing them from adult fiction.

 And so the little girl who had reached that period of little girlhood when every well-regulated
young person is compelled by some inward power
to ask the librarian, tremblingly, if she has a book
in the libr'y called St. Elmo , was spared all embarrassment,
for Jimmy handed it out to her almost
before she asked.

 Not that he lacked the discrimination to exercise
a proper authority on occasion. Miss Watkins
remembered long a surprising scene which she witnessed
from the top of a ladder in the Biography
and Letters Section. A shambling, unwholesome
boy had asked Miss Mather in a husky voice for
the works of Edgar A. Poe, and as she blew off
the dust from the top and extended two fat volumes
toward him, a rapid tapping heralded the
youngest official.

 "Don't you give 'em to him, don't you!" he
cried, warningly. As she paused instinctively he
shook his finger with a quaint, old-fashioned gesture
at the boy.

 "You ought to be ashamed, Sam Wheeler," he
said reprovingly. "You shan't take those books a
step. Not a step. If you think you're going to scare Susy to death you're mistaken. If you want
to read 'em, come here and do it. But you aren't
a-going to read 'em to her nights, again. So you
go right off, now!"

 Without a word Sam turned and left the library,
and Miss Watkins from her ladder remonstrated
feebly.

 "Why, Jimmy, if that boy has a ticket you
haven't any right——"

 "Do you know what he does with those books,
Miss Watkins?" replied the dauntless squire of
dames. "He reads 'em after supper to his little sister
Susy. That one where the house all falls down
and the one where the lady's teeth come out and
she carries 'em in her hand! And she don't dare
take her feet off the rungs, she sits so still. And
she don't go to sleep hardly ever. Do you s'pose
I'd let him take 'em?"

 The librarian threshed the matter over, and
finally thought to stagger him by the suggestion
that it would be difficult for him to ascertain the
precise intention of everyone drawing out books.
"How do you know," she asked, "that other peo ple
may not be frightening each other with various
stories?"

 "There aren't many fellows as mean as Sam
Wheeler," he replied promptly, "and then I was
sure that he was going to. I happened to
know."

 She turned again to her work and he went back
to his corner, the brown book under his arm.

 The syringa was out now, and the mournful,
sweet odour blew in from the bushes around the
church. In the still June air he could hear the bees
buzzing there. He turned the beloved pages idly.
Should it be poor Psyche, so sweet and foolish, or
Dana, the lovely mother, hushing her baby in the
sea-tossed chest? He found the place of Proverbial
Expressions at the back of the book, and read
them with a never-failing interest. Around them he
wove long stories to please himself.

 " Their faces were not all alike, nor yet unlike,
but such as those of sisters ought to be. "

 This one always pleased him—he could not
have said why.

 " Here lies Phton, the driver of his father's chariot, which if he failed to manage, yet he fell
in a great undertaking. "

 The simple grandeur of this one was like the
trumpet tone of the organ. He thrilled to it delightedly.

 The third he murmured to himself, entranced
by the very sound of the words:

 " He falls, unhappy, by a wound intended for
another; looks up to the skies, and dying remembers
sweet Argos. "

 Ah, why would Thomas never consent to the
witchery of these words:

 "—— and dying remembers sweet Argos. "

 He sighed delightedly and dreamed into the
dusk. Almost he thought he had known that man,
almost he remembered sweet Argos....

 In the middle of June the Vanderhoof's coachman
brought bad news: Master Clarence was quite
ill. No one knew what it was exactly, but if there
was any exceptionally fine book that Jimmy could
suggest, he'd be glad to be read to from it.

 For the first time the little librarian parted from
his darling.

 "If you'll be especially careful of it, William,
and I've put in slips of paper at the best ones.
And as soon as he gets better, I'd be glad if he'd
send it back—if he's through with it."

 The days seemed long without it. The heat was
intense, and when Miss Mather stayed at home a
day or two, and all the summer people came in
for books, he had a great deal to do. Miss Watkins
was very glad of his help, now.

 One hot Saturday afternoon he did not return
to the library, but began a resolute journey to the
Vanderhoof's big house on the hill. It was almost
two miles, and he went slowly; now and then he
stopped to rest on the stone horse-blocks. It took
him an hour to get there, and at the door he had
to stop to wipe his forehead and get his breath.

 "I came to ask how Clarence was," he said to
the maid.

 "He's better, thank you, but it's dreadful sick
he's been. 'Twas scarlet fever, dear," she answered,
with a pitying glance at the crutch. "Not that
you need be worried, for the half of the house is
shut off, and we've not been near it," she added.

  "I'm glad he's better, and—and is he through
with the book?" he asked eagerly.

 "The book? What book is it, my dear? Sure the
nurse does be reading a hundred books to him."

 "A brown book: Stories of Gods and Heroes.
I—I'd like it, if he's through with it. I stay at
the libr'y, and I sent it to him—" he sank on the
step, exhausted.

 The kind-hearted girl dragged him into the
hall. "Come out with me, dear, and get a glass
of cold milk," she said. "You've walked too far."

 Seated on a chair in the kitchen, his eyes closed,
he heard, as in a dream, his friend's voice raised
in dispute with some distant person.

 "And I say he shall have it, then. Walking all
this way! And him lame, too! Tell Emma to put
it on the tray, and leave it in the hall. The child's
well enough now, anyway. I'll go get it myself—I'm
not afraid. The whole of us had the fever,
and no such smelling sheets pinned up, and no
fuss at all, at all. I'm as good as a paid nurse, any
day, if you come to that. A book'll hurt no
one."

  Later he found himself perched beside the coachman,
who was going to meet a train, the beloved
book tight in his arms. He fingered it lovingly;
he smelled the leaves like a little dog. For the first
time in his life he took it to his home, and clasped
it in his arms as he lay in bed.

 For days he did not appear, and it was Thomas,
the janitor, who went finally to look him up,
troubled by the children's reports of his illness.
He returned grave-faced.

 "It's the fever, Miss Watkins, and they say
there's little chance for him, the poor little feller!
He was worn out with the heat. They don't know
how he got it. He's out of his mind. To think of
Jimmy like that!"

 The librarian's heart sank, and her assistant put
her head on her arms and cried. Thomas sat sadly
on his little porch, his unlighted pipe in his mouth.
The library seemed strangely empty.

 The little Meadows girl brought them the news
the next morning.

 "Jimmy's dead," she said abruptly. "He got it
from a book up at the Vanderhoof's. His aunt feels awful bad. It was a libr'y book. They say he
held it all the time."

 The librarian put away the book in her hand,
envying the younger woman her facile tears. She
was not imaginative, but she realised dimly for a
moment that this little boy had known more of
books, had got more from them, than she, with all
her catalogues.

 They sat together, she, Miss Mather, and
Thomas, a strange trio, at the simple funeral service
in the church nearby. So far as daily living
went, they were as near to him as the aunt who
cared for him.

 Coming back to the library, they lingered
awhile in the reading-room, trying to realise that
it was all over, and that that little, quick tapping
would never be heard again among the books. At
last Thomas spoke:

 "It don't seem right," he said thickly, "it don't
seem right nor fair. Here he was, doting on that
book so, tugging it round, just living on it, you
might say, and it turned on him and killed him.
Gave it up, and a sacrifice it was, too—I know— and
as a reward, it killed him. Went back to get
it, brought it home, took it to bed—and it killed
him. It's like those things he'd tell me out of it—they
all died; seemingly without any reason, the
gods would go back on 'em, and they'd die. He's
often read it out to me."

 "It will be lovely to have that Children's-room
memorial," said Miss Mather, softly, "with all the
books and pictures and the little chairs. It was
beautiful in Mrs. Vanderhoof, I think. It wasn't
her fault. I wish—I wish we'd had a little chair
in there for Jimmy."

 The librarian got up abruptly and moved
around among the magazines, a mist before her
eyes. Only now did she realise how she had grown
to love him.