I

 Dark mesquit spread from horizon to horizon. There was no house or
horseman from which a mind could evolve a city or a crowd. The world
was declared to be a desert and unpeopled. Sometimes, however, on
days when no heat-mist arose, a blue shape, dim, of the substance
of a spectre's veil, appeared in the south-west, and a pondering
sheep-herder might remember that there were mountains.

 In the silence of these plains the sudden and childish banging of a
tin pan could have made an iron-nerved man leap into the air. The sky
was ever flawless; the manoeuvring of clouds was an unknown pageant;
but at times a sheep-herder could see, miles away, the long, white
streamers of dust rising from the feet of another's flock, and the
interest became intense.

 Bill was arduously cooking his dinner, bending over the fire, and
toiling like a blacksmith. A movement, a flash of strange colour,
perhaps, off in the bushes, caused him suddenly to turn his head.
Presently he arose, and, shading his eyes with his hand, stood
motionless and gazing. He perceived at last a Mexican sheep-herder
winding through the brush toward his camp.

 "Hello!" shouted Bill.

 The Mexican made no answer, but came steadily forward until he was
within some twenty yards. There he paused, and, folding his arms,
drew himself up in the manner affected by the villain in the play.
His serape muffled the lower part of his face, and his great sombrero
shaded his brow. Being unexpected and also silent, he had something of
the quality of an apparition; moreover, it was clearly his intention to
be mysterious and devilish.

 The American's pipe, sticking carelessly in the corner of his mouth,
was twisted until the wrong side was uppermost, and he held his
frying-pan poised in the air. He surveyed with evident surprise this
apparition in the mesquit. "Hello, Jos!" he said; "what's the matter?"

 The Mexican spoke with the solemnity of funeral tollings: "Beel,
you mus' geet off range. We want you geet off range. We no like.
Un'erstan'? We no like."

 "What you talking about?" said Bill. "No like what?"

 "We no like you here. Un'erstan'? Too mooch. You mus' geet out. We no
like. Un'erstan'?"

 "Understand? No; I don't know what the blazes you're gittin' at."
Bill's eyes wavered in bewilderment, and his jaw fell. "I must git out?
I must git off the range? What you givin' us?"

  The Mexican unfolded his serape with his small yellow hand. Upon his
face was then to be seen a smile that was gently, almost caressingly
murderous. "Beel," he said, "geet out!"

 Bill's arm dropped until the frying-pan was at his knee. Finally he
turned again toward the fire. "Go on, you dog-gone little yaller rat!"
he said over his shoulder. "You fellers can't chase me off this range.
I got as much right here as anybody."

 "Beel," answered the other in a vibrant tone, thrusting his head
forward and moving one foot, "you geet out or we keel you."

 "Who will?" said Bill.

 "I—and the others." The Mexican tapped his breast gracefully.

 Bill reflected for a time, and then he said: "You ain't got no manner
of license to warn me off'n this range, and I won't move a rod.
Understand? I've got rights, and I suppose if I don't see 'em through,
no one is likely to give me a good hand and help me lick you fellers,
since I'm the only white man in half a day's ride. Now, look; if you
fellers try to rush this camp, I'm goin' to plug about fifty per cent.
of the gentlemen present, sure. I'm goin' in for trouble, an' I'll
git a lot of you. 'Nuther thing: if I was a fine valuable caballero
like you, I'd stay in the rear till the shootin' was done, because I'm
goin' to make a particular p'int of shootin' you through the chest." He
grinned affably, and made a gesture of dismissal.

 As for the Mexican, he waved his hands in a consummate expression
of indifference. "Oh, all  right," he said. Then, in a tone of deep
menace and glee, he added: "We will keel you eef you no geet. They have
decide'."

 "They have, have they?" said Bill. "Well, you tell them to go to the
devil!"

 II

 Bill had been a mine-owner in Wyoming, a great man, an aristocrat,
one who possessed unlimited credit in the saloons down the gulch. He
had the social weight that could interrupt a lynching or advise a bad
man of the particular merits of a remote geographical point. However,
the fates exploded the toy balloon with which they had amused Bill,
and on the evening of the same day he was a professional gambler with
ill-fortune dealing him unspeakable irritation in the shape of three
big cards whenever another fellow stood pat. It is well here to inform
the world that Bill considered his calamities of life all dwarfs in
comparison with the excitement of one particular evening, when three
kings came to him with criminal regularity against a man who always
filled a straight. Later he became a cow-boy, more weirdly abandoned
than if he had never been an aristocrat. By this time all that remained
of his former splendour was his pride, or his vanity, which was one
thing which need not have remained. He killed the foreman of the ranch
over an inconsequent matter as to which of them was a liar, and the
midnight train carried him eastward. He became a  brakeman on the Union
Pacific, and really gained high honours in the hobo war that for many
years has devastated the beautiful railroads of our country. A creature
of ill-fortune himself, he practised all the ordinary cruelties upon
these other creatures of ill-fortune. He was of so fierce a mien that
tramps usually surrendered at once whatever coin or tobacco they had
in their possession; and if afterward he kicked them from the train,
it was only because this was a recognized treachery of the war upon
the hoboes. In a famous battle fought in Nebraska in 1879, he would
have achieved a lasting distinction if it had not been for a deserter
from the United States army. He was at the head of a heroic and
sweeping charge, which really broke the power of the hoboes in that
country for three months; he had already worsted four tramps with
his own coupling-stick, when a stone thrown by the ex-third baseman
of F Troop's nine laid him flat on the prairie, and later enforced
a stay in the hospital in Omaha. After his recovery he engaged with
other railroads, and shuffled cars in countless yards. An order to
strike came upon him in Michigan, and afterward the vengeance of the
railroad pursued him until he assumed a name. This mask is like the
darkness in which the burglar chooses to move. It destroys many of the
healthy fears. It is a small thing, but it eats that which we call our
conscience. The conductor of No. 419 stood in the caboose within two
feet of Bill's nose, and called him a liar. Bill requested him to use
a milder term. He had not bored the foreman of Tin Can Ranch with any
such request, but had killed him  with expedition. The conductor seemed
to insist, and so Bill let the matter drop.

 He became the bouncer of a saloon on the Bowery in New York. Here most
of his fights were as successful as had been his brushes with the
hoboes in the West. He gained the complete admiration of the four clean
bar-tenders who stood behind the great and glittering bar. He was an
honoured man. He nearly killed Bad Hennessy, who, as a matter of fact,
had more reputation than ability, and his fame moved up the Bowery and
down the Bowery.

 But let a man adopt fighting as his business, and the thought grows
constantly within him that it is his business to fight. These phrases
became mixed in Bill's mind precisely as they are here mixed; and let
a man get this idea in his mind, and defeat begins to move toward him
over the unknown ways of circumstances. One summer night three sailors
from the U.S.S. Seattle sat in the saloon drinking and attending to
other people's affairs in an amiable fashion. Bill was a proud man
since he had thrashed so many citizens, and it suddenly occurred to him
that the loud talk of the sailors was very offensive. So he swaggered
upon their attention, and warned them that the saloon was the flowery
abode of peace and gentle silence. They glanced at him in surprise, and
without a moment's pause consigned him to a worse place than any stoker
of them knew. Whereupon he flung one of them through the side door
before the others could prevent it. On the sidewalk there was a short
struggle, with many hoarse epithets in the air, and then Bill slid
into the saloon again. A  frown of false rage was upon his brow, and
he strutted like a savage king. He took a long yellow night-stick from
behind the lunch-counter, and started importantly toward the main doors
to see that the incensed seamen did not again enter.

 The ways of sailormen are without speech, and, together in the street,
the three sailors exchanged no word, but they moved at once. Landsmen
would have required two years of discussion to gain such unanimity. In
silence, and immediately, they seized a long piece of scantling that
lay handily. With one forward to guide the battering-ram, and with two
behind him to furnish the power, they made a beautiful curve, and came
down like the Assyrians on the front door of that saloon.

 Mystic and still mystic are the laws of fate. Bill, with his kingly
frown and his long night-stick, appeared at precisely that moment
in the doorway. He stood like a statue of victory; his pride was at
its zenith; and in the same second this atrocious piece of scantling
punched him in the bulwarks of his stomach, and he vanished like a
mist. Opinions differed as to where the end of the scantling landed
him, but it was ultimately clear that it landed him in south-western
Texas, where he became a sheep-herder.

 The sailors charged three times upon the plate-glass front of the
saloon, and when they had finished, it looked as if it had been the
victim of a rural fire company's success in saving it from the flames.
As the proprietor of the place surveyed the ruins, he remarked that
Bill was a very zealous guardian of  property. As the ambulance surgeon
surveyed Bill, he remarked that the wound was really an excavation.

 III

 As his Mexican friend tripped blithely away, Bill turned with a
thoughtful face to his frying-pan and his fire. After dinner he drew
his revolver from its scarred old holster, and examined every part of
it. It was the revolver that had dealt death to the foreman, and it
had also been in free fights in which it had dealt death to several or
none. Bill loved it because its allegiance was more than that of man,
horse, or dog. It questioned neither social nor moral position; it
obeyed alike the saint and the assassin. It was the claw of the eagle,
the tooth of the lion, the poison of the snake; and when he swept
it from its holster, this minion smote where he listed, even to the
battering of a far penny. Wherefore it was his dearest possession, and
was not to be exchanged in south-western Texas for a handful of rubies,
nor even the shame and homage of the conductor of No. 419.

 During the afternoon he moved through his monotony of work and leisure
with the same air of deep meditation. The smoke of his supper-time fire
was curling across the shadowy sea of mesquit when the instinct of the
plainsman warned him that the stillness, the desolation, was again
invaded. He saw a motionless horseman in black outline against the
pallid sky. The silhouette displayed serape and sombrero, and even the
Mexican spurs as large as  pies. When this black figure began to move
toward the camp, Bill's hand dropped to his revolver.

 The horseman approached until Bill was enabled to see pronounced
American features, and a skin too red to grow on a Mexican face. Bill
released his grip on his revolver.

 "Hello!" called the horseman.

 "Hello!" answered Bill.

 The horseman cantered forward. "Good evening," he said, as he again
drew rein.

 "Good evenin'," answered Bill, without committing himself by too much
courtesy.

 For a moment the two men scanned each other in a way that is not
ill-mannered on the plains, where one is in danger of meeting
horse-thieves or tourists.

 Bill saw a type which did not belong in the mesquit. The young fellow
had invested in some Mexican trappings of an expensive kind. Bill's
eyes searched the outfit for some sign of craft, but there was none.
Even with his local regalia, it was clear that the young man was of a
far, black Northern city. He had discarded the enormous stirrups of
his Mexican saddle; he used the small English stirrup, and his feet
were thrust forward until the steel tightly gripped his ankles. As
Bill's eyes travelled over the stranger, they lighted suddenly upon the
stirrups and the thrust feet, and immediately he smiled in a friendly
way. No dark purpose could dwell in the innocent heart of a man who
rode thus on the plains.

 As for the stranger, he saw a tattered individual with a tangle of hair
and beard, and with a complexion  turned brick-colour from the sun and
whisky. He saw a pair of eyes that at first looked at him as the wolf
looks at the wolf, and then became childlike, almost timid, in their
glance. Here was evidently a man who had often stormed the iron walls
of the city of success, and who now sometimes valued himself as the
rabbit values his prowess.

 The stranger smiled genially, and sprang from his horse. "Well, sir, I
suppose you will let me camp here with you to-night?"

 "Eh?" said Bill.

 "I suppose you will let me camp here with you to-night?"

 Bill for a time seemed too astonished for words. "Well,"—he answered,
scowling in inhospitable annoyance—"well, I don't believe this here is
a good place to camp to-night, mister."

 The stranger turned quickly from his saddle-girth.

 "What?" he said in surprise. "You don't want me here? You don't want me
to camp here?"

 Bill's feet scuffled awkwardly, and he looked steadily at a cactus
plant. "Well, you see, mister," he said, "I'd like your company well
enough, but—you see, some of these here greasers are goin' to chase
me off the range to-night; and while I might like a man's company all
right, I couldn't let him in for no such game when he ain't got nothin'
to do with the trouble."

 "Going to chase you off the range?" cried the stranger.

 "Well, they said they were goin' to do it," said Bill.

  "And—great heavens! will they kill you, do you think?"

 "Don't know. Can't tell till afterwards. You see, they take some feller
that's alone like me, and then they rush his camp when he ain't quite
ready for 'em, and ginerally plug 'im with a sawed-off shot-gun load
before he has a chance to git at 'em. They lay around and wait for
their chance, and it comes soon enough. Of course a feller alone like
me has got to let up watching some time. Maybe they ketch 'im asleep.
Maybe the feller gits tired waiting, and goes out in broad day, and
kills two or three just to make the whole crowd pile on him and settle
the thing. I heard of a case like that once. It's awful hard on a man's
mind—to git a gang after him."

 "And so they're going to rush your camp to-night?" cried the stranger.
"How do you know? Who told you?"

 "Feller come and told me."

 "And what are you going to do? Fight?"

 "Don't see nothin' else to do," answered Bill gloomily, still staring
at the cactus plant.

 There was a silence. Finally the stranger burst out in an amazed cry.
"Well, I never heard of such a thing in my life! How many of them are
there?"

 "Eight," answered Bill. "And now look-a-here; you ain't got no manner
of business foolin' around here just now, and you might better lope
off before dark. I don't ask no help in this here row. I know your
happening along here just now don't give me no call on you, and you
better hit the trail."

  "Well, why in the name of wonder don't you go get the sheriff?" cried
the stranger.

 "Oh, h——!" said Bill.

 IV

 Long, smoldering clouds spread in the western sky, and to the east
silver mists lay on the purple gloom of the wilderness.

 Finally, when the great moon climbed the heavens and cast its ghastly
radiance upon the bushes, it made a new and more brilliant crimson of
the campfire, where the flames capered merrily through its mesquit
branches, filling the silence with the fire chorus, an ancient melody
which surely bears a message of the inconsequence of individual
tragedy—a message that is in the boom of the sea, the sliver of the
wind through the grass-blades, the silken clash of hemlock boughs.

 No figures moved in the rosy space of the camp, and the search of the
moonbeams failed to disclose a living thing in the bushes. There was no
owl-faced clock to chant the weariness of the long silence that brooded
upon the plain.

 The dew gave the darkness under the mesquit a velvet quality that
made air seem nearer to water, and no eye could have seen through it
the black things that moved like monster lizards toward the camp. The
branches, the leaves, that are fain to cry out when death approaches in
the wilds, were frustrated by these uncanny bodies gliding with the finesse of the escaping serpent. They crept forward to the last point
where assuredly no frantic attempt of the fire could discover them, and
there they paused to locate the prey. A romance relates the tale of the
black cell hidden deep in the earth, where, upon entering, one sees
only the little eyes of snakes fixing him in menaces. If a man could
have approached a certain spot in the bushes, he would not have found
it romantically necessary to have his hair rise. There would have been
a sufficient expression of horror in the feeling of the death-hand at
the nape of his neck and in his rubber knee-joints.

 Two of these bodies finally moved toward each other until for each
there grew out of the darkness a face placidly smiling with tender
dreams of assassination. "The fool is asleep by the fire, God be
praised!" The lips of the other widened in a grin of affectionate
appreciation of the fool and his plight. There was some signaling in
the gloom, and then began a series of subtle rustlings, interjected
often with pauses, during which no sound arose but the sound of faint
breathing.

 A bush stood like a rock in the stream of firelight, sending its long
shadow backward. With painful caution the little company travelled
along this shadow, and finally arrived at the rear of the bush. Through
its branches they surveyed for a moment of comfortable satisfaction a
form in a grey blanket extended on the ground near the fire. The smile
of joyful anticipation fled quickly, to give place to a quiet air of
business. Two men lifted shot-guns with much of the barrels gone, and
sighting these weapons through the branches, pulled trigger together.

  The noise of the explosions roared over the lonely mesquit as if these
guns wished to inform the entire world; and as the grey smoke fled,
the dodging company back of the bush saw the blanketed form twitching;
whereupon they burst out in chorus in a laugh, and arose as merry as a
lot of banqueters. They gleefully gestured congratulations, and strode
bravely into the light of the fire.

 Then suddenly a new laugh rang from some unknown spot in the darkness.
It was a fearsome laugh of ridicule, hatred, ferocity. It might have
been demoniac. It smote them motionless in their gleeful prowl, as the
stern voice from the sky smites the legendary malefactor. They might
have been a weird group in wax, the light of the dying fire on their
yellow faces, and shining athwart their eyes turned toward the darkness
whence might come the unknown and the terrible.

 The thing in the grey blanket no longer twitched; but if the knives in
their hands had been thrust toward it, each knife was now drawn back,
and its owner's elbow was thrown upward, as if he expected death from
the clouds.

 This laugh had so chained their reason that for a moment they had no
wit to flee. They were prisoners to their terror. Then suddenly the
belated decision arrived, and with bubbling cries they turned to run;
but at that instant there was a long flash of red in the darkness, and
with the report one of the men shouted a bitter shout, spun once, and
tumbled headlong. The thick bushes failed to impede the route of the
others.

 The silence returned to the wilderness. The tired  flames faintly
illumined the blanketed thing and the flung corpse of the marauder, and
sang the fire chorus, the ancient melody which bears the message of the
inconsequence of human tragedy.

 V

 "Now you are worse off than ever," said the young man, dry-voiced and
awed.

 "No, I ain't," said Bill rebelliously. "I'm one ahead."

 After reflection, the stranger remarked, "Well, there's seven more."

 They were cautiously and slowly approaching the camp. The sun was
flaring its first warming rays over the grey wilderness. Upreared
twigs, prominent branches, shone with golden light, while the shadows
under the mesquit were heavily blue.

 Suddenly the stranger uttered a frightened cry. He had arrived at a
point whence he had, through openings in the thicket, a clear view of a
dead face.

 "Gosh!" said Bill, who at the next instant had seen the thing; "I
thought at first it was that there Jos. That would have been queer,
after what I told 'im yesterday."

 They continued their way, the stranger wincing in his walk, and Bill
exhibiting considerable curiosity.

 The yellow beams of the new sun were touching the grim hues of the
dead Mexican's face, and creating there an inhuman effect, which made
his countenance more like a mask of dulled brass. One hand, grown curiously thinner, had been flung out regardlessly to a cactus bush.

 Bill walked forward and stood looking respectfully at the body. "I know
that feller; his name is Miguel. He——"

 The stranger's nerves might have been in that condition when there
is no backbone to the body, only a long groove. "Good heavens!" he
exclaimed, much agitated; "don't speak that way!"

 "What way?" said Bill. "I only said his name was Miguel."

 After a pause the stranger said:

 "Oh, I know; but——" He waved his hand. "Lower your voice, or
something. I don't know. This part of the business rattles me, don't
you see?"

 "Oh, all right," replied Bill, bowing to the other's mysterious
mood. But in a moment he burst out violently and loud in the most
extraordinary profanity, the oaths winging from him as the sparks go
from the funnel.

 He had been examining the contents of the bundled grey blanket, and
he had brought forth, among other things, his frying-pan. It was now
only a rim with a handle; the Mexican volley had centered upon it. A
Mexican shot-gun of the abbreviated description is ordinarily loaded
with flat-irons, stove-lids, lead pipe, old horseshoes, sections of
chain, window weights, railroad sleepers and spikes, dumb-bells, and
any other junk which may be at hand. When one of these loads encounters
a man vitally, it is likely to make an impression upon him, and a cooking-utensil may be supposed to subside before such an assault of
curiosities.

 Bill held high his desecrated frying-pan, turning it this way and that
way. He swore until he happened to note the absence of the stranger. A
moment later he saw him leading his horse from the bushes. In silence
and sullenly the young man went about saddling the animal. Bill said,
"Well, goin' to pull out?"

 The stranger's hands fumbled uncertainly at the throat-latch. Once
he exclaimed irritably, blaming the buckle for the trembling of his
fingers. Once he turned to look at the dead face with the light of the
morning sun upon it. At last he cried, "Oh, I know the whole thing was
all square enough—couldn't be squarer—but—somehow or other,
that man there takes the heart out of me." He turned his troubled face for
another look. "He seems to be all the time calling me a—he makes me
feel like a murderer."

 "But," said Bill, puzzling, "you didn't shoot him, mister; I shot him."

 "I know; but I feel that way, somehow. I can't get rid of it."

 Bill considered for a time; then he said diffidently, "Mister, you're a
eddycated man, ain't you?"

 "What?"

 "You're what they call a—a eddycated man, ain't you?"

 The young man, perplexed, evidently had a question upon his lips, when
there was a roar of guns, bright flashes, and in the air such hooting
and whistling as would come from a swift flock of steam-boilers. The
stranger's horse gave a mighty, convulsive spring,  snorting wildly in
its sudden anguish, fell upon its knees, scrambled afoot again, and was
away in the uncanny death run known to men who have seen the finish of
brave horses.

 "This comes from discussin' things," cried Bill angrily.

 He had thrown himself flat on the ground facing the thicket whence had
come the firing. He could see the smoke winding over the bush-tops.
He lifted his revolver, and the weapon came slowly up from the ground
and poised like the glittering crest of a snake. Somewhere on his face
there was a kind of smile, cynical, wicked, deadly, of a ferocity which
at the same time had brought a deep flush to his face, and had caused
two upright lines to glow in his eyes.

 "Hello, Jos!" he called, amiable for satire's sake. "Got your old
blunderbusses loaded up again yet?"

 The stillness had returned to the plain. The sun's brilliant rays swept
over the sea of mesquit, painting the far mists of the west with faint
rosy light, and high in the air some great bird fled toward the south.

 "You come out here," called Bill, again addressing the landscape, "and
I'll give you some shootin' lessons. That ain't the way to shoot."
Receiving no reply, he began to invent epithets and yell them at
the thicket. He was something of a master of insult, and, moreover,
he dived into his memory to bring forth imprecations tarnished with
age, unused since fluent Bowery days. The occupation amused him, and
sometimes he laughed so that it was uncomfortable for his chest to be
against the ground.

  Finally the stranger, prostrate near him, said wearily, "Oh, they've
gone."

 "Don't you believe it," replied Bill, sobering swiftly. "They're there
yet—every man of 'em."

 "How do you know?"

 "Because I do. They won't shake us so soon. Don't put your head up, or
they'll get you, sure."

 Bill's eyes, meanwhile, had not wavered from their scrutiny of the
thicket in front. "They're there all right; don't you forget it. Now
you listen." So he called out: "Jos! Ojo, Jos! Speak up, hombre ! I
want have talk. Speak up, you yaller cuss, you!"

 Whereupon a mocking voice from off in the bushes said, "Seor?"

 "There," said Bill to his ally; "didn't I tell you? The whole batch."
Again he lifted his voice. "Jos—look—ain't you gittin' kinder tired?
You better go home, you fellers, and git some rest."

 The answer was a sudden furious chatter of Spanish, eloquent with
hatred, calling down upon Bill all the calamities which life holds. It
was as if some one had suddenly enraged a cageful of wild cats. The
spirits of all the revenges which they had imagined were loosened at
this time, and filled the air.

 "They're in a holler," said Bill, chuckling, "or there'd be shootin'."

 Presently he began to grow angry. His hidden enemies called him nine
kinds of coward, a man who could fight only in the dark, a baby who
would run from the shadows of such noble Mexican gentlemen, a dog that
sneaked. They described the affair of the previous night, and informed
him of the base advan  tage he had taken of their friend. In fact,
they in all sincerity endowed him with every quality which he no less
earnestly believed them to possess. One could have seen the phrases
bite him as he lay there on the ground fingering his revolver.

 VI

 It is sometimes taught that men do the furious and desperate thing from
an emotion that is as even and placid as the thoughts of a village
clergyman on Sunday afternoon. Usually, however, it is to be believed
that a panther is at the time born in the heart, and that the subject
does not resemble a man picking mulberries.

 "B' G——!" said Bill, speaking as from a throat filled with dust,
"I'll go after 'em in a minute."

 "Don't you budge an inch!" cried the stranger, sternly. "Don't you
budge!"

 "Well," said Bill, glaring at the bushes—"well—"

 "Put your head down!" suddenly screamed the stranger, in white alarm.
As the guns roared, Bill uttered a loud grunt, and for a moment leaned
panting on his elbow, while his arm shook like a twig. Then he upreared
like a great and bloody spirit of vengeance, his face lighted with the
blaze of his last passion. The Mexicans came swiftly and in silence.

 The lightning action of the next few moments was of the fabric of
dreams to the stranger. The muscular struggle may not be real to the
drowning man.
His mind may be fixed on the far, straight shadows back
of the stars, and the terror of them. And so the fight, and his part in
it, had to the stranger only the quality of a picture half drawn. The
rush of feet, the spatter of shots, the cries, the swollen faces seen
like masks on the smoke, resembled a happening of the night.

 And yet afterward certain lines, forms, lived out so strongly from the
incoherence that they were always in his memory.

 He killed a man, and the thought went swiftly by him, like the feather
on the gale, that it was easy to kill a man.

 Moreover, he suddenly felt for Bill, this grimy sheep-herder, some deep
form of idolatry. Bill was dying, and the dignity of last defeat, the
superiority of him who stands in his grave, was in the pose of the lost
sheep-herder.

  The stranger sat on the ground idly mopping the sweat and powder-stain
from his brow. He wore the gentle idiot smile of an aged beggar as he
watched three Mexicans limping and staggering in the distance. He noted
at this time that one who still possessed a serape had from it none
of the grandeur of the cloaked Spaniard, but that against the sky the
silhouette resembled a cornucopia of childhood's Christmas.

 They turned to look at him, and he lifted his weary arm to menace them
with his revolver. They stood for a moment banded together, and hooted
curses at him.

  Finally he arose, and, walking some paces, stooped to loosen Bill's
grey hands from a throat. Swaying as if slightly drunk, he stood
looking down into the still face.

 Struck suddenly with a thought, he went about with dulled eyes on the
ground, until he plucked his gaudy blanket from where it lay dirty from
trampling feet. He dusted it carefully, and then returned and laid it
over Bill's form. There he again stood motionless, his mouth just agape
and the same stupid glance in his eyes, when all at once he made a
gesture of fright and looked wildly about him.

 He had almost reached the thicket when he stopped, smitten with alarm.
A body contorted, with one arm stiff in the air, lay in his path.
Slowly and warily he moved around it, and in a moment the bushes,
nodding and whispering, their leaf-faces turned toward the scene
behind him, swung and swung again into stillness and the peace of the
wilderness.