A MISFORTUNE
    

SOFYA PETROVNA, the
      wife of Lubyantsev the notary, a handsome young woman of five-and-twenty,
      was walking slowly along a track that had been cleared in the wood, with
      Ilyin, a lawyer who was spending the summer in the neighbourhood. It was
      five o’clock in the evening. Feathery-white masses of cloud stood
      overhead; patches of bright blue sky peeped out between them. The clouds
      stood motionless, as though they had caught in the tops of the tall old
      pine-trees. It was still and sultry.
    

      Farther on, the track was crossed by a low railway embankment on which a
      sentinel with a gun was for some reason pacing up and down. Just beyond
      the embankment there was a large white church with six domes and a rusty
      roof.
    

      “I did not expect to meet you here,” said Sofya Petrovna,
      looking at the ground and prodding at the last year’s leaves with
      the tip of her parasol, “and now I am glad we have met. I want to
      speak to you seriously and once for all. I beg you, Ivan Mihalovitch, if
      you really love and respect me, please make an end of this pursuit of me!
      You follow me about like a shadow, you are continually looking at me not
      in a nice way, making love to me, writing me strange letters, and . . .
      and I don’t know where it’s all going to end! Why, what can
      come of it?”
    

      Ilyin said nothing. Sofya Petrovna walked on a few steps and continued:
    

      “And this complete transformation in you all came about in the
      course of two or three weeks, after five years’ friendship. I don’t
      know you, Ivan Mihalovitch!”
    

      Sofya Petrovna stole a glance at her companion. Screwing up his eyes, he
      was looking intently at the fluffy clouds. His face looked angry,
      ill-humoured, and preoccupied, like that of a man in pain forced to listen
      to nonsense.
    

      “I wonder you don’t see it yourself,” Madame Lubyantsev
      went on, shrugging her shoulders. “You ought to realize that it’s
      not a very nice part you are playing. I am married; I love and respect my
      husband. . . . I have a daughter . . . . Can you think all that means
      nothing? Besides, as an old friend you know my attitude to family life and
      my views as to the sanctity of marriage.”
    

      Ilyin cleared his throat angrily and heaved a sigh.
    

      “Sanctity of marriage . . .” he muttered. “Oh, Lord!”
    

      “Yes, yes. . . . I love my husband, I respect him; and in any case I
      value the peace of my home. I would rather let myself be killed than be a
      cause of unhappiness to Andrey and his daughter. . . . And I beg you, Ivan
      Mihalovitch, for God’s sake, leave me in peace! Let us be as good,
      true friends as we used to be, and give up these sighs and groans, which
      really don’t suit you. It’s settled and over! Not a word more
      about it. Let us talk of something else.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna again stole a glance at Ilyin’s face. Ilyin was
      looking up; he was pale, and was angrily biting his quivering lips. She
      could not understand why he was angry and why he was indignant, but his
      pallor touched her.
    

      “Don’t be angry; let us be friends,” she said
      affectionately. “Agreed? Here’s my hand.”
    

      Ilyin took her plump little hand in both of his, squeezed it, and slowly
      raised it to his lips.
    

      “I am not a schoolboy,” he muttered. “I am not in the
      least tempted by friendship with the woman I love.”
    

      “Enough, enough! It’s settled and done with. We have reached
      the seat; let us sit down.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna’s soul was filled with a sweet sense of relief: the
      most difficult and delicate thing had been said, the painful question was
      settled and done with. Now she could breathe freely and look Ilyin
      straight in the face. She looked at him, and the egoistic feeling of the
      superiority of the woman over the man who loves her, agreeably flattered
      her. It pleased her to see this huge, strong man, with his manly, angry
      face and his big black beard—clever, cultivated, and, people said,
      talented—sit down obediently beside her and bow his head dejectedly.
      For two or three minutes they sat without speaking.
    

      “Nothing is settled or done with,” began Ilyin. “You
      repeat copy-book maxims to me. ‘I love and respect my husband . . .
      the sanctity of marriage. . . .’ I know all that without your help,
      and I could tell you more, too. I tell you truthfully and honestly that I
      consider the way I am behaving as criminal and immoral. What more can one
      say than that? But what’s the good of saying what everybody knows?
      Instead of feeding nightingales with paltry words, you had much better
      tell me what I am to do.”
    

      “I’ve told you already—go away.”
    

      “As you know perfectly well, I have gone away five times, and every
      time I turned back on the way. I can show you my through tickets —I’ve
      kept them all. I have not will enough to run away from you! I am
      struggling. I am struggling horribly; but what the devil am I good for if
      I have no backbone, if I am weak, cowardly! I can’t struggle with
      Nature! Do you understand? I cannot! I run away from here, and she holds
      on to me and pulls me back. Contemptible, loathsome weakness!”
    

      Ilyin flushed crimson, got up, and walked up and down by the seat.
    

      “I feel as cross as a dog,” he muttered, clenching his fists.
      “I hate and despise myself! My God! like some depraved schoolboy, I
      am making love to another man’s wife, writing idiotic letters,
      degrading myself . . . ugh!”
    

      Ilyin clutched at his head, grunted, and sat down. “And then your
      insincerity!” he went on bitterly. “If you do dislike my
      disgusting behaviour, why have you come here? What drew you here? In my
      letters I only ask you for a direct, definite answer—yes or no; but
      instead of a direct answer, you contrive every day these ‘chance’
      meetings with me and regale me with copy-book maxims!”
    

      Madame Lubyantsev was frightened and flushed. She suddenly felt the
      awkwardness which a decent woman feels when she is accidentally discovered
      undressed.
    

      “You seem to suspect I am playing with you,” she muttered.
      “I have always given you a direct answer, and . . . only today I’ve
      begged you . . .”
    

      “Ough! as though one begged in such cases! If you were to say
      straight out ‘Get away,’ I should have been gone long ago; but
      you’ve never said that. You’ve never once given me a direct
      answer. Strange indecision! Yes, indeed; either you are playing with me,
      or else . . .”
    

      Ilyin leaned his head on his fists without finishing. Sofya Petrovna began
      going over in her own mind the way she had behaved from beginning to end.
      She remembered that not only in her actions, but even in her secret
      thoughts, she had always been opposed to Ilyin’s love-making; but
      yet she felt there was a grain of truth in the lawyer’s words. But
      not knowing exactly what the truth was, she could not find answers to make
      to Ilyin’s complaint, however hard she thought. It was awkward to be
      silent, and, shrugging her shoulders, she said:
    

      So I am to blame, it appears.”
    

      “I don’t blame you for your insincerity,” sighed Ilyin.
      “I did not mean that when I spoke of it. . . . Your insincerity is
      natural and in the order of things. If people agreed together and suddenly
      became sincere, everything would go to the devil.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna was in no mood for philosophical reflections, but she was
      glad of a chance to change the conversation, and asked:
    

      “But why?”
    

      “Because only savage women and animals are sincere. Once
      civilization has introduced a demand for such comforts as, for instance,
      feminine virtue, sincerity is out of place. . . .”
    

      Ilyin jabbed his stick angrily into the sand. Madame Lubyantsev listened
      to him and liked his conversation, though a great deal of it she did not
      understand. What gratified her most was that she, an ordinary woman, was
      talked to by a talented man on “intellectual” subjects; it
      afforded her great pleasure, too, to watch the working of his mobile,
      young face, which was still pale and angry. She failed to understand a
      great deal that he said, but what was clear to her in his words was the
      attractive boldness with which the modern man without hesitation or doubt
      decides great questions and draws conclusive deductions.
    

      She suddenly realized that she was admiring him, and was alarmed.
    

      “Forgive me, but I don’t understand,” she said
      hurriedly. “What makes you talk of insincerity? I repeat my request
      again: be my good, true friend; let me alone! I beg you most earnestly!”
    

      “Very good; I’ll try again,” sighed Ilyin. “Glad
      to do my best. . . . Only I doubt whether anything will come of my
      efforts. Either I shall put a bullet through my brains or take to drink in
      an idiotic way. I shall come to a bad end! There’s a limit to
      everything— to struggles with Nature, too. Tell me, how can one
      struggle against madness? If you drink wine, how are you to struggle
      against intoxication? What am I to do if your image has grown into my
      soul, and day and night stands persistently before my eyes, like that pine
      there at this moment? Come, tell me, what hard and difficult thing can I
      do to get free from this abominable, miserable condition, in which all my
      thoughts, desires, and dreams are no longer my own, but belong to some
      demon who has taken possession of me? I love you, love you so much that I
      am completely thrown out of gear; I’ve given up my work and all who
      are dear to me; I’ve forgotten my God! I’ve never been in love
      like this in my life.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna, who had not expected such a turn to their conversation,
      drew away from Ilyin and looked into his face in dismay. Tears came into
      his eyes, his lips were quivering, and there was an imploring, hungry
      expression in his face.
    

      “I love you!” he muttered, bringing his eyes near her big,
      frightened eyes. “You are so beautiful! I am in agony now, but I
      swear I would sit here all my life, suffering and looking in your eyes.
      But . . . be silent, I implore you!”
    

      Sofya Petrovna, feeling utterly disconcerted, tried to think as quickly as
      possible of something to say to stop him. “I’ll go away,”
      she decided, but before she had time to make a movement to get up, Ilyin
      was on his knees before her. . . . He was clasping her knees, gazing into
      her face and speaking passionately, hotly, eloquently. In her terror and
      confusion she did not hear his words; for some reason now, at this
      dangerous moment, while her knees were being agreeably squeezed and felt
      as though they were in a warm bath, she was trying, with a sort of angry
      spite, to interpret her own sensations. She was angry that instead of
      brimming over with protesting virtue, she was entirely overwhelmed with
      weakness, apathy, and emptiness, like a drunken man utterly reckless; only
      at the bottom of her soul a remote bit of herself was malignantly taunting
      her: “Why don’t you go? Is this as it should be? Yes?”
    

      Seeking for some explanation, she could not understand how it was she did
      not pull away the hand to which Ilyin was clinging like a leech, and why,
      like Ilyin, she hastily glanced to right and to left to see whether any
      one was looking. The clouds and the pines stood motionless, looking at
      them severely, like old ushers seeing mischief, but bribed not to tell the
      school authorities. The sentry stood like a post on the embankment and
      seemed to be looking at the seat.
    

      “Let him look,” thought Sofya Petrovna.
    

      “But . . . but listen,” she said at last, with despair in her
      voice. “What can come of this? What will be the end of this?”
    

      “I don’t know, I don’t know,” he whispered, waving
      off the disagreeable questions.
    

      They heard the hoarse, discordant whistle of the train. This cold,
      irrelevant sound from the everyday world of prose made Sofya Petrovna
      rouse herself.
    

      “I can’t stay . . . it’s time I was at home,” she
      said, getting up quickly. “The train is coming in. . . Andrey is
      coming by it! He will want his dinner.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna turned towards the embankment with a burning face. The
      engine slowly crawled by, then came the carriages. It was not the local
      train, as she had supposed, but a goods train. The trucks filed by against
      the background of the white church in a long string like the days of a man’s
      life, and it seemed as though it would never end.
    

      But at last the train passed, and the last carriage with the guard and a
      light in it had disappeared behind the trees. Sofya Petrovna turned round
      sharply, and without looking at Ilyin, walked rapidly back along the
      track. She had regained her self-possession. Crimson with shame,
      humiliated not by Ilyin—no, but by her own cowardice, by the
      shamelessness with which she, a chaste and high-principled woman, had
      allowed a man, not her husband, to hug her knees—she had only one
      thought now: to get home as quickly as possible to her villa, to her
      family. The lawyer could hardly keep pace with her. Turning from the
      clearing into a narrow path, she turned round and glanced at him so
      quickly that she saw nothing but the sand on his knees, and waved to him
      to drop behind.
    

      Reaching home, Sofya Petrovna stood in the middle of her room for five
      minutes without moving, and looked first at the window and then at her
      writing-table.
    

      “You low creature!” she said, upbraiding herself. “You
      low creature!”
    

      To spite herself, she recalled in precise detail, keeping nothing back—she
      recalled that though all this time she had been opposed to Ilyin’s
      lovemaking, something had impelled her to seek an interview with him; and
      what was more, when he was at her feet she had enjoyed it enormously. She
      recalled it all without sparing herself, and now, breathless with shame,
      she would have liked to slap herself in the face.
    

      “Poor Andrey!” she said to herself, trying as she thought of
      her husband to put into her face as tender an expression as she could.
      “Varya, my poor little girl, doesn’t know what a mother she
      has! Forgive me, my dear ones! I love you so much . . . so much!”
    

      And anxious to prove to herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      and that corruption had not yet touched that “sanctity of marriage”
      of which she had spoken to Ilyin, Sofya Petrovna ran to the kitchen and
      abused the cook for not having yet laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She
      tried to picture her husband’s hungry and exhausted appearance,
      commiserated him aloud, and laid the table for him with her own hands,
      which she had never done before. Then she found her daughter Varya, picked
      her up in her arms and hugged her warmly; the child seemed to her cold and
      heavy, but she was unwilling to acknowledge this to herself, and she began
      explaining to the child how good, kind, and honourable her papa was.
    

      But when Andrey Ilyitch arrived soon afterwards she hardly greeted him.
      The rush of false feeling had already passed off without proving anything
      to her, only irritating and exasperating her by its falsity. She was
      sitting by the window, feeling miserable and cross. It is only by being in
      trouble that people can understand how far from easy it is to be the
      master of one’s feelings and thoughts. Sofya Petrovna said
      afterwards that there was a tangle within her which it was as difficult to
      unravel as to count a flock of sparrows rapidly flying by. From the fact
      that she was not overjoyed to see her husband, that she did not like his
      manner at dinner, she concluded all of a sudden that she was beginning to
      hate her husband.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch, languid with hunger and exhaustion, fell upon the sausage
      while waiting for the soup to be brought in, and ate it greedily, munching
      noisily and moving his temples.
    

      “My goodness!” thought Sofya Petrovna. “I love and
      respect him, but . . . why does he munch so repulsively?”
    

      The disorder in her thoughts was no less than the disorder in her
      feelings. Like all persons inexperienced in combating unpleasant ideas,
      Madame Lubyantsev did her utmost not to think of her trouble, and the
      harder she tried the more vividly Ilyin, the sand on his knees, the fluffy
      clouds, the train, stood out in her imagination.
    

      “And why did I go there this afternoon like a fool?” she
      thought, tormenting herself. “And am I really so weak that I cannot
      depend upon myself?”
    

      Fear magnifies danger. By the time Andrey Ilyitch was finishing the last
      course, she had firmly made up her mind to tell her husband everything and
      to flee from danger!
    

      “I’ve something serious to say to you, Andrey,” she
      began after dinner while her husband was taking off his coat and boots to
      lie down for a nap.
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Let us leave this place!”
    

      “H’m! . . . Where shall we go? It’s too soon to go back
      to town.”
    

      “No; for a tour or something of that sort.
    

      “For a tour . . .” repeated the notary, stretching. “I
      dream of that myself, but where are we to get the money, and to whom am I
      to leave the office?”
    

      And thinking a little he added:
    

      “Of course, you must be bored. Go by yourself if you like.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna agreed, but at once reflected that Ilyin would be delighted
      with the opportunity, and would go with her in the same train, in the same
      compartment. . . . She thought and looked at her husband, now satisfied
      but still languid. For some reason her eyes rested on his feet—miniature,
      almost feminine feet, clad in striped socks; there was a thread standing
      out at the tip of each sock.
    

      Behind the blind a bumble-bee was beating itself against the window-pane
      and buzzing. Sofya Petrovna looked at the threads on the socks, listened
      to the bee, and pictured how she would set off . . . . vis-Ã -vis
      Ilyin would sit, day and night, never taking his eyes off her, wrathful at
      his own weakness and pale with spiritual agony. He would call himself an
      immoral schoolboy, would abuse her, tear his hair, but when darkness came
      on and the passengers were asleep or got out at a station, he would seize
      the opportunity to kneel before her and embrace her knees as he had at the
      seat in the wood. . . .
    

      She caught herself indulging in this day-dream.
    

      “Listen. I won’t go alone,” she said. “You must
      come with me.”
    

      “Nonsense, Sofotchka!” sighed Lubyantsev. “One must be
      sensible and not want the impossible.”
    

      “You will come when you know all about it,” thought Sofya
      Petrovna.
    

      Making up her mind to go at all costs, she felt that she was out of
      danger. Little by little her ideas grew clearer; her spirits rose and she
      allowed herself to think about it all, feeling that however much she
      thought, however much she dreamed, she would go away. While her husband
      was asleep, the evening gradually came on. She sat in the drawing-room and
      played the piano. The greater liveliness out of doors, the sound of music,
      but above all the thought that she was a sensible person, that she had
      surmounted her difficulties, completely restored her spirits. Other women,
      her appeased conscience told her, would probably have been carried off
      their feet in her position, and would have lost their balance, while she
      had almost died of shame, had been miserable, and was now running out of
      the danger which perhaps did not exist! She was so touched by her own
      virtue and determination that she even looked at herself two or three
      times in the looking-glass.
    

      When it got dark, visitors arrived. The men sat down in the dining-room to
      play cards; the ladies remained in the drawing-room and the verandah. The
      last to arrive was Ilyin. He was gloomy, morose, and looked ill. He sat
      down in the corner of the sofa and did not move the whole evening. Usually
      good-humoured and talkative, this time he remained silent, frowned, and
      rubbed his eyebrows. When he had to answer some question, he gave a forced
      smile with his upper lip only, and answered jerkily and irritably. Four or
      five times he made some jest, but his jests sounded harsh and cutting. It
      seemed to Sofya Petrovna that he was on the verge of hysterics. Only now,
      sitting at the piano, she recognized fully for the first time that this
      unhappy man was in deadly earnest, that his soul was sick, and that he
      could find no rest. For her sake he was wasting the best days of his youth
      and his career, spending the last of his money on a summer villa,
      abandoning his mother and sisters, and, worst of all, wearing himself out
      in an agonizing struggle with himself. From mere common humanity he ought
      to be treated seriously.
    

      She recognized all this clearly till it made her heart ache, and if at
      that moment she had gone up to him and said to him, “No,”
      there would have been a force in her voice hard to disobey. But she did
      not go up to him and did not speak—indeed, never thought of doing
      so. The pettiness and egoism of youth had never been more patent in her
      than that evening. She realized that Ilyin was unhappy, and that he was
      sitting on the sofa as though he were on hot coals; she felt sorry for
      him, but at the same time the presence of a man who loved her to
      distraction, filled her soul with triumph and a sense of her own power.
      She felt her youth, her beauty, and her unassailable virtue, and, since
      she had decided to go away, gave herself full licence for that evening.
      She flirted, laughed incessantly, sang with peculiar feeling and gusto.
      Everything delighted and amused her. She was amused at the memory of what
      had happened at the seat in the wood, of the sentinel who had looked on.
      She was amused by her guests, by Ilyin’s cutting jests, by the pin
      in his cravat, which she had never noticed before. There was a red snake
      with diamond eyes on the pin; this snake struck her as so amusing that she
      could have kissed it on the spot.
    

      Sofya Petrovna sang nervously, with defiant recklessness as though half
      intoxicated, and she chose sad, mournful songs which dealt with wasted
      hopes, the past, old age, as though in mockery of another’s grief.
      “‘And old age comes nearer and nearer’ . . .” she
      sang. And what was old age to her?
    

      “It seems as though there is something going wrong with me,”
      she thought from time to time through her laughter and singing.
    

      The party broke up at twelve o’clock. Ilyin was the last to leave.
      Sofya Petrovna was still reckless enough to accompany him to the bottom
      step of the verandah. She wanted to tell him that she was going away with
      her husband, and to watch the effect this news would produce on him.
    

      The moon was hidden behind the clouds, but it was light enough for Sofya
      Petrovna to see how the wind played with the skirts of his overcoat and
      with the awning of the verandah. She could see, too, how white Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper lip in the effort to smile.
    

      “Sonia, Sonitchka . . . my darling woman!” he muttered,
      preventing her from speaking. “My dear! my sweet!”
    

      In a rush of tenderness, with tears in his voice, he showered caressing
      words upon her, that grew tenderer and tenderer, and even called her
      “thou,” as though she were his wife or mistress. Quite
      unexpectedly he put one arm round her waist and with the other hand took
      hold of her elbow.
    

      “My precious! my delight!” he whispered, kissing the nape of
      her neck; “be sincere; come to me at once!”
    

      She slipped out of his arms and raised her head to give vent to her
      indignation and anger, but the indignation did not come off, and all her
      vaunted virtue and chastity was only sufficient to enable her to utter the
      phrase used by all ordinary women on such occasions:
    

      “You must be mad.”
    

      “Come, let us go,” Ilyin continued. “I felt just now, as
      well as at the seat in the wood, that you are as helpless as I am, Sonia .
      . . . You are in the same plight! You love me and are fruitlessly trying
      to appease your conscience. . . .”
    

      Seeing that she was moving away, he caught her by her lace cuff and said
      rapidly:
    

      “If not today, then tomorrow you will have to give in! Why, then,
      this waste of time? My precious, darling Sonia, the sentence is passed;
      why put off the execution? Why deceive yourself?”
    

      Sofya Petrovna tore herself from him and darted in at the door. Returning
      to the drawing-room, she mechanically shut the piano, looked for a long
      time at the music-stand, and sat down. She could not stand up nor think.
      All that was left of her excitement and recklessness was a fearful
      weakness, apathy, and dreariness. Her conscience whispered to her that she
      had behaved badly, foolishly, that evening, like some madcap girl—that
      she had just been embraced on the verandah, and still had an uneasy
      feeling in her waist and her elbow. There was not a soul in the
      drawing-room; there was only one candle burning. Madame Lubyantsev sat on
      the round stool before the piano, motionless, as though expecting
      something. And as though taking advantage of the darkness and her extreme
      lassitude, an oppressive, overpowering desire began to assail her. Like a
      boa-constrictor it gripped her limbs and her soul, and grew stronger every
      second, and no longer menaced her as it had done, but stood clear before
      her in all its nakedness.
    

      She sat for half an hour without stirring, not restraining herself from
      thinking of Ilyin, then she got up languidly and dragged herself to her
      bedroom. Andrey Ilyitch was already in bed. She sat down by the open
      window and gave herself up to desire. There was no “tangle”
      now in her head; all her thoughts and feelings were bent with one accord
      upon a single aim. She tried to struggle against it, but instantly gave it
      up. . . . She understood now how strong and relentless was the foe.
      Strength and fortitude were needed to combat him, and her birth, her
      education, and her life had given her nothing to fall back upon.
    

      “Immoral wretch! Low creature!” she nagged at herself for her
      weakness. “So that’s what you’re like!”
    

      Her outraged sense of propriety was moved to such indignation by this
      weakness that she lavished upon herself every term of abuse she knew, and
      told herself many offensive and humiliating truths. So, for instance, she
      told herself that she never had been moral, that she had not come to grief
      before simply because she had had no opportunity, that her inward conflict
      during that day had all been a farce. . . .
    

      “And even if I have struggled,” she thought, “what sort
      of struggle was it? Even the woman who sells herself struggles before she
      brings herself to it, and yet she sells herself. A fine struggle! Like
      milk, I’ve turned in a day! In one day!”
    

      She convicted herself of being tempted, not by feeling, not by Ilyin
      personally, but by sensations which awaited her . . . an idle lady, having
      her fling in the summer holidays, like so many!
    

      “‘Like an unfledged bird when the mother has been slain,’”
      sang a husky tenor outside the window.
    

      “If I am to go, it’s time,” thought Sofya Petrovna. Her
      heart suddenly began beating violently.
    

      “Andrey!” she almost shrieked. “Listen! we . . . we are
      going? Yes?”
    

      “Yes, I’ve told you already: you go alone.”
    

      “But listen,” she began. “If you don’t go with me,
      you are in danger of losing me. I believe I am . . . in love already.”
    

      “With whom?” asked Andrey Ilyitch.
    

      “It can’t make any difference to you who it is!” cried
      Sofya Petrovna.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch sat up with his feet out of bed and looked wonderingly at
      his wife’s dark figure.
    

      “It’s a fancy!” he yawned.
    

      He did not believe her, but yet he was frightened. After thinking a little
      and asking his wife several unimportant questions, he delivered himself of
      his opinions on the family, on infidelity . . . spoke listlessly for about
      ten minutes and got into bed again. His moralizing produced no effect.
      There are a great many opinions in the world, and a good half of them are
      held by people who have never been in trouble!
    

      In spite of the late hour, summer visitors were still walking outside.
      Sofya Petrovna put on a light cape, stood a little, thought a little. . .
      . She still had resolution enough to say to her sleeping husband:
    

      “Are you asleep? I am going for a walk. . . . Will you come with me?”
    

      That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she went out. . . . It was
      fresh and windy. She was conscious neither of the wind nor the darkness,
      but went on and on. . . . An overmastering force drove her on, and it
      seemed as though, if she had stopped, it would have pushed her in the
      back.
    

      “Immoral creature!” she muttered mechanically. “Low
      wretch!”
    

      She was breathless, hot with shame, did not feel her legs under her, but
      what drove her on was stronger than shame, reason, or fear.
    











      A TRIFLE FROM LIFE
    

A WELL-FED,
      red-cheeked young man called Nikolay Ilyitch Belyaev, of thirty-two, who
      was an owner of house property in Petersburg, and a devotee of the
      race-course, went one evening to see Olga Ivanovna Irnin, with whom he was
      living, or, to use his own expression, was dragging out a long, wearisome
      romance. And, indeed, the first interesting and enthusiastic pages of this
      romance had long been perused; now the pages dragged on, and still dragged
      on, without presenting anything new or of interest.
    

      Not finding Olga Ivanovna at home, my hero lay down on the lounge chair
      and proceeded to wait for her in the drawing-room.
    

      “Good-evening, Nikolay Ilyitch!” he heard a child’s
      voice. “Mother will be here directly. She has gone with Sonia to the
      dressmaker’s.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna’s son, Alyosha—a boy of eight who looked
      graceful and very well cared for, who was dressed like a picture, in a
      black velvet jacket and long black stockings—was lying on the sofa
      in the same room. He was lying on a satin cushion and, evidently imitating
      an acrobat he had lately seen at the circus, stuck up in the air first one
      leg and then the other. When his elegant legs were exhausted, he brought
      his arms into play or jumped up impulsively and went on all fours, trying
      to stand with his legs in the air. All this he was doing with the utmost
      gravity, gasping and groaning painfully as though he regretted that God
      had given him such a restless body.
    

      “Ah, good-evening, my boy,” said Belyaev. “It’s
      you! I did not notice you. Is your mother well?”
    

      Alyosha, taking hold of the tip of his left toe with his right hand and
      falling into the most unnatural attitude, turned over, jumped up, and
      peeped at Belyaev from behind the big fluffy lampshade.
    

      “What shall I say?” he said, shrugging his shoulders. “In
      reality mother’s never well. You see, she is a woman, and women,
      Nikolay Ilyitch, have always something the matter with them.”
    

      Belyaev, having nothing better to do, began watching Alyosha’s face.
      He had never before during the whole of his intimacy with Olga Ivanovna
      paid any attention to the boy, and had completely ignored his existence;
      the boy had been before his eyes, but he had not cared to think why he was
      there and what part he was playing.
    

      In the twilight of the evening, Alyosha’s face, with his white
      forehead and black, unbClinking eyes, unexpectedly reminded Belyaev of
      Olga Ivanovna as she had been during the first pages of their romance. And
      he felt disposed to be friendly to the boy.
    

      “Come here, insect,” he said; “let me have a closer look
      at you.”
    

      The boy jumped off the sofa and skipped up to Belyaev.
    

      “Well,” began Nikolay Ilyitch, putting a hand on the boy’s
      thin shoulder. “How are you getting on?”
    

      “How shall I say! We used to get on a great deal better.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “It’s very simple. Sonia and I used only to learn music and
      reading, and now they give us French poetry to learn. Have you been shaved
      lately?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Yes, I see you have. Your beard is shorter. Let me touch it. . . .
      Does that hurt?”
    

      “No.”
    

      “Why is it that if you pull one hair it hurts, but if you pull a lot
      at once it doesn’t hurt a bit? Ha, ha! And, you know, it’s a
      pity you don’t have whiskers. Here ought to be shaved . . . but here
      at the sides the hair ought to be left. . . .”
    

      The boy nestled up to Belyaev and began playing with his watch-chain.
    

      “When I go to the high-school,” he said, “mother is
      going to buy me a watch. I shall ask her to buy me a watch-chain like
      this. . . . Wh-at a lo-ket! Father’s got a locket like that, only
      yours has little bars on it and his has letters. . . . There’s
      mother’s portrait in the middle of his. Father has a different sort
      of chain now, not made with rings, but like ribbon. . . .”
    

      “How do you know? Do you see your father?”
    

      “I? M’m . . . no . . . I . . .”
    

      Alyosha blushed, and in great confusion, feeling caught in a lie, began
      zealously scratching the locket with his nail. . . . Belyaev looked
      steadily into his face and asked:
    

      “Do you see your father?”
    

      “N-no!”
    

      “Come, speak frankly, on your honour. . . . I see from your face you
      are telling a fib. Once you’ve let a thing slip out it’s no
      good wriggling about it. Tell me, do you see him? Come, as a friend.”
    

      Alyosha hesitated.
    

      “You won’t tell mother?” he said.
    

      “As though I should!”
    

      “On your honour?”
    

      “On my honour.”
    

      “Do you swear?”
    

      “Ah, you provoking boy! What do you take me for?”
    

      Alyosha looked round him, then with wide-open eyes, whispered to him:
    

      “Only, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell mother. . . . Don’t
      tell any one at all, for it is a secret. I hope to goodness mother won’t
      find out, or we should all catch it—Sonia, and I, and Pelagea . . .
      . Well, listen. . . Sonia and I see father every Tuesday and Friday. When
      Pelagea takes us for a walk before dinner we go to the Apfel Restaurant,
      and there is father waiting for us. . . . He is always sitting in a room
      apart, where you know there’s a marble table and an ash-tray in the
      shape of a goose without a back. . . .”
    

      “What do you do there?”
    

      “Nothing! First we say how-do-you-do, then we all sit round the
      table, and father treats us with coffee and pies. You know Sonia eats the
      meat-pies, but I can’t endure meat-pies! I like the pies made of
      cabbage and eggs. We eat such a lot that we have to try hard to eat as
      much as we can at dinner, for fear mother should notice.”
    

      “What do you talk about?”
    

      “With father? About anything. He kisses us, he hugs us, tells us all
      sorts of amusing jokes. Do you know, he says when we are grown up he is
      going to take us to live with him. Sonia does not want to go, but I agree.
      Of course, I should miss mother; but, then, I should write her letters! It’s
      a queer idea, but we could come and visit her on holidays—couldn’t
      we? Father says, too, that he will buy me a horse. He’s an awfully
      kind man! I can’t understand why mother does not ask him to come and
      live with us, and why she forbids us to see him. You know he loves mother
      very much. He is always asking us how she is and what she is doing. When
      she was ill he clutched his head like this, and . . . and kept running
      about. He always tells us to be obedient and respectful to her. Listen. Is
      it true that we are unfortunate?”
    

      “H’m! . . . Why?”
    

      “That’s what father says. ‘You are unhappy children,’
      he says. It’s strange to hear him, really. ‘You are unhappy,’
      he says, ‘I am unhappy, and mother’s unhappy. You must pray to
      God,’ he says; ‘for yourselves and for her.’”
    

      Alyosha let his eyes rest on a stuffed bird and sank into thought.
    

      “So . . .” growled Belyaev. “So that’s how you are
      going on. You arrange meetings at restaurants. And mother does not know?”
    

      “No-o. . . . How should she know? Pelagea would not tell her for
      anything, you know. The day before yesterday he gave us some pears. As
      sweet as jam! I ate two.”
    

      “H’m! . . . Well, and I say . . Listen. Did father say
      anything about me?”
    

      “About you? What shall I say?”
    

      Alyosha looked searchingly into Belyaev’s face and shrugged his
      shoulders.
    

      “He didn’t say anything particular.”
    

      “For instance, what did he say?”
    

      “You won’t be offended?”
    

      “What next? Why, does he abuse me?”
    

      “He doesn’t abuse you, but you know he is angry with you. He
      says mother’s unhappy owing to you . . . and that you have ruined
      mother. You know he is so queer! I explain to him that you are kind, that
      you never scold mother; but he only shakes his head.”
    

      “So he says I have ruined her?”
    

      “Yes; you mustn’t be offended, Nikolay Ilyitch.”
    

      Belyaev got up, stood still a moment, and walked up and down the
      drawing-room.
    

      “That’s strange and . . . ridiculous!” he muttered,
      shrugging his shoulders and smiling sarcastically. “He’s
      entirely to blame, and I have ruined her, eh? An innocent lamb, I must
      say. So he told you I ruined your mother?”
    

      “Yes, but . . . you said you would not be offended, you know.”
    

      “I am not offended, and . . . and it’s not your business. Why,
      it’s . . . why, it’s positively ridiculous! I have been thrust
      into it like a chicken in the broth, and now it seems I’m to blame!”
    

      A ring was heard. The boy sprang up from his place and ran out. A minute
      later a lady came into the room with a little girl; this was Olga
      Ivanovna, Alyosha’s mother. Alyosha followed them in, skipping and
      jumping, humming aloud and waving his hands. Belyaev nodded, and went on
      walking up and down.
    

      “Of course, whose fault is it if not mine?” he muttered with a
      snort. “He is right! He is an injured husband.”
    

      “What are you talking about?” asked Olga Ivanovna.
    

      “What about? . . . Why, just listen to the tales your lawful spouse
      is spreading now! It appears that I am a scoundrel and a villain, that I
      have ruined you and the children. All of you are unhappy, and I am the
      only happy one! Wonderfully, wonderfully happy!”
    

      “I don’t understand, Nikolay. What’s the matter?”
    

      “Why, listen to this young gentleman!” said Belyaev, pointing
      to Alyosha.
    

      Alyosha flushed crimson, then turned pale, and his whole face began
      working with terror.
    

      “Nikolay Ilyitch,” he said in a loud whisper. “Sh-sh!”
    

      Olga Ivanovna looked in surprise at Alyosha, then at Belyaev, then at
      Alyosha again.
    

      “Just ask him,” Belyaev went on. “Your Pelagea, like a
      regular fool, takes them about to restaurants and arranges meetings with
      their papa. But that’s not the point: the point is that their dear
      papa is a victim, while I’m a wretch who has broken up both your
      lives. . .”
    

      “Nikolay Ilyitch,” moaned Alyosha. “Why, you promised on
      your word of honour!”
    

      “Oh, get away!” said Belyaev, waving him off. “This is
      more important than any word of honour. It’s the hypocrisy revolts
      me, the lying! . . .”
    

      “I don’t understand it,” said Olga Ivanovna, and tears
      glistened in her eyes. “Tell me, Alyosha,” she turned to her
      son. “Do you see your father?”
    

      Alyosha did not hear her; he was looking with horror at Belyaev.
    

      “It’s impossible,” said his mother; “I will go and
      question Pelagea.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna went out.
    

      “I say, you promised on your word of honour!” said Alyosha,
      trembling all over.
    

      Belyaev dismissed him with a wave of his hand, and went on walking up and
      down. He was absorbed in his grievance and was oblivious of the boy’s
      presence, as he always had been. He, a grownup, serious person, had no
      thought to spare for boys. And Alyosha sat down in the corner and told
      Sonia with horror how he had been deceived. He was trembling, stammering,
      and crying. It was the first time in his life that he had been brought
      into such coarse contact with lying; till then he had not known that there
      are in the world, besides sweet pears, pies, and expensive watches, a
      great many things for which the language of children has no expression.
    








      The Cook's Wedding and Other Stories
    











      THE COOK’S WEDDING
    

GRISHA, a fat,
      solemn little person of seven, was standing by the kitchen door listening
      and peeping through the keyhole. In the kitchen something extraordinary,
      and in his opinion never seen before, was taking place. A big, thick-set,
      red-haired peasant, with a beard, and a drop of perspiration on his nose,
      wearing a cabman’s full coat, was sitting at the kitchen table on
      which they chopped the meat and sliced the onions. He was balancing a
      saucer on the five fingers of his right hand and drinking tea out of it,
      and crunching sugar so loudly that it sent a shiver down Grisha’s
      back. Aksinya Stepanovna, the old nurse, was sitting on the dirty stool
      facing him, and she, too, was drinking tea. Her face was grave, though at
      the same time it beamed with a kind of triumph. Pelageya, the cook, was
      busy at the stove, and was apparently trying to hide her face. And on her
      face Grisha saw a regular illumination: it was burning and shifting
      through every shade of colour, beginning with a crimson purple and ending
      with a deathly white. She was continually catching hold of knives, forks,
      bits of wood, and rags with trembling hands, moving, grumbling to herself,
      making a clatter, but in reality doing nothing. She did not once glance at
      the table at which they were drinking tea, and to the questions put to her
      by the nurse she gave jerky, sullen answers without turning her face.
    

      “Help yourself, Danilo Semyonitch,” the nurse urged him
      hospitably. “Why do you keep on with tea and nothing but tea? You
      should have a drop of vodka!”
    

      And nurse put before the visitor a bottle of vodka and a wine-glass, while
      her face wore a very wily expression.
    

      “I never touch it. . . . No . . .” said the cabman, declining.
      “Don’t press me, Aksinya Stepanovna.”
    

      “What a man! . . . A cabman and not drink! . . . A bachelor can’t
      get on without drinking. Help yourself!”
    

      The cabman looked askance at the bottle, then at nurse’s wily face,
      and his own face assumed an expression no less cunning, as much as to say,
      “You won’t catch me, you old witch!”
    

      “I don’t drink; please excuse me. Such a weakness does not do
      in our calling. A man who works at a trade may drink, for he sits at home,
      but we cabmen are always in view of the public. Aren’t we? If one
      goes into a pothouse one finds one’s horse gone; if one takes a drop
      too much it is worse still; before you know where you are you will fall
      asleep or slip off the box. That’s where it is.”
    

      “And how much do you make a day, Danilo Semyonitch?”
    

      “That’s according. One day you will have a fare for three
      roubles, and another day you will come back to the yard without a
      farthing. The days are very different. Nowadays our business is no good.
      There are lots and lots of cabmen as you know, hay is dear, and folks are
      paltry nowadays and always contriving to go by tram. And yet, thank God, I
      have nothing to complain of. I have plenty to eat and good clothes to
      wear, and . . . we could even provide well for another. . .” (the
      cabman stole a glance at Pelageya) “if it were to their liking. . .
      .”
    

      Grisha did not hear what was said further. His mamma came to the door and
      sent him to the nursery to learn his lessons.
    

      “Go and learn your lesson. It’s not your business to listen
      here!”
    

      When Grisha reached the nursery, he put “My Own Book” in front
      of him, but he did not get on with his reading. All that he had just seen
      and heard aroused a multitude of questions in his mind.
    

      “The cook’s going to be married,” he thought. “Strange—I
      don’t understand what people get married for. Mamma was married to
      papa, Cousin Verotchka to Pavel Andreyitch. But one might be married to
      papa and Pavel Andreyitch after all: they have gold watch-chains and nice
      suits, their boots are always polished; but to marry that dreadful cabman
      with a red nose and felt boots. . . . Fi! And why is it nurse wants poor
      Pelageya to be married?”
    

      When the visitor had gone out of the kitchen, Pelageya appeared and began
      clearing away. Her agitation still persisted. Her face was red and looked
      scared. She scarcely touched the floor with the broom, and swept every
      corner five times over. She lingered for a long time in the room where
      mamma was sitting. She was evidently oppressed by her isolation, and she
      was longing to express herself, to share her impressions with some one, to
      open her heart.
    

      “He’s gone,” she muttered, seeing that mamma would not
      begin the conversation.
    

      “One can see he is a good man,” said mamma, not taking her
      eyes off her sewing. “Sober and steady.”
    

      “I declare I won’t marry him, mistress!” Pelageya cried
      suddenly, flushing crimson. “I declare I won’t!”
    

      “Don’t be silly; you are not a child. It’s a serious
      step; you must think it over thoroughly, it’s no use talking
      nonsense. Do you like him?”
    

      “What an idea, mistress!” cried Pelageya, abashed. “They
      say such things that . . . my goodness. . . .”
    

      “She should say she doesn’t like him!” thought Grisha.
    

      “What an affected creature you are. . . . Do you like him?”
    

      “But he is old, mistress!”
    

      “Think of something else,” nurse flew out at her from the next
      room. “He has not reached his fortieth year; and what do you want a
      young man for? Handsome is as handsome does. . . . Marry him and that’s
      all about it!”
    

      “I swear I won’t,” squealed Pelageya.
    

      “You are talking nonsense. What sort of rascal do you want? Anyone
      else would have bowed down to his feet, and you declare you won’t
      marry him. You want to be always winking at the postmen and tutors. That
      tutor that used to come to Grishenka, mistress . . . she was never tired
      of making eyes at him. O-o, the shameless hussy!”
    

      “Have you seen this Danilo before?” mamma asked Pelageya.
    

      “How could I have seen him? I set eyes on him to-day for the first
      time. Aksinya picked him up and brought him along . . . the accursed
      devil. . . . And where has he come from for my undoing!”
    

      At dinner, when Pelageya was handing the dishes, everyone looked into her
      face and teased her about the cabman. She turned fearfully red, and went
      off into a forced giggle.
    

      “It must be shameful to get married,” thought Grisha. “Terribly
      shameful.”
    

      All the dishes were too salt, and blood oozed from the half-raw chickens,
      and, to cap it all, plates and knives kept dropping out of Pelageya’s
      hands during dinner, as though from a shelf that had given way; but no one
      said a word of blame to her, as they all understood the state of her
      feelings. Only once papa flicked his table-napkin angrily and said to
      mamma:
    

      “What do you want to be getting them all married for? What business
      is it of yours? Let them get married of themselves if they want to.”
    

      After dinner, neighbouring cooks and maidservants kept flitting into the
      kitchen, and there was the sound of whispering till late evening. How they
      had scented out the matchmaking, God knows. When Grisha woke in the night
      he heard his nurse and the cook whispering together in the nursery. Nurse
      was talking persuasively, while the cook alternately sobbed and giggled.
      When he fell asleep after this, Grisha dreamed of Pelageya being carried
      off by Tchernomor and a witch.
    

      Next day there was a calm. The life of the kitchen went on its accustomed
      way as though the cabman did not exist. Only from time to time nurse put
      on her new shawl, assumed a solemn and austere air, and went off somewhere
      for an hour or two, obviously to conduct negotiations. . . . Pelageya did
      not see the cabman, and when his name was mentioned she flushed up and
      cried:
    

      “May he be thrice damned! As though I should be thinking of him!
      Tfoo!”
    

      In the evening mamma went into the kitchen, while nurse and Pelageya were
      zealously mincing something, and said:
    

      “You can marry him, of course—that’s your business—but
      I must tell you, Pelageya, that he cannot live here. . . . You know I don’t
      like to have anyone sitting in the kitchen. Mind now, remember . . . . And
      I can’t let you sleep out.”
    

      “Goodness knows! What an idea, mistress!” shrieked the cook.
      “Why do you keep throwing him up at me? Plague take him! He’s
      a regular curse, confound him! . . .”
    

      Glancing one Sunday morning into the kitchen, Grisha was struck dumb with
      amazement. The kitchen was crammed full of people. Here were cooks from
      the whole courtyard, the porter, two policemen, a non-commissioned officer
      with good-conduct stripes, and the boy Filka. . . . This Filka was
      generally hanging about the laundry playing with the dogs; now he was
      combed and washed, and was holding an ikon in a tinfoil setting. Pelageya
      was standing in the middle of the kitchen in a new cotton dress, with a
      flower on her head. Beside her stood the cabman. The happy pair were red
      in the face and perspiring and bDlinking with embarrassment.
    

      “Well . . . I fancy it is time,” said the non-commissioned
      officer, after a prolonged silence.
    

      Pelageya’s face worked all over and she began blubbering. . . .
    

      The soldier took a big loaf from the table, stood beside nurse, and began
      blessing the couple. The cabman went up to the soldier, flopped down on
      his knees, and gave a smacking kiss on his hand. He did the same before
      nurse. Pelageya followed him mechanically, and she too bowed down to the
      ground. At last the outer door was opened, there was a whiff of white
      mist, and the whole party flocked noisily out of the kitchen into the
      yard.
    

      “Poor thing, poor thing,” thought Grisha, hearing the sobs of
      the cook. “Where have they taken her? Why don’t papa and mamma
      protect her?”
    

      After the wedding there was singing and concertina-playing in the laundry
      till late evening. Mamma was cross all the evening because nurse smelt of
      vodka, and owing to the wedding there was no one to heat the samovar.
      Pelageya had not come back by the time Grisha went to bed.
    

      “The poor thing is crying somewhere in the dark!” he thought.
      “While the cabman is saying to her ‘shut up!’”
    

      Next morning the cook was in the kitchen again. The cabman came in for a
      minute. He thanked mamma, and glancing sternly at Pelageya, said:
    

      “Will you look after her, madam? Be a father and a mother to her.
      And you, too, Aksinya Stepanovna, do not forsake her, see that everything
      is as it should be . . . without any nonsense. . . . And also, madam, if
      you would kindly advance me five roubles of her wages. I have got to buy a
      new horse-collar.”
    

      Again a problem for Grisha: Pelageya was living in freedom, doing as she
      liked, and not having to account to anyone for her actions, and all at
      once, for no sort of reason, a stranger turns up, who has somehow acquired
      rights over her conduct and her property! Grisha was distressed. He longed
      passionately, almost to tears, to comfort this victim, as he supposed, of
      man’s injustice. Picking out the very biggest apple in the
      store-room he stole into the kitchen, slipped it into Pelageya’s
      hand, and darted headlong away.