A NEW YEAR'S GIFT

 Jacques de Randal, having dined at home alone, told his valet he might go
      out, and he sat down at his table to write some letters.

 He ended every year in this manner, writing and dreaming. He reviewed the
      events of his life since last New Year's Day, things that were now all
      over and dead; and, in proportion as the faces of his friends rose up
      before his eyes, he wrote them a few lines, a cordial New Year's greeting
      on the first of January.

 So he sat down, opened a drawer, took out of it a woman's photograph,
      gazed at it a few moments, and kissed it. Then, having laid it beside a
      sheet of notepaper, he began:

 “MY DEAR IRENE: You must by this time have received the little
   souvenir I sent you addressed to the maid. I have shut myself up
   this evening in order to tell you——”

 The pen here ceased to move. Jacques rose up and began walking up and down
      the room.

 For the last ten months he had had a sweetheart, not like the others, a
      woman with whom one engages in a passing intrigue, of the theatrical world
      or the demi-monde, but a woman whom he loved and won. He was no longer a
      young man, although he was still comparatively young for a man, and he
      looked on life seriously in a positive and practical spirit.

 Accordingly, he drew up the balance sheet of his passion, as he drew up
      every year the balance sheet of friendships that were ended or freshly
      contracted, of circumstances and persons that had entered into his life.

 His first ardor of love having grown calmer, he asked himself with the
      precision of a merchant making a calculation what was the state of his
      heart with regard to her, and he tried to form an idea of what it would be
      in the future.

 He found there a great and deep affection; made up of tenderness,
      gratitude and the thousand subtleties which give birth to long and
      powerful attachments.

 A ring at the bell made him start. He hesitated. Should he open the door?
      But he said to himself that one must always open the door on New Year's
      night, to admit the unknown who is passing by and knocks, no matter who it
      may be.

 So he took a wax candle, passed through the antechamber, drew back the
      bolts, turned the key, pulled the door back, and saw his sweetheart
      standing pale as a corpse, leaning against the wall.

 He stammered:

 “What is the matter with you?”

 She replied:

 “Are you alone?”

 “Yes.”

 “Without servants?”

 “Yes.”

 “You are not going out?”

 “No.”

 She entered with the air of a woman who knew the house. As soon as she was
      in the drawing-room, she sank down on the sofa, and, covering her face
      with her hands, began to weep bitterly.

 He knelt down at her feet, and tried to remove her hands from her eyes, so
      that he might look at them, and exclaimed:

 “Irene, Irene, what is the matter with you? I implore you to tell me
      what is the matter with you?”

 Then, amid her sobs, she murmured:

 “I can no longer live like this.”

 “Live like this? What do you mean?”

 “Yes. I can no longer live like this. I have endured so much. He
      struck me this afternoon.”

 “Who? Your husband?”

 “Yes, my husband.”

 “Ah!”

 He was astonished, having never suspected that her husband could be
      brutal. He was a man of the world, of the better class, a clubman, a lover
      of horses, a theatergoer and an expert swordsman; he was known, talked
      about, appreciated everywhere, having very courteous manners, a very
      mediocre intellect, an absence of education and of the real culture needed
      in order to think like all well-bred people, and finally a respect for
      conventionalities.

 He appeared to devote himself to his wife, as a man ought to do in the
      case of wealthy and well-bred people. He displayed enough of anxiety about
      her wishes, her health, her dresses, and, beyond that, left her perfectly
      free.

 Randal, having become Irene's friend, had a right to the affectionate
      hand-clasp which every husband endowed with good manners owes to his
      wife's intimate acquaintance. Then, when Jacques, after having been for
      some time the friend, became the lover, his relations with the husband
      were more cordial, as is fitting.

 Jacques had never dreamed that there were storms in this household, and he
      was bewildered at this unexpected revelation.

 He asked:

 “How did it happen? Tell me.”

 Thereupon she related a long story, the entire history of her life since
      the day of her marriage, the first disagreement arising out of a mere
      nothing, then becoming accentuated at every new difference of opinion
      between two dissimilar dispositions.

 Then came quarrels, a complete separation, not apparent, but real; next,
      her husband showed himself aggressive, suspicious, violent. Now, he was
      jealous, jealous of Jacques, and that very day, after a scene, he had
      struck her.

 She added with decision: “I will not go back to him. Do with me what
      you like.”

 Jacques sat down opposite to her, their knees touching. He took her hands:

 “My dear love, you are going to commit a gross, an irreparable
      folly. If you want to leave your husband, put him in the wrong, so that
      your position as a woman of the world may be saved.”

 She asked, as she looked at him uneasily:

 “Then, what do you advise me?”

 “To go back home and to put up with your life there till the day
      when you can obtain either a separation or a divorce, with the honors of
      war.”

 “Is not this thing which you advise me to do a little cowardly?”

 “No; it is wise and sensible. You have a high position, a reputation
      to protect, friends to preserve and relations to deal with. You must not
      lose all these through a mere caprice.”

 She rose up, and said with violence:

 “Well, no! I cannot stand it any longer! It is at an end! it is at
      an end!”

 Then, placing her two hands on her lover's shoulders, and looking him
      straight in the face, she asked:

 “Do you love me?”

 “Yes.”

 “Really and truly?”

 “Yes.”

 “Then take care of me.”

 He exclaimed:

 “Take care of you? In my own house? Here? Why, you are mad. It would
      mean losing you forever; losing you beyond hope of recall! You are mad!”

 She replied, slowly and seriously, like a woman who feels the weight of
      her words:

 “Listen, Jacques. He has forbidden me to see you again, and I will
      not play this comedy of coming secretly to your house. You must either
      lose me or take me.”

 “My dear Irene, in that case, obtain your divorce, and I will marry
      you.”

 “Yes, you will marry me in—two years at the soonest. Yours is
      a patient love.”

 “Look here! Reflect! If you remain here he'll come to-morrow to take
      you away, seeing that he is your husband, seeing that he has right and law
      on his side.”

 “I did not ask you to keep me in your own house, Jacques, but to
      take me anywhere you like. I thought you loved me enough to do that. I
      have made a mistake. Good-by!”

 She turned round and went toward the door so quickly that he was only able
      to catch hold of her when she was outside the room:

 “Listen, Irene.”

 She struggled, and would not listen to him. Her eyes were full of tears,
      and she stammered:

 “Let me alone! let me alone! let me alone!”

 He made her sit down by force, and once more falling on his knees at her
      feet, he now brought forward a number of arguments and counsels to make
      her understand the folly and terrible risk of her project. He omitted
      nothing which he deemed necessary to convince her, finding even in his
      very affection for her incentives to persuasion.

 As she remained silent and cold as ice, he begged of her, implored of her
      to listen to him, to trust him, to follow his advice.

 When he had finished speaking, she only replied:

 “Are you disposed to let me go away now? Take away your hands, so
      that I may rise to my feet.”

 “Look here, Irene.”

 “Will you let me go?”

 “Irene—is your resolution irrevocable?”

 “Will you let me go.”

 “Tell me only whether this resolution, this mad resolution of yours,
      which you will bitterly regret, is irrevocable?”

 “Yes—let me go!”

 “Then stay. You know well that you are at home here. We shall go
      away to-morrow morning.”

 She rose to her feet in spite of him, and said in a hard tone:

 “No. It is too late. I do not want sacrifice; I do not want
      devotion.”

 “Stay! I have done what I ought to do; I have said what I ought to
      say. I have no further responsibility on your behalf. My conscience is at
      peace. Tell me what you want me to do, and I will obey.”'

 She resumed her seat, looked at him for a long time, and then asked, in a
      very calm voice:

 “Well, then, explain.”

 “Explain what? What do you wish me to explain?”

 “Everything—everything that you thought about before changing
      your mind. Then I will see what I ought to do.”

 “But I thought about nothing at all. I had to warn you that you were
      going to commit an act of folly. You persist; then I ask to share in this
      act of folly, and I even insist on it.”

 “It is not natural to change one's mind so quickly.”

 “Listen, my dear love. It is not a question here of sacrifice or
      devotion. On the day when I realized that I loved you, I said to myself
      what every lover ought to say to himself in the same case: 'The man who
      loves a woman, who makes an effort to win her, who gets her, and who takes
      her, enters into a sacred contract with himself and with her. That is, of
      course, in dealing with a woman like you, not a woman with a fickle heart
      and easily impressed.'

 “Marriage which has a great social value, a great legal value,
      possesses in my eyes only a very slight moral value, taking into account
      the conditions under which it generally takes place.

 “Therefore, when a woman, united by this lawful bond, but having no
      attachment to her husband, whom she cannot love, a woman whose heart is
      free, meets a man whom she cares for, and gives herself to him, when a man
      who has no other tie, takes a woman in this way, I say that they pledge
      themselves toward each other by this mutual and free agreement much more
      than by the 'Yes' uttered in the presence of the mayor.

 “I say that, if they are both honorable persons, their union must be
      more intimate, more real, more wholesome, than if all the sacraments had
      consecrated it.

 “This woman risks everything. And it is exactly because she knows
      it, because she gives everything, her heart, her body, her soul, her
      honor, her life, because she has foreseen all miseries, all dangers all
      catastrophes, because she dares to do a bold act, an intrepid act, because
      she is prepared, determined to brave everything—her husband, who
      might kill her, and society, which may cast her out. This is why she is
      worthy of respect in the midst of her conjugal infidelity; this is why her
      lover, in taking her, should also foresee everything, and prefer her to
      every one else whatever may happen. I have nothing more to say. I spoke in
      the beginning like a sensible man whose duty it was to warn you; and now I
      am only a man—a man who loves you—Command, and I obey.”

 Radiant, she closed his mouth with a kiss, and said in a low tone:

 “It is not true, darling! There is nothing the matter! My husband
      does not suspect anything. But I wanted to see, I wanted to know, what you
      would do. I wished for a New Year's gift—the gift of your heart—another
      gift besides the necklace you sent me. You have given it to me. Thanks!
      thanks! God be thanked for the happiness you have given me!”