A NORMANDY JOKE
    

      It was a wedding procession that was coming along the road between the
      tall trees that bounded the farms and cast their shadow on the road. At
      the head were the bride and groom, then the family, then the invited
      guests, and last of all the poor of the neighborhood. The village urchins
      who hovered about the narrow road like flies ran in and out of the ranks
      or climbed up the trees to see it better.
    

      The bridegroom was a good-looking young fellow, Jean Patu, the richest
      farmer in the neighborhood, but he was above all things, an ardent
      sportsman who seemed to take leave of his senses in order to satisfy that
      passion, and who spent large sums on his dogs, his keepers, his ferrets
      and his guns. The bride, Rosalie Roussel, had been courted by all the
      likely young fellows in the district, for they all thought her handsome
      and they knew that she would have a good dowry. But she had chosen Patu;
      partly, perhaps, because she liked him better than she did the others, but
      still more, like a careful Normandy girl, because he had more crown
      pieces.
    

      As they entered the white gateway of the husband's farm, forty shots
      resounded without their seeing those who fired, as they were hidden in the
      ditches. The noise seemed to please the men, who were slouching along
      heavily in their best clothes, and Patu left his wife, and running up to a
      farm servant whom he perceived behind a tree, took his gun and fired a
      shot himself, as frisky as a young colt. Then they went on, beneath the
      apple trees which were heavy with fruit, through the high grass and
      through the midst of the calves, who looked at them with their great eyes,
      got up slowly and remained standing, with their muzzles turned toward the
      wedding party.
    

      The men became serious when they came within measurable distance of the
      wedding dinner. Some of them, the rich ones, had on tall, shining silk
      hats, which seemed altogether out of place there; others had old
      head-coverings with a long nap, which might have been taken for moleskin,
      while the humblest among them wore caps. All the women had on shawls,
      which they wore loosely on their back, holding the tips ceremoniously
      under their arms. They were red, parti-colored, flaming shawls, and their
      brightness seemed to astonish the black fowls on the dung-heap, the ducks
      on the side of the pond and the pigeons on the thatched roofs.
    

      The extensive farm buildings seemed to be waiting there at the end of that
      archway of apple trees, and a sort of vapor came out of open door and
      windows and an almost overpowering odor of eatables was exhaled from the
      vast building, from all its openings and from its very walls. The string
      of guests extended through the yard; but when the foremost of them reached
      the house, they broke the chain and dispersed, while those behind were
      still coming in at the open gate. The ditches were now lined with urchins
      and curious poor people, and the firing did not cease, but came from every
      side at once, and a cloud of smoke, and that odor which has the same
      intoxicating effect as absinthe, blended with the atmosphere. The women
      were shaking their dresses outside the door, to get rid of the dust, were
      undoing their cap-strings and pulling their shawls over their arms, and
      then they went into the house to lay them aside altogether for the time.
      The table was laid in the great kitchen that would hold a hundred persons;
      they sat down to dinner at two o'clock; and at eight o'clock they were
      still eating, and the men, in their shirt-sleeves, with their waistcoats
      unbuttoned and with red faces, were swallowing down the food and drink as
      if they had been whirlpools. The cider sparkled merrily, clear and golden
      in the large glasses, by the side of the dark, blood-colored wine, and
      between every dish they made a “hole,” the Normandy hole, with
      a glass of brandy which inflamed the body and put foolish notions into the
      head. Low jokes were exchanged across the table until the whole arsenal of
      peasant wit was exhausted. For the last hundred years the same broad
      stories had served for similar occasions, and, although every one knew
      them, they still hit the mark and made both rows of guests roar with
      laughter.
    

      At one end of the table four young fellows, who were neighbors, were
      preparing some practical jokes for the newly married couple, and they
      seemed to have got hold of a good one by the way they whispered and
      laughed, and suddenly one of them, profiting by a moment of silence,
      exclaimed: “The poachers will have a good time to-night, with this
      moon! I say, Jean, you will not be looking at the moon, will you?”
      The bridegroom turned to him quickly and replied: “Only let them
      come, that's all!” But the other young fellow began to laugh, and
      said: “I do not think you will pay much attention to them!”
    

      The whole table was convulsed with laughter, so that the glasses shook,
      but the bridegroom became furious at the thought that anybody would profit
      by his wedding to come and poach on his land, and repeated: “I only
      say-just let them come!”
    

      Then there was a flood of talk with a double meaning which made the bride
      blush somewhat, although she was trembling with expectation; and when they
      had emptied the kegs of brandy they all went to bed. The young couple went
      into their own room, which was on the ground floor, as most rooms in
      farmhouses are. As it was very warm, they opened the window and closed the
      shutters. A small lamp in bad taste, a present from the bride's father,
      was burning on the chest of drawers, and the bed stood ready to receive
      the young people.
    

      The young woman had already taken off her wreath and her dress, and she
      was in her petticoat, unlacing her boots, while Jean was finishing his
      cigar and looking at her out of the corners of his eyes. Suddenly, with a
      brusque movement, like a man who is about to set to work, he took off his
      coat. She had already taken off her boots, and was now pulling off her
      stockings, and then she said to him: “Go and hide yourself behind
      the curtains while I get into bed.”
    

      He seemed as if he were about to refuse; but at last he did as she asked
      him, and in a moment she unfastened her petticoat, which slipped down,
      fell at her feet and lay on the ground. She left it there, stepped over it
      in her loose chemise and slipped into the bed, whose springs creaked
      beneath her weight. He immediately went up to the bed, and, stooping over
      his wife, he sought her lips, which she hid beneath the pillow, when a
      shot was heard in the distance, in the direction of the forest of Rapees,
      as he thought.
    

      He raised himself anxiously, with his heart beating, and running to the
      window, he opened the shutters. The full moon flooded the yard with yellow
      light, and the reflection of the apple trees made black shadows at their
      feet, while in the distance the fields gleamed, covered with the ripe
      corn. But as he was leaning out, listening to every sound in the still
      night, two bare arms were put round his neck, and his wife whispered,
      trying to pull him back: “Do leave them alone; it has nothing to do
      with you. Come to bed.”
    

      He turned round, put his arms round her, and drew her toward him, but just
      as he was laying her on the bed, which yielded beneath her weight, they
      heard another report, considerably nearer this time, and Jean, giving way
      to his tumultuous rage, swore aloud: “Damn it! They will think I do
      not go out and see what it is because of you! Wait, wait a few minutes!”
      He put on his shoes again, took down his gun, which was always hanging
      within reach against the wall, and, as his wife threw herself on her knees
      in her terror, imploring him not to go, he hastily freed himself, ran to
      the window and jumped into the yard.
    

      She waited one hour, two hours, until daybreak, but her husband did not
      return. Then she lost her head, aroused the house, related how angry Jean
      was, and said that he had gone after the poachers, and immediately all the
      male farm-servants, even the boys, went in search of their master. They
      found him two leagues from the farm, tied hand and foot, half dead with
      rage, his gun broken, his trousers turned inside out, and with three dead
      hares hanging round his neck, and a placard on his chest with these words:
      “Who goes on the chase loses his place.”
    

      In later years, when he used to tell this story of his wedding night, he
      usually added: “Ah! as far as a joke went it was a good joke. They
      caught me in a snare, as if I had been a rabbit, the dirty brutes, and
      they shoved my head into a bag. But if I can only catch them some day they
      had better look out for themselves!”
    

      That is how they amuse themselves in Normandy on a wedding day.