A NORMANDY JOKE
    

      It was a wedding procession that was coming along the road between the
      tall trees that bounded the farms and cast their shadow on the road. At
      the head were the bride and groom, then the family, then the invited
      guests, and last of all the poor of the neighborhood. The village urchins
      who hovered about the narrow road like flies ran in and out of the ranks
      or climbed up the trees to see it better.
    

      The bridegroom was a good-looking young fellow, Jean Patu, the richest
      farmer in the neighborhood, but he was above all things, an ardent
      sportsman who seemed to take leave of his senses in order to satisfy that
      passion, and who spent large sums on his dogs, his keepers, his ferrets
      and his guns. The bride, Rosalie Roussel, had been courted by all the
      likely young fellows in the district, for they all thought her handsome
      and they knew that she would have a good dowry. But she had chosen Patu;
      partly, perhaps, because she liked him better than she did the others, but
      still more, like a careful Normandy girl, because he had more crown
      pieces.
    

      As they entered the white gateway of the husband's farm, forty shots
      resounded without their seeing those who fired, as they were hidden in the
      ditches. The noise seemed to please the men, who were slouching along
      heavily in their best clothes, and Patu left his wife, and running up to a
      farm servant whom he perceived behind a tree, took his gun and fired a
      shot himself, as frisky as a young colt. Then they went on, beneath the
      apple trees which were heavy with fruit, through the high grass and
      through the midst of the calves, who looked at them with their great eyes,
      got up slowly and remained standing, with their muzzles turned toward the
      wedding party.
    

      The men became serious when they came within measurable distance of the
      wedding dinner. Some of them, the rich ones, had on tall, shining silk
      hats, which seemed altogether out of place there; others had old
      head-coverings with a long nap, which might have been taken for moleskin,
      while the humblest among them wore caps. All the women had on shawls,
      which they wore loosely on their back, holding the tips ceremoniously
      under their arms. They were red, parti-colored, flaming shawls, and their
      brightness seemed to astonish the black fowls on the dung-heap, the ducks
      on the side of the pond and the pigeons on the thatched roofs.
    

      The extensive farm buildings seemed to be waiting there at the end of that
      archway of apple trees, and a sort of vapor came out of open door and
      windows and an almost overpowering odor of eatables was exhaled from the
      vast building, from all its openings and from its very walls. The string
      of guests extended through the yard; but when the foremost of them reached
      the house, they broke the chain and dispersed, while those behind were
      still coming in at the open gate. The ditches were now lined with urchins
      and curious poor people, and the firing did not cease, but came from every
      side at once, and a cloud of smoke, and that odor which has the same
      intoxicating effect as absinthe, blended with the atmosphere. The women
      were shaking their dresses outside the door, to get rid of the dust, were
      undoing their cap-strings and pulling their shawls over their arms, and
      then they went into the house to lay them aside altogether for the time.
      The table was laid in the great kitchen that would hold a hundred persons;
      they sat down to dinner at two o'clock; and at eight o'clock they were
      still eating, and the men, in their shirt-sleeves, with their waistcoats
      unbuttoned and with red faces, were swallowing down the food and drink as
      if they had been whirlpools. The cider sparkled merrily, clear and golden
      in the large glasses, by the side of the dark, blood-colored wine, and
      between every dish they made a “hole,” the Normandy hole, with
      a glass of brandy which inflamed the body and put foolish notions into the
      head. Low jokes were exchanged across the table until the whole arsenal of
      peasant wit was exhausted. For the last hundred years the same broad
      stories had served for similar occasions, and, although every one knew
      them, they still hit the mark and made both rows of guests roar with
      laughter.
    

      At one end of the table four young fellows, who were neighbors, were
      preparing some practical jokes for the newly married couple, and they
      seemed to have got hold of a good one by the way they whispered and
      laughed, and suddenly one of them, profiting by a moment of silence,
      exclaimed: “The poachers will have a good time to-night, with this
      moon! I say, Jean, you will not be looking at the moon, will you?”
      The bridegroom turned to him quickly and replied: “Only let them
      come, that's all!” But the other young fellow began to laugh, and
      said: “I do not think you will pay much attention to them!”
    

      The whole table was convulsed with laughter, so that the glasses shook,
      but the bridegroom became furious at the thought that anybody would profit
      by his wedding to come and poach on his land, and repeated: “I only
      say-just let them come!”
    

      Then there was a flood of talk with a double meaning which made the bride
      blush somewhat, although she was trembling with expectation; and when they
      had emptied the kegs of brandy they all went to bed. The young couple went
      into their own room, which was on the ground floor, as most rooms in
      farmhouses are. As it was very warm, they opened the window and closed the
      shutters. A small lamp in bad taste, a present from the bride's father,
      was burning on the chest of drawers, and the bed stood ready to receive
      the young people.
    

      The young woman had already taken off her wreath and her dress, and she
      was in her petticoat, unlacing her boots, while Jean was finishing his
      cigar and looking at her out of the corners of his eyes. Suddenly, with a
      brusque movement, like a man who is about to set to work, he took off his
      coat. She had already taken off her boots, and was now pulling off her
      stockings, and then she said to him: “Go and hide yourself behind
      the curtains while I get into bed.”
    

      He seemed as if he were about to refuse; but at last he did as she asked
      him, and in a moment she unfastened her petticoat, which slipped down,
      fell at her feet and lay on the ground. She left it there, stepped over it
      in her loose chemise and slipped into the bed, whose springs creaked
      beneath her weight. He immediately went up to the bed, and, stooping over
      his wife, he sought her lips, which she hid beneath the pillow, when a
      shot was heard in the distance, in the direction of the forest of Rapees,
      as he thought.
    

      He raised himself anxiously, with his heart beating, and running to the
      window, he opened the shutters. The full moon flooded the yard with yellow
      light, and the reflection of the apple trees made black shadows at their
      feet, while in the distance the fields gleamed, covered with the ripe
      corn. But as he was leaning out, listening to every sound in the still
      night, two bare arms were put round his neck, and his wife whispered,
      trying to pull him back: “Do leave them alone; it has nothing to do
      with you. Come to bed.”
    

      He turned round, put his arms round her, and drew her toward him, but just
      as he was laying her on the bed, which yielded beneath her weight, they
      heard another report, considerably nearer this time, and Jean, giving way
      to his tumultuous rage, swore aloud: “Damn it! They will think I do
      not go out and see what it is because of you! Wait, wait a few minutes!”
      He put on his shoes again, took down his gun, which was always hanging
      within reach against the wall, and, as his wife threw herself on her knees
      in her terror, imploring him not to go, he hastily freed himself, ran to
      the window and jumped into the yard.
    

      She waited one hour, two hours, until daybreak, but her husband did not
      return. Then she lost her head, aroused the house, related how angry Jean
      was, and said that he had gone after the poachers, and immediately all the
      male farm-servants, even the boys, went in search of their master. They
      found him two leagues from the farm, tied hand and foot, half dead with
      rage, his gun broken, his trousers turned inside out, and with three dead
      hares hanging round his neck, and a placard on his chest with these words:
      “Who goes on the chase loses his place.”
    

      In later years, when he used to tell this story of his wedding night, he
      usually added: “Ah! as far as a joke went it was a good joke. They
      caught me in a snare, as if I had been a rabbit, the dirty brutes, and
      they shoved my head into a bag. But if I can only catch them some day they
      had better look out for themselves!”
    

      That is how they amuse themselves in Normandy on a wedding day.
    







      FATHER MATTHEW
    

      We had just left Rouen and were galloping along the road to Jumieges. The
      light carriage flew along across the level country. Presently the horse
      slackened his pace to walk up the hill of Cantelen.
    

      One sees there one of the most magnificent views in the world. Behind us
      lay Rouen, the city of churches, with its Gothic belfries, sculptured like
      ivory trinkets; before us Saint Sever, the manufacturing suburb, whose
      thousands of smoking chimneys rise amid the expanse of sky, opposite the
      thousand sacred steeples of the old city.
    

      On the one hand the spire of the cathedral, the highest of human
      monuments, on the other the engine of the power-house, its rival, and
      almost as high, and a metre higher than the tallest pyramid in Egypt.
    

      Before us wound the Seine, with its scattered islands and bordered by
      white banks, covered with a forest on the right and on the left immense
      meadows, bounded by another forest yonder in the distance.
    

      Here and there large ships lay at anchor along the banks of the wide
      river. Three enormous steam boats were starting out, one behind the other,
      for Havre, and a chain of boats, a bark, two schooners and a brig, were
      going upstream to Rouen, drawn by a little tug that emitted a cloud of
      black smoke.
    

      My companion, a native of the country, did not glance at this wonderful
      landscape, but he smiled continually; he seemed to be amused at his
      thoughts. Suddenly he cried:
    

      “Ah, you will soon see something comical—Father Matthew's
      chapel. That is a sweet morsel, my boy.”
    

      I looked at him in surprise. He continued:
    

      “I will give you a whiff of Normandy that will stay by you. Father
      Matthew is the handsomest Norman in the province and his chapel is one of
      the wonders of the world, nothing more nor less. But I will first give you
      a few words of explanation.
    

      “Father Matthew, who is also called Father 'La Boisson,' is an old
      sergeant-major who has come back to his native land. He combines in
      admirable proportions, making a perfect whole, the humbug of the old
      soldier and the sly roguery of the Norman. On his return to Normandy,
      thanks to influence and incredible cleverness, he was made doorkeeper of a
      votive chapel, a chapel dedicated to the Virgin and frequented chiefly by
      young women who have gone astray . . . . He composed and had painted a
      special prayer to his 'Good Virgin.' This prayer is a masterpiece of
      unintentional irony, of Norman wit, in which jest is blended with fear of
      the saint and with the superstitious fear of the secret influence of
      something. He has not much faith in his protectress, but he believes in
      her a little through prudence, and he is considerate of her through
      policy.
    

      “This is how this wonderful prayer begins:
    

      “'Our good Madame Virgin Mary, natural protectress of girl mothers
      in this land and all over the world, protect your servant who erred in a
      moment of forgetfulness . . .'
    

      “It ends thus:
    

      “'Do not forget me, especially when you are with your holy spouse,
      and intercede with God the Father that he may grant me a good husband,
      like your own.'
    

      “This prayer, which was suppressed by the clergy of the district, is
      sold by him privately, and is said to be very efficacious for those who
      recite it with unction.
    

      “In fact he talks of the good Virgin as the valet de chambre of a
      redoubted prince might talk of his master who confided in him all his
      little private secrets. He knows a number of amusing anecdotes at his
      expense which he tells confidentially among friends as they sit over their
      glasses.
    

      “But you will see for yourself.
    

      “As the fees coming from the Virgin did not appear sufficient to
      him, he added to the main figure a little business in saints. He has them
      all, or nearly all. There was not room enough in the chapel, so he stored
      them in the wood-shed and brings them forth as soon as the faithful ask
      for them. He carved these little wooden statues himself—they are
      comical in the extreme—and painted them all bright green one year
      when they were painting his house. You know that saints cure diseases, but
      each saint has his specialty, and you must not confound them or make any
      blunders. They are as jealous of each other as mountebanks.
    

      “In order that they may make no mistake, the old women come and
      consult Matthew.
    

      “'For diseases of the ear which saint is the best?'
    

      “'Why, Saint Osyme is good and Saint Pamphilius is not bad.' But
      that is not all.
    

      “As Matthew has some time to spare, he drinks; but he drinks like a
      professional, with conviction, so much so that he is intoxicated regularly
      every evening. He is drunk, but he is aware of it. He is so well aware of
      it that he notices each day his exact degree of intoxication. That is his
      chief occupation; the chapel is a secondary matter.
    

      “And he has invented—listen and catch on—he has invented
      the 'Saoulometre.'
    

      “There is no such instrument, but Matthew's observations are as
      precise as those of a mathematician. You may hear him repeating
      incessantly: 'Since Monday I have had more than forty-five,' or else 'I
      was between fifty-two and fifty-eight,' or else 'I had at least sixty-six
      to seventy,' or 'Hullo, cheat, I thought I was in the fifties and here I
      find I had had seventy-five!'
    

      “He never makes a mistake.
    

      “He declares that he never reached his limit, but as he acknowledges
      that his observations cease to be exact when he has passed ninety, one
      cannot depend absolutely on the truth of that statement.
    

      “When Matthew acknowledges that he has passed ninety, you may rest
      assured that he is blind drunk.
    

      “On these occasions his wife, Melie, another marvel, flies into a
      fury. She waits for him at the door of the house, and as he enters she
      roars at him:
    

      “'So there you are, slut, hog, giggling sot!'
    

      “Then Matthew, who is not laughing any longer, plants himself
      opposite her and says in a severe tone:
    

      “'Be still, Melie; this is no time to talk; wait till to-morrow.'
    

      “If she keeps on shouting at him, he goes up to her and says in a
      shaky voice:
    

      “'Don't bawl any more. I have had about ninety; I am not counting
      any more. Look out, I am going to hit you!'
    

      “Then Melie beats a retreat.
    

      “If, on the following day, she reverts to the subject, he laughs in
      her face and says:
    

      “'Come, come! We have said enough. It is past. As long as I have not
      reached my limit there is no harm done. But if I go past that, I will
      allow you to correct me, my word on it!'”
    

      We had reached the top of the hill. The road entered the delightful forest
      of Roumare.
    

      Autumn, marvellous autumn, blended its gold and purple with the remaining
      traces of verdure. We passed through Duclair. Then, instead of going on to
      Jumieges, my friend turned to the left and, taking a crosscut, drove in
      among the trees.
    

      And presently from the top of a high hill we saw again the magnificent
      valley of the Seine and the winding river beneath us.
    

      At our right a very small slate-covered building, with a bell tower as
      large as a sunshade, adjoined a pretty house with green Venetian blinds,
      and all covered with honeysuckle and roses.
    

      “Here are some friends!” cried a big voice, and Matthew
      appeared on the threshold. He was a man about sixty, thin and with a
      goatee and long, white mustache.
    

      My friend shook him by the hand and introduced me, and Matthew took us
      into a clean kitchen, which served also as a dining-room. He said:
    

      “I have no elegant apartment, monsieur. I do not like to get too far
      away from the food. The saucepans, you see, keep me company.” Then,
      turning to my friend:
    

      “Why did you come on Thursday? You know quite well that this is the
      day I consult my Guardian Saint. I cannot go out this afternoon.”
    

      And running to the door, he uttered a terrific roar: “Melie!”
      which must have startled the sailors in the ships along the stream in the
      valley below.
    

      Melie did not reply.
    

      Then Matthew winked his eye knowingly.
    

      “She is not pleased with me, you see, because yesterday I was in the
      nineties.”
    

      My friend began to laugh. “In the nineties, Matthew! How did you
      manage it?”
    

      “I will tell you,” said Matthew. “Last year I found only
      twenty rasieres (an old dry measure) of apricots. There are no more, but
      those are the only things to make cider of. So I made some, and yesterday
      I tapped the barrel. Talk of nectar! That was nectar. You shall tell me
      what you think of it. Polyte was here, and we sat down and drank a glass
      and another without being satisfied (one could go on drinking it until
      to-morrow), and at last, with glass after glass, I felt a chill at my
      stomach. I said to Polyte: 'Supposing we drink a glass of cognac to warm
      ourselves?' He agreed. But this cognac, it sets you on fire, so that we
      had to go back to the cider. But by going from chills to heat and heat to
      chills, I saw that I was in the nineties. Polyte was not far from his
      limit.”
    

      The door opened and Melie appeared. At once, before bidding us good-day,
      she cried:
    

      “Great hog, you have both of you reached your limit!”
    

      “Don't say that, Melie; don't say that,” said Matthew, getting
      angry. “I have never reached my limit.”
    

      They gave us a delicious luncheon outside beneath two lime trees, beside
      the little chapel and overlooking the vast landscape. And Matthew told us,
      with a mixture of humor and unexpected credulity, incredible stories of
      miracles.
    

      We had drunk a good deal of delicious cider, sparkling and sweet, fresh
      and intoxicating, which he preferred to all other drinks, and were smoking
      our pipes astride our chairs when two women appeared.
    

      They were old, dried up and bent. After greeting us they asked for Saint
      Blanc. Matthew winked at us as he replied:
    

      “I will get him for you.” And he disappeared in his wood shed.
      He remained there fully five minutes. Then he came back with an expression
      of consternation. He raised his hands.
    

      “I don't know where he is. I cannot find him. I am quite sure that I
      had him.” Then making a speaking trumpet of his hands, he roared
      once more:
    

      “Meli-e-a!”
    

      “What's the matter?” replied his wife from the end of the
      garden.
    

      “Where's Saint Blanc? I cannot find him in the wood shed.”
    

      Then Melie explained it this way:
    

      “Was not that the one you took last week to stop up a hole in the
      rabbit hutch?”
    

      Matthew gave a start.
    

      “By thunder, that may be!” Then turning to the women, he said:
    

      “Follow me.”
    

      They followed him. We did the same, almost choking with suppressed
      laughter.
    

      Saint Blanc was indeed stuck into the earth like an ordinary stake,
      covered with mud and dirt, and forming a corner for the rabbit hutch.
    

      As soon as they perceived him, the two women fell on their knees, crossed
      themselves and began to murmur an “Oremus.” But Matthew darted
      toward them.
    

      “Wait,” he said, “you are in the mud; I will get you a
      bundle of straw.”
    

      He went to fetch the straw and made them a priedieu. Then, looking at his
      muddy saint and doubtless afraid of bringing discredit on his business, he
      added:
    

      “I will clean him off a little for you.”
    

      He took a pail of water and a brush and began to scrub the wooden image
      vigorously, while the two old women kept on praying.
    

      When he had finished he said:
    

      “Now he is all right.” And he took us back to the house to
      drink another glass.
    

      As he was carrying the glass to his lips he stopped and said in a rather
      confused manner:
    

      “All the same, when I put Saint Blanc out with the rabbits I thought
      he would not make any more money. For two years no one had asked for him.
      But the saints, you see, they are never out of date.”
    







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 11.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME XI.