A PORTRAIT
    

      “Hello! there's Milial!” said somebody near me. I looked at
      the man who had been pointed out as I had been wishing for a long time to
      meet this Don Juan.
    

      He was no longer young. His gray hair looked a little like those fur
      bonnets worn by certain Northern peoples, and his long beard, which fell
      down over his chest, had also somewhat the appearance of fur. He was
      talking to a lady, leaning toward her, speaking in a low voice and looking
      at her with an expression full of respect and tenderness.
    

      I knew his life, or at least as much as was known of it. He had loved
      madly several times, and there had been certain tragedies with which his
      name had been connected. When I spoke to women who were the loudest in his
      praise, and asked them whence came this power, they always answered, after
      thinking for a while: “I don't know—he has a certain charm
      about him.”
    

      He was certainly not handsome. He had none of the elegance that we ascribe
      to conquerors of feminine hearts. I wondered what might be his hidden
      charm. Was it mental? I never had heard of a clever saying of his. In his
      glance? Perhaps. Or in his voice? The voices of some beings have a certain
      irresistible attraction, almost suggesting the flavor of things good to
      eat. One is hungry for them, and the sound of their words penetrates us
      like a dainty morsel. A friend was passing. I asked him: “Do you
      know Monsieur Milial?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Introduce us.”
    

      A minute later we were shaking hands and talking in the doorway. What he
      said was correct, agreeable to hear; it contained no irritable thought.
      The voice was sweet, soft, caressing, musical; but I had heard others much
      more attractive, much more moving. One listened to him with pleasure, just
      as one would look at a pretty little brook. No tension of the mind was
      necessary in order to follow him, no hidden meaning aroused curiosity, no
      expectation awoke interest. His conversation was rather restful, but it
      did not awaken in one either a desire to answer, to contradict or to
      approve, and it was as easy to answer him as it was to listen to him. The
      response came to the lips of its own accord, as soon as he had finished
      talking, and phrases turned toward him as if he had naturally aroused
      them.
    

      One thought soon struck me. I had known him for a quarter of an hour, and
      it seemed as if he were already one of my old friends, that I had known
      all about him for a long time; his face, his gestures, his voice, his
      ideas. Suddenly, after a few minutes of conversation, he seemed already to
      be installed in my intimacy. All constraint disappeared between us, and,
      had he so desired, I might have confided in him as one confides only in
      old friends.
    

      Certainly there was some mystery about him. Those barriers that are closed
      between most people and that are lowered with time when sympathy, similar
      tastes, equal intellectual culture and constant intercourse remove
      constraint—those barriers seemed not to exist between him and me,
      and no doubt this was the case between him and all people, both men and
      women, whom fate threw in his path.
    

      After half an hour we parted, promising to see each other often, and he
      gave me his address after inviting me to take luncheon with him in two
      days.
    

      I forgot what hour he had stated, and I arrived too soon; he was not yet
      home. A correct and silent domestic showed me into a beautiful, quiet,
      softly lighted parlor. I felt comfortable there, at home. How often I have
      noticed the influence of apartments on the character and on the mind!
      There are some which make one feel foolish; in others, on the contrary,
      one always feels lively. Some make us sad, although well lighted and
      decorated in light-colored furniture; others cheer us up, although hung
      with sombre material. Our eye, like our heart, has its likes and dislikes,
      of which it does not inform us, and which it secretly imposes on our
      temperament. The harmony of furniture, walls, the style of an ensemble,
      act immediately on our mental state, just as the air from the woods, the
      sea or the mountains modifies our physical natures.
    

      I sat down on a cushion-covered divan and felt myself suddenly carried and
      supported by these little silk bags of feathers, as if the outline of my
      body had been marked out beforehand on this couch.
    

      Then I looked about. There was nothing striking about the room;
      every-where were beautiful and modest things, simple and rare furniture,
      Oriental curtains which did not seem to come from a department store but
      from the interior of a harem; and exactly opposite me hung the portrait of
      a woman. It was a portrait of medium size, showing the head and the upper
      part of the body, and the hands, which were holding a book. She was young,
      bareheaded; ribbons were woven in her hair; she was smiling sadly. Was it
      because she was bareheaded, was it merely her natural expression? I never
      have seen a portrait of a lady which seemed so much in its place as that
      one in that dwelling. Of all those I knew I have seen nothing like that
      one. All those that I know are on exhibition, whether the lady be dressed
      in her gaudiest gown, with an attractive headdress and a look which shows
      that she is posing first of all before the artist and then before those
      who will look at her or whether they have taken a comfortable attitude in
      an ordinary gown. Some are standing majestically in all their beauty,
      which is not at all natural to them in life. All of them have something, a
      flower or, a jewel, a crease in the dress or a curve of the lip, which one
      feels to have been placed there for effect by the artist. Whether they
      wear a hat or merely their hair one can immediately notice that they are
      not entirely natural. Why? One cannot say without knowing them, but the
      effect is there. They seem to be calling somewhere, on people whom they
      wish to please and to whom they wish to appear at their best advantage;
      and they have studied their attitudes, sometimes modest, Sometimes
      haughty.
    

      What could one say about this one? She was at home and alone. Yes, she was
      alone, for she was smiling as one smiles when thinking in solitude of
      something sad or sweet, and not as one smiles when one is being watched.
      She seemed so much alone and so much at home that she made the whole large
      apartment seem absolutely empty. She alone lived in it, filled it, gave it
      life. Many people might come in and converse, laugh, even sing; she would
      still be alone with a solitary smile, and she alone would give it life
      with her pictured gaze.
    

      That look also was unique. It fell directly on me, fixed and caressing,
      without seeing me. All portraits know that they are being watched, and
      they answer with their eyes, which see, think, follow us without leaving
      us, from the very moment we enter the apartment they inhabit. This one did
      not see me; it saw nothing, although its look was fixed directly on me. I
      remembered the surprising verse of Baudelaire:
    

      And your eyes, attractive as those of a portrait.
    

      They did indeed attract me in an irresistible manner; those painted eyes
      which had lived, or which were perhaps still living, threw over me a
      strange, powerful spell. Oh, what an infinite and tender charm, like a
      passing breeze, like a dying sunset of lilac rose and blue, a little sad
      like the approaching night, which comes behind the sombre frame and out of
      those impenetrable eyes! Those eyes, created by a few strokes from a
      brush, hide behind them the mystery of that which seems to be and which
      does not exist, which can appear in the eyes of a woman, which can make
      love blossom within us.
    

      The door opened and M. Milial entered. He excused himself for being late.
      I excused myself for being ahead of time. Then I said: “Might I ask
      you who is this lady?”
    

      He answered: “That is my mother. She died very young.”
    

      Then I understood whence came the inexplicable attraction of this man.