A RECOLLECTION

 How many recollections of youth come to me in the soft sunlight of early
      spring! It was an age when all was pleasant, cheerful, charming,
      intoxicating. How exquisite are the remembrances of those old springtimes!

 Do you recall, old friends and brothers, those happy years when life was
      nothing but a triumph and an occasion for mirth? Do you recall the days of
      wanderings around Paris, our jolly poverty, our walks in the fresh, green
      woods, our drinks in the wine-shops on the banks of the Seine and our
      commonplace and delightful little flirtations?

 I will tell you about one of these. It was twelve years ago and already
      appears to me so old, so old that it seems now as if it belonged to the
      other end of life, before middle age, this dreadful middle age from which
      I suddenly perceived the end of the journey.

 I was then twenty-five. I had just come to Paris. I was in a government
      office, and Sundays were to me like unusual festivals, full of exuberant
      happiness, although nothing remarkable occurred.

 Now it is Sunday every day, but I regret the time when I had only one
      Sunday in the week. How enjoyable it was! I had six francs to spend!

 On this particular morning I awoke with that sense of freedom that all
      clerks know so well—the sense of emancipation, of rest, of quiet and
      of independence.

 I opened my window. The weather was charming. A blue sky full of sunlight
      and swallows spread above the town.

 I dressed quickly and set out, intending to spend the day in the woods
      breathing the air of the green trees, for I am originally a rustic, having
      been brought up amid the grass and the trees.

 Paris was astir and happy in the warmth and the light. The front of the
      houses was bathed in sunlight, the janitress' canaries were singing in
      their cages and there was an air of gaiety in the streets, in the faces of
      the inhabitants, lighting them up with a smile as if all beings and all
      things experienced a secret satisfaction at the rising of the brilliant
      sun.

 I walked towards the Seine to take the Swallow, which would land me at
      Saint-Cloud.

 How I loved waiting for the boat on the wharf:

 It seemed to me that I was about to set out for the ends of the world, for
      new and wonderful lands. I saw the boat approaching yonder, yonder under
      the second bridge, looking quite small with its plume of smoke, then
      growing larger and ever larger, as it drew near, until it looked to me
      like a mail steamer.

 It came up to the wharf and I went on board. People were there already in
      their Sunday clothes, startling toilettes, gaudy ribbons and bright
      scarlet designs. I took up a position in the bows, standing up and looking
      at the quays, the trees, the houses and the bridges disappearing behind
      us. And suddenly I perceived the great viaduct of Point du Jour which
      blocked the river. It was the end of Paris, the beginning of the country,
      and behind the double row of arches the Seine, suddenly spreading out as
      though it had regained space and liberty, became all at once the peaceful
      river which flows through the plains, alongside the wooded hills, amid the
      meadows, along the edge of the forests.

 After passing between two islands the Swallow went round a curved verdant
      slope dotted with white houses. A voice called out: “Bas Meudon”
      and a little further on, “Sevres,” and still further, “Saint-Cloud.”

 I went on shore and walked hurriedly through the little town to the road
      leading to the wood.

 I had brought with me a map of the environs of Paris, so that I might not
      lose my way amid the paths which cross in every direction these little
      forests where Parisians take their outings.

 As soon as I was unperceived I began to study my guide, which seemed to be
      perfectly clear. I was to turn to the right, then to the left, then again
      to the left and I should reach Versailles by evening in time for dinner.

 I walked slowly beneath the young leaves, drinking in the air, fragrant
      with the odor of young buds and sap. I sauntered along, forgetful of musty
      papers, of the offices, of my chief, my colleagues, my documents, and
      thinking of the good things that were sure to come to me, of all the
      veiled unknown contained in the future. A thousand recollections of
      childhood came over me, awakened by these country odors, and I walked
      along, permeated with the fragrant, living enchantment, the emotional
      enchantment of the woods warmed by the sun of June.

 At times I sat down to look at all sorts of little flowers growing on a
      bank, with the names of which I was familiar. I recognized them all just
      as if they were the ones I had seen long ago in the country. They were
      yellow, red, violet, delicate, dainty, perched on long stems or close to
      the ground. Insects of all colors and shapes, short, long, of peculiar
      form, frightful, and microscopic monsters, climbed quietly up the stalks
      of grass which bent beneath their weight.

 Then I went to sleep for some hours in a hollow and started off again,
      refreshed by my doze.

 In front of me lay an enchanting pathway and through its somewhat scanty
      foliage the sun poured down drops of light on the marguerites which grew
      there. It stretched out interminably, quiet and deserted, save for an
      occasional big wasp, who would stop buzzing now and then to sip from a
      flower, and then continue his way.

 All at once I perceived at the end of the path two persons, a man and a
      woman, coming towards me. Annoyed at being disturbed in my quiet walk, I
      was about to dive into the thicket, when I thought I heard someone calling
      me. The woman was, in fact, shaking her parasol, and the man, in his shirt
      sleeves, his coat over one arm, was waving the other as a signal of
      distress.

 I went towards them. They were walking hurriedly, their faces very red,
      she with short, quick steps and he with long strides. They both looked
      annoyed and fatigued.

 The woman asked:

 “Can you tell me, monsieur, where we are? My fool of a husband made
      us lose our way, although he pretended he knew the country perfectly.”

 I replied confidently:

 “Madame, you are going towards Saint-Cloud and turning your back on
      Versailles.”

 With a look of annoyed pity for her husband, she exclaimed:

 “What, we are turning our back on Versailles? Why, that is just
      where we want to dine!”

 “I am going there also, madame.”

 “Mon Dieu, mon Dieu, mon Dieu!” she repeated, shrugging her
      shoulders, and in that tone of sovereign contempt assumed by women to
      express their exasperation.

 She was quite young, pretty, a brunette with a slight shadow on her upper
      lip.

 As for him, he was perspiring and wiping his forehead. It was assuredly a
      little Parisian bourgeois couple. The man seemed cast down, exhausted and
      distressed.

 “But, my dear friend, it was you—” he murmured.

 She did not allow him to finish his sentence.

 “It was I! Ah, it is my fault now! Was it I who wanted to go out
      without getting any information, pretending that I knew how to find my
      way? Was it I who wanted to take the road to the right on top of the hill,
      insisting that I recognized the road? Was it I who undertook to take
      charge of Cachou—”

 She had not finished speaking when her husband, as if he had suddenly gone
      crazy, gave a piercing scream, a long, wild cry that could not be
      described in any language, but which sounded like 'tuituit'.

 The young woman did not appear to be surprised or moved and resumed:

 “No, really, some people are so stupid and they pretend they know
      everything. Was it I who took the train to Dieppe last year instead of the
      train to Havre—tell me, was it I? Was it I who bet that M.
      Letourneur lived in Rue des Martyres? Was it I who would not believe that
      Celeste was a thief?”

 She went on, furious, with a surprising flow of language, accumulating the
      most varied, the most unexpected and the most overwhelming accusations
      drawn from the intimate relations of their daily life, reproaching her
      husband for all his actions, all his ideas, all his habits, all his
      enterprises, all his efforts, for his life from the time of their marriage
      up to the present time.

 He strove to check her, to calm her and stammered:

 “But, my dear, it is useless—before monsieur. We are making
      ourselves ridiculous. This does not interest monsieur.”

 And he cast mournful glances into the thicket as though he sought to sound
      its peaceful and mysterious depths, in order to flee thither, to escape
      and hide from all eyes, and from time to time he uttered a fresh scream, a
      prolonged and shrill “tuituit.” I took this to be a nervous
      affection.

 The young woman, suddenly turning towards me: and changing her tone with
      singular rapidity, said:

 “If monsieur will kindly allow us, we will accompany him on the
      road, so as not to lose our way again, and be obliged, possibly, to sleep
      in the wood.”

 I bowed. She took my arm and began to talk about a thousand things —about
      herself, her life, her family, her business. They were glovers in the Rue
      Saint-Lazare.

 Her husband walked beside her, casting wild glances into the thick wood
      and screaming “tuituit” every few moments.

 At last I inquired:

 “Why do you scream like that?”

 “I have lost my poor dog,” he replied in a tone of
      discouragement and despair.

 “How is that—you have lost your dog?”

 “Yes. He was just a year old. He had never been outside the shop. I
      wanted to take him to have a run in the woods. He had never seen the grass
      nor the leaves and he was almost wild. He began to run about and bark and
      he disappeared in the wood. I must also add that he was greatly afraid of
      the train. That may have driven him mad. I kept on calling him, but he has
      not come back. He will die of hunger in there.”

 Without turning towards her husband, the young woman said:

 “If you had left his chain on, it would not have happened. When
      people are as stupid as you are they do not keep a dog.”

 “But, my dear, it was you—” he murmured timidly.

 She stopped short, and looking into his eyes as if she were going to tear
      them out, she began again to cast in his face innumerable reproaches.

 It was growing dark. The cloud of vapor that covers the country at dusk
      was slowly rising and there was a poetry in the air, induced by the
      peculiar and enchanting freshness of the atmosphere that one feels in the
      woods at nightfall.

 Suddenly the young man stopped, and feeling his body feverishly,
      exclaimed:

 “Oh, I think that I—”

 She looked at him.

 “Well, what?”

 “I did not notice that I had my coat on my arm.”

 “Well—?”

 “I have lost my pocketbook—my money was in it.”

 She shook with anger and choked with indignation.

 “That was all that was lacking. How stupid you are! how stupid you
      are! Is it possible that I could have married such an idiot! Well, go and
      look for it, and see that you find it. I am going on to Versailles with
      monsieur. I do not want to sleep in the wood.”

 “Yes, my dear,” he replied gently. “Where shall I find
      you?”

 A restaurant had been recommended to me. I gave him the address.

 He turned back and, stooping down as he searched the ground with anxious
      eyes, he moved away, screaming “tuituit” every few moments.

 We could see him for some time until the growing darkness concealed all
      but his outline, but we heard his mournful “tuituit,” shriller
      and shriller as the night grew darker.

 As for me, I stepped along quickly and happily in the soft twilight, with
      this little unknown woman leaning on my arm. I tried to say pretty things
      to her, but could think of nothing. I remained silent, disturbed,
      enchanted.

 Our path was suddenly crossed by a high road. To the right I perceived a
      town lying in a valley.

 What was this place? A man was passing. I asked him. He replied:

 “Bougival.”

 I was dumfounded.

 “What, Bougival? Are you sure?”

 “Parbleu, I belong there!”

 The little woman burst into an idiotic laugh.

 I proposed that we should take a carriage and drive to Versailles. She
      replied:

 “No, indeed. This is very funny and I am very hungry. I am really
      quite calm. My husband will find his way all right. It is a treat to me to
      be rid of him for a few hours.”

 We went into a restaurant beside the water and I ventured to ask for a
      private compartment. We had some supper. She sang, drank champagne,
      committed all sorts of follies.

 That was my first serious flirtation.