A SALE

 The defendants, Cesaire-Isidore Brument and Prosper-Napoleon Cornu,
      appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Seine-Inferieure, on a charge
      of attempted murder, by drowning, of Mme. Brument, lawful wife of the
      first of the aforenamed.

 The two prisoners sat side by side on the traditional bench. They were two
      peasants; the first was small and stout, with short arms, short legs, and
      a round head with a red pimply face, planted directly on his trunk, which
      was also round and short, and with apparently no neck. He was a raiser of
      pigs and lived at Cacheville-la-Goupil, in the district of Criquetot.

 Cornu (Prosper-Napoleon) was thin, of medium height, with enormously long
      arms. His head was on crooked, his jaw awry, and he squinted. A blue
      blouse, as long as a shirt, hung down to his knees, and his yellow hair,
      which was scanty and plastered down on his head, gave his face a worn-out,
      dirty look, a dilapidated look that was frightful. He had been nicknamed
      “the cure” because he could imitate to perfection the chanting
      in church, and even the sound of the serpent. This talent attracted to his
      cafe—for he was a saloon keeper at Criquetot—a great many
      customers who preferred the “mass at Cornu” to the mass in
      church.

 Mme. Brument, seated on the witness bench, was a thin peasant woman who
      seemed to be always asleep. She sat there motionless, her hands crossed on
      her knees, gazing fixedly before her with a stupid expression.

 The judge continued his interrogation.

 “Well, then, Mme. Brument, they came into your house and threw you
      into a barrel full of water. Tell us the details. Stand up.”

 She rose. She looked as tall as a flag pole with her cap which looked like
      a white skull cap. She said in a drawling tone:

 “I was shelling beans. Just then they came in. I said to myself,
      'What is the matter with them? They do not seem natural, they seem up to
      some mischief.' They watched me sideways, like this, especially Cornu,
      because he squints. I do not like to see them together, for they are two
      good-for-nothings when they are in company. I said: 'What do you want with
      me?' They did not answer. I had a sort of mistrust——”

 The defendant Brument interrupted the witness hastily, saying:

 “I was full.”

 Then Cornu, turning towards his accomplice said in the deep tones of an
      organ:

 “Say that we were both full, and you will be telling no lie.”

 The judge, severely:

 “You mean by that that you were both drunk?”

 Brument: “There can be no question about it.”

 Cornu: “That might happen to anyone.”

 The judge to the victim: “Continue your testimony, woman Brument.”

 “Well, Brument said to me, 'Do you wish to earn a hundred sous?'
      'Yes,' I replied, seeing that a hundred sous are not picked up in a
      horse's tracks. Then he said: 'Open your eyes and do as I do,' and he went
      to fetch the large empty barrel which is under the rain pipe in the
      corner, and he turned it over and brought it into my kitchen, and stuck it
      down in the middle of the floor, and then he said to me: 'Go and fetch
      water until it is full.'

 “So I went to the pond with two pails and carried water, and still
      more water for an hour, seeing that the barrel was as large as a vat,
      saving your presence, m'sieu le president.

 “All this time Brument and Cornu were drinking a glass, and then
      another glass, and then another. They were finishing their drinks when I
      said to them: 'You are full, fuller than this barrel.' And Brument
      answered me. 'Do not worry, go on with your work, your turn will come,
      each one has his share.' I paid no attention to what he said as he was
      full.

 “When the barrel was full to the brim, I said: 'There, that's done.'

 “And then Cornu gave me a hundred sous, not Brument, Cornu; it was
      Cornu gave them to me. And Brument said: 'Do you wish to earn a hundred
      sous more?' 'Yes,' I said, for I am not accustomed to presents like that.
      Then he said: 'Take off your clothes!

 “'Take off my clothes?'

 “'Yes,' he said.

 “'How many shall I take off?'

 “'If it worries you at all, keep on your chemise, that won't bother
      us.'

 “A hundred sous is a hundred sous, and I have to undress myself; but
      I did not fancy undressing before those two good-for-nothings. I took off
      my cap, and then my jacket, and then my skirt, and then my sabots. Brument
      said, 'Keep on your stockings, also; we are good fellows.'

 “And Cornu said, too, 'We are good fellows.'

 “So there I was, almost like mother Eve. And they got up from their
      chairs, but could not stand straight, they were so full, saving your
      presence, M'sieu le president.

 “I said to myself: 'What are they up to?'

 “And Brument said: 'Are you ready?'

 “And Cornu said: 'I'm ready!'

 “And then they took me, Brument by the head, and Cornu by the feet,
      as one might take, for instance, a sheet that has been washed. Then I
      began to bawl.

 “And Brument said: 'Keep still, wretched creature!'

 “And they lifted me up in the air and put me into the barrel, which
      was full of water, so that I had a check of the circulation, a chill to my
      very insides.

 “And Brument said: 'Is that all?'

 “Cornu said: 'That is all.'

 “Brument said: 'The head is not in, that will make a difference in
      the measure.'

 “Cornu said: 'Put in her head.'

 “And then Brument pushed down my head as if to drown me, so that the
      water ran into my nose, so that I could already see Paradise. And he
      pushed it down, and I disappeared.

 “And then he must have been frightened. He pulled me out and said:
      'Go and get dry, carcass.'

 “As for me, I took to my heels and ran as far as M. le cure's. He
      lent me a skirt belonging to his servant, for I was almost in a state of
      nature, and he went to fetch Maitre Chicot, the country watchman who went
      to Criquetot to fetch the police who came to my house with me.

 “Then we found Brument and Cornu fighting each other like two rams.

 “Brument was bawling: 'It isn't true, I tell you that there is at
      least a cubic metre in it. It is the method that was no good.'

 “Cornu bawled: 'Four pails, that is almost half a cubic metre. You
      need not reply, that's what it is.'

 “The police captain put them both under arrest. I have no more to
      tell.”

 She sat down. The audience in the court room laughed. The jurors looked at
      one another in astonishment. The judge said:

 “Defendant Cornu, you seem to have been the instigator of this
      infamous plot. What have you to say?”

 And Cornu rose in his turn.

 “Judge,” he replied, “I was full.”

 The Judge answered gravely:

 “I know it. Proceed.”

 “I will. Well, Brument came to my place about nine o'clock, and
      ordered two drinks, and said: 'There's one for you, Cornu.' I sat down
      opposite him and drank, and out of politeness, I offered him a glass. Then
      he returned the compliment and so did I, and so it went on from glass to
      glass until noon, when we were full.

 “Then Brument began to cry. That touched me. I asked him what was
      the matter. He said: 'I must have a thousand francs by Thursday.' That
      cooled me off a little, you understand. Then he said to me all at once: 'I
      will sell you my wife.'

 “I was full, and I was a widower. You understand, that stirred me
      up. I did not know his wife, but she was a woman, wasn't she? I asked him:
      'How much would you sell her for?'

 “He reflected, or pretended to reflect. When one is full one is not
      very clear-headed, and he replied: 'I will sell her by the cubic metre.'

 “That did not surprise me, for I was as drunk as he was, and I knew
      what a cubic metre is in my business. It is a thousand litres, that suited
      me.

 “But the price remained to be settled. All depends on the quality. I
      said: 'How much do you want a cubic metre?'

 “He answered: 'Two thousand francs.'

 “I gave a bound like a rabbit, and then I reflected that a woman
      ought not to measure more than three hundred litres. So I said: 'That's
      too dear.'

 “He answered: 'I cannot do it for less. I should lose by it.'

 “You understand, one is not a dealer in hogs for nothing. One
      understands one's business. But, if he is smart, the seller of bacon, I am
      smarter, seeing that I sell them also. Ha, Ha, Ha! So I said to him: 'If
      she were new, I would not say anything, but she has been married to you
      for some time, so she is not as fresh as she was. I will give you fifteen
      hundred francs a cubic metre, not a sou more. Will that suit you?'

 “He answered: 'That will do. That's a bargain!'

 “I agreed, and we started out, arm in arm. We must help each other
      in this world.

 “But a fear came to me: 'How can you measure her unless you put her
      into the liquid?'

 “Then he explained his idea, not without difficulty for he was full.
      He said to me: 'I take a barrel, and fill it with water to the brim. I put
      her in it. All the water that comes out we will measure, that is the way
      to fix it.'

 “I said: 'I see, I understand. But this water that overflows will
      run away; how are you going to gather it up?'

 “Then he began stuffing me and explained to me that all we should
      have to do would be to refill the barrel with the water his wife had
      displaced as soon as she should have left. All the water we should pour in
      would be the measure. I supposed about ten pails; that would be a cubic
      metre. He isn't a fool, all the same, when he is drunk, that old horse.

 “To be brief, we reached his house and I took a look at its
      mistress. A beautiful woman she certainly was not. Anyone can see her, for
      there she is. I said to myself: 'I am disappointed, but never mind, she
      will be of value; handsome or ugly, it is all the same, is it not,
      monsieur le president?' And then I saw that she was as thin as a rail. I
      said to myself: 'She will not measure four hundred litres.' I understand
      the matter, it being in liquids.

 “She told you about the proceeding. I even let her keep on her
      chemise and stockings, to my own disadvantage.

 “When that was done she ran away. I said: 'Look out, Brument! she is
      escaping.'

 “He replied: 'Do not be afraid. I will catch her all right. She will
      have to come back to sleep, I will measure the deficit.'

 “We measured. Not four pailfuls. Ha, Ha, Ha!”

 The witness began to laugh so persistently that a gendarme was obliged to
      punch him in the back. Having quieted down, he resumed:

 “In short, Brument exclaimed: 'Nothing doing, that is not enough.' I
      bawled and bawled, and bawled again, he punched me, I hit back. That would
      have kept on till the Day of judgment, seeing we were both drunk.

 “Then came the gendarmes! They swore at us, they took us off to
      prison. I want damages.”

 He sat down.

 Brument confirmed in every particular the statements of his accomplice.
      The jury, in consternation, retired to deliberate.

 At the end of an hour they returned a verdict of acquittal for the
      defendants, with some severe strictures on the dignity of marriage, and
      establishing the precise limitations of business transactions.

 Brument went home to the domestic roof accompanied by his wife.

 Cornu went back to his business.