A SECOND-RATE WOMAN

 Est fuga, volvitur rota,
    On we drift; where looms the dim port?
   One Two Three Four Five contribute their quota:
    Something is gained if one caught but the import,
   Show it us, Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.

   —Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.

 “DRESSED! Don't tell me that woman ever dressed in her life. She stood in
      the middle of her room while her ayah—no, her husband—it must
      have been a man—threw her clothes at her. She then did her hair with
      her fingers, and rubbed her bonnet in the flue under the bed. I know she
      did, as well as if I had assisted at the orgy. Who is she?” said Mrs.
      Hauksbee.

 “Don't!” said Mrs. Mallowe, feebly. “You make my head ache. I'm miserable
      today. Stay me with fondants, comfort me with chocolates, for I am—Did
      you bring anything from Peliti's?”

 “Questions to begin with. You shall have the sweets when you have answered
      them. Who and what is the creature? There were at least half a dozen men
      round her, and she appeared to be going to sleep in their midst.”

 “Delville,” said Mrs. Mallowe, “'Shady' Delville, to distinguish her from
      Mrs. Jim of that ilk. She dances as untidily as she dresses, I believe,
      and her husband is somewhere in Madras. Go and call, if you are so
      interested.”

 “What have I to do with Shigramitish women? She merely caught my attention
      for a minute, and I wondered at the attraction that a dowd has for a
      certain type of man. I expected to see her walk out of her clothes—until
      I looked at her eyes.”

 “Hooks and eyes, surely,” drawled Mrs. Mallowe.

 “Don't be clever, Polly. You make my head ache. And round this hayrick
      stood a crowd of men—a positive crowd!”

 “Perhaps they also expected”—

 “Polly, don't be Rabelaisian!”

 Mrs. Mallowe curled herself up comfortably on the sofa, and turned her
      attention to the sweets. She and Mrs. Hauksbee shared the same house at
      Simla; and these things befell two seasons after the matter of Otis Yeere,
      which has been already recorded.

 Mrs. Hauksbee stepped into the veranda and looked down upon the Mall, her
      forehead puckered with thought.

 “Hah!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, shortly. “Indeed!”

 “What is it?” said Mrs. Mallowe, sleepily.

 “That dowd and The Dancing Master—to whom I object.”

 “Why to The Dancing Master? He is a middle-aged gentleman, of reprobate
      and romantic tendencies, and tries to be a friend of mine.”

 “Then make up your mind to lose him. Dowds cling by nature, and I should
      imagine that this animal—how terrible her bonnet looks from above!—is
      specially clingsome.”

 “She is welcome to The Dancing Master so far as I am concerned. I never
      could take an interest in a monotonous liar. The frustrated aim of his
      life is to persuade people that he is a bachelor.”

 “0—oh! I think I've met that sort of man before. And isn't he?”

 “No. He confided that to me a few days ago. Ugh! Some men ought to Be
      killed.”

 “What happened then?”

 “He posed as the horror of horrors—a misunderstood man. Heaven knows
      the femme incomprise is sad enough and had enough—but the other
      thing!”

 “And so fat too! I should have laughed in his face. Men seldom confide in
      me. How is it they come to you?”

 “For the sake of impressing me with their careers in the past. Protect me
      from men with confidences!”

 “And yet you encourage them?”

 “What can I do? They talk. I listen, and they vow that I am sympathetic. I
      know I always profess astonishment even when the plot is—of the most
      old possible.”

 “Yes. Men are so unblushingly explicit if they are once allowed to talk,
      whereas women's confidences are full of reservations and fibs, except”—

 “When they go mad and babble of the Unutterabilities after a week's
      acquaintance. Really, if you come to consider, we know a great deal more
      of men than of our own sex.”

 “And the extraordinary thing is that men will never believe it. They say
      we are trying to hide something.”

 “They are generally doing that on their own account. Alas! These
      chocolates pall upon me, and I haven't eaten more than a dozen. I think I
      shall go to sleep.”

 “Then you'll get fat dear. If you took more exercise and a more
      intelligent interest in your neighbors you would—”

 “Be as much loved as Mrs. Hauksbee. You're a darling in many ways and I
      like you—you are not a woman's woman—but why do you trouble
      yourself about mere human beings?”

 “Because in the absence of angels, who I am sure would be horribly dull,
      men and women are the most fascinating things in the whole wide world,
      lazy one. I am interested in The Dowd—I am interested in The Dancing
      Master—I am interested in the Hawley Boy—and I am interested
      in you.”

 “Why couple me with the Hawley Boy? He is your property.”

 “Yes, and in his own guileless speech, I'm making a good thing out of him.
      When he is slightly more reformed, and has passed his Higher Standard, or
      whatever the authorities think fit to exact from him, I shall select a
      pretty little girl, the Holt girl, I think, and”—here she waved her
      hands airily—“'whom Mrs. Hauksbee hath joined together let no man
      put asunder.' That's all.”

 “And when you have yoked May Holt with the most notorious detrimental in
      Simla, and earned the undying hatred of Mamma Holt, what will you do with
      me, Dispenser of the Destinies of the Universe?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee dropped into a low chair in front of the fire, and, chin in
      band, gazed long and steadfastly at Mrs. Mallowe.

 “I do not know,” she said, shaking her head, “what I shall do with you,
      dear. It's obviously impossible to marry you to some one else—your
      husband would object and the experiment might not be successful after all.
      I think I shall begin by preventing you from—what is it?—'sleeping
      on ale-house benches and snoring in the sun.'”

 “Don't! I don't like your quotations. They are so rude. Go to the Library
      and bring me new books.”

 “While you sleep? No! If you don't come with me, I shall spread your
      newest frock on my 'rickshaw-bow, and when any one asks me what I am
      doing, I shall say that I am going to Phelps's to get it let out. I shall
      take care that Mrs. MacNamara sees me. Put your things on, there's a good
      girl.”

 Mrs. Mallowe groaned and obeyed, and the two went off to the Library,
      where they found Mrs. Delville and the man who went by the nickname of The
      Dancing Master. By that time Mrs Mallowe was awake and eloquent.

 “That is the Creature!” said Mrs Hauksbee, with the air of one pointing
      out a slug in the road.

 “No,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “The man is the Creature. Ugh! Good-evening, Mr.
      Bent. I thought you were coming to tea this evening.”

 “Surely it was for tomorrow, was it not?” answered The Dancing Master. “I
      understood... I fancied... I'm so sorry... How very unfortunate!...”

 But Mrs. Mallowe had passed on.

 “For the practiced equivocator you said he was,” murmured Mrs. Hauksbee,
      “he strikes me as a failure. Now wherefore should he have preferred a walk
      with The Dowd to tea with us? Elective affinities, I suppose—both
      grubby. Polly, I'd never forgive that woman as long as the world rolls.”

 “I forgive every woman everything,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “He will be a
      sufficient punishment for her. What a common voice she has!”

 Mrs. Delville's voice was not pretty, her carriage was even less lovely,
      and her raiment was strikingly neglected. All these things Mrs. Mallowe
      noticed over the top of a magazine.

 “Now what is there in her?” said Mrs. Hauksbee. “Do you see what I meant
      about the clothes falling off? If I were a man I would perish sooner than
      be seen with that rag-bag. And yet, she has good eyes, but—oh!”

 “What is it?”

 “She doesn't know how to use them! On my Honor, she does not. Look! Oh
      look! Untidiness I can endure, but ignorance never! The woman's a fool.”

 “H'sh! She'll hear you.”

 “All the women in Simla are fools. She'll think I mean some one else. Now
      she's going out. What a thoroughly objectionable couple she and The
      Dancing Master make! Which reminds me. Do you suppose they'll ever dance
      together?”

 “Wait and see. I don't envy her the conversation of The Dancing Master—loathly
      man. His wife ought to be up here before long.”

 “Do you know anything about him?”

 “Only what he told me. It may be all a fiction. He married a girl bred in
      the country, I think, and, being an honorable, chivalrous soul, told me
      that he repented his bargain and sent her to her mother as often as
      possible—a person who has lived in the Doon since the memory of man
      and goes to Mussoorie when other people go Home. The wife is with her at
      present. So he says.”

 'Babies?'

 “One only, but he talks of his wife in a revolting way. I hated him for
      it. He thought he was being epigrammatic and brilliant.”

 “That is a vice peculiar to men. I dislike him because he is generally in
      the wake of some girl, disappointing the Eligibles. He will persecute May
      Holt no more, unless I am much mistaken.”

 “No. I think Mrs. Delville may occupy his attention for a while.”

 “Do you suppose she knows that he is the head of a family?”

 “Not from his lips. He swore me to eternal secrecy. Wherefore I tell you.
      Don't you know that type of man?”

 “Not intimately, thank goodness! As a general rule, when a man begins to
      abuse his wife to me, I find that the Lord gives me wherewith to answer
      him according to his folly; and we part with a coolness between us. I
      laugh.”

 “I'm different. I've no sense of humor.”

 “Cultivate it, then. It has been my mainstay for more years than I care to
      think about. A well-educated sense of Humor will save a woman when
      Religion, Training, and Home influences fail; and we may all need
      salvation sometimes.”

 “Do you suppose that the Delville woman has humor?”

 “Her dress betrays her. How can a Thing who wears her supple'ment under
      her left arm have any notion of the fitness of things—much less
      their folly? If she discards The Dancing Master after having once seen him
      dance, I may respect her, Otherwise—

 “But are we not both assuming a great deal too much, dear? You saw the
      woman at Peliti's—half an hour later you saw her walking with The
      Dancing Master—an hour later you met her here at the Library.”

 “Still with The Dancing Master, remember.”

 “Still with The Dancing Master, I admit, but why on the strength of that
      should you imagine”—

 “I imagine nothing. I have no imagination. I am only convinced that The
      Dancing Master is attracted to The Dowd because he is objectionable in
      every way and she in every other. If I know the man as you have described
      him, he holds his wife in slavery at present.”

 “She is twenty years younger than he.”

 “Poor wretch! And, in the end, after he has posed and swaggered and lied—he
      has a mouth under that ragged moustache simply made for lies—he will
      be rewarded according to his merits.”

 “I wonder what those really are,” said Mrs. Mallowe.

 But Mrs. Hauksbee, her face close to the shelf of the new books, was
      humming softly: “What shall he have who killed the Deer!” She was a lady
      of unfettered speech.

 One month later, she announced her intention of calling upon Mrs.
      Delville. Both Mrs. Hauksbee and Mrs. Mallowe were in morning wrappers,
      and there was a great peace in the land.

 “I should go as I was,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “It would be a delicate
      compliment to her style.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee studied herself in the glass.

 “Assuming for a moment that she ever darkened these doors, I should put on
      this robe, after all the others, to show her what a morning wrapper ought
      to be. It might enliven her. As it is, I shall go in the dove-colored—sweet
      emblem of youth and innocence—and shall put on my new gloves.”

 “If you really are going, dirty tan would be too good; and you know that
      dove—color spots with the rain.”

 “I care not. I may make her envious. At least I shall try, though one
      cannot expect very much from a woman who puts a lace tucker into her
      habit.”

 “Just Heavens! When did she do that?”

 “Yesterday—riding with The Dancing Master. I met them at the back of
      Jakko, and the rain had made the lace lie down. To complete the effect,
      she was wearing an unclean terai with the elastic under her chin. I felt
      almost too well content to take the trouble to despise her.”

 “The Hawley Boy was riding with you. What did he think?”

 “Does a boy ever notice these things? Should I like him if he did? He
      stared in the rudest way, and just when I thought he had seen the elastic,
      he said, 'There's something very taking about that face.' I rebuked him on
      the spot. I don't approve of boys being taken by faces.”

 “Other than your own. I shouldn't be in the least surprised if the Hawley
      Boy immediately went to call.”

 “I forbade him. Let her be satisfied with The Dancing Master, and his wife
      when she comes up. I'm rather curious to see Mrs. Bent and the Delville
      woman together.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee departed and, at the end of an hour, returned slightly
      flushed.

 “There is no limit to the treachery of youth! I ordered the Hawley Boy, as
      he valued my patronage, not to call. The first person I stumble over—literally
      stumble over—in her poky, dark, little drawing-room is, of course,
      the Hawley Boy. She kept us waiting ten minutes, and then emerged as
      though he had been tipped out of the dirty-clothes basket. You know my
      way, dear, when I am all put out. I was Superior, crrrushingly Superior!
      'Lifted my eyes to Heaven, and had heard of nothing—'dropped my eyes
      on the carpet and 'really didn't know'—'played with my cardcase and
      'supposed so.' The Hawley Boy giggled like a girl, and I had to freeze him
      with scowls between the sentences.”

 “And she?”

 “She sat in a heap on the edge of a couch, and managed to convey the
      impression that she was suffering from stomach-ache, at the very least. It
      was all I could do not to ask after her symptoms. When I rose she grunted
      just like a buffalo in the water—too lazy to move.”

 “Are you certain?”—

 “Am I blind, Polly? Laziness, sheer laziness, nothing else—or her
      garments were only constructed for sitting down in. I stayed for a quarter
      of an hour trying to penetrate the gloom, to guess what her surroundings
      were like, while she stuck out her tongue.”

 “Lu—cy!”

 “Well—I'll withdraw the tongue, though I'm sure if she didn't do it
      when I was in the room, she did the minute I was outside. At any rate, she
      lay in a lump and grunted. Ask the Hawley Boy, dear. I believe the grunts
      were meant for sentences, but she spoke so indistinctly that I can't swear
      to it.”

 “You are incorrigible, simply.”

 “I am not! Treat me civilly, give me peace with honor, don't put the only
      available seat facing the window, and a child may eat jam in my lap before
      Church. But I resent being grunted at. Wouldn't you? Do you suppose that
      she communicates her views on life and love to The Dancing Master in a set
      of modulated 'Grmphs'?”

 “You attach too much importance to The Dancing Master.”

 “He came as we went, and The Dowd grew almost cordial at the sight of him.
      He smiled greasily, and moved about that darkened dog-kennel in a
      suspiciously familiar way.”

 “Don't be uncharitable. Any sin but that I'll forgive.”

 “Listen to the voice of History. I am only describing what I saw. He
      entered, the heap on the sofa revived slightly, and the Hawley Boy and I
      came away together. He is disillusioned, but I felt it my duty to lecture
      him severely for going there. And that's all.”

 “Now for Pity's sake leave the wretched creature and The Dancing Master
      alone. They never did you any harm.”

 “No harm? To dress as an example and a stumbling-block for half Simla, and
      then to find this Person who is dressed by the hand of God—not that
      I wish to disparage Him for a moment, but you know the tikka-dhurzie way
      He attires those lilies of the field—this Person draws the eyes of
      men—and some of them nice men? It's almost enough to make one
      discard clothing. I told the Hawley Boy so.”

 “And what did that sweet youth do?”

 “Turned shell-pink and looked across the far blue hills like a distressed
      cherub. Am I talking wildly, Polly? Let me say my say, and I shall be
      calm. Otherwise I may go abroad and disturb Simla with a few original
      reflections. Excepting always your own sweet self, there isn't a single
      woman in the land who understands me when I am—what's the word?”

 “Tete-Fele'e,” suggested Mrs. Mallowe.

 “Exactly! And now let us have tiffin. The demands of Society are
      exhausting, and as Mrs. Delville says”—Here Mrs. Hauksbee, to the
      horror of the khitmatgars, lapsed into a series of grunts, while Mrs.
      Mallowe stared in lazy surprise.

 “'God gie us a gude conceit of oorselves,'” said Mrs. Hauksbee, piously,
      returning to her natural speech. “Now, in any other woman that would have
      been vulgar. I am consumed with curiosity to see Mrs. Bent. I expect
      complications.”

 “Woman of one idea,” said Mrs. Mallowe, shortly; “all complications are as
      old as the hills! I have lived through or near all—all—ALL!”

 “And yet do not understand that men and women never behave twice alike. I
      am old who was young—if ever I put my head in your lap, you dear,
      big sceptic, you will learn that my parting is gauze—but never, no
      never have I lost my interest in men and women. Polly, I shall see this
      business Out to the bitter end.”

 “I am going to sleep,” said Mrs. Mallowe, calmly. “I never interfere with
      men or women unless I am compelled,” and she retired with dignity to her
      own room.

 Mrs. Hauksbee's curiosity was not long left ungratified, for Mrs. Bent
      came up to Simla a few days after the conversation faithfully reported
      above, and pervaded the Mall by her husband's side.

 “Behold!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, thoughtfully rubbing her nose. “That is the
      last link of the chain, if we omit the husband of the Delville, whoever he
      may be. Let me consider. The Bents and the Delvilles inhabit the same
      hotel; and the Delville is detested by the Waddy—do you know the
      Waddy?—who is almost as big a dowd. The Waddy also abominates the
      male Bent, for which, if her other sins do not weigh too heavily, she will
      eventually be caught up to Heaven.”

 “Don't be irreverent,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “I like Mrs. Bent's face.”

 “I am discussing the Waddy,” returned Mrs. Hauksbee, loftily. “The Waddy
      will take the female Bent apart, after having borrowed—yes!—everything
      that she can, from hairpins to babies' bottles. Such, my dear, is life in
      a hotel. The Waddy will tell the female Bent facts and fictions about The
      Dancing Master and The Dowd.”

 “Lucy, I should like you better if you were not always looking into
      people's back bedrooms.”

 “Anybody can look into their front drawing-rooms; and remember whatever I
      do, and whatever I look, I never talk—as the Waddy will. Let us hope
      that The Dancing Master's greasy smile and manner of the pedagogue will
      soften the heart of that cow, his wife. If mouths speak truth, I should
      think that little Mrs. Bent could get very angry on occasion.

 “But what reason has she for being angry?”

 “What reason! The Dancing Master in himself is a reason. How does it go?
      'If in his life some trivial errors fall, Look in his face and you'll
      believe them all.' I am prepared to credit any evil of The Dancing Master,
      because I hate him so. And The Dowd is so disgustingly badly dressed”—

 “That she, too, is capable of every iniquity? I always prefer to believe
      the best of everybody. It saves so much trouble.”

 “Very good. I prefer to believe the worst. It saves useless expenditure of
      sympathy. And you may be quite certain that the Waddy believes with me.”

 Mrs. Mallowe sighed and made no answer.

 The conversation was holden after dinner while Mrs. Hauksbee was dressing
      for a dance.

 “I am too tired to go,” pleaded Mrs. Mallowe, and Mrs. Hauksbee left her
      in peace till two in the morning, when she was aware of emphatic knocking
      at her door.

 “Don't be very angry, dear,” said Mrs. Hauksbee. “My idiot of an ayah has
      gone home, and, as I hope to sleep tonight, there isn't a soul in the
      place to unlace me.”

 “Oh, this is too bad!” said Mrs. Mallowe sulkily.

 “'Can't help it. I'm a lone, lorn grass-widow, dear, but I will not sleep
      in my stays. And such news, too! Oh, do unlace me, there's a darling! The
      Dowd—The Dancing Master—I and the Hawley Boy—You know
      the North veranda?”

 “How can I do anything if you spin round like this?” protested Mrs.
      Mallowe, fumbling with the knot of the laces.

 “Oh, I forget. I must tell my tale without the aid of your eyes. Do you
      know you've lovely eyes, dear? Well to begin with, I took the Hawley Boy
      to a kala juggah.”

 “Did he want much taking?”

 “Lots! There was an arrangement of loose-boxes in kanats, and she was in
      the next one talking to him.”

 “Which? How? Explain.”

 “You know what I mean—The Dowd and The Dancing Master. We could hear
      every word and we listened shamelessly—'specially the Hawley Boy.
      Polly, I quite love that woman!”

 “This is interesting. There! Now turn round. What happened?”

 “One moment. Ah-h! Blessed relief. I've been looking forward to taking
      them off for the last half-hour—which is ominous at my time of life.
      But, as I was saying, we listened and heard The Dowd drawl worse than
      ever. She drops her final g's like a barmaid or a blue-blooded
      Aide-de-Camp. 'Look he-ere, you're gettin' too fond 0' me,' she said, and
      The Dancing Master owned it was so in language that nearly made me ill.
      The Dowd reflected for a while. Then we heard her say, 'Look he-ere,
      Mister Bent, why are you such an awful liar?' I nearly exploded while The
      Dancing Master denied the charge. It seems that he never told her he was a
      married man.”

 “I said he wouldn't.”

 “And she had taken this to heart, on personal grounds, I suppose. She
      drawled along for five minutes, reproaching him with his perfidy and grew
      quite motherly. 'Now you've got a nice little wife of your own—you
      have,' she said. 'She's ten times too good for a fat old man like you,
      and, look he-ere, you never told me a word about her, and I've been
      thinkin' about it a good deal, and I think you're a liar.' Wasn't that
      delicious? The Dancing Master maundered and raved till the Hawley Boy
      suggested that he should burst in and beat him. His voice runs up into an
      impassioned squeak when he is afraid. The Dowd must be an extraordinary
      woman. She explained that had he been a bachelor she might not have
      objected to his devotion; but since he was a married man and the father of
      a very nice baby, she considered him a hypocrite, and this she repeated
      twice. She wound up her drawl with: 'An I'm tellin' you this because your
      wife is angry with me, an' I hate quarrellin' with any other woman, an' I
      like your wife. You know how you have behaved for the last six weeks. You
      shouldn't have done it, indeed you shouldn't. You're too old an' fat.'
      Can't you imagine how The Dancing Master would wince at that! 'Now go
      away,' she said. 'I don't want to tell you what I think of you, because I
      think you are not nice. I'll stay he-ere till the next dance begins.' Did
      you think that the creature had so much in her?”

 “I never studied her as closely as you did. It sounds unnatural. What
      happened?”

 “The Dancing Master attempted blandishment, reproof, jocularity, and the
      style of the Lord High Warden, and I had almost to pinch the Hawley Boy to
      make him keep quiet. She grunted at the end of each sentence and, in the
      end he went away swearing to himself, quite like a man in a novel. He
      looked more objectionable than ever. I laughed. I love that woman—in
      spite of her clothes. And now I'm going to bed. What do you think of it?”

 “I sha'n't begin to think till the morning,” said Mrs. Mallowe, yawning
      “Perhaps she spoke the truth. They do fly into it by accident sometimes.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee's account of her eavesdropping was an ornate one but
      truthful in the main. For reasons best known to herself, Mrs. “Shady”
       Delville had turned upon Mr Bent and rent him limb from limb, casting him
      away limp and disconcerted ere she withdrew the light of her eyes from him
      permanently. Being a man of resource, and anything but pleased in that he
      had been called both old and fat, he gave Mrs. Bent to understand that he
      had, during her absence in the Doon, been the victim of unceasing
      persecution at the hands of Mrs. Delville, and he told the tale so often
      and with such eloquence that he ended in believing it, while his wife
      marvelled at the manners and customs of “some women.” When the situation
      showed signs of languishing, Mrs. Waddy was always on hand to wake the
      smouldering fires of suspicion in Mrs. Bent's bosom and to contribute
      generally to the peace and comfort of the hotel. Mr. Bent's life was not a
      happy one, for if Mrs. Waddy's story were true, he was, argued his wife,
      untrustworthy to the last degree. If his own statement was true, his
      charms of manner and conversation were so great that he needed constant
      surveillance. And he received it, till he repented genuinely of his
      marriage and neglected his personal appearance. Mrs. Delville alone in the
      hotel was unchanged. She removed her chair some six paces toward the head
      of the table, and occasionally in the twilight ventured on timid overtures
      of friendship to Mrs. Bent, which were repulsed.

 “She does it for my sake,” hinted the Virtuous Bent.

 “A dangerous and designing woman,” purred Mrs. Waddy.

 Worst of all, every other hotel in Simla was full!

  “Polly, are you afraid of diphtheria?”

 “Of nothing in the world except smallpox. Diphtheria kills, but it doesn't
      disfigure. Why do you ask?”

 “Because the Bent baby has got it, and the whole hotel is upside down in
      consequence. The Waddy has 'set her five young on the rail' and fled. The
      Dancing Master fears for his precious throat, and that miserable little
      woman, his wife, has no notion of what ought to be done. She wanted to put
      it into a mustard bath—for croup!”

 “Where did you learn all this?”

 “Just now, on the Mall. Dr. Howlen told me. The Manager of the hotel is
      abusing the Bents, and the Bents are abusing the manager. They are a
      feckless couple.”

 “Well. What's on your mind?”

 “This; and I know it's a grave thing to ask. Would you seriously object to
      my bringing the child over here, with its mother?”

 “On the most strict understanding that we see nothing of The Dancing
      Master.”

 “He will be only too glad to stay away. Polly, you're an angel. The woman
      really is at her wits' end.”

 “And you know nothing about her, careless, and would hold her up to public
      scorn if it gave you a minute's amusement. Therefore you risk your life
      for the sake of her brat. No, Loo, I'm not the angel. I shall keep to my
      rooms and avoid her. But do as you please—only tell me why you do
      it.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee's eyes softened; she looked out of the window and back into
      Mrs. Mallowe's face.

 “I don't know,” said Mrs. Hauksbee, simply.

 “You dear!”

 “Polly!—and for aught you knew you might have taken my fringe off.
      Never do that again without warning. Now we'll get the rooms ready. I
      don't suppose I shall be allowed to circulate in society for a month.”

 “And I also. Thank goodness I shall at last get all the sleep I want.”

 Much to Mrs. Bent's surprise she and the baby were brought over to the
      house almost before she knew where she was. Bent was devoutly and
      undisguisedly thankful, for he was afraid of the infection, and also hoped
      that a few weeks in the hotel alone with Mrs. Delville might lead to
      explanations. Mrs. Bent had thrown her jealousy to the winds in her fear
      for her child's life.

 “We can give you good milk,” said Mrs. Hauksbee to her, “and our house is
      much nearer to the Doctor's than the hotel, and you won't feel as though
      you were living in a hostile camp Where is the dear Mrs. Waddy? She seemed
      to be a particular friend of yours.”

 “They've all left me,” said Mrs. Bent, bitterly. “Mrs. Waddy went first.
      She said I ought to be ashamed of myself for introducing diseases there,
      and I am sure it wasn't my fault that little Dora”—

 “How nice!” cooed Mrs. Hauksbee. “The Waddy is an infectious disease
      herself—'more quickly caught than the plague and the taker runs
      presently mad.' I lived next door to her at the Elysium, three years ago.
      Now see, you won't give us the least trouble, and I've ornamented all the
      house with sheets soaked in carbolic. It smells comforting, doesn't it?
      Remember I'm always in call, and my ayah's at your service when yours goes
      to her meals and—and... if you cry I'll never forgive you.”

 Dora Bent occupied her mother's unprofitable attention through the day and
      the night. The Doctor called thrice in the twenty-four hours, and the
      house reeked with the smell of the Condy's Fluid, chlorine-water, and
      carbolic acid washes. Mrs. Mallowe kept to her own rooms—she
      considered that she had made sufficient concessions in the cause of
      humanity—and Mrs. Hauksbee was more esteemed by the Doctor as a help
      in the sick-room than the half-distraught mother.

 “I know nothing of illness,” said Mrs. Hauksbee to the Doctor. “Only tell
      me what to do, and I'll do it.”

 “Keep that crazy woman from kissing the child, and let her have as little
      to do with the nursing as you possibly can,” said the Doctor; “I'd turn
      her out of the sick-room, but that I honestly believe she'd die of
      anxiety. She is less than no good, and I depend on you and the ayahs,
      remember.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee accepted the responsibility, though it painted olive hollows
      under her eyes and forced her to her oldest dresses. Mrs. Bent clung to
      her with more than childlike faith.

 “I know you'll, make Dora well, won't you?” she said at least twenty times
      a day; and twenty times a day Mrs. Hauksbee answered valiantly, “Of course
      I will.”

 But Dora did not improve, and the Doctor seemed to be always in the house.

 “There's some danger of the thing taking a bad turn,” he said; “I'll come
      over between three and four in the morning tomorrow.”

 “Good gracious!” said Mrs. Hauksbee. “He never told me what the turn would
      be! My education has been horribly neglected; and I have only this foolish
      mother-woman to fall back upon.”

 The night wore through slowly, and Mrs. Hauksbee dozed in a chair by the
      fire. There was a dance at the Viceregal Lodge, and she dreamed of it till
      she was aware of Mrs. Bent's anxious eyes staring into her own.

 “Wake up! Wake up! Do something!” cried Mrs. Bent, piteously. “Dora's
      choking to death! Do you mean to let her die?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee jumped to her feet and bent over the bed. The child was
      fighting for breath, while the mother wrung her hands despairing.

 “Oh, what can I do? What can you do? She won't stay still! I can't hold
      her. Why didn't the Doctor say this was coming?” screamed Mrs. Bent.
      “Won't you help me? She's dying!”

 “I-I've never seen a child die before!” stammered Mrs. Hauksbee, feebly,
      and then—let none blame her weakness after the strain of long
      watching—she broke down, and covered her face with her hands. The
      ayahs on the threshold snored peacefully.

 There was a rattle of 'rickshaw wheels below, the clash of an opening
      door, a heavy step on the stairs, and Mrs. Delville entered to find Mrs.
      Bent screaming for the Doctor as she ran round the room. Mrs. Hauksbee,
      her hands to her ears, and her face buried in the chintz of a chair, was
      quivering with pain at each cry from the bed, and murmuring, “Thank God, I
      never bore a child! Oh! thank God, I never bore a child!”

 Mrs. Delville looked at the bed for an instant, took Mrs. Bent by the
      shoulders, and said, quietly, “Get me some caustic. Be quick.”

 The mother obeyed mechanically. Mrs. Delville had thrown herself down by
      the side of the child and was opening its mouth.

 “Oh, you're killing her!” cried Mrs. Bent. “Where's the Doctor! Leave her
      alone!”

 Mrs. Delville made no reply for a minute, but busied herself with the
      child.

 “Now the caustic, and hold a lamp behind my shoulder. Will you do as you
      are told? The acid-bottle, if you don't know what I mean,” she said.

 A second time Mrs. Delville bent over the child. Mrs. Hauksbee, her face
      still hidden, sobbed and shivered. One of the ayahs staggered sleepily
      into the room, yawning: “Doctor Sahib come.”

 Mrs. Delville turned her head.

 “You're only just in time,” she said. “It was chokin' her when I came in,
      an' I've burned it.”

 “There was no sign of the membrane getting to the air-passages after the
      last steaming. It was the general weakness, I feared,” said the Doctor
      half to himself, and he whispered as he looked. “You've done what I should
      have been afraid to do without consultation.”

 “She was dyin',” said Mrs. Delville, under her breath. “Can you do
      anythin'? What a mercy it was I went to the dance!”

 Mrs. Hauksbee raised her head.

 “Is it all over?” she gasped. “I'm useless—I'm worse than useless!
      What are you doing here?”

 She stared at Mrs. Delville, and Mrs. Bent, realizing for the first time
      who was the Goddess from the Machine, stared also.

 Then Mrs. Delville made explanation, putting on a dirty long glove and
      smoothing a crumpled and ill-fitting ball-dress.

 “I was at the dance, an' the Doctor was tellin' me about your baby bein'
      so ill. So I came away early, an' your door was open, an' I-I lost my boy
      this way six months ago, an' I've been tryin' to forget it ever since, an'
      I-I-I-am very sorry for intrudin' an' anythin' that has happened.”

 Mrs. Bent was putting out the Doctor's eye with a lamp as he stooped over
      Dora.

 “Take it away,” said the Doctor. “I think the child will do, thanks to
      you, Mrs. Delville. I should have come too late, but, I assure you”—he
      was addressing himself to Mrs. Delville—“I had not the faintest
      reason to expect this. The membrane must have grown like a mushroom. Will
      one of you help me, please?”

 He had reason for the last sentence. Mrs. Hauksbee had thrown herself into
      Mrs. Delville's arms, where she was weeping bitterly, and Mrs. Bent was
      unpicturesquely mixed up with both, while from the tangle came the sound
      of many sobs and much promiscuous kissing.

 “Good gracious! I've spoilt all your beautiful roses!” said Mrs. Hauksbee,
      lifting her head from the lump of crushed gum and calico atrocities on
      Mrs. Delville's shoulder and hurrying to the Doctor.

 Mrs. Delville picked up her shawl, and slouched out of the room, mopping
      her eyes with the glove that she had not put on.

 “I always said she was more than a woman,” sobbed Mrs. Hauksbee,
      hysterically, “and that proves it!”

  Six weeks later, Mrs. Bent and Dora had returned to the hotel. Mrs.
      Hauksbee had come out of the Valley of Humiliation, had ceased to reproach
      herself for her collapse in an hour of need, and was even beginning to
      direct the affairs of the world as before.

 “So nobody died, and everything went off as it should, and I kissed The
      Dowd, Polly. I feel so old. Does it show in my face?”

 “Kisses don't as a rule, do they? Of course you know what the result of
      The Dowd's providential arrival has been.”

 “They ought to build her a statue—only no sculptor dare copy those
      skirts.”

 “Ah!” said Mrs. Mallowe, quietly. “She has found another reward. The
      Dancing Master has been smirking through Simla giving every one to
      understand that she came because of her undying love for him—for him—to
      save his child, and all Simla naturally believes this.”

 “But Mrs. Bent”—

 “Mrs. Bent believes it more than any one else. She won't speak to The Dowd
      now. Isn't The Dancing Master an angel?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee lifted up her voice and raged till bedtime. The doors of the
      two rooms stood open.

 “Polly,” said a voice from the darkness, “what did that
      American-heiress-globe-trotter-girl say last season when she was tipped
      out of her 'rickshaw turning a corner? Some absurd adjective that made the
      man who picked her up explode.”

 “'Paltry,'” said Mrs. Mallowe. “Through her nose—like this—'Ha-ow
      pahltry!'”

 “Exactly,” said the voice. “Ha-ow pahltry it all is!”

 “Which?”

 “Everything. Babies, Diphtheria, Mrs. Bent and The Dancing Master, I
      whooping in a chair, and The Dowd dropping in from the clouds. I wonder
      what the motive was—all the motives.”

 “Um!”

 “What do you think?”

 “Don't ask me. She was a woman. Go to sleep.”