A TRESS OF HAIR

 The walls of the cell were bare and white washed. A narrow grated window,
      placed so high that one could not reach it, lighted this sinister little
      room. The mad inmate, seated on a straw chair, looked at us with a fixed,
      vacant and haunted expression. He was very thin, with hollow cheeks and
      hair almost white, which one guessed might have turned gray in a few
      months. His clothes appeared to be too large for his shrunken limbs, his
      sunken chest and empty paunch. One felt that this man's mind was
      destroyed, eaten by his thoughts, by one thought, just as a fruit is eaten
      by a worm. His craze, his idea was there in his brain, insistent,
      harassing, destructive. It wasted his frame little by little. It—the
      invisible, impalpable, intangible, immaterial idea—was mining his
      health, drinking his blood, snuffing out his life.

 What a mystery was this man, being killed by an ideal! He aroused sorrow,
      fear and pity, this madman. What strange, tremendous and deadly thoughts
      dwelt within this forehead which they creased with deep wrinkles which
      were never still?

 “He has terrible attacks of rage,” said the doctor to me.
      “His is one of the most peculiar cases I have ever seen. He has
      seizures of erotic and macaberesque madness. He is a sort of necrophile.
      He has kept a journal in which he sets forth his disease with the utmost
      clearness. In it you can, as it were, put your finger on it. If it would
      interest you, you may go over this document.”

 I followed the doctor into his office, where he handed me this wretched
      man's diary, saying: “Read it and tell me what you think of it.”
      I read as follows:

 “Until the age of thirty-two I lived peacefully, without knowing
      love. Life appeared very simple, very pleasant and very easy. I was rich.
      I enjoyed so many things that I had no passion for anything in particular.
      It was good to be alive! I awoke happy every morning and did those things
      that pleased me during the day and went to bed at night contented, in the
      expectation of a peaceful tomorrow and a future without anxiety.

 “I had had a few flirtations without my heart being touched by any
      true passion or wounded by any of the sensations of true love. It is good
      to live like that. It is better to love, but it is terrible. And yet those
      who love in the ordinary way must experience ardent happiness, though less
      than mine possibly, for love came to me in a remarkable manner.

 “As I was wealthy, I bought all kinds of old furniture and old
      curiosities, and I often thought of the unknown hands that had touched
      these objects, of the eyes that had admired them, of the hearts that had
      loved them; for one does love things! I sometimes remained hours and hours
      looking at a little watch of the last century. It was so tiny, so pretty
      with its enamel and gold chasing. And it kept time as on the day when a
      woman first bought it, enraptured at owning this dainty trinket. It had
      not ceased to vibrate, to live its mechanical life, and it had kept up its
      regular tick-tock since the last century. Who had first worn it on her
      bosom amid the warmth of her clothing, the heart of the watch beating
      beside the heart of the woman? What hand had held it in its warm fingers,
      had turned it over and then wiped the enamelled shepherds on the case to
      remove the slight moisture from her fingers? What eyes had watched the
      hands on its ornamental face for the expected, the beloved, the sacred
      hour?

 “How I wished I had known her, seen her, the woman who had selected
      this exquisite and rare object! She is dead! I am possessed with a longing
      for women of former days. I love, from afar, all those who have loved. The
      story of those dead and gone loves fills my heart with regrets. Oh, the
      beauty, the smiles, the youthful caresses, the hopes! Should not all that
      be eternal?

 “How I have wept whole nights-thinking of those poor women of former
      days, so beautiful, so loving, so sweet, whose arms were extended in an
      embrace, and who now are dead! A kiss is immortal! It goes from lips to
      lips, from century to century, from age to age. Men receive them, give
      them and die.

 “The past attracts me, the present terrifies me because the future
      means death. I regret all that has gone by. I mourn all who have lived; I
      should like to check time, to stop the clock. But time goes, it goes, it
      passes, it takes from me each second a little of myself for the
      annihilation of to-morrow. And I shall never live again.

 “Farewell, ye women of yesterday. I love you!

 “But I am not to be pitied. I found her, the one I was waiting for,
      and through her I enjoyed inestimable pleasure.

 “I was sauntering in Paris on a bright, sunny morning, with a happy
      heart and a high step, looking in at the shop windows with the vague
      interest of an idler. All at once I noticed in the shop of a dealer in
      antiques a piece of Italian furniture of the seventeenth century. It was
      very handsome, very rare. I set it down as being the work of a Venetian
      artist named Vitelli, who was celebrated in his day.

 “I went on my way.

 “Why did the remembrance of that piece of furniture haunt me with
      such insistence that I retraced my steps? I again stopped before the shop,
      in order to take another look at it, and I felt that it tempted me.

 “What a singular thing temptation is! One gazes at an object, and,
      little by little, it charms you, it disturbs you, it fills your thoughts
      as a woman's face might do. The enchantment of it penetrates your being, a
      strange enchantment of form, color and appearance of an inanimate object.
      And one loves it, one desires it, one wishes to have it. A longing to own
      it takes possession of you, gently at first, as though it were timid, but
      growing, becoming intense, irresistible.

 “And the dealers seem to guess, from your ardent gaze, your secret
      and increasing longing.

 “I bought this piece of furniture and had it sent home at once. I
      placed it in my room.

 “Oh, I am sorry for those who do not know the honeymoon of the
      collector with the antique he has just purchased. One looks at it tenderly
      and passes one's hand over it as if it were human flesh; one comes back to
      it every moment, one is always thinking of it, wherever one goes, whatever
      one does. The dear recollection of it pursues you in the street, in
      society, everywhere; and when you return home at night, before taking off
      your gloves or your hat; you go and look at it with the tenderness of a
      lover.

 “Truly, for eight days I worshipped this piece of furniture. I
      opened its doors and pulled out the drawers every few moments. I handled
      it with rapture, with all the intense joy of possession.

 “But one evening I surmised, while I was feeling the thickness of
      one of the panels, that there must be a secret drawer in it: My heart
      began to beat, and I spent the night trying to discover this secret
      cavity.

 “I succeeded on the following day by driving a knife into a slit in
      the wood. A panel slid back and I saw, spread out on a piece of black
      velvet, a magnificent tress of hair.

 “Yes, a woman's hair, an immense coil of fair hair, almost red,
      which must have been cut off close to the head, tied with a golden cord.

 “I stood amazed, trembling, confused. An almost imperceptible
      perfume, so ancient that it seemed to be the spirit of a perfume, issued
      from this mysterious drawer and this remarkable relic.

 “I lifted it gently, almost reverently, and took it out of its
      hiding place. It at once unwound in a golden shower that reached to the
      floor, dense but light; soft and gleaming like the tail of a comet.

 “A strange emotion filled me. What was this? When, how, why had this
      hair been shut up in this drawer? What adventure, what tragedy did this
      souvenir conceal? Who had cut it off? A lover on a day of farewell, a
      husband on a day of revenge, or the one whose head it had graced on the
      day of despair?

 “Was it as she was about to take the veil that they had cast thither
      that love dowry as a pledge to the world of the living? Was it when they
      were going to nail down the coffin of the beautiful young corpse that the
      one who had adored her had cut off her tresses, the only thing that he
      could retain of her, the only living part of her body that would not
      suffer decay, the only thing he could still love, and caress, and kiss in
      his paroxysms of grief?

 “Was it not strange that this tress should have remained as it was
      in life, when not an atom of the body on which it grew was in existence?

 “It fell over my fingers, tickled the skin with a singular caress,
      the caress of a dead woman. It affected me so that I felt as though I
      should weep.

 “I held it in my hands for a long time, then it seemed as if it
      disturbed me, as though something of the soul had remained in it. And I
      put it back on the velvet, rusty from age, and pushed in the drawer,
      closed the doors of the antique cabinet and went out for a walk to
      meditate.

 “I walked along, filled with sadness and also with unrest, that
      unrest that one feels when in love. I felt as though I must have lived
      before, as though I must have known this woman.

 “And Villon's lines came to my mind like a sob:

 Tell me where, and in what place
   Is Flora, the beautiful Roman,
   Hipparchia and Thais
   Who was her cousin-german?

   Echo answers in the breeze
   O'er river and lake that blows,
   Their beauty was above all praise,
   But where are last year's snows?

   The queen, white as lilies,
   Who sang as sing the birds,
   Bertha Broadfoot, Beatrice, Alice,
   Ermengarde, princess of Maine,
   And Joan, the good Lorraine,
   Burned by the English at Rouen,
   Where are they, Virgin Queen?
   And where are last year's snows?

 “When I got home again I felt an irresistible longing to see my
      singular treasure, and I took it out and, as I touched it, I felt a shiver
      go all through me.

 “For some days, however, I was in my ordinary condition, although
      the thought of that tress of hair was always present to my mind.

 “Whenever I came into the house I had to see it and take it in my,
      hands. I turned the key of the cabinet with the same hesitation that one
      opens the door leading to one's beloved, for in my hands and my heart I
      felt a confused, singular, constant sensual longing to plunge my hands in
      the enchanting golden flood of those dead tresses.

 “Then, after I had finished caressing it and had locked the cabinet
      I felt as if it were a living thing, shut up in there, imprisoned; and I
      longed to see it again. I felt again the imperious desire to take it in my
      hands, to touch it, to even feel uncomfortable at the cold, slippery,
      irritating, bewildering contact.

 “I lived thus for a month or two, I forget how long. It obsessed me,
      haunted me. I was happy and tormented by turns, as when one falls in love,
      and after the first vows have been exchanged.

 “I shut myself in the room with it to feel it on my skin, to bury my
      lips in it, to kiss it. I wound it round my face, covered my eyes with the
      golden flood so as to see the day gleam through its gold.

 “I loved it! Yes, I loved it. I could not be without it nor pass an
      hour without looking at it.

 “And I waited—I waited—for what? I do not know—For
      her!

 “One night I woke up suddenly, feeling as though I were not alone in
      my room.

 “I was alone, nevertheless, but I could not go to sleep again, and,
      as I was tossing about feverishly, I got up to look at the golden tress.
      It seemed softer than usual, more life-like. Do the dead come back? I
      almost lost consciousness as I kissed it. I took it back with me to bed
      and pressed it to my lips as if it were my sweetheart.

 “Do the dead come back? She came back. Yes, I saw her; I held her in
      my arms, just as she was in life, tall, fair and round. She came back
      every evening—the dead woman, the beautiful, adorable, mysterious
      unknown.

 “My happiness was so great that I could not conceal it. No lover
      ever tasted such intense, terrible enjoyment. I loved her so well that I
      could not be separated from her. I took her with me always and everywhere.
      I walked about the town with her as if she were my wife, and took her to
      the theatre, always to a private box. But they saw her—they guessed—they
      arrested me. They put me in prison like a criminal. They took her. Oh,
      misery!”

 Here the manuscript stopped. And as I suddenly raised my astonished eyes
      to the doctor a terrific cry, a howl of impotent rage and of exasperated
      longing resounded through the asylum.

 “Listen,” said the doctor. “We have to douse the obscene
      madman with water five times a day. Sergeant Bertrand was the only one who
      was in love with the dead.”

 Filled with astonishment, horror and pity, I stammered out:

 “But—that tress—did it really exist?”

 The doctor rose, opened a cabinet full of phials and instruments and
      tossed over a long tress of fair hair which flew toward me like a golden
      bird.

 I shivered at feeling its soft, light touch on my hands. And I sat there,
      my heart beating with disgust and desire, disgust as at the contact of
      anything accessory to a crime and desire as at the temptation of some
      infamous and mysterious thing.

 The doctor said as he shrugged his shoulders:

 “The mind of man is capable of anything.”