A VAGABOND
    

      He was a journeyman carpenter, a good workman and a steady fellow,
      twenty-seven years old, but, although the eldest son, Jacques Randel had
      been forced to live on his family for two months, owing to the general
      lack of work. He had walked about seeking work for over a month and had
      left his native town, Ville-Avary, in La Manche, because he could find
      nothing to do and would no longer deprive his family of the bread they
      needed themselves, when he was the strongest of them all. His two sisters
      earned but little as charwomen. He went and inquired at the town hall, and
      the mayor's secretary told him that he would find work at the Labor
      Agency, and so he started, well provided with papers and certificates, and
      carrying another pair of shoes, a pair of trousers and a shirt in a blue
      handkerchief at the end of his stick.
    

      And he had walked almost without stopping, day and night, along
      interminable roads, in sun and rain, without ever reaching that mysterious
      country where workmen find work. At first he had the fixed idea that he
      must only work as a carpenter, but at every carpenter's shop where he
      applied he was told that they had just dismissed men on account of work
      being so slack, and, finding himself at the end of his resources, he made
      up his mind to undertake any job that he might come across on the road.
      And so by turns he was a navvy, stableman, stonecutter; he split wood,
      lopped the branches of trees, dug wells, mixed mortar, tied up fagots,
      tended goats on a mountain, and all for a few pence, for he only obtained
      two or three days' work occasionally by offering himself at a shamefully
      low price, in order to tempt the avarice of employers and peasants.
    

      And now for a week he had found nothing, and had no money left, and
      nothing to eat but a piece of bread, thanks to the charity of some women
      from whom he had begged at house doors on the road. It was getting dark,
      and Jacques Randel, jaded, his legs failing him, his stomach empty, and
      with despair in his heart, was walking barefoot on the grass by the side
      of the road, for he was taking care of his last pair of shoes, as the
      other pair had already ceased to exist for a long time. It was a Saturday,
      toward the end of autumn. The heavy gray clouds were being driven rapidly
      through the sky by the gusts of wind which whistled among the trees, and
      one felt that it would rain soon. The country was deserted at that hour on
      the eve of Sunday. Here and there in the fields there rose up stacks of
      wheat straw, like huge yellow mushrooms, and the fields looked bare, as
      they had already been sown for the next year.
    

      Randel was hungry, with the hunger of some wild animal, such a hunger as
      drives wolves to attack men. Worn out and weakened with fatigue, he took
      longer strides, so as not to take so many steps, and with heavy head, the
      blood throbbing in his temples, with red eyes and dry mouth, he grasped
      his stick tightly in his hand, with a longing to strike the first passerby
      who might be going home to supper.
    

      He looked at the sides of the road, imagining he saw potatoes dug up and
      lying on the ground before his eyes; if he had found any he would have
      gathered some dead wood, made a fire in the ditch and have had a capital
      supper off the warm, round vegetables with which he would first of all
      have warmed his cold hands. But it was too late in the year, and he would
      have to gnaw a raw beetroot which he might pick up in a field as he had
      done the day before.
    

      For the last two days he had talked to himself as he quickened his steps
      under the influence of his thoughts. He had never thought much hitherto,
      as he had given all his mind, all his simple faculties to his mechanical
      work. But now fatigue and this desperate search for work which he could
      not get, refusals and rebuffs, nights spent in the open air lying on the
      grass, long fasting, the contempt which he knew people with a settled
      abode felt for a vagabond, and that question which he was continually
      asked, “Why do you not remain at home?” distress at not being
      able to use his strong arms which he felt so full of vigor, the
      recollection of the relations he had left at home and who also had not a
      penny, filled him by degrees with rage, which had been accumulating every
      day, every hour, every minute, and which now escaped his lips in spite of
      himself in short, growling sentences.
    

      As he stumbled over the stones which tripped his bare feet, he grumbled:
      “How wretched! how miserable! A set of hogs—to let a man die
      of hunger—a carpenter—a set of hogs—not two sous—not
      two sous—and now it is raining—a set of hogs!”
    

      He was indignant at the injustice of fate, and cast the blame on men, on
      all men, because nature, that great, blind mother, is unjust, cruel and
      perfidious, and he repeated through his clenched teeth:
    

      “A set of hogs” as he looked at the thin gray smoke which rose
      from the roofs, for it was the dinner hour. And, without considering that
      there is another injustice which is human, and which is called robbery and
      violence, he felt inclined to go into one of those houses to murder the
      inhabitants and to sit down to table in their stead.
    

      He said to himself: “I have no right to live now, as they are
      letting me die of hunger, and yet I only ask for work—a set of hogs!”
      And the pain in his limbs, the gnawing in his heart rose to his head like
      terrible intoxication, and gave rise to this simple thought in his brain:
      “I have the right to live because I breathe and because the air is
      the common property of everybody. So nobody has the right to leave me
      without bread!”
    

      A fine, thick, icy cold rain was coming down, and he stopped and murmured:
      “Oh, misery! Another month of walking before I get home.” He
      was indeed returning home then, for he saw that he should more easily find
      work in his native town, where he was known—and he did not mind what
      he did—than on the highroads, where everybody suspected him. As the
      carpentering business was not prosperous, he would turn day laborer, be a
      mason's hodman, a ditcher, break stones on the road. If he only earned a
      franc a day, that would at any rate buy him something to eat.
    

      He tied the remains of his last pocket handkerchief round his neck to
      prevent the cold rain from running down his back and chest, but he soon
      found that it was penetrating the thin material of which his clothes were
      made, and he glanced about him with the agonized look of a man who does
      not know where to hide his body and to rest his head, and has no place of
      shelter in the whole world.
    

      Night came on and wrapped the country in obscurity, and in the distance,
      in a meadow, he saw a dark spot on the grass; it was a cow, and so he got
      over the ditch by the roadside and went up to her without exactly knowing
      what he was doing. When he got close to her she raised her great head to
      him, and he thought: “If I only had a jug I could get a little milk.”
      He looked at the cow and the cow looked at him and then, suddenly giving
      her a kick in the side, he said: “Get up!”
    

      The animal got up slowly, letting her heavy udders bang down. Then the man
      lay down on his back between the animal's legs and drank for a long time,
      squeezing her warm, swollen teats, which tasted of the cowstall, with both
      hands, and he drank as long as she gave any milk. But the icy rain began
      to fall more heavily, and he saw no place of shelter on the whole of that
      bare plain. He was cold, and he looked at a light which was shining among
      the trees in the window of a house.
    

      The cow had lain down again heavily, and he sat down by her side and
      stroked her head, grateful for the nourishment she had given him. The
      animal's strong, thick breath, which came out of her nostrils like two
      jets of steam in the evening air, blew on the workman's face, and he said:
      “You are not cold inside there!” He put his hands on her chest
      and under her stomach to find some warmth there, and then the idea struck
      him that he might pass the night beside that large, warm animal. So he
      found a comfortable place and laid his head on her side, and then, as he
      was worn out with fatigue, fell asleep immediately.
    

      He woke up, however, several times, with his back or his stomach half
      frozen, according as he put one or the other against the animal's flank.
      Then he turned over to warm and dry that part of his body which had
      remained exposed to the night air, and soon went soundly to sleep again.
      The crowing of a cock woke him; the day was breaking, it was no longer
      raining, and the sky was bright. The cow was resting with her muzzle on
      the ground, and he stooped down, resting on his hands, to kiss those wide,
      moist nostrils, and said: “Good-by, my beauty, until next time. You
      are a nice animal. Good-by.” Then he put on his shoes and went off,
      and for two hours walked straight before him, always following the same
      road, and then he felt so tired that he sat down on the grass. It was
      broad daylight by that time, and the church bells were ringing; men in
      blue blouses, women in white caps, some on foot, some in carts, began to
      pass along the road, going to the neighboring villages to spend Sunday
      with friends or relations.
    

      A stout peasant came in sight, driving before him a score of frightened,
      bleating sheep, with the help of an active dog. Randel got up, and raising
      his cap, said: “You do not happen to have any work for a man who is
      dying of hunger?” But the other, giving an angry look at the
      vagabond, replied: “I have no work for fellows whom I meet on the
      road.”
    

      And the carpenter went back and sat down by the side of the ditch again.
      He waited there for a long time, watching the country people pass and
      looking for a kind, compassionate face before he renewed his request, and
      finally selected a man in an overcoat, whose stomach was adorned with a
      gold chain. “I have been looking for work,” he said, “for
      the last two months and cannot find any, and I have not a sou in my
      pocket.” But the would-be gentleman replied: “You should have
      read the notice which is stuck up at the entrance to the village: 'Begging
      is prohibited within the boundaries of this parish.' Let me tell you that
      I am the mayor, and if you do not get out of here pretty quickly I shall
      have you arrested.”
    

      Randel, who was getting angry, replied: “Have me arrested if you
      like; I should prefer it, for, at any rate, I should not die of hunger.”
      And he went back and sat down by the side of his ditch again, and in about
      a quarter of an hour two gendarmes appeared on the road. They were walking
      slowly side by side, glittering in the sun with their shining hats, their
      yellow accoutrements and their metal buttons, as if to frighten evildoers,
      and to put them to flight at a distance. He knew that they were coming
      after him, but he did not move, for he was seized with a sudden desire to
      defy them, to be arrested by them, and to have his revenge later.
    

      They came on without appearing to have seen him, walking heavily, with
      military step, and balancing themselves as if they were doing the goose
      step; and then, suddenly, as they passed him, appearing to have noticed
      him, they stopped and looked at him angrily and threateningly, and the
      brigadier came up to him and asked: “What are you doing here?”
      “I am resting,” the man replied calmly. “Where do you
      come from?” “If I had to tell you all the places I have been
      to it would take me more than an hour.” “Where are you going
      to?” “To Ville-Avary.” “Where is that?”
      “In La Manche.” “Is that where you belong?”
      “It is.” “Why did you leave it?” “To look
      for work.”
    

      The brigadier turned to his gendarme and said in the angry voice of a man
      who is exasperated at last by an oft-repeated trick: “They all say
      that, these scamps. I know all about it.” And then he continued:
      “Have you any papers?” “Yes, I have some.” “Give
      them to me.”
    

      Randel took his papers out of his pocket, his certificates, those poor,
      worn-out, dirty papers which were falling to pieces, and gave them to the
      soldier, who spelled them through, hemming and hawing, and then, having
      seen that they were all in order, he gave them back to Randel with the
      dissatisfied look of a man whom some one cleverer than himself has
      tricked.
    

      After a few moments' further reflection, he asked him: “Have you any
      money on you?” “No.” “None whatever?”
      “None.” “Not even a sou?” “Not even a son!”
      “How do you live then?” “On what people give me.”
      “Then you beg?” And Randel answered resolutely: “Yes,
      when I can.”
    

      Then the gendarme said: “I have caught you on the highroad in the
      act of vagabondage and begging, without any resources or trade, and so I
      command you to come with me.” The carpenter got up and said: “Wherever
      you please.” And, placing himself between the two soldiers, even
      before he had received the order to do so, he added: “Well, lock me
      up; that will at any rate put a roof over my head when it rains.”
    

      And they set off toward the village, the red tiles of which could be seen
      through the leafless trees, a quarter of a league off. Service was about
      to begin when they went through the village. The square was full of
      people, who immediately formed two lines to see the criminal pass. He was
      being followed by a crowd of excited children. Male and female peasants
      looked at the prisoner between the two gendarmes, with hatred in their
      eyes and a longing to throw stones at him, to tear his skin with their
      nails, to trample him under their feet. They asked each other whether he
      had committed murder or robbery. The butcher, who was an ex-'spahi',
      declared that he was a deserter. The tobacconist thought that he
      recognized him as the man who had that very morning passed a bad
      half-franc piece off on him, and the ironmonger declared that he was the
      murderer of Widow Malet, whom the police had been looking for for six
      months.
    

      In the municipal court, into which his custodians took him, Randel saw the
      mayor again, sitting on the magisterial bench, with the schoolmaster by
      his side. “Aha! aha!” the magistrate exclaimed, “so here
      you are again, my fine fellow. I told you I should have you locked up.
      Well, brigadier, what is he charged with?”
    

      “He is a vagabond without house or home, Monsieur le Maire, without
      any resources or money, so he says, who was arrested in the act of
      begging, but he is provided with good testimonials, and his papers are all
      in order.”
    

      “Show me his papers,” the mayor said. He took them, read them,
      reread, returned them and then said: “Search him.” So they
      searched him, but found nothing, and the mayor seemed perplexed, and asked
      the workman:
    

      “What were you doing on the road this morning?” “I was
      looking for work.” “Work? On the highroad?” “How
      do you expect me to find any if I hide in the woods?”
    

      They looked at each other with the hatred of two wild beasts which belong
      to different hostile species, and the magistrate continued: “I am
      going to have you set at liberty, but do not be brought up before me
      again.” To which the carpenter replied: “I would rather you
      locked me up; I have had enough running about the country.” But the
      magistrate replied severely: “be silent.” And then he said to
      the two gendarmes: “You will conduct this man two hundred yards from
      the village and let him continue his journey.”
    

      “At any rate, give me something to eat,” the workman said, but
      the other grew indignant: “Have we nothing to do but to feed you?
      Ah! ah! ah! that is rather too much!” But Randel went on firmly:
      “If you let me nearly die of hunger again, you will force me to
      commit a crime, and then, so much the worse for you other fat fellows.”
    

      The mayor had risen and he repeated: “Take him away immediately or I
      shall end by getting angry.”
    

      The two gendarmes thereupon seized the carpenter by the arms and dragged
      him out. He allowed them to do it without resistance, passed through the
      village again and found himself on the highroad once more; and when the
      men had accompanied him two hundred yards beyond the village, the
      brigadier said: “Now off with you and do not let me catch you about
      here again, for if I do, you will know it.”
    

      Randel went off without replying or knowing where he was going. He walked
      on for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes, so stupefied that he no
      longer thought of anything. But suddenly, as he was passing a small house,
      where the window was half open, the smell of the soup and boiled meat
      stopped him suddenly, and hunger, fierce, devouring, maddening hunger,
      seized him and almost drove him against the walls of the house like a wild
      beast.
    

      He said aloud in a grumbling voice: “In Heaven's name! they must
      give me some this time!” And he began to knock at the door
      vigorously with his stick, and as no one came he knocked louder and called
      out: “Hey! hey! you people in there, open the door!” And then,
      as nothing stirred, he went up to the window and pushed it wider open with
      his hand, and the close warm air of the kitchen, full of the smell of hot
      soup, meat and cabbage, escaped into the cold outer air, and with a bound
      the carpenter was in the house. Two places were set at the table, and no
      doubt the proprietors of the house, on going to church, had left their
      dinner on the fire, their nice Sunday boiled beef and vegetable soup,
      while there was a loaf of new bread on the chimney-piece, between two
      bottles which seemed full.
    

      Randel seized the bread first of all and broke it with as much violence as
      if he were strangling a man, and then he began to eat voraciously,
      swallowing great mouthfuls quickly. But almost immediately the smell of
      the meat attracted him to the fireplace, and, having taken off the lid of
      the saucepan, he plunged a fork into it and brought out a large piece of
      beef tied with a string. Then he took more cabbage, carrots and onions
      until his plate was full, and, having put it on the table, he sat down
      before it, cut the meat into four pieces, and dined as if he had been at
      home. When he had eaten nearly all the meat, besides a quantity of
      vegetables, he felt thirsty and took one of the bottles off the
      mantelpiece.
    

      Scarcely had he poured the liquor into his glass when he saw it was
      brandy. So much the better; it was warming and would instill some fire
      into his veins, and that would be all right, after being so cold; and he
      drank some. He certainly enjoyed it, for he had grown unaccustomed to it,
      and he poured himself out another glassful, which he drank at two gulps.
      And then almost immediately he felt quite merry and light-hearted from the
      effects of the alcohol, just as if some great happiness filled his heart.
    

      He continued to eat, but more slowly, and dipping his bread into the soup.
      His skin had become burning, and especially his forehead, where the veins
      were throbbing. But suddenly the church bells began to ring. Mass was
      over, and instinct rather than fear, the instinct of prudence, which
      guides all beings and makes them clear-sighted in danger, made the
      carpenter get up. He put the remains of the loaf into one pocket and the
      brandy bottle into the other, and he furtively went to the window and
      looked out into the road. It was still deserted, so he jumped out and set
      off walking again, but instead of following the highroad he ran across the
      fields toward a wood he saw a little way off.
    

      He felt alert, strong, light-hearted, glad of what he had done, and so
      nimble that he sprang over the enclosure of the fields at a single bound,
      and as soon as he was under the trees he took the bottle out of his pocket
      again and began to drink once more, swallowing it down as he walked, and
      then his ideas began to get confused, his eyes grew dim, and his legs as
      elastic as springs, and he started singing the old popular song:
    

     “Oh! what joy, what joy it is,
     To pick the sweet, wild strawberries.”
 

      He was now walking on thick, damp, cool moss, and that soft carpet under
      his feet made him feel absurdly inclined to turn head over heels as he
      used to do when a child, so he took a run, turned a somersault, got up and
      began over again. And between each time he began to sing again:
    

     “Oh! what joy, what joy it is,
     To pick the sweet, wild strawberries.”
 

      Suddenly he found himself above a deep road, and in the road he saw a tall
      girl, a servant, who was returning to the village with two pails of milk.
      He watched, stooping down, and with his eyes as bright as those of a dog
      who scents a quail, but she saw him raised her head and said: “Was
      that you singing like that?” He did not reply, however, but jumped
      down into the road, although it was a fall of at least six feet and when
      she saw him suddenly standing in front of her, she exclaimed: “Oh!
      dear, how you frightened me!”
    

      But he did not hear her, for he was drunk, he was mad, excited by another
      requirement which was more imperative than hunger, more feverish than
      alcohol; by the irresistible fury of the man who has been deprived of
      everything for two months, and who is drunk; who is young, ardent and
      inflamed by all the appetites which nature has implanted in the vigorous
      flesh of men.
    

      The girl started back from him, frightened at his face, his eyes, his
      half-open mouth, his outstretched hands, but he seized her by the
      shoulders, and without a word, threw her down in the road.
    

      She let her two pails fall, and they rolled over noisily, and all the milk
      was spilt, and then she screamed lustily, but it was of no avail in that
      lonely spot.
    

      When she got up the thought of her overturned pails suddenly filled her
      with fury, and, taking off one of her wooden sabots, she threw it at the
      man to break his head if he did not pay her for her milk.
    

      But he, mistaking the reason of this sudden violent attack, somewhat
      sobered, and frightened at what he had done, ran off as fast as he could,
      while she threw stones at him, some of which hit him in the back.
    

      He ran for a long time, very long, until he felt more tired than he had
      ever been before. His legs were so weak that they could scarcely carry
      him; all his ideas were confused, he lost recollection of everything and
      could no longer think about anything, and so he sat down at the foot of a
      tree, and in five minutes was fast asleep. He was soon awakened, however,
      by a rough shake, and, on opening his eyes, he saw two cocked hats of
      shiny leather bending over him, and the two gendarmes of the morning, who
      were holding him and binding his arms.
    

      “I knew I should catch you again,” said the brigadier
      jeeringly. But Randel got up without replying. The two men shook him,
      quite ready to ill treat him if he made a movement, for he was their prey
      now. He had become a jailbird, caught by those hunters of criminals who
      would not let him go again.
    

      “Now, start!” the brigadier said, and they set off. It was
      late afternoon, and the autumn twilight was setting in over the land, and
      in half an hour they reached the village, where every door was open, for
      the people had heard what had happened. Peasants and peasant women and
      girls, excited with anger, as if every man had been robbed and every woman
      attacked, wished to see the wretch brought back, so that they might
      overwhelm him with abuse. They hooted him from the first house in the
      village until they reached the Hotel de Ville, where the mayor was waiting
      for him to be himself avenged on this vagabond, and as soon as he saw him
      approaching he cried:
    

      “Ah! my fine fellow! here we are!” And he rubbed his hands,
      more pleased than he usually was, and continued: “I said so. I said
      so, the moment I saw him in the road.”
    

      And then with increased satisfaction:
    

      “Oh, you blackguard! Oh, you dirty blackguard! You will get your
      twenty years, my fine fellow!”