A VENDETTA

 The widow of Paolo Saverini lived alone with her son in a poor little
      house on the outskirts of Bonifacio. The town, built on an outjutting part
      of the mountain, in places even overhanging the sea, looks across the
      straits, full of sandbanks, towards the southernmost coast of Sardinia.
      Beneath it, on the other side and almost surrounding it, is a cleft in the
      cliff like an immense corridor which serves as a harbor, and along it the
      little Italian and Sardinian fishing boats come by a circuitous route
      between precipitous cliffs as far as the first houses, and every two weeks
      the old, wheezy steamer which makes the trip to Ajaccio.

 On the white mountain the houses, massed together, makes an even whiter
      spot. They look like the nests of wild birds, clinging to this peak,
      overlooking this terrible passage, where vessels rarely venture. The wind,
      which blows uninterruptedly, has swept bare the forbidding coast; it
      drives through the narrow straits and lays waste both sides. The pale
      streaks of foam, clinging to the black rocks, whose countless peaks rise
      up out of the water, look like bits of rag floating and drifting on the
      surface of the sea.

 The house of widow Saverini, clinging to the very edge of the precipice,
      looks out, through its three windows, over this wild and desolate picture.

 She lived there alone, with her son Antonia and their dog “Semillante,”
      a big, thin beast, with a long rough coat, of the sheep-dog breed. The
      young man took her with him when out hunting.

 One night, after some kind of a quarrel, Antoine Saverini was
      treacherously stabbed by Nicolas Ravolati, who escaped the same evening to
      Sardinia.

 When the old mother received the body of her child, which the neighbors
      had brought back to her, she did not cry, but she stayed there for a long
      time motionless, watching him. Then, stretching her wrinkled hand over the
      body, she promised him a vendetta. She did not wish anybody near her, and
      she shut herself up beside the body with the dog, which howled
      continuously, standing at the foot of the bed, her head stretched towards
      her master and her tail between her legs. She did not move any more than
      did the mother, who, now leaning over the body with a blank stare, was
      weeping silently and watching it.

 The young man, lying on his back, dressed in his jacket of coarse cloth,
      torn at the chest, seemed to be asleep. But he had blood all over him; on
      his shirt, which had been torn off in order to administer the first aid;
      on his vest, on his trousers, on his face, on his hands. Clots of blood
      had hardened in his beard and in his hair.

 His old mother began to talk to him. At the sound of this voice the dog
      quieted down.

 “Never fear, my boy, my little baby, you shall be avenged. Sleep,
      sleep; you shall be avenged. Do you hear? It's your mother's promise! And
      she always keeps her word, your mother does, you know she does.”

 Slowly she leaned over him, pressing her cold lips to his dead ones.

 Then Semillante began to howl again with a long, monotonous, penetrating,
      horrible howl.

 The two of them, the woman and the dog, remained there until morning.

 Antoine Saverini was buried the next day and soon his name ceased to be
      mentioned in Bonifacio.

 He had neither brothers nor cousins. No man was there to carry on the
      vendetta. His mother, the old woman, alone pondered over it.

 On the other side of the straits she saw, from morning until night, a
      little white speck on the coast. It was the little Sardinian village
      Longosardo, where Corsican criminals take refuge when they are too closely
      pursued. They compose almost the entire population of this hamlet,
      opposite their native island, awaiting the time to return, to go back to
      the “maquis.” She knew that Nicolas Ravolati had sought refuge
      in this village.

 All alone, all day long, seated at her window, she was looking over there
      and thinking of revenge. How could she do anything without help—she,
      an invalid and so near death? But she had promised, she had sworn on the
      body. She could not forget, she could not wait. What could she do? She no
      longer slept at night; she had neither rest nor peace of mind; she thought
      persistently. The dog, dozing at her feet, would sometimes lift her head
      and howl. Since her master's death she often howled thus, as though she
      were calling him, as though her beast's soul, inconsolable too, had also
      retained a recollection that nothing could wipe out.

 One night, as Semillante began to howl, the mother suddenly got hold of an
      idea, a savage, vindictive, fierce idea. She thought it over until
      morning. Then, having arisen at daybreak she went to church. She prayed,
      prostrate on the floor, begging the Lord to help her, to support her, to
      give to her poor, broken-down body the strength which she needed in order
      to avenge her son.

 She returned home. In her yard she had an old barrel, which acted as a
      cistern. She turned it over, emptied it, made it fast to the ground with
      sticks and stones. Then she chained Semillante to this improvised kennel
      and went into the house.

 She walked ceaselessly now, her eyes always fixed on the distant coast of
      Sardinia. He was over there, the murderer.

 All day and all night the dog howled. In the morning the old woman brought
      her some water in a bowl, but nothing more; no soup, no bread.

 Another day went by. Semillante, exhausted, was sleeping. The following
      day her eyes were shining, her hair on end and she was pulling wildly at
      her chain.

 All this day the old woman gave her nothing to eat. The beast, furious,
      was barking hoarsely. Another night went by.

 Then, at daybreak, Mother Saverini asked a neighbor for some straw. She
      took the old rags which had formerly been worn by her husband and stuffed
      them so as to make them look like a human body.

 Having planted a stick in the ground, in front of Semillante's kennel, she
      tied to it this dummy, which seemed to be standing up. Then she made a
      head out of some old rags.

 The dog, surprised, was watching this straw man, and was quiet, although
      famished. Then the old woman went to the store and bought a piece of black
      sausage. When she got home she started a fire in the yard, near the
      kennel, and cooked the sausage. Semillante, frantic, was jumping about,
      frothing at the mouth, her eyes fixed on the food, the odor of which went
      right to her stomach.

 Then the mother made of the smoking sausage a necktie for the dummy. She
      tied it very tight around the neck with string, and when she had finished
      she untied the dog.

 With one leap the beast jumped at the dummy's throat, and with her paws on
      its shoulders she began to tear at it. She would fall back with a piece of
      food in her mouth, then would jump again, sinking her fangs into the
      string, and snatching few pieces of meat she would fall back again and
      once more spring forward. She was tearing up the face with her teeth and
      the whole neck was in tatters.

 The old woman, motionless and silent, was watching eagerly. Then she
      chained the beast up again, made her fast for two more days and began this
      strange performance again.

 For three months she accustomed her to this battle, to this meal conquered
      by a fight. She no longer chained her up, but just pointed to the dummy.

 She had taught her to tear him up and to devour him without even leaving
      any traces in her throat.

 Then, as a reward, she would give her a piece of sausage.

 As soon as she saw the man, Semillante would begin to tremble. Then she
      would look up to her mistress, who, lifting her finger, would cry, “Go!”
      in a shrill tone.

 When she thought that the proper time had come, the widow went to
      confession and, one Sunday morning she partook of communion with an
      ecstatic fervor. Then, putting on men's clothes and looking like an old
      tramp, she struck a bargain with a Sardinian fisherman who carried her and
      her dog to the other side of the straits.

 In a bag she had a large piece of sausage. Semillante had had nothing to
      eat for two days. The old woman kept letting her smell the food and
      whetting her appetite.

 They got to Longosardo. The Corsican woman walked with a limp. She went to
      a baker's shop and asked for Nicolas Ravolati. He had taken up his old
      trade, that of carpenter. He was working alone at the back of his store.

 The old woman opened the door and called:

 “Hallo, Nicolas!”

 He turned around. Then releasing her dog, she cried:

 “Go, go! Eat him up! eat him up!”

 The maddened animal sprang for his throat. The man stretched out his arms,
      clasped the dog and rolled to the ground. For a few seconds he squirmed,
      beating the ground with his feet. Then he stopped moving, while Semillante
      dug her fangs into his throat and tore it to ribbons. Two neighbors,
      seated before their door, remembered perfectly having seen an old beggar
      come out with a thin, black dog which was eating something that its master
      was giving him.

 At nightfall the old woman was at home again. She slept well that night.