A WAYSIDE COMEDY
    

  Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore
  the misery of man is great upon him.
              —Eccles. viii. 6.


      Fate and the Government of India have turned the Station of Kashima into a
      prison; and, because there is no help for the poor souls who are now lying
      there in torment, I write this story, praying that the Government of India
      may be moved to scatter the European population to the four winds.
    

      Kashima is bound on all sides by the rock-tipped circle of the Dosehri
      hills. In Spring, it is ablaze with roses; in Summer, the roses die and
      the hot winds blow from the hills; in Autumn, the white mists from the
      hills cover the place as with water; and in Winter the frosts nip
      everything young and tender to earth-level. There is but one view in
      Kashima—a stretch of perfectly flat pasture and plough-land, running
      up to the grey-blue scrub of the Dosehri hills.
    

      There are no amusements, except snipe and tiger shooting; but the tigers
      have been long since hunted from their lairs in the rock-caves, and the
      snipe only come once a year. Narkarra—one hundred and forty-three
      miles by road—is the nearest station to Kashima. But Kashima never
      goes to Narkarra, where there are at least twelve English people. It stays
      within the circle of the Dosehri hills.
    

      All Kashima acquits Mrs. Vansuythen of any intention to do harm; but all
      Kashima knows that she, and she alone, brought about their pain.
    

      Boulte, the Engineer, Mrs. Boulte, and Captain Kurrell know this. They are
      the English population of Kashima, if we except Major Vansuythen, who is
      of no importance whatever, and Mrs. Vansuythen, who is the most important
      of all.
    

      You must remember, though you will not understand, that all laws weaken in
      a small and hidden community where there is no public opinion. When a man
      is absolutely alone in a Station he runs a certain risk of falling into
      evil ways. The risk is multiplied by every addition to the population up
      to twelve—the Jury-number. After that, fear and consequent restraint
      begin, and human action becomes less grotesquely jerky.
    

      There was deep peace in Kashima till Mrs. Vansuythen arrived. She was a
      charming woman, every one said so everywhere; and she charmed every one.
      In spite of this, or, perhaps, because of this, since Fate is so perverse,
      she cared only for one man, and he was Major Vansuythen. Had she been
      plain or stupid, this matter would have been intelligible to Kashima. But
      she was a fair woman, with very still grey eyes, the color of a lake just
      before the light of the sun touches it. No man who had seen those eyes,
      could, later on, explain what fashion of woman she was to look upon. The
      eyes dazzled him. Her own sex said that she was “not bad looking, but
      spoiled by pretending to be so grave.” And yet her gravity was natural It
      was not her habit to smile. She merely went through life, looking at those
      who passed; and the women objected while the men fell down and worshipped.
    

      She knows and is deeply sorry for the evil she has done to Kashima; but
      Major Vansuythen cannot understand why Mrs. Boulte does not drop in to
      afternoon tea at least three times a week. “When there are only two women
      in one Station, they ought to see a great deal of each other,” says Major
      Vansuythen.
    

      Long and long before ever Mrs. Vansuythen came out of those far-away
      places where there is society and amusement, Kurrell had discovered that
      Mrs. Boulte was the one woman in the world for him and—you dare not
      blame them. Kashima was as out of the world as Heaven or the Other Place,
      and the Dosehri hills kept their secret well. Boulte had no concern in the
      matter. He was in camp for a fortnight at a time. He was a hard, heavy
      man, and neither Mrs. Boulte nor Kurrell pitied him. They had all Kashima
      and each other for their very, very own; and Kashima was the Garden of
      Eden in those days. When Boulte returned from his wanderings he would slap
      Kurrell between the shoulders and call him “old fellow,” and the three
      would dine together. Kashima was happy then when the judgment of God
      seemed almost as distant as Narkarra or the railway that ran down to the
      sea. But the Government sent Major Vansuythen to Kashima, and with him
      came his wife.
    

      The etiquette of Kashima is much the same as that of a desert island. When
      a stranger is cast away there, all hands go down to the shore to make him
      welcome. Kashima assembled at the masonry platform close to the Narkarra
      Road, and spread tea for the Vansuythens. That ceremony was reckoned a
      formal call, and made them free of the Station, its rights and privileges.
      When the Vansuythens were settled down, they gave a tiny housewarming to
      all Kashima; and that made Kashima free of their house, according to the
      immemorial usage of the Station.
    

      Then the Rains came, when no one could go into camp, and the Narkarra Road
      was washed away by the Kasun River, and in the cup-like pastures of
      Kashima the cattle waded knee-deep. The clouds dropped down from the
      Dosehri hills and covered everything.
    

      At the end of the Rains, Boulte's manner toward his wife changed and
      became demonstratively affectionate. They had been married twelve years,
      and the change startled Mrs. Boulte, who hated her husband with the hate
      of a woman who has met with nothing but kindness from her mate, and, in
      the teeth of this kindness, had done him a great wrong. Moreover, she had
      her own trouble to fight with—her watch to keep over her own
      property, Kurrell. For two months the Rains had hidden the Dosehri hills
      and many other things besides; but when they lifted, they showed Mrs.
      Boulte that her man among men, her Ted—for she called him Ted in the
      old days when Boulte was out of earshot—was slipping the links of
      the allegiance.
    

      “The Vansuythen Woman has taken him,” Mrs. Boulte said to herself; and
      when Boulte was away, wept over her belief, in the face of the
      over-vehement blandishments of Ted. Sorrow in Kashima is as fortunate as
      Love, because there is nothing to weaken it save the flight of Time. Mrs.
      Boulte had never breathed her suspicion to Kurrell because she was not
      certain; and her nature led her to be very certain before she took steps
      in any direction. That is why she behaved as she did.
    

      Boulte came into the house one evening, and leaned against the door-posts
      of the drawing-room, chewing his moustache. Mrs. Boulte was putting some
      flowers into a vase. There is a pretence of civilization even in Kashima.
    

      “Little woman,” said Boulte, quietly, “do you care for me?”
     

      “Immensely,” said she, with a laugh. “Can you ask it?”
     

      “But I'm serious,” said Boulte. “Do you care for me?”
     

      Mrs. Boulte dropped the flowers, and turned round quickly. “Do you want an
      honest answer?”
     

      “Ye-es, I've asked for it.”
     

      Mrs. Boulte spoke in a low, even voice for five minutes, very distinctly,
      that there might be no misunderstanding her meaning. When Samson broke the
      pillars of Gaza, he did a little thing, and one not to be compared to the
      deliberate pulling down of a woman's homestead about her own ears. There
      was no wise female friend to advise Mrs. Boulte, the singularly cautious
      wife, to hold her hand. She struck at Boulte's heart, because her own was
      sick with suspicion of Kurrell, and worn out with the long strain of
      watching alone through the Rains. There was no plan or purpose in her
      speaking. The sentences made themselves; and Boulte listened leaning
      against the door-post with his hands in his pockets. When all was over,
      and Mrs. Boulte began to breathe through her nose before breaking out into
      tears, he laughed and stared straight in front of him at the Dosehri
      hills.
    

      “Is that all?” he said. “Thanks, I only wanted to know, you know.”
     

      “What are you going to do?” said the woman, between her sobs.
    

      “Do! Nothing. What should I do? Kill Kurrell or send you Home, or apply
      for leave to get a divorce? It's two days' dak into Narkarra.” He laughed
      again and went on: “I'll tell you what you can do. You can ask Kurrell to
      dinner tomorrow—no, on Thursday, that will allow you time to pack—and
      you can bolt with him. I give you my word I won't follow.”
     

      He took up his helmet and went out of the room, and Mrs. Boulte sat till
      the moonlight streaked the floor, thinking and thinking and thinking. She
      had done her best upon the spur of the moment to pull the house down; but
      it would not fall. Moreover, she could not understand her husband, and she
      was afraid. Then the folly of her useless truthfulness struck her, and she
      was ashamed to write to Kurrell, saying: “I have gone mad and told
      everything. My husband says that I am free to elope with you. Get a dak
      for Thursday, and we will fly after dinner.” There was a cold-bloodedness
      about that procedure which did not appeal to her. So she sat still in her
      own house and thought.
    

      At dinner-time Boulte came back from his walk, white and worn and haggard,
      and the woman was touched at his distress. As the evening wore on, she
      muttered some expression of sorrow, something approaching to contrition.
      Boulte came out of a brown study and said, “Oh, that! I wasn't thinking
      about that. By the way, what does Kurrell say to the elopement?”
     

      “I haven't seen him,” said Mrs. Boulte. “Good God! is that all?”
     

      But Boulte was not listening, and her sentence ended in a gulp.
    

      The next day brought no comfort to Mrs. Boulte, for Kurrell did not
      appear, and the new life that she, in the five minutes' madness of the
      previous evening, had hoped to build out of the ruins of the old, seemed
      to be no nearer.
    

      Boulte ate his breakfast, advised her to see her Arab pony fed in the
      veranda, and went out. The morning wore through, and at midday the tension
      became unendurable. Mrs. Boulte could not cry. She had finished her crying
      in the night, and now she did not want to be left alone. Perhaps the
      Vansuythen woman would talk to her; and, since talking opens the heart,
      perhaps there might be some comfort to be found in her company. She was
      the only other woman in the Station.
    

      In Kashima there are no regular calling-hours. Every one can drop in upon
      every one else at pleasure. Mrs. Boulte put on a big terai hat, and walked
      across to the Vansuythens's house to borrow last week's Queen. The two
      compounds touched, and instead of going up the drive, she crossed through
      the gap in the cactus-hedge, entering the house from the back. As she
      passed through the dining-room, she heard, behind the purdah that cloaked
      the drawing-room door, her husband's voice, saying—“But on my Honor!
      On my Soul and Honor, I tell you she doesn't care for me. She told me so
      last night. I would have told you then if Vansuythen hadn't been with you.
      If it is for her sake that you'll have nothing to say to me, you can make
      your mind easy. It's Kurrell.”
     

      “What?” said Mrs. Vansuythen, with an hysterical little laugh. “Kurrell!
      Oh, it can't be. You two must have made some horrible mistake. Perhaps you—you
      lost your temper, or misunderstood, or something. Things can't be as wrong
      as you say.”
     

      Mrs. Vansuythen had shifted her defence to avoid the man's pleading, and
      was desperately trying to keep him to a side-issue.
    

      “There must be some mistake,” she insisted, “and it can be all put right
      again.”
     

      Boulte laughed grimly.
    

      “It can't be Captain Kurrell! He told me that he had never taken the least—the
      least interest in your wife, Mr. Boulte. Oh, do listen! He said he had
      not. He swore he had not,” said Mrs. Vansuythen.
    

      The purdah rustled, and the speech was cut short by the entry of a little,
      thin woman with big rings round her eyes. Mrs. Vansuythen stood up with a
      gasp.
    

      “What was that you said?” asked Mrs. Boulte. “Never mind that man. What
      did Ted say to you? What did he say to you? What did he say to you?”
     

      Mrs. Vansuythen sat down helplessly on the sofa, overborne by the trouble
      of her questioner.
    

      “He said—I can't remember exactly what he said—but I
      understood him to say—that is—But, really, Mrs. Boulte, isn't
      it rather a strange question?”
     

      “Will you tell me what he said?” repeated Mrs. Boulte.
    

      Even a tiger will fly before a bear robbed of her whelps, and Mrs.
      Vansuythen was only an ordinarily good woman. She began in a sort of
      desperation: “Well, he said that he never cared for you at all, and, of
      course, there was not the least reason why he should have, and—and—that
      was all.”
     

      “You said he swore he had not cared for me. Was that true?”
     

      “Yes,” said Mrs. Vansuythen, very softly.
    

      Mrs. Boulte wavered for an instant where she stood, and then fell forward
      fainting.
    

      “What did I tell you?” said Boulte, as though the conversation had been
      unbroken. “You can see for yourself she cares for him.” The light began to
      break into his dull mind, and he went on—“And he—what was he
      saying to you?”
     

      But Mrs. Vansuythen, with no heart for explanations or impassioned
      protestations, was kneeling over Mrs. Boulte.
    

      “Oh, you brute!” she cried. “Are all men like this? Help me to get her
      into my room—and her face is cut against the table. Oh, will you be
      quiet, and help me to carry her? I hate you, and I hate Captain Kurrell.
      Lift her up carefully and now—go! Go away!”
     

      Boulte carried his wife into Mrs. Vansuythen's bedroom and departed before
      the storm of that lady's wrath and disgust, impenitent and burning with
      jealousy. Kurrell had been making love to Mrs. Vansuythen—would do
      Vansuythen as great a wrong as he had done Boulte, who caught himself
      considering whether Mrs. Vansuythen would faint if she discovered that the
      man she loved had foresworn her.
    

      In the middle of these meditations, Kurrell came cantering along the road
      and pulled up with a cheery, “Good mornin'. 'Been mashing Mrs. Vansuythen
      as usual, eh? Bad thing for a sober, married man, that. What will Mrs
      Boulte say?”
     

      Boulte raised his head and said, slowly, “Oh, you liar!”
     

      Kurrell's face changed. “What's that?” he asked, quickly.
    

      “Nothing much,” said Boulte. “Has my wife told you that you two are free
      to go off whenever you please? She has been good enough to explain the
      situation to me. You've been a true friend to me, Kurrell—old man—haven't
      you?”
     

      Kurrell groaned, and tried to frame some sort of idiotic sentence about
      being willing to give “satisfaction.” But his interest in the woman was
      dead, had died out in the Rains, and, mentally, he was abusing her for her
      amazing indiscretion. It would have been so easy to have broken off the
      thing gently and by degrees, and now he was saddled with—Boulte's
      voice recalled him.
    

      “I don't think I should get any satisfaction from killing you, and I'm
      pretty sure you'd get none from killing me.”
     

      Then in a querulous tone, ludicrously disproportioned to his wrongs,
      Boulte added—“'Seems rather a pity that you haven't the decency to
      keep to the woman, now you've got her. You've been a true friend to her
      too, haven't you?”
     

      Kurrell stared long and gravely. The situation was getting beyond him.
    

      “What do you mean?” he said.
    

      Boulte answered, more to himself than the questioner: “My wife came over
      to Mrs. Vansuythen's just now; and it seems you'd been telling Mrs.
      Vansuythen that you'd never cared for Emma. I suppose you lied, as usual.
      What had Mrs. Vansuythen to do with you, or you with her? Try to speak the
      truth for once in a way.”
     

      Kurrell took the double insult without wincing, and replied by another
      question: “Go on. What happened?”
     

      “Emma fainted,” said Boulte, simply. “But, look here, what had you been
      saying to Mrs. Vansuythen?”
     

      Kurrell laughed. Mrs. Boulte had, with unbridled tongue, made havoc of his
      plans; and he could at least retaliate by hurting the man in whose eyes he
      was humiliated and shown dishonorable.
    

      “Said to her? What does a man tell a lie like that for? I suppose I said
      pretty much what you've said, unless I'm a good deal mistaken.”
     

      “I spoke the truth,” said Boulte, again more to himself than Kurrell.
      “Emma told me she hated me. She has no right in me.”
     

      “No! I suppose not. You're only her husband, y'know. And what did Mrs.
      Vansuythen say after you had laid your disengaged heart at her feet?”
     

      Kurrell felt almost virtuous as he put the question.
    

      “I don't think that matters,” Boulte replied; “and it doesn't concern
      you.”
     

      “But it does! I tell you it does” began Kurrell, shamelessly.
    

      The sentence was cut by a roar of laughter from Boulte's lips. Kurrell was
      silent for an instant, and then he, too, laughed—laughed long and
      loudly, rocking in his saddle. It was an unpleasant sound—the
      mirthless mirth of these men on the long, white line of the Narkarra Road.
      There were no strangers in Kashima, or they might have thought that
      captivity within the Dosehri hills had driven half the European population
      mad. The laughter ended abruptly, and Kurrell was the first to speak.
    

      “Well, what are you going to do?”
     

      Boulte looked up the road, and at the hills. “Nothing,” said he, quietly;
      “what's the use? It's too ghastly for anything. We must let the old life
      go on. I can only call you a hound and a liar, and I can't go on calling
      you names forever. Besides which, I don't feel that I'm much better. We
      can't get out of this place. What is there to do?”
     

      Kurrell looked round the rat-pit of Kashima and made no reply. The injured
      husband took up the wondrous tale.
    

      “Ride on, and speak to Emma if you want to. God knows I don't care what
      you do.”
     

      He walked forward and left Kurrell gazing blankly after him. Kurrell did
      not ride on either to see Mrs. Boulte or Mrs. Vansuythen. He sat in his
      saddle and thought, while his pony grazed by the roadside.
    

      The whir of approaching wheels roused him. Mrs. Vansuythen was driving
      home Mrs. Boulte, white and wan, with a cut on her forehead.
    

      “Stop, please,” said Mrs. Boulte “I want to speak to Ted.”
     

      Mrs. Vansuythen obeyed, but as Mrs. Boulte leaned forward, putting her
      hand upon the splash-board of the dog-cart, Kurrell spoke.
    

      “I've seen your husband, Mrs. Boulte.”
     

      There was no necessity for any further explanation. The man's eyes were
      fixed, not upon Mrs. Boulte, but her companion. Mrs. Boulte saw the look.
    

      “Speak to him!” she pleaded, turning to the woman at her side. “Oh, speak
      to him! Tell him what you told me just now. Tell him you hate him. Tell
      him you hate him!”
     

      She bent forward and wept bitterly, while the sais, impassive, went
      forward to hold the horse. Mrs. Vansuythen turned scarlet and dropped the
      reins. She wished to be no party to such unholy explanations.
    

      “I've nothing to do with it,” she began, coldly; but Mrs. Boulte's sobs
      overcame her, and she addressed herself to the man. “I don't know what I
      am to say, Captain Kurrell. I don't know what I can call you. I think
      you've—you've behaved abominably, and she has cut her forehead
      terribly against the table.”
     

      “It doesn't hurt. It isn't anything,” said Mrs. Boulte feebly. “That
      doesn't matter. Tell him what you told me. Say you don't care for him. Oh,
      Ted, won't you believe her?”
     

      “Mrs. Boulte has made me understand that you were—that you were fond
      of her once upon a time,” went on Mrs. Vansuythen.
    

      “Well!” said Kurrell brutally. “It seems to me that Mrs. Boulte had better
      be fond of her own husband first.”
     

      “Stop!” said Mrs. Vansuythen. “Hear me first. I don't care—I don't
      want to know anything about you and Mrs. Boulte; but I want you to know
      that I hate you, that I think you are a cur, and that I'll never, never
      speak to you again. Oh, I don't dare to say what I think of you, you—man!
      Sais, gorah ko jane do.”
     

      “I want to speak to Ted,” moaned Mrs. Boulte, but the dog-cart rattled on,
      and Kurrell was left on the road, shamed, and boiling with wrath against
      Mrs. Boulte.
    

      He waited till Mrs. Vansuythen was driving back to her own house, and, she
      being freed from the embarrassment of Mrs. Boulte's presence, learned for
      the second time her opinion of himself and his actions.
    

      In the evenings, it was the wont of all Kashima to meet at the platform on
      the Narkarra Road, to drink tea, and discuss the trivialities of the day.
      Major Vansuythen and his wife found themselves alone at the
      gathering-place for almost the first time in their remembrance; and the
      cheery Major, in the teeth of his wife's remarkably reasonable suggestion
      that the rest of the Station might be sick, insisted upon driving round to
      the two bungalows and unearthing the population.
    

      “Sitting in the twilight!” said he, with great indignation to the Boultes.
      “That'll never do! Hang it all, we're one family here! You must come out,
      and so must Kurrell. I'll make him bring his banjo.” So great is the power
      of honest simplicity and a good digestion over guilty consciences that all
      Kashima did turn out, even down to the banjo; and the Major embraced the
      company in one expansive grin. As he grinned, Mrs. Vansuythen raised her
      eyes for an instant and looked at all Kashima. Her meaning was clear.
      Major Vansuythen would never know anything. He was to be the outsider in
      that happy family whose cage was the Dosehri hills.
    

      “You're singing villainously out of tune, Kurrell,” said the Major,
      truthfully. “Pass me that banjo.”
     

      And he sang in excruciating-wise till the stars came out and all Kashima
      went to dinner.
    


      That was the beginning of the New Life of Kashima—the life that Mrs.
      Boulte made when her tongue was loosened in the twilight.
    

      Mrs. Vansuythen has never told the Major; and since be insists upon
      keeping up a burdensome geniality, she has been compelled to break her vow
      of not speaking to Kurrell. This speech, which must of necessity preserve
      the semblance of politeness and interest, serves admirably to keep alive
      the flame of jealousy and dull hatred in Boulte's bosom, as it awakens the
      same passions in his wife's heart. Mrs. Boulte hates Mrs. Vansuythen
      because she has taken Ted from her, and, in some curious fashion, hates
      her because Mrs. Vansuythen—and here the wife's eyes see far more
      clearly than the husband's—detests Ted. And Ted—that gallant
      captain and honorable man—knows now that it is possible to hate a
      woman once loved, to the verge of wishing to silence her forever with
      blows. Above all, is he shocked that Mrs. Boulte cannot see the error of
      her ways.
    

      Boulte and he go out tiger-shooting together in all friendship. Boulte has
      put their relationship on a most satisfactory footing.
    

      “You're a blackguard,” he says to Kurrell, “and I've lost any self-respect
      I may ever have had; but when you're with me, I can feel certain that you
      are not with Mrs. Vansuythen, or making Emma miserable.”
     

      Kurrell endures anything that Boulte may say to him. Sometimes they are
      away for three days together, and then the Major insists upon his wife
      going over to sit with Mrs. Boulte; although Mrs. Vansuythen has
      repeatedly declared that she prefers her husband's company to any in the
      world. From the way in which she clings to him, she would certainly seem
      to be speaking the truth.
    

      But of course, as the Major says, “in a little Station we must all be
      friendly.”