A WIND FLOWER

 I

 Willard's landlady smiled sympathetically
across the narrow breakfast-table. "I guess you've
got to stay in this mornin', Mr. Willard," she said.
"It's a good deal too raw and cold for you to be
out around, paintin', to-day."

 Willard nodded. "Quite right, Mrs. Storrs," he
returned, and he smiled at his landlady's daughter,
who sat opposite. But she did not smile at him.
She continued her silent meal, looking for the most
part at her plate, and replying to direct questions
only by monosyllables.

 She must be nineteen or twenty, he decided, but
her slender, curveless figure might have been that
of a girl several years younger. Her face was
absolutely without character to the casual glance—pale,
slightly freckled, lighted by grey-green,
half-closed eyes, and framed in light brown hair.
Her lips were thin, and her rare smile did not dis close
her teeth. Even her direct look, when he compelled
it, was quite uninterested.

 Her mother chattered with volubility of a woman
left much alone, and glad of an appreciative listener,
but the girl had not, of her own accord,
spoken a word during his week's stay. He wondered
as he thought of it why he had not noticed
it before, and decided that her silence was not obtrusive,
but only the outcome of her colourless
personality—like the silence of the prim New England
house itself.

 He groaned inwardly. "What in time can I do?
Nothing to read within five miles: my last cigar
gone yesterday: this beastly weather driving me to
melancholia! If she weren't such a stick—heavens!
I never knew a girl could be so thin!"

 The girl in question rose and began clearing
the table. Her mother bustled out of the room, and
left Willard in the old-fashioned arm-chair by the
window, almost interested, as he wondered what the
girl would do or say now. After five minutes of
silence he realised the strange impression, or rather
the lack of impression, she made on him. He was hardly conscious of a woman's presence. The intangible
atmosphere of femininity that wraps
around a tte--tte with even the most unattractive
woman was wholly lacking. She seemed simply
a more or less intelligent human being.

 Given greatly to analysis, he grew interested.
Why was this? She was not wanting intellectually,
he was sure. Such remarks as she had made in
answer to his own were not noticeable for stupidity
or even stolidity of thought. He broke the
silence.

 "What do you do with yourself, these days?"
he suggested. "I don't see you about at all. Are
you reading, or walking about these fascinating
Maine beaches?"

 She did not even look up at him as she replied.
"I don't know as I do very much of anything.
I'm not very fond of reading—at least, not these
books."

 Remembering the "Pilgrim's Progress," "Book
of Martyrs," "Mrs. Heman's Poems," and the
"Adventures of Rev. James Hogan, Missionary
to the Heathen of Africa," that adorned the marble-topped table in the parlour, he shuddered
sympathetically.

 "But I walk a good deal," she volunteered. "I've
been all over that ledge you're painting."

 "Isn't it beautiful?" he said. "It reminds me of
a poem I read somewhere about the beauty of
Appledore—that's on this coast somewhere, too,
isn't it? You'd appreciate the poem, I'm sure—do
you care for poetry?"

 She piled the dishes on a tray, and carried it
through the door before he had time to take it
from her.

 "No," she replied over her shoulder, "no, I don't
care for it. It seems so—so smooth and shiny,
somehow."

 "Smooth? shiny?" he smiled as she came back,
"I don't see."

 Her high, rather indifferent voice fell in a slight
embarrassment, as she explained: "Oh, I mean the
rhymes and the verses—they're so even and like a
clock ticking."

 He took from his pocket a little red book. "Let
me read you this," he said eagerly, "and see if you think it smooth and shiny. You must have
heard and seen what this man tries to tell."

 She stood awkwardly by the table, her scant,
shapeless dress accentuating the straight lines of
her slim figure, her hands clasped loosely before
her, her face turned toward the window, which
rattled now and then at the gusts of the rising
wind. Willard held the little book easily between
thumb and finger, and read in clear, pleasant tones,
looking at her occasionally with interest:

   " Fresh from his fastnesses, wholesome and spacious,  The north wind, the mad huntsman, halloos on his white hounds  Over the gray, roaring reaches and ridges,  The forest of Ocean, the chase of the world.  Hark to the peal of the pack in full cry,  As he thongs them before him, swarming voluminous,  Weltering, wide-wallowing, till in a ruining  Chaos of energy, hurled on their quarry,  They crash into foam! "



 "There! is that smooth and shiny?" he demanded.
She had moved nearer, to catch more certainly
his least intonation.

  Her hands twisted nervously, and to his surprise
she smiled with unmistakable pleasure.

 "Oh, no!" she half whispered, eyeing the book in
his hand wistfully. "Oh, no! That makes me feel
different. I—I love the wind."

 "What's that?" Mrs. Storrs entered quickly.
"Now, Sarah, you just stop that nonsense! Mr.
Willard, has she been tellin' you any foolishness?"

 "Miss Storrs had only told me that she liked
the wind," he replied, hoping that the woman
would go, and let him develop at leisure what
promised to be a most interesting situation. She
had really very pretty, even teeth, and when she
smiled her lips curved pleasantly.

 But Mrs. Storrs was not to be evaded. She had
evidently a grievance to set forth, and looking
reproachfully at her daughter, continued:

 "Ever since Sarah was five or six years old she's
had that crazy likin' for the wind. 'Tain't natural,
I say, and when the gales that we hev up here strike
us, the least anybody can do 's to stay in the house
and thank Providence they've got a house to stay in! Why, Mr. Willard, you'd never think it to
look at her, for she's a real quiet girl—too quiet,
seems to me, sometimes, when I'm just put to it
for somebody to be social with—but in thet big
gale of eighty-eight she was out all night in it,
and me and her father—that was before Mr.
Storrs died—nearly crazy with fearin' she was lost
for good. And when she was six years old, she
got up from her crib and went out on the beach
in her little nightgown, and nothin' else, and it's
a miracle she didn't die of pneumonia, if not of
bein' blown to death."

 Mrs. Storrs stopped for breath, and Willard
glanced at the girl, wondering if she would appear
disconcerted or angry at such unlooked-for
revelation of her eccentricity; but her face had
settled into its usual impassive lines, and she dusted
the chairs serenely, turning now and then to look
fixedly through the window at the swaying elm
whose boughs leaned to the ground under the still
rising wind.

 Her mother was evidently relieving the strain
of an enforced silence, and sitting stiffly in her chair, as one not accustomed to the luxury of idle
conversation, she continued:

 "And even now, when she's old enough to know
better, you'd think, she acts possessed. Any wind-storm
'll set her off, but when the spring gales
come, she'll just roam 'round the house, back and
forth, staring out of doors, and me as nervous
as a cat all the while. Just because I won't let
her go out she acts like a child. Why, last year
I had to go out and drag her in by main force;
I was nearly blown off the cliff gettin' her
home. And she was singin', calm, as if she
was in her bed like any decent person! It's the
most unnatural thing I ever heard of! Now,
Sarah Storrs," as the girl was slipping from the
room, "you remember you promised me not to go
out this year after supper, if the wind was
high. You mind, now! It's comin' up an awful
blow."

 The girl turned abruptly. "I never promised
you that, mother," she said quickly. "I said I
wouldn't if I could help it, and if I can't help it,
I can't, and that's all there is to it." The door closed behind her, and shortly afterwards Willard
left Mrs. Storrs in possession of the room.

 The day affected him strangely. The steady
low moan of the wind was by this time very noticeable.
It was not cold, only clear and rather keen,
and the scurrying grey clouds looked chillier than
one found the air on going out. The boom of the
surf carried a sinister threat with it, and the birds
drove helplessly with the wind-current, as if escaping
some dreaded thing behind them.

 Indoors, the state of affairs was not much better:
Mrs. Storrs looked injured; her sister, a lady of
uncertain years and temper, talked of sudden
deaths, and the probability of premature burial,
pointed by the relation of actual occurrences of
that nature; Sarah was not to be seen. At last he
could bear idleness no longer, and opening the
dusty melodeon, tried to drown the dreary minor
music of the wind by some cheerful selection from
the hymn-book Mrs. Storrs brought him, having
a vague idea that secular music was out of keeping
with the character of that instrument. After
a few moments' aimless fingering the keys he found himself pedalling a laborious accompaniment to
the "Dead March" from Saul, and closed the
wheezy little organ in despair.

 The long day dragged somehow by, and at
supper Sarah appeared, if anything, whiter and
more uninteresting than ever, only to retire immediately
when the meal was over.

 "I might's well tell you, Mr. Willard, that you
c'n give up all hope of paintin' any more this
week," announced Mrs. Storrs, as the door closed
behind her daughter. "This wind's good for a
week, I guess. I'm sorry to have you go, but I
shouldn't feel honest not to tell you." Mentally
vowing to leave the next morning, Willard thanked
her, and explained that the study was far enough
advanced to be completed at his studio in the city,
and that he had intended leaving very shortly.

 II

 A few moments later, as he stood at the window
in the parlour, looking at the waving elm-boughs
and lazily wondering how the moon could be so
bright when there were so many clouds, the soft swish of a woman's skirt sounded close to his ear.
As he turned, the frightened "Oh!" and the little
gasp of surprised femininity revealed Sarah, standing
near the table in the centre of the room. Even
at that distance and in the dark he was aware of
a difference in her, a subtle element of personality
not present before.

 "Did I frighten you?" he asked, coming nearer.

 "No, not very much. Only I thought nobody
would be here. I—I—wanted some place to breathe
in; it seems so tight and close in the house." As
she spoke, a violent blast of wind drove the shutters
against the side of the house and rubbed together
the branches of the elm until they creaked
dismally. She pressed her face against the glass
and stared out into the dark.

 "Don't you love it?" she questioned, almost
eagerly.

 Willard shook his head dubiously. "Don't know.
Looks pretty cool. If it gets much higher, I
shouldn't care to walk far."

 She took her old place by the table again, but
soon left it, and wandered restlessly about the room. As she passed him he was conscious of a
distinct physical impression—a kind of electric
presence. She seemed to gather and hold about her
all the faint light of the cold room, and the sweep
of her skirt against his foot seemed to draw him
toward her. Suddenly she stopped her irregular
march.

 "Hear it sing!" she whispered.

 The now distinct voice of the wind grew to a
long, minor wail, that rose and fell with rhythmic
regularity. As she paused with uplifted finger near
him, Willard felt with amazement a compelling
force, a personality more intense, for the time, than
his own. Then, as the blast, with a shriek that
echoed for a moment with startling distinctness
from every side, dashed the elm branches against
the house itself, she turned abruptly and left the
room. "Stay here!" she said shortly, and, resisting
the impulse to follow her, he obeyed. In a few moments
she returned with a heavy shawl wrapped
over her head and shoulders.

 "Hold the window open for me," she said, "I'm
going out." He attempted remonstrance, but she waved him impatiently away. "I can't get out of
the door—mother's locked it and taken the key,
but you can hold up the window while I get out.
Oh, come yourself, if you like! But nothing can
happen to me."

 Mechanically he held open the window as she
slipped out, and, dragging his overcoat after him,
scrambled through himself. She was waiting for
him at the corner of the house, and as he stumbled
in the unfamiliar shadows, held out her hand.

 "Here, take hold of my hand," she commanded.
Her cool, slim grasp was strangely pleasant, as
she hurried along with a smooth, gliding motion,
wholly unlike her indifferent gait of the day before.

 Once out of the shelter of the house, the storm
struck them with full force, and Willard realised
that he was well-nigh strangled in the clutches of
a genuine Maine gale.

 "What folly!" he gasped, crowding his hat
over his eyes and struggling to gain his wonted
consciousness of superiority. "Come back instantly,
Miss Storrs! Your mother——"

  "Come! come!" she interrupted, pulling him
along.

 He stared at her in amazement. Her eyes were
wide open and almost black with excitement. Her
face gleamed like ivory in the cold light. Her lips
were parted and curved in a happy smile. Her
slender body swayed easily with the wind that
nearly bent Willard double. She seemed unreal—a
phantom of the storm, a veritable wind-spirit.
Her loosened hair flew across his face, and its touch
completed the strange thrill that her hand-clasp
brought. He followed unresistingly.

 "Aren't—you—afraid—of—the—woods?" he
gasped, the gusts tearing the words from his lips,
as he saw that she was making for the thick growth
of trees that bordered the cliff. Her high, light
laughter almost frightened him, so weird and unhuman
it came to him on the wind.

 "Why should I be afraid? The woods are so
beautiful in a storm! They bow and nod and throw
their branches about—oh, they're best of all,
then!"

 A sweeping blast nearly threw him down, and he instinctively dropped her hand, since there was
no possible feeling of protection for her, her footing
was so sure, her balance so perfect. As he
righted himself and staggered to the shelter of
the tree under which she was standing, he stopped,
lost in wonder and admiration. She had impatiently
thrown off the shawl and stood in a gleam
of moonlight under the tree. Her long, straight
hair flew out in two fluttering wisps at either side;
her straight, fine brows, her dark, long lashes, her
slender, curved mouth were painted against her
pale face in clear relief. Her eyes were widely
open, the pupils dark and gleaming. It seemed to
his excited glance that rays of light streamed from
them to him. "Heavens! she's a beauty! If only
I could catch that pose!" he said under his
breath.

 "Come!" she called to him again, "we're wasting
time! I want to get to the cliff!" He pressed
on to her, but she slipped around the tree and
eluded him, keeping a little in advance as he
panted on, fighting with all the force of a fairly
powerful man against the gale that seemed to offer her no resistance. It occurred to him, as he
watched with a greedy artist's eye the almost unnatural
ease and lightness of her walk, that she
caught intuitively the turns of the wind, guiding
along currents and channels unknown to him, for
she seemed with it always, never against it. Once
she threw out both her arms in an abandon of
delight, and actually leaned on the gust that
tossed him against a tree, baffled and wearied with
his efforts to keep pace with her, and confusedly
wondering if he would wake soon from this improbable
dream.

 Speech was impossible. The whistling of the
wind alone was deafening, and his voice was blown
in twenty directions when he attempted to call her.
Small twigs lashed his face, slippery boughs glided
from his grasp, and the trees fled by in a thick-grown
crowd to his dazed eyes. To his right, a
birch suddenly fell with a snapping crash. He
leaped to one side, only to feel about his face a
blinding storm of pattering acorns from the great
oak that with a rending sigh and swish tottered
through the air at his left.

  "Good God!" he cried in terror, as he saw her
standing apparently in its track. A veer in the
gale altered the direction of the great trunk, that
sank to the ground across her path. As it fell,
with an indescribable, swaying bound she leaped
from the ground, and before it quite touched the
earth she rested lightly upon it. She seemed absolutely
unreal—a dryad of the windy wood. All
fear for her left him. As she stood poised on the
still trembling trunk, a quick gust blew out her
skirt to a bubble on one side, and drove it close to
her slender body on the other, while her loose hair
streamed like a banner along the wind. She curved
her figure towards him and made a cup of one
hand, laying it beside her opened lips. What she
said he did not hear. He was rapt in delighted
wonder at the consummate grace of her attitude,
the perfect poise of her body. She was a figure
in a Greek frieze—a bas-relief—a breathing
statue.

 Unable to make him hear, she turned slightly
and pointed ahead. He realised the effect of the
Wingless Victory in its unbroken beauty. She was not a woman, but an incarnate art, a miracle of
changing line and curve, a ceaseless inspiration.

 Suddenly he heard the pound and boom of the
surf. In an ecstasy of impatience she hurried back,
seized his hand, and fairly dragged him on. The
crash of the waves and the wind together took
from him all power of connected thought. He
clung to her hand like a child, and when she threw
herself down on her face to breathe, he grasped
her dress and panted in her ear: "We—can't—get—much—farther—unless—you—can—walk—the—Atlantic!"
She smiled happily back at
him, and the thickness of her hair, blown by the
wind from the ocean about his face, brought him
a strange, unspeakable content.

 "Shall we ever go back?" he whispered, half to
himself. "Or will you float down the cliff and wake
me by your going?"

 Her wide, dark eyes answered him silently. "It
is like a dream, though," her high, sweet voice
added. And then he realised that she had hardly
spoken since they left the house. The house? As in a dream he tried vaguely to connect this Undine
of the wood with the girl whose body she had
stolen for this night's pranks. As in a dream he
rose and followed her back, through the howling,
sweeping wind. Her cold, slim hand held his; her
light, shrill voice sang little snatches of songs—hymns,
he remembered afterward. As the moonlight
fell on her, he wondered dreamily why he
had thought her too thin. And all the while he
fought, half-unconsciously, the resistless gale, that
spared him only when he yielded utterly.

 The house gleamed white and square before
them. Silently he raised the window for her. He
had no thought of lifting her in. That she should
slip lightly through was of course. The house was
still lighted, and he heard the creaking of her
mother's rocking-chair in the bedroom over his
head. He looked at his watch. "Does her mother
rock all night?" he thought dully, for it was
nearly twelve. She read his question from the perplexed
glance he threw at her.

 "She's sitting up to watch the door so that I
sha'n't get out," she whispered quietly, without a smile. "Good-bye." And he stood alone in the
room.

 Until late the next morning he wandered in
strange, wearied, yet fascinating dreams with her.
Vague sounds, as of high-pitched reproaches and
quiet sobbing, mingled with his morning dreams,
and when, with aching head and thoroughly bewildered
brain, he went to his late breakfast, Mrs.
Storrs served him; only as he left for the
train, possessed by a longing for the great, busy
city of his daily work, did he see her daughter,
walking listlessly about the house. Her freckled
face was paler than ever, her half-closed eyes reddened,
and her slight, awkward bow in recognition
of his puzzled salute might have been directed to
some one behind him. Only his aching head and
wearied feet assured him that the strangest night
of his life had been no dream.

 III

 That his studio should seem bare and uninteresting
as he threw open the door, and tried to
kindle a fire in the dusty stove, did not surprise him. That the sketches and studies in colour should
look tame and flat to the eye that had been fed
for two weeks with Maine surf, angry clouds, and
swaying branches, was perhaps only natural. But
as the days went on and he failed to get in train
for work a puzzled wonder slowly grew in him.
Why was it that the picture dragged so? He remembered
perfectly the look of the beach, the feel
of the cold, hungry water, the heavy, grey clouds,
the primitive, forbidding austerity that a while
ago he had been so confidently eager to put on the
canvas. Why was it that he sat for hours together
helplessly staring at it? His friends supposed him
wrapped in his subject, working under a high
pressure, and considerately left him alone; they
would have marvelled greatly had they seen him
glowering moodily at the merest study of the subject
he had described so vividly to them, smoking
countless packages of cigarettes, hardly lifting his
hand from his chair-arm.

 Once he threw down a handful of brushes and
started out for a tramp. It occurred to him that
the city sights and smells, the endless hum and roar, the rapid pace of the crowded streets would
tone him up and set his thoughts in a new line;
he was tired of the whistling gales and tossing
trunks and booming surf that haunted his nights
and confused his days. A block away from the
studio a flower-woman met him with a tray of
daffodils and late crocuses. A sudden puff of wind
blew out her scant, thin skirt; a tree in the centre
of the park they were crossing bent to it, the
branches creaked faintly. The fresh, earthy odour
of the flowers moved him strangely. He bought a
bunch, turned, and went back to the studio,
to sit for an hour gazing sightlessly ahead of
him.

 Suddenly he started up and approached the
sketch.

 "It wants wind," he muttered, half unconsciously,
and fell to work. An hour passed, two,
three—he still painted rapidly. Just as the light
was fading a thunderous knock at the door ushered
in the two men he knew best. He nodded vaguely,
and they crossed the room in silence and looked
at the picture. For a few moments no one spoke. Presently Willard took a brush from his mouth
and faced them.

 "Well?" he said.

 The older man shook his head. "Queer sky!"
he answered briefly.

 The younger looked questioningly at Willard.
"You'll have to get a gait on you if you hope to
beat Morris with that," he said. "What's up,
Willard? Don't you want that prize?"

 "Of course I do." His voice sounded dull, even
to himself. "You aren't any too sympathetic, you
fellows——" he tried to feel injured.

 The older man came nearer. "What's that white
thing there? Good Lord, Will, you're not going to
try a figure——"

 Willard brushed rapidly over the shadowy outline.
"No—that was just a sketch. The whole
thing's just a sort of——"

 "The whole thing's just a bluff!" interrupted
the younger man, decidedly. "It's not what you
told us about at all—and it's not good, anyway.
It looks as if a tornado had struck it! You said it
was to be late afternoon—it's nearer midnight, as far as I can see! What's that tree lying around
for?"

 His tone was abusive, but a genuine concern and
surprise was underneath it. He looked furtively at
his older friend behind Willard's back. The other
shook his head expressively.

 Willard bit his lip. "I only wanted to try—it
won't necessarily stay that way," he explained.
He wished he cared more for what they said. He
wished they did not bore him so unspeakably.
More than all, he wished they would go.

 The younger one whistled softly. "Pretty late
in the day to be making up your mind, I should
say," he remarked. "When's it going to dry
in? Morris has been working like a horse on his
for six weeks. He's coming on, too—splendid
colour!"

 Willard lit a cigarette. "Damn Morris!" he said
casually. The older man drew on his glove and
turned to go.

 "Oh, certainly!" he replied cheerfully. "By all
means! No, we can't stay—we only dropped in.
We just thought we'd see how you were getting along. If I were you, Will, I'd make up my mind
about that intoxicated tree and set it up straight—good-bye!"

 They went out cheerfully enough, but he knew
they were disappointed and hurt—they had expected
so much from that picture. And he wished
he cared more. He looked at it critically. Of course
it was bad, but how could they tell what he had
been doing? It was the plan of months changed
utterly in three hours. The result was ridiculous,
but he needed it no longer—he knew what he
wanted now, what he had been fighting against all
these days. He would paint it if he could—and
till he could. The insistent artist-passion to express
even bunglingly something of the unendurable
beauty of that strange night was on him,
and before the echo of his guests' departure had
died away he was working as he had never worked
before, the old picture lying unnoticed in the corner
where he had thrown it.

 He needed no models, he did not use his studies.
Was it not printed on his brain, was it not etched
into his heart, that weird vision of the storm, with the floating fairy creature that hardly touched the
earth? Was there a lovely curve in all her melting
postures, which slipped like water circles into new
shapes, that he did not know? That haunting,
elf-like look, that ineffably exquisite abandon , had
he not studied it greedily then in the wood, and
later, in his restless dreams? The trees were sentient,
the bushes put out clasping fingers to detain
him, the wind shrieked out its angry soul at him;
and she, the white wonder with her floating wisps
of stinging hair, had joined with them to mock at
him, the startled witness of that mad revel of all
the elements. He knew all this—he was drunk with
it: could he paint it? Or would people see only a
strange-eyed girl dancing in a wood?

 He did not know how many days he had been
at work on it; he ate what the cleaning-woman
brought him; his face was bristled with a stubby
growth; the cigarette boxes strewed the floor. Men
appeared at the door, and he urged them peevishly
to go away; people brought messages, and he said
he was not in town, and returned the notes unread.
In the morning he smiled and breathed hard and patted the easel; at night he bit his nails and
cursed himself for a colour-blind fool.

 There was a white birch, strained and bent in
the wind, that troubled him still, and as he was
giving it the last touches, in the cold, strong afternoon
light, the door burst open.

 "Look here, the thing closes at six! Are you
crazy?" they called to him, exasperatedly. "Aren't
you going to send it?"

 "That's all right, that's all right," he muttered
vaguely, "shut up, can't you?"

 They stood over behind him, and there was a
stillness in the room. He laid down his palette
carefully and turned to them, a worried look on
his drawn, bristled face.

 "That's meant to be the ocean beyond the cliff
there," he said, an almost childlike fear in his eyes,
"did—did you know it?"

 The older man drew in a long breath.

 "Lord, yes! I hear it!" he returned, "do you
think we're deaf?"

 The younger one squinted at various distances,
muttering to himself.

  "Dryad? Undine? No, she frightens you, but
she's sweet! George! He's painted the wind! He's
actually drawn a wind! My, but it's stunning!
My!"

 Willard sank into a chair. He was flushed and
his legs shook. He patted the terrier unsteadily
and talked to her. "Well, then! Well, then! So
she was, iss, so she was!"

 The older man snapped his watch. "Five-thirty,"
he said. "Put something 'round it, and
whistle a cab—we'll have to hurry!"

 Willard fingered some dead crocuses on the
stand beside him. "Look out, you fool, it's wet!"
he growled. The older man patted his shoulder.

 "All right, boy, all right!" he said soothingly.
"It's all done, now—never mind!"

 They shouldered it out of the door while he
pulled the terrier's ears.

 "Where you going?" they called.

 "Turkish bath. Restaurant. Vaudeville," he answered,
and they nodded.

 "All alone?"

 "Yes, thanks. Drop in to-morrow!"

  "——And drive like thunder!" he heard them
through the open window.

 A week later he was walking up Broadway between
them, sniffing the fresh, sweet air comfortably,
the terrier at his heels. At intervals they
read him bits from the enthusiastic comments of
the critics.

 "Mr. Willard, whose 'Windflower' distanced all
competitors and won the Minot prize by a unanimous
verdict of the judges, has displayed, aside
from his thorough master of technic, a breadth
of atmosphere, an imaginative range rarely if ever
equalled by an American. Nothing but the work
itself, so manifestly idealistic in subject and treatment,
could convince us that it is not a study from
life, so keen, so haunting is the impression produced
by the remarkable figure of the Spirit of
the Gale, who seems to sink before our eyes on the
falling trunk, literally riding the storm. In direct
contrast to this abandon of the figure is the admirable
reticence of the background which is keyed
so low——"

 Willard stopped abruptly before the window of a large art establishment where a photograph of
the picture was already displayed. "I want one
of those," he said, "and I'm going out into the
country for a bit before I sail, I think."

 "Oh, back there?" they asked, comprehensively.

 "Yes, back there!"

 IV

 As the train rushed along he explained to himself
why he was going—why he had not merely
sent the photograph. He wanted to see her, to
brush away the cloud of illusion that the weeks
had spun around her. He wanted to realise definitely
the difference between the pale, silent, unformed
New England girl and the fascinating
personality of his picture. Ever since he left her
they had grown confused, these two that his common
sense told him were so different, and he was
beginning to dread the unavowed hope that for
him, at least, they might be some day one. The
same passionate power that had thrown mystery
and beauty into colour on the canvas wove sweet, wild dreams around what he contemptuously told
himself was little better than a lay figure, but he
yielded to it now as he had then.

 When he told himself that he was going purposely
to hear her talk, to see her flat, unlovely
figure, to appreciate her utter lack of charm, of
all vitality, he realised that it was a cruel errand.
But when he felt the sharp thrill that he suffered
even in anticipation as his quick imagination pictured
the dream-cloud dropping off from her, actually
before his eyes, he believed the journey more
than ever a necessary one.

 As he walked up the little country street his
heart beat fast; the greening lawns, the fresh,
faint odours, the ageless, unnamable appeal of the
spring stirred his blood and thrilled him inexpressibly.
He was yet in the first flush of his success;
his whole nature was relaxed and sensitive to every
joy; he let himself drift on the sweet confused
expectancy, the delicious folly, the hope that he
was to find his dream, his inspiration, his spirit of
the wind and wood.

 A child passed him with a great bunch of daf fodils
and stopped to watch him long after he had
passed, wondering at the silver in her hand.

 At the familiar gate a tall, thin woman's figure
stopped his heart a second, and as a fitful gust
blew out her apron and tossed her shawl over her
head, he felt his breath come more quickly.

 "Good heavens!" he muttered, "what folly! Am
I never to see a woman's skirt blown without——"

 She put the shawl back as he neared her—it
was Mrs. Storrs's sister. She met his outstretched
hand with a blank stare. Suddenly her face
twitched convulsively.

 "O Mr. Willard! O Mr. Willard!" she cried,
and burst into tears.

 The wind blew sharper, the elm tree near the
window creaked, a dull pain grew in him.

 "What is it? What's the matter?" he said
brusquely.

 "I suppose you ain't heard—you wouldn't be
apt to!" she sobbed, and pushing back the locks
the wind drove into her reddened eyes, she broke
into incoherent sentences: he heard her as one in
a dream.

  "And she would go—'twas the twenty-fifth—there
was dozens o' trees blown down—'twas just
before dark—her mother, she ran out after her
as soon's she knew—she called, but she didn't hear—she
saw her on the edge o' the rocks, an' she
almost got up to her an' screamed, an' it scared
her, we think—she turned 'round quick, an' she
went right off the cliff an' her mother saw her go—'twas
awful!"

 Willard's eyes went beyond her to the woods;
the woman's voice, with its high, flat intonation,
brought the past so vividly before him that he
was unconscious of the actual scene—he lived
through the quick, terrible drama with the intensity
of a witness of it.

 "No, they haven't found her yet—the surf's too
high. We always had a feeling she wouldn't live—she
wasn't like other girls——"

 Half unconsciously he unwrapped the photograph.

 "I—I brought this," he said dully. The woman
blanched and clutched the gate-post.

 "Oh, take it away! Take it away!" she gasped, a real terror in her eyes. "O Mr. Willard, how
could you—it's awful! I—I wouldn't have her
mother see it for all the world!" Her sobs grew
uncontrollable.

 He bent it slowly across and thrust it in his
pocket.

 "No, no," he said soothingly, "of course not,
of course not. I only wanted to tell—you all—that
it took the prize I told you about and—and
was a good thing for me. I hoped—I hoped——"

 He saw that she was trembling in the sudden
cold wind, and held out his hand.

 "This has been a great shock to me," he said
quietly, his eyes still on the woods. "Please tell Mrs.
Storrs how I sympathise—how startled I was. I
am going abroad in a few days. I will send you my
address, and if there is ever anything I can do, you
will gratify me more than you can know by letting
me help you in any way. Give her these," and he
thrust out the great bunch of daffodils to her.
She took them, still crying softly, and turned
towards the house.

 Later he found himself in the woods near the great oak that lay just as it had fallen that night.
Beneath all the confused tumult of his thoughts
one clear truth rang like a bell, one bitter-sweet
certainty that caught him smiling strangely as he
realised it! "She's won! She's won!"

 There, while the branches swayed above him,
and the surf, sinister and monotonous, pounded
below, the vision that had made them both famous
melted into the elusive reality, and he lived again
with absolute abandonment that sweet mad night,
he felt again her hair blown about his face as he
lay on the windy cliff with the lady of his dreams.

 For him her fate was not dreadful—she could
not have died like other women. There was an intoxication
in her sudden taking away: she was
rapt out of life as she would have wished, he knew.

 Slowly there grew upon him a frightened wonder
if she had lived for this. Her actual life had
been so empty, so unreal, so concentrated in those
piercing stolen moments; she had ended it, once
the heart of it had been caught and fixed to give
to others faint thrills of all she had felt so utterly.

 "She died for it!" he felt, with a kind of awe that was far from all personal vanity—the blameless
egoism of the artist.

 He left the little town hardly consciously. On
his outward voyage, when the gale beat the
vessel and the wind howled to the thundering
waves, he came to know that though a love more
real, a passion less elusive, might one day hold
him, there would rest always in his heart and brain
one ceaseless inspiration, one strange, sweet memory
that nothing could efface.