ADVICE TO LITTLE GIRLS

 Good little girls ought not to make mouths at their teachers for every
      trifling offense. This retaliation should only be resorted to under
      peculiarly aggravated circumstances.

 If you have nothing but a rag-doll stuffed with sawdust, while one of your
      more fortunate little playmates has a costly China one, you should treat
      her with a show of kindness nevertheless. And you ought not to attempt to
      make a forcible swap with her unless your conscience would justify you in
      it, and you know you are able to do it.

 You ought never to take your little brother's “chewing-gum” away from him
      by main force; it is better to rope him in with the promise of the first
      two dollars and a half you find floating down the river on a grindstone.
      In the artless simplicity natural to this time of life, he will regard it
      as a perfectly fair transaction. In all ages of the world this eminently
      plausible fiction has lured the obtuse infant to financial ruin and
      disaster.

 If at any time you find it necessary to correct your brother, do not
      correct him with mud—never, on any account, throw mud at him,
      because it will spoil his clothes. It is better to scald him a little, for
      then you obtain desirable results. You secure his immediate attention to
      the lessons you are inculcating, and at the same time your hot water will
      have a tendency to move impurities from his person, and possibly the skin,
      in spots.

 If your mother tells you to do a thing, it is wrong to reply that you
      won't. It is better and more becoming to intimate that you will do as she
      bids you, and then afterward act quietly in the matter according to the
      dictates of your best judgment.

 You should ever bear in mind that it is to your kind parents that you are
      indebted for your food, and for the privilege of staying home from school
      when you let on that you are sick. Therefore you ought to respect their
      little prejudices, and humor their little whims, and put up with their
      little foibles until they get to crowding you too much.

 Good little girls always show marked deference for the aged. You ought
      never to “sass” old people unless they “sass” you first.