AFTER

 “My darlings,” said the comtesse, “you might go to bed.”

 The three children, two girls and a boy, rose and kissed their
      grandmother. Then they said good-night to M. le Cure, who had dined at the
      chateau, as was his custom every Thursday.

 The Abbe Mauduit lifted two of the children on his knees, passing his long
      arms clad in black round their necks, and kissing them tenderly on the
      forehead as he drew their heads toward him as a father might.

 Then he set them down on the ground, and the little beings went off, the
      boy ahead, and the girls following.

 “You are fond of children, M. le Cure,” said the comtesse.

 “Very fond, madame.”

 The old woman raised her bright eyes toward the priest.

 “And—has your solitude never weighed too heavily on you?”

 “Yes, sometimes.”

 He became silent, hesitated, and then added: “But I was never made
      for ordinary life.”

 “What do you know about it?”

 “Oh! I know very well. I was made to be a priest; I followed my
      vocation.”

 The comtesse kept staring at him:

 “Come now, M. le Cure, tell me this—tell me how it was you
      resolved to renounce forever all that makes the rest of us love life—all
      that consoles and sustains us? What is it that drove you, impelled you, to
      separate yourself from the great natural path of marriage and the family?
      You are neither an enthusiast nor a fanatic, neither a gloomy person nor a
      sad person. Was it some incident, some sorrow, that led you to take life
      vows?”

 The Abbe Mauduit rose and approached the fire, then, holding toward the
      flame his big shoes, such as country priests generally wear, he seemed
      still hesitating as to what reply he should make.

 He was a tall old man with white hair, and for the last twenty years had
      been pastor of the parish of Saint-Antoine-du-Rocher. The peasants said of
      him: “There's a good man for you!” And indeed he was a good
      man, benevolent, friendly to all, gentle, and, to crown all, generous.
      Like Saint Martin, he would have cut his cloak in two. He laughed readily,
      and wept also, on slight provocation, just like a woman—which
      prejudiced him more or less in the hard minds of the country folk.

 The old Comtesse de Saville, living in retirement in her chateau of
      Rocher, in order to bring up her grandchildren, after the successive
      deaths of her son and her daughter-in-law, was very much attached to her
      cure, and used to say of him: “What a heart he has!”

 He came every Thursday to spend the evening with the comtesse, and they
      were close friends, with the frank and honest friendship of old people.

 She persisted:

 “Look here, M. le Cure! it is your turn now to make a confession!”

 He repeated: “I was not made for ordinary life. I saw it fortunately
      in time, and I have had many proofs since that I made no mistake on the
      point:

 “My parents, who were mercers in Verdiers, and were quite well to
      do, had great ambitions for me. They sent me to a boarding school while I
      was very young. No one knows what a boy may suffer at school through the
      mere fact of separation, of isolation. This monotonous life without
      affection is good for some, and detestable for others. Young people are
      often more sensitive than one supposes, and by shutting them up thus too
      soon, far from those they love, we may develop to an exaggerated extent a
      sensitiveness which is overwrought and may become sickly and dangerous.

 “I scarcely ever played; I had no companions; I passed my hours in
      homesickness; I spent the whole night weeping in my bed. I sought to bring
      before my mind recollections of home, trifling memories of little things,
      little events. I thought incessantly of all I had left behind there. I
      became almost imperceptibly an over-sensitive youth to whom the slightest
      annoyances were terrible griefs.

 “In this way I remained taciturn, self-absorbed, without expansion,
      without confidants. This mental excitement was going on secretly and
      surely. The nerves of children are quickly affected, and one should see to
      it that they live a tranquil life until they are almost fully developed.
      But who ever reflects that, for certain boys, an unjust imposition may be
      as great a pang as the death of a friend in later years? Who can explain
      why certain young temperaments are liable to terrible emotions for the
      slightest cause, and may eventually become morbid and incurable?

 “This was my case. This faculty of regret developed in me to such an
      extent that my existence became a martyrdom.

 “I did not speak about it; I said nothing about it; but gradually I
      became so sensitive that my soul resembled an open wound. Everything that
      affected me gave me painful twitchings, frightful shocks, and consequently
      impaired my health. Happy are the men whom nature has buttressed with
      indifference and armed with stoicism.

 “I reached my sixteenth year. An excessive timidity had arisen from
      this abnormal sensitiveness. Feeling myself unprotected from all the
      attacks of chance or fate, I feared every contact, every approach, every
      current. I lived as though I were threatened by an unknown and always
      expected misfortune. I did not venture either to speak or do anything in
      public. I had, indeed, the feeling that life, is a battle, a dreadful
      conflict in which one receives terrible blows, grievous, mortal wounds. In
      place of cherishing, like all men, a cheerful anticipation of the morrow,
      I had only a confused fear of it, and felt in my own mind a desire to
      conceal myself to avoid that combat in which I would be vanquished and
      slain.

 “As soon as my studies were finished, they gave me six months' time
      to choose a career. A very simple occurrence showed me clearly, all of a
      sudden, the diseased condition of my mind, made me understand the danger,
      and determined me to flee from it.

 “Verdiers is a little town surrounded with plains and woods. In the
      central street stands my parents' house. I now passed my days far from
      this dwelling which I had so much regretted, so much desired. Dreams had
      reawakened in me, and I walked alone in the fields in order to let them
      escape and fly away. My father and mother, quite occupied with business,
      and anxious about my future, talked to me only about their profits or
      about my possible plans. They were fond of me after the manner of
      hardheaded, practical people; they had more reason than heart in their
      affection for me. I lived imprisoned in my thoughts, and vibrating with my
      eternal sensitiveness.

 “Now, one evening, after a long walk, as I was making my way home
      with great strides so as not to be late, I saw a dog trotting toward me.
      He was a species of red spaniel, very lean, with long curly ears.

 “When he was ten paces away from me he stopped. I did the same. Then
      he began wagging his tail, and came over to me with short steps and
      nervous movements of his whole body, bending down on his paws as if
      appealing to me, and softly shaking his head. I spoke to him. He then
      began to crawl along in such a sad, humble, suppliant manner that I felt
      the tears coming into my eyes. I approached him; he ran away, then he came
      back again; and I bent down on one knee trying to coax him to approach me,
      with soft words. At last, he was within reach of my hands, and I gently
      and very carefully stroked him.

 “He gained courage, gradually rose and, placing his paws on my
      shoulders, began to lick my face. He followed me to the house.

 “This was really the first being I had passionately loved, because
      he returned my affection. My attachment to this animal was certainly
      exaggerated and ridiculous. It seemed to me in a confused sort of way that
      we were two brothers, lost on this earth, and therefore isolated and
      without defense, one as well as the other. He never again quitted my side.
      He slept at the foot of my bed, ate at the table in spite of the
      objections of my parents, and followed me in my solitary walks.

 “I often stopped at the side of a ditch, and sat down in the grass.
      Sam immediately rushed up, lay down at my feet, and lifted up my hand with
      his muzzle that I might caress him.

 “One day toward the end of June, as we were on the road from
      Saint-Pierre de Chavrol, I saw the diligence from Pavereau coming along.
      Its four horses were going at a gallop, with its yellow body, and its
      imperial with the black leather hood. The coachman cracked his whip; a
      cloud of dust rose up under the wheels of the heavy vehicle, then floated
      behind, just as a cloud would do.

 “Suddenly, as the vehicle came close to me, Sam, perhaps frightened
      by the noise and wishing to join me, jumped in front of it. A horse's hoof
      knocked him down. I saw him roll over, turn round, fall back again beneath
      the horses' feet, then the coach gave two jolts, and behind it I saw
      something quivering in the dust on the road. He was nearly cut in two; all
      his intestines were hanging out and blood was spurting from the wound. He
      tried to get up, to walk, but he could only move his two front paws, and
      scratch the ground with them, as if to make a hole. The two others were
      already dead. And he howled dreadfully, mad with pain.

 “He died in a few minutes. I cannot describe how much I felt and
      suffered. I was confined to my room for a month.

 “One night, my father, enraged at seeing me so affected by such a
      trifling occurrence, exclaimed:

 “'How will it be when you have real griefs—if you lose your
      wife or children?'

 “His words haunted me and I began to see my condition clearly. I
      understood why all the small miseries of each day assumed in my eyes the
      importance of a catastrophe; I saw that I was organized in such a way that
      I suffered dreadfully from everything, that every painful impression was
      multiplied by my diseased sensibility, and an atrocious fear of life took
      possession of me. I was without passions, without ambitions; I resolved to
      sacrifice possible joys in order to avoid sure sorrows. Existence is
      short, but I made up my mind to spend it in the service of others, in
      relieving their troubles and enjoying their happiness. Having no direct
      experience of either one or the other, I should only experience a milder
      form of emotion.

 “And if you only knew how, in spite of this, misery tortures me,
      ravages me! But what would formerly have been an intolerable affliction
      has become commiseration, pity.

 “These sorrows which cross my path at every moment, I could not
      endure if they affected me directly. I could not have seen one of my
      children die without dying myself. And I have, in spite of everything,
      preserved such a mysterious, overwhelming fear of events that the sight of
      the postman entering my house makes a shiver pass every day through my
      veins, and yet I have nothing to be afraid of now.”

 The Abbe Mauduit ceased speaking. He stared into the fire in the huge
      grate, as if he saw there mysterious things, all the unknown of the
      existence he might have passed had he been more fearless in the face of
      suffering.

 He added, then, in a subdued tone:

 “I was right. I was not made for this world.”

 The comtesse said nothing at first; but at length, after a long silence,
      she remarked:

 “For my part, if I had not my grandchildren, I believe I would not
      have the courage to live.”

 And the cure rose up without saying another word.

 As the servants were asleep in the kitchen, she accompanied him herself to
      the door, which looked out on the garden, and she saw his tall shadow, lit
      up by the reflection of the lamp, disappearing through the gloom of night.

 Then she came back and sat down before the fire, and pondered over many
      things we never think of when we are young.