AMENDED OBITUARIES

  TO THE EDITOR:

 Sir,—I am approaching seventy; it is in sight; it is only three
        years away. Necessarily, I must go soon. It is but matter-of-course
        wisdom, then, that I should begin to set my worldly house in order now,
        so that it may be done calmly and with thoroughness, in place of waiting
        until the last day, when, as we have often seen, the attempt to set both
        houses in order at the same time has been marred by the necessity for
        haste and by the confusion and waste of time arising from the inability
        of the notary and the ecclesiastic to work together harmoniously, taking
        turn about and giving each other friendly assistance—not perhaps
        in fielding, which could hardly be expected, but at least in the minor
        offices of keeping game and umpiring; by consequence of which conflict
        of interests and absence of harmonious action a draw has frequently
        resulted where this ill-fortune could not have happened if the houses
        had been set in order one at a time and hurry avoided by beginning in
        season, and giving to each the amount of time fairly and justly proper
        to it.

 In setting my earthly house in order I find it of moment that I should
        attend in person to one or two matters which men in my position have
        long had the habit of leaving wholly to others, with consequences often
        most regrettable. I wish to speak of only one of these matters at this
        time: Obituaries. Of necessity, an Obituary is a thing which cannot be
        so judiciously edited by any hand as by that of the subject of it. In
        such a work it is not the Facts that are of chief importance, but the
        light which the obituarist shall throw upon them, the meaning which he
        shall dress them in, the conclusions which he shall draw from them, and
        the judgments which he shall deliver upon them. The Verdicts, you
        understand: that is the danger-line.

 In considering this matter, in view of my approaching change, it has
        seemed to me wise to take such measures as may be feasible, to acquire,
        by courtesy of the press, access to my standing obituaries, with the
        privilege—if this is not asking too much—of editing, not
        their Facts, but their Verdicts. This, not for the present profit,
        further than as concerns my family, but as a favorable influence usable
        on the Other Side, where there are some who are not friendly to me.

 With this explanation of my motives, I will now ask you of your courtesy
        to make an appeal for me to the public press. It is my desire that such
        journals and periodicals as have obituaries of me lying in their
        pigeonholes, with a view to sudden use some day, will not wait longer,
        but will publish them now, and kindly send me a marked copy. My address
        is simply New York City—I have no other that is permanent and not
        transient.

 I will correct them—not the Facts, but the Verdicts—striking
        out such clauses as could have a deleterious influence on the Other
        Side, and replacing them with clauses of a more judicious character. I
        should, of course, expect to pay double rates for both the omissions and
        the substitutions; and I should also expect to pay quadruple rates for
        all obituaries which proved to be rightly and wisely worded in the
        originals, thus requiring no emendations at all.

 It is my desire to leave these Amended Obituaries neatly bound behind me
        as a perennial consolation and entertainment to my family, and as an
        heirloom which shall have a mournful but definite commercial value for
        my remote posterity.

 I beg, sir, that you will insert this Advertisement (1t-eow, agate,
        inside), and send the bill to

 Yours very respectfully.

 Mark Twain.

 P.S.—For the best Obituary—one suitable for me to read in
        public, and calculated to inspire regret—I desire to offer a
        Prize, consisting of a Portrait of me done entirely by myself in pen and
        ink without previous instructions. The ink warranted to be the kind used
        by the very best artists.