AN ACTOR’S END
    

SHTCHIPTSOV, the
      “heavy father” and “good-hearted simpleton,” a
      tall and thick-set old man, not so much distinguished by his talents as an
      actor as by his exceptional physical strength, had a desperate quarrel
      with the manager during the performance, and just when the storm of words
      was at its height felt as though something had snapped in his chest.
      Zhukov, the manager, as a rule began at the end of every heated discussion
      to laugh hysterically and to fall into a swoon; on this occasion, however,
      Shtchiptsov did not remain for this climax, but hurried home. The high
      words and the sensation of something ruptured in his chest so agitated him
      as he left the theatre that he forgot to wash off his paint, and did
      nothing but take off his beard.
    

      When he reached his hotel room, Shtchiptsov spent a long time pacing up
      and down, then sat down on the bed, propped his head on his fists, and
      sank into thought. He sat like that without stirring or uttering a sound
      till two o’clock the next afternoon, when Sigaev, the comic man,
      walked into his room.
    

      “Why is it you did not come to the rehearsal, Booby Ivanitch?”
      the comic man began, panting and filling the room with fumes of vodka.
      “Where have you been?”
    

      Shtchiptsov made no answer, but simply stared at the comic man with
      lustreless eyes, under which there were smudges of paint.
    

      “You might at least have washed your phiz!” Sigaev went on.
      “You are a disgraceful sight! Have you been boozing, or . . . are
      you ill, or what? But why don’t you speak? I am asking you: are you
      ill?”
    

      Shtchiptsov did not speak. In spite of the paint on his face, the comic
      man could not help noticing his striking pallor, the drops of sweat on his
      forehead, and the twitching of his lips. His hands and feet were trembling
      too, and the whole huge figure of the “good-natured simpleton”
      looked somehow crushed and flattened. The comic man took a rapid glance
      round the room, but saw neither bottle nor flask nor any other suspicious
      vessel.
    

      “I say, Mishutka, you know you are ill!” he said in a flutter.
      “Strike me dead, you are ill! You don’t look yourself!”
    

      Shtchiptsov remained silent and stared disconsolately at the floor.
    

      “You must have caught cold,” said Sigaev, taking him by the
      hand. “Oh, dear, how hot your hands are! What’s the trouble?”
    

      “I wa-ant to go home,” muttered Shtchiptsov.
    

      “But you are at home now, aren’t you?”
    

      “No. . . . To Vyazma. . . .”
    

      “Oh, my, anywhere else! It would take you three years to get to your
      Vyazma. . . . What? do you want to go and see your daddy and mummy? I’ll
      be bound, they’ve kicked the bucket years ago, and you won’t
      find their graves. . . .”
    

      “My ho-ome’s there.”
    

      “Come, it’s no good giving way to the dismal dumps. These
      neurotic feelings are the limit, old man. You must get well, for you have
      to play Mitka in ‘The Terrible Tsar’ to-morrow. There is
      nobody else to do it. Drink something hot and take some castor-oil? Have
      you got the money for some castor-oil? Or, stay, I’ll run and buy
      some.”
    

      The comic man fumbled in his pockets, found a fifteen-kopeck piece, and
      ran to the chemist’s. A quarter of an hour later he came back.
    

      “Come, drink it,” he said, holding the bottle to the “heavy
      father’s” mouth. “Drink it straight out of the bottle. .
      . . All at a go! That’s the way. . . . Now nibble at a clove that
      your very soul mayn’t stink of the filthy stuff.”
    

      The comic man sat a little longer with his sick friend, then kissed him
      tenderly, and went away. Towards evening the jeune premier,
      Brama-Glinsky, ran in to see Shtchiptsov. The gifted actor was wearing a
      pair of prunella boots, had a glove on his left hand, was smoking a cigar,
      and even smelt of heliotrope, yet nevertheless he strongly suggested a
      traveller cast away in some land in which there were neither baths nor
      laundresses nor tailors. . . .
    

      “I hear you are ill?” he said to Shtchiptsov, twirling round
      on his heel. “What’s wrong with you? What’s wrong with
      you, really? . . .”
    

      Shtchiptsov did not speak nor stir.
    

      “Why don’t you speak? Do you feel giddy? Oh well, don’t
      talk, I won’t pester you . . . don’t talk. . . .”
    

      Brama-Glinsky (that was his stage name, in his passport he was called
      Guskov) walked away to the window, put his hands in his pockets, and fell
      to gazing into the street. Before his eyes stretched an immense waste,
      bounded by a grey fence beside which ran a perfect forest of last year’s
      burdocks. Beyond the waste ground was a dark, deserted factory, with
      windows boarded up. A belated jackdaw was flying round the chimney. This
      dreary, lifeless scene was beginning to be veiled in the dusk of evening.
    

      “I must go home!” the jeune premier heard.
    

      “Where is home?”
    

      “To Vyazma . . . to my home. . . .”
    

      “It is a thousand miles to Vyazma . . . my boy,” sighed
      Brama-Glinsky, drumming on the window-pane. “And what do you want to
      go to Vyazma for?”
    

      “I want to die there.”
    

      “What next! Now he’s dying! He has fallen ill for the first
      time in his life, and already he fancies that his last hour is come. . . .
      No, my boy, no cholera will carry off a buffalo like you. You’ll
      live to be a hundred. . . . Where’s the pain?”
    

      “There’s no pain, but I . . . feel . . .”
    

      “You don’t feel anything, it all comes from being too healthy.
      Your surplus energy upsets you. You ought to get jolly tight—drink,
      you know, till your whole inside is topsy-turvy. Getting drunk is
      wonderfully restoring. . . . Do you remember how screwed you were at
      Rostov on the Don? Good Lord, the very thought of it is alarming! Sashka
      and I together could only just carry in the barrel, and you emptied it
      alone, and even sent for rum afterwards. . . . You got so drunk you were
      catching devils in a sack and pulled a lamp-post up by the roots. Do you
      remember? Then you went off to beat the Greeks. . . .”
    

      Under the influence of these agreeable reminiscences Shtchiptsov’s
      face brightened a little and his eyes began to shine.
    

      “And do you remember how I beat Savoikin the manager?” he
      muttered, raising his head. “But there! I’ve beaten
      thirty-three managers in my time, and I can’t remember how many
      smaller fry. And what managers they were! Men who would not permit the
      very winds to touch them! I’ve beaten two celebrated authors and one
      painter!”
    

      “What are you crying for?”
    

      “At Kherson I killed a horse with my fists. And at Taganrog some
      roughs fell upon me at night, fifteen of them. I took off their caps and
      they followed me, begging: ‘Uncle, give us back our caps.’
      That’s how I used to go on.”
    

      “What are you crying for, then, you silly?”
    

      “But now it’s all over . . . I feel it. If only I could go to
      Vyazma!”
    

      A pause followed. After a silence Shtchiptsov suddenly jumped up and
      seized his cap. He looked distraught.
    

      “Good-bye! I am going to Vyazma!” he articulated, staggering.
    

      “And the money for the journey?”
    

      “H’m! . . . I shall go on foot!”
    

      “You are crazy. . . .”
    

      The two men looked at each other, probably because the same thought—of
      the boundless plains, the unending forests and swamps—struck both of
      them at once.
    

      “Well, I see you have gone off your head,” the jeune
      premier commented. “I’ll tell you what, old man. . . .
      First thing, go to bed, then drink some brandy and tea to put you into a
      sweat. And some castor-oil, of course. Stay, where am I to get some
      brandy?”
    

      Brama-Glinsky thought a minute, then made up his mind to go to a
      shopkeeper called Madame Tsitrinnikov to try and get it from her on tick:
      who knows? perhaps the woman would feel for them and let them have it. The
      jeune premier went off, and half an hour later returned with a
      bottle of brandy and some castor-oil. Shtchiptsov was sitting motionless,
      as before, on the bed, gazing dumbly at the floor. He drank the castor-oil
      offered him by his friend like an automaton, with no consciousness of what
      he was doing. Like an automaton he sat afterwards at the table, and drank
      tea and brandy; mechanically he emptied the whole bottle and let the jeune
      premier put him to bed. The latter covered him up with a quilt and an
      overcoat, advised him to get into a perspiration, and went away.
    

      The night came on; Shtchiptsov had drunk a great deal of brandy, but he
      did not sleep. He lay motionless under the quilt and stared at the dark
      ceiling; then, seeing the moon looking in at the window, he turned his
      eyes from the ceiling towards the companion of the earth, and lay so with
      open eyes till the morning. At nine o’clock in the morning Zhukov,
      the manager, ran in.
    

      “What has put it into your head to be ill, my angel?” he
      cackled, wrinkling up his nose. “Aie, aie! A man with your physique
      has no business to be ill! For shame, for shame! Do you know, I was quite
      frightened. ‘Can our conversation have had such an effect on him?’
      I wondered. My dear soul, I hope it’s not through me you’ve
      fallen ill! You know you gave me as good . . . er . . . And, besides,
      comrades can never get on without words. You called me all sorts of names
      . . . and have gone at me with your fists too, and yet I am fond of you!
      Upon my soul, I am. I respect you and am fond of you! Explain, my angel,
      why I am so fond of you. You are neither kith nor kin nor wife, but as
      soon as I heard you had fallen ill it cut me to the heart.”
    

      Zhukov spent a long time declaring his affection, then fell to kissing the
      invalid, and finally was so overcome by his feelings that he began
      laughing hysterically, and was even meaning to fall into a swoon, but,
      probably remembering that he was not at home nor at the theatre, put off
      the swoon to a more convenient opportunity and went away.
    

      Soon after him Adabashev, the tragic actor, a dingy, short-sighted
      individual who talked through his nose, made his appearance. . . . For a
      long while he looked at Shtchiptsov, for a long while he pondered, and at
      last he made a discovery.
    

      “Do you know what, Mifa?” he said, pronouncing through his
      nose “f” instead of “sh,” and assuming a
      mysterious expression. “Do you know what? You ought to have a dose
      of castor-oil!”
    

      Shtchiptsov was silent. He remained silent, too, a little later as the
      tragic actor poured the loathsome oil into his mouth. Two hours later
      Yevlampy, or, as the actors for some reason called him, Rigoletto, the
      hairdresser of the company, came into the room. He too, like the tragic
      man, stared at Shtchiptsov for a long time, then sighed like a
      steam-engine, and slowly and deliberately began untying a parcel he had
      brought with him. In it there were twenty cups and several little flasks.
    

      “You should have sent for me and I would have cupped you long ago,”
      he said, tenderly baring Shtchiptsov’s chest. “It is easy to
      neglect illness.”
    

      Thereupon Rigoletto stroked the broad chest of the “heavy father”
      and covered it all over with suction cups.
    

      “Yes . . .” he said, as after this operation he packed up his
      paraphernalia, crimson with Shtchiptsov’s blood. “You should
      have sent for me, and I would have come. . . . You needn’t trouble
      about payment. . . . I do it from sympathy. Where are you to get the money
      if that idol won’t pay you? Now, please take these drops. They are
      nice drops! And now you must have a dose of this castor-oil. It’s
      the real thing. That’s right! I hope it will do you good. Well, now,
      good-bye. . . .”
    

      Rigoletto took his parcel and withdrew, pleased that he had been of
      assistance to a fellow-creature.
    

      The next morning Sigaev, the comic man, going in to see Shtchiptsov, found
      him in a terrible condition. He was lying under his coat, breathing in
      gasps, while his eyes strayed over the ceiling. In his hands he was
      crushing convulsively the crumpled quilt.
    

      “To Vyazma!” he whispered, when he saw the comic man. “To
      Vyazma.”
    

      “Come, I don’t like that, old man!” said the comic man,
      flinging up his hands. “You see . . . you see . . . you see, old
      man, that’s not the thing! Excuse me, but . . . it’s
      positively stupid. . . .”
    

      “To go to Vyazma! My God, to Vyazma!”
    

      “I . . . I did not expect it of you,” the comic man muttered,
      utterly distracted. “What the deuce do you want to collapse like
      this for? Aie . . . aie . . . aie! . . . that’s not the thing. A
      giant as tall as a watch-tower, and crying. Is it the thing for actors to
      cry?”
    

      “No wife nor children,” muttered Shtchiptsov. “I ought
      not to have gone for an actor, but have stayed at Vyazma. My life has been
      wasted, Semyon! Oh, to be in Vyazma!”
    

      “Aie . . . aie . . . aie! . . . that’s not the thing! You see,
      it’s stupid . . . contemptible indeed!”
    

      Recovering his composure and setting his feelings in order, Sigaev began
      comforting Shtchiptsov, telling him untruly that his comrades had decided
      to send him to the Crimea at their expense, and so on, but the sick man
      did not listen and kept muttering about Vyazma . . . . At last, with a
      wave of his hand, the comic man began talking about Vyazma himself to
      comfort the invalid.
    

      “It’s a fine town,” he said soothingly, “a capital
      town, old man! It’s famous for its cakes. The cakes are classical,
      but—between ourselves—h’m!—they are a bit groggy.
      For a whole week after eating them I was . . . h’m! . . . But what
      is fine there is the merchants! They are something like merchants. When
      they treat you they do treat you!”
    

      The comic man talked while Shtchiptsov listened in silence and nodded his
      head approvingly.
    

      Towards evening he died.
    





      The Schoolmaster and Other Stories
    











      THE SCHOOLMASTER
    

FYODOR LUKITCH
      SYSOEV, the master of the factory school maintained at the expense of the
      firm of Kulikin, was getting ready for the annual dinner. Every year after
      the school examination the board of managers gave a dinner at which the
      inspector of elementary schools, all who had conducted the examinations,
      and all the managers and foremen of the factory were present. In spite of
      their official character, these dinners were always good and lively, and
      the guests sat a long time over them; forgetting distinctions of rank and
      recalling only their meritorious labours, they ate till they were full,
      drank amicably, chattered till they were all hoarse and parted late in the
      evening, deafening the whole factory settlement with their singing and the
      sound of their kisses. Of such dinners Sysoev had taken part in thirteen,
      as he had been that number of years master of the factory school.
    

      Now, getting ready for the fourteenth, he was trying to make himself look
      as festive and correct as possible. He had spent a whole hour brushing his
      new black suit, and spent almost as long in front of a looking-glass while
      he put on a fashionable shirt; the studs would not go into the
      button-holes, and this circumstance called forth a perfect storm of
      complaints, threats, and reproaches addressed to his wife.
    

      His poor wife, bustling round him, wore herself out with her efforts. And
      indeed he, too, was exhausted in the end. When his polished boots were
      brought him from the kitchen he had not strength to pull them on. He had
      to lie down and have a drink of water.
    

      “How weak you have grown!” sighed his wife. “You ought
      not to go to this dinner at all.”
    

      “No advice, please!” the schoolmaster cut her short angrily.
    

      He was in a very bad temper, for he had been much displeased with the
      recent examinations. The examinations had gone off splendidly; all the
      boys of the senior division had gained certificates and prizes; both the
      managers of the factory and the government officials were pleased with the
      results; but that was not enough for the schoolmaster. He was vexed that
      Babkin, a boy who never made a mistake in writing, had made three mistakes
      in the dictation; Sergeyev, another boy, had been so excited that he could
      not remember seventeen times thirteen; the inspector, a young and
      inexperienced man, had chosen a difficult article for dictation, and
      Lyapunov, the master of a neighbouring school, whom the inspector had
      asked to dictate, had not behaved like “a good comrade”; but
      in dictating had, as it were, swallowed the words and had not pronounced
      them as written.
    

      After pulling on his boots with the assistance of his wife, and looking at
      himself once more in the looking-glass, the schoolmaster took his gnarled
      stick and set off for the dinner. Just before the factory manager’s
      house, where the festivity was to take place, he had a little mishap. He
      was taken with a violent fit of coughing . . . . He was so shaken by it
      that the cap flew off his head and the stick dropped out of his hand; and
      when the school inspector and the teachers, hearing his cough, ran out of
      the house, he was sitting on the bottom step, bathed in perspiration.
    

      “Fyodor Lukitch, is that you?” said the inspector, surprised.
      “You . . . have come?”
    

      “Why not?”
    

      “You ought to be at home, my dear fellow. You are not at all well
      to-day. . . .”
    

      “I am just the same to-day as I was yesterday. And if my presence is
      not agreeable to you, I can go back.”
    

      “Oh, Fyodor Lukitch, you must not talk like that! Please come in.
      Why, the function is really in your honour, not ours. And we are delighted
      to see you. Of course we are! . . .”
    

      Within, everything was ready for the banquet. In the big dining-room
      adorned with German oleographs and smelling of geraniums and varnish there
      were two tables, a larger one for the dinner and a smaller one for the
      hors-d’oeuvres. The hot light of midday faintly percolated through
      the lowered blinds. . . . The twilight of the room, the Swiss views on the
      blinds, the geraniums, the thin slices of sausage on the plates, all had a
      naÃ¯ve, girlishly-sentimental air, and it was all in keeping with the
      master of the house, a good-natured little German with a round little
      stomach and affectionate, oily little eyes. Adolf Andreyitch Bruni (that
      was his name) was bustling round the table of hors-d’oeuvres as
      zealously as though it were a house on fire, filling up the wine-glasses,
      loading the plates, and trying in every way to please, to amuse, and to
      show his friendly feelings. He clapped people on the shoulder, looked into
      their eyes, chuckled, rubbed his hands, in fact was as ingratiating as a
      friendly dog.
    

      “Whom do I behold? Fyodor Lukitch!” he said in a jerky voice,
      on seeing Sysoev. “How delightful! You have come in spite of your
      illness. Gentlemen, let me congratulate you, Fyodor Lukitch has come!”
    

      The school-teachers were already crowding round the table and eating the
      hors-d’oeuvres. Sysoev frowned; he was displeased that his
      colleagues had begun to eat and drink without waiting for him. He noticed
      among them Lyapunov, the man who had dictated at the examination, and
      going up to him, began:
    

      “It was not acting like a comrade! No, indeed! Gentlemanly people
      don’t dictate like that!”
    

      “Good Lord, you are still harping on it!” said Lyapunov, and
      he frowned. “Aren’t you sick of it?”
    

      “Yes, still harping on it! My Babkin has never made mistakes! I know
      why you dictated like that. You simply wanted my pupils to be floored, so
      that your school might seem better than mine. I know all about it! . . .”
    

      “Why are you trying to get up a quarrel?” Lyapunov snarled.
      “Why the devil do you pester me?”
    

      “Come, gentlemen,” interposed the inspector, making a
      woebegone face. “Is it worth while to get so heated over a trifle?
      Three mistakes . . . not one mistake . . . does it matter?”
    

      “Yes, it does matter. Babkin has never made mistakes.”
    

      “He won’t leave off,” Lyapunov went on, snorting
      angrily. “He takes advantage of his position as an invalid and
      worries us all to death. Well, sir, I am not going to consider your being
      ill.”
    

      “Let my illness alone!” cried Sysoev, angrily. “What is
      it to do with you? They all keep repeating it at me: illness! illness!
      illness! . . . As though I need your sympathy! Besides, where have you
      picked up the notion that I am ill? I was ill before the examinations,
      that’s true, but now I have completely recovered, there is nothing
      left of it but weakness.”
    

      “You have regained your health, well, thank God,” said the
      scripture teacher, Father Nikolay, a young priest in a foppish
      cinnamon-coloured cassock and trousers outside his boots. “You ought
      to rejoice, but you are irritable and so on.”
    

      “You are a nice one, too,” Sysoev interrupted him. “Questions
      ought to be straightforward, clear, but you kept asking riddles. That’s
      not the thing to do!”
    

      By combined efforts they succeeded in soothing him and making him sit down
      to the table. He was a long time making up his mind what to drink, and
      pulling a wry face drank a wine-glass of some green liqueur; then he drew
      a bit of pie towards him, and sulkily picked out of the inside an egg with
      onion on it. At the first mouthful it seemed to him that there was no salt
      in it. He sprinkled salt on it and at once pushed it away as the pie was
      too salt.
    

      At dinner Sysoev was seated between the inspector and Bruni. After the
      first course the toasts began, according to the old-established custom.
    

      “I consider it my agreeable duty,” the inspector began,
      “to propose a vote of thanks to the absent school wardens, Daniel
      Petrovitch and . . . and . . . and . . .”
    

      “And Ivan Petrovitch,” Bruni prompted him.
    

      “And Ivan Petrovitch Kulikin, who grudge no expense for the school,
      and I propose to drink their health. . . .”
    

      “For my part,” said Bruni, jumping up as though he had been
      stung, “I propose a toast to the health of the honoured inspector of
      elementary schools, Pavel Gennadievitch Nadarov!”
    

      Chairs were pushed back, faces beamed with smiles, and the usual cBlinking
      of glasses began.
    

      The third toast always fell to Sysoev. And on this occasion, too, he got
      up and began to speak. Looking grave and clearing his throat, he first of
      all announced that he had not the gift of eloquence and that he was not
      prepared to make a speech. Further he said that during the fourteen years
      that he had been schoolmaster there had been many intrigues, many
      underhand attacks, and even secret reports on him to the authorities, and
      that he knew his enemies and those who had informed against him, and he
      would not mention their names, “for fear of spoiling somebody’s
      appetite”; that in spite of these intrigues the Kulikin school held
      the foremost place in the whole province not only from a moral, but also
      from a material point of view.”
    

      “Everywhere else,” he said, “schoolmasters get two
      hundred or three hundred roubles, while I get five hundred, and moreover
      my house has been redecorated and even furnished at the expense of the
      firm. And this year all the walls have been repapered. . . .”
    

      Further the schoolmaster enlarged on the liberality with which the pupils
      were provided with writing materials in the factory schools as compared
      with the Zemstvo and Government schools. And for all this the school was
      indebted, in his opinion, not to the heads of the firm, who lived abroad
      and scarcely knew of its existence, but to a man who, in spite of his
      German origin and Lutheran faith, was a Russian at heart.
    

      Sysoev spoke at length, with pauses to get his breath and with pretensions
      to rhetoric, and his speech was boring and unpleasant. He several times
      referred to certain enemies of his, tried to drop hints, repeated himself,
      coughed, and flourished his fingers unbecomingly. At last he was exhausted
      and in a perspiration and he began talking jerkily, in a low voice as
      though to himself, and finished his speech not quite coherently: “And
      so I propose the health of Bruni, that is Adolf Andreyitch, who is here,
      among us . . . generally speaking . . . you understand . . .”
    

      When he finished everyone gave a faint sigh, as though someone had
      sprinkled cold water and cleared the air. Bruni alone apparently had no
      unpleasant feeling. Beaming and rolling his sentimental eyes, the German
      shook Sysoev’s hand with feeling and was again as friendly as a dog.
    

      “Oh, I thank you,” he said, with an emphasis on the oh,
      laying his left hand on his heart. “I am very happy that you
      understand me! I, with my whole heart, wish you all things good. But I
      ought only to observe; you exaggerate my importance. The school owes its
      flourishing condition only to you, my honoured friend, Fyodor Lukitch. But
      for you it would be in no way distinguished from other schools! You think
      the German is paying a compliment, the German is saying something polite.
      Ha-ha! No, my dear Fyodor Lukitch, I am an honest man and never make
      complimentary speeches. If we pay you five hundred roubles a year it is
      because you are valued by us. Isn’t that so? Gentlemen, what I say
      is true, isn’t it? We should not pay anyone else so much. . . . Why,
      a good school is an honour to the factory!”
    

      “I must sincerely own that your school is really exceptional,”
      said the inspector. “Don’t think this is flattery. Anyway, I
      have never come across another like it in my life. As I sat at the
      examination I was full of admiration. . . . Wonderful children! They know
      a great deal and answer brightly, and at the same time they are somehow
      special, unconstrained, sincere. . . . One can see that they love you,
      Fyodor Lukitch. You are a schoolmaster to the marrow of your bones. You
      must have been born a teacher. You have all the gifts —innate
      vocation, long experience, and love for your work. . . . It’s simply
      amazing, considering the weak state of your health, what energy, what
      understanding . . . what perseverance, do you understand, what confidence
      you have! Some one in the school committee said truly that you were a poet
      in your work. . . . Yes, a poet you are!”
    

      And all present at the dinner began as one man talking of Sysoev’s
      extraordinary talent. And as though a dam had been burst, there followed a
      flood of sincere, enthusiastic words such as men do not utter when they
      are restrained by prudent and cautious sobriety. Sysoev’s speech and
      his intolerable temper and the horrid, spiteful expression on his face
      were all forgotten. Everyone talked freely, even the shy and silent new
      teachers, poverty-stricken, down-trodden youths who never spoke to the
      inspector without addressing him as “your honour.” It was
      clear that in his own circle Sysoev was a person of consequence.
    

      Having been accustomed to success and praise for the fourteen years that
      he had been schoolmaster, he listened with indifference to the noisy
      enthusiasm of his admirers.
    

      It was Bruni who drank in the praise instead of the schoolmaster. The
      German caught every word, beamed, clapped his hands, and flushed modestly
      as though the praise referred not to the schoolmaster but to him.
    

      “Bravo! bravo!” he shouted. “That’s true! You have
      grasped my meaning! . . . Excellent! . . .” He looked into the
      schoolmaster’s eyes as though he wanted to share his bliss with him.
      At last he could restrain himself no longer; he leapt up, and,
      overpowering all the other voices with his shrill little tenor, shouted:
    

      “Gentlemen! Allow me to speak! Sh-h! To all you say I can make only
      one reply: the management of the factory will not be forgetful of what it
      owes to Fyodor Lukitch! . . .”
    

      All were silent. Sysoev raised his eyes to the German’s rosy face.
    

      “We know how to appreciate it,” Bruni went on, dropping his
      voice. “In response to your words I ought to tell you that . . .
      Fyodor Lukitch’s family will be provided for and that a sum of money
      was placed in the bank a month ago for that object.”
    

      Sysoev looked enquiringly at the German, at his colleagues, as though
      unable to understand why his family should be provided for and not he
      himself. And at once on all the faces, in all the motionless eyes bent
      upon him, he read not the sympathy, not the commiseration which he could
      not endure, but something else, something soft, tender, but at the same
      time intensely sinister, like a terrible truth, something which in one
      instant turned him cold all over and filled his soul with unutterable
      despair. With a pale, distorted face he suddenly jumped up and clutched at
      his head. For a quarter of a minute he stood like that, stared with horror
      at a fixed point before him as though he saw the swiftly coming death of
      which Bruni was speaking, then sat down and burst into tears.
    

      “Come, come! . . . What is it?” he heard agitated voices
      saying. “Water! drink a little water!”
    

      A short time passed and the schoolmaster grew calmer, but the party did
      not recover their previous liveliness. The dinner ended in gloomy silence,
      and much earlier than on previous occasions.
    

      When he got home Sysoev first of all looked at himself in the glass.
    

      “Of course there was no need for me to blubber like that!” he
      thought, looking at his sunken cheeks and his eyes with dark rings under
      them. “My face is a much better colour to-day than yesterday. I am
      suffering from anemia and catarrh of the stomach, and my cough is only a
      stomach cough.”
    

      Reassured, he slowly began undressing, and spent a long time brushing his
      new black suit, then carefully folded it up and put it in the chest of
      drawers.
    

      Then he went up to the table where there lay a pile of his pupils’
      exercise-books, and picking out Babkin’s, sat down and fell to
      contemplating the beautiful childish handwriting. . . .
    

      And meantime, while he was examining the exercise-books, the district
      doctor was sitting in the next room and telling his wife in a whisper that
      a man ought not to have been allowed to go out to dinner who had not in
      all probability more than a week to live.