AN ARTIFICE

 The old doctor sat by the fireside, talking to his fair patient who was
      lying on the lounge. There was nothing much the matter with her, except
      that she had one of those little feminine ailments from which pretty women
      frequently suffer—slight anaemia, a nervous attack, etc.

 “No, doctor,” she said; “I shall never be able to
      understand a woman deceiving her husband. Even allowing that she does not
      love him, that she pays no heed to her vows and promises, how can she give
      herself to another man? How can she conceal the intrigue from other
      people's eyes? How can it be possible to love amid lies and treason?”

 The doctor smiled, and replied: “It is perfectly easy, and I can
      assure you that a woman does not think of all those little subtle details
      when she has made up her mind to go astray.

 “As for dissimulation, all women have plenty of it on hand for such
      occasions, and the simplest of them are wonderful, and extricate
      themselves from the greatest dilemmas in a remarkable manner.”

 The young woman, however, seemed incredulous.

 “No, doctor,” she said; “one never thinks until after it
      has happened of what one ought to have done in a critical situation, and
      women are certainly more liable than men to lose their head on such
      occasions:”

 The doctor raised his hands. “After it has happened, you say! Now I
      will tell you something that happened to one of my female patients, whom I
      always considered an immaculate woman.

 “It happened in a provincial town, and one night when I was asleep,
      in that deep first sleep from which it is so difficult to rouse us, it
      seemed to me, in my dreams, as if the bells in the town were sounding a
      fire alarm, and I woke up with a start. It was my own bell, which was
      ringing wildly, and as my footman did not seem to be answering the door,
      I, in turn, pulled the bell at the head of my bed, and soon I heard a
      banging, and steps in the silent house, and Jean came into my room, and
      handed me a letter which said: 'Madame Lelievre begs Dr. Simeon to come to
      her immediately.'

 “I thought for a few moments, and then I said to myself: 'A nervous
      attack, vapors; nonsense, I am too tired.' And so I replied: 'As Dr.
      Simeon is not at all well, he must beg Madame Lelievre to be kind enough
      to call in his colleague, Monsieur Bonnet.' I put the note into an
      envelope and went to sleep again, but about half an hour later the street
      bell rang again, and Jean came to me and said: 'There is somebody
      downstairs; I do not quite know whether it is a man or a woman, as the
      individual is so wrapped up, but they wish to speak to you immediately.
      They say it is a matter of life and death for two people.' Whereupon I sat
      up in bed and told him to show the person in.

 “A kind of black phantom appeared and raised her veil as soon as
      Jean had left the room. It was Madame Berthe Lelievre, quite a young
      woman, who had been married for three years to a large merchant in the
      town, who was said to have married the prettiest girl in the neighborhood.

 “She was terribly pale, her face was contracted as the faces of
      insane people are, occasionally, and her hands trembled violently. Twice
      she tried to speak without being able to utter a sound, but at last she
      stammered out: 'Come—quick—quick, doctor. Come—my—friend
      has just died in my bedroom.' She stopped, half suffocated with emotion,
      and then went on: 'My husband will be coming home from the club very
      soon.'

 “I jumped out of bed without even considering that I was only in my
      nightshirt, and dressed myself in a few moments, and then I said: 'Did you
      come a short time ago?' 'No,' she said, standing like a statue petrified
      with horror. 'It was my servant—she knows.' And then, after a short
      silence, she went on: 'I was there—by his side.' And she uttered a
      sort of cry of horror, and after a fit of choking, which made her gasp,
      she wept violently, and shook with spasmodic sobs for a minute: or two.
      Then her tears suddenly ceased, as if by an internal fire, and with an air
      of tragic calmness, she said: 'Let us make haste.'

 “I was ready, but exclaimed: 'I quite forgot to order my carriage.'
      'I have one,' she said; 'it is his, which was waiting for him!' She
      wrapped herself up, so as to completely conceal her face, and we started.

 “When she was by my side in the carriage she suddenly seized my
      hand, and crushing it in her delicate fingers, she said, with a shaking
      voice, that proceeded from a distracted heart: 'Oh! if you only knew, if
      you only knew what I am suffering! I loved him, I have loved him
      distractedly, like a madwoman, for the last six months.' 'Is anyone up in
      your house?' I asked. 'No, nobody except those, who knows everything.'

 “We stopped at the door, and evidently everybody was asleep. We went
      in without making any noise, by means of her latch-key, and walked
      upstairs on tiptoe. The frightened servant was sitting on the top of the
      stairs with a lighted candle by her side, as she was afraid to remain with
      the dead man, and I went into the room, which was in great disorder. Wet
      towels, with which they had bathed the young man's temples, were lying on
      the floor, by the side of a washbasin and a glass, while a strong smell of
      vinegar pervaded the room.

 “The dead man's body was lying at full length in the middle of the
      room, and I went up to it, looked at it, and touched it. I opened the eyes
      and felt the hands, and then, turning to the two women, who were shaking
      as if they were freezing, I said to them: 'Help me to lift him on to the
      bed.' When we had laid him gently on it, I listened to his heart and put a
      looking-glass to his lips, and then said: 'It is all over.' It was a
      terrible sight!

 “I looked at the man, and said: 'You ought to arrange his hair a
      little.' The girl went and brought her mistress' comb and brush, but as
      she was trembling, and pulling out his long, matted hair in doing it,
      Madame Lelievre took the comb out of her hand, and arranged his hair as if
      she were caressing him. She parted it, brushed his beard, rolled his
      mustaches gently round her fingers, then, suddenly, letting go of his
      hair, she took the dead man's inert head in her hands and looked for a
      long time in despair at the dead face, which no longer could smile at her,
      and then, throwing herself on him, she clasped him in her arms and kissed
      him ardently. Her kisses fell like blows on his closed mouth and eyes, his
      forehead and temples; and then, putting her lips to his ear, as if he
      could still hear her, and as if she were about to whisper something to
      him, she said several times, in a heartrending voice:

 “'Good-by, my darling!'

 “Just then the clock struck twelve, and I started up. 'Twelve
      o'clock!' I exclaimed. 'That is the time when the club closes. Come,
      madame, we have not a moment to lose!' She started up, and I said:

 “'We must carry him into the drawing-room.' And when we had done
      this, I placed him on a sofa, and lit the chandeliers, and just then the
      front door was opened and shut noisily. 'Rose, bring me the basin and the
      towels, and make the room look tidy. Make haste, for Heaven's sake!
      Monsieur Lelievre is coming in.'

 “I heard his steps on the stairs, and then his hands feeling along
      the walls. 'Come here, my dear fellow,' I said; 'we have had an accident.'

 “And the astonished husband appeared in the door with a cigar in his
      mouth, and said: 'What is the matter? What is the meaning of this?' 'My
      dear friend,' I said, going up to him, 'you find us in great
      embarrassment. I had remained late, chatting with your wife and our
      friend, who had brought me in his carriage, when he suddenly fainted, and
      in spite of all we have done, he has remained unconscious for two hours. I
      did not like to call in strangers, and if you will now help me downstairs
      with him, I shall be able to attend to him better at his own house.'

 “The husband, who was surprised, but quite unsuspicious, took off
      his hat, and then he took his rival, who would be quite inoffensive for
      the future, under the arms. I got between his two legs, as if I had been a
      horse between the shafts, and we went downstairs, while his wife held a
      light for us. When we got outside I stood the body up, so as to deceive
      the coachman, and said: 'Come, my friend; it is nothing; you feel better
      already I expect. Pluck up your courage, and make an effort. It will soon
      be over.' But as I felt that he was slipping out of my hands, I gave him a
      slap on the shoulder, which sent him forward and made him fall into the
      carriage, and then I got in after him. Monsieur Lelievre, who was rather
      alarmed, said to me: 'Do you think it is anything serious?' To which I
      replied: 'No,' with a smile, as I looked at his wife, who had put her arm
      into that of her husband, and was trying to see into the carriage.

 “I shook hands with them and told my coachman to start, and during
      the whole drive the dead man kept falling against me. When we got to his
      house I said that he had become unconscious on the way home, and helped to
      carry him upstairs, where I certified that he was dead, and acted another
      comedy to his distracted family, and at last I got back to bed, not
      without swearing at lovers.”

 The doctor ceased, though he was still smiling, and the young woman, who
      was in a very nervous state, said: “Why have you told me that
      terrible story?”

 He gave her a gallant bow, and replied:

 “So that I may offer you my services if they should be needed.”