AN ENTERTAINING ARTICLE

 I take the following paragraph from an article in the Boston Advertiser :

  AN ENGLISH CRITIC ON MARK TWAIN

 Perhaps the most successful flights of humor of Mark Twain have been
        descriptions of the persons who did not appreciate his humor at all. We
        have become familiar with the Californians who were thrilled with terror
        by his burlesque of a newspaper reporter's way of telling a story, and
        we have heard of the Pennsylvania clergyman who sadly returned his Innocents
        Abroad to the book-agent with the remark that “the man who could
        shed tears over the tomb of Adam must be an idiot.” But Mark Twain may
        now add a much more glorious instance to his string of trophies. The Saturday
        Review, in its number of October 8th, reviews his book of travels,
        which has been republished in England, and reviews it seriously. We can
        imagine the delight of the humorist in reading this tribute to his
        power; and indeed it is so amusing in itself that he can hardly do
        better than reproduce the article in full in his next monthly Memoranda.



 (Publishing the above paragraph thus, gives me a sort of authority for
      reproducing the Saturday Review's article in full in these pages. I
      dearly wanted to do it, for I cannot write anything half so delicious
      myself. If I had a cast-iron dog that could read this English criticism
      and preserve his austerity, I would drive him off the door-step.)

 (From the London “ Saturday Review .”)

 REVIEWS OF NEW BOOKS

  The Innocents Abroad . A Book of Travels. By Mark Twain. London:
      Hotten, publisher. 1870.

 Lord Macaulay died too soon. We never felt this so deeply as when we
      finished the last chapter of the above-named extravagant work. Macaulay
      died too soon—for none but he could mete out complete and
      comprehensive justice to the insolence, the impertinence, the presumption,
      the mendacity, and, above all, the majestic ignorance of this author.

 To say that The Innocents Abroad is a curious book, would be to use
      the faintest language—would be to speak of the Matterhorn as a neat
      elevation or of Niagara as being “nice” or “pretty.” “Curious” is too tame
      a word wherewith to describe the imposing insanity of this work. There is
      no word that is large enough or long enough. Let us, therefore, photograph
      a passing glimpse of book and author, and trust the rest to the reader.
      Let the cultivated English student of human nature picture to himself this
      Mark Twain as a person capable of doing the following-described things—and
      not only doing them, but with incredible innocence printing them calmly and tranquilly in a book. For instance:

 He states that he entered a hair-dresser's in Paris to get shaved, and the
      first “_rake_” the barber gave him with his razor it loosened his
      “_hide_” and lifted him out of the chair. 

 This is unquestionably exaggerated. In Florence he was so annoyed by
      beggars that he pretends to have seized and eaten one in a frantic spirit
      of revenge. There is, of course, no truth in this. He gives at full length
      a theatrical program seventeen or eighteen hundred years old, which he
      professes to have found in the ruins of the Coliseum, among the dirt and
      mold and rubbish. It is a sufficient comment upon this statement to remark
      that even a cast-iron program would not have lasted so long under such
      circumstances. In Greece he plainly betrays both fright and flight upon
      one occasion, but with frozen effrontery puts the latter in this falsely
      tamed form: “We sidled toward the Piraeus.” “Sidled,” indeed! He
      does not hesitate to intimate that at Ephesus, when his mule strayed from
      the proper course, he got down, took him under his arm, carried him to the
      road again, pointed him right, remounted, and went to sleep contentedly
      till it was time to restore the beast to the path once more. He states
      that a growing youth among his ship's passengers was in the constant habit
      of appeasing his hunger with soap and oakum between meals. In Palestine he
      tells of ants that came eleven miles to spend the summer in the desert and
      brought their provisions with them; yet he shows by his description of the
      country that the feat was an impossibility. He mentions, as if it were the
      most commonplace of matters, that he cut a Moslem in two in broad daylight
      in Jerusalem, with Godfrey de Bouillon's sword, and would have shed more
      blood if he had had a graveyard of his own. These statements are
      unworthy a moment's attention. Mr. Twain or any other foreigner who did
      such a thing in Jerusalem would be mobbed, and would infallibly lose his
      life. But why go on? Why repeat more of his audacious and exasperating
      falsehoods? Let us close fittingly with this one: he affirms that “in the
      mosque of St. Sophia at Constantinople I got my feet so stuck up with a
      complication of gums, slime, and general impurity, that I wore out more
      than two thousand pair of bootjacks getting my boots off that night, and
      even then some Christian hide peeled off with them.” It is monstrous. Such
      statements are simply lies—there is no other name for them. Will the
      reader longer marvel at the brutal ignorance that pervades the American
      nation when we tell him that we are informed upon perfectly good authority
      that this extravagant compilation of falsehoods, this exhaustless mine of
      stupendous lies, this Innocents Abroad , has actually been adopted
      by the schools and colleges of several of the states as a text-book!

 But if his falsehoods are distressing, his innocence and his ignorance are
      enough to make one burn the book and despise the author. In one place he
      was so appalled at the sudden spectacle of a murdered man, unveiled by the
      moonlight, that he jumped out of the window, going through sash and all,
      and then remarks with the most childlike simplicity that he “was not
      scared, but was considerably agitated.” It puts us out of patience to note
      that the simpleton is densely unconscious that Lucrezia Borgia ever
      existed off the stage. He is vulgarly ignorant of all foreign languages,
      but is frank enough to criticize, the Italians' use of their own tongue.
      He says they spell the name of their great painter “Vinci, but pronounce
      it Vinchy”—and then adds with a naivete possible only to helpless
      ignorance, “foreigners always spell better than they pronounce.” In
      another place he commits the bald absurdity of putting the phrase “tare an
      ouns” into an Italian's mouth. In Rome he unhesitatingly believes the
      legend that St. Philip Neri's heart was so inflamed with divine love that
      it burst his ribs—believes it wholly because an author with a
      learned list of university degrees strung after his name endorses it—“otherwise,”
       says this gentle idiot, “I should have felt a curiosity to know what
      Philip had for dinner.” Our author makes a long, fatiguing journey to the
      Grotto del Cane on purpose to test its poisoning powers on a dog—got
      elaborately ready for the experiment, and then discovered that he had no
      dog. A wiser person would have kept such a thing discreetly to himself,
      but with this harmless creature everything comes out. He hurts his foot in
      a rut two thousand years old in exhumed Pompeii, and presently, when
      staring at one of the cinder-like corpses unearthed in the next square,
      conceives the idea that maybe it is the remains of the ancient Street
      Commissioner, and straightway his horror softens down to a sort of chirpy
      contentment with the condition of things. In Damascus he visits the well
      of Ananias, three thousand years old, and is as surprised and delighted as
      a child to find that the water is “as pure and fresh as if the well had
      been dug yesterday.” In the Holy Land he gags desperately at the hard
      Arabic and Hebrew Biblical names, and finally concludes to call them
      Baldwinsville, Williamsburgh, and so on, “for convenience of spelling.”

 We have thus spoken freely of this man's stupefying simplicity and
      innocence, but we cannot deal similarly with his colossal ignorance. We do
      not know where to begin. And if we knew where to begin, we certainly would
      not know where to leave off. We will give one specimen, and one only. He
      did not know, until he got to Rome, that Michael Angelo was dead! And
      then, instead of crawling away and hiding his shameful ignorance
      somewhere, he proceeds to express a pious, grateful sort of satisfaction
      that he is gone and out of his troubles!

 No, the reader may seek out the author's exhibition of his uncultivation
      for himself. The book is absolutely dangerous, considering the magnitude
      and variety of its misstatements, and the convincing confidence with which
      they are made. And yet it is a text-book in the schools of America.

 The poor blunderer mouses among the sublime creations of the Old Masters,
      trying to acquire the elegant proficiency in art-knowledge, which he has a
      groping sort of comprehension is a proper thing for a traveled man to be
      able to display. But what is the manner of his study? And what is the
      progress he achieves? To what extent does he familiarize himself with the
      great pictures of Italy, and what degree of appreciation does he arrive
      at? Read:

 “When we see a monk going about with a lion and looking up into heaven, we
      know that that is St. Mark. When we see a monk with a book and a pen,
      looking tranquilly up to heaven, trying to think of a word, we know that
      that is St. Matthew. When we see a monk sitting on a rock, looking
      tranquilly up to heaven, with a human skull beside him, and without other
      baggage, we know that that is St. Jerome. Because we know that he always
      went flying light in the matter of baggage. When we see other monks
      looking tranquilly up to heaven, but having no trade-mark, we always ask
      who those parties are. We do this because we humbly wish to learn.”

 He then enumerates the thousands and thousand of copies of these several
      pictures which he has seen, and adds with accustomed simplicity that he
      feels encouraged to believe that when he has seen “Some More” of each, and
      had a larger experience, he will eventually “begin to take an absorbing
      interest in them”—the vulgar boor.

 That we have shown this to be a remarkable book, we think no one will
      deny. That it is a pernicious book to place in the hands of the confiding
      and uniformed, we think we have also shown. That the book is a deliberate
      and wicked creation of a diseased mind, is apparent upon every page.
      Having placed our judgment thus upon record, let us close with what
      charity we can, by remarking that even in this volume there is some good
      to be found; for whenever the author talks of his own country and lets
      Europe alone, he never fails to make himself interesting, and not only
      interesting but instructive. No one can read without benefit his
      occasional chapters and paragraphs, about life in the gold and silver
      mines of California and Nevada; about the Indians of the plains and
      deserts of the West, and their cannibalism; about the raising of
      vegetables in kegs of gunpowder by the aid of two or three teaspoons of
      guano; about the moving of small arms from place to place at night in
      wheelbarrows to avoid taxes; and about a sort of cows and mules in the
      Humboldt mines, that climb down chimneys and disturb the people at night.
      These matters are not only new, but are well worth knowing. It is a pity
      the author did not put in more of the same kind. His book is well written
      and is exceedingly entertaining, and so it just barely escaped being quite
      valuable also.

 (One month later)

 Latterly I have received several letters, and see a number of newspaper
      paragraphs, all upon a certain subject, and all of about the same tenor. I
      here give honest specimens. One is from a New York paper, one is from a
      letter from an old friend, and one is from a letter from a New York
      publisher who is a stranger to me. I humbly endeavor to make these bits
      toothsome with the remark that the article they are praising (which
      appeared in the December Galaxy , and pretended to be a
      criticism from the London Saturday Review on my Innocents Abroad ) was written by myself, every line of it :

  The Herald says the richest thing out is the “serious critique”
         in the London Saturday Review , on Mark Twain's Innocents
        Abroad . We thought before we read it that it must be “serious,” as
        everybody said so, and were even ready to shed a few tears; but since
        perusing it, we are bound to confess that next to Mark Twain's “ Jumping
        Frog ” it's the finest bit of humor and sarcasm that we've come
        across in many a day.



 (I do not get a compliment like that every day.)

  I used to think that your writings were pretty good, but after reading
        the criticism in The Galaxy from the London Review , have
        discovered what an ass I must have been. If suggestions are in order,
        mine is, that you put that article in your next edition of the Innocents ,
        as an extra chapter, if you are not afraid to put your own humor in
        competition with it. It is as rich a thing as I ever read.



 (Which is strong commendation from a book publisher.)

  The London Reviewer, my friend, is not the stupid, “serious” creature he
        pretends to be, I think; but, on the contrary, has a keen
        appreciation and enjoyment of your book. As I read his article in The
        Galaxy , I could imagine him giving vent to many a hearty laugh. But
        he is writing for Catholics and Established Church people, and
        high-toned, antiquated, conservative gentility, whom it is a delight to
        him to help you shock, while he pretends to shake his head with owlish
        density. He is a magnificent humorist himself.



 (Now that is graceful and handsome. I take off my hat to my life-long
      friend and comrade, and with my feet together and my fingers spread over
      my heart, I say, in the language of Alabama, “You do me proud.”)

 I stand guilty of the authorship of the article, but I did not mean any
      harm. I saw by an item in the Boston Advertiser that a solemn,
      serious critique on the English edition of my book had appeared in the
      London Saturday Review , and the idea of such a literary
      breakfast by a stolid, ponderous British ogre of the quill was too much
      for a naturally weak virtue, and I went home and burlesqued it—reveled
      in it, I may say. I never saw a copy of the real Saturday Review criticism until after my burlesque was written and mailed to the printer.
      But when I did get hold of a copy, I found it to be vulgar, awkwardly
      written, ill-natured, and entirely serious and in earnest. The gentleman
      who wrote the newspaper paragraph above quoted had not been misled as to
      its character.

 If any man doubts my word now, I will kill him. No, I will not kill him; I
      will win his money. I will bet him twenty to one, and let any New York
      publisher hold the stakes, that the statements I have above made as to the
      authorship of the article in question are entirely true. Perhaps I may get
      wealthy at this, for I am willing to take all the bets that offer; and if
      a man wants larger odds, I will give him all he requires. But he ought to
      find out whether I am betting on what is termed “a sure thing” or not
      before he ventures his money, and he can do that by going to a public
      library and examining the London Saturday Review of October 8th,
      which contains the real critique.

 Bless me, some people thought that I was the “sold” person!

 P.S.—I cannot resist the temptation to toss in this most savory
      thing of all—this easy, graceful, philosophical disquisition, with
      his happy, chirping confidence. It is from the Cincinnati Enquirer :

 Nothing is more uncertain than the value of a fine cigar. Nine smokers out
      of ten would prefer an ordinary domestic article, three for a quarter, to
      a fifty-cent Partaga, if kept in ignorance of the cost of the latter. The
      flavor of the Partaga is too delicate for palates that have been
      accustomed to Connecticut seed leaf. So it is with humor. The finer it is
      in quality, the more danger of its not being recognized at all. Even Mark
      Twain has been taken in by an English review of his Innocents Abroad .
      Mark Twain is by no means a coarse humorist, but the Englishman's humor is
      so much finer than his, that he mistakes it for solid earnest, and “larfs
      most consumedly.”

 A man who cannot learn stands in his own light. Hereafter, when I write an
      article which I know to be good, but which I may have reason to fear will
      not, in some quarters, be considered to amount to much, coming from an
      American, I will aver that an Englishman wrote it and that it is copied
      from a London journal. And then I will occupy a back seat and enjoy the
      cordial applause.

 (Still later)

  Mark Twain at last sees that the Saturday Review's criticism of
        his Innocents Abroad was not serious, and he is intensely
        mortified at the thought of having been so badly sold. He takes the only
        course left him, and in the last Galaxy claims that he wrote
        the criticism himself, and published it in The Galaxy to sell the
        public. This is ingenious, but unfortunately it is not true. If any of
        our readers will take the trouble to call at this office we sill show
        them the original article in the Saturday Review of October 8th,
        which, on comparison, will be found to be identical with the one
        published in The Galaxy. The best thing for Mark to do will be to
        admit that he was sold, and say no more about it.



 The above is from the Cincinnati Enquirer , and is a falsehood. Come
      to the proof. If the Enquirer people, through any agent, will
      produce at The Galaxy office a London Saturday Review of
      October 8th, containing an article which, on comparison, will be found to
      be identical with the one published in The Galaxy , I will pay to
      that agent five hundred dollars cash. Moreover, if at any specified time I
      fail to produce at the same place a copy of the London Saturday Review of October 8th, containing a lengthy criticism upon the Innocents
      Abroad , entirely different, in every paragraph and sentence, from the
      one I published in The Galaxy, I will pay to the Enquirer agent another five hundred dollars cash. I offer Sheldon & Co.,
      publishers, 500 Broadway, New York, as my “backers.” Any one in New York,
      authorized by the Enquirer , will receive prompt attention. It is an
      easy and profitable way for the Enquirer people to prove that they
      have not uttered a pitiful, deliberate falsehood in the above paragraphs.
      Will they swallow that falsehood ignominiously, or will they send an agent
      to The Galaxy office. I think the Cincinnati Enquirer must
      be edited by children.