AN INCIDENT
    

MORNING. Brilliant
      sunshine is piercing through the frozen lacework on the window-panes into
      the nursery. Vanya, a boy of six, with a cropped head and a nose like a
      button, and his sister Nina, a short, chubby, curly-headed girl of four,
      wake up and look crossly at each other through the bars of their cots.
    

      “Oo-oo-oo! naughty children!” grumbles their nurse. “Good
      people have had their breakfast already, while you can’t get your
      eyes open.”
    

      The sunbeams frolic over the rugs, the walls, and nurse’s skirts,
      and seem inviting the children to join in their play, but they take no
      notice. They have woken up in a bad humour. Nina pouts, makes a grimace,
      and begins to whine:
    

      “Brea-eakfast, nurse, breakfast!”
    

      Vanya knits his brows and ponders what to pitch upon to howl over. He has
      already begun screwing up his eyes and opening his mouth, but at that
      instant the voice of mamma reaches them from the drawing-room, saying:
      “Don’t forget to give the cat her milk, she has a family now!”
    

      The children’s puckered countenances grow smooth again as they look
      at each other in astonishment. Then both at once begin shouting, jump out
      of their cots, and filling the air with piercing shrieks, run barefoot, in
      their nightgowns, to the kitchen.
    

      “The cat has puppies!” they cry. “The cat has got
      puppies!”
    

      Under the bench in the kitchen there stands a small box, the one in which
      Stepan brings coal when he lights the fire. The cat is peeping out of the
      box. There is an expression of extreme exhaustion on her grey face; her
      green eyes, with their narrow black pupils, have a languid, sentimental
      look. From her face it is clear that the only thing lacking to complete
      her happiness is the presence in the box of “him,” the father
      of her children, to whom she had abandoned herself so recklessly! She
      wants to mew, and opens her mouth wide, but nothing but a hiss comes from
      her throat; the squealing of the kittens is audible.
    

      The children squat on their heels before the box, and, motionless, holding
      their breath, gaze at the cat. . . . They are surprised, impressed, and do
      not hear nurse grumbling as she pursues them. The most genuine delight
      shines in the eyes of both.
    

      Domestic animals play a scarcely noticed but undoubtedly beneficial part
      in the education and life of children. Which of us does not remember
      powerful but magnanimous dogs, lazy lapdogs, birds dying in captivity,
      dull-witted but haughty turkeys, mild old tabby cats, who forgave us when
      we trod on their tails for fun and caused them agonising pain? I even
      fancy, sometimes, that the patience, the fidelity, the readiness to
      forgive, and the sincerity which are characteristic of our domestic
      animals have a far stronger and more definite effect on the mind of a
      child than the long exhortations of some dry, pale Karl Karlovitch, or the
      misty expositions of a governess, trying to prove to children that water
      is made up of hydrogen and oxygen.
    

      “What little things!” says Nina, opening her eyes wide and
      going off into a joyous laugh. “They are like mice!”
    

      “One, two, three,” Vanya counts. “Three kittens. So
      there is one for you, one for me, and one for somebody else, too.”
    

      “Murrm . . . murrm . . .” purrs the mother, flattered by their
      attention. “Murrm.”
    

      After gazing at the kittens, the children take them from under the cat,
      and begin squeezing them in their hands, then, not satisfied with this,
      they put them in the skirts of their nightgowns, and run into the other
      rooms.
    

      “Mamma, the cat has got pups!” they shout.
    

      Mamma is sitting in the drawing-room with some unknown gentleman. Seeing
      the children unwashed, undressed, with their nightgowns held up high, she
      is embarrassed, and looks at them severely.
    

      “Let your nightgowns down, disgraceful children,” she says.
      “Go out of the room, or I will punish you.”
    

      But the children do not notice either mamma’s threats or the
      presence of a stranger. They put the kittens down on the carpet, and go
      off into deafening squeals. The mother walks round them, mewing
      imploringly. When, a little afterwards, the children are dragged off to
      the nursery, dressed, made to say their prayers, and given their
      breakfast, they are full of a passionate desire to get away from these
      prosaic duties as quickly as possible, and to run to the kitchen again.
    

      Their habitual pursuits and games are thrown completely into the
      background.
    

      The kittens throw everything into the shade by making their appearance in
      the world, and supply the great sensation of the day. If Nina or Vanya had
      been offered forty pounds of sweets or ten thousand kopecks for each
      kitten, they would have rejected such a barter without the slightest
      hesitation. In spite of the heated protests of the nurse and the cook, the
      children persist in sitting by the cat’s box in the kitchen, busy
      with the kittens till dinner-time. Their faces are earnest and
      concentrated and express anxiety. They are worried not so much by the
      present as by the future of the kittens. They decide that one kitten shall
      remain at home with the old cat to be a comfort to her mother, while the
      second shall go to their summer villa, and the third shall live in the
      cellar, where there are ever so many rats.
    

      “But why don’t they look at us?” Nina wondered. “Their
      eyes are blind like the beggars’.”
    

      Vanya, too, is perturbed by this question. He tries to open one kitten’s
      eyes, and spends a long time puffing and breathing hard over it, but his
      operation is unsuccessful. They are a good deal troubled, too, by the
      circumstance that the kittens obstinately refuse the milk and the meat
      that is offered to them. Everything that is put before their little noses
      is eaten by their grey mamma.
    

      “Let’s build the kittens little houses,” Vanya suggests.
      “They shall live in different houses, and the cat shall come and pay
      them visits. . . .”
    

      Cardboard hat-boxes are put in the different corners of the kitchen and
      the kittens are installed in them. But this division turns out to be
      premature; the cat, still wearing an imploring and sentimental expression
      on her face, goes the round of all the hat-boxes, and carries off her
      children to their original position.
    

      “The cat’s their mother,” observed Vanya, “but who
      is their father?”
    

      “Yes, who is their father?” repeats Nina.
    

      “They must have a father.”
    

      Vanya and Nina are a long time deciding who is to be the kittens’
      father, and, in the end, their choice falls on a big dark-red horse
      without a tail, which is lying in the store-cupboard under the stairs,
      together with other relics of toys that have outlived their day. They drag
      him up out of the store-cupboard and stand him by the box.
    

      “Mind now!” they admonish him, “stand here and see they
      behave themselves properly.”
    

      All this is said and done in the gravest way, with an expression of
      anxiety on their faces. Vanya and Nina refuse to recognise the existence
      of any world but the box of kittens. Their joy knows no bounds. But they
      have to pass through bitter, agonising moments, too.
    

      Just before dinner, Vanya is sitting in his father’s study, gazing
      dreamily at the table. A kitten is moving about by the lamp, on stamped
      note paper. Vanya is watching its movements, and thrusting first a pencil,
      then a match into its little mouth. . . . All at once, as though he has
      sprung out of the floor, his father is beside the table.
    

      “What’s this?” Vanya hears, in an angry voice.
    

      “It’s . . . it’s the kitty, papa. . . .”
    

      “I’ll give it you; look what you have done, you naughty boy!
      You’ve dirtied all my paper!”
    

      To Vanya’s great surprise his papa does not share his partiality for
      the kittens, and, instead of being moved to enthusiasm and delight, he
      pulls Vanya’s ear and shouts:
    

      “Stepan, take away this horrid thing.”
    

      At dinner, too, there is a scene. . . . During the second course there is
      suddenly the sound of a shrill mew. They begin to investigate its origin,
      and discover a kitten under Nina’s pinafore.
    

      “Nina, leave the table!” cries her father angrily. “Throw
      the kittens in the cesspool! I won’t have the nasty things in the
      house! . . .”
    

      Vanya and Nina are horrified. Death in the cesspool, apart from its
      cruelty, threatens to rob the cat and the wooden horse of their children,
      to lay waste the cat’s box, to destroy their plans for the future,
      that fair future in which one cat will be a comfort to its old mother,
      another will live in the country, while the third will catch rats in the
      cellar. The children begin to cry and entreat that the kittens may be
      spared. Their father consents, but on the condition that the children do
      not go into the kitchen and touch the kittens.
    

      After dinner, Vanya and Nina slouch about the rooms, feeling depressed.
      The prohibition of visits to the kitchen has reduced them to dejection.
      They refuse sweets, are naughty, and are rude to their mother. When their
      uncle Petrusha comes in the evening, they draw him aside, and complain to
      him of their father, who wanted to throw the kittens into the cesspool.
    

      “Uncle Petrusha, tell mamma to have the kittens taken to the
      nursery,” the children beg their uncle, “do-o tell her.”
    

      “There, there . . . very well,” says their uncle, waving them
      off. “All right.”
    

      Uncle Petrusha does not usually come alone. He is accompanied by Nero, a
      big black dog of Danish breed, with drooping ears, and a tail as hard as a
      stick. The dog is silent, morose, and full of a sense of his own dignity.
      He takes not the slightest notice of the children, and when he passes them
      hits them with his tail as though they were chairs. The children hate him
      from the bottom of their hearts, but on this occasion, practical
      considerations override sentiment.
    

      “I say, Nina,” says Vanya, opening his eyes wide. “Let
      Nero be their father, instead of the horse! The horse is dead and he is
      alive, you see.”
    

      They are waiting the whole evening for the moment when papa will sit down
      to his cards and it will be possible to take Nero to the kitchen without
      being observed. . . . At last, papa sits down to cards, mamma is busy with
      the samovar and not noticing the children. . . .
    

      The happy moment arrives.
    

      “Come along!” Vanya whispers to his sister.
    

      But, at that moment, Stepan comes in and, with a snigger, announces:
    

      “Nero has eaten the kittens, madam.”
    

      Nina and Vanya turn pale and look at Stepan with horror.
    

      “He really has . . .” laughs the footman, “he went to
      the box and gobbled them up.”
    

      The children expect that all the people in the house will be aghast and
      fall upon the miscreant Nero. But they all sit calmly in their seats, and
      only express surprise at the appetite of the huge dog. Papa and mamma
      laugh. Nero walks about by the table, wags his tail, and licks his lips
      complacently . . . the cat is the only one who is uneasy. With her tail in
      the air she walks about the rooms, looking suspiciously at people and
      mewing plaintively.
    

      “Children, it’s past nine,” cries mamma, “it’s
      bedtime.”
    

      Vanya and Nina go to bed, shed tears, and spend a long time thinking about
      the injured cat, and the cruel, insolent, and unpunished Nero.