A baby was wandering in a strange country. He was a tattered child with
a frowsled wealth of yellow hair. His dress, of a checked stuff, was
soiled, and showed the marks of many conflicts, like the chain-shirt
of a warrior. His sun-tanned knees shone above wrinkled stockings,
which he pulled up occasionally with an impatient movement when they
entangled his feet. From a gaping shoe there appeared an array of tiny
toes.

 He was toddling along an avenue between rows of stolid brown houses.
He went slowly, with a look of absorbed interest on his small flushed
face. His blue eyes stared curiously. Carriages went with a musical
rumble over the smooth asphalt. A man with a chrysanthemum was going
up steps. Two nursery maids chatted as they walked slowly, while their
charges hobnobbed amiably between perambulators. A truck wagon roared
thunderously in the distance.

 The child from the poor district made his way along the brown street
filled with dull grey shadows. High up, near the roofs, glancing
sun-rays changed cornices to blazing gold and silvered the fronts of windows. The wandering baby stopped and stared at the two children
laughing and playing in their carriages among the heaps of rugs and
cushions. He braced his legs apart in an attitude of earnest attention.
His lower jaw fell, and disclosed his small, even teeth. As they moved
on, he followed the carriages with awe in his face as if contemplating
a pageant. Once one of the babies, with twittering laughter, shook a
gorgeous rattle at him. He smiled jovially in return.

 Finally a nursery maid ceased conversation and, turning, made a gesture
of annoyance.

 "Go 'way, little boy," she said to him. "Go 'way. You're all dirty."

 He gazed at her with infant tranquillity for a moment, and then went
slowly off dragging behind him a bit of rope he had acquired in another
street. He continued to investigate the new scenes. The people and
houses struck him with interest as would flowers and trees. Passengers
had to avoid the small, absorbed figure in the middle of the sidewalk.
They glanced at the intent baby face covered with scratches and dust as
with scars and with powder smoke.

 After a time, the wanderer discovered upon the pavement a pretty child
in fine clothes playing with a toy. It was a tiny fire-engine, painted
brilliantly in crimson and gold. The wheels rattled as its small owner
dragged it uproariously about by means of a string. The babe with his
bit of rope trailing behind him paused and regarded the child and
the toy. For a long while he remained motionless, save for his eyes,
which followed all movements of the glittering thing.  The owner paid
no attention to the spectator, but continued his joyous imitations of
phases of the career of a fire-engine. His gleeful baby laugh rang
against the calm fronts of the houses. After a little the wandering
baby began quietly to sidle nearer. His bit of rope, now forgotten,
dropped at his feet. He removed his eyes from the toy and glanced
expectantly at the other child.

 "Say," he breathed softly.

 The owner of the toy was running down the walk at top speed. His tongue
was clanging like a bell and his legs were galloping. He did not look
around at the coaxing call from the small tattered figure on the curb.

 The wandering baby approached still nearer, and presently spoke again.

 "Say," he murmured, "le' me play wif it?"

 The other child interrupted some shrill tootings. He bended his head
and spoke disdainfully over his shoulder.

 "No," he said.

 The wanderer retreated to the curb. He failed to notice the bit of
rope, once treasured. His eyes followed as before the winding course of
the engine, and his tender mouth twitched.

 "Say," he ventured at last, "is dat yours?"

 "Yes," said the other, tilting his round chin. He drew his property
suddenly behind him as if it were menaced. "Yes," he repeated, "it's
mine."

 "Well, le' me play wif it?" said the wandering baby, with a trembling
note of desire in his voice.

  "No," cried the pretty child with determined lips. "It's mine. My ma-ma
buyed it."

 "Well, tan't I play wif it?" His voice was a sob. He stretched forth
little covetous hands.

 "No," the pretty child continued to repeat. "No, it's mine."

 "Well, I want to play wif it," wailed the other. A sudden fierce frown
mantled his baby face. He clenched his fat hands and advanced with a
formidable gesture. He looked some wee battler in a war.

 "It's mine! It's mine," cried the pretty child, his voice in the treble
of outraged rights.

 "I want it," roared the wanderer.

 "It's mine! It's mine!"

 "I want it!"

 "It's mine!"

 The pretty child retreated to the fence, and there paused at bay. He
protected his property with outstretched arms. The small vandal made a
charge. There was a short scuffle at the fence. Each grasped the string
to the toy and tugged. Their faces were wrinkled with baby rage, the
verge of tears. Finally, the child in tatters gave a supreme tug and
wrenched the string from the other's hands. He set off rapidly down the
street, bearing the toy in his arms. He was weeping with the air of
a wronged one who has at last succeeded in achieving his rights. The
other baby was squalling lustily. He seemed quite helpless. He rung his
chubby hands and railed.

 After the small barbarian had got some distance away, he paused and
regarded his booty. His little form curved with pride. A soft, gleeful
smile loomed through the storm of tears. With great care he prepared
the toy for travelling. He stopped a moment on a corner and gazed at
the pretty child, whose small figure was quivering with sobs. As the
latter began to show signs of beginning pursuit, the little vandal
turned and vanished down a dark side street as into a cavern.