AT THE PIT'S MOUTH
    

   Men say it was a stolen tide—
    The Lord that sent it he knows all,
   But in mine ear will aye abide
    The message that the bells let fall,
   And awesome bells they were to me,
   That in the dark rang, “Enderby.”
                  —Jean Ingelow.


      Once upon a time there was a man and his Wife and a Tertium Quid.
    

      All three were unwise, but the Wife was the unwisest. The Man should have
      looked after his Wife, who should have avoided the Tertium Quid, who,
      again, should have married a wife of his own, after clean and open
      flirtations, to which nobody can possibly object, round Jakko or
      Observatory Hill. When you see a young man with his pony in a white
      lather, and his hat on the back of his head flying down-hill at fifteen
      miles an hour to meet a girl who will be properly surprised to meet him,
      you naturally approve of that young man, and wish him Staff Appointments,
      and take an interest in his welfare, and, as the proper time comes, give
      them sugar-tongs or side-saddles, according to your means and generosity.
    

      The Tertium Quid flew down-hill on horseback, but it was to meet the Man's
      Wife; and when he flew up-hill it was for the same end. The Man was in the
      Plains, earning money for his Wife to spend on dresses and
      four-hundred-rupee bracelets, and inexpensive luxuries of that kind. He
      worked very hard, and sent her a letter or a post-card daily. She also
      wrote to him daily, and said that she was longing for him to come up to
      Simla. The Tertium Quid used to lean over her shoulder and laugh as she
      wrote the notes. Then the two would ride to the Post Office together.
    

      Now, Simla is a strange place and its customs are peculiar; nor is any man
      who has not spent at least ten seasons there qualified to pass judgment on
      circumstantial evidence, which is the most untrustworthy in the Courts.
      For these reasons, and for others which need not appear, I decline to
      state positively whether there was anything irretrievably wrong in the
      relations between the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid. If there was, and
      hereon you must form your own opinion, it was the Man's Wife's fault. She
      was kittenish in her manners, wearing generally an air of soft and fluffy
      innocence. But she was deadly learned and evil-instructed; and, now and
      again, when the mask dropped, men saw this, shuddered and almost drew
      back. Men are occasionally particular, and the least particular men are
      always the most exacting.
    

      Simla is eccentric in its fashion of tearing friendships. Certain
      attachments which have set and crystallized through half a dozen seasons
      acquire almost the sanctity of the marriage bond, and are revered as such.
      Again, certain attachments equally old, and, to all appearance, equally
      venerable, never seem to win any recognized official status; while a
      chance-sprung acquaintance now two months born, steps into the place which
      by right belongs to the senior. There is no law reducible to print which
      regulates these affairs.
    

      Some people have a gift which secures them infinite toleration, and others
      have not. The Man's Wife had not. If she looked over the garden wall, for
      instance, women taxed her with stealing their husbands. She complained
      pathetically that she was not allowed to choose her own friends. When she
      put up her big white muff to her lips, and gazed over it and under her
      eyebrows at you as she said this thing, you felt that she had been
      infamously misjudged, and that all the other women's instincts were all
      wrong; which was absurd. She was not allowed to own the Tertium Quid in
      peace; and was so strangely constructed that she would not have enjoyed
      peace had she been so permitted. She preferred some semblance of intrigue
      to cloak even her most commonplace actions.
    

      After two months of riding, first round Jakko, then Elysium, then Summer
      Hill, then Observatory Hill, then under Jutogh, and lastly up and down the
      Cart Road as far as the Tara Devi gap in the dusk, she said to the Tertium
      Quid, “Frank, people say we are too much together, and people are so
      horrid.”
     

      The Tertium Quid pulled his moustache, and replied that horrid people were
      unworthy of the consideration of nice people.
    

      “But they have done more than talk—they have written—written
      to my hubby—I'm sure of it,” said the Man's Wife, and she pulled a
      letter from her husband out of her saddle-pocket and gave it to the
      Tertium Quid.
    

      It was an honest letter, written by an honest man, then stewing in the
      Plains on two hundred rupees a month (for he allowed his wife eight
      hundred and fifty), and in a silk banian and cotton trousers. It is said
      that, perhaps, she had no thought of the unwisdom of allowing her name to
      be so generally coupled with the Tertium Quid's; that she was too much of
      a child to understand the dangers of that sort of thing; that he, her
      husband, was the last man in the world to interfere jealously with her
      little amusements and interests, but that it would be better were she to
      drop the Tertium Quid quietly and for her husband's sake. The letter was
      sweetened with many pretty little pet names, and it amused the Tertium
      Quid considerably. He and She laughed over it, so that you, fifty yards
      away, could see their shoulders shaking while the horses slouched along
      side by side.
    

      Their conversation was not worth reporting. The upshot of it was that,
      next day, no one saw the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid together. They
      had both gone down to the Cemetery, which, as a rule, is only visited
      officially by the inhabitants of Simla.
    

      A Simla funeral with the clergyman riding, the mourners riding, and the
      coffin creaking as it swings between the bearers, is one of the most
      depressing things on this earth, particularly when the procession passes
      under the wet, dank dip beneath the Rockcliffe Hotel, where the sun is
      shut out and all the hill streams are wailing and weeping together as they
      go down the valleys.
    

      Occasionally folk tend the graves, but we in India shift and are
      transferred so often that, at the end of the second year, the Dead have no
      friends—only acquaintances who are far too busy amusing themselves
      up the hill to attend to old partners. The idea of using a Cemetery as a
      rendezvous is distinctly a feminine one. A man would have said simply “Let
      people talk. We'll go down the Mall.” A woman is made differently,
      especially if she be such a woman as the Man's Wife. She and the Tertium
      Quid enjoyed each other's society among the graves of men and women whom
      they had known and danced with aforetime.
    

      They used to take a big horse-blanket and sit on the grass a little to the
      left of the lower end, where there is a dip in the ground and where the
      occupied graves stop short and the ready-made ones are not ready. Each
      well-regulated India Cemetery keeps half a dozen graves permanently open
      for contingencies and incidental wear and tear. In the Hills these are
      more usually baby's size, because children who come up weakened and sick
      from the Plains often succumb to the effects of the Rains in the Hills or
      get pneumonia from their ayahs taking them through damp pine-woods after
      the sun has set. In Cantonments, of course, the man's size is more in
      request; these arrangements varying with the climate and population.
    

      One day when the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid had just arrived in the
      Cemetery, they saw some coolies breaking ground. They had marked out a
      full-size grave, and the Tertium Quid asked them whether any Sahib was
      sick. They said that they did not know; but it was an order that they
      should dig a Sahib's grave.
    

      “Work away,” said the Tertium Quid, “and let's see how it's done.”
     

      The coolies worked away, and the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid watched
      and talked for a couple of hours while the grave was being deepened Then a
      coolie, taking the earth in blankets as it was thrown up, jumped over the
      grave.
    

      “That's queer,” said the Tertium Quid. “Where's my ulster?”
     

      “What's queer?” said the Man's Wife.
    

      “I have got a chill down my back just as if a goose had walked over my
      grave.”
     

      “Why do you look at the thing, then?” said the Man's Wife. “Let us go.”
     

      The Tertium Quid stood at the head of the grave, and stared without
      answering for a space. Then he said, dropping a pebble down, “It is nasty
      and cold; horribly cold. I don't think I shall come to the Cemetery any
      more. I don't think grave-digging is cheerful.”
     

      The two talked and agreed that the Cemetery was depressing. They also
      arranged for a ride next day out from the Cemetery through the Mashobra
      Tunnel up to Fagoo and back, because all the world was going to a
      garden-party at Viceregal Lodge, and all the people of Mashobra would go
      too.
    

      Coming up the Cemetery road, the Tertium Quid's horse tried to bolt up
      hill, being tired with standing so long, and managed to strain a back
      sinew.
    

      “I shall have to take the mare tomorrow,” said the Tertium Quid, “and she
      will stand nothing heavier than a snaffle.”
     

      They made their arrangements to meet in the Cemetery, after allowing all
      the Mashobra people time to pass into Simla. That night it rained heavily,
      and next day, when the Tertium Quid came to the trysting-place, he saw
      that the new grave had a foot of water in it, the ground being a tough and
      sour clay.
    

      “'Jove! That looks beastly,” said the Tertium Quid. “Fancy being boarded
      up and dropped into that well!”
     

      They then started off to Fagoo, the mare playing with the snaffle and
      picking her way as though she were shod with satin, and the sun shining
      divinely. The road below Mashobra to Fagoo is officially styled the
      Himalayan-Thibet Road; but in spite of its name it is not much more than
      six feet wide in most places, and the drop into the valley below must be
      anything between one and two thousand feet.
    

      “Now we're going to Thibet,” said the Man's Wife merrily, as the horses
      drew near to Fagoo. She was riding on the cliff-side.
    

      “Into Thibet,” said the Tertium Quid, “ever so far from people who say
      horrid things, and hubbies who write stupid letters. With you—to the
      end of the world!”
     

      A coolie carrying a log of wood came round a corner, and the mare went
      wide to avoid him—forefeet in and haunches out, as a sensible mare
      should go.
    

      “To the world's end,” said the Man's Wife, and looked unspeakable things
      over her near shoulder at the Tertium Quid.
    

      He was smiling, but, while she looked, the smile froze stiff as it were on
      his face, and changed to a nervous grin—the sort of grin men wear
      when they are not quite easy in their saddles. The mare seemed to be
      sinking by the stem, and her nostrils cracked while she was trying to
      realize what was happening. The rain of the night before had rotted the
      drop-side of the Himalayan-Thibet Road, and it was giving way under her.
      “What are you doing?” said the Man's Wife. The Tertium Quid gave no
      answer. He grinned nervously and set his spurs into the mare, who rapped
      with her forefeet on the road, and the struggle began. The Man's Wife
      screamed, “Oh, Frank, get off!”
     

      But the Tertium Quid was glued to the saddle—his face blue and white—and
      he looked into the Man's Wife's eyes. Then the Man's Wife clutched at the
      mare's head and caught her by the nose instead of the bridle. The brute
      threw up her head and went down with a scream, the Tertium Quid upon her,
      and the nervous grin still set on his face.
    

      The Man's Wife heard the tinkle-tinkle of little stones and loose earth
      falling off the roadway, and the sliding roar of the man and horse going
      down. Then everything was quiet, and she called on Frank to leave his mare
      and walk up. But Frank did not answer. He was underneath the mare, nine
      hundred feet below, spoiling a patch of Indian corn.
    

      As the revellers came back from Viceregal Lodge in the mists of the
      evening, they met a temporarily insane woman, on a temporarily mad horse,
      swinging round the corners, with her eyes and her mouth open, and her head
      like the head of the Medusa. She was stopped by a man at the risk of his
      life, and taken out of the saddle, a limp heap, and put on the bank to
      explain herself. This wasted twenty minutes, and then she was sent home in
      a lady's 'rickshaw, still with her mouth open and her hands picking at her
      riding-gloves.
    

      She was in bed through the following three days, which were rainy; so she
      missed attending the funeral of the Tertium Quid, who was lowered into
      eighteen inches of water, instead of the twelve to which he had first
      objected.