At the Bay

 I

 Very early morning. The sun was not yet risen, and the whole of Crescent Bay
was hidden under a white sea-mist. The big bush-covered hills at the back were
smothered. You could not see where they ended and the paddocks and bungalows
began. The sandy road was gone and the paddocks and bungalows the other side of
it; there were no white dunes covered with reddish grass beyond them; there was
nothing to mark which was beach and where was the sea. A heavy dew had fallen.
The grass was blue. Big drops hung on the bushes and just did not fall; the
silvery, fluffy toi-toi was limp on its long stalks, and all the marigolds and
the pinks in the bungalow gardens were bowed to the earth with wetness.
Drenched were the cold fuchsias, round pearls of dew lay on the flat nasturtium
leaves. It looked as though the sea had beaten up softly in the darkness, as
though one immense wave had come rippling, rippling—how far? Perhaps if
you had waked up in the middle of the night you might have seen a big fish
flicking in at the window and gone again....

 Ah-Aah! sounded the sleepy sea. And from the bush there came the sound of
little streams flowing, quickly, lightly, slipping between the smooth stones,
gushing into ferny basins and out again; and there was the splashing of big
drops on large leaves, and something else—what was it?—a faint
stirring and shaking, the snapping of a twig and then such silence that it
seemed some one was listening.

 Round the corner of Crescent Bay, between the piled-up masses of broken rock, a
flock of sheep came pattering. They were huddled together, a small, tossing,
woolly mass, and their thin, stick-like legs trotted along quickly as if the
cold and the quiet had frightened them. Behind them an old sheep-dog, his
soaking paws covered with sand, ran along with his nose to the ground, but
carelessly, as if thinking of something else. And then in the rocky gateway the
shepherd himself appeared. He was a lean, upright old man, in a frieze coat
that was covered with a web of tiny drops, velvet trousers tied under the knee,
and a wide-awake with a folded blue handkerchief round the brim. One hand was
crammed into his belt, the other grasped a beautifully smooth yellow stick. And
as he walked, taking his time, he kept up a very soft light whistling, an airy,
far-away fluting that sounded mournful and tender. The old dog cut an ancient
caper or two and then drew up sharp, ashamed of his levity, and walked a few
dignified paces by his master’s side. The sheep ran forward in little
pattering rushes; they began to bleat, and ghostly flocks and herds answered
them from under the sea. “Baa! Baaa!” For a time they seemed to be
always on the same piece of ground. There ahead was stretched the sandy road
with shallow puddles; the same soaking bushes showed on either side and the
same shadowy palings. Then something immense came into view; an enormous
shock-haired giant with his arms stretched out. It was the big gum-tree outside
Mrs. Stubbs’ shop, and as they passed by there was a strong whiff of
eucalyptus. And now big spots of light gleamed in the mist. The shepherd
stopped whistling; he rubbed his red nose and wet beard on his wet sleeve and,
screwing up his eyes, glanced in the direction of the sea. The sun was rising.
It was marvellous how quickly the mist thinned, sped away, dissolved from the
shallow plain, rolled up from the bush and was gone as if in a hurry to escape;
big twists and curls jostled and shouldered each other as the silvery beams
broadened. The far-away sky—a bright, pure blue—was reflected in
the puddles, and the drops, swimming along the telegraph poles, flashed into
points of light. Now the leaping, glittering sea was so bright it made
one’s eyes ache to look at it. The shepherd drew a pipe, the bowl as
small as an acorn, out of his breast pocket, fumbled for a chunk of speckled
tobacco, pared off a few shavings and stuffed the bowl. He was a grave,
fine-looking old man. As he lit up and the blue smoke wreathed his head, the
dog, watching, looked proud of him.

 “Baa! Baaa!” The sheep spread out into a fan. They were just clear
of the summer colony before the first sleeper turned over and lifted a drowsy
head; their cry sounded in the dreams of little children... who lifted their
arms to drag down, to cuddle the darling little woolly lambs of sleep. Then the
first inhabitant appeared; it was the Burnells’ cat Florrie, sitting on
the gatepost, far too early as usual, looking for their milk-girl. When she saw
the old sheep-dog she sprang up quickly, arched her back, drew in her tabby
head, and seemed to give a little fastidious shiver. “Ugh! What a coarse,
revolting creature!” said Florrie. But the old sheep-dog, not looking up,
waggled past, flinging out his legs from side to side. Only one of his ears
twitched to prove that he saw, and thought her a silly young female.

 The breeze of morning lifted in the bush and the smell of leaves and wet black
earth mingled with the sharp smell of the sea. Myriads of birds were singing. A
goldfinch flew over the shepherd’s head and, perching on the tiptop of a
spray, it turned to the sun, ruffling its small breast feathers. And now they
had passed the fisherman’s hut, passed the charred-looking little whare where Leila the milk-girl lived with her old Gran. The sheep
strayed over a yellow swamp and Wag, the sheep-dog, padded after, rounded them
up and headed them for the steeper, narrower rocky pass that led out of
Crescent Bay and towards Daylight Cove. “Baa! Baa!” Faint the cry
came as they rocked along the fast-drying road. The shepherd put away his pipe,
dropping it into his breast-pocket so that the little bowl hung over. And
straightway the soft airy whistling began again. Wag ran out along a ledge of
rock after something that smelled, and ran back again disgusted. Then pushing,
nudging, hurrying, the sheep rounded the bend and the shepherd followed after
out of sight.

 II

 A few moments later the back door of one of the bungalows opened, and a figure
in a broad-striped bathing suit flung down the paddock, cleared the stile,
rushed through the tussock grass into the hollow, staggered up the sandy
hillock, and raced for dear life over the big porous stones, over the cold, wet
pebbles, on to the hard sand that gleamed like oil. Splish-Splosh!
Splish-Splosh! The water bubbled round his legs as Stanley Burnell waded out
exulting. First man in as usual! He’d beaten them all again. And he
swooped down to souse his head and neck.

 “Hail, brother! All hail, Thou Mighty One!” A velvety bass voice
came booming over the water.

 Great Scott! Damnation take it! Stanley lifted up to see a dark head bobbing
far out and an arm lifted. It was Jonathan Trout—there before him!
“Glorious morning!” sang the voice.

 “Yes, very fine!” said Stanley briefly. Why the dickens
didn’t the fellow stick to his part of the sea? Why should he come
barging over to this exact spot? Stanley gave a kick, a lunge and struck out,
swimming overarm. But Jonathan was a match for him. Up he came, his black hair
sleek on his forehead, his short beard sleek.

 “I had an extraordinary dream last night!” he shouted.

 What was the matter with the man? This mania for conversation irritated Stanley
beyond words. And it was always the same—always some piffle about a dream
he’d had, or some cranky idea he’d got hold of, or some rot
he’d been reading. Stanley turned over on his back and kicked with his
legs till he was a living waterspout. But even then.... “I dreamed I was
hanging over a terrifically high cliff, shouting to some one below.” You
would be! thought Stanley. He could stick no more of it. He stopped splashing.
“Look here, Trout,” he said, “I’m in rather a hurry
this morning.”

 “You’re WHAT?” Jonathan was so surprised—or pretended
to be—that he sank under the water, then reappeared again blowing.

 “All I mean is,” said Stanley, “I’ve no time
to—to—to fool about. I want to get this over. I’m in a hurry.
I’ve work to do this morning—see?”

 Jonathan was gone before Stanley had finished. “Pass, friend!” said
the bass voice gently, and he slid away through the water with scarcely a
ripple.... But curse the fellow! He’d ruined Stanley’s bathe. What
an unpractical idiot the man was! Stanley struck out to sea again, and then as
quickly swam in again, and away he rushed up the beach. He felt cheated.

 Jonathan stayed a little longer in the water. He floated, gently moving his
hands like fins, and letting the sea rock his long, skinny body. It was
curious, but in spite of everything he was fond of Stanley Burnell. True, he
had a fiendish desire to tease him sometimes, to poke fun at him, but at bottom
he was sorry for the fellow. There was something pathetic in his determination
to make a job of everything. You couldn’t help feeling he’d be
caught out one day, and then what an almighty cropper he’d come! At that
moment an immense wave lifted Jonathan, rode past him, and broke along the
beach with a joyful sound. What a beauty! And now there came another. That was
the way to live—carelessly, recklessly, spending oneself. He got on to
his feet and began to wade towards the shore, pressing his toes into the firm,
wrinkled sand. To take things easy, not to fight against the ebb and flow of
life, but to give way to it—that was what was needed. It was this tension
that was all wrong. To live—to live! And the perfect morning, so fresh
and fair, basking in the light, as though laughing at its own beauty, seemed to
whisper, “Why not?”

 But now he was out of the water Jonathan turned blue with cold. He ached all
over; it was as though some one was wringing the blood out of him. And stalking
up the beach, shivering, all his muscles tight, he too felt his bathe was
spoilt. He’d stayed in too long.

 III

 Beryl was alone in the living-room when Stanley appeared, wearing a blue serge
suit, a stiff collar and a spotted tie. He looked almost uncannily clean and
brushed; he was going to town for the day. Dropping into his chair, he pulled
out his watch and put it beside his plate.

 “I’ve just got twenty-five minutes,” he said. “You
might go and see if the porridge is ready, Beryl?”

 “Mother’s just gone for it,” said Beryl. She sat down at the
table and poured out his tea.

 “Thanks!” Stanley took a sip. “Hallo!” he said in an
astonished voice, “you’ve forgotten the sugar.”

 “Oh, sorry!” But even then Beryl didn’t help him; she pushed
the basin across. What did this mean? As Stanley helped himself his blue eyes
widened; they seemed to quiver. He shot a quick glance at his sister-in-law and
leaned back.

 “Nothing wrong, is there?” he asked carelessly, fingering his
collar.

 Beryl’s head was bent; she turned her plate in her fingers.

 “Nothing,” said her light voice. Then she too looked up, and smiled
at Stanley. “Why should there be?”

 “O-oh! No reason at all as far as I know. I thought you seemed
rather—”

 At that moment the door opened and the three little girls appeared, each
carrying a porridge plate. They were dressed alike in blue jerseys and
knickers; their brown legs were bare, and each had her hair plaited and pinned
up in what was called a horse’s tail. Behind them came Mrs. Fairfield
with the tray.

 “Carefully, children,” she warned. But they were taking the very
greatest care. They loved being allowed to carry things. “Have you said
good morning to your father?”

 “Yes, grandma.” They settled themselves on the bench opposite
Stanley and Beryl.

 “Good morning, Stanley!” Old Mrs. Fairfield gave him his plate.

 “Morning, mother! How’s the boy?”

 “Splendid! He only woke up once last night. What a perfect
morning!” The old woman paused, her hand on the loaf of bread, to gaze
out of the open door into the garden. The sea sounded. Through the wide-open
window streamed the sun on to the yellow varnished walls and bare floor.
Everything on the table flashed and glittered. In the middle there was an old
salad bowl filled with yellow and red nasturtiums. She smiled, and a look of
deep content shone in her eyes.

 “You might cut me a slice of that bread, mother,” said
Stanley. “I’ve only twelve and a half minutes before the coach
passes. Has anyone given my shoes to the servant girl?”

 “Yes, they’re ready for you.” Mrs. Fairfield was quite
unruffled.

 “Oh, Kezia! Why are you such a messy child!” cried Beryl
despairingly.

 “Me, Aunt Beryl?” Kezia stared at her. What had she done now? She
had only dug a river down the middle of her porridge, filled it, and was eating
the banks away. But she did that every single morning, and no one had said a
word up till now.

 “Why can’t you eat your food properly like Isabel and
Lottie?” How unfair grown-ups are!

 “But Lottie always makes a floating island, don’t you,
Lottie?”

 “I don’t,” said Isabel smartly. “I just sprinkle mine
with sugar and put on the milk and finish it. Only babies play with their
food.”

 Stanley pushed back his chair and got up.

 “Would you get me those shoes, mother? And, Beryl, if you’ve
finished, I wish you’d cut down to the gate and stop the coach. Run in to
your mother, Isabel, and ask her where my bowler hat’s been put. Wait a
minute—have you children been playing with my stick?”

 “No, father!”

 “But I put it here.” Stanley began to bluster. “I remember
distinctly putting it in this corner. Now, who’s had it? There’s no
time to lose. Look sharp! The stick’s got to be found.”

 Even Alice, the servant-girl, was drawn into the chase. “You
haven’t been using it to poke the kitchen fire with by any chance?”

 Stanley dashed into the bedroom where Linda was lying. “Most
extraordinary thing. I can’t keep a single possession to myself.
They’ve made away with my stick, now!”

 “Stick, dear? What stick?” Linda’s vagueness on these
occasions could not be real, Stanley decided. Would nobody sympathize with him?

 “Coach! Coach, Stanley!” Beryl’s voice cried from the gate.

 Stanley waved his arm to Linda. “No time to say good-bye!” he
cried. And he meant that as a punishment to her.

 He snatched his bowler hat, dashed out of the house, and swung down the garden
path. Yes, the coach was there waiting, and Beryl, leaning over the open gate,
was laughing up at somebody or other just as if nothing had happened. The
heartlessness of women! The way they took it for granted it was your job to
slave away for them while they didn’t even take the trouble to see that
your walking-stick wasn’t lost. Kelly trailed his whip across the horses.

 “Good-bye, Stanley,” called Beryl, sweetly and gaily. It was easy
enough to say good-bye! And there she stood, idle, shading her eyes with her
hand. The worst of it was Stanley had to shout good-bye too, for the sake of
appearances. Then he saw her turn, give a little skip and run back to the
house. She was glad to be rid of him!

 Yes, she was thankful. Into the living-room she ran and called
“He’s gone!” Linda cried from her room: “Beryl! Has
Stanley gone?” Old Mrs. Fairfield appeared, carrying the boy in his
little flannel coatee.

 “Gone?”

 “Gone!”

 Oh, the relief, the difference it made to have the man out of the house. Their
very voices were changed as they called to one another; they sounded warm and
loving and as if they shared a secret. Beryl went over to the table.
“Have another cup of tea, mother. It’s still hot.” She
wanted, somehow, to celebrate the fact that they could do what they liked now.
There was no man to disturb them; the whole perfect day was theirs.

 “No, thank you, child,” said old Mrs. Fairfield, but the way at
that moment she tossed the boy up and said “a-goos-a-goos-a-ga!” to
him meant that she felt the same. The little girls ran into the paddock like
chickens let out of a coop.

 Even Alice, the servant-girl, washing up the dishes in the kitchen, caught the
infection and used the precious tank water in a perfectly reckless fashion.

 “Oh, these men!” said she, and she plunged the teapot into the bowl
and held it under the water even after it had stopped bubbling, as if it too
was a man and drowning was too good for them.

 IV

 “Wait for me, Isa-bel! Kezia, wait for me!”

 There was poor little Lottie, left behind again, because she found it so
fearfully hard to get over the stile by herself. When she stood on the first
step her knees began to wobble; she grasped the post. Then you had to put one
leg over. But which leg? She never could decide. And when she did finally put
one leg over with a sort of stamp of despair—then the feeling was awful.
She was half in the paddock still and half in the tussock grass. She clutched
the post desperately and lifted up her voice. “Wait for me!”

 “No, don’t you wait for her, Kezia!” said Isabel.
“She’s such a little silly. She’s always making a fuss. Come
on!” And she tugged Kezia’s jersey. “You can use my bucket if
you come with me,” she said kindly. “It’s bigger than
yours.” But Kezia couldn’t leave Lottie all by herself. She ran
back to her. By this time Lottie was very red in the face and breathing
heavily.

 “Here, put your other foot over,” said Kezia.

 “Where?”

 Lottie looked down at Kezia as if from a mountain height.

 “Here where my hand is.” Kezia patted the place.

 “Oh, there do you mean!” Lottie gave a deep sigh and put the
second foot over.

 “Now—sort of turn round and sit down and slide,” said Kezia.

 “But there’s nothing to sit down on , Kezia,” said
Lottie.

 She managed it at last, and once it was over she shook herself and began to
beam.

 “I’m getting better at climbing over stiles, aren’t I,
Kezia?”

 Lottie’s was a very hopeful nature.

 The pink and the blue sunbonnet followed Isabel’s bright red sunbonnet up
that sliding, slipping hill. At the top they paused to decide where to go and
to have a good stare at who was there already. Seen from behind, standing
against the skyline, gesticulating largely with their spades, they looked like
minute puzzled explorers.

 The whole family of Samuel Josephs was there already with their lady-help, who
sat on a camp-stool and kept order with a whistle that she wore tied round her
neck, and a small cane with which she directed operations. The Samuel Josephs
never played by themselves or managed their own game. If they did, it ended in
the boys pouring water down the girls’ necks or the girls trying to put
little black crabs into the boys’ pockets. So Mrs. S. J. and the poor
lady-help drew up what she called a “brogramme” every morning to
keep them “abused and out of bischief.” It was all competitions or
races or round games. Everything began with a piercing blast of the
lady-help’s whistle and ended with another. There were even
prizes—large, rather dirty paper parcels which the lady-help with a sour
little smile drew out of a bulging string kit. The Samuel Josephs fought
fearfully for the prizes and cheated and pinched one another’s
arms—they were all expert pinchers. The only time the Burnell children
ever played with them Kezia had got a prize, and when she undid three bits of
paper she found a very small rusty button-hook. She couldn’t understand
why they made such a fuss....

 But they never played with the Samuel Josephs now or even went to their
parties. The Samuel Josephs were always giving children’s parties at the
Bay and there was always the same food. A big washhand basin of very brown
fruit-salad, buns cut into four and a washhand jug full of something the
lady-help called “Limmonadear.” And you went away in the evening
with half the frill torn off your frock or something spilled all down the front
of your open-work pinafore, leaving the Samuel Josephs leaping like savages on
their lawn. No! They were too awful.

 On the other side of the beach, close down to the water, two little boys, their
knickers rolled up, twinkled like spiders. One was digging, the other pattered
in and out of the water, filling a small bucket. They were the Trout boys, Pip
and Rags. But Pip was so busy digging and Rags was so busy helping that they
didn’t see their little cousins until they were quite close.

 “Look!” said Pip. “Look what I’ve discovered.”
And he showed them an old wet, squashed-looking boot. The three little girls
stared.

 “Whatever are you going to do with it?” asked Kezia.

 “Keep it, of course!” Pip was very scornful. “It’s a
find—see?”

 Yes, Kezia saw that. All the same....

 “There’s lots of things buried in the sand,” explained Pip.
“They get chucked up from wrecks. Treasure. Why—you might
find—”

 “But why does Rags have to keep on pouring water in?” asked Lottie.

 “Oh, that’s to moisten it,” said Pip, “to make the work
a bit easier. Keep it up, Rags.”

 And good little Rags ran up and down, pouring in the water that turned brown
like cocoa.

 “Here, shall I show you what I found yesterday?” said Pip
mysteriously, and he stuck his spade into the sand. “Promise not to
tell.”

 They promised.

 “Say, cross my heart straight dinkum.”

 The little girls said it.

 Pip took something out of his pocket, rubbed it a long time on the front of his
jersey, then breathed on it and rubbed it again.

 “Now turn round!” he ordered.

 They turned round.

 “All look the same way! Keep still! Now!”

 And his hand opened; he held up to the light something that flashed, that
winked, that was a most lovely green.

 “It’s a nemeral,” said Pip solemnly.

 “Is it really, Pip?” Even Isabel was impressed.

 The lovely green thing seemed to dance in Pip’s fingers. Aunt Beryl had a
nemeral in a ring, but it was a very small one. This one was as big as a star
and far more beautiful.

 V

 As the morning lengthened whole parties appeared over the sand-hills and came
down on the beach to bathe. It was understood that at eleven o’clock the
women and children of the summer colony had the sea to themselves. First the
women undressed, pulled on their bathing dresses and covered their heads in
hideous caps like sponge bags; then the children were unbuttoned. The beach was
strewn with little heaps of clothes and shoes; the big summer hats, with stones
on them to keep them from blowing away, looked like immense shells. It was
strange that even the sea seemed to sound differently when all those leaping,
laughing figures ran into the waves. Old Mrs. Fairfield, in a lilac cotton
dress and a black hat tied under the chin, gathered her little brood and got
them ready. The little Trout boys whipped their shirts over their heads, and
away the five sped, while their grandma sat with one hand in her knitting-bag
ready to draw out the ball of wool when she was satisfied they were safely in.

 The firm compact little girls were not half so brave as the tender,
delicate-looking little boys. Pip and Rags, shivering, crouching down, slapping
the water, never hesitated. But Isabel, who could swim twelve strokes, and
Kezia, who could nearly swim eight, only followed on the strict understanding
they were not to be splashed. As for Lottie, she didn’t follow at all.
She liked to be left to go in her own way, please. And that way was to sit down
at the edge of the water, her legs straight, her knees pressed together, and to
make vague motions with her arms as if she expected to be wafted out to sea.
But when a bigger wave than usual, an old whiskery one, came lolloping along in
her direction, she scrambled to her feet with a face of horror and flew up the
beach again.

 “Here, mother, keep those for me, will you?”

 Two rings and a thin gold chain were dropped into Mrs Fairfield’s lap.

 “Yes, dear. But aren’t you going to bathe here?”

 “No-o,” Beryl drawled. She sounded vague. “I’m
undressing farther along. I’m going to bathe with Mrs. Harry
Kember.”

 “Very well.” But Mrs. Fairfield’s lips set. She disapproved
of Mrs Harry Kember. Beryl knew it.

 Poor old mother, she smiled, as she skimmed over the stones. Poor old mother!
Old! Oh, what joy, what bliss it was to be young....

 “You look very pleased,” said Mrs. Harry Kember. She sat hunched up
on the stones, her arms round her knees, smoking.

 “It’s such a lovely day,” said Beryl, smiling down at her.

 “Oh my dear !” Mrs. Harry Kember’s voice sounded as
though she knew better than that. But then her voice always sounded as though
she knew something better about you than you did yourself. She was a long,
strange-looking woman with narrow hands and feet. Her face, too, was long and
narrow and exhausted-looking; even her fair curled fringe looked burnt out and
withered. She was the only woman at the Bay who smoked, and she smoked
incessantly, keeping the cigarette between her lips while she talked, and only
taking it out when the ash was so long you could not understand why it did not
fall. When she was not playing bridge—she played bridge every day of her
life—she spent her time lying in the full glare of the sun. She could
stand any amount of it; she never had enough. All the same, it did not seem to
warm her. Parched, withered, cold, she lay stretched on the stones like a piece
of tossed-up driftwood. The women at the Bay thought she was very, very fast.
Her lack of vanity, her slang, the way she treated men as though she was one of
them, and the fact that she didn’t care twopence about her house and
called the servant Gladys “Glad-eyes,” was disgraceful. Standing on
the veranda steps Mrs. Kember would call in her indifferent, tired voice,
“I say, Glad-eyes, you might heave me a handkerchief if I’ve got
one, will you?” And Glad-eyes, a red bow in her hair instead of a cap,
and white shoes, came running with an impudent smile. It was an absolute
scandal! True, she had no children, and her husband.... Here the voices were
always raised; they became fervent. How can he have married her? How can he,
how can he? It must have been money, of course, but even then!

 Mrs. Kember’s husband was at least ten years younger than she was, and so
incredibly handsome that he looked like a mask or a most perfect illustration
in an American novel rather than a man. Black hair, dark blue eyes, red lips, a
slow sleepy smile, a fine tennis player, a perfect dancer, and with it all a
mystery. Harry Kember was like a man walking in his sleep. Men couldn’t
stand him, they couldn’t get a word out of the chap; he ignored his wife
just as she ignored him. How did he live? Of course there were stories, but
such stories! They simply couldn’t be told. The women he’d been
seen with, the places he’d been seen in... but nothing was ever certain,
nothing definite. Some of the women at the Bay privately thought he’d
commit a murder one day. Yes, even while they talked to Mrs. Kember and took in
the awful concoction she was wearing, they saw her, stretched as she lay on the
beach; but cold, bloody, and still with a cigarette stuck in the corner of her
mouth.

 Mrs. Kember rose, yawned, unsnapped her belt buckle, and tugged at the tape of
her blouse. And Beryl stepped out of her skirt and shed her jersey, and stood
up in her short white petticoat, and her camisole with ribbon bows on the
shoulders.

 “Mercy on us,” said Mrs. Harry Kember, “what a little beauty
you are!”

 “Don’t!” said Beryl softly; but, drawing off one stocking and
then the other, she felt a little beauty.

 “My dear—why not?” said Mrs. Harry Kember, stamping on her
own petticoat. Really—her underclothes! A pair of blue cotton knickers
and a linen bodice that reminded one somehow of a pillow-case.... “And
you don’t wear stays, do you?” She touched Beryl’s waist, and
Beryl sprang away with a small affected cry. Then “Never!” she said
firmly.

 “Lucky little creature,” sighed Mrs. Kember, unfastening her own.

 Beryl turned her back and began the complicated movements of some one who is
trying to take off her clothes and to pull on her bathing-dress all at one and
the same time.

 “Oh, my dear—don’t mind me,” said Mrs. Harry Kember.
“Why be shy? I shan’t eat you. I shan’t be shocked like those
other ninnies.” And she gave her strange neighing laugh and grimaced at
the other women.

 But Beryl was shy. She never undressed in front of anybody. Was that silly?
Mrs. Harry Kember made her feel it was silly, even something to be ashamed of.
Why be shy indeed! She glanced quickly at her friend standing so boldly in her
torn chemise and lighting a fresh cigarette; and a quick, bold, evil feeling
started up in her breast. Laughing recklessly, she drew on the limp,
sandy-feeling bathing-dress that was not quite dry and fastened the twisted
buttons.

 “That’s better,” said Mrs. Harry Kember. They began to go
down the beach together. “Really, it’s a sin for you to wear
clothes, my dear. Somebody’s got to tell you some day.”

 The water was quite warm. It was that marvellous transparent blue, flecked with
silver, but the sand at the bottom looked gold; when you kicked with your toes
there rose a little puff of gold-dust. Now the waves just reached her breast.
Beryl stood, her arms outstretched, gazing out, and as each wave came she gave
the slightest little jump, so that it seemed it was the wave which lifted her
so gently.

 “I believe in pretty girls having a good time,” said Mrs. Harry
Kember. “Why not? Don’t you make a mistake, my dear. Enjoy
yourself.” And suddenly she turned turtle, disappeared, and swam away
quickly, quickly, like a rat. Then she flicked round and began swimming back.
She was going to say something else. Beryl felt that she was being poisoned by
this cold woman, but she longed to hear. But oh, how strange, how horrible! As
Mrs. Harry Kember came up close she looked, in her black waterproof
bathing-cap, with her sleepy face lifted above the water, just her chin
touching, like a horrible caricature of her husband.

 VI

 In a steamer chair, under a manuka tree that grew in the middle of the front
grass patch, Linda Burnell dreamed the morning away. She did nothing. She
looked up at the dark, close, dry leaves of the manuka, at the chinks of blue
between, and now and again a tiny yellowish flower dropped on her.
Pretty—yes, if you held one of those flowers on the palm of your hand and
looked at it closely, it was an exquisite small thing. Each pale yellow petal
shone as if each was the careful work of a loving hand. The tiny tongue in the
centre gave it the shape of a bell. And when you turned it over the outside was
a deep bronze colour. But as soon as they flowered, they fell and were
scattered. You brushed them off your frock as you talked; the horrid little
things got caught in one’s hair. Why, then, flower at all? Who takes the
trouble—or the joy—to make all these things that are wasted,
wasted.... It was uncanny.

 On the grass beside her, lying between two pillows, was the boy. Sound asleep
he lay, his head turned away from his mother. His fine dark hair looked more
like a shadow than like real hair, but his ear was a bright, deep coral. Linda
clasped her hands above her head and crossed her feet. It was very pleasant to
know that all these bungalows were empty, that everybody was down on the beach,
out of sight, out of hearing. She had the garden to herself; she was alone.

 Dazzling white the picotees shone; the golden-eyed marigold glittered; the
nasturtiums wreathed the veranda poles in green and gold flame. If only one had
time to look at these flowers long enough, time to get over the sense of
novelty and strangeness, time to know them! But as soon as one paused to part
the petals, to discover the under-side of the leaf, along came Life and one was
swept away. And, lying in her cane chair, Linda felt so light; she felt like a
leaf. Along came Life like a wind and she was seized and shaken; she had to go.
Oh dear, would it always be so? Was there no escape?

 ... Now she sat on the veranda of their Tasmanian home, leaning against her
father’s knee. And he promised, “As soon as you and I are old
enough, Linny, we’ll cut off somewhere, we’ll escape. Two boys
together. I have a fancy I’d like to sail up a river in China.”
Linda saw that river, very wide, covered with little rafts and boats. She saw
the yellow hats of the boatmen and she heard their high, thin voices as they
called....

 “Yes, papa.”

 But just then a very broad young man with bright ginger hair walked slowly past
their house, and slowly, solemnly even, uncovered. Linda’s father pulled
her ear teasingly, in the way he had.

 “Linny’s beau,” he whispered.

 “Oh, papa, fancy being married to Stanley Burnell!”

 Well, she was married to him. And what was more she loved him. Not the Stanley
whom every one saw, not the everyday one; but a timid, sensitive, innocent
Stanley who knelt down every night to say his prayers, and who longed to be
good. Stanley was simple. If he believed in people—as he believed in her,
for instance—it was with his whole heart. He could not be disloyal; he
could not tell a lie. And how terribly he suffered if he thought
anyone—she—was not being dead straight, dead sincere with him!
“This is too subtle for me!” He flung out the words, but his open,
quivering, distraught look was like the look of a trapped beast.

 But the trouble was—here Linda felt almost inclined to laugh, though
Heaven knows it was no laughing matter—she saw her Stanley so
seldom. There were glimpses, moments, breathing spaces of calm, but all the
rest of the time it was like living in a house that couldn’t be cured of
the habit of catching on fire, on a ship that got wrecked every day. And it was
always Stanley who was in the thick of the danger. Her whole time was spent in
rescuing him, and restoring him, and calming him down, and listening to his
story. And what was left of her time was spent in the dread of having children.

 Linda frowned; she sat up quickly in her steamer chair and clasped her ankles.
Yes, that was her real grudge against life; that was what she could not
understand. That was the question she asked and asked, and listened in vain for
the answer. It was all very well to say it was the common lot of women to bear
children. It wasn’t true. She, for one, could prove that wrong. She was
broken, made weak, her courage was gone, through child-bearing. And what made
it doubly hard to bear was, she did not love her children. It was useless
pretending. Even if she had had the strength she never would have nursed and
played with the little girls. No, it was as though a cold breath had chilled
her through and through on each of those awful journeys; she had no warmth left
to give them. As to the boy—well, thank Heaven, mother had taken him; he
was mother’s, or Beryl’s, or anybody’s who wanted him. She
had hardly held him in her arms. She was so indifferent about him that as he
lay there... Linda glanced down.

 The boy had turned over. He lay facing her, and he was no longer asleep. His
dark-blue, baby eyes were open; he looked as though he was peeping at his
mother. And suddenly his face dimpled; it broke into a wide, toothless smile, a
perfect beam, no less.

 “I’m here!” that happy smile seemed to say. “Why
don’t you like me?”

 There was something so quaint, so unexpected about that smile that Linda smiled
herself. But she checked herself and said to the boy coldly, “I
don’t like babies.”

 “Don’t like babies?” The boy couldn’t believe her.
“Don’t like me ?” He waved his arms foolishly at his
mother.

 Linda dropped off her chair on to the grass.

 “Why do you keep on smiling?” she said severely. “If you knew
what I was thinking about, you wouldn’t.”

 But he only squeezed up his eyes, slyly, and rolled his head on the pillow. He
didn’t believe a word she said.

 “We know all about that!” smiled the boy.

 Linda was so astonished at the confidence of this little creature.... Ah no, be
sincere. That was not what she felt; it was something far different, it was
something so new, so.... The tears danced in her eyes; she breathed in a small
whisper to the boy, “Hallo, my funny!”

 But by now the boy had forgotten his mother. He was serious again. Something
pink, something soft waved in front of him. He made a grab at it and it
immediately disappeared. But when he lay back, another, like the first,
appeared. This time he determined to catch it. He made a tremendous effort and
rolled right over.

 VII

 The tide was out; the beach was deserted; lazily flopped the warm sea. The sun
beat down, beat down hot and fiery on the fine sand, baking the grey and blue
and black and white-veined pebbles. It sucked up the little drop of water that
lay in the hollow of the curved shells; it bleached the pink convolvulus that
threaded through and through the sand-hills. Nothing seemed to move but the
small sand-hoppers. Pit-pit-pit! They were never still.

 Over there on the weed-hung rocks that looked at low tide like shaggy beasts
come down to the water to drink, the sunlight seemed to spin like a silver coin
dropped into each of the small rock pools. They danced, they quivered, and
minute ripples laved the porous shores. Looking down, bending over, each pool
was like a lake with pink and blue houses clustered on the shores; and oh! the
vast mountainous country behind those houses—the ravines, the passes, the
dangerous creeks and fearful tracks that led to the water’s edge.
Underneath waved the sea-forest—pink thread-like trees, velvet anemones,
and orange berry-spotted weeds. Now a stone on the bottom moved, rocked, and
there was a glimpse of a black feeler; now a thread-like creature wavered by
and was lost. Something was happening to the pink, waving trees; they were
changing to a cold moonlight blue. And now there sounded the faintest
“plop.” Who made that sound? What was going on down there? And how
strong, how damp the seaweed smelt in the hot sun....

 The green blinds were drawn in the bungalows of the summer colony. Over the
verandas, prone on the paddock, flung over the fences, there were
exhausted-looking bathing-dresses and rough striped towels. Each back window
seemed to have a pair of sand-shoes on the sill and some lumps of rock or a
bucket or a collection of pawa shells. The bush quivered in a haze of heat; the
sandy road was empty except for the Trouts’ dog Snooker, who lay
stretched in the very middle of it. His blue eye was turned up, his legs stuck
out stiffly, and he gave an occasional desperate-sounding puff, as much as to
say he had decided to make an end of it and was only waiting for some kind cart
to come along.

 “What are you looking at, my grandma? Why do you keep stopping and sort
of staring at the wall?”

 Kezia and her grandmother were taking their siesta together. The little girl,
wearing only her short drawers and her under-bodice, her arms and legs bare,
lay on one of the puffed-up pillows of her grandma’s bed, and the old
woman, in a white ruffled dressing-gown, sat in a rocker at the window, with a
long piece of pink knitting in her lap. This room that they shared, like the
other rooms of the bungalow, was of light varnished wood and the floor was
bare. The furniture was of the shabbiest, the simplest. The dressing-table, for
instance, was a packing-case in a sprigged muslin petticoat, and the mirror
above was very strange; it was as though a little piece of forked lightning was
imprisoned in it. On the table there stood a jar of sea-pinks, pressed so
tightly together they looked more like a velvet pincushion, and a special shell
which Kezia had given her grandma for a pin-tray, and another even more special
which she had thought would make a very nice place for a watch to curl up in.

 “Tell me, grandma,” said Kezia.

 The old woman sighed, whipped the wool twice round her thumb, and drew the bone
needle through. She was casting on.

 “I was thinking of your Uncle William, darling,” she said quietly.

 “My Australian Uncle William?” said Kezia. She had another.

 “Yes, of course.”

 “The one I never saw?”

 “That was the one.”

 “Well, what happened to him?” Kezia knew perfectly well, but she
wanted to be told again.

 “He went to the mines, and he got a sunstroke there and died,” said
old Mrs. Fairfield.

 Kezia blinked and considered the picture again.... A little man fallen over
like a tin soldier by the side of a big black hole.

 “Does it make you sad to think about him, grandma?” She hated her
grandma to be sad.

 It was the old woman’s turn to consider. Did it make her sad? To look
back, back. To stare down the years, as Kezia had seen her doing. To look after them as a woman does, long after they were out of sight. Did it
make her sad? No, life was like that.

 “No, Kezia.”

 “But why?” asked Kezia. She lifted one bare arm and began to draw
things in the air. “Why did Uncle William have to die? He wasn’t
old.”

 Mrs. Fairfield began counting the stitches in threes. “It just
happened,” she said in an absorbed voice.

 “Does everybody have to die?” asked Kezia.

 “Everybody!”

 “ Me? ” Kezia sounded fearfully incredulous.

 “Some day, my darling.”

 “But, grandma.” Kezia waved her left leg and waggled the toes. They
felt sandy. “What if I just won’t?”

 The old woman sighed again and drew a long thread from the ball.

 “We’re not asked, Kezia,” she said sadly. “It happens
to all of us sooner or later.”

 Kezia lay still thinking this over. She didn’t want to die. It meant she
would have to leave here, leave everywhere, for ever, leave—leave her
grandma. She rolled over quickly.

 “Grandma,” she said in a startled voice.

 “What, my pet!”

 “ You’re not to die.” Kezia was very decided.

 “Ah, Kezia”—her grandma looked up and smiled and shook her
head—“don’t let’s talk about it.”

 “But you’re not to. You couldn’t leave me. You couldn’t
not be there.” This was awful. “Promise me you won’t ever do
it, grandma,” pleaded Kezia.

 The old woman went on knitting.

 “Promise me! Say never!”

 But still her grandma was silent.

 Kezia rolled off her bed; she couldn’t bear it any longer, and lightly
she leapt on to her grandma’s knees, clasped her hands round the old
woman’s throat and began kissing her, under the chin, behind the ear, and
blowing down her neck.

 “Say never... say never... say never—” She gasped between the
kisses. And then she began, very softly and lightly, to tickle her grandma.

 “Kezia!” The old woman dropped her knitting. She swung back in the
rocker. She began to tickle Kezia. “Say never, say never, say
never,” gurgled Kezia, while they lay there laughing in each
other’s arms. “Come, that’s enough, my squirrel! That’s
enough, my wild pony!” said old Mrs. Fairfield, setting her cap straight.
“Pick up my knitting.”

 Both of them had forgotten what the “never” was about.

 VIII

 The sun was still full on the garden when the back door of the Burnells’
shut with a bang, and a very gay figure walked down the path to the gate. It
was Alice, the servant-girl, dressed for her afternoon out. She wore a white
cotton dress with such large red spots on it and so many that they made you
shudder, white shoes and a leghorn turned up under the brim with poppies. Of
course she wore gloves, white ones, stained at the fastenings with iron-mould,
and in one hand she carried a very dashed-looking sunshade which she referred
to as her “ perishall .”

 Beryl, sitting in the window, fanning her freshly-washed hair, thought she had
never seen such a guy. If Alice had only blacked her face with a piece of cork
before she started out, the picture would have been complete. And where did a
girl like that go to in a place like this? The heart-shaped Fijian fan beat
scornfully at that lovely bright mane. She supposed Alice had picked up some
horrible common larrikin and they’d go off into the bush together. Pity
to have made herself so conspicuous; they’d have hard work to hide with
Alice in that rig-out.

 But no, Beryl was unfair. Alice was going to tea with Mrs Stubbs, who’d
sent her an “invite” by the little boy who called for orders. She
had taken ever such a liking to Mrs. Stubbs ever since the first time she went
to the shop to get something for her mosquitoes.

 “Dear heart!” Mrs. Stubbs had clapped her hand to her side.
“I never seen anyone so eaten. You might have been attacked by
canningbals.”

 Alice did wish there’d been a bit of life on the road though. Made her
feel so queer, having nobody behind her. Made her feel all weak in the spine.
She couldn’t believe that some one wasn’t watching her. And yet it
was silly to turn round; it gave you away. She pulled up her gloves, hummed to
herself and said to the distant gum-tree, “Shan’t be long
now.” But that was hardly company.

 Mrs. Stubbs’s shop was perched on a little hillock just off the road. It
had two big windows for eyes, a broad veranda for a hat, and the sign on the
roof, scrawled MRS. STUBBS’S, was like a little card stuck rakishly in
the hat crown.

 On the veranda there hung a long string of bathing-dresses, clinging together
as though they’d just been rescued from the sea rather than waiting to go
in, and beside them there hung a cluster of sandshoes so extraordinarily mixed
that to get at one pair you had to tear apart and forcibly separate at least
fifty. Even then it was the rarest thing to find the left that belonged to the
right. So many people had lost patience and gone off with one shoe that fitted
and one that was a little too big.... Mrs. Stubbs prided herself on keeping
something of everything. The two windows, arranged in the form of precarious
pyramids, were crammed so tight, piled so high, that it seemed only a conjurer
could prevent them from toppling over. In the left-hand corner of one window,
glued to the pane by four gelatine lozenges, there was—and there had been
from time immemorial—a notice.

 LOST! HANSOME GOLE BROOCH 

SOLID GOLD 

ON OR NEAR BEACH 

REWARD OFFERED

 Alice pressed open the door. The bell jangled, the red serge curtains parted,
and Mrs. Stubbs appeared. With her broad smile and the long bacon knife in her
hand, she looked like a friendly brigand. Alice was welcomed so warmly that she
found it quite difficult to keep up her “manners.” They consisted
of persistent little coughs and hems, pulls at her gloves, tweaks at her skirt,
and a curious difficulty in seeing what was set before her or understanding
what was said.

 Tea was laid on the parlour table—ham, sardines, a whole pound of butter,
and such a large johnny cake that it looked like an advertisement for
somebody’s baking-powder. But the Primus stove roared so loudly that it
was useless to try to talk above it. Alice sat down on the edge of a
basket-chair while Mrs. Stubbs pumped the stove still higher. Suddenly Mrs.
Stubbs whipped the cushion off a chair and disclosed a large brown-paper
parcel.

 “I’ve just had some new photers taken, my dear,” she shouted
cheerfully to Alice. “Tell me what you think of them.”

 In a very dainty, refined way Alice wet her finger and put the tissue back from
the first one. Life! How many there were! There were three dozzing at least.
And she held it up to the light.

 Mrs. Stubbs sat in an arm-chair, leaning very much to one side. There was a
look of mild astonishment on her large face, and well there might be. For
though the arm-chair stood on a carpet, to the left of it, miraculously
skirting the carpet-border, there was a dashing water-fall. On her right stood
a Grecian pillar with a giant fern-tree on either side of it, and in the
background towered a gaunt mountain, pale with snow.

 “It is a nice style, isn’t it?” shouted Mrs. Stubbs; and
Alice had just screamed “Sweetly” when the roaring of the Primus
stove died down, fizzled out, ceased, and she said “Pretty” in a
silence that was frightening.

 “Draw up your chair, my dear,” said Mrs. Stubbs, beginning to pour
out. “Yes,” she said thoughtfully, as she handed the tea,
“but I don’t care about the size. I’m having an enlargemint.
All very well for Christmas cards, but I never was the one for small photers
myself. You get no comfort out of them. To say the truth, I find them
dis’eartening.”

 Alice quite saw what she meant.

 “Size,” said Mrs. Stubbs. “Give me size. That was what my
poor dear husband was always saying. He couldn’t stand anything small.
Gave him the creeps. And, strange as it may seem, my dear”—here
Mrs. Stubbs creaked and seemed to expand herself at the memory—“it
was dropsy that carried him off at the larst. Many’s the time they drawn
one and a half pints from ’im at the ’ospital... It seemed like a
judgmint.”

 Alice burned to know exactly what it was that was drawn from him. She ventured,
“I suppose it was water.”

 But Mrs. Stubbs fixed Alice with her eyes and replied meaningly, “It was liquid , my dear.”

 Liquid! Alice jumped away from the word like a cat and came back to it, nosing
and wary.

 “That’s ’im!” said Mrs. Stubbs, and she pointed
dramatically to the life-size head and shoulders of a burly man with a dead
white rose in the buttonhole of his coat that made you think of a curl of cold
mutting fat. Just below, in silver letters on a red cardboard ground, were the
words, “Be not afraid, it is I.”

 “It’s ever such a fine face,” said Alice faintly.

 The pale-blue bow on the top of Mrs. Stubbs’s fair frizzy hair quivered.
She arched her plump neck. What a neck she had! It was bright pink where it
began and then it changed to warm apricot, and that faded to the colour of a
brown egg and then to a deep creamy.

 “All the same, my dear,” she said surprisingly,
“freedom’s best!” Her soft, fat chuckle sounded like a purr.
“Freedom’s best,” said Mrs. Stubbs again.

 Freedom! Alice gave a loud, silly little titter. She felt awkward. Her mind
flew back to her own kitching. Ever so queer! She wanted to be back in it
again.

 IX

 A strange company assembled in the Burnells’ washhouse after tea. Round
the table there sat a bull, a rooster, a donkey that kept forgetting it was a
donkey, a sheep and a bee. The washhouse was the perfect place for such a
meeting because they could make as much noise as they liked, and nobody ever
interrupted. It was a small tin shed standing apart from the bungalow. Against
the wall there was a deep trough and in the corner a copper with a basket of
clothes-pegs on top of it. The little window, spun over with cobwebs, had a
piece of candle and a mouse-trap on the dusty sill. There were clotheslines
criss-crossed overhead and, hanging from a peg on the wall, a very big, a huge,
rusty horseshoe. The table was in the middle with a form at either side.

 “You can’t be a bee, Kezia. A bee’s not an animal. It’s
a ninseck.”

 “Oh, but I do want to be a bee frightfully,” wailed Kezia.... A
tiny bee, all yellow-furry, with striped legs. She drew her legs up under her
and leaned over the table. She felt she was a bee.

 “A ninseck must be an animal,” she said stoutly. “It makes a
noise. It’s not like a fish.”

 “I’m a bull, I’m a bull!” cried Pip. And he gave such a
tremendous bellow—how did he make that noise?—that Lottie looked
quite alarmed.

 “I’ll be a sheep,” said little Rags. “A whole lot of
sheep went past this morning.”

 “How do you know?”

 “Dad heard them. Baa!” He sounded like the little lamb that trots
behind and seems to wait to be carried.

 “Cock-a-doodle-do!” shrilled Isabel. With her red cheeks and bright
eyes she looked like a rooster.

 “What’ll I be?” Lottie asked everybody, and she sat there
smiling, waiting for them to decide for her. It had to be an easy one.

 “Be a donkey, Lottie.” It was Kezia’s suggestion.
“Hee-haw! You can’t forget that.”

 “Hee-haw!” said Lottie solemnly. “When do I have to say
it?”

 “I’ll explain, I’ll explain,” said the bull. It was he
who had the cards. He waved them round his head. “All be quiet! All
listen!” And he waited for them. “Look here, Lottie.” He
turned up a card. “It’s got two spots on it—see? Now, if you
put that card in the middle and somebody else has one with two spots as well,
you say ‘Hee-haw,’ and the card’s yours.”

 “Mine?” Lottie was round-eyed. “To keep?”

 “No, silly. Just for the game, see? Just while we’re
playing.” The bull was very cross with her.

 “Oh, Lottie, you are a little silly,” said the proud
rooster.

 Lottie looked at both of them. Then she hung her head; her lip quivered.
“I don’t want to play,” she whispered. The others glanced at
one another like conspirators. All of them knew what that meant. She would go
away and be discovered somewhere standing with her pinny thrown over her head,
in a corner, or against a wall, or even behind a chair.

 “Yes, you do , Lottie. It’s quite easy,” said Kezia.

 And Isabel, repentant, said exactly like a grown-up, “Watch me ,
Lottie, and you’ll soon learn.”

 “Cheer up, Lot,” said Pip. “There, I know what I’ll do.
I’ll give you the first one. It’s mine, really, but I’ll give
it to you. Here you are.” And he slammed the card down in front of
Lottie.

 Lottie revived at that. But now she was in another difficulty. “I
haven’t got a hanky,” she said; “I want one badly,
too.”

 “Here, Lottie, you can use mine.” Rags dipped into his sailor
blouse and brought up a very wet-looking one, knotted together. “Be very
careful,” he warned her. “Only use that corner. Don’t undo
it. I’ve got a little starfish inside I’m going to try and
tame.”

 “Oh, come on, you girls,” said the bull. “And
mind—you’re not to look at your cards. You’ve got to keep
your hands under the table till I say ‘Go.’”

 Smack went the cards round the table. They tried with all their might to see,
but Pip was too quick for them. It was very exciting, sitting there in the
washhouse; it was all they could do not to burst into a little chorus of
animals before Pip had finished dealing.

 “Now, Lottie, you begin.”

 Timidly Lottie stretched out a hand, took the top card off her pack, had a good
look at it—it was plain she was counting the spots—and put it down.

 “No, Lottie, you can’t do that. You mustn’t look first. You
must turn it the other way over.”

 “But then everybody will see it the same time as me,” said Lottie.

 The game proceeded. Mooe-ooo-er! The bull was terrible. He charged over the
table and seemed to eat the cards up.

 Bss-ss! said the bee.

 Cock-a-doodle-do! Isabel stood up in her excitement and moved her elbows like
wings.

 Baa! Little Rags put down the King of Diamonds and Lottie put down the one they
called the King of Spain. She had hardly any cards left.

 “Why don’t you call out, Lottie?”

 “I’ve forgotten what I am,” said the donkey woefully.

 “Well, change! Be a dog instead! Bow-wow!”

 “Oh yes. That’s much easier.” Lottie smiled again. But
when she and Kezia both had a one Kezia waited on purpose. The others made
signs to Lottie and pointed. Lottie turned very red; she looked bewildered, and
at last she said, “Hee-haw! Ke-zia.”

 “Ss! Wait a minute!” They were in the very thick of it when the
bull stopped them, holding up his hand. “What’s that? What’s
that noise?”

 “What noise? What do you mean?” asked the rooster.

 “Ss! Shut up! Listen!” They were mouse-still. “I thought I
heard a—a sort of knocking,” said the bull.

 “What was it like?” asked the sheep faintly.

 No answer.

 The bee gave a shudder. “Whatever did we shut the door for?” she
said softly. Oh, why, why had they shut the door?

 While they were playing, the day had faded; the gorgeous sunset had blazed and
died. And now the quick dark came racing over the sea, over the sand-hills, up
the paddock. You were frightened to look in the corners of the washhouse, and
yet you had to look with all your might. And somewhere, far away, grandma was
lighting a lamp. The blinds were being pulled down; the kitchen fire leapt in
the tins on the mantelpiece.

 “It would be awful now,” said the bull, “if a spider was to
fall from the ceiling on to the table, wouldn’t it?”

 “Spiders don’t fall from ceilings.”

 “Yes, they do. Our Min told us she’d seen a spider as big as a
saucer, with long hairs on it like a gooseberry.”

 Quickly all the little heads were jerked up; all the little bodies drew
together, pressed together.

 “Why doesn’t somebody come and call us?” cried the rooster.

 Oh, those grown-ups, laughing and snug, sitting in the lamp-light, drinking out
of cups! They’d forgotten about them. No, not really forgotten. That was
what their smile meant. They had decided to leave them there all by themselves.

 Suddenly Lottie gave such a piercing scream that all of them jumped off the
forms, all of them screamed too. “A face—a face looking!”
shrieked Lottie.

 It was true, it was real. Pressed against the window was a pale face, black
eyes, a black beard.

 “Grandma! Mother! Somebody!”

 But they had not got to the door, tumbling over one another, before it opened
for Uncle Jonathan. He had come to take the little boys home.

 X

 He had meant to be there before, but in the front garden he had come upon Linda
walking up and down the grass, stopping to pick off a dead pink or give a
top-heavy carnation something to lean against, or to take a deep breath of
something, and then walking on again, with her little air of remoteness. Over
her white frock she wore a yellow, pink-fringed shawl from the Chinaman’s
shop.

 “Hallo, Jonathan!” called Linda. And Jonathan whipped off his
shabby panama, pressed it against his breast, dropped on one knee, and kissed
Linda’s hand.

 “Greeting, my Fair One! Greeting, my Celestial Peach Blossom!”
boomed the bass voice gently. “Where are the other noble dames?”

 “Beryl’s out playing bridge and mother’s giving the boy his
bath.... Have you come to borrow something?”

 The Trouts were for ever running out of things and sending across to the
Burnells’ at the last moment.

 But Jonathan only answered, “A little love, a little kindness;” and
he walked by his sister-in-law’s side.

 Linda dropped into Beryl’s hammock under the manuka-tree, and Jonathan
stretched himself on the grass beside her, pulled a long stalk and began
chewing it. They knew each other well. The voices of children cried from the
other gardens. A fisherman’s light cart shook along the sandy road, and
from far away they heard a dog barking; it was muffled as though the dog had
its head in a sack. If you listened you could just hear the soft swish of the
sea at full tide sweeping the pebbles. The sun was sinking.

 “And so you go back to the office on Monday, do you, Jonathan?”
asked Linda.

 “On Monday the cage door opens and clangs to upon the victim for another
eleven months and a week,” answered Jonathan.

 Linda swung a little. “It must be awful,” she said slowly.

 “Would ye have me laugh, my fair sister? Would ye have me weep?”

 Linda was so accustomed to Jonathan’s way of talking that she paid no
attention to it.

 “I suppose,” she said vaguely, “one gets used to it. One gets
used to anything.”

 “Does one? Hum!” The “Hum” was so deep it seemed to
boom from underneath the ground. “I wonder how it’s done,”
brooded Jonathan; “I’ve never managed it.”

 Looking at him as he lay there, Linda thought again how attractive he was. It
was strange to think that he was only an ordinary clerk, that Stanley earned
twice as much money as he. What was the matter with Jonathan? He had no
ambition; she supposed that was it. And yet one felt he was gifted,
exceptional. He was passionately fond of music; every spare penny he had went
on books. He was always full of new ideas, schemes, plans. But nothing came of
it all. The new fire blazed in Jonathan; you almost heard it roaring softly as
he explained, described and dilated on the new thing; but a moment later it had
fallen in and there was nothing but ashes, and Jonathan went about with a look
like hunger in his black eyes. At these times he exaggerated his absurd manner
of speaking, and he sang in church—he was the leader of the
choir—with such fearful dramatic intensity that the meanest hymn put on
an unholy splendour.

 “It seems to me just as imbecile, just as infernal, to have to go to the
office on Monday,” said Jonathan, “as it always has done and always
will do. To spend all the best years of one’s life sitting on a stool
from nine to five, scratching in somebody’s ledger! It’s a queer
use to make of one’s... one and only life, isn’t it? Or do I fondly
dream?” He rolled over on the grass and looked up at Linda. “Tell
me, what is the difference between my life and that of an ordinary prisoner.
The only difference I can see is that I put myself in jail and nobody’s
ever going to let me out. That’s a more intolerable situation than the
other. For if I’d been—pushed in, against my will—kicking,
even—once the door was locked, or at any rate in five years or so, I
might have accepted the fact and begun to take an interest in the flight of
flies or counting the warder’s steps along the passage with particular
attention to variations of tread and so on. But as it is, I’m like an
insect that’s flown into a room of its own accord. I dash against the
walls, dash against the windows, flop against the ceiling, do everything on
God’s earth, in fact, except fly out again. And all the while I’m
thinking, like that moth, or that butterfly, or whatever it is, ‘The
shortness of life! The shortness of life!’ I’ve only one night or
one day, and there’s this vast dangerous garden, waiting out there,
undiscovered, unexplored.”

 “But, if you feel like that, why—” began Linda quickly.

 “ Ah! ” cried Jonathan. And that “ah!” was somehow
almost exultant. “There you have me. Why? Why indeed? There’s the
maddening, mysterious question. Why don’t I fly out again? There’s
the window or the door or whatever it was I came in by. It’s not
hopelessly shut—is it? Why don’t I find it and be off? Answer me
that, little sister.” But he gave her no time to answer.

 “I’m exactly like that insect again. For some
reason”—Jonathan paused between the words—“it’s
not allowed, it’s forbidden, it’s against the insect law, to stop
banging and flopping and crawling up the pane even for an instant. Why
don’t I leave the office? Why don’t I seriously consider, this
moment, for instance, what it is that prevents me leaving? It’s not as
though I’m tremendously tied. I’ve two boys to provide for, but,
after all, they’re boys. I could cut off to sea, or get a job up-country,
or—” Suddenly he smiled at Linda and said in a changed voice, as if
he were confiding a secret, “Weak... weak. No stamina. No anchor. No
guiding principle, let us call it.” But then the dark velvety voice
rolled out:

 Would ye hear the story 

How it unfolds itself. . .

 and they were silent.

 The sun had set. In the western sky there were great masses of crushed-up
rose-coloured clouds. Broad beams of light shone through the clouds and beyond
them as if they would cover the whole sky. Overhead the blue faded; it turned a
pale gold, and the bush outlined against it gleamed dark and brilliant like
metal. Sometimes when those beams of light show in the sky they are very awful.
They remind you that up there sits Jehovah, the jealous God, the Almighty,
Whose eye is upon you, ever watchful, never weary. You remember that at His
coming the whole earth will shake into one ruined graveyard; the cold, bright
angels will drive you this way and that, and there will be no time to explain
what could be explained so simply.... But to-night it seemed to Linda there was
something infinitely joyful and loving in those silver beams. And now no sound
came from the sea. It breathed softly as if it would draw that tender, joyful
beauty into its own bosom.

 “It’s all wrong, it’s all wrong,” came the shadowy
voice of Jonathan. “It’s not the scene, it’s not the setting
for... three stools, three desks, three inkpots and a wire blind.”

 Linda knew that he would never change, but she said, “Is it too late,
even now?”

 “I’m old—I’m old,” intoned Jonathan. He bent
towards her, he passed his hand over his head. “Look!” His black
hair was speckled all over with silver, like the breast plumage of a black
fowl.

 Linda was surprised. She had no idea that he was grey. And yet, as he stood up
beside her and sighed and stretched, she saw him, for the first time, not
resolute, not gallant, not careless, but touched already with age. He looked
very tall on the darkening grass, and the thought crossed her mind, “He
is like a weed.”

 Jonathan stooped again and kissed her fingers.

 “Heaven reward thy sweet patience, lady mine,” he murmured.
“I must go seek those heirs to my fame and fortune....” He was
gone.

 XI

 Light shone in the windows of the bungalow. Two square patches of gold fell
upon the pinks and the peaked marigolds. Florrie, the cat, came out on to the
veranda, and sat on the top step, her white paws close together, her tail
curled round. She looked content, as though she had been waiting for this
moment all day.

 “Thank goodness, it’s getting late,” said Florrie.
“Thank goodness, the long day is over.” Her greengage eyes opened.

 Presently there sounded the rumble of the coach, the crack of Kelly’s
whip. It came near enough for one to hear the voices of the men from town,
talking loudly together. It stopped at the Burnells’ gate.

 Stanley was half-way up the path before he saw Linda. “Is that you,
darling?”

 “Yes, Stanley.”

 He leapt across the flower-bed and seized her in his arms. She was enfolded in
that familiar, eager, strong embrace.

 “Forgive me, darling, forgive me,” stammered Stanley, and he put
his hand under her chin and lifted her face to him.

 “Forgive you?” smiled Linda. “But whatever for?”

 “Good God! You can’t have forgotten,” cried Stanley Burnell.
“I’ve thought of nothing else all day. I’ve had the hell of a
day. I made up my mind to dash out and telegraph, and then I thought the wire
mightn’t reach you before I did. I’ve been in tortures,
Linda.”

 “But, Stanley,” said Linda, “what must I forgive you
for?”

 “Linda!”—Stanley was very hurt—“didn’t you
realize—you must have realized—I went away without saying good-bye
to you this morning? I can’t imagine how I can have done such a thing. My
confounded temper, of course. But—well”—and he sighed and
took her in his arms again—“I’ve suffered for it enough
to-day.”

 “What’s that you’ve got in your hand?” asked Linda.
“New gloves? Let me see.”

 “Oh, just a cheap pair of wash-leather ones,” said Stanley humbly.
“I noticed Bell was wearing some in the coach this morning, so, as I was
passing the shop, I dashed in and got myself a pair. What are you smiling at?
You don’t think it was wrong of me, do you?”

 “On the con -trary, darling,” said Linda, “I think it
was most sensible.”

 She pulled one of the large, pale gloves on her own fingers and looked at her
hand, turning it this way and that. She was still smiling.

 Stanley wanted to say, “I was thinking of you the whole time I bought
them.” It was true, but for some reason he couldn’t say it.
“Let’s go in,” said he.

 XII

 Why does one feel so different at night? Why is it so exciting to be awake when
everybody else is asleep? Late—it is very late! And yet every moment you
feel more and more wakeful, as though you were slowly, almost with every
breath, waking up into a new, wonderful, far more thrilling and exciting world
than the daylight one. And what is this queer sensation that you’re a
conspirator? Lightly, stealthily you move about your room. You take something
off the dressing-table and put it down again without a sound. And everything,
even the bed-post, knows you, responds, shares your secret....

 You’re not very fond of your room by day. You never think about it.
You’re in and out, the door opens and slams, the cupboard creaks. You sit
down on the side of your bed, change your shoes and dash out again. A dive down
to the glass, two pins in your hair, powder your nose and off again. But
now—it’s suddenly dear to you. It’s a darling little funny
room. It’s yours. Oh, what a joy it is to own things! Mine—my own!

 “My very own for ever?”

 “Yes.” Their lips met.

 No, of course, that had nothing to do with it. That was all nonsense and
rubbish. But, in spite of herself, Beryl saw so plainly two people standing in
the middle of her room. Her arms were round his neck; he held her. And now he
whispered, “My beauty, my little beauty!” She jumped off her bed,
ran over to the window and kneeled on the window-seat, with her elbows on the
sill. But the beautiful night, the garden, every bush, every leaf, even the
white palings, even the stars, were conspirators too. So bright was the moon
that the flowers were bright as by day; the shadow of the nasturtiums,
exquisite lily-like leaves and wide-open flowers, lay across the silvery
veranda. The manuka-tree, bent by the southerly winds, was like a bird on one
leg stretching out a wing.

 But when Beryl looked at the bush, it seemed to her the bush was sad.

 “We are dumb trees, reaching up in the night, imploring we know not
what,” said the sorrowful bush.

 It is true when you are by yourself and you think about life, it is always sad.
All that excitement and so on has a way of suddenly leaving you, and it’s
as though, in the silence, somebody called your name, and you heard your name
for the first time. “Beryl!”

 “Yes, I’m here. I’m Beryl. Who wants me?”

 “Beryl!”

 “Let me come.”

 It is lonely living by oneself. Of course, there are relations, friends, heaps
of them; but that’s not what she means. She wants some one who will find
the Beryl they none of them know, who will expect her to be that Beryl always.
She wants a lover.

 “Take me away from all these other people, my love. Let us go far away.
Let us live our life, all new, all ours, from the very beginning. Let us make
our fire. Let us sit down to eat together. Let us have long talks at
night.”

 And the thought was almost, “Save me, my love. Save me!”

 ... “Oh, go on! Don’t be a prude, my dear. You enjoy yourself while
you’re young. That’s my advice.” And a high rush of silly
laughter joined Mrs. Harry Kember’s loud, indifferent neigh.

 You see, it’s so frightfully difficult when you’ve nobody.
You’re so at the mercy of things. You can’t just be rude. And
you’ve always this horror of seeming inexperienced and stuffy like the
other ninnies at the Bay. And—and it’s fascinating to know
you’ve power over people. Yes, that is fascinating....

 Oh why, oh why doesn’t “he” come soon?

 If I go on living here, thought Beryl, anything may happen to me.

 “But how do you know he is coming at all?” mocked a small voice
within her.

 But Beryl dismissed it. She couldn’t be left. Other people, perhaps, but
not she. It wasn’t possible to think that Beryl Fairfield never married,
that lovely fascinating girl.

 “Do you remember Beryl Fairfield?”

 “Remember her! As if I could forget her! It was one summer at the Bay
that I saw her. She was standing on the beach in a blue”—no,
pink—“muslin frock, holding on a big cream”—no,
black—“straw hat. But it’s years ago now.”

 “She’s as lovely as ever, more so if anything.”

 Beryl smiled, bit her lip, and gazed over the garden. As she gazed, she saw
somebody, a man, leave the road, step along the paddock beside their palings as
if he was coming straight towards her. Her heart beat. Who was it? Who could it
be? It couldn’t be a burglar, certainly not a burglar, for he was smoking
and he strolled lightly. Beryl’s heart leapt; it seemed to turn right
over, and then to stop. She recognized him.

 “Good evening, Miss Beryl,” said the voice softly.

 “Good evening.”

 “Won’t you come for a little walk?” it drawled.

 Come for a walk—at that time of night! “I couldn’t.
Everybody’s in bed. Everybody’s asleep.”

 “Oh,” said the voice lightly, and a whiff of sweet smoke reached
her. “What does everybody matter? Do come! It’s such a fine night.
There’s not a soul about.”

 Beryl shook her head. But already something stirred in her, something reared
its head.

 The voice said, “Frightened?” It mocked, “Poor little
girl!”

 “Not in the least,” said she. As she spoke that weak thing within
her seemed to uncoil, to grow suddenly tremendously strong; she longed to go!

 And just as if this was quite understood by the other, the voice said, gently
and softly, but finally, “Come along!”

 Beryl stepped over her low window, crossed the veranda, ran down the grass to
the gate. He was there before her.

 “That’s right,” breathed the voice, and it teased,
“You’re not frightened, are you? You’re not
frightened?”

 She was; now she was here she was terrified, and it seemed to her everything
was different. The moonlight stared and glittered; the shadows were like bars
of iron. Her hand was taken.

 “Not in the least,” she said lightly. “Why should I
be?”

 Her hand was pulled gently, tugged. She held back.

 “No, I’m not coming any farther,” said Beryl.

 “Oh, rot!” Harry Kember didn’t believe her. “Come
along! We’ll just go as far as that fuchsia bush. Come along!”

 The fuchsia bush was tall. It fell over the fence in a shower. There was a
little pit of darkness beneath.

 “No, really, I don’t want to,” said Beryl.

 For a moment Harry Kember didn’t answer. Then he came close to her,
turned to her, smiled and said quickly, “Don’t be silly!
Don’t be silly!”

 His smile was something she’d never seen before. Was he drunk? That
bright, blind, terrifying smile froze her with horror. What was she doing? How
had she got here? the stern garden asked her as the gate pushed open, and quick
as a cat Harry Kember came through and snatched her to him.

 “Cold little devil! Cold little devil!” said the hateful voice.

 But Beryl was strong. She slipped, ducked, wrenched free.

 “You are vile, vile,” said she.

 “Then why in God’s name did you come?” stammered Harry
Kember.

 Nobody answered him.

 A cloud, small, serene, floated across the moon. In that moment of darkness the
sea sounded deep, troubled. Then the cloud sailed away, and the sound of the
sea was a vague murmur, as though it waked out of a dark dream. All was still.