[

208 ] 

‘BARTON’S JACKAROO.’

 ‘ Bother

!’ exclaimed Mr Barton, the Manager of Tarnpirr,
as he finished reading one of his letters on a certain
evening.

 ‘What’s the matter, papa?’ asked his daughter, Daisy,
pausing with the teapot in her hand.

 ‘Oh, nothing much, my dear,’ he replied; only we
are to have company. The firm is sending up the
444th cousin of an Irish Earl to learn sheep-farming,
and I suppose I’ve got the contract to break him in.
That’s all.’

 ‘I wish your mother could be at home, Daisy,’
he continued. ‘I never did care much about these
colonial-experience fellows. They generally give a lot
of trouble, especially when they’re well connected.
There, read the precious letter for yourself. Pity we
couldn’t put him into the hut, instead of making him
one of ourselves—eh, Daisy?’

 The girl laughed as she read aloud,—

 ‘Mr Fortescue is highly connected; and as he not
only brings introductions from the London office, but [

209 ]

also possesses an interest in several properties out
here, we hope you will do your best to make him
comfortable, and to give him that insight into the
business that he seems desirous of acquiring at first
hand.’

 ‘Why, daddy!’ she exclaimed, ‘you ought to think
yourself honoured—“highly connected,” not merely
“well,” remember—by such a charge! As for myself,
I am all anxiety to see him.’

 ‘I don’t think anything of the sort, then, Daisy,’ TN: closing quote invisible said her father. ‘And if I could afford to do so,
I should like to tell them that I consider it a piece
of impertinence on their part to ask me to receive
a perfect stranger, knowing how I am situated alone
with you, how small the place is, and how roughly we
live. But one can’t ride the high horse on a hundred
and fifty pounds a year!’

 And the Manager of Tarnpirr sighed, and stared
thoughtfully into his cup.

 In the general sense of the word, Daisy Barton
was not a pretty girl, inasmuch as she possessed not
one regular feature. But it was such a calm, quiet,
pleasant face, out of which dark blue eyes looked so
tenderly and honestly at you, that one forgot to search
for details in the charm of the whole. Add to this,
one of the neatest, trimmest, most loveable little figures
imaginable, and you may have some faint idea of the
pleasant picture she made as she sat thinking which
of the two spare rooms should be got ready for the
new inmate. Mrs Barton was never at the station. [

210 ]

She was a confirmed invalid, and resided permanently
in a far southern town. Daisy and an old Irishwoman
kept house.

 In due course the ‘highly connected’ one arrived,
bringing with him as much luggage as sufficed to fill
the extra room.

 He was a tall, good-looking Englishman, and he
gazed around at the small bare house with its strip
of burnt-up, dusty garden, and background of sombre
eucalypti; at the squalid ‘hut;’ the sluggish, dirty
river; and the barren forlornness of everything, with
a look on his face that caused Mr Barton to chuckle,
and think to himself that the new-comer’s stay would
be short. The manager had expected a youngster, not
a grown man of five or six and twenty, and he was
rather puzzled.

 This self-possessed, languid sort of gentleman, with
well-cut features, long moustache, and slow, pleasant-sounding,
if rather drawling, speech, wasn’t by any
means the sort of creature that Mr Barton was accustomed
to associate with the term ‘jackaroo,’ and its
natural corollary, ‘licking into shape.’

 ‘A fellow with lots of money, I expect,’ he said
to Daisy that night after their guest, pleading fatigue,
had retired. ‘One of those chaps who just come
out to have a look around, and then off home
again with wonderful stories about the wild Australian
Bush.’

 ‘Yaas; shouldn’t wondah, now, Mistah Barton, if you
ah not quaite correct,’ laughed Daisy, mischievously. [

211 ]

‘Oh, papa, do all the folk in England talk as if they
were clean knocked up?’

 ‘Only the highly-connected ones, my dear,’ replied
her father, smiling. ‘It’s considered quite fashionable,
too, amongst our own upper ten. He’ll lose
it after he’s been bushed a few times. I shouldn’t
imagine from his looks, however, that he’s got much
backbone. He’ll be away again presently—too rough
a life.’

 And, in fact, poor Fortescue at first often did get
bushed.

 Luckily for him, perhaps, a camp of blacks settled
at Tarnpirr shortly after his arrival, and these made a
regular income by hunting for and bringing him back.
And he was very considerate.

 Once, when he had been missing for three days,
and Mr Barton and Daisy were half out of their
minds with fright, he made the blacks who were
bearing him home, tattered and hungry, and faint
from exposure, go ahead for clean clothes and soap
and water before he would put in an appearance.
This incident only confirmed Mr Barton the more in
his idea that he had to do with a man lacking strength
of character—a dandy willing to sacrifice everything
to personal outward show. His daughter thought quite
otherwise.

 However, in time, ‘Barton’s Jackaroo,’ as he was
called throughout the district of the lower rivers, became
a favourite, not only at Tarnpirr, but on the
neighbouring runs. Even old Bridget admitted that [

212 ]

‘he was a good sort ov a cratur, barrin’ the want ov a
bit more life wid him.’

 But he was always calm and self-possessed; and
the Manager was accustomed to swear that a bush
fire at his heels wouldn’t make him quicken his pace
by a step.

 And once Daisy, in a moment of irritation, confided TN: hyphen invisible to her father that she felt inclined to stick a
needle into his jackaroo for the sake of discovering
whether that provoking air of leisurely languor was
natural or assumed.

 ‘He’s got no backbone, my dear,’ said the Manager,
laughing. ‘But try him by all means. I’ll bet you
ten to one he only says what he did last week, when
that old ram made a drive at him in the yard, and
knocked him down and jumped on him.’

 ‘And what did he say to that?’ asked Daisy
eagerly.

 ‘Well,’ replied Mr Barton, laughing again, ‘when
he’d cleaned the mud out of his eyes and mouth, he
looked surprised and said “Haw!”’

 ‘Oh,’ said Daisy, disappointedly. ‘But what ought
he to have said to show that he had a backbone,
papa?’

 ‘Well,’ replied her father vaguely, ‘you know, Daisy—er—um—well,
that is—um—a great many people, my
dear, your father amongst them, perhaps, would be apt
to say a good deal on such an occasion.’

 ‘I have a better opinion than ever of Mr Fortescue,’
cried Daisy indignantly at this. ‘Because he keeps his [

213 ]

temper, and doesn’t go on like Long Jim or Ben the
Bullocky when any little thing happens, he’s got no
pluck or resolution! I own he exasperates one sometimes
with his calm, dawdling ways. But if he were
pushed, I shouldn’t be surprised to find more in him
than he gets credit for after all!’

 ‘Umph!’ said Mr Barton glancing kindly, but with
rather a troubled face, at the flushed cheeks and sparkling
eyes upturned to his own. And as he rode over the
run that day the burden of his thoughts was that the
sooner his serene-tempered jackaroo got tired of the Bush
the better it would be for all of them.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘Ned, if the river ain’t a-risin’, an’ risin’ precious quick,
too, call me a Dutchman! ’Arf-an-hour ago the water
warn’t near them bullocks, and now it’s right agin their
’eels!’

 ‘Well,’ replied his mate, glancing towards the brown
stream slowly spreading over the flat, ‘we’re safe enough.
I’ll forgive it if it comes over this. Tell you what, though,
you might catch the pony an’ canter up to the station,
an’ tell ole Barton as there’s some water a-comin’. He
might have some stock he’d like to git out o’ the road.
An’ you might’s well git a lump o’ meat while you’re
there.’

 So Ned, of the travelling bullock team, went with the
news to Tarnpirr, lower down.

 But Mr Barton that very morning had been to Warrooga
township, and the telegraph people had said no
word of floods or heavy rain at the head of the river. [

214 ]

Around Tarnpirr and district the weather had been
dry for weeks, so the Manager was not in the least uneasy.

 ‘It’s only a bit of a fresh, Brown,’ said he. ‘It’ll soon
go down again. Thanks all the same, though. Meat?
Yes, of course. And now you’d better go over to the
kitchen and get your dinner.’

 ‘Boss reckons it’s nothin’,’ said Ned, returning that
evening. ‘No rain fall’d up above.’

 ‘We wouldn’t need shift anyhow,’ replied the other,
preparing to cook the meat given them by Mr Barton,
who little dreamt how welcome it would be to some
people later on. ‘We’re a lot higher here than they
are at the station. I saw “Barton’s Jackaroo” just
now, out ridin’ with Miss Daisy. He’s a rum stick, he is.’

 ‘But ain’t she a little star!’ exclaimed Ned enthusiastically.

 ‘She are; all that!’ replied his mate. ‘Finest
gall on the rivers. Too good by sights for any new-chum.’

 And so the pair sat and yarned and watched the
treacherous water of what was to become the biggest
flood since ’64 stealthily eating its way up amongst the
long grass of the sandridge, sneaking quietly into little
hollows, then pretending to creep back again, then with
a rush advancing a miniature wave further than ever.
Sat and talked and watched the brown expanse broaden
until the tall oaks that bordered the banks were whipping
the fierce current with their slender tops, sole mark now
to show where lay mid-stream.

 [

215 ] 

‘It’s a darned big lump of a fresh!’ quoth Ned doubtfully.

 ‘It’ll be down afore mornin’,’ replied his mate. ‘And
anyhow it can’t do us real bad, seein’ what we’ve got in
the loadin’. But there’s no danger ’ere on this ridge.’

 So they turned in under their tarpaulins, and never
heard how the water hissed at midnight as it crept, little
by little, advancing, receding, but always gaining, into
their carefully covered-up fire.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 In the snug sitting-room at Tarnpirr, with lamps burning
brightly, and curtains drawn against the lowering
dusk, sat Herbert Fortescue and Daisy Barton, their
heads pretty close together over a chessboard.

 ‘I’m going across to the Back Ridge out-station this
afternoon,’ had said Mr Barton. ‘I sha’n’t be home
before to-morrow; I want to see how Macpherson’s getting
on with those weaners. Needn’t bother about the
river. It’s only a fresh, or Warrooga would have sent us
word.’

 Alas for dependence on Warrooga with its absent
trooper, and absent-minded operator, who was warned,
just after Manager Barton left him, that masses of
water were coming down three rivers towards Tarnpirr!

 Had he but taken horse and galloped out the few
miles, or sent, things might have happened very differently,
and this story would never have been written.
But as it was—

 ‘There!’ exclaimed Daisy, ‘my king is in trouble [

216 ]

again. I feel out of sorts to-night. It’s very close.
Shall we go on to the verandah?’

 ‘With pleasure,’ said the young man rising. ‘But it’s
as dark as pitch outside. Give me your hand, please, for
fear you stumble.’

 Hesitating for a moment, their eyes met, and with
deepening colour she placed her hand in his, and they
went out through the long window into the night. It
was very quiet, and the darkness felt woolly and warm.
No light glimmered anywhere, and the only sound was
the cry of a solitary mopoke coming from amongst
the spectral boles of the box trees.

 ‘The men are in bed, I suppose,’ said Daisy, glancing
towards their hut.

 ‘They are away on the run,’ TN: closing quote invisible replied Fortescue, ‘drawing
fencing stuff for the new line. But it’s a wonder we
don’t see the blacks’ fire.’

 As they stood leaning against the garden fence a
soft continuous ripple, mingled with a sound like the
sighing of wind through tall belars fell on their
ears.

 ‘It’s only the river,’ said Daisy, ‘I’ve often heard it
making that mournful noise when it’s rising over its
banks. Shall we walk as far as the camp?’

 It was a rough track, and more than once, but for the
sustaining arm of her companion, Daisy would have
come to grief over log or tussock.

 But they got there at last, guided by a few dim sparks
from expiring fires.

 ‘Why, it’s deserted,’ exclaimed Daisy, as they found [

217 ]

themselves amongst the empty gunyahs. ‘They’re gone,
dogs and all.’

 ‘Off on some hunting expedition, I expect,’ replied
Fortescue, laughing. ‘They look at me in a comically
disgusted manner of late since I left off getting bushed
so regularly.’

 It was too dark to see the water, but they stood for a
long time listening to the swish of it as it ran full-lipped
from one steep high bank to the other, telling with
eerie mutterings and whisperings, and curious little
complaining noises, and low hoarse threatenings of
what it would presently do, and the mischief it would
work, but in language all untranslatable by its hearers.

 ‘What a sweet little lady it is,’ said Fortescue to
himself as, later, he sat on the edge of his bed staring
straight before him into a pair of tender, steadfast eyes
conjured out of the darkness. ‘ TN: opening quote invisible I wonder if she does?
I’m nearly sure of it, thank heaven! Why, she is worth
coming here and roughing it like this, and being called
“Barton’s Jackaroo” twenty times over for!’ and he
laughed gently. ‘Fancy a prize like that hidden away
amongst these solitudes. I wonder what her father will
say? Anyhow, I won’t put it off any longer. I’ll ask
him to-morrow.’

 With which resolution he laid down and went to sleep,
still thinking on Daisy Barton.

 He awoke with a start, and lay listening to noises
in his room, the remnants, as he imagined, of some
grotesque dream.

 Gurglings there were, and agonised squeakings and [

218 ]

scrapings, with, now and then, ploppings and splashings
as of many small swimmers. Then something cold, wet
and hairy, crawled over his hand.

 Shaking it off with an exclamation, he jumped out of
bed, and with the shock of it, stood stock still for two
minutes up to his knees in water.

 Then, striking a match, he saw that his room was
awash, and that all sorts of articles were floating about
it, drawn hither and thither by the current which
swelled and eddied between the old slabs. Up a
corner of blanket, touching the water, swarmed a great
host of ants, tarantulas, beetles and crickets, whilst
drowning mice, lizards, and heaven knows what else,
swam wildly round and round and gratefully hailed his
bare legs as a harbour of refuge. Hastily rubbing
them off, and getting into some wet clothes, he opened
the window and looked out. A wan moon shed a
feeble light upon one vast sea of turgid water. Nothing
in sight but water—water, and the tops of the trees
quivering above the flood! No wonder the river talked
to itself last night! The scene was enough to make
even a man with a backbone quail and feel a bit
nervous.

 As for Barton’s Jackaroo, his first astonishment over,
he forgot himself so far as first to whistle, and then
to swear, but very softly and tentatively, as one trying
an experiment.

 You see, this was a different matter altogether to being
butted of rams, or even being badly bushed without a
drink for three days and three nights.

 [

219 ] 

Brushing off his sleeve the head of a column of sugar-ants
that had effected a lodgment via the window-sill, he
waded into the sitting-room and lit the lamp. Then,
making for Daisy’s room, he called and tapped until
she answered.

 ‘It’s me—Fortescue. Don’t be alarmed, Daisy—Miss
Barton,’ said he. ‘The water’s in the house. Get up
and dress, and come out as quickly as possible.’

 As he finished speaking a wild yell rang through the
place, and Bridget’s voice from near by exclaimed,
punctuated by screams,—

 ‘Howly Mother av Moses! Ow! Blessid Vargin an’
all the saints purtect us! Ow! the divvle be wid me!
but it’s drowned I am this minnit! an’ the wather up me
legs, an’ niver a soul comin’ next anigh me! Och! wirras-thru!
it’s a lost woman I am, wid all the mices and
bastes atin’ away at me! Ow! ow! ow!’

 With difficulty suppressing a desire to laugh, Fortescue
shouted to her to get her clothes on and join him.
One little cry of dismay he heard from Daisy as she
lit her candle, and then he returned to the dining-room.

 Here he was startled to notice a burst of dull moonlight
coming in through the front of the house where
already were gaps caused by the slabs being displaced
and carried away by the water.

 Clearly the building, old and rotten, was going to
pieces.

 Presently Daisy, pale, but silent and composed,
entered. Taking her in his arms, he placed her on a [

220 ]

sideboard, grieving the while to see how the water
poured from her clothes.

 ‘I am afraid the whole house will go, Daisy,’ he said.
‘It’s shaky and decayed. I was thinking of making a
stage on the wall-plates up there. But I’m sure now
that our only hope is in a raft of some kind.’

 At this moment in floundered Bridget, clasping a large
bottle to her breast, and muttering at every stride objurgations,
entreaties, and fag-ends of prayers.

 ‘Ochone!’ she cried, ‘may the saints an’ the Howly
Mother av all hould us in their kapin’ this night!’
Then, uncorking the bottle, ‘Sure, Misthur Fortyskeu,
sorr, if ye are

a haythen, ye might have a thry for
purgathory itself. It’s better nor the other place, so it
is. Here’s the howly wather, avick, that Father Dennis
give me lasht chapel at Warrooga—if ye’ll let me sprinkle
a weeshy dhrop—’

 ‘Come, come, Bridget; stop that nonsense!’ exclaimed
Fortescue sternly, as he knocked down slabs
and pulled them inside. ‘Isn’t there water enough
about, without any more. Take the candle and get me
some ropes—clothes-lines, saddlestraps, anything you can
find!’

 Bridget opened her mouth with astonishment. She
had never been spoken to in such manner before.
Then putting down her precious bottle, she waddled off.

 Presently Daisy slipped into the water, saying,—

 ‘I can’t sit there and watch you working away by
yourself,’ and she helped to hold the slabs, whilst he and
Bridget secured them with lashings.

 [

221 ] 

Four, ten feet long, tied at the ends, and upon them
cross-pieces, and upon these the long dining-room table.
This was the raft; and while Fortescue tied and knotted
and fastened, he talked of how he had once been cast
away in a yacht, and had then learned many things.
And the pair, listening to his cheery voice, took courage,
albeit the water now was waist high.

 The seasoned pine timber floated like a cork, and to
his satisfaction Fortescue found that with their combined
weight it was still well out of the water. He was just
considering whether it might be possible to secure a few
valuables and important papers, when an ominous creaking
caught his ear, and the house began to quiver
bodily.

 Hurriedly jumping on board and seizing a long thin
slab, he pushed off. And what a wild sight it was
outside, as the frail craft shot clear of everything into
the flood!

 The water ran like brown oil, swift but waveless,
bearing with it logs, great trees, posts and rails, planks,
heaps of straw, débris TN: original reads "debris" of every description, whilst into
the still, warm air ascended a stern hum like the sound
of some mighty engine. It was like the sound of the
river purring with satisfaction at the fulfilling of its last
night’s promises.

 Looking back, they saw through the open front the
lamp, like some welcoming beacon, burning steadily
across the waters. Even as they gazed, there was a faint
crash heard, and the light disappeared. The house had
gone, and in another moment its fragments drifted by [

222 ]

them. Round and round they swept, now threatened by
some huge uptorn tree whose bristling roots came nigh
transfixing them, now nearly dashed against the topmost
limbs of a standing one, taking all Fortescue’s strength
and skill to avoid a collision.

 Presently they saw, on either hand, long strings of
sheep swimming down the current with plaintive bleatings
to their death; heard, too, shrill neighings and
bellowings of drowning cattle and horses.

 Round and round they swept, although they knew it
not, towards the raging central current, where disaster
was inevitable; whilst Daisy sat with white face, mute,
and almost hopeless, and Bridget crouched, one arm
around a table leg, mumbling over her beads; and
Barton’s Jackaroo, the man without a backbone, toiled
steadily and watchfully, still finding time, at intervals, to
throw a word of cheer to his helpless companions.

 Crash! and a log overtaking them and hitting them
end-on, sent the raft spinning; whilst to his dismay
Fortescue felt the slabs begin to loose and spread.
Decidedly, a few more knocks like that, and they would
all find themselves in the water.

 ‘I’m afraid, Herbert, it’s going to pieces,’ TN: original has double quote whispered
Daisy, who had crept close to where he knelt.

 It was the first time she had ever used that name
when addressing him, and her voice sounded so inexpressibly
sweet that, without even glancing at Bridget, he
turned and took the girl in his arms and kissed her,
a caress which she, thinking her end at hand, and loving
him, returned.

 [

223 ] 

Smash! and they are amongst the stout upper
branches of what must be a giant tree. But, in place
of pushing off, Fortescue hugs and pulls, and calls upon
the women to help him, which they do until the raft
is moored, so to speak, hard and fast between forks
and branches, the only ones visible now over all that
brown, bare waste of water with silver patches of moonlight
here and there upon it.

 It was a grateful thing to be at rest, even so precariously,
after all the twisting and twirling they had
come through; and Bridget, rising stiffly and shaking
herself, with the fear of present death gone out of her
soul, said,—

 ‘Praise the saints! Sure, Misther Fortyskeu, sorr, we
oughter to be thankful for gettin’ this far wid clane
shkins, so we ought! Sorra a one ov me ’ll go any
furder if I can help it! Is the wather raisin’ yet, does
ye think, sorr?’

 ‘I’m afraid it is, Bridget,’ said Fortescue, as he sat
on a stout limb supporting Daisy beside him. ‘I hope,
though, it won’t rise over the top of this tree.’ But,
disquieted by the idea, he presently got into the water
and tightened the lashings of the raft as well as he was
able.

 It was a long, dreary night, especially after the moon
went down. Fortunately it was warm and fine. Indeed,
throughout that trying time of flood, curiously enough,
not a single point of rain fell in that region. They
talked of many things, these two, nestling snugly in
a great fork of the giant apple-tree, but their chief [

224 ]

subject was the old, old story; whilst Bridget, just
below them, alternately invoked heavenly succour and
lamented earthly losses.

 ‘Twinty wan poun’ notes undther me head in the
bolsther, an’ me too hurried an’ flurried to remimber
’em! Sure, it’s clane roond I am afther this noight, bad
cess to it! But for Father Dennis’s wather—may glory
be his bed whin his toime comes—it’s at the bottom
wid the sheep and craturs I’d be afore now, so it is!
May the saints above sind the blessed light an’ the
masther wid a ship to us! Ochone! Miss Daisy, me
darlin’, I knows it’s hard on ye too. An’ for ye too,
sorr—God forgive me thinkin’ ye wasn’t quite so smart
as ye moight be!’

 And so she rambled on, unheeded by the lovers
perched in the big fork above her.

 Dawn at last, bright and clear, with presently a
brilliant sun.

 To his relief, Fortescue saw by the marks on the
tree that the water was falling. By noon the raft was
suspended high and dry. But still a lamentable procession
of sheep and household débris , with an occasional
horse or bullock, hurried along the swift central stream,
at whose very verge a merciful Providence had arrested
the raft. Presently Fortescue was lucky enough to
secure a pumpkin out of the dozens floating about, and
the three divided and ate it with an appetite. Slowly
the shadows lengthened. Other tree tops, dishevelled
and dirty with driftage, began to appear around them.
The water was falling rapidly. But were they to pass [

225 ]

another night there? Fortescue began to fear so, and
was even setting about the construction of a platform
out of the raft, when a loud ‘ Coo-ee-e-e!

’ made him start.
‘ Coo-ee-e-e!

’ in answer; and then a small boat pulled
by two men came through the branches of the big
tree.

 ‘Hoorar!’ shouted one. ‘We was afraid it was all
up with yees! But where’s the Boss?’

 ‘My father went to the out-station yesterday,’ replied
Daisy.

 ‘Oh, then he’s right enough,’ said the man. ‘Bet your
life, miss, he ain’t very far away this minute! He’s
seed, afore now, what the “bit of a fresh” turned to.
Hand us down the lady fust, guv’nor.’

 But old Bridget, being lowest, and in a hurry, suddenly
let herself drop fairly on the speaker’s shoulders,
fetching him down, and nearly capsizing the boat.
Then, to his infinite astonishment, she got her arms
round his neck and hugged him, and would have served
his mate the same way, but he sprang into the tree and
avoided her.

 ‘Where are your waggons?’ asked Fortescue, as at
last they pulled off.

 ‘Ten foot under water, by this,’ TN: closing quote invisible replied the carrier,
‘seein’ it was up to the naves afore we left. We
knowed nothin’ till we feels it in our blankets. Then
up we jumps, and, behold you, we’re on a hiland about
twenty foot round, an’ the flood a-roarin’ like billyho.
As luck ’ll ’ave it, Tom, there, has this boat in his
loadin’, takin’ her to a storekeeper at Overflow—I [

226 ]

expect he’s a-thinkin’ on her just now. So we hiked her
out, paddles an’ all, gits some tucker, an’ steers for
Tarnpirr, knowin’ as you was a lot lower ’n we, an’ no
boat. Well, when we sees nothin’ but water where the
house shud ha’ been, we reckoned you’d all been swep’
away, so comes along on chance, cooeyin’ pretty often.
By jakers, guv’nor, if you hadn’t ’appened to have savee
enough to chuck that thing together, you’d all a’ been gone
goosers sure enough! I don’t b’lieve there’s one single
solitary ’oof left on the run, not exceptin’ our bullocks
an’ saddle ’orses.’

 The castaways now made a much-needed meal off
damper and some of the Tarnpirr mutton, and voted it
a wonderful improvement on raw pumpkin, even with
love for its sauce.

 Before they had pulled a mile towards Warrooga,
they met Mr Barton with some residents in the police
boat. He had been nearly frantic with anxiety since, on
returning home, he encountered the water, and, galloping
back, had with great difficulty reached the township.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘What’s the use?’ replied Mr Barton despondently,
when, that same evening, Fortescue asked him for Daisy.
‘I’m a ruined man, and, like most such, selfish, and I
want to keep my little girl. So far as I can gather,
there’s not an animal of any description left alive on
Tarnpirr. Pastoral firms make no allowances; they’ll
say I ought to have cleared everything off before the
flood came, and they’ll sack me at a minute’s notice. [

227 ]

Of course, if the people here had done as they should, I
might have saved most of the sheep, if not all. No; I
don’t like to disappoint you, after having behaved so
nobly and pluckily—and I must say now that I never
did you justice—but I think, Mr Fortescue, you’d better
choose a wife elsewhere; I do, indeed.’

 Seeing that Barton was irritable, and rather inclined
to hug his misfortune, Fortescue, perhaps wisely, said no
more just then, and apparently took his dismissal with a
good grace.

 But later, before starting for the capital, Daisy and he
had a long talk, during which a conspiracy was hatched.

 Mr Barton bade his jackaroo a kindly good-bye; and
if he felt any surprise at the non-renewal of his suit, he
never showed it.

 He was expecting, with almost feverish impatience, a
letter from the firm in answer to his own report, with
details of the disaster at Tarnpirr. And when at length
it arrived, after what seemed a long delay, and he found
that, instead of the reproaches and curt dismissal he was
prepared for, it contained sympathy and an appointment
to a large station on the Darling Downs, words were
wanting to express his utter astonishment, and his
deep contrition for the bad opinion he had formed of his
employers.

 ‘Never mind, Daisy,’ he cried. ‘They say the owner
will be there himself to receive us on our arrival. I can
thank him then in person.’

 ‘Dear me, how nice that will be!’ replied Daisy,
demurely.

 [

228 ] 

‘And, only fancy,’ he went on, ‘they request us to
take our servant—that’s Bridget, of course—with us!
I’m to find out, too, if those carriers lost much, and, if
so, to compensate them.’

 ‘How very good and thoughtful they must be,’
answered Daisy—but this time with moist eyes.

 I will not insult the reader’s penetration by asking
him to guess who the owner of that Downs station
was.

 It will be sufficient to remark that Mr and Mrs Fortescue have only just returned from their wedding
trip to the Continent; and that it will be very long
indeed ere they forget that memorable night in ’90 upon
which the waters came to Tarnpirr, and caused ‘Barton’s
Jackaroo’ to show what he was made of.