BERTHA

 Dr. Bonnet, my old friend—one sometimes has friends older than one's
      self—had often invited me to spend some time with him at Riom, and,
      as I did not know Auvergne, I made up my mind to visit him in the summer
      of 1876.

 I arrived by the morning train, and the first person I saw on the platform
      was the doctor. He was dressed in a gray suit, and wore a soft, black,
      wide-brimmed, high-crowned felt hat, narrow at the top like a chimney pot,
      a hat which hardly any one except an Auvergnat would wear, and which
      reminded one of a charcoal burner. Dressed like that, the doctor had the
      appearance of an old young man, with his spare body under his thin coat,
      and his large head covered with white hair.

 He embraced me with that evident pleasure which country people feel when
      they meet long-expected friends, and, stretching out his arm, he said
      proudly:

 “This is Auvergne!” I saw nothing before me except a range of
      mountains, whose summits, which resembled truncated cones, must have been
      extinct volcanoes.

 Then, pointing to the name of the station, he said:

 “Riom, the fatherland of magistrates, the pride of the magistracy,
      and which ought rather to be the fatherland of doctors.”

 “Why?” I, asked.

 “Why?” he replied with a laugh. “If you transpose the
      letters, you have the Latin word 'mori', to die. That is the reason why I
      settled here, my young friend.”

 And, delighted at his own joke, he carried me off, rubbing his hands.

 As soon as I had swallowed a cup of coffee, he made me go and see the
      town. I admired the druggist's house, and the other noted houses, which
      were all black, but as pretty as bric-a-brac, with their facades of
      sculptured stone. I admired the statue of the Virgin, the patroness of
      butchers, and he told me an amusing story about this, which I will relate
      some other time, and then Dr. Bonnet said to me:

 “I must beg you to excuse me for a few minutes while I go and see a
      patient, and then I will take you to Chatel-Guyon, so as to show you the
      general aspect of the town, and all the mountain chain of the Puy-de-Dome
      before lunch. You can wait for me outside; I shall only go upstairs and
      come down immediately.”

 He left me outside one of those old, gloomy, silent, melancholy houses,
      which one sees in the provinces, and this one appeared to look
      particularly sinister, and I soon discovered the reason. All the large
      windows on the first floor were boarded half way up. The upper part of
      them alone could be opened, as if one had wished to prevent the people who
      were locked up in that huge stone box from looking into the street.

 When the doctor came down again, I told him how it struck me, and he
      replied:

 “You are quite right; the poor creature who is living there must
      never see what is going on outside. She is a madwoman, or rather an idiot,
      what you Normans would call a Niente. It is a miserable story, but a very
      singular pathological case at the same time. Shall I tell you?”

 I begged him to do so, and he continued:

 “Twenty years ago the owners of this house, who were my patients,
      had a daughter who was like all other girls, but I soon discovered that
      while her body became admirably developed, her intellect remained
      stationary.

 “She began to walk very early, but she could not talk. At first I
      thought she was deaf, but I soon discovered that, although she heard
      perfectly, she did not understand anything that was said to her. Violent
      noises made her start and frightened her, without her understanding how
      they were caused.

 “She grew up into a superb woman, but she was dumb, from an absolute
      want of intellect. I tried all means to introduce a gleam of intelligence
      into her brain, but nothing succeeded. I thought I noticed that she knew
      her nurse, though as soon as she was weaned, she failed to recognize her
      mother. She could never pronounce that word which is the first that
      children utter and the last which soldiers murmur when they are dying on
      the field of battle. She sometimes tried to talk, but she produced nothing
      but incoherent sounds.

 “When the weather was fine, she laughed continually, and emitted low
      cries which might be compared to the twittering of birds; when it rained
      she cried and moaned in a mournful, terrifying manner, which sounded like
      the howling of a dog before a death occurs in a house.

 “She was fond of rolling on the grass, as young animals do, and of
      running about madly, and she would clap her hands every morning, when the
      sun shone into her room, and would insist, by signs, on being dressed as
      quickly as possible, so that she might get out.

 “She did not appear to distinguish between people, between her
      mother and her nurse, or between her father and me, or between the
      coachman and the cook. I particularly liked her parents, who were very
      unhappy on her account, and went to see them nearly every day. I dined
      with them quite frequently, which enabled me to remark that Bertha (they
      had called her Bertha) seemed to recognize the various dishes, and to
      prefer some to others. At that time she was twelve years old, but as fully
      formed in figure as a girl of eighteen, and taller than I was. Then the
      idea struck me of developing her greediness, and by this means of
      cultivating some slight power of discrimination in her mind, and to force
      her, by the diversity of flavors, if not to reason, at any rate to arrive
      at instinctive distinctions, which would of themselves constitute a kind
      of process that was necessary to thought. Later on, by appealing to her
      passions, and by carefully making use of those which could serve our
      purpose, we might hope to obtain a kind of reaction on her intellect, and
      by degrees increase the unconscious action of her brain.

 “One day I put two plates before her, one of soup, and the other of
      very sweet vanilla cream. I made her taste each of them successively, and
      then I let her choose for herself, and she ate the plate of cream. In a
      short time I made her very greedy, so greedy that it appeared as if the
      only idea she had in her head was the desire for eating. She perfectly
      recognized the various dishes, and stretched out her hands toward those
      that she liked, and took hold of them eagerly, and she used to cry when
      they were taken from her. Then I thought I would try and teach her to come
      to the dining-room when the dinner bell rang. It took a long time, but I
      succeeded in the end. In her vacant intellect a vague correlation was
      established between sound and taste, a correspondence between the two
      senses, an appeal from one to the other, and consequently a sort of
      connection of ideas—if one can call that kind of instinctive hyphen
      between two organic functions an idea—and so I carried my
      experiments further, and taught her, with much difficulty, to recognize
      meal times by the clock.

 “It was impossible for me for a long time to attract her attention
      to the hands, but I succeeded in making her remark the clockwork and the
      striking apparatus. The means I employed were very simple; I asked them
      not to have the bell rung for lunch, and everybody got up and went into
      the dining-room when the little brass hammer struck twelve o'clock, but I
      found great difficulty in making her learn to count the strokes. She ran
      to the door each time she heard the clock strike, but by degrees she
      learned that all the strokes had not the same value as far as regarded
      meals, and she frequently fixed her eyes, guided by her ears, on the dial
      of the clock.

 “When I noticed that, I took care every day at twelve, and at six
      o'clock, to place my fingers on the figures twelve and six, as soon as the
      moment she was waiting for had arrived, and I soon noticed that she
      attentively followed the motion of the small brass hands, which I had
      often turned in her presence.

 “She had understood! Perhaps I ought rather to say that she had
      grasped the idea. I had succeeded in getting the knowledge, or, rather,
      the sensation, of the time into her, just as is the case with carp, who
      certainly have no clocks, when they are fed every day exactly at the same
      time.

 “When once I had obtained that result all the clocks and watches in
      the house occupied her attention almost exclusively. She spent her time in
      looking at them, listening to them, and in waiting for meal time, and once
      something very funny happened. The striking apparatus of a pretty little
      Louis XVI clock that hung at the head of her bed having got out of order,
      she noticed it. She sat for twenty minutes with her eyes on the hands,
      waiting for it to strike ten, but when the hands passed the figure she was
      astonished at not hearing anything; so stupefied was she, indeed, that she
      sat down, no doubt overwhelmed by a feeling of violent emotion such as
      attacks us in the face of some terrible catastrophe. And she had the
      wonderful patience to wait until eleven o'clock in order to see what would
      happen, and as she naturally heard nothing, she was suddenly either seized
      with a wild fit of rage at having been deceived and imposed upon by
      appearances, or else overcome by that fear which some frightened creature
      feels at some terrible mystery, and by the furious impatience of a
      passionate individual who meets with some obstacle; she took up the tongs
      from the fireplace and struck the clock so violently that she broke it to
      pieces in a moment.

 “It was evident, therefore, that her, brain did act and calculate,
      obscurely it is true, and within very restricted limits, for I could never
      succeed in making her distinguish persons as she distinguished the time;
      and to stir her intellect, it was necessary to appeal to her passions, in
      the material sense of the word, and we soon had another, and alas! a very
      terrible proof of this!

 “She had grown up into a splendid girl, a perfect type of a race, a
      sort of lovely and stupid Venus. She was sixteen, and I have rarely seen
      such perfection of form, such suppleness and such regular features. I said
      she was a Venus; yes, a fair, stout, vigorous Venus, with large, bright,
      vacant eyes, which were as blue as the flowers of the flax plant; she had
      a large mouth with full lips, the mouth of a glutton, of a sensualist, a
      mouth made for kisses. Well, one morning her father came into my
      consulting room with a strange look on his face, and, sitting down without
      even replying to my greeting, he said:

 “'I want to speak to you about a very serious matter. Would it be
      possible—would it be possible for Bertha to marry?'

 “'Bertha to marry! Why, it is quite impossible!'

 “'Yes, I know, I know,' he replied. 'But reflect, doctor. Don't you
      think—perhaps—we hoped—if she had children—it
      would be a great shock to her, but a great happiness, and—who knows
      whether maternity might not rouse her intellect?'

 “I was in a state of great perplexity. He was right, and it was
      possible that such a new situation, and that wonderful instinct of
      maternity, which beats in the hearts of the lower animals as it does in
      the heart of a woman, which makes the hen fly at a dog's jaws to defend
      her chickens, might bring about a revolution, an utter change in her
      vacant mind, and set the motionless mechanism of her thoughts in motion.
      And then, moreover, I immediately remembered a personal instance. Some
      years previously I had owned a spaniel bitch who was so stupid that I
      could do nothing with her, but when she had had puppies she became, if not
      exactly intelligent, yet almost like many other dogs who had not been
      thoroughly broken.

 “As soon as I foresaw the possibility of this, the wish to get
      Bertha married grew in me, not so much out of friendship for her and her
      poor parents as from scientific curiosity. What would happen? It was a
      singular problem. I said in reply to her father:

 “'Perhaps you are right. You might make the attempt, but you will
      never find a man to consent to marry her.'

 “'I have found somebody,' he said, in a low voice.

 “I was dumfounded, and said: 'Somebody really suitable? Some one of
      your own rank and position in society?'

 “'Decidedly,' he replied.

 “'Oh! And may I ask his name?'

 “'I came on purpose to tell you, and to consult you. It is Monsieur
      Gaston du Boys de Lucelles.'

 “I felt inclined to exclaim: 'The wretch!' but I held my tongue, and
      after a few moments' silence I said:

 “'Oh! Very good. I see nothing against it.'

 “The poor man shook me heartily by the hand.

 “'She is to be married next month,' he said.

 “Monsieur Gaston du Boys de Lucelles was a scapegrace of good
      family, who, after having spent all that he had inherited from his father,
      and having incurred debts in all kinds of doubtful ways, had been trying
      to discover some other means of obtaining money, and he had discovered
      this method. He was a good-looking young fellow, and in capital health,
      but fast; one of that odious race of provincial fast men, and he appeared
      to me to be as suitable as anyone, and could be got rid of later by making
      him an allowance. He came to the house to pay his addresses and to strut
      about before the idiot girl, who, however, seemed to please him. He
      brought her flowers, kissed her hands, sat at her feet, and looked at her
      with affectionate eyes; but she took no notice of any of his attentions,
      and did not make any distinction between him and the other persons who
      were about her.

 “However, the marriage took place, and you may guess how my
      curiosity was aroused. I went to see Bertha the next day to try and
      discover from her looks whether any feelings had been awakened in her, but
      I found her just the same as she was every day, wholly taken up with the
      clock and dinner, while he, on the contrary, appeared really in love, and
      tried to rouse his wife's spirits and affection by little endearments and
      such caresses as one bestows on a kitten. He could think of nothing
      better.

 “I called upon the married couple pretty frequently, and I soon
      perceived that the young woman knew her husband, and gave him those eager
      looks which she had hitherto only bestowed on sweet dishes.

 “She followed his movements, knew his step on the stairs or in the
      neighboring rooms, clapped her hands when he came in, and her face was
      changed and brightened by the flames of profound happiness and of desire.

 “She loved him with her whole body and with all her soul to the very
      depths of her poor, weak soul, and with all her heart, that poor heart of
      some grateful animal. It was really a delightful and innocent picture of
      simple passion, of carnal and yet modest passion, such as nature had
      implanted in mankind, before man had complicated and disfigured it by all
      the various shades of sentiment. But he soon grew tired of this ardent,
      beautiful, dumb creature, and did not spend more than an hour during the
      day with her, thinking it sufficient if he came home at night, and she
      began to suffer in consequence. She used to wait for him from morning till
      night with her eyes on the clock; she did not even look after the meals
      now, for he took all his away from home, Clermont, Chatel-Guyon, Royat, no
      matter where, as long as he was not obliged to come home.

 “She began to grow thin; every other thought, every other wish,
      every other expectation, and every confused hope disappeared from her
      mind, and the hours during which she did not see him became hours of
      terrible suffering to her. Soon he ceased to come home regularly of
      nights; he spent them with women at the casino at Royat and did not come
      home until daybreak. But she never went to bed before he returned. She
      remained sitting motionless in an easy-chair, with her eyes fixed on the
      hands of the clock, which turned so slowly and regularly round the china
      face on which the hours were painted.

 “She heard the trot of his horse in the distance and sat up with a
      start, and when he came into the room she got up with the movements of an
      automaton and pointed to the clock, as if to say: 'Look how late it is!'

 “And he began to be afraid of this amorous and jealous, half-witted
      woman, and flew into a rage, as brutes do; and one night he even went so
      far as to strike her, so they sent for me. When I arrived she was writhing
      and screaming in a terrible crisis of pain, anger, passion, how do I know
      what? Can one tell what goes on in such undeveloped brains?

 “I calmed her by subcutaneous injections of morphine, and forbade
      her to see that man again, for I saw clearly that marriage would
      infallibly kill her by degrees.

 “Then she went mad! Yes, my dear friend, that idiot went mad. She is
      always thinking of him and waiting for him; she waits for him all day and
      night, awake or asleep, at this very moment, ceaselessly. When I saw her
      getting thinner and thinner, and as she persisted in never taking her eyes
      off the clocks, I had them removed from the house. I thus made it
      impossible for her to count the hours, and to try to remember, from her
      indistinct reminiscences, at what time he used to come home formerly. I
      hope to destroy the recollection of it in time, and to extinguish that ray
      of thought which I kindled with so much difficulty.

 “The other day I tried an experiment. I offered her my watch; she
      took it and looked at it for some time; then she began to scream terribly,
      as if the sight of that little object had suddenly awakened her memory,
      which was beginning to grow indistinct. She is pitiably thin now, with
      hollow and glittering eyes, and she walks up and down ceaselessly, like a
      wild beast in its cage; I have had gratings put on the windows, boarded
      them up half way, and have had the seats fixed to the floor so as to
      prevent her from looking to see whether he is coming.

 “Oh! her poor parents! What a life they must lead!”

 We had got to the top of the hill, and the doctor turned round and said to
      me:

 “Look at Riom from here.”

 The gloomy town looked like some ancient city. Behind it a green, wooded
      plain studded with towns and villages, and bathed in a soft blue haze,
      extended until it was lost in the distance. Far away, on my right, there
      was a range of lofty mountains with round summits, or else cut off flat,
      as if with a sword, and the doctor began to enumerate the villages, towns
      and hills, and to give me the history of all of them. But I did not listen
      to him; I was thinking of nothing but the madwoman, and I only saw her.
      She seemed to be hovering over that vast extent of country like a mournful
      ghost, and I asked him abruptly:

 “What has become of the husband?”

 My friend seemed rather surprised, but after a few moments' hesitation, he
      replied:

 “He is living at Royat, on an allowance that they made him, and is
      quite happy; he leads a very fast life.”

 As we were slowly going back, both of us silent and rather low-spirited,
      an English dogcart, drawn by a thoroughbred horse, came up behind us and
      passed us rapidly. The doctor took me by the arm.

 “There he is,” he said.

 I saw nothing except a gray felt hat, cocked over one ear above a pair of
      broad shoulders, driving off in a cloud of dust.