BESIDE SCHOPENHAUER'S CORPSE
    

      He was slowly dying, as consumptives die. I saw him each day, about two
      o'clock, sitting beneath the hotel windows on a bench in the promenade,
      looking out on the calm sea. He remained for some time without moving, in
      the heat of the sun, gazing mournfully at the Mediterranean. Every now and
      then, he cast a glance at the lofty mountains with beclouded summits that
      shut in Mentone; then, with a very slow movement, he would cross his long
      legs, so thin that they seemed like two bones, around which fluttered the
      cloth of his trousers, and he would open a book, always the same book. And
      then he did not stir any more, but read on, read on with his eye and his
      mind; all his wasting body seemed to read, all his soul plunged, lost,
      disappeared, in this book, up to the hour when the cool air made him cough
      a little. Then, he got up and reentered the hotel.
    

      He was a tall German, with fair beard, who breakfasted and dined in his
      own room, and spoke to nobody.
    

      A vague, curiosity attracted me to him. One day, I sat down by his side,
      having taken up a book, too, to keep up appearances, a volume of Musset's
      poems.
    

      And I began to look through “Rolla.”
    

      Suddenly, my neighbor said to me, in good French:
    

      “Do you know German, monsieur?”
    

      “Not at all, monsieur.”
    

      “I am sorry for that. Since chance has thrown us side by side, I
      could have lent you, I could have shown you, an inestimable thing—this
      book which I hold in my hand.”
    

      “What is it, pray?”
    

      “It is a copy of my master, Schopenhauer, annotated with his own
      hand. All the margins, as you may see, are covered with his handwriting.”
    

      I took the book from him reverently, and I gazed at these forms
      incomprehensible to me, but which revealed the immortal thoughts of the
      greatest shatterer of dreams who had ever dwelt on earth.
    

      And Musset's verses arose in my memory:
    

   “Hast thou found out, Voltaire, that it is bliss to die,
   And does thy hideous smile over thy bleached bones fly?”
 

      And involuntarily I compared the childish sarcasm, the religious sarcasm
      of Voltaire with the irresistible irony of the German philosopher whose
      influence is henceforth ineffaceable.
    

      Let us protest and let us be angry, let us be indignant, or let us be
      enthusiastic, Schopenhauer has marked humanity with the seal of his
      disdain and of his disenchantment.
    

      A disabused pleasure-seeker, he overthrew beliefs, hopes, poetic ideals
      and chimeras, destroyed the aspirations, ravaged the confidence of souls,
      killed love, dragged down the chivalrous worship of women, crushed the
      illusions of hearts, and accomplished the most gigantic task ever
      attempted by scepticism. He spared nothing with his mocking spirit, and
      exhausted everything. And even to-day those who execrate him seem to carry
      in their own souls particles of his thought.
    

      “So, then, you were intimately acquainted with Schopenhauer?”
      I said to the German.
    

      He smiled sadly.
    

      “Up to the time of his death, monsieur.”
    

      And he spoke to me about the philosopher and told me about the almost
      supernatural impression which this strange being made on all who came near
      him.
    

      He gave me an account of the interview of the old iconoclast with a French
      politician, a doctrinaire Republican, who wanted to get a glimpse of this
      man, and found him in a noisy tavern, seated in the midst of his
      disciples, dry, wrinkled, laughing with an unforgettable laugh, attacking
      and tearing to pieces ideas and beliefs with a single word, as a dog tears
      with one bite of his teeth the tissues with which he plays.
    

      He repeated for me the comment of this Frenchman as he went away,
      astonished and terrified: “I thought I had spent an hour with the
      devil.”
    

      Then he added:
    

      “He had, indeed, monsieur, a frightful smile, which terrified us
      even after his death. I can tell you an anecdote about it that is not
      generally known, if it would interest you.”
    

      And he began, in a languid voice, interrupted by frequent fits of
      coughing.
    

      “Schopenhauer had just died, and it was arranged that we should
      watch, in turn, two by two, till morning.
    

      “He was lying in a large apartment, very simple, vast and gloomy.
      Two wax candles were burning on the stand by the bedside.
    

      “It was midnight when I went on watch, together with one of our
      comrades. The two friends whom we replaced had left the apartment, and we
      came and sat down at the foot of the bed.
    

      “The face was not changed. It was laughing. That pucker which we
      knew so well lingered still around the corners of the lips, and it seemed
      to us that he was about to open his eyes, to move and to speak. His
      thought, or rather his thoughts, enveloped us. We felt ourselves more than
      ever in the atmosphere of his genius, absorbed, possessed by him. His
      domination seemed to be even more sovereign now that he was dead. A
      feeling of mystery was blended with the power of this incomparable spirit.
    

      “The bodies of these men disappear, but they themselves remain; and
      in the night which follows the cessation of their heart's pulsation I
      assure you, monsieur, they are terrifying.
    

      “And in hushed tones we talked about him, recalling to mind certain
      sayings, certain formulas of his, those startling maxims which are like
      jets of flame flung, in a few words, into the darkness of the Unknown
      Life.
    

      “'It seems to me that he is going to speak,' said my comrade. And we
      stared with uneasiness bordering on fear at the motionless face, with its
      eternal laugh. Gradually, we began to feel ill at ease, oppressed, on the
      point of fainting. I faltered:
    

      “'I don't know what is the matter with me, but, I assure you I am
      not well.'
    

      “And at that moment we noticed that there was an unpleasant odor
      from the corpse.
    

      “Then, my comrade suggested that we should go into the adjoining
      room, and leave the door open; and I assented to his proposal.
    

      “I took one of the wax candles which burned on the stand, and I left
      the second behind. Then we went and sat down at the other end of the
      adjoining apartment, in such a position that we could see the bed and the
      corpse, clearly revealed by the light.
    

      “But he still held possession of us. One would have said that his
      immaterial essence, liberated, free, all-powerful and dominating, was
      flitting around us. And sometimes, too, the dreadful odor of the
      decomposed body came toward us and penetrated us, sickening and
      indefinable.
    

      “Suddenly a shiver passed through our bones: a sound, a slight
      sound, came from the death-chamber. Immediately we fixed our glances on
      him, and we saw, yes, monsieur, we saw distinctly, both of us, something
      white pass across the bed, fall on the carpet, and vanish under an
      armchair.
    

      “We were on our feet before we had time to think of anything,
      distracted by stupefying terror, ready to run away. Then we stared at each
      other. We were horribly pale. Our hearts throbbed fiercely enough to have
      raised the clothing on our chests. I was the first to speak:
    

      “'Did you see?'
    

      “'Yes, I saw.'
    

      “'Can it be that he is not dead?'
    

      “'Why, when the body is putrefying?'
    

      “'What are we to do?'
    

      “My companion said in a hesitating tone:
    

      “'We must go and look.'
    

      “I took our wax candle and entered first, glancing into all the dark
      corners in the large apartment. Nothing was moving now, and I approached
      the bed. But I stood transfixed with stupor and fright:
    

      “Schopenhauer was no longer laughing! He was grinning in a horrible
      fashion, with his lips pressed together and deep hollows in his cheeks. I
      stammered out:
    

      “'He is not dead!'
    

      “But the terrible odor ascended to my nose and stifled me. And I no
      longer moved, but kept staring fixedly at him, terrified as if in the
      presence of an apparition.
    

      “Then my companion, having seized the other wax candle, bent
      forward. Next, he touched my arm without uttering a word. I followed his
      glance, and saw on the ground, under the armchair by the side of the bed,
      standing out white on the dark carpet, and open as if to bite,
      Schopenhauer's set of artificial teeth.
    

      “The work of decomposition, loosening the jaws, had made it jump out
      of the mouth.
    

      “I was really frightened that day, monsieur.”
    

      And as the sun was sinking toward the glittering sea, the consumptive
      German rose from his seat, gave me a parting bow, and retired into the
      hotel.
    







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 3.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME III.