BEYOND THE PALE.

 “Love heeds not caste nor sleep a broken bed. I went in search of
   love and lost myself.” Hindu Proverb.

 A man should, whatever happens, keep to his own caste, race and breed. Let
      the White go to the White and the Black to the Black.

 Then, whatever trouble falls is in the ordinary course of things—neither
      sudden, alien, nor unexpected.

 This is the story of a man who wilfully stepped beyond the safe limits of
      decent every-day society, and paid for it heavily.

 He knew too much in the first instance; and he saw too much in the second.
      He took too deep an interest in native life; but he will never do so
      again.

 Deep away in the heart of the City, behind Jitha Megji's bustee, lies Amir
      Nath's Gully, which ends in a dead-wall pierced by one grated window. At
      the head of the Gully is a big cow-byre, and the walls on either side of
      the Gully are without windows. Neither Suchet Singh nor Gaur Chand
      approved of their women-folk looking into the world. If Durga Charan had
      been of their opinion, he would have been a happier man today, and little
      Bisesa would have been able to knead her own bread. Her room looked out
      through the grated window into the narrow dark Gully where the sun never
      came and where the buffaloes wallowed in the blue slime. She was a widow,
      about fifteen years old, and she prayed the Gods, day and night, to send
      her a lover; for she did not approve of living alone.

 One day the man—Trejago his name was—came into Amir Nath's
      Gully on an aimless wandering; and, after he had passed the buffaloes,
      stumbled over a big heap of cattle food.

 Then he saw that the Gully ended in a trap, and heard a little laugh from
      behind the grated window. It was a pretty little laugh, and Trejago,
      knowing that, for all practical purposes, the old Arabian Nights are good
      guides, went forward to the window, and whispered that verse of “The Love
      Song of Har Dyal” which begins:

 Can a man stand upright in the face of the naked Sun;
    or a Lover in the Presence of his Beloved?
  If my feet fail me, O Heart of my Heart, am I to blame,
    being blinded by the glimpse of your beauty?

 There came the faint tchinks of a woman's bracelets from behind the
      grating, and a little voice went on with the song at the fifth verse:

 Alas! alas! Can the Moon tell the Lotus of her love when the
   Gate of Heaven is shut and the clouds gather for the rains?
  They have taken my Beloved, and driven her with the pack-horses
    to the North.
  There are iron chains on the feet that were set on my heart.
  Call to the bowman to make ready—

 The voice stopped suddenly, and Trejago walked out of Amir Nath's Gully,
      wondering who in the world could have capped “The Love Song of Har Dyal”
       so neatly.

 Next morning, as he was driving to the office, an old woman threw a packet
      into his dog-cart. In the packet was the half of a broken glass bangle,
      one flower of the blood red dhak, a pinch of bhusa or cattle-food, and
      eleven cardamoms. That packet was a letter—not a clumsy compromising
      letter, but an innocent, unintelligible lover's epistle.

 Trejago knew far too much about these things, as I have said. No
      Englishman should be able to translate object-letters. But Trejago spread
      all the trifles on the lid of his office-box and began to puzzle them out.

 A broken glass-bangle stands for a Hindu widow all India over; because,
      when her husband dies a woman's bracelets are broken on her wrists.
      Trejago saw the meaning of the little bit of the glass.

 The flower of the dhak means diversely “desire,” “come,” “write,” or
      “danger,” according to the other things with it. One cardamom means
      “jealousy;” but when any article is duplicated in an object-letter, it
      loses its symbolic meaning and stands merely for one of a number
      indicating time, or, if incense, curds, or saffron be sent also, place.
      The message ran then:—“A widow dhak flower and bhusa—at eleven
      o'clock.” The pinch of bhusa enlightened Trejago. He saw—this kind
      of letter leaves much to instinctive knowledge—that the bhusa
      referred to the big heap of cattle-food over which he had fallen in Amir
      Nath's Gully, and that the message must come from the person behind the
      grating; she being a widow. So the message ran then:—“A widow, in
      the Gully in which is the heap of bhusa, desires you to come at eleven
      o'clock.”

 Trejago threw all the rubbish into the fireplace and laughed. He knew that
      men in the East do not make love under windows at eleven in the forenoon,
      nor do women fix appointments a week in advance.

 So he went, that very night at eleven, into Amir Nath's Gully, clad in a
      boorka, which cloaks a man as well as a woman. Directly the gongs in the
      City made the hour, the little voice behind the grating took up “The Love
      Song of Har Dyal” at the verse where the Panthan girl calls upon Har Dyal
      to return. The song is really pretty in the Vernacular. In English you
      miss the wail of it. It runs something like this:—

 Alone upon the housetops, to the North
     I turn and watch the lightning in the sky,—
    The glamour of thy footsteps in the North,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

    Below my feet the still bazar is laid
     Far, far below the weary camels lie,—
    The camels and the captives of thy raid,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

    My father's wife is old and harsh with years,
     And drudge of all my father's house am I.—
    My bread is sorrow and my drink is tears,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

 As the song stopped, Trejago stepped up under the grating and whispered:—“I
      am here.”

 Bisesa was good to look upon.

 That night was the beginning of many strange things, and of a double life
      so wild that Trejago today sometimes wonders if it were not all a dream.
      Bisesa or her old handmaiden who had thrown the object-letter had detached
      the heavy grating from the brick-work of the wall; so that the window slid
      inside, leaving only a square of raw masonry, into which an active man
      might climb.

 In the day-time, Trejago drove through his routine of office-work, or put
      on his calling-clothes and called on the ladies of the Station; wondering
      how long they would know him if they knew of poor little Bisesa. At night,
      when all the City was still, came the walk under the evil-smelling boorka,
      the patrol through Jitha Megji's bustee, the quick turn into Amir Nath's
      Gully between the sleeping cattle and the dead walls, and then, last of
      all, Bisesa, and the deep, even breathing of the old woman who slept
      outside the door of the bare little room that Durga Charan allotted to his
      sister's daughter. Who or what Durga Charan was, Trejago never inquired;
      and why in the world he was not discovered and knifed never occurred to
      him till his madness was over, and Bisesa... But this comes later.

 Bisesa was an endless delight to Trejago. She was as ignorant as a bird;
      and her distorted versions of the rumors from the outside world that had
      reached her in her room, amused Trejago almost as much as her lisping
      attempts to pronounce his name—“Christopher.” The first syllable was
      always more than she could manage, and she made funny little gestures with
      her rose-leaf hands, as one throwing the name away, and then, kneeling
      before Trejago, asked him, exactly as an Englishwoman would do, if he were
      sure he loved her. Trejago swore that he loved her more than any one else
      in the world. Which was true.

 After a month of this folly, the exigencies of his other life compelled
      Trejago to be especially attentive to a lady of his acquaintance. You may
      take it for a fact that anything of this kind is not only noticed and
      discussed by a man's own race, but by some hundred and fifty natives as
      well. Trejago had to walk with this lady and talk to her at the
      Band-stand, and once or twice to drive with her; never for an instant
      dreaming that this would affect his dearer out-of-the-way life. But the
      news flew, in the usual mysterious fashion, from mouth to mouth, till
      Bisesa's duenna heard of it and told Bisesa. The child was so troubled
      that she did the household work evilly, and was beaten by Durga Charan's
      wife in consequence.

 A week later, Bisesa taxed Trejago with the flirtation. She understood no
      gradations and spoke openly. Trejago laughed and Bisesa stamped her little
      feet—little feet, light as marigold flowers, that could lie in the
      palm of a man's one hand.

 Much that is written about “Oriental passion and impulsiveness” is
      exaggerated and compiled at second-hand, but a little of it is true; and
      when an Englishman finds that little, it is quite as startling as any
      passion in his own proper life. Bisesa raged and stormed, and finally
      threatened to kill herself if Trejago did not at once drop the alien
      Memsahib who had come between them. Trejago tried to explain, and to show
      her that she did not understand these things from a Western standpoint.
      Bisesa drew herself up, and said simply:

 “I do not. I know only this—it is not good that I should have made
      you dearer than my own heart to me, Sahib. You are an Englishman. I am
      only a black girl”—she was fairer than bar-gold in the Mint—and
      the widow of a black man.

 Then she sobbed and said: “But on my soul and my Mother's soul, I love
      you. There shall no harm come to you, whatever happens to me.”

 Trejago argued with the child, and tried to soothe her, but she seemed
      quite unreasonably disturbed. Nothing would satisfy her save that all
      relations between them should end. He was to go away at once. And he went.
      As he dropped out at the window, she kissed his forehead twice, and he
      walked away wondering.

 A week, and then three weeks, passed without a sign from Bisesa.

 Trejago, thinking that the rupture had lasted quite long enough, went down
      to Amir Nath's Gully for the fifth time in the three weeks, hoping that
      his rap at the sill of the shifting grating would be answered. He was not
      disappointed.

 There was a young moon, and one stream of light fell down into Amir Nath's
      Gully, and struck the grating, which was drawn away as he knocked. From
      the black dark, Bisesa held out her arms into the moonlight. Both hands
      had been cut off at the wrists, and the stumps were nearly healed.

 Then, as Bisesa bowed her head between her arms and sobbed, some one in
      the room grunted like a wild beast, and something sharp—knife, sword
      or spear—thrust at Trejago in his boorka. The stroke missed his
      body, but cut into one of the muscles of the groin, and he limped slightly
      from the wound for the rest of his days.

 The grating went into its place. There was no sign whatever from inside
      the house—nothing but the moonlight strip on the high wall, and the
      blackness of Amir Nath's Gully behind.

 The next thing Trejago remembers, after raging and shouting like a madman
      between those pitiless walls, is that he found himself near the river as
      the dawn was breaking, threw away his boorka and went home bareheaded.

 What the tragedy was—whether Bisesa had, in a fit of causeless
      despair, told everything, or the intrigue had been discovered and she
      tortured to tell, whether Durga Charan knew his name, and what became of
      Bisesa—Trejago does not know to this day. Something horrible had
      happened, and the thought of what it must have been comes upon Trejago in
      the night now and again, and keeps him company till the morning. One
      special feature of the case is that he does not know where lies the front
      of Durga Charan's house. It may open on to a courtyard common to two or
      more houses, or it may lie behind any one of the gates of Jitha Megji's
      bustee. Trejago cannot tell.

 He cannot get Bisesa—poor little Bisesa—back again. He has
      lost her in the City, where each man's house is as guarded and as
      unknowable as the grave; and the grating that opens into Amir Nath's Gully
      has been walled up.

 But Trejago pays his calls regularly, and is reckoned a very decent sort
      of man.

 There is nothing peculiar about him, except a slight stiffness, caused by
      a riding-strain, in the right leg.