BEYOND THE BAYOU

 The bayou curved like a crescent around the point of land on which La
      Folle's cabin stood. Between the stream and the hut lay a big abandoned
      field, where cattle were pastured when the bayou supplied them with water
      enough. Through the woods that spread back into unknown regions the woman
      had drawn an imaginary line, and past this circle she never stepped. This
      was the form of her only mania.

 She was now a large, gaunt black woman, past thirty-five. Her real name
      was Jacqueline, but every one on the plantation called her La Folle,
      because in childhood she had been frightened literally “out of her
      senses,” and had never wholly regained them.

 It was when there had been skirmishing and sharpshooting all day in the
      woods. Evening was near when P'tit Maitre, black with powder and crimson
      with blood, had staggered into the cabin of Jacqueline's mother, his
      pursuers close at his heels. The sight had stunned her childish reason.

 She dwelt alone in her solitary cabin, for the rest of the quarters had
      long since been removed beyond her sight and knowledge. She had more
      physical strength than most men, and made her patch of cotton and corn and
      tobacco like the best of them. But of the world beyond the bayou she had
      long known nothing, save what her morbid fancy conceived.

 People at Bellissime had grown used to her and her way, and they thought
      nothing of it. Even when “Old Mis'” died, they did not wonder that La
      Folle had not crossed the bayou, but had stood upon her side of it,
      wailing and lamenting.

 P'tit Maitre was now the owner of Bellissime. He was a middle-aged man,
      with a family of beautiful daughters about him, and a little son whom La
      Folle loved as if he had been her own. She called him Cheri, and so did
      every one else because she did.

 None of the girls had ever been to her what Cheri was. They had each and
      all loved to be with her, and to listen to her wondrous stories of things
      that always happened “yonda, beyon' de bayou.”

 But none of them had stroked her black hand quite as Cheri did, nor rested
      their heads against her knee so confidingly, nor fallen asleep in her arms
      as he used to do. For Cheri hardly did such things now, since he had
      become the proud possessor of a gun, and had had his black curls cut off.

 That summer—the summer Cheri gave La Folle two black curls tied with
      a knot of red ribbon—the water ran so low in the bayou that even the
      little children at Bellissime were able to cross it on foot, and the
      cattle were sent to pasture down by the river. La Folle was sorry when
      they were gone, for she loved these dumb companions well, and liked to
      feel that they were there, and to hear them browsing by night up to her
      own enclosure.

 It was Saturday afternoon, when the fields were deserted. The men had
      flocked to a neighboring village to do their week's trading, and the women
      were occupied with household affairs,—La Folle as well as the
      others. It was then she mended and washed her handful of clothes, scoured
      her house, and did her baking.

 In this last employment she never forgot Cheri. To-day she had fashioned
      croquignoles of the most fantastic and alluring shapes for him. So when
      she saw the boy come trudging across the old field with his gleaming
      little new rifle on his shoulder, she called out gayly to him, “Cheri!
      Cheri!”

 But Cheri did not need the summons, for he was coming straight to her. His
      pockets all bulged out with almonds and raisins and an orange that he had
      secured for her from the very fine dinner which had been given that day up
      at his father's house.

 He was a sunny-faced youngster of ten. When he had emptied his pockets, La
      Folle patted his round red cheek, wiped his soiled hands on her apron, and
      smoothed his hair. Then she watched him as, with his cakes in his hand, he
      crossed her strip of cotton back of the cabin, and disappeared into the
      wood.

 He had boasted of the things he was going to do with his gun out there.

 “You think they got plenty deer in the wood, La Folle?” he had inquired,
      with the calculating air of an experienced hunter.

 “Non, non!” the woman laughed. “Don't you look fo' no deer, Cheri. Dat's
      too big. But you bring La Folle one good fat squirrel fo' her dinner
      to-morrow, an' she goin' be satisfi'.”

 “One squirrel ain't a bite. I'll bring you mo' 'an one, La Folle,” he had
      boasted pompously as he went away.

 When the woman, an hour later, heard the report of the boy's rifle close
      to the wood's edge, she would have thought nothing of it if a sharp cry of
      distress had not followed the sound.

 She withdrew her arms from the tub of suds in which they had been plunged,
      dried them upon her apron, and as quickly as her trembling limbs would
      bear her, hurried to the spot whence the ominous report had come.

 It was as she feared. There she found Cheri stretched upon the ground,
      with his rifle beside him. He moaned piteously:—

 “I'm dead, La Folle! I'm dead! I'm gone!”

 “Non, non!” she exclaimed resolutely, as she knelt beside him. “Put you'
      arm 'roun' La Folle's nake, Cheri. Dat's nuttin'; dat goin' be nuttin'.”
       She lifted him in her powerful arms.

 Cheri had carried his gun muzzle-downward. He had stumbled,—he did
      not know how. He only knew that he had a ball lodged somewhere in his leg,
      and he thought that his end was at hand. Now, with his head upon the
      woman's shoulder, he moaned and wept with pain and fright.

 “Oh, La Folle! La Folle! it hurt so bad! I can' stan' it, La Folle!”

 “Don't cry, mon bebe, mon bebe, mon Cheri!” the woman spoke soothingly as
      she covered the ground with long strides. “La Folle goin' mine you; Doctor
      Bonfils goin' come make mon Cheri well agin.”

 She had reached the abandoned field. As she crossed it with her precious
      burden, she looked constantly and restlessly from side to side. A terrible
      fear was upon her,—the fear of the world beyond the bayou, the
      morbid and insane dread she had been under since childhood.

 When she was at the bayou's edge she stood there, and shouted for help as
      if a life depended upon it:—

 “Oh, P'tit Maitre! P'tit Maitre! Venez donc! Au secours! Au secours!”

 No voice responded. Cheri's hot tears were scalding her neck. She called
      for each and every one upon the place, and still no answer came.

 She shouted, she wailed; but whether her voice remained unheard or
      unheeded, no reply came to her frenzied cries. And all the while Cheri
      moaned and wept and entreated to be taken home to his mother.

 La Folle gave a last despairing look around her. Extreme terror was upon
      her. She clasped the child close against her breast, where he could feel
      her heart beat like a muffled hammer. Then shutting her eyes, she ran
      suddenly down the shallow bank of the bayou, and never stopped till she
      had climbed the opposite shore.

 She stood there quivering an instant as she opened her eyes. Then she
      plunged into the footpath through the trees.

 She spoke no more to Cheri, but muttered constantly, “Bon Dieu, ayez pitie
      La Folle! Bon Dieu, ayez pitie moi!”

 Instinct seemed to guide her. When the pathway spread clear and smooth
      enough before her, she again closed her eyes tightly against the sight of
      that unknown and terrifying world.

 A child, playing in some weeds, caught sight of her as she neared the
      quarters. The little one uttered a cry of dismay.

 “La Folle!” she screamed, in her piercing treble. “La Folle done cross de
      bayer!”

 Quickly the cry passed down the line of cabins.

 “Yonda, La Folle done cross de bayou!”

 Children, old men, old women, young ones with infants in their arms,
      flocked to doors and windows to see this awe-inspiring spectacle. Most of
      them shuddered with superstitious dread of what it might portend. “She
      totin' Cheri!” some of them shouted.

 Some of the more daring gathered about her, and followed at her heels,
      only to fall back with new terror when she turned her distorted face upon
      them. Her eyes were bloodshot and the saliva had gathered in a white foam
      on her black lips.

 Some one had run ahead of her to where P'tit Maitre sat with his family
      and guests upon the gallery.

 “P'tit Maitre! La Folle done cross de bayou! Look her! Look her yonda
      totin' Cheri!” This startling intimation was the first which they had of
      the woman's approach.

 She was now near at hand. She walked with long strides. Her eyes were
      fixed desperately before her, and she breathed heavily, as a tired ox.

 At the foot of the stairway, which she could not have mounted, she laid
      the boy in his father's arms. Then the world that had looked red to La
      Folle suddenly turned black,—like that day she had seen powder and
      blood.

 She reeled for an instant. Before a sustaining arm could reach her, she
      fell heavily to the ground.

 When La Folle regained consciousness, she was at home again, in her own
      cabin and upon her own bed. The moon rays, streaming in through the open
      door and windows, gave what light was needed to the old black mammy who
      stood at the table concocting a tisane of fragrant herbs. It was very
      late.

 Others who had come, and found that the stupor clung to her, had gone
      again. P'tit Maitre had been there, and with him Doctor Bonfils, who said
      that La Folle might die.

 But death had passed her by. The voice was very clear and steady with
      which she spoke to Tante Lizette, brewing her tisane there in a corner.

 “Ef you will give me one good drink tisane, Tante Lizette, I b'lieve I'm
      goin' sleep, me.”

 And she did sleep; so soundly, so healthfully, that old Lizette without
      compunction stole softly away, to creep back through the moonlit fields to
      her own cabin in the new quarters.

 The first touch of the cool gray morning awoke La Folle. She arose,
      calmly, as if no tempest had shaken and threatened her existence but
      yesterday.

 She donned her new blue cottonade and white apron, for she remembered that
      this was Sunday. When she had made for herself a cup of strong black
      coffee, and drunk it with relish, she quitted the cabin and walked across
      the old familiar field to the bayou's edge again.

 She did not stop there as she had always done before, but crossed with a
      long, steady stride as if she had done this all her life.

 When she had made her way through the brush and scrub cottonwood-trees
      that lined the opposite bank, she found herself upon the border of a field
      where the white, bursting cotton, with the dew upon it, gleamed for acres
      and acres like frosted silver in the early dawn.

 La Folle drew a long, deep breath as she gazed across the country. She
      walked slowly and uncertainly, like one who hardly knows how, looking
      about her as she went.

 The cabins, that yesterday had sent a clamor of voices to pursue her, were
      quiet now. No one was yet astir at Bellissime. Only the birds that darted
      here and there from hedges were awake, and singing their matins.

 When La Folle came to the broad stretch of velvety lawn that surrounded
      the house, she moved slowly and with delight over the springy turf, that
      was delicious beneath her tread.

 She stopped to find whence came those perfumes that were assailing her
      senses with memories from a time far gone.

 There they were, stealing up to her from the thousand blue violets that
      peeped out from green, luxuriant beds. There they were, showering down
      from the big waxen bells of the magnolias far above her head, and from the
      jessamine clumps around her.

 There were roses, too, without number. To right and left palms spread in
      broad and graceful curves. It all looked like enchantment beneath the
      sparkling sheen of dew.

 When La Folle had slowly and cautiously mounted the many steps that led up
      to the veranda, she turned to look back at the perilous ascent she had
      made. Then she caught sight of the river, bending like a silver bow at the
      foot of Bellissime. Exultation possessed her soul.

 La Folle rapped softly upon a door near at hand. Cheri's mother soon
      cautiously opened it. Quickly and cleverly she dissembled the astonishment
      she felt at seeing La Folle.

 “Ah, La Folle! Is it you, so early?”

 “Oui, madame. I come ax how my po' li'le Cheri do, 's mo'nin'.”

 “He is feeling easier, thank you, La Folle. Dr. Bonfils says it will be
      nothing serious. He's sleeping now. Will you come back when he awakes?”

 “Non, madame. I'm goin' wait yair tell Cheri wake up.” La Folle seated
      herself upon the topmost step of the veranda.

 A look of wonder and deep content crept into her face as she watched for
      the first time the sun rise upon the new, the beautiful world beyond the
      bayou.