BIMI

 THE orangoutang in the big iron cage lashed to the sheep-pen began the
      discussion. The night was stiflingly hot, and as Hans Breitmann and I
      passed him, dragging our bedding to the fore-peak of the steamer, he
      roused himself and chattered obscenely. He had been caught somewhere in
      the Malayan Archipelago, and was going to England to be exhibited at a
      shilling a head. For four days he had struggled, yelled, and wrenched at
      the heavy iron bars of his prison without ceasing, and had nearly slain a
      Lascar incautious enough to come within reach of the great hairy paw.

 “It would be well for you, mine friend, if you was a liddle seasick,” said
      Hans Breitmann, pausing by the cage. “You haf too much Ego in your
      Cosmos.”

 The orangoutang's arm slid out negligently from between the bars. No one
      would have believed that it would make a sudden snake-like rush at the
      German's breast. The thin silk of the sleeping-suit tore out: Hans stepped
      back unconcernedly, to pluck a banana from a bunch hanging close to one of
      the boats.

 “Too much Ego,” said he, peeling the fruit and offering it to the caged
      devil, who was rending the silk to tatters.

 Then we laid out our bedding in the bows, among the sleeping Lascars, to
      catch any breeze that the pace of the ship might give us. The sea was like
      smoky oil, except where it turned to fire under our forefoot and whirled
      back into the dark in smears of dull flame. There was a thunderstorm some
      miles away: we could see the glimmer of the lightning. The ship's cow,
      distressed by the heat and the smell of the ape-beast in the cage, lowed
      unhappily from time to time in exactly the same key as the lookout man at
      the bows answered the hourly call from the bridge. The trampling tune of
      the engines was very distinct, and the jarring of the ash-lift, as it was
      tipped into the sea, hurt the procession of hushed noise. Hans lay down by
      my side and lighted a good-night cigar. This was naturally the beginning
      of conversation. He owned a voice as soothing as the wash of the sea, and
      stores of experiences as vast as the sea itself; for his business in life
      was to wander up and down the world, collecting orchids and wild beasts
      and ethnological specimens for German and American dealers. I watched the
      glowing end of his cigar wax and wane in the gloom, as the sentences rose
      and fell, till I was nearly asleep. The orangoutang, troubled by some
      dream of the forests of his freedom, began to yell like a soul in
      purgatory, and to wrench madly at the bars of the cage.

 “If he was out now dere would not be much of us left hereabouts,” said
      Hans, lazily. “He screams good. See, now, how I shall tame him when he
      stops himself.”

 There was a pause in the outcry, and from Hans' mouth came an imitation of
      a snake's hiss, so perfect that I almost sprung to my feet. The sustained
      murderous sound ran along the deck, and the wrenching at the bars ceased.
      The orangoutang was quaking in an ecstasy of pure terror.

 “Dot stop him,” said Hans. “I learned dot trick in Mogoung Tanjong when I
      was collecting liddle monkeys for some peoples in Berlin. Efery one in der
      world is afraid of der monkeys except der snake. So I blay snake against
      monkey, and he keep quite still. Dere was too much Ego in his Cosmos. Dot
      is der soul-custom of monkeys. Are you asleep, or will you listen, and I
      will tell a dale dot you shall not pelief?”

 “There's no tale in the wide world that I can't believe,” I said.

 “If you have learned pelief you haf learned somedings. Now I shall try
      your pelief. Good! When I was collecting dose liddle monkeys—it was
      in '79 or '80, und I was in der islands of der Archipelago—over dere
      in der dark”—he pointed southward to New Guinea generally—“Mein
      Gott! I would sooner collect life red devils than liddle monkeys. When dey
      do not bite off your thumbs dey are always dying from nostalgia—homesick—for
      dey haf der imperfect soul, which is midway arrested in defelopment—und
      too much Ego. I was dere for nearly a year, und dere I found a man dot was
      called Bertran. He was a Frenchman, und he was a goot man—naturalist
      to the bone. Dey said he was an escaped convict, but he was a naturalist,
      und dot was enough for me. He would call all her life beasts from der
      forests, und dey would come. I said he was St. Francis of Assisi in a new
      dransmigration produced, und he laughed und said he had never preach to
      der fishes. He sold dem for trepang—beche-de-mer.

 “Und dot man, who was king of beasts-tamer men, he had in der house shush
      such anoder as dot devil-animal in der cage—a great orangoutang dot
      thought he was a man. He haf found him when he was a child—der
      orangoutang—und he was child and brother and opera comique all round
      to Bertran. He had his room in dot house—not a cage, but a room—mit
      a bed and sheets, and he would go to bed and get up in der morning and
      smoke his cigar und eat his dinner mit Bertran, und walk mit him
      hand-in-hand, which was most horrible. Herr Gott! I haf seen dot beast
      throw himself back in his chair and laugh when Bertran haf made fun of me.
      He was not a beast; he was a man, and he talked to Bertran, und Bertran
      comprehended, for I have seen dem. Und he was always politeful to me
      except when I talk too long to Bertran und say nodings at all to him. Den
      he would pull me away—dis great, dark devil, mit his enormous paws
      shush as if I was a child. He was not a beast, he was a man. Dis I saw
      pefore I know him three months, und Bertran he haf saw the same; and Bimi,
      der orangoutang, haf understood us both, mit his cigar between his big-dog
      teeth und der blue gum.

 “I was dere a year, dere und at dere oder islands—somedimes for
      monkeys and somedimes for butterflies und orchits. One time Bertran says
      to me dot he will be married, because he hass found a girl dot was goot,
      and he inquire if this marrying idea was right. I would not say, pecause
      it was not me dot was going to be married. Den he go off courting der girl—she
      was a half-caste French girl—very pretty. Haf you got a new light
      for my cigar? Oof! Very pretty. Only I say 'Haf you thought of Bimi? If he
      pulls me away when I talk to you, what will he do to your wife? He will
      pull her in pieces. If I was you, Bertran, I would gif my wife for wedding
      present der stuff figure of Bimi.' By dot time I bad learned somedings
      about der monkey peoples. 'Shoot him?' says Bertran. 'He is your beast,' I
      said; 'if he was mine he would be shot now.'

 “Den I felt at der back of my neck der fingers of Bimi. Mein Gott! I tell
      you dot he talked through dose fingers. It was der deaf-and-dumb alphabet
      all gomplete. He slide his hairy arm round my neck, and he tilt up my chin
      and look into my face, shust to see if I understood his talk so well as he
      understood mine.

 “'See now dere!' says Bertran, 'und you would shoot him while he is
      cuddling you? Dot is der Teuton ingrate!'

 “But I knew dot I had made Bimi a life's enemy, pecause his fingers haf
      talk murder through the back of my neck. Next dime I see Bimi dere was a
      pistol in my belt, und he touch it once, and I open de breech to show him
      it was loaded. He haf seen der liddle monkeys killed in der woods, and he
      understood.

 “So Bertran he was married, and he forgot clean about Bimi dot was
      skippin' alone on the beach mit der haf of a human soul in his belly. I
      was see him skip, und he took a big bough und thrash der sand till he haf
      made a great hole like a grave. So I says to Bertran 'For any sakes, kill
      Bimi. He is mad mit der jealousy.'

 “Bertran haf said: 'He is not mad at all. He haf obey and love my wife,
      und if she speaks he will get her slippers,' und he looked at his wife
      across der room. She was a very pretty girl.

 “Den I said to him: 'Dost thou pretend to know monkeys und dis beast dot
      is lashing himself mad upon der sands, pecause you do not talk to him?
      Shoot him when he comes to der house, for he haf der light in his eyes dot
      means killing—und killing.' Bimi come to der house, but dere was no
      light in his eyes. It was all put away, cunning—so cunning—und
      he fetch der girl her slippers, and Bertran turn to me und say: 'Dost thou
      know him in nine months more dan I haf known him in twelve years? Shall a
      child stab his fader? I have fed him, und he was my child. Do not speak
      this nonsense to my wife or to me any more.'

 “Dot next day Bertran came to my house to help me make some wood cases for
      der specimens, und he tell me dot he haf left his wife a liddle while mit
      Bimi in der garden. Den I finish my cases quick, und I say: 'Let us go to
      your house und get a trink.' He laugh und say: 'Come along, dry mans.'

 “His wife was not in der garden, und Bimi did not come when Bertran
      called. Und his wife did not come when he called, und he knocked at her
      bedroom door und dot was shut tight-locked. Den he looked at me, und his
      face was white. I broke down der door mit my shoulder, und der thatch of
      der roof was torn into a great hole, und der sun came in upon der floor.
      Haf you ever seen paper in der waste-basket, or cards at whist on der
      table scattered? Dere was no wife dot could be seen. I tell you dere was
      noddings in dot room dot might be a woman. Dere was stuff on der floor,
      und dot was all. I looked at dese things und I was very sick; but Bertran
      looked a little longer at what was upon the floor und der walls, und der
      hole in der thatch. Den he pegan to laugh, soft and low, und I know und
      thank God dot he was mad. He nefer cried, he nefer prayed. He stood still
      in der doorway und laugh to himself. Den he said: 'She haf locked herself
      in dis room, and he haf torn up der thatch. Fi donc. Dot is so. We will
      mend der thatch und wait for Bimi. He will surely come.'

 “I tell you we waited ten days in dot house, after der room was made into
      a room again, and once or twice we saw Bimi comin' a liddle way from der
      woods. He was afraid pecause he haf done wrong. Bertran called him when he
      was come to look on the tenth day, und Bimi come skipping along der beach
      und making noises, mit a long piece of Nack hair in his hands. Den Bertran
      laugh and say, 'Fi donc' shust as if it was a glass broken upon der table;
      und Bimi come nearer, und Bertran was honey-sweet in his voice and laughed
      to himself. For three days he made love to Bimi, pecause Bimi would not
      let himself be touched Den Bimi come to dinner at der same table mit us,
      und der hair on his hands was all black und thick mit—mit what had
      dried on his hands. Bertran gave him sangaree till Bimi was drunk and
      stupid, und den—”

 Hans paused to puff at his cigar.

 “And then?” said I.

 “Und den Bertran kill him with his hands, und I go for a walk upon der
      heach. It was Bertran's own piziness. When I come back der ape he was
      dead, und Bertran he was dying abofe him; but still he laughed a liddle
      und low, and he was quite content. Now you know der formula uf der
      strength of der orangoutang—it is more as seven to one in relation
      to man. But Bertran, he haf killed Bimi mit sooch dings as Gott gif him.
      Dot was der mericle.”

 The infernal clamor in the cage recommenced. “Aha! Dot friend of ours haf
      still too much Ego in his Cosmos, Be quiet, thou!”

 Hans hissed long and venomously. We could hear the great beast quaking in
      his cage.

 “But why in the world didn't you help Bertran instead of letting him be
      killed?” I asked.

 “My friend,” said Hans, composedly stretching himself to slumber, “it was
      not nice even to mineself dot I should lif after I had seen dot room wit
      der hole in der thatch. Und Bertran, he was her husband. Good-night, und
      sleep well.”