[

192 ] 

BOOKS AT BARRACABOO.

 A Sketch.

  PART I.

 They

were all very sore at Barracaboo station. From
manager to horse-boy, from jackaroo to boundary-rider,
they felt aggrieved and vengeful. First it had been
‘Around the World by Sea and Land,’ copiously
illustrated, and in monthly parts. This was dull—unutterably
dull—and each instalment turned out duller
and heavier than the last. Also, the pictures resembled
those on the specimen sheets as nearly as a mule does
a grindstone.

 After this came ‘Diseases of All Known Domestic
Animals,’ with gorgeously coloured pictures. As nothing
could be found in the whole work relating to horses or
cattle or dogs, except the illustrations, this was also
voted a fraud. However, they cut out the plates, and
stuck them upon the walls of the huts and cottages, so
that it was not clear loss altogether.

  [

192a ] 

[Illustration:

Started back to Atlanta, pursued for half the distance with thunderous whip-crackings. ( .) ]



 But the last straw was ‘The Universal Biography of
Eminent Men—Dead and Alive,’ with splendid portraits. [

193 ]

When they discovered that the notices they had been
led to expect of their own ‘Boss,’ ‘Hungry’ Parkes of
Humpalong, the Mayor of Atlanta, etc., etc., were
absent, and their places filled by paragraphs and woodcuts
relating to Nelson, Julius Cæsar, Pompey, Scipio
Africanus, and such-like characters, they one and all
bucked, and refused to pay on delivery. Then they
were hauled to Quarter Sessions, confronted with their
signatures, and made to pay.

 In vain they swore that the thing had never been
ordered; that it wasn’t up to specification; that their
handwriting was a palpable forgery. In vain they
related how they had never touched it, but had left
their copies lying on verandahs, stockyard posts, in
mud, in dust, wherever, in fact, the agent had chanced
to bail them up. All in vain; they had to pay—costs
and all.

 Therefore was it that Barracaboo had forsworn literature
by sample, or in uncertain instalments, and vowed
vengeance upon all shabby men with indelible pencils,
and printed agreements with a space left for signature.
More especially had they a ‘down’ on people who wore
goatees and snuffled when they talked.

 ‘If you see one of ’em at the station,’ said the
manager—a rough, tough old customer, and disappointed
at being ousted by Julius Cæsar—‘set the
dogs on him. I’ll pay damages. If he don’t take
that hint, touch him up with stockwhips. It’ll only
be justifiable homicide at the worst. I know the law:
an’ I don’t mind a fiver in such a case!’

 [

194 ] 

‘Let us only get a chance, sorr,’ said the sheep-overseer,
‘an’ we’ll learn ’em betther manners wid our whups.
Doggin’s too good for the thrash!’

 This state of affairs was pretty well known at Atlanta,
the neighbouring township; and book-fiends, warned,
generally gave Barracaboo a wide berth. Once, certainly,
a new hand at the game, and one who fancied
himself too much to bother about collecting local
information, came boldly into the station-yard just
as the bell was ringing for dinner, and produced the
advance sheets of a sweet and lively work, entitled,
‘Hermits, Ancient and Modern: Illustrated with Forty-seven
Choice Engravings.’

 He had got to ‘Now, gentlemen,’ when, hearing the
howl of execration that went up, he suddenly took in
the situation and , pursued for
half the distance with thunderous whip-crackings by the
sheep-overseer and the butcher, who were the only
two who happened to have their horses ready.

 Chancing to have a capital mount, he distanced them
and galloped into town, and up the main street, reins
on his horse’s neck, and trousers over his knees, half
dead with fright, only to be promptly summoned and
fined for furious riding within the municipality.

 For weeks afterwards sheets of ‘Hermits’ strewed the
‘ TN: opening quote invisible cleared line,’ and he received a merciless chaffing from
his fellow-fiends, who could have warned him what to
expect had he confided his destination to them.

 About this time came to Atlanta a small, ’cute-looking,
clean-shaven, elderly man. He was unknown to any [

195 ]

present, but modestly admitted that he was in the book
trade, and had a consignment with him. And he
listened with interest to the conversation in the ‘Commercial
Room.’

 ‘The district’s petered out,’ remarked a tall American
gentleman, with the goatee and nasal voice abhorred of
Barracaboo. ‘Clean petered out since that last
“Universal Biography” business. They’re kickin’
everywhere. Darned if a feller didn’t draw a bead on
me yesterday afore I’d time almost to explain business.
Then he got so mad that I left, not wantin’ to become
a lead mine.’

 ‘Been here a week and haven’t cleared exes.,’ said
another mournfully. ‘Off to-morrow. No use trying to
work such a desert as this now.’

 ‘Big place, this station with the funny name, you’re
talkin’ about?’ asked the newcomer, who had introduced
himself as ‘Mr Potts, from London.’

 ‘Over a hundred men of one sort or another all the
year round,’ was the reply. ‘Capital shop for us, once
too. But it’s sudden death to venture there now. I
did real good biz at Barracaboo for the Shuffle Litho.
Company. It wouldn’t pay, though, to chance back
again.’

 ‘Ah, that was the “Around the World” thing, wasn’t
it? Didn’t come up to guarantee, eh?’

 ‘Well, hardly,’ replied the other. ‘However, that
wasn’t my fault, you know. All I had to do was to get
the orders, which I did to the tune of a couple of hundred
or thereabout.’

 [

196 ] 

‘That’s the worst of those things,’ said Mr Potts.
‘Instalments always make a mess of it. Then the agent
loses his character, if nothing else. I was out delivering
in the Western District for Shuffle Litho., and was glad
to get away by the skin of my teeth. But TN: original reads "But's" it’s not
only the personal danger I object to,’ continued Mr Potts, after a pause. ‘It is the, ahem, the moral
degradation involved in such a pursuit—you know what
I mean, sir?’

 ‘Just so, just so,’ answered the other vaguely, with
a hard stare at the round, red face looming through
cigar smoke.

 ‘That’s what made me throw the line up,’ went on
Mr Potts, ‘more than anything else. The money’s not
clean, sir! I’d rather carry about a ton of print, and
risk selling for cash at a fractional advance upon cost
price.’

 ‘That’s all right,’ replied his companion with a grin.
‘Only take my advice, and don’t trouble Barracaboo
with your ton of print, or you’ll be very apt to leave it
there. They won’t give you time to open your mouth.
Ask “The Hermit,” if you don’t believe me.’

 For a whole day Mr Potts drove around and about
with a selection from his stock.

 But he never was allowed even a chance to exhibit a
sample. Farmers, selectors, squatters, townsfolk, had
all apparently quite made up their minds.

 Times out of number he was threatened with personal
violence, and greeted with language quite unprintable
here. TN: punctuation invisible Once sticks were thrown at him; and once an [

197 ]

old copy of the ‘Biography’ was hurled into the buggy,
whilst cattle-dogs were heeling his horses. Clearly it
was useless to persist. The district was fairly demoralised;
and with a sigh, Mr Potts drove home to
receive the ‘What did I tell you’s’ of the other
‘gents.’

 But he was a resourceful man was Mr Potts, and he
determined, before leaving the district for ever, to have
one more attempt under conditions which should, at all
events, give him an opportunity of displaying a specimen
of his goods. Besides, he thirsted for vengeance on
the community, and knew that if he could but get an
opening it was his, full and complete.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘No objection to my camping here to-night, I s’pose?’
asked a rather forlorn-looking traveller of the cook at
Barracaboo, shortly after the events related above.

 ‘Chop that heap o’ wood up, an’ you gets your supper
an’ breakfus’,’ said the cook, laconically.

 The traveller worked hard for an hour, and finished
his task, handling the axe as if born to it, and provoking
the cook’s admiration to such an extent that he went
one better than his promise, and proffered a pint of tea
and a lump of ‘brownie.’

 Presently, lighting his pipe, and undoing his swag, the
new-comer, remarking that there was nothing like a read
for passing the time away, took out a gorgeously bound
volume, sat down at the table, and was soon so interested
that he let his pipe go out. Save for the cook, the long
kitchen was empty, all the men being away on the run.

 [

198 ] 

For a time, busy with a batch of bread, the former
took no notice of the stranger. Then, his work done,
he came and looked over his shoulder, saying, ‘What
you got there, mate?’

 ‘Finest thing ever you read,’ said the other, carelessly
turning over some vivid pictures. “The Life and
Adventures of Dick Turpin, Claude Duval, and Other
Eminent Outlaws.” Something like a book this is,’
he continued. ‘Six hundred pages full of love and
murder; and that excitin’ you can’t bear to put it
down!’

 This was charming; and the cook, and the butcher,
and a couple of boundary riders dropped in for a yarn,
at once became inquisitive, and anxious to have a
look.

 ‘See here,’ said the owner of the wonderful volume,
pointing to an outrageous effort in coloured process,
‘this is the bold Dick Turpin on his wonderful mare,
Black Bess, taking the ten-foot gate on the road to York.
See, he’s got the reins in his teeth and a pistol in each
hand.’

 ‘By gum, she’s a flyer!’ ‘Twig the long-necked
spurs.’ ‘No knee-pads to the saddle either!’ ‘Ten
foot! there ain’t a horse in Hostralia as could do it!’—exclaimed
his audience, becoming excited.

 ‘And here you have,’ went on the traveller, ‘ TN: opening quote invisible the gentle
highwayman, Claude Duval, stickin’ up the Duke of
York’s coach on ’Oundslow ’Eath. And here he is
again, dancing under the moon with the Duchess.’ And
so he continued, setting forth in tempting sequence the [

199 ]

glories of the work, pausing at intervals to read aloud
thrilling bits, and comment upon them.

 ‘Where did you get it, mate?’ at length asked the
cook.

 ‘Bought it in Atlanta,’ replied the other. ‘Fellow
there’s got lots of ’em, and only thirty bob apiece.
Cheap at double the price, I reckon, considerin’ the
amoun’ of readin’ in it.’

 ‘Ain’t no deliv’rin’ numbers, or signin’ ’greements,
or any o’ that game?’ asked one suspiciously. ‘’Cause
if there is, we’re full.’

 ‘No,’ was the reply; ‘you pays your money and you
takes your bargain. But I don’t think you fellows’ll
ever get the chance. I heard him say he’d as soon
face a mad bull as come to this station.’

 The men, of whom the hut was now full, laughed;
and said one,—

 ‘The chap as sells, out an’ out, an honest article like
that un needn’t be scared. It’s them coves as gets
you to sign things, and keeps sendin’ a lot o’ rotten
trash, not a bit like what you seen furst; an’ then
comes, as flash as you please, summonsin’ of you an’
a-gettin’ of you bullyragged in Court—them’s the coves
as we’ve got a derry on. Let’s have another squint at
that pitcher o’ Dick Turpin an’ Black Bess, mates.’

 ‘Give you five bob on your bargain!’ shouted a
tall stockman, presently, from the outer edge of the
circle, where he had been impatiently waiting for a
look.

 ‘Couldn’t part with it,’ said the owner decidedly. [

200 ]

‘But I’ll tell you what I will do. I’m going back to
the township to-morrow. If the chap ain’t gone, I’ll
let him know he can sell a few here. He might
venture if you’ll all give your word not to go for him
when he does come. He’s got lots of others, too.
There’s “The Bloody Robber of the Blue Mountains,”
and “The Pirate’s Bride,” and “The Boundin’ Outlaws
of the Backwoods,” and plenty more—all same
price, and all pictures and covers same as this
one is.’

 ‘Right! Tell him to come! It was pay-day yesterday,’
yelled the crowd unanimously.

 ‘Not a bad night’s work, I do believe,’ muttered
the traveller to himself, as he reluctantly stretched out
on the hard bunk-boards. ‘I hope, though, this
confounded beard and moustache won’t come off
while I’m asleep, if I ever do get any on such a
bed.’

  PART II.

 ‘ Is

your life insured?’ ‘You’ll get sudden notice to
vamose TN: ok OED the ranche TN: ok OED , sir!’ ‘Mind the dogs!’ ‘Look
out for whips!’ ‘You’ll lose your stock!’

 Such were some of the warnings and admonitions
dealt out to Mr Potts by his friends, as he heavily [

201 ]

loaded his buggy preparatory to starting for Barracaboo.

 ‘I’ll chance it!’ said he. ‘Haven’t sold a cent’s
worth yet; and it’s the only place I haven’t tried.
They can’t very well kill a fellow, anyhow. I’ll chance
it; faint heart never won fair lady!’

 ‘Give you five pounds to one you don’t deal!’ cried
one.

 ‘Give you five pounds to one you’re hunted!’
shouted ‘The Hermit.’

 ‘Bet you slap-up feed for the crowd to-night, and
wine thrown in, that somethin’s broke afore you come
back,’ said the American gentleman.

 ‘Done, and done, and done,’ replied Mr Potts
placidly, as he carefully booked the wagers and drove
off; whilst the bystanders, to a man, agreed to delay
their departure for the sake of not only eating a cheap
dinner, but witnessing a return which they were all
convinced would be ‘as good as a play.’

 But they were mistaken. Mr Potts was received at
Barracaboo with open arms, no one recognising in the
clean-shaven features those of the bearded, dilapidated
swagman who had the other night spied out the lay of
the land and the leanings of its people. The manager
was absent; but the overseer, who had already by
personal inspection satisfied himself of the merits of
‘Bold Dick Turpin,’ etc., was amongst the earliest
purchasers.

 ‘Everything went like wildfire. Mr Potts could
hardly hand them out fast enough. Those present [

202 ]

bought for others away on the run, and in a very short
time there were only three volumes left.

 These were of a different calibre to the rest of the
rubbish, being nothing less than ‘The Adventures of
Don Quixote de la Mancha,’ with illustrations by
Gustave Doré. However, as no one would even look
at them at the price—five pounds—the dealer, having
pretty well cleaned out ‘the Hut,’ determined to try
his luck at ‘the House.’

 Now, it happened that Mrs Morris, the manager’s
wife, wished just at this time to buy something for
her eldest boy, whose birthday was approaching.
Recognising, as a reading woman, that the work was
genuine, and not more than a pound or two over
price, she bought it. It was so much less trouble
than sending to the capital, with a chance of disappointment.

 ‘It’ll do very nicely for Master Reginald,’ quoth she;
‘I’m sure he’ll be pleased with it. And I’m glad to
see that you people are at last beginning to carry
something better than the usual lot of trash. I hope
you did well amongst the men with these standard
works?’

 ‘Very nicely indeed, thank you, ma’am,’ replied Mr Potts, smiling, as he bowed and withdrew.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 John, the waiter, had twice informed the ‘commercial
gents’ that dinner was ready, before the anxious watchers
saw the man who was expected to pay for it drive into
the yard of the hotel.

 [

203 ] 

‘He looks kinder spry,’ remarked the American
gentleman disappointedly. ‘Guess he’s got clear off
with a caution this once.’

 ‘Buggy seems to run light,’ chimed in another.
‘Shouldn’t wonder if they’d unloaded it into the river.’

 ‘Never had such a haul since I’ve been in the
business, gentlemen!’ exclaimed Mr Potts, as he
presently entered the dining-room with a big roll of
paper in his hand. ‘There must have been some
mistake about the place. Why, they’re the mildest
crowd you’d see in a day’s march. Sellin’ ’em books is
like tea-drinkin’. It actually kept me goin’ as fast as I
could to change their stuff for ’em. Here, you know
the Barracaboo cheques. Look at this, and count ’em TN: original reads "em'" ,
one of you. Blessed if I’ve had time! I hope dinner’s
ready. Never let me hear a word against Barracaboo
after this!’

 There was a long silence of utter astonishment, during
which the American rapidly thumbed strips of green
paper, and made mental calculations.

 ‘Eight hundred dollars!’ exclaimed he, at last, in
tones of unalloyed admiration. ‘Mister Potts, sir,
you’re a gifted genius! I ante-up, Colonel, to once,
an’ allow I’ll take a back seat.’

 And so, in their several fashions, said the rest; whilst
the lion of the evening ate his dinner, sipped his
porphyry, and kept his own counsel.

 ‘Cost me four bob, landed in Sydney, averaging
the lot,’ said Mr Potts confidentially to a friend
that evening, as they enjoyed their coffee and cigars [

204 ]

on the balcony. ‘I’m on my own hook, too, now.
I seen that the specimen-sheet-monthly-delivery-collection-per-agent
game was blown—not that I guessed it
was near as bad as it really is. So I sends straight
away to New York for this consignment, specially
got up and prepared for the Bush. It was a regular
bobby-dazzler! You see, the boards are only stuck
on with glue, type and paper’s as rough as they make
’em, and the picturin’s done by a cheap colour
patent. I’ve got another lot nearly due by this—not
for here, though. You fellows have ruined this
district. Of course the Dorees was genuine. I
bought the three of ’em a job lot in town for a
song. They’re the only books I’ve got left now.
If I’d had a score more of Turpins and such, I
could have sold ’em at the station.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘There’s old Morris, of Barracaboo, just come
in,’ remarked someone the next morning. ‘He’s
on his way home from Larras Show, I expect.’

 ‘Which is him?’ asked Mr Potts eagerly (all
literary people are not necessarily purists).

 ‘Sorry to disturb you at lunch, sir,’ said Mr Potts
presently, as he entered, bearing a large book. ‘But
Mrs Morris was kind enough to say that this would
do nicely for Master Reginald’s birthday. ‘Don
Quixote,’ sir, the most startling work of that
celebrated author, Gustavus Do-ree, sir. Splendidly
illustrated, sir. Your good lady was very much
pleased with it.’

 [

205 ] 

‘Umph, umph,’ growled the manager. ‘Been out
at the station, eh? Didn’t they run you, eh? No
whips, no dogs! Eh! eh! What?’

 ‘I am not an advance agent for books I know
nothing about, sir,’ returned the other with dignity,
as he took the volume up again. ‘I sell a genuine
article, sir, for cash on the nail. In transactions of
that kind there can be no mistake, sir.’

 ‘Umph!’ growled the squatter doubtfully. ‘Well,
as long as the missus says it’s all right, I s’pose it is.
How much?’

 He paid without a murmur. Mrs M. was a lady
who stood no trifling.

 ‘Wrap the thing up and put it in the buggy,’ said
he. ‘Gad, it’s as big as the station ledger! Look
sharp, now, I’m in a hurry!’

 ‘So am I,’ quoth Mr Potts, as he returned. ‘John,
what time does the next train start?’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 When the manager reached home that afternoon
with ‘Don Quixote,’ and compared notes and books,
there was a row, the upshot of which was that he
received orders to hurry off at once in pursuit, and
avenge the trick played upon them.

 ‘You’re a J.P.,’ stormed the lady, ‘and if you can’t
give that oily villain three months, what’s the use
of you? Besides, isn’t five pounds worth recovering?’

 Mr Morris would much sooner have let the matter
drop quietly. No man likes to publicly advertise [

206 ]

the fact of his having been duped, least of all
by a book-fiend.

 ‘Well, well, my dear,’ said he at last, ‘never mind.
I’ll go directly. I’ve got some letters to write first
But I’ll send M‘Fadyen into town to see the fellow
doesn’t get away.’

 ‘Tell him,’ said the manager, as the overseer was
preparing to start, ‘tell him I’m coming in presently,
about—um—er—about a book. Oh, and if he gives
you anything, perhaps you’d better take it. No use,’
he muttered to himself, with a side glance to where
his wife sat, ‘letting all hands and the cook know
one’s business. The beggar ’ll only be too glad to
stump up when he finds I’m in earnest. Thought,
I suppose, that I wouldn’t bother about it, eh,
what!’

 Inquiring at the ‘Royal,’ the overseer was told
that Mr Potts had left; although, perhaps, if he
hastened, he might yet see him, as the train hadn’t
started. Sure enough, galloping up to the station
and searching along the carriages, he found his
man just making himself comfortable in smoking-cap
and slippers.

 ‘Be jakers, mister,’ he gasped breathlessly, ‘the
Boss wants to see ye badly! Have ye got anythin’
for him? It’s of a book he was spakin’. Tould me
to tell ye that he’d be in himself directly.’ TN: closing quote invisible

 ‘Too late! Can’t stop! Time’s up!’ replied Mr Potts. ‘But’—rising to the occasion, and taking the
last copy of ‘Do-ree’ out of his portmanteau—‘this [

207 ]

is it. It’s for Master Reginald’s birthday. Your Boss
wouldn’t miss having it for three times the money.
Six pounds—quick!’

 In a desperate flurry, the overseer ransacked his
pockets. No; he could only muster four.

 ‘All right, guard, wait a minute!’ he yelled as,
borrowing the balance, he clutched the book, whilst
the train, giving a screech, moved away, with Mr Potts nodding and grinning a friendly farewell.

 ‘Be kicked now!’ exclaimed the overseer, ‘if that
wasn’t a close shave! The Boss oughter think
himself lucky, so he ought!’

 So, carrying the book carefully under his arm, he
jogged Barracaboowards.

 Half way he met Mr Morris coming in at full
speed.

 ‘No hurry in loife, sorr!’ cried the overseer, beamingly,
and showing ‘Don Quixote.’ ‘I ped six notes
for it, an’ had to borrow two. It was just touch an’
go, though, so it was!’