BOULE DE SUIF

 For several days in succession fragments of a defeated army had passed
      through the town. They were mere disorganized bands, not disciplined
      forces. The men wore long, dirty beards and tattered uniforms; they
      advanced in listless fashion, without a flag, without a leader. All seemed
      exhausted, worn out, incapable of thought or resolve, marching onward
      merely by force of habit, and dropping to the ground with fatigue the
      moment they halted. One saw, in particular, many enlisted men, peaceful
      citizens, men who lived quietly on their income, bending beneath the
      weight of their rifles; and little active volunteers, easily frightened
      but full of enthusiasm, as eager to attack as they were ready to take to
      flight; and amid these, a sprinkling of red-breeched soldiers, the pitiful
      remnant of a division cut down in a great battle; somber artillerymen,
      side by side with nondescript foot-soldiers; and, here and there, the
      gleaming helmet of a heavy-footed dragoon who had difficulty in keeping up
      with the quicker pace of the soldiers of the line. Legions of irregulars
      with high-sounding names “Avengers of Defeat,” “Citizens
      of the Tomb,” “Brethren in Death”—passed in their
      turn, looking like banditti. Their leaders, former drapers or grain
      merchants, or tallow or soap chandlers—warriors by force of
      circumstances, officers by reason of their mustachios or their money—covered
      with weapons, flannel and gold lace, spoke in an impressive manner,
      discussed plans of campaign, and behaved as though they alone bore the
      fortunes of dying France on their braggart shoulders; though, in truth,
      they frequently were afraid of their own men—scoundrels often brave
      beyond measure, but pillagers and debauchees.

 Rumor had it that the Prussians were about to enter Rouen.

 The members of the National Guard, who for the past two months had been
      reconnoitering with the utmost caution in the neighboring woods,
      occasionally shooting their own sentinels, and making ready for fight
      whenever a rabbit rustled in the undergrowth, had now returned to their
      homes. Their arms, their uniforms, all the death-dealing paraphernalia
      with which they had terrified all the milestones along the highroad for
      eight miles round, had suddenly and marvellously disappeared.

 The last of the French soldiers had just crossed the Seine on their way to
      Pont-Audemer, through Saint-Sever and Bourg-Achard, and in their rear the
      vanquished general, powerless to do aught with the forlorn remnants of his
      army, himself dismayed at the final overthrow of a nation accustomed to
      victory and disastrously beaten despite its legendary bravery, walked
      between two orderlies.

 Then a profound calm, a shuddering, silent dread, settled on the city.
      Many a round-paunched citizen, emasculated by years devoted to business,
      anxiously awaited the conquerors, trembling lest his roasting-jacks or
      kitchen knives should be looked upon as weapons.

 Life seemed to have stopped short; the shops were shut, the streets
      deserted. Now and then an inhabitant, awed by the silence, glided swiftly
      by in the shadow of the walls. The anguish of suspense made men even
      desire the arrival of the enemy.

 In the afternoon of the day following the departure of the French troops,
      a number of uhlans, coming no one knew whence, passed rapidly through the
      town. A little later on, a black mass descended St. Catherine's Hill,
      while two other invading bodies appeared respectively on the Darnetal and
      the Boisguillaume roads. The advance guards of the three corps arrived at
      precisely the same moment at the Square of the Hotel de Ville, and the
      German army poured through all the adjacent streets, its battalions making
      the pavement ring with their firm, measured tread.

 Orders shouted in an unknown, guttural tongue rose to the windows of the
      seemingly dead, deserted houses; while behind the fast-closed shutters
      eager eyes peered forth at the victors-masters now of the city, its
      fortunes, and its lives, by “right of war.” The inhabitants,
      in their darkened rooms, were possessed by that terror which follows in
      the wake of cataclysms, of deadly upheavals of the earth, against which
      all human skill and strength are vain. For the same thing happens whenever
      the established order of things is upset, when security no longer exists,
      when all those rights usually protected by the law of man or of Nature are
      at the mercy of unreasoning, savage force. The earthquake crushing a whole
      nation under falling roofs; the flood let loose, and engulfing in its
      swirling depths the corpses of drowned peasants, along with dead oxen and
      beams torn from shattered houses; or the army, covered with glory,
      murdering those who defend themselves, making prisoners of the rest,
      pillaging in the name of the Sword, and giving thanks to God to the
      thunder of cannon—all these are appalling scourges, which destroy
      all belief in eternal justice, all that confidence we have been taught to
      feel in the protection of Heaven and the reason of man.

 Small detachments of soldiers knocked at each door, and then disappeared
      within the houses; for the vanquished saw they would have to be civil to
      their conquerors.

 At the end of a short time, once the first terror had subsided, calm was
      again restored. In many houses the Prussian officer ate at the same table
      with the family. He was often well-bred, and, out of politeness, expressed
      sympathy with France and repugnance at being compelled to take part in the
      war. This sentiment was received with gratitude; besides, his protection
      might be needful some day or other. By the exercise of tact the number of
      men quartered in one's house might be reduced; and why should one provoke
      the hostility of a person on whom one's whole welfare depended? Such
      conduct would savor less of bravery than of fool-hardiness. And
      foolhardiness is no longer a failing of the citizens of Rouen as it was in
      the days when their city earned renown by its heroic defenses. Last of
      all-final argument based on the national politeness—the folk of
      Rouen said to one another that it was only right to be civil in one's own
      house, provided there was no public exhibition of familiarity with the
      foreigner. Out of doors, therefore, citizen and soldier did not know each
      other; but in the house both chatted freely, and each evening the German
      remained a little longer warming himself at the hospitable hearth.

 Even the town itself resumed by degrees its ordinary aspect. The French
      seldom walked abroad, but the streets swarmed with Prussian soldiers.
      Moreover, the officers of the Blue Hussars, who arrogantly dragged their
      instruments of death along the pavements, seemed to hold the simple
      townsmen in but little more contempt than did the French cavalry officers
      who had drunk at the same cafes the year before.

 But there was something in the air, a something strange and subtle, an
      intolerable foreign atmosphere like a penetrating odor—the odor of
      invasion. It permeated dwellings and places of public resort, changed the
      taste of food, made one imagine one's self in far-distant lands, amid
      dangerous, barbaric tribes.

 The conquerors exacted money, much money. The inhabitants paid what was
      asked; they were rich. But, the wealthier a Norman tradesman becomes, the
      more he suffers at having to part with anything that belongs to him, at
      having to see any portion of his substance pass into the hands of another.

 Nevertheless, within six or seven miles of the town, along the course of
      the river as it flows onward to Croisset, Dieppedalle and Biessart,
      boat-men and fishermen often hauled to the surface of the water the body
      of a German, bloated in his uniform, killed by a blow from knife or club,
      his head crushed by a stone, or perchance pushed from some bridge into the
      stream below. The mud of the river-bed swallowed up these obscure acts of
      vengeance—savage, yet legitimate; these unrecorded deeds of bravery;
      these silent attacks fraught with greater danger than battles fought in
      broad day, and surrounded, moreover, with no halo of romance. For hatred
      of the foreigner ever arms a few intrepid souls, ready to die for an idea.

 At last, as the invaders, though subjecting the town to the strictest
      discipline, had not committed any of the deeds of horror with which they
      had been credited while on their triumphal march, the people grew bolder,
      and the necessities of business again animated the breasts of the local
      merchants. Some of these had important commercial interests at Havre
      —occupied at present by the French army—and wished to attempt
      to reach that port by overland route to Dieppe, taking the boat from
      there.

 Through the influence of the German officers whose acquaintance they had
      made, they obtained a permit to leave town from the general in command.

 A large four-horse coach having, therefore, been engaged for the journey,
      and ten passengers having given in their names to the proprietor, they
      decided to start on a certain Tuesday morning before daybreak, to avoid
      attracting a crowd.

 The ground had been frozen hard for some time-past, and about three
      o'clock on Monday afternoon—large black clouds from the north shed
      their burden of snow uninterruptedly all through that evening and night.

 At half-past four in the morning the travellers met in the courtyard of
      the Hotel de Normandie, where they were to take their seats in the coach.

 They were still half asleep, and shivering with cold under their wraps.
      They could see one another but indistinctly in the darkness, and the
      mountain of heavy winter wraps in which each was swathed made them look
      like a gathering of obese priests in their long cassocks. But two men
      recognized each other, a third accosted them, and the three began to talk.
      “I am bringing my wife,” said one. “So am I.”
      “And I, too.” The first speaker added: “We shall not
      return to Rouen, and if the Prussians approach Havre we will cross to
      England.” All three, it turned out, had made the same plans, being
      of similar disposition and temperament.

 Still the horses were not harnessed. A small lantern carried by a
      stable-boy emerged now and then from one dark doorway to disappear
      immediately in another. The stamping of horses' hoofs, deadened by the
      dung and straw of the stable, was heard from time to time, and from inside
      the building issued a man's voice, talking to the animals and swearing at
      them. A faint tinkle of bells showed that the harness was being got ready;
      this tinkle soon developed into a continuous jingling, louder or softer
      according to the movements of the horse, sometimes stopping altogether,
      then breaking out in a sudden peal accompanied by a pawing of the ground
      by an iron-shod hoof.

 The door suddenly closed. All noise ceased.

 The frozen townsmen were silent; they remained motionless, stiff with
      cold.

 A thick curtain of glistening white flakes fell ceaselessly to the ground;
      it obliterated all outlines, enveloped all objects in an icy mantle of
      foam; nothing was to be heard throughout the length and breadth of the
      silent, winter-bound city save the vague, nameless rustle of falling snow—a
      sensation rather than a sound—the gentle mingling of light atoms
      which seemed to fill all space, to cover the whole world.

 The man reappeared with his lantern, leading by a rope a
      melancholy-looking horse, evidently being led out against his inclination.
      The hostler placed him beside the pole, fastened the traces, and spent
      some time in walking round him to make sure that the harness was all
      right; for he could use only one hand, the other being engaged in holding
      the lantern. As he was about to fetch the second horse he noticed the
      motionless group of travellers, already white with snow, and said to them:
      “Why don't you get inside the coach? You'd be under shelter, at
      least.”

 This did not seem to have occurred to them, and they at once took his
      advice. The three men seated their wives at the far end of the coach, then
      got in themselves; lastly the other vague, snow-shrouded forms clambered
      to the remaining places without a word.

 The floor was covered with straw, into which the feet sank. The ladies at
      the far end, having brought with them little copper foot-warmers heated by
      means of a kind of chemical fuel, proceeded to light these, and spent some
      time in expatiating in low tones on their advantages, saying over and over
      again things which they had all known for a long time.

 At last, six horses instead of four having been harnessed to the
      diligence, on account of the heavy roads, a voice outside asked: “Is
      every one there?” To which a voice from the interior replied:
      “Yes,” and they set out.

 The vehicle moved slowly, slowly, at a snail's pace; the wheels sank into
      the snow; the entire body of the coach creaked and groaned; the horses
      slipped, puffed, steamed, and the coachman's long whip cracked
      incessantly, flying hither and thither, coiling up, then flinging out its
      length like a slender serpent, as it lashed some rounded flank, which
      instantly grew tense as it strained in further effort.

 But the day grew apace. Those light flakes which one traveller, a native
      of Rouen, had compared to a rain of cotton fell no longer. A murky light
      filtered through dark, heavy clouds, which made the country more
      dazzlingly white by contrast, a whiteness broken sometimes by a row of
      tall trees spangled with hoarfrost, or by a cottage roof hooded in snow.

 Within the coach the passengers eyed one another curiously in the dim
      light of dawn.

 Right at the back, in the best seats of all, Monsieur and Madame Loiseau,
      wholesale wine merchants of the Rue Grand-Pont, slumbered opposite each
      other. Formerly clerk to a merchant who had failed in business, Loiseau
      had bought his master's interest, and made a fortune for himself. He sold
      very bad wine at a very low price to the retail-dealers in the country,
      and had the reputation, among his friends and acquaintances, of being a
      shrewd rascal a true Norman, full of quips and wiles. So well established
      was his character as a cheat that, in the mouths of the citizens of Rouen,
      the very name of Loiseau became a byword for sharp practice.

 Above and beyond this, Loiseau was noted for his practical jokes of every
      description—his tricks, good or ill-natured; and no one could
      mention his name without adding at once: “He's an extraordinary man—Loiseau.”
      He was undersized and potbellied, had a florid face with grayish whiskers.

 His wife-tall, strong, determined, with a loud voice and decided manner
      —represented the spirit of order and arithmetic in the business
      house which Loiseau enlivened by his jovial activity.

 Beside them, dignified in bearing, belonging to a superior caste, sat
      Monsieur Carre-Lamadon, a man of considerable importance, a king in the
      cotton trade, proprietor of three spinning-mills, officer of the Legion of
      Honor, and member of the General Council. During the whole time the Empire
      was in the ascendancy he remained the chief of the well-disposed
      Opposition, merely in order to command a higher value for his devotion
      when he should rally to the cause which he meanwhile opposed with “courteous
      weapons,” to use his own expression.

 Madame Carre-Lamadon, much younger than her husband, was the consolation
      of all the officers of good family quartered at Rouen. Pretty, slender,
      graceful, she sat opposite her husband, curled up in her furs, and gazing
      mournfully at the sorry interior of the coach.

 Her neighbors, the Comte and Comtesse Hubert de Breville, bore one of the
      noblest and most ancient names in Normandy. The count, a nobleman advanced
      in years and of aristocratic bearing, strove to enhance by every artifice
      of the toilet, his natural resemblance to King Henry IV, who, according to
      a legend of which the family were inordinately proud, had been the favored
      lover of a De Breville lady, and father of her child —the frail
      one's husband having, in recognition of this fact, been made a count and
      governor of a province.

 A colleague of Monsieur Carre-Lamadon in the General Council, Count Hubert
      represented the Orleanist party in his department. The story of his
      marriage with the daughter of a small shipowner at Nantes had always
      remained more or less of a mystery. But as the countess had an air of
      unmistakable breeding, entertained faultlessly, and was even supposed to
      have been loved by a son of Louis-Philippe, the nobility vied with one
      another in doing her honor, and her drawing-room remained the most select
      in the whole countryside—the only one which retained the old spirit
      of gallantry, and to which access was not easy.

 The fortune of the Brevilles, all in real estate, amounted, it was said,
      to five hundred thousand francs a year.

 These six people occupied the farther end of the coach, and represented
      Society—with an income—the strong, established society of good
      people with religion and principle.

 It happened by chance that all the women were seated on the same side; and
      the countess had, moreover, as neighbors two nuns, who spent the time in
      fingering their long rosaries and murmuring paternosters and aves. One of
      them was old, and so deeply pitted with smallpox that she looked for all
      the world as if she had received a charge of shot full in the face. The
      other, of sickly appearance, had a pretty but wasted countenance, and a
      narrow, consumptive chest, sapped by that devouring faith which is the
      making of martyrs and visionaries.

 A man and woman, sitting opposite the two nuns, attracted all eyes.

 The man—a well-known character—was Cornudet, the democrat, the
      terror of all respectable people. For the past twenty years his big red
      beard had been on terms of intimate acquaintance with the tankards of all
      the republican cafes. With the help of his comrades and brethren he had
      dissipated a respectable fortune left him by his father, an
      old-established confectioner, and he now impatiently awaited the Republic,
      that he might at last be rewarded with the post he had earned by his
      revolutionary orgies. On the fourth of September—possibly as the
      result of a practical joke—he was led to believe that he had been
      appointed prefect; but when he attempted to take up the duties of the
      position the clerks in charge of the office refused to recognize his
      authority, and he was compelled in consequence to retire. A good sort of
      fellow in other respects, inoffensive and obliging, he had thrown himself
      zealously into the work of making an organized defence of the town. He had
      had pits dug in the level country, young forest trees felled, and traps
      set on all the roads; then at the approach of the enemy, thoroughly
      satisfied with his preparations, he had hastily returned to the town. He
      thought he might now do more good at Havre, where new intrenchments would
      soon be necessary.

 The woman, who belonged to the courtesan class, was celebrated for an
      embonpoint unusual for her age, which had earned for her the sobriquet of
      “Boule de Suif” (Tallow Ball). Short and round, fat as a pig,
      with puffy fingers constricted at the joints, looking like rows of short
      sausages; with a shiny, tightly-stretched skin and an enormous bust
      filling out the bodice of her dress, she was yet attractive and much
      sought after, owing to her fresh and pleasing appearance. Her face was
      like a crimson apple, a peony-bud just bursting into bloom; she had two
      magnificent dark eyes, fringed with thick, heavy lashes, which cast a
      shadow into their depths; her mouth was small, ripe, kissable, and was
      furnished with the tiniest of white teeth.

 As soon as she was recognized the respectable matrons of the party began
      to whisper among themselves, and the words “hussy” and “public
      scandal” were uttered so loudly that Boule de Suif raised her head.
      She forthwith cast such a challenging, bold look at her neighbors that a
      sudden silence fell on the company, and all lowered their eyes, with the
      exception of Loiseau, who watched her with evident interest.

 But conversation was soon resumed among the three ladies, whom the
      presence of this girl had suddenly drawn together in the bonds of
      friendship—one might almost say in those of intimacy. They decided
      that they ought to combine, as it were, in their dignity as wives in face
      of this shameless hussy; for legitimized love always despises its
      easygoing brother.

 The three men, also, brought together by a certain conservative instinct
      awakened by the presence of Cornudet, spoke of money matters in a tone
      expressive of contempt for the poor. Count Hubert related the losses he
      had sustained at the hands of the Prussians, spoke of the cattle which had
      been stolen from him, the crops which had been ruined, with the easy
      manner of a nobleman who was also a tenfold millionaire, and whom such
      reverses would scarcely inconvenience for a single year. Monsieur
      Carre-Lamadon, a man of wide experience in the cotton industry, had taken
      care to send six hundred thousand francs to England as provision against
      the rainy day he was always anticipating. As for Loiseau, he had managed
      to sell to the French commissariat department all the wines he had in
      stock, so that the state now owed him a considerable sum, which he hoped
      to receive at Havre.

 And all three eyed one another in friendly, well-disposed fashion.
      Although of varying social status, they were united in the brotherhood of
      money—in that vast freemasonry made up of those who possess, who can
      jingle gold wherever they choose to put their hands into their breeches'
      pockets.

 The coach went along so slowly that at ten o'clock in the morning it had
      not covered twelve miles. Three times the men of the party got out and
      climbed the hills on foot. The passengers were becoming uneasy, for they
      had counted on lunching at Totes, and it seemed now as if they would
      hardly arrive there before nightfall. Every one was eagerly looking out
      for an inn by the roadside, when, suddenly, the coach foundered in a
      snowdrift, and it took two hours to extricate it.

 As appetites increased, their spirits fell; no inn, no wine shop could be
      discovered, the approach of the Prussians and the transit of the starving
      French troops having frightened away all business.

 The men sought food in the farmhouses beside the road, but could not find
      so much as a crust of bread; for the suspicious peasant invariably hid his
      stores for fear of being pillaged by the soldiers, who, being entirely
      without food, would take violent possession of everything they found.

 About one o'clock Loiseau announced that he positively had a big hollow in
      his stomach. They had all been suffering in the same way for some time,
      and the increasing gnawings of hunger had put an end to all conversation.

 Now and then some one yawned, another followed his example, and each in
      turn, according to his character, breeding and social position, yawned
      either quietly or noisily, placing his hand before the gaping void whence
      issued breath condensed into vapor.

 Several times Boule de Suif stooped, as if searching for something under
      her petticoats. She would hesitate a moment, look at her neighbors, and
      then quietly sit upright again. All faces were pale and drawn. Loiseau
      declared he would give a thousand francs for a knuckle of ham. His wife
      made an involuntary and quickly checked gesture of protest. It always hurt
      her to hear of money being squandered, and she could not even understand
      jokes on such a subject.

 “As a matter of fact, I don't feel well,” said the count.
      “Why did I not think of bringing provisions?” Each one
      reproached himself in similar fashion.

 Cornudet, however, had a bottle of rum, which he offered to his neighbors.
      They all coldly refused except Loiseau, who took a sip, and returned the
      bottle with thanks, saying: “That's good stuff; it warms one up, and
      cheats the appetite.” The alcohol put him in good humor, and he
      proposed they should do as the sailors did in the song: eat the fattest of
      the passengers. This indirect allusion to Boule de Suif shocked the
      respectable members of the party. No one replied; only Cornudet smiled.
      The two good sisters had ceased to mumble their rosary, and, with hands
      enfolded in their wide sleeves, sat motionless, their eyes steadfastly
      cast down, doubtless offering up as a sacrifice to Heaven the suffering it
      had sent them.

 At last, at three o'clock, as they were in the midst of an apparently
      limitless plain, with not a single village in sight, Boule de Suif stooped
      quickly, and drew from underneath the seat a large basket covered with a
      white napkin.

 From this she extracted first of all a small earthenware plate and a
      silver drinking cup, then an enormous dish containing two whole chickens
      cut into joints and imbedded in jelly. The basket was seen to contain
      other good things: pies, fruit, dainties of all sorts-provisions, in fine,
      for a three days' journey, rendering their owner independent of wayside
      inns. The necks of four bottles protruded from among the food. She took a
      chicken wing, and began to eat it daintily, together with one of those
      rolls called in Normandy “Regence.”

 All looks were directed toward her. An odor of food filled the air,
      causing nostrils to dilate, mouths to water, and jaws to contract
      painfully. The scorn of the ladies for this disreputable female grew
      positively ferocious; they would have liked to kill her, or throw, her and
      her drinking cup, her basket, and her provisions, out of the coach into
      the snow of the road below.

 But Loiseau's gaze was fixed greedily on the dish of chicken. He said:

 “Well, well, this lady had more forethought than the rest of us.
      Some people think of everything.”

 She looked up at him.

 “Would you like some, sir? It is hard to go on fasting all day.”

 He bowed.

 “Upon my soul, I can't refuse; I cannot hold out another minute. All
      is fair in war time, is it not, madame?” And, casting a glance on
      those around, he added:

 “At times like this it is very pleasant to meet with obliging
      people.”

 He spread a newspaper over his knees to avoid soiling his trousers, and,
      with a pocketknife he always carried, helped himself to a chicken leg
      coated with jelly, which he thereupon proceeded to devour.

 Then Boule le Suif, in low, humble tones, invited the nuns to partake of
      her repast. They both accepted the offer unhesitatingly, and after a few
      stammered words of thanks began to eat quickly, without raising their
      eyes. Neither did Cornudet refuse his neighbor's offer, and, in
      combination with the nuns, a sort of table was formed by opening out the
      newspaper over the four pairs of knees.

 Mouths kept opening and shutting, ferociously masticating and devouring
      the food. Loiseau, in his corner, was hard at work, and in low tones urged
      his wife to follow his example. She held out for a long time, but
      overstrained Nature gave way at last. Her husband, assuming his politest
      manner, asked their “charming companion” if he might be
      allowed to offer Madame Loiseau a small helping.

 “Why, certainly, sir,” she replied, with an amiable smile,
      holding out the dish.

 When the first bottle of claret was opened some embarrassment was caused
      by the fact that there was only one drinking cup, but this was passed from
      one to another, after being wiped. Cornudet alone, doubtless in a spirit
      of gallantry, raised to his own lips that part of the rim which was still
      moist from those of his fair neighbor.

 Then, surrounded by people who were eating, and well-nigh suffocated by
      the odor of food, the Comte and Comtesse de Breville and Monsieur and
      Madame Carre-Lamadon endured that hateful form of torture which has
      perpetuated the name of Tantalus. All at once the manufacturer's young
      wife heaved a sigh which made every one turn and look at her; she was
      white as the snow without; her eyes closed, her head fell forward; she had
      fainted. Her husband, beside himself, implored the help of his neighbors.
      No one seemed to know what to do until the elder of the two nuns, raising
      the patient's head, placed Boule de Suif's drinking cup to her lips, and
      made her swallow a few drops of wine. The pretty invalid moved, opened her
      eyes, smiled, and declared in a feeble voice that she was all right again.
      But, to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophe, the nun made her drink a
      cupful of claret, adding: “It's just hunger —that's what is
      wrong with you.”

 Then Boule de Suif, blushing and embarrassed, stammered, looking at the
      four passengers who were still fasting:

 “'Mon Dieu', if I might offer these ladies and gentlemen——”

 She stopped short, fearing a snub. But Loiseau continued:

 “Hang it all, in such a case as this we are all brothers and sisters
      and ought to assist each other. Come, come, ladies, don't stand on
      ceremony, for goodness' sake! Do we even know whether we shall find a
      house in which to pass the night? At our present rate of going we sha'n't
      be at Totes till midday to-morrow.”

 They hesitated, no one daring to be the first to accept. But the count
      settled the question. He turned toward the abashed girl, and in his most
      distinguished manner said:

 “We accept gratefully, madame.”

 As usual, it was only the first step that cost. This Rubicon once crossed,
      they set to work with a will. The basket was emptied. It still contained a
      pate de foie gras, a lark pie, a piece of smoked tongue, Crassane pears,
      Pont-Leveque gingerbread, fancy cakes, and a cup full of pickled gherkins
      and onions—Boule de Suif, like all women, being very fond of
      indigestible things.

 They could not eat this girl's provisions without speaking to her. So they
      began to talk, stiffly at first; then, as she seemed by no means forward,
      with greater freedom. Mesdames de Breville and Carre-Lamadon, who were
      accomplished women of the world, were gracious and tactful. The countess
      especially displayed that amiable condescension characteristic of great
      ladies whom no contact with baser mortals can sully, and was absolutely
      charming. But the sturdy Madame Loiseau, who had the soul of a gendarme,
      continued morose, speaking little and eating much.

 Conversation naturally turned on the war. Terrible stories were told about
      the Prussians, deeds of bravery were recounted of the French; and all
      these people who were fleeing themselves were ready to pay homage to the
      courage of their compatriots. Personal experiences soon followed, and
      Boule le Suif related with genuine emotion, and with that warmth of
      language not uncommon in women of her class and temperament, how it came
      about that she had left Rouen.

 “I thought at first that I should be able to stay,” she said.
      “My house was well stocked with provisions, and it seemed better to
      put up with feeding a few soldiers than to banish myself goodness knows
      where. But when I saw these Prussians it was too much for me! My blood
      boiled with rage; I wept the whole day for very shame. Oh, if only I had
      been a man! I looked at them from my window—the fat swine, with
      their pointed helmets!—and my maid held my hands to keep me from
      throwing my furniture down on them. Then some of them were quartered on
      me; I flew at the throat of the first one who entered. They are just as
      easy to strangle as other men! And I'd have been the death of that one if
      I hadn't been dragged away from him by my hair. I had to hide after that.
      And as soon as I could get an opportunity I left the place, and here I am.”

 She was warmly congratulated. She rose in the estimation of her
      companions, who had not been so brave; and Cornudet listened to her with
      the approving and benevolent smile of an apostle, the smile a priest might
      wear in listening to a devotee praising God; for long-bearded democrats of
      his type have a monopoly of patriotism, just as priests have a monopoly of
      religion. He held forth in turn, with dogmatic self-assurance, in the
      style of the proclamations daily pasted on the walls of the town, winding
      up with a specimen of stump oratory in which he reviled “that
      besotted fool of a Louis-Napoleon.”

 But Boule de Suif was indignant, for she was an ardent Bonapartist. She
      turned as red as a cherry, and stammered in her wrath: “I'd just
      like to have seen you in his place—you and your sort! There would
      have been a nice mix-up. Oh, yes! It was you who betrayed that man. It
      would be impossible to live in France if we were governed by such rascals
      as you!”

 Cornudet, unmoved by this tirade, still smiled a superior, contemptuous
      smile; and one felt that high words were impending, when the count
      interposed, and, not without difficulty, succeeded in calming the
      exasperated woman, saying that all sincere opinions ought to be respected.
      But the countess and the manufacturer's wife, imbued with the unreasoning
      hatred of the upper classes for the Republic, and instinct, moreover, with
      the affection felt by all women for the pomp and circumstance of despotic
      government, were drawn, in spite of themselves, toward this dignified
      young woman, whose opinions coincided so closely with their own.

 The basket was empty. The ten people had finished its contents without
      difficulty amid general regret that it did not hold more. Conversation
      went on a little longer, though it flagged somewhat after the passengers
      had finished eating.

 Night fell, the darkness grew deeper and deeper, and the cold made Boule
      de Suif shiver, in spite of her plumpness. So Madame de Breville offered
      her her foot-warmer, the fuel of which had been several times renewed
      since the morning, and she accepted the offer at once, for her feet were
      icy cold. Mesdames Carre-Lamadon and Loiseau gave theirs to the nuns.

 The driver lighted his lanterns. They cast a bright gleam on a cloud of
      vapor which hovered over the sweating flanks of the horses, and on the
      roadside snow, which seemed to unroll as they went along in the changing
      light of the lamps.

 All was now indistinguishable in the coach; but suddenly a movement
      occurred in the corner occupied by Boule de Suif and Cornudet; and
      Loiseau, peering into the gloom, fancied he saw the big, bearded democrat
      move hastily to one side, as if he had received a well-directed, though
      noiseless, blow in the dark.

 Tiny lights glimmered ahead. It was Totes. The coach had been on the road
      eleven hours, which, with the three hours allotted the horses in four
      periods for feeding and breathing, made fourteen. It entered the town, and
      stopped before the Hotel du Commerce.

 The coach door opened; a well-known noise made all the travellers start;
      it was the clanging of a scabbard, on the pavement; then a voice called
      out something in German.

 Although the coach had come to a standstill, no one got out; it looked as
      if they were afraid of being murdered the moment they left their seats.
      Thereupon the driver appeared, holding in his hand one of his lanterns,
      which cast a sudden glow on the interior of the coach, lighting up the
      double row of startled faces, mouths agape, and eyes wide open in surprise
      and terror.

 Beside the driver stood in the full light a German officer, a tall young
      man, fair and slender, tightly encased in his uniform like a woman in her
      corset, his flat shiny cap, tilted to one side of his head, making him
      look like an English hotel runner. His exaggerated mustache, long and
      straight and tapering to a point at either end in a single blond hair that
      could hardly be seen, seemed to weigh down the corners of his mouth and
      give a droop to his lips.

 In Alsatian French he requested the travellers to alight, saying stiffly:

 “Kindly get down, ladies and gentlemen.”

 The two nuns were the first to obey, manifesting the docility of holy
      women accustomed to submission on every occasion. Next appeared the count
      and countess, followed by the manufacturer and his wife, after whom came
      Loiseau, pushing his larger and better half before him.

 “Good-day, sir,” he said to the officer as he put his foot to
      the ground, acting on an impulse born of prudence rather than of
      politeness. The other, insolent like all in authority, merely stared
      without replying.

 Boule de Suif and Cornudet, though near the door, were the last to alight,
      grave and dignified before the enemy. The stout girl tried to control
      herself and appear calm; the democrat stroked his long russet beard with a
      somewhat trembling hand. Both strove to maintain their dignity, knowing
      well that at such a time each individual is always looked upon as more or
      less typical of his nation; and, also, resenting the complaisant attitude
      of their companions, Boule de Suif tried to wear a bolder front than her
      neighbors, the virtuous women, while he, feeling that it was incumbent on
      him to set a good example, kept up the attitude of resistance which he had
      first assumed when he undertook to mine the high roads round Rouen.

 They entered the spacious kitchen of the inn, and the German, having
      demanded the passports signed by the general in command, in which were
      mentioned the name, description and profession of each traveller,
      inspected them all minutely, comparing their appearance with the written
      particulars.

 Then he said brusquely: “All right,” and turned on his heel.

 They breathed freely, All were still hungry; so supper was ordered. Half
      an hour was required for its preparation, and while two servants were
      apparently engaged in getting it ready the travellers went to look at
      their rooms. These all opened off a long corridor, at the end of which was
      a glazed door with a number on it.

 They were just about to take their seats at table when the innkeeper
      appeared in person. He was a former horse dealer—a large, asthmatic
      individual, always wheezing, coughing, and clearing his throat. Follenvie
      was his patronymic.

 He called:

 “Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset?”

 Boule de Suif started, and turned round.

 “That is my name.”

 “Mademoiselle, the Prussian officer wishes to speak to you
      immediately.”

 “To me?”

 “Yes; if you are Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset.”

 She hesitated, reflected a moment, and then declared roundly:

 “That may be; but I'm not going.”

 They moved restlessly around her; every one wondered and speculated as to
      the cause of this order. The count approached:

 “You are wrong, madame, for your refusal may bring trouble not only
      on yourself but also on all your companions. It never pays to resist those
      in authority. Your compliance with this request cannot possibly be fraught
      with any danger; it has probably been made because some formality or other
      was forgotten.”

 All added their voices to that of the count; Boule de Suif was begged,
      urged, lectured, and at last convinced; every one was afraid of the
      complications which might result from headstrong action on her part. She
      said finally:

 “I am doing it for your sakes, remember that!”

 The countess took her hand.

 “And we are grateful to you.”

 She left the room. All waited for her return before commencing the meal.
      Each was distressed that he or she had not been sent for rather than this
      impulsive, quick-tempered girl, and each mentally rehearsed platitudes in
      case of being summoned also.

 But at the end of ten minutes she reappeared breathing hard, crimson with
      indignation.

 “Oh! the scoundrel! the scoundrel!” she stammered.

 All were anxious to know what had happened; but she declined to enlighten
      them, and when the count pressed the point, she silenced him with much
      dignity, saying:

 “No; the matter has nothing to do with you, and I cannot speak of
      it.”

 Then they took their places round a high soup tureen, from which issued an
      odor of cabbage. In spite of this coincidence, the supper was cheerful.
      The cider was good; the Loiseaus and the nuns drank it from motives of
      economy. The others ordered wine; Cornudet demanded beer. He had his own
      fashion of uncorking the bottle and making the beer foam, gazing at it as
      he inclined his glass and then raised it to a position between the lamp
      and his eye that he might judge of its color. When he drank, his great
      beard, which matched the color of his favorite beverage, seemed to tremble
      with affection; his eyes positively squinted in the endeavor not to lose
      sight of the beloved glass, and he looked for all the world as if he were
      fulfilling the only function for which he was born. He seemed to have
      established in his mind an affinity between the two great passions of his
      life—pale ale and revolution—and assuredly he could not taste
      the one without dreaming of the other.

 Monsieur and Madame Follenvie dined at the end of the table. The man,
      wheezing like a broken-down locomotive, was too short-winded to talk when
      he was eating. But the wife was not silent a moment; she told how the
      Prussians had impressed her on their arrival, what they did, what they
      said; execrating them in the first place because they cost her money, and
      in the second because she had two sons in the army. She addressed herself
      principally to the countess, flattered at the opportunity of talking to a
      lady of quality.

 Then she lowered her voice, and began to broach delicate subjects. Her
      husband interrupted her from time to time, saying:

 “You would do well to hold your tongue, Madame Follenvie.”

 But she took no notice of him, and went on:

 “Yes, madame, these Germans do nothing but eat potatoes and pork,
      and then pork and potatoes. And don't imagine for a moment that they are
      clean! No, indeed! And if only you saw them drilling for hours, indeed for
      days, together; they all collect in a field, then they do nothing but
      march backward and forward, and wheel this way and that. If only they
      would cultivate the land, or remain at home and work on their high roads!
      Really, madame, these soldiers are of no earthly use! Poor people have to
      feed and keep them, only in order that they may learn how to kill! True, I
      am only an old woman with no education, but when I see them wearing
      themselves out marching about from morning till night, I say to myself:
      When there are people who make discoveries that are of use to people, why
      should others take so much trouble to do harm? Really, now, isn't it a
      terrible thing to kill people, whether they are Prussians, or English, or
      Poles, or French? If we revenge ourselves on any one who injures us we do
      wrong, and are punished for it; but when our sons are shot down like
      partridges, that is all right, and decorations are given to the man who
      kills the most. No, indeed, I shall never be able to understand it.”

 Cornudet raised his voice:

 “War is a barbarous proceeding when we attack a peaceful neighbor,
      but it is a sacred duty when undertaken in defence of one's country.”

 The old woman looked down:

 “Yes; it's another matter when one acts in self-defence; but would
      it not be better to kill all the kings, seeing that they make war just to
      amuse themselves?”

 Cornudet's eyes kindled.

 “Bravo, citizens!” he said.

 Monsieur Carre-Lamadon was reflecting profoundly. Although an ardent
      admirer of great generals, the peasant woman's sturdy common sense made
      him reflect on the wealth which might accrue to a country by the
      employment of so many idle hands now maintained at a great expense, of so
      much unproductive force, if they were employed in those great industrial
      enterprises which it will take centuries to complete.

 But Loiseau, leaving his seat, went over to the innkeeper and began
      chatting in a low voice. The big man chuckled, coughed, sputtered; his
      enormous carcass shook with merriment at the pleasantries of the other;
      and he ended by buying six casks of claret from Loiseau to be delivered in
      spring, after the departure of the Prussians.

 The moment supper was over every one went to bed, worn out with fatigue.

 But Loiseau, who had been making his observations on the sly, sent his
      wife to bed, and amused himself by placing first his ear, and then his
      eye, to the bedroom keyhole, in order to discover what he called “the
      mysteries of the corridor.”

 At the end of about an hour he heard a rustling, peeped out quickly, and
      caught sight of Boule de Suif, looking more rotund than ever in a
      dressing-gown of blue cashmere trimmed with white lace. She held a candle
      in her hand, and directed her steps to the numbered door at the end of the
      corridor. But one of the side doors was partly opened, and when, at the
      end of a few minutes, she returned, Cornudet, in his shirt-sleeves,
      followed her. They spoke in low tones, then stopped short. Boule de Suif
      seemed to be stoutly denying him admission to her room. Unfortunately,
      Loiseau could not at first hear what they said; but toward the end of the
      conversation they raised their voices, and he caught a few words. Cornudet
      was loudly insistent.

 “How silly you are! What does it matter to you?” he said.

 She seemed indignant, and replied:

 “No, my good man, there are times when one does not do that sort of
      thing; besides, in this place it would be shameful.”

 Apparently he did not understand, and asked the reason. Then she lost her
      temper and her caution, and, raising her voice still higher, said:

 “Why? Can't you understand why? When there are Prussians in the
      house! Perhaps even in the very next room!”

 He was silent. The patriotic shame of this wanton, who would not suffer
      herself to be caressed in the neighborhood of the enemy, must have roused
      his dormant dignity, for after bestowing on her a simple kiss he crept
      softly back to his room. Loiseau, much edified, capered round the bedroom
      before taking his place beside his slumbering spouse.

 Then silence reigned throughout the house. But soon there arose from some
      remote part—it might easily have been either cellar or attic—a
      stertorous, monotonous, regular snoring, a dull, prolonged rumbling,
      varied by tremors like those of a boiler under pressure of steam. Monsieur
      Follenvie had gone to sleep.

 As they had decided on starting at eight o'clock the next morning, every
      one was in the kitchen at that hour; but the coach, its roof covered with
      snow, stood by itself in the middle of the yard, without either horses or
      driver. They sought the latter in the stables, coach-houses and barns
      —but in vain. So the men of the party resolved to scour the country
      for him, and sallied forth. They found themselves in the square, with the
      church at the farther side, and to right and left low-roofed houses where
      there were some Prussian soldiers. The first soldier they saw was peeling
      potatoes. The second, farther on, was washing out a barber's shop. Another, bearded to the eyes, was fondling a crying infant, and dandling it
      on his knees to quiet it; and the stout peasant women, whose men-folk were
      for the most part at the war, were, by means of signs, telling their
      obedient conquerors what work they were to do: chop wood, prepare soup,
      grind coffee; one of them even was doing the washing for his hostess, an
      infirm old grandmother.

 The count, astonished at what he saw, questioned the beadle who was coming
      out of the presbytery. The old man answered:

 “Oh, those men are not at all a bad sort; they are not Prussians, I
      am told; they come from somewhere farther off, I don't exactly know where.
      And they have all left wives and children behind them; they are not fond
      of war either, you may be sure! I am sure they are mourning for the men
      where they come from, just as we do here; and the war causes them just as
      much unhappiness as it does us. As a matter of fact, things are not so
      very bad here just now, because the soldiers do no harm, and work just as
      if they were in their own homes. You see, sir, poor folk always help one
      another; it is the great ones of this world who make war.”

 Cornudet indignant at the friendly understanding established between
      conquerors and conquered, withdrew, preferring to shut himself up in the
      inn.

 “They are repeopling the country,” jested Loiseau.

 “They are undoing the harm they have done,” said Monsieur
      Carre-Lamadon gravely.

 But they could not find the coach driver. At last he was discovered in the
      village cafe, fraternizing cordially with the officer's orderly.

 “Were you not told to harness the horses at eight o'clock?”
      demanded the count.

 “Oh, yes; but I've had different orders since.”

 “What orders?”

 “Not to harness at all.”

 “Who gave you such orders?”

 “Why, the Prussian officer.”

 “But why?”

 “I don't know. Go and ask him. I am forbidden to harness the horses,
      so I don't harness them—that's all.”

 “Did he tell you so himself?”

 “No, sir; the innkeeper gave me the order from him.”

 “When?”

 “Last evening, just as I was going to bed.”

 The three men returned in a very uneasy frame of mind.

 They asked for Monsieur Follenvie, but the servant replied that on account
      of his asthma he never got up before ten o'clock. They were strictly
      forbidden to rouse him earlier, except in case of fire.

 They wished to see the officer, but that also was impossible, although he
      lodged in the inn. Monsieur Follenvie alone was authorized to interview
      him on civil matters. So they waited. The women returned to their rooms,
      and occupied themselves with trivial matters.

 Cornudet settled down beside the tall kitchen fireplace, before a blazing
      fire. He had a small table and a jug of beer placed beside him, and he
      smoked his pipe—a pipe which enjoyed among democrats a consideration
      almost equal to his own, as though it had served its country in serving
      Cornudet. It was a fine meerschaum, admirably colored to a black the shade
      of its owner's teeth, but sweet-smelling, gracefully curved, at home in
      its master's hand, and completing his physiognomy. And Cornudet sat
      motionless, his eyes fixed now on the dancing flames, now on the froth
      which crowned his beer; and after each draught he passed his long, thin
      fingers with an air of satisfaction through his long, greasy hair, as he
      sucked the foam from his mustache.

 Loiseau, under pretence of stretching his legs, went out to see if he
      could sell wine to the country dealers. The count and the manufacturer
      began to talk politics. They forecast the future of France. One believed
      in the Orleans dynasty, the other in an unknown savior—a hero who
      should rise up in the last extremity: a Du Guesclin, perhaps a Joan of
      Arc? or another Napoleon the First? Ah! if only the Prince Imperial were
      not so young! Cornudet, listening to them, smiled like a man who holds the
      keys of destiny in his hands. His pipe perfumed the whole kitchen.

 As the clock struck ten, Monsieur Follenvie appeared. He was immediately
      surrounded and questioned, but could only repeat, three or four times in
      succession, and without variation, the words:

 “The officer said to me, just like this: 'Monsieur Follenvie, you
      will forbid them to harness up the coach for those travellers to-morrow.
      They are not to start without an order from me. You hear? That is
      sufficient.'”

 Then they asked to see the officer. The count sent him his card, on which
      Monsieur Carre-Lamadon also inscribed his name and titles. The Prussian
      sent word that the two men would be admitted to see him after his luncheon—that
      is to say, about one o'clock.

 The ladies reappeared, and they all ate a little, in spite of their
      anxiety. Boule de Suif appeared ill and very much worried.

 They were finishing their coffee when the orderly came to fetch the
      gentlemen.

 Loiseau joined the other two; but when they tried to get Cornudet to
      accompany them, by way of adding greater solemnity to the occasion, he
      declared proudly that he would never have anything to do with the Germans,
      and, resuming his seat in the chimney corner, he called for another jug of
      beer.

 The three men went upstairs, and were ushered into the best room in the
      inn, where the officer received them lolling at his ease in an armchair,
      his feet on the mantelpiece, smoking a long porcelain pipe, and enveloped
      in a gorgeous dressing-gown, doubtless stolen from the deserted dwelling
      of some citizen destitute of taste in dress. He neither rose, greeted
      them, nor even glanced in their direction. He afforded a fine example of
      that insolence of bearing which seems natural to the victorious soldier.

 After the lapse of a few moments he said in his halting French:

 “What do you want?”

 “We wish to start on our journey,” said the count.

 “No.”

 “May I ask the reason of your refusal?”

 “Because I don't choose.”

 “I would respectfully call your attention, monsieur, to the fact
      that your general in command gave us a permit to proceed to Dieppe; and I
      do not think we have done anything to deserve this harshness at your
      hands.”

 “I don't choose—that's all. You may go.”

 They bowed, and retired.

 The afternoon was wretched. They could not understand the caprice of this
      German, and the strangest ideas came into their heads. They all
      congregated in the kitchen, and talked the subject to death, imagining all
      kinds of unlikely things. Perhaps they were to be kept as hostages —but
      for what reason? or to be extradited as prisoners of war? or possibly they
      were to be held for ransom? They were panic-stricken at this last
      supposition. The richest among them were the most alarmed, seeing
      themselves forced to empty bags of gold into the insolent soldier's hands
      in order to buy back their lives. They racked their brains for plausible
      lies whereby they might conceal the fact that they were rich, and pass
      themselves off as poor—very poor. Loiseau took off his watch chain,
      and put it in his pocket. The approach of night increased their
      apprehension. The lamp was lighted, and as it wanted yet two hours to
      dinner Madame Loiseau proposed a game of trente et un. It would distract
      their thoughts. The rest agreed, and Cornudet himself joined the party,
      first putting out his pipe for politeness' sake.

 The count shuffled the cards—dealt—and Boule de Suif had
      thirty-one to start with; soon the interest of the game assuaged the
      anxiety of the players. But Cornudet noticed that Loiseau and his wife
      were in league to cheat.

 They were about to sit down to dinner when Monsieur Follenvie appeared,
      and in his grating voice announced:

 “The Prussian officer sends to ask Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset if
      she has changed her mind yet.”

 Boule de Suif stood still, pale as death. Then, suddenly turning crimson
      with anger, she gasped out:

 “Kindly tell that scoundrel, that cur, that carrion of a Prussian,
      that I will never consent—you understand?—never, never, never!”

 The fat innkeeper left the room. Then Boule de Suif was surrounded,
      questioned, entreated on all sides to reveal the mystery of her visit to
      the officer. She refused at first; but her wrath soon got the better of
      her.

 “What does he want? He wants to make me his mistress!” she
      cried.

 No one was shocked at the word, so great was the general indignation.
      Cornudet broke his jug as he banged it down on the table. A loud outcry
      arose against this base soldier. All were furious. They drew together in
      common resistance against the foe, as if some part of the sacrifice
      exacted of Boule de Suif had been demanded of each. The count declared,
      with supreme disgust, that those people behaved like ancient barbarians.
      The women, above all, manifested a lively and tender sympathy for Boule de
      Suif. The nuns, who appeared only at meals, cast down their eyes, and said
      nothing.

 They dined, however, as soon as the first indignant outburst had subsided;
      but they spoke little and thought much.

 The ladies went to bed early; and the men, having lighted their pipes,
      proposed a game of ecarte, in which Monsieur Follenvie was invited to
      join, the travellers hoping to question him skillfully as to the best
      means of vanquishing the officer's obduracy. But he thought of nothing but
      his cards, would listen to nothing, reply to nothing, and repeated, time
      after time: “Attend to the game, gentlemen! attend to the game!”
      So absorbed was his attention that he even forgot to expectorate. The
      consequence was that his chest gave forth rumbling sounds like those of an
      organ. His wheezing lungs struck every note of the asthmatic scale, from
      deep, hollow tones to a shrill, hoarse piping resembling that of a young
      cock trying to crow.

 He refused to go to bed when his wife, overcome with sleep, came to fetch
      him. So she went off alone, for she was an early bird, always up with the
      sun; while he was addicted to late hours, ever ready to spend the night
      with friends. He merely said: “Put my egg-nogg by the fire,”
      and went on with the game. When the other men saw that nothing was to be
      got out of him they declared it was time to retire, and each sought his
      bed.

 They rose fairly early the next morning, with a vague hope of being
      allowed to start, a greater desire than ever to do so, and a terror at
      having to spend another day in this wretched little inn.

 Alas! the horses remained in the stable, the driver was invisible. They
      spent their time, for want of something better to do, in wandering round
      the coach.

 Luncheon was a gloomy affair; and there was a general coolness toward
      Boule de Suif, for night, which brings counsel, had somewhat modified the
      judgment of her companions. In the cold light of the morning they almost
      bore a grudge against the girl for not having secretly sought out the
      Prussian, that the rest of the party might receive a joyful surprise when
      they awoke. What more simple?

 Besides, who would have been the wiser? She might have saved appearances
      by telling the officer that she had taken pity on their distress. Such a
      step would be of so little consequence to her.

 But no one as yet confessed to such thoughts.

 In the afternoon, seeing that they were all bored to death, the count
      proposed a walk in the neighborhood of the village. Each one wrapped
      himself up well, and the little party set out, leaving behind only
      Cornudet, who preferred to sit over the fire, and the two nuns, who were
      in the habit of spending their day in the church or at the presbytery.

 The cold, which grew more intense each day, almost froze the noses and
      ears of the pedestrians, their feet began to pain them so that each step
      was a penance, and when they reached the open country it looked so
      mournful and depressing in its limitless mantle of white that they all
      hastily retraced their steps, with bodies benumbed and hearts heavy.

 The four women walked in front, and the three men followed a little in
      their rear.

 Loiseau, who saw perfectly well how matters stood, asked suddenly “if
      that trollop were going to keep them waiting much longer in this
      Godforsaken spot.” The count, always courteous, replied that they
      could not exact so painful a sacrifice from any woman, and that the first
      move must come from herself. Monsieur Carre-Lamadon remarked that if the
      French, as they talked of doing, made a counter attack by way of Dieppe,
      their encounter with the enemy must inevitably take place at Totes. This
      reflection made the other two anxious.

 “Supposing we escape on foot?” said Loiseau.

 The count shrugged his shoulders.

 “How can you think of such a thing, in this snow? And with our
      wives? Besides, we should be pursued at once, overtaken in ten minutes,
      and brought back as prisoners at the mercy of the soldiery.”

 This was true enough; they were silent.

 The ladies talked of dress, but a certain constraint seemed to prevail
      among them.

 Suddenly, at the end of the street, the officer appeared. His tall,
      wasp-like, uniformed figure was outlined against the snow which bounded
      the horizon, and he walked, knees apart, with that motion peculiar to
      soldiers, who are always anxious not to soil their carefully polished
      boots.

 He bowed as he passed the ladies, then glanced scornfully at the men, who
      had sufficient dignity not to raise their hats, though Loiseau made a
      movement to do so.

 Boule de Suif flushed crimson to the ears, and the three married women
      felt unutterably humiliated at being met thus by the soldier in company
      with the girl whom he had treated with such scant ceremony.

 Then they began to talk about him, his figure, and his face. Madame
      Carre-Lamadon, who had known many officers and judged them as a
      connoisseur, thought him not at all bad-looking; she even regretted that
      he was not a Frenchman, because in that case he would have made a very
      handsome hussar, with whom all the women would assuredly have fallen in
      love.

 When they were once more within doors they did not know what to do with
      themselves. Sharp words even were exchanged apropos of the merest trifles.
      The silent dinner was quickly over, and each one went to bed early in the
      hope of sleeping, and thus killing time.

 They came down next morning with tired faces and irritable tempers; the
      women scarcely spoke to Boule de Suif.

 A church bell summoned the faithful to a baptism. Boule de Suif had a
      child being brought up by peasants at Yvetot. She did not see him once a
      year, and never thought of him; but the idea of the child who was about to
      be baptized induced a sudden wave of tenderness for her own, and she
      insisted on being present at the ceremony.

 As soon as she had gone out, the rest of the company looked at one another
      and then drew their chairs together; for they realized that they must
      decide on some course of action. Loiseau had an inspiration: he proposed
      that they should ask the officer to detain Boule de Suif only, and to let
      the rest depart on their way.

 Monsieur Follenvie was intrusted with this commission, but he returned to
      them almost immediately. The German, who knew human nature, had shown him
      the door. He intended to keep all the travellers until his condition had
      been complied with.

 Whereupon Madame Loiseau's vulgar temperament broke bounds.

 “We're not going to die of old age here!” she cried. “Since
      it's that vixen's trade to behave so with men I don't see that she has any
      right to refuse one more than another. I may as well tell you she took any
      lovers she could get at Rouen—even coachmen! Yes, indeed, madame—the
      coachman at the prefecture! I know it for a fact, for he buys his wine of
      us. And now that it is a question of getting us out of a difficulty she
      puts on virtuous airs, the drab! For my part, I think this officer has
      behaved very well. Why, there were three others of us, any one of whom he
      would undoubtedly have preferred. But no, he contents himself with the
      girl who is common property. He respects married women. Just think. He is
      master here. He had only to say: 'I wish it!' and he might have taken us
      by force, with the help of his soldiers.”

 The two other women shuddered; the eyes of pretty Madame Carre-Lamadon
      glistened, and she grew pale, as if the officer were indeed in the act of
      laying violent hands on her.

 The men, who had been discussing the subject among themselves, drew near.
      Loiseau, in a state of furious resentment, was for delivering up “that
      miserable woman,” bound hand and foot, into the enemy's power. But
      the count, descended from three generations of ambassadors, and endowed,
      moreover, with the lineaments of a diplomat, was in favor of more tactful
      measures.

 “We must persuade her,” he said.

 Then they laid their plans.

 The women drew together; they lowered their voices, and the discussion
      became general, each giving his or her opinion. But the conversation was
      not in the least coarse. The ladies, in particular, were adepts at
      delicate phrases and charming subtleties of expression to describe the
      most improper things. A stranger would have understood none of their
      allusions, so guarded was the language they employed. But, seeing that the
      thin veneer of modesty with which every woman of the world is furnished
      goes but a very little way below the surface, they began rather to enjoy
      this unedifying episode, and at bottom were hugely delighted —feeling
      themselves in their element, furthering the schemes of lawless love with
      the gusto of a gourmand cook who prepares supper for another.

 Their gaiety returned of itself, so amusing at last did the whole business
      seem to them. The count uttered several rather risky witticisms, but so
      tactfully were they said that his audience could not help smiling. Loiseau
      in turn made some considerably broader jokes, but no one took offence; and
      the thought expressed with such brutal directness by his wife was
      uppermost in the minds of all: “Since it's the girl's trade, why
      should she refuse this man more than another?” Dainty Madame
      Carre-Lamadon seemed to think even that in Boule de Suif's place she would
      be less inclined to refuse him than another.

 The blockade was as carefully arranged as if they were investing a
      fortress. Each agreed on the role which he or she was to play, the
      arguments to be used, the maneuvers to be executed. They decided on the
      plan of campaign, the stratagems they were to employ, and the surprise
      attacks which were to reduce this human citadel and force it to receive
      the enemy within its walls.

 But Cornudet remained apart from the rest, taking no share in the plot.

 So absorbed was the attention of all that Boule de Suif's entrance was
      almost unnoticed. But the count whispered a gentle “Hush!”
      which made the others look up. She was there. They suddenly stopped
      talking, and a vague embarrassment prevented them for a few moments from
      addressing her. But the countess, more practiced than the others in the
      wiles of the drawing-room, asked her:

 “Was the baptism interesting?”

 The girl, still under the stress of emotion, told what she had seen and
      heard, described the faces, the attitudes of those present, and even the
      appearance of the church. She concluded with the words:

 “It does one good to pray sometimes.”

 Until lunch time the ladies contented themselves with being pleasant to
      her, so as to increase her confidence and make her amenable to their
      advice.

 As soon as they took their seats at table the attack began. First they
      opened a vague conversation on the subject of self-sacrifice. Ancient
      examples were quoted: Judith and Holofernes; then, irrationally enough,
      Lucrece and Sextus; Cleopatra and the hostile generals whom she reduced to
      abject slavery by a surrender of her charms. Next was recounted an
      extraordinary story, born of the imagination of these ignorant
      millionaires, which told how the matrons of Rome seduced Hannibal, his
      lieutenants, and all his mercenaries at Capua. They held up to admiration
      all those women who from time to time have arrested the victorious
      progress of conquerors, made of their bodies a field of battle, a means of
      ruling, a weapon; who have vanquished by their heroic caresses hideous or
      detested beings, and sacrificed their chastity to vengeance and devotion.

 All was said with due restraint and regard for propriety, the effect
      heightened now and then by an outburst of forced enthusiasm calculated to
      excite emulation.

 A listener would have thought at last that the one role of woman on earth
      was a perpetual sacrifice of her person, a continual abandonment of
      herself to the caprices of a hostile soldiery.

 The two nuns seemed to hear nothing, and to be lost in thought. Boule de
      Suif also was silent.

 During the whole afternoon she was left to her reflections. But instead of
      calling her “madame” as they had done hitherto, her companions
      addressed her simply as “mademoiselle,” without exactly
      knowing why, but as if desirous of making her descend a step in the esteem
      she had won, and forcing her to realize her degraded position.

 Just as soup was served, Monsieur Follenvie reappeared, repeating his
      phrase of the evening before:

 “The Prussian officer sends to ask if Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset
      has changed her mind.”

 Boule de Suif answered briefly:

 “No, monsieur.”

 But at dinner the coalition weakened. Loiseau made three unfortunate
      remarks. Each was cudgeling his brains for further examples of
      self-sacrifice, and could find none, when the countess, possibly without
      ulterior motive, and moved simply by a vague desire to do homage to
      religion, began to question the elder of the two nuns on the most striking
      facts in the lives of the saints. Now, it fell out that many of these had
      committed acts which would be crimes in our eyes, but the Church readily
      pardons such deeds when they are accomplished for the glory of God or the
      good of mankind. This was a powerful argument, and the countess made the
      most of it. Then, whether by reason of a tacit understanding, a thinly
      veiled act of complaisance such as those who wear the ecclesiastical habit
      excel in, or whether merely as the result of sheer stupidity—a
      stupidity admirably adapted to further their designs—the old nun
      rendered formidable aid to the conspirator. They had thought her timid;
      she proved herself bold, talkative, bigoted. She was not troubled by the
      ins and outs of casuistry; her doctrines were as iron bars; her faith knew
      no doubt; her conscience no scruples. She looked on Abraham's sacrifice as
      natural enough, for she herself would not have hesitated to kill both
      father and mother if she had received a divine order to that effect; and
      nothing, in her opinion, could displease our Lord, provided the motive
      were praiseworthy. The countess, putting to good use the consecrated
      authority of her unexpected ally, led her on to make a lengthy and
      edifying paraphrase of that axiom enunciated by a certain school of
      moralists: “The end justifies the means.”

 “Then, sister,” she asked, “you think God accepts all
      methods, and pardons the act when the motive is pure?”

 “Undoubtedly, madame. An action reprehensible in itself often
      derives merit from the thought which inspires it.”

 And in this wise they talked on, fathoming the wishes of God, predicting
      His judgments, describing Him as interested in matters which assuredly
      concern Him but little.

 All was said with the utmost care and discretion, but every word uttered
      by the holy woman in her nun's garb weakened the indignant resistance of
      the courtesan. Then the conversation drifted somewhat, and the nun began
      to talk of the convents of her order, of her Superior, of herself, and of
      her fragile little neighbor, Sister St. Nicephore. They had been sent for
      from Havre to nurse the hundreds of soldiers who were in hospitals,
      stricken with smallpox. She described these wretched invalids and their
      malady. And, while they themselves were detained on their way by the
      caprices of the Prussian officer, scores of Frenchmen might be dying, whom
      they would otherwise have saved! For the nursing of soldiers was the old
      nun's specialty; she had been in the Crimea, in Italy, in Austria; and as
      she told the story of her campaigns she revealed herself as one of those
      holy sisters of the fife and drum who seem designed by nature to follow
      camps, to snatch the wounded from amid the strife of battle, and to quell
      with a word, more effectually than any general, the rough and
      insubordinate troopers—a masterful woman, her seamed and pitted face
      itself an image of the devastations of war.

 No one spoke when she had finished for fear of spoiling the excellent
      effect of her words.

 As soon as the meal was over the travellers retired to their rooms, whence
      they emerged the following day at a late hour of the morning.

 Luncheon passed off quietly. The seed sown the preceding evening was being
      given time to germinate and bring forth fruit.

 In the afternoon the countess proposed a walk; then the count, as had been
      arranged beforehand, took Boule de Suif's arm, and walked with her at some
      distance behind the rest.

 He began talking to her in that familiar, paternal, slightly contemptuous
      tone which men of his class adopt in speaking to women like her, calling
      her “my dear child,” and talking down to her from the height
      of his exalted social position and stainless reputation. He came straight
      to the point.

 “So you prefer to leave us here, exposed like yourself to all the
      violence which would follow on a repulse of the Prussian troops, rather
      than consent to surrender yourself, as you have done so many times in your
      life?”

 The girl did not reply.

 He tried kindness, argument, sentiment. He still bore himself as count,
      even while adopting, when desirable, an attitude of gallantry, and making
      pretty—nay, even tender—speeches. He exalted the service she
      would render them, spoke of their gratitude; then, suddenly, using the
      familiar “thou”:

 “And you know, my dear, he could boast then of having made a
      conquest of a pretty girl such as he won't often find in his own country.”

 Boule de Suif did not answer, and joined the rest of the party.

 As soon as they returned she went to her room, and was seen no more. The
      general anxiety was at its height. What would she do? If she still
      resisted, how awkward for them all!

 The dinner hour struck; they waited for her in vain. At last Monsieur
      Follenvie entered, announcing that Mademoiselle Rousset was not well, and
      that they might sit down to table. They all pricked up their ears. The
      count drew near the innkeeper, and whispered:

 “Is it all right?”

 “Yes.”

 Out of regard for propriety he said nothing to his companions, but merely
      nodded slightly toward them. A great sigh of relief went up from all
      breasts; every face was lighted up with joy.

 “By Gad!” shouted Loiseau, “I'll stand champagne all
      round if there's any to be found in this place.” And great was
      Madame Loiseau's dismay when the proprietor came back with four bottles in
      his hands. They had all suddenly become talkative and merry; a lively joy
      filled all hearts. The count seemed to perceive for the first time that
      Madame Carre-Lamadon was charming; the manufacturer paid compliments to
      the countess. The conversation was animated, sprightly, witty, and,
      although many of the jokes were in the worst possible taste, all the
      company were amused by them, and none offended—indignation being
      dependent, like other emotions, on surroundings. And the mental atmosphere
      had gradually become filled with gross imaginings and unclean thoughts.

 At dessert even the women indulged in discreetly worded allusions. Their
      glances were full of meaning; they had drunk much. The count, who even in
      his moments of relaxation preserved a dignified demeanor, hit on a
      much-appreciated comparison of the condition of things with the
      termination of a winter spent in the icy solitude of the North Pole and
      the joy of shipwrecked mariners who at last perceive a southward track
      opening out before their eyes.

 Loiseau, fairly in his element, rose to his feet, holding aloft a glass of
      champagne.

 “I drink to our deliverance!” he shouted.

 All stood up, and greeted the toast with acclamation. Even the two good
      sisters yielded to the solicitations of the ladies, and consented to
      moisten their lips with the foaming wine, which they had never before
      tasted. They declared it was like effervescent lemonade, but with a
      pleasanter flavor.

 “It is a pity,” said Loiseau, “that we have no piano; we
      might have had a quadrille.”

 Cornudet had not spoken a word or made a movement; he seemed plunged in
      serious thought, and now and then tugged furiously at his great beard, as
      if trying to add still further to its length. At last, toward midnight,
      when they were about to separate, Loiseau, whose gait was far from steady,
      suddenly slapped him on the back, saying thickly:

 “You're not jolly to-night; why are you so silent, old man?”

 Cornudet threw back his head, cast one swift and scornful glance over the
      assemblage, and answered:

 “I tell you all, you have done an infamous thing!”

 He rose, reached the door, and repeating: “Infamous!”
      disappeared.

 A chill fell on all. Loiseau himself looked foolish and disconcerted for a
      moment, but soon recovered his aplomb, and, writhing with laughter,
      exclaimed:

 “Really, you are all too green for anything!”

 Pressed for an explanation, he related the “mysteries of the
      corridor,” whereat his listeners were hugely amused. The ladies
      could hardly contain their delight. The count and Monsieur Carre-Lamadon
      laughed till they cried. They could scarcely believe their ears.

 “What! you are sure? He wanted——”

 “I tell you I saw it with my own eyes.”

 “And she refused?”

 “Because the Prussian was in the next room!”

 “Surely you are mistaken?”

 “I swear I'm telling you the truth.”

 The count was choking with laughter. The manufacturer held his sides.
      Loiseau continued:

 “So you may well imagine he doesn't think this evening's business at
      all amusing.”

 And all three began to laugh again, choking, coughing, almost ill with
      merriment.

 Then they separated. But Madame Loiseau, who was nothing if not spiteful,
      remarked to her husband as they were on the way to bed that “that
      stuck-up little minx of a Carre-Lamadon had laughed on the wrong side of
      her mouth all the evening.”

 “You know,” she said, “when women run after uniforms
      it's all the same to them whether the men who wear them are French or
      Prussian. It's perfectly sickening!”

 The next morning the snow showed dazzling white tinder a clear winter sun.
      The coach, ready at last, waited before the door; while a flock of white
      pigeons, with pink eyes spotted in the centres with black, puffed out
      their white feathers and walked sedately between the legs of the six
      horses, picking at the steaming manure.

 The driver, wrapped in his sheepskin coat, was smoking a pipe on the box,
      and all the passengers, radiant with delight at their approaching
      departure, were putting up provisions for the remainder of the journey.

 They were waiting only for Boule de Suif. At last she appeared.

 She seemed rather shamefaced and embarrassed, and advanced with timid step
      toward her companions, who with one accord turned aside as if they had not
      seen her. The count, with much dignity, took his wife by the arm, and
      removed her from the unclean contact.

 The girl stood still, stupefied with astonishment; then, plucking up
      courage, accosted the manufacturer's wife with a humble “Good-morning,
      madame,” to which the other replied merely with a slight and
      insolent nod, accompanied by a look of outraged virtue. Every one suddenly
      appeared extremely busy, and kept as far from Boule de Suif as if her
      skirts had been infected with some deadly disease. Then they hurried to
      the coach, followed by the despised courtesan, who, arriving last of all,
      silently took the place she had occupied during the first part of the
      journey.

 The rest seemed neither to see nor to know her—all save Madame
      Loiseau, who, glancing contemptuously in her direction, remarked, half
      aloud, to her husband:

 “What a mercy I am not sitting beside that creature!”

 The lumbering vehicle started on its way, and the journey began afresh.

 At first no one spoke. Boule de Suif dared not even raise her eyes. She
      felt at once indignant with her neighbors, and humiliated at having
      yielded to the Prussian into whose arms they had so hypocritically cast
      her.

 But the countess, turning toward Madame Carre-Lamadon, soon broke the
      painful silence:

 “I think you know Madame d'Etrelles?”

 “Yes; she is a friend of mine.”

 “Such a charming woman!”

 “Delightful! Exceptionally talented, and an artist to the finger
      tips. She sings marvellously and draws to perfection.”

 The manufacturer was chatting with the count, and amid the clatter of the
      window-panes a word of their conversation was now and then
      distinguishable: “Shares—maturity—premium—time-limit.”

 Loiseau, who had abstracted from the inn the timeworn pack of cards, thick
      with the grease of five years' contact with half-wiped-off tables, started
      a game of bezique with his wife.

 The good sisters, taking up simultaneously the long rosaries hanging from
      their waists, made the sign of the cross, and began to mutter in unison
      interminable prayers, their lips moving ever more and more swiftly, as if
      they sought which should outdistance the other in the race of orisons;
      from time to time they kissed a medal, and crossed themselves anew, then
      resumed their rapid and unintelligible murmur.

 Cornudet sat still, lost in thought.

 Ah the end of three hours Loiseau gathered up the cards, and remarked that
      he was hungry.

 His wife thereupon produced a parcel tied with string, from which she
      extracted a piece of cold veal. This she cut into neat, thin slices, and
      both began to eat.

 “We may as well do the same,” said the countess. The rest
      agreed, and she unpacked the provisions which had been prepared for
      herself, the count, and the Carre-Lamadons. In one of those oval dishes,
      the lids of which are decorated with an earthenware hare, by way of
      showing that a game pie lies within, was a succulent delicacy consisting
      of the brown flesh of the game larded with streaks of bacon and flavored
      with other meats chopped fine. A solid wedge of Gruyere cheese, which had
      been wrapped in a newspaper, bore the imprint: “Items of News,”
      on its rich, oily surface.

 The two good sisters brought to light a hunk of sausage smelling strongly
      of garlic; and Cornudet, plunging both hands at once into the capacious
      pockets of his loose overcoat, produced from one four hard-boiled eggs and
      from the other a crust of bread. He removed the shells, threw them into
      the straw beneath his feet, and began to devour the eggs, letting morsels
      of the bright yellow yolk fall in his mighty beard, where they looked like
      stars.

 Boule de Suif, in the haste and confusion of her departure, had not
      thought of anything, and, stifling with rage, she watched all these people
      placidly eating. At first, ill-suppressed wrath shook her whole person,
      and she opened her lips to shriek the truth at them, to overwhelm them
      with a volley of insults; but she could not utter a word, so choked was
      she with indignation.

 No one looked at her, no one thought of her. She felt herself swallowed up
      in the scorn of these virtuous creatures, who had first sacrificed, then
      rejected her as a thing useless and unclean. Then she remembered her big
      basket full of the good things they had so greedily devoured: the two
      chickens coated in jelly, the pies, the pears, the four bottles of claret;
      and her fury broke forth like a cord that is overstrained, and she was on
      the verge of tears. She made terrible efforts at self-control, drew
      herself up, swallowed the sobs which choked her; but the tears rose
      nevertheless, shone at the brink of her eyelids, and soon two heavy drops
      coursed slowly down her cheeks. Others followed more quickly, like water
      filtering from a rock, and fell, one after another, on her rounded bosom.
      She sat upright, with a fixed expression, her face pale and rigid, hoping
      desperately that no one saw her give way.

 But the countess noticed that she was weeping, and with a sign drew her
      husband's attention to the fact. He shrugged his shoulders, as if to say:
      “Well, what of it? It's not my fault.” Madame Loiseau chuckled
      triumphantly, and murmured:

 “She's weeping for shame.”

 The two nuns had betaken themselves once more to their prayers, first
      wrapping the remainder of their sausage in paper:

 Then Cornudet, who was digesting his eggs, stretched his long legs under
      the opposite seat, threw himself back, folded his arms, smiled like a man
      who had just thought of a good joke, and began to whistle the
      Marseillaise.

 The faces of his neighbors clouded; the popular air evidently did not find
      favor with them; they grew nervous and irritable, and seemed ready to howl
      as a dog does at the sound of a barrel-organ. Cornudet saw the discomfort
      he was creating, and whistled the louder; sometimes he even hummed the
      words:

 Amour sacre de la patrie,
     Conduis, soutiens, nos bras vengeurs,
     Liberte, liberte cherie,
     Combats avec tes defenseurs!

 The coach progressed more swiftly, the snow being harder now; and all the
      way to Dieppe, during the long, dreary hours of the journey, first in the
      gathering dusk, then in the thick darkness, raising his voice above the
      rumbling of the vehicle, Cornudet continued with fierce obstinacy his
      vengeful and monotonous whistling, forcing his weary and
      exasperated-hearers to follow the song from end to end, to recall every
      word of every line, as each was repeated over and over again with untiring
      persistency.

 And Boule de Suif still wept, and sometimes a sob she could not restrain
      was heard in the darkness between two verses of the song.