BOYS
    

      “VOLODYA’S come!” someone shouted in the yard.
    

“Master
      Volodya’s here!” bawled Natalya the cook, running into the
      dining-room. “Oh, my goodness!”
    

      The whole Korolyov family, who had been expecting their Volodya from hour
      to hour, rushed to the windows. At the front door stood a wide sledge,
      with three white horses in a cloud of steam. The sledge was empty, for
      Volodya was already in the hall, untying his hood with red and chilly
      fingers. His school overcoat, his cap, his snowboots, and the hair on his
      temples were all white with frost, and his whole figure from head to foot
      diffused such a pleasant, fresh smell of the snow that the very sight of
      him made one want to shiver and say “brrr!”
    

      His mother and aunt ran to kiss and hug him. Natalya plumped down at his
      feet and began pulling off his snowboots, his sisters shrieked with
      delight, the doors creaked and banged, and Volodya’s father, in his
      waistcoat and shirt-sleeves, ran out into the hall with scissors in his
      hand, and cried out in alarm:
    

      “We were expecting you all yesterday? Did you come all right? Had a
      good journey? Mercy on us! you might let him say ‘how do you do’
      to his father! I am his father after all!”
    

      “Bow-wow!” barked the huge black dog, Milord, in a deep bass,
      tapping with his tail on the walls and furniture.
    

      For two minutes there was nothing but a general hubbub of joy. After the
      first outburst of delight was over the Korolyovs noticed that there was,
      besides their Volodya, another small person in the hall, wrapped up in
      scarves and shawls and white with frost. He was standing perfectly still
      in a corner, in the shadow of a big fox-lined overcoat.
    

      “Volodya darling, who is it?” asked his mother, in a whisper.
    

      “Oh!” cried Volodya. “This is—let me introduce my
      friend Lentilov, a schoolfellow in the second class. . . . I have brought
      him to stay with us.”
    

      “Delighted to hear it! You are very welcome,” the father said
      cordially. “Excuse me, I’ve been at work without my coat. . .
      . Please come in! Natalya, help Mr. Lentilov off with his things. Mercy on
      us, do turn that dog out! He is unendurable!”
    

      A few minutes later, Volodya and his friend Lentilov, somewhat dazed by
      their noisy welcome, and still red from the outside cold, were sitting
      down to tea. The winter sun, making its way through the snow and the
      frozen tracery on the window-panes, gleamed on the samovar, and plunged
      its pure rays in the tea-basin. The room was warm, and the boys felt as
      though the warmth and the frost were struggling together with a tingling
      sensation in their bodies.
    

      “Well, Christmas will soon be here,” the father said in a
      pleasant sing-song voice, rolling a cigarette of dark reddish tobacco.
      “It doesn’t seem long since the summer, when mamma was crying
      at your going . . . and here you are back again. . . . Time flies, my boy.
      Before you have time to cry out, old age is upon you. Mr. Lentilov, take
      some more, please help yourself! We don’t stand on ceremony!”
    

      Volodya’s three sisters, Katya, Sonya, and Masha (the eldest was
      eleven), sat at the table and never took their eyes off the newcomer.
    

      Lentilov was of the same height and age as Volodya, but not as round-faced
      and fair-skinned. He was thin, dark, and freckled; his hair stood up like
      a brush, his eyes were small, and his lips were thick. He was, in fact,
      distinctly ugly, and if he had not been wearing the school uniform, he
      might have been taken for the son of a cook. He seemed morose, did not
      speak, and never once smiled. The little girls, staring at him,
      immediately came to the conclusion that he must be a very clever and
      learned person. He seemed to be thinking about something all the time, and
      was so absorbed in his own thoughts, that, whenever he was spoken to, he
      started, threw his head back, and asked to have the question repeated.
    

      The little girls noticed that Volodya, who had always been so merry and
      talkative, also said very little, did not smile at all, and hardly seemed
      to be glad to be home. All the time they were at tea he only once
      addressed his sisters, and then he said something so strange. He pointed
      to the samovar and said:
    

      “In California they don’t drink tea, but gin.”
    

      He, too, seemed absorbed in his own thoughts, and, to judge by the looks
      that passed between him and his friend Lentilov, their thoughts were the
      same.
    

      After tea, they all went into the nursery. The girls and their father took
      up the work that had been interrupted by the arrival of the boys. They
      were making flowers and frills for the Christmas tree out of paper of
      different colours. It was an attractive and noisy occupation. Every fresh
      flower was greeted by the little girls with shrieks of delight, even of
      awe, as though the flower had dropped straight from heaven; their father
      was in ecstasies too, and every now and then he threw the scissors on the
      floor, in vexation at their bluntness. Their mother kept running into the
      nursery with an anxious face, asking:
    

      “Who has taken my scissors? Ivan Nikolaitch, have you taken my
      scissors again?”
    

      “Mercy on us! I’m not even allowed a pair of scissors!”
      their father would respond in a lachrymose voice, and, flinging himself
      back in his chair, he would pretend to be a deeply injured man; but a
      minute later, he would be in ecstasies again.
    

      On his former holidays Volodya, too, had taken part in the preparations
      for the Christmas tree, or had been running in the yard to look at the
      snow mountain that the watchman and the shepherd were building. But this
      time Volodya and Lentilov took no notice whatever of the coloured paper,
      and did not once go into the stable. They sat in the window and began
      whispering to one another; then they opened an atlas and looked carefully
      at a map.
    

      “First to Perm . . .” Lentilov said, in an undertone, “from
      there to Tiumen, then Tomsk . . . then . . . then . . . Kamchatka. There
      the Samoyedes take one over Behring’s Straits in boats . . . . And
      then we are in America. . . . There are lots of furry animals there. . . .”
    

      “And California?” asked Volodya.
    

      “California is lower down. . . . We’ve only to get to America
      and California is not far off. . . . And one can get a living by hunting
      and plunder.”
    

      All day long Lentilov avoided the little girls, and seemed to look at them
      with suspicion. In the evening he happened to be left alone with them for
      five minutes or so. It was awkward to be silent.
    

      He cleared his throat morosely, rubbed his left hand against his right,
      looked sullenly at Katya and asked:
    

      “Have you read Mayne Reid?”
    

      “No, I haven’t. . . . I say, can you skate?”
    

      Absorbed in his own reflections, Lentilov made no reply to this question;
      he simply puffed out his cheeks, and gave a long sigh as though he were
      very hot. He looked up at Katya once more and said:
    

      “When a herd of bisons stampedes across the prairie the earth
      trembles, and the frightened mustangs kick and neigh.”
    

      He smiled impressively and added:
    

      “And the Indians attack the trains, too. But worst of all are the
      mosquitoes and the termites.”
    

      “Why, what’s that?”
    

      “They’re something like ants, but with wings. They bite
      fearfully. Do you know who I am?”
    

      “Mr. Lentilov.”
    

      “No, I am Montehomo, the Hawk’s Claw, Chief of the Ever
      Victorious.”
    

      Masha, the youngest, looked at him, then into the darkness out of window
      and said, wondering:
    

      “And we had lentils for supper yesterday.”
    

      Lentilov’s incomprehensible utterances, and the way he was always
      whispering with Volodya, and the way Volodya seemed now to be always
      thinking about something instead of playing . . . all this was strange and
      mysterious. And the two elder girls, Katya and Sonya, began to keep a
      sharp look-out on the boys. At night, when the boys had gone to bed, the
      girls crept to their bedroom door, and listened to what they were saying.
      Ah, what they discovered! The boys were planning to run away to America to
      dig for gold: they had everything ready for the journey, a pistol, two
      knives, biscuits, a burning glass to serve instead of matches, a compass,
      and four roubles in cash. They learned that the boys would have to walk
      some thousands of miles, and would have to fight tigers and savages on the
      road: then they would get gold and ivory, slay their enemies, become
      pirates, drink gin, and finally marry beautiful maidens, and make a
      plantation.
    

      The boys interrupted each other in their excitement. Throughout the
      conversation, Lentilov called himself “Montehomo, the Hawk’s
      Claw,” and Volodya was “my pale-face brother!”
    

      “Mind you don’t tell mamma,” said Katya, as they went
      back to bed. “Volodya will bring us gold and ivory from America, but
      if you tell mamma he won’t be allowed to go.”
    

      The day before Christmas Eve, Lentilov spent the whole day poring over the
      map of Asia and making notes, while Volodya, with a languid and swollen
      face that looked as though it had been stung by a bee, walked about the
      rooms and ate nothing. And once he stood still before the holy image in
      the nursery, crossed himself, and said:
    

      “Lord, forgive me a sinner; Lord, have pity on my poor unhappy
      mamma!”
    

      In the evening he burst out crying. On saying good-night he gave his
      father a long hug, and then hugged his mother and sisters. Katya and Sonya
      knew what was the matter, but little Masha was puzzled, completely
      puzzled. Every time she looked at Lentilov she grew thoughtful and said
      with a sigh:
    

      “When Lent comes, nurse says we shall have to eat peas and lentils.”
    

      Early in the morning of Christmas Eve, Katya and Sonya slipped quietly out
      of bed, and went to find out how the boys meant to run away to America.
      They crept to their door.
    

      “Then you don’t mean to go?” Lentilov was saying
      angrily. “Speak out: aren’t you going?”
    

      “Oh dear,” Volodya wept softly. “How can I go? I feel so
      unhappy about mamma.”
    

      “My pale-face brother, I pray you, let us set off. You declared you
      were going, you egged me on, and now the time comes, you funk it!”
    

      “I . . . I . . . I’m not funking it, but I . . . I . . . I’m
      sorry for mamma.”
    

      “Say once and for all, are you going or are you not?”
    

      “I am going, only . . . wait a little . . . I want to be at home a
      little.”
    

      “In that case I will go by myself,” Lentilov declared. “I
      can get on without you. And you wanted to hunt tigers and fight! Since
      that’s how it is, give me back my cartridges!”
    

      At this Volodya cried so bitterly that his sisters could not help crying
      too. Silence followed.
    

      “So you are not coming?” Lentilov began again.
    

      “I . . . I . . . I am coming!”
    

      “Well, put on your things, then.”
    

      And Lentilov tried to cheer Volodya up by singing the praises of America,
      growling like a tiger, pretending to be a steamer, scolding him, and
      promising to give him all the ivory and lions’ and tigers’
      skins.
    

      And this thin, dark boy, with his freckles and his bristling shock of
      hair, impressed the little girls as an extraordinary remarkable person. He
      was a hero, a determined character, who knew no fear, and he growled so
      ferociously, that, standing at the door, they really might imagine there
      was a tiger or lion inside. When the little girls went back to their room
      and dressed, Katya’s eyes were full of tears, and she said:
    

      “Oh, I feel so frightened!”
    

      Everything was as usual till two o’clock, when they sat down to
      dinner. Then it appeared that the boys were not in the house. They sent to
      the servants’ quarters, to the stables, to the bailiff’s
      cottage. They were not to be found. They sent into the village— they
      were not there.
    

      At tea, too, the boys were still absent, and by supper-time Volodya’s
      mother was dreadfully uneasy, and even shed tears.
    

      Late in the evening they sent again to the village, they searched
      everywhere, and walked along the river bank with lanterns. Heavens! what a
      fuss there was!
    

      Next day the police officer came, and a paper of some sort was written out
      in the dining-room. Their mother cried. . . .
    

      All of a sudden a sledge stopped at the door, with three white horses in a
      cloud of steam.
    

      “Volodya’s come,” someone shouted in the yard.
    

      “Master Volodya’s here!” bawled Natalya, running into
      the dining-room. And Milord barked his deep bass, “bow-wow.”
    

      It seemed that the boys had been stopped in the Arcade, where they had
      gone from shop to shop asking where they could get gunpowder.
    

      Volodya burst into sobs as soon as he came into the hall, and flung
      himself on his mother’s neck. The little girls, trembling, wondered
      with terror what would happen next. They saw their father take Volodya and
      Lentilov into his study, and there he talked to them a long while.
    

      “Is this a proper thing to do?” their father said to them.
      “I only pray they won’t hear of it at school, you would both
      be expelled. You ought to be ashamed, Mr. Lentilov, really. It’s not
      at all the thing to do! You began it, and I hope you will be punished by
      your parents. How could you? Where did you spend the night?”
    

      “At the station,” Lentilov answered proudly.
    

      Then Volodya went to bed, and had a compress, steeped in vinegar, on his
      forehead.
    

      A telegram was sent off, and next day a lady, Lentilov’s mother,
      made her appearance and bore off her son.
    

      Lentilov looked morose and haughty to the end, and he did not utter a
      single word at taking leave of the little girls. But he took Katya’s
      book and wrote in it as a souvenir: “Montehomo, the Hawk’s
      Claw, Chief of the Ever Victorious.”