CHLOE, CHLORIS, AND CYTHEREA

 To make you acquainted by sight with
young Chloris: she was a tall girl, a trifle
meagre in outline, but not disagreeably so;
she had light reddish-brown hair, and a
sprinkling of freckles on a peachy skin, and
those eyes with dead-leaf spots in them; altogether
an air of openness and intelligent
goodness that had quickly thrown the newly
introduced off the question—was she pretty?
But she was pretty, too, at her hours.

 On this day she had shut out the sun by
means of the green Venetian blinds, and her
room, like a submerged crystal chamber, was
full of a watery light; she herself, white
clothed, made a fair green-shadowy nymph
in the dim green atmosphere.

 This was her first hour of complete con scious
content. So rich was she in content
that she had set herself to perusing a volume
of the driest essays, a present for a diligent
girl graduate.

 This sense of life unfolding like a normal
flower and becoming the perfection of a rose
was too much for the grateful heart to contemplate
at its ease; some great demonstration
towards God must follow on such contemplation.
And Chloris in her security
putting it off until bedtime, sat reading about
the discipline of the will, the happy blood
all the while keeping up in her veins a pleasant
undercurrent babbling of other matters.
Two hours more and the summer sun would
be reaching its glorious haven, the cool flow
in with the darkness, and time take up
again that sweet scanning of the lines of her
idyl....

 After reading the same passage some
seven times, Chloris let her book lie a moment
in her lap. How marvellous, how
simple, how natural, how exquisite! Truly
like the coming up of a flower. First, they
were children together, fair-dealing, un quarrelsome
playmates; then, schoolboy
and schoolgirl, always good unsentimental
friends; and finally, time, passing over them,
slowly turned them to lovers; for this, no
question, was whither they were tending:
quiet, undemonstrative, unjealous, faithful,
devoted lovers, presently married people,
and by and by, God pleasing, tenants of one
same grave. And this sweetness in the
heart, this best of all earthly goods, God
granted it to the humblest of his creatures!
Why, then, were so many dissatisfied with
this dear earth? Why were some on it interested
in the discipline of the will? Ah,
this summer, so endearingly begun, to be
ended so—and Chloris, in a confusion of
bliss, almost as if to give herself a countenance
towards herself, took up her book
again, finding moonlight and wild azaleas
and whippoorwills between the lines, a
dappled, singing shingle, a golden beach,
velvet winds from over sea.

 The sunshine crept off the window-square;
a sadness instantly invaded the room; Chloris
jumped up to open the blinds. Time to dress! Then she did her hair as painstakingly
as ably, put on a just-ironed white
gown with a violet figure, and stood at the
glass weighing the question of a velvet band
around the neck. A fateful sound already
was dawning on the distance outside, but
she did not as yet hear it. Too hot! She
tossed the velvet ribbon in the top bureau-drawer
so unconcernedly as if not, at that
moment, the Parc had been tangling the
skein of her life, and wondered idly if any
one describing her would call her pretty.
She thought, in conscience, not; but of a
charming appearance, she hoped any one
would.

 At this point penetrated to her brain a
sound of voices out on the road beyond the
lawn and the hedge. She looked between
the curtains.

 Two ladies, unknown to her, were slowly
sauntering past in the direction of the beach;
one, near middle age, in a darkish gown; the
other, young, in light colors of a distinctly
fashionable tone; this latter carried over her
shoulder a very large, fluffy, and, as it showed even at this distance, inexpressibly costly
parasol. She turned her face a moment
on the ancient vine-overclambered country-house,
from one window of which peeped
Chloris, looked it up and down and across,
and turned away, making, Chloris supposed,
some comment upon it to her companion.

 When they had disappeared from sight,
Chloris, still at the window, musing on that
face seen a moment, heard a leisurely jingling,
and saw pass at a walking pace an
empty shining carriage, drawn by two superb
bays, driven by a man in livery.

 "It must be their turn-out," she concluded
her wondering. "Who can they be but the
people that were to move into the Beauregard
cottage?"

 Then, as there was time to spare before
tea, she sat down in the window. Shortly,
was a lively jingling, a trampling, and the
shining carriage bowled swiftly by on its way
back from the beach; on its cushions, two
ladies under a broad lacy parasol; a mighty
cloud of dust running after it, never to over-take.

  Almost at the same moment Chloris saw
Him, half the subject of her idyl, coming
across the lawn.

 She went to meet him.

 "Who are the arrivals?" she asked at once.

 And here was pronounced, for the first time
before Chloris, the name of Cytherea.

 "Cytherea, Damon? Who is Cytherea?
Where does she come from? Do you know
her?"

 "Very slightly," answered the young man;
"I have met her in town. She had told me
she thought of coming here for the summer,
but I supposed it was conversation. I had
completely forgotten, until I saw her this
afternoon. She is entranced with everything!
You can never see our poky little
old place in its true light: you must get a
description of it from her, Chloris. She will
find it deadly dull before the end of a week;
but for the moment she imagines quiet to be
all she wants. She has been working like a
slave at doing the proper thing in town."

 "She has brought her style with her, I
see."

  "They are inseparable. She arrived yesterday
on the late train, and you should see
the change already in the Beauregard."

 "You have been there, then?"

 "Just a moment. They called to me from
the veranda. They were having tea. Fancy
their bringing down a grand-piano!"

 "Does she play much?"

 "I don't know. Very probably. She
looks as if she might."

 "Oh, no, Damon! There you mistake.
She looks as if she mightn't. She is very
pretty, but I will vouch for it she can't
play—"

 "Perhaps the cousin is the pianist. We
shall see. I said you would call on them
this evening."

 "I, Damon? The instant they arrive?
Why did you say that? Why should I call
before they have had time to breathe?"

 "Do you mind? I am so sorry. They
asked me to come, and I half promised. It
is likely to be somewhat slow for them here
if we stand on ceremony. You will like them,
I am sure."

  "You are sure? No doubt I shall. But
to-night seems rather—instantaneous, if you
don't mind. You will excuse me to them,
and I will wait till they get a little more
settled."

 "Settled! They have brought down an
army of servants. The house looks as if
they had lived in it for a month."

 "Make what excuse for me you please,
then."

 "You won't come, Chloris?"

 "I think not. Not this evening. Go by
yourself, and tell me all the great changes
to-morrow. She will be much better pleased
to see you than me, anyway."

 "Why do you say that?"

 "Her face, my dear boy! She can't play
the piano, to speak of, and she greatly prefers
men to women."

 "Perhaps you do her an injustice—"

 "Have I said anything disparaging? I
signalled two virtues, I think. You don't
really mind my not going, Damon? I had
intended to write letters this evening, and
mend table-cloths and read to father."

  When, shortly after tea, Damon had gone,
Chloris tried to return herself into a truthful
person by reading an hour to her father, and
adding a dozen stitches to a delicate darn,
and writing a note, which, when finished, she
tore up. In order, as far as possible, with
her conscience, she seated herself at the
piano, a poor, tin-voiced instrument, tired of
the sea-air. No one so well as Chloris,
accustomed to its senile vagaries, could
make the worn thing discourse music;
her greatest successes on it were old-time
compositions written in the day of spinet
and harpsichord, minuets with a sprinkling
of grace-notes, things not sonorous or profound.
To-night, playing for no one's praise,
she plunged haphazard into the melodies
most sympathetic at the moment, stormy
and subtle, melancholy and intricate and
modern. It was Chloris's one proud gift,
this effectiveness at the piano.

 Her father and his elderly sisters took
themselves off to bed on the stroke of ten.
Chloris remained on the adjustable stool,
relieved at their going. She took up her playing again, without trying now to keep
her eyes dry.

 The sweet, hot air of the day, cooling, was
turned to dew outside; something of the
same kind seemed taking place within herself—and
the dew was tears. Why had she
been so curiously uplifted that day, so at rest
concerning every point in life, so sure of one
thing at least? Nothing was changed, yet
she saw no reason now for blessing this summer,
golden hour for hour, and looking to it
for the greatest, serenest happiness. Damon?
What was Damon to her, or she to Damon?
He had never in so many words made love
to her, and she had never felt the first pang
of wonder or disappointment at this. They
had walked, rowed, ridden together. What
of it? They should do these things again a
hundred times, probably. What of that?
What had she been dreaming, erewhile?
Or was this the dream, this bad one? Something
splendid and shining and purple had
gone gray.

 While continuing mechanically to play,
she looked through the open window into the summer night. It was rightfully her
moon, that honeyed bright moon outside;
her balm-breathing night; it was her silver
sea yonder out of sight; they were her
odorous pine-needle paths in the sighing
grove—and she was robbed of them. And
the sense of it gave her a seething in the
heart, the like of which sensation she had
never dreamed existed: as if a painful separation
of all the atoms in it one from the
other, as well as the stern conviction of being—oh,
the novel idea!—a fool.

 "I won't have it!" she muttered, emphatically,
without knowing definitely what she
meant, and struck an angry discord.

 Through her playing reached her suddenly
that merry harness-jingle of the afternoon,
approaching, passing, fading away.

 "There they go—to the beach for the
second time to-day—to look at the ocean
by light of the moon."

 When in little less than an hour she heard
the breaking again, on the quiet air, of the
fatuous silvery jingle, she let her playing
fall to a mere musical murmur, and lis tened,
acutely, burning all the while with
shame.

 "Go slowly, Humphrey," she caught, in a
rich, sweet voice; "I want to listen to the
music."

 "She plays really wonderfully. I have
never heard playing I preferred to hers,"
came in a well-known deeper voice, at
which Chloris's cheeks waxed hotter still.
She pressed her foot on the pedal and shut
herself within a wall of dinning, buzzing
sound.

 When she had lifted it, and risen, the road
was empty, the night silent, but for the crickets
and the distant surf, as the grave.

  Several days passed, each bringing Chloris
its very natural request from Damon that
she would go with him to pay her respects
to the new neighbors; but with a perversity
that surprised herself more livelily than him,
she daily found a bad reason for putting off
the duty. This hindered the progress of the
idyl; for Damon had a delicate conscience
where these strangers were concerned; he would not see them bored in a latitude whose
honor, as an earlier inhabitant, he appeared
to have at heart.

 And presently the atmosphere of the whole
country-side seemed qualified by the presence
of this Cytherea. It seemed to Chloris one
could not escape the effect of her, without
taking to the deepest of the woods. She
was like an unstopped jar of some powerful
essence; the little country world was redolent
of her.

 Before the time Chloris had at last rigidly
fixed for a formal visit came a message from
Cytherea inviting her. Hard as she sought
to discover a reason for misliking the dainty
note, she could find none; it was irreproachable,
and Chloris dressed herself for the occasion
with a divided mind, the preponderant
part of which was finally comfort: she
should at least grapple now with a reality.

 She came to Cytherea's house at evening
under Damon's escort. As one approached
it among the trees it looked rather more like
one's idea of an Eastern temple than a sea-coast
cottage. The veranda was behung with colored paper moons, glowing subduedly
among the vines; soft light streamed
through lace from the changed interior.

 Excitement took Chloris from herself.
Now the great adversary was welcoming
her; and Chloris, at the touch of a warm,
soft hand, said to herself, "What bugbear
have I been frightening myself with?" and
found ease and ability to converse, and
release from that sense of disadvantage that
had ridden her helpless heart like a nightmare.

 This atmosphere of the great world that
went with Cytherea, how awakening, how
satisfying after all, to the mind! Not the
smallness of envy, thought Chloris, should
keep her from giving it its due, or getting
her benefit from it. In the distance and
abstract she had hated it; but entered into,
seen close, how unconscious, how inoffensive,
nay, genial, it proved! What a great good,
too, this wealth that permitted such distinction
in luxury! Country girl as she was, it
seemed to Chloris she was breathing her
native air.

  At Cytherea's prayer she sat down at the
piano, and to her own surprise played better
than usual. When she had done, she begged
the hostess to play. She forgot how she
had declared that Cytherea's face showed no
soul for music.

 She was surprised to hear the lady say,
"I play hardly at all." She sincerely now
could not believe it.

 "Ah, well!" laughed Cytherea; and good-naturedly
she pushed a chair to the piano,
and appeared preparing to begin.

 Chloris looked on in some wonder. Cytherea
seated herself half away from the keyboard,
one nonchalant arm over the back of
her chair, her curly forehead on her hand;
and, the first to smile at her own affectation,
played an elaborate waltz, very languidly,
with her left hand.

 Impossible for the eyes to leave her a
moment while she performed her pretty
trick; and ably enough she performed it,
with an adorable cream-white hand.

 Chloris seemed to be slowly returning to
consciousness. What perfection was here! Nature had given this creature everything.
Criticism of her could only pass current under
the stamp of envy. That gracious dark
beauty, that warm radiance! And sparkle,
and charm—with winningness, dignity, rarity,
variousness!

 Chloris looked over at Damon; and the
image of his fascinated face, as, a fond forgotten
smile on his lips, he followed with his
dark dog-eyes each movement of Cytherea's,
affected her as a drop of poison let into her
blood. She seemed to herself growing aged
and haggard, even as she sat there, the dancing
measure beating on her ear. Her hands
lay cold in the lap of her best gown—modest
made-over gown of pale purplish silk that
she wore with a lace bertha of past fashion,
once her poor mother's. "What is the use
of trying to contend with a thing like that?"
her heart asked, dully.

 An acuter pain pierced it when, the waltz
played out, the laugh following it laughed
out, and conversation resumed, she realized
the faintest possible shade of disregard in
Cytherea for the observations made by Damon. Cytherea prized her, Chloris's,
utterances distinctly more; her, she seemed,
from all her manner, to be honoring; him,
for some reason, she held a trifle cheap.
This seemed to Chloris just a little more
unendurable than all the rest. And the
dear boy, who, totally ignorant of the effect
he produced, was in such high spirits, was
so anxious to please, so cheerfully making a
mantle in the mud of himself for the beauty
to tread upon.

 At last it was over; Chloris lay in her own
bed in the pale summer darkness, and felt
she was the heart of the created world, and
this pain man's old inheritance; it seemed
the very essence of her being which was distilled
slowly from her eyes.

  On the day following, Chloris punctually
sought Cytherea, for appreciation must be
shown the cordiality of the beauty. That
was a question apart from others: one is
just and polite before anything else. A
person overhearing the chatting and laughing
of that afternoon in Cytherea's room would have thought certainly he listened to
a pair of heart friends. The greater expense
of admiration between the two women
seemed of a truth to be borne by Cytherea.
Chloris must look herself mentally over in
astonishment at this value set on her by so
great a judge. After the examination she
felt foolish and humble. She felt profoundly
how, all being different, she too could have
worshipped Cytherea.

 And now she must be concerned in every
sort of rural festivity organized by Damon
for Cytherea's amusement; she must see
the rival's first effect of being mildly bored
by Damon's whole-souled dedication turn
into an effect of indulgence, daily tinged
with increased liking; for who in nature could
fail to do final justice to one so simple, so sincere
as Damon—Damon, with his dear, clear,
curiously gentle Roman face and curly hair?

 "The heat does not seem to agree with
you this summer, child," one of the aunts
concluded her kindly meant scrutiny of
Chloris's face; and the girl's heart tightened
with affright.

  She stood that day before the glass, and,
leaning her elbows on the bureau, seriously
examined the tinted shadow. "All is of
no use," she said. "The more I care, the
more I must look like that. Does it not
seem a little strange that the more one loves
the less lovely one should become? And a
little hard, too, perhaps, oh, you, my God,
with all respect, who have arranged these
little matters?" And tired, discouraged
Chloris began weakly to laugh aloud, though
she was alone; and watched the grimacing
of her own reflection with a sort of brutal
contemptuousness. "Oh, you sickening
object!" she exclaimed, and hid the delicate,
nervous, tell-tale face in her hands. "This
cannot go on!" she raved. "Human flesh
cannot endure it—and I cannot alter it.
All must soon see how it is with me. I can
barely keep a hold on my temper now. I
must get away. Damon shall court her;
she shall bloom and smile at her ease for
him. Welcome to each other—both! I
shall be where I cannot see it. I refused to
visit Fidele in her mountain home. I had a use already—God help me!—for every hour
of the summer. I will write to say I repent.
Then Damon, Cytherea, sing duets out in
the canoe by moonlight; find clover-leaves
for each other. I shall be scouring the
mountain in search of healing herbs, and I
do not doubt but, God helping, I shall find
them. It is not in nature that a torture like
this should last!"

 And Chloris, when next she appeared before
the public eye, looked almost triumphant.
And when her leave had been taken
of all, and the swift air of change was blowing
against her brow, her heart felt so strangely
sound and quiet that she almost laughed,
asking herself, "Why am I going away? I
am recovered merely at the notion of it.
Had I but known, I could have remained
like a little heroine, and stood it out."

 But the hours passing broke down and
carried off more and more all the gallant
props of pride and resolution, and at last
Chloris sat in the galloping car, a drooping
runaway, who looked steadily out of the window,
and saw the flying scene through tears. Contemptible, countrified Chloris, with her
freckles and inferior clothes, and so ordinary
notions of conduct and taste, running away
from comparison with the peerless Cytherea;
taking her envy and weakness out
of sight till she got strength to disguise
them.

 Now the scenery, which she had not been
seeing, became more lonely and wild; the
first low hills, heavy and slow in the general
nimbleness of things, shifted themselves with
an amiable clumsiness till they had closed in
Chloris with her train; waking her suddenly,
with a faintly happy sense of diversion
from immediate suffering, to the feeling of
being a child again visiting strange countries.
Then wheeled and tumbled themselves
about and came to meet her the little hills'
big brothers, the mountains, with velvety
sides, and rocky, rosy summits. A weight
for no reason seemed to melt away from
Chloris's chest as she looked up at them,
and thought of living among them now for
many a day—the distinguished, sage, cool,
sturdily benevolent ones, so high above, so far from, the world she knew, down on the
hot-colored, populous plain.

 Here she was at last, where she must
alight; in a high, pure, crystal-clear atmosphere,
at a little lost place, wildly green to
eyes used to the sun-burned shore, forgotten
of all the world but this train that remembered
it for a second twice a day.

 And here was Fidele! It seemed to
Chloris she had not half known, until this
moment, how fond she was of Fidele. Tears
sprang to her eyes on meeting the familiar
eyes, and she embraced her old school friend
with an impulse of overflowing gratitude.
She felt like a storm-beaten lamb come to
some sort of shelter at last.

 After the first moment's frantic clutch
the two friends stood apart, holding hands,
and looking each other fondly and frankly
over, with wide, moved smiles. Fidele, seeing
Chloris's eyes, wondered why tears had
not come to her, too; and compared her
own nature unfavorably with her friend's
rich nature; and at this thought of her
friend's deep, sweet nature, behold! tears were come in her affectionate eyes, too.
Then both girls fell to giggling like schoolgirls,
from mere association of this meeting
with other meetings; and in a moment were
talking lightly and inconsecutively, in an
involuntary imitation of old days; and
Fidele had taken her friend's arm tightly
under her own, intertwined their fingers, and
was dragging her along at a hop-and-skip
pace.

 "What a godsend you are to me!" she
exclaimed, rapturously. "There is not a
soul in this forsaken place to whom one can
talk like a Christian. Oh, but we are slow!
Oh, but we are primitive! Oh, but we are
simple!—"

 "What air it is!" Chloris breathed, profoundly.
"How sweet! I never dreamed
such green!—My dear, this is Paradise!"

 "The air is good enough. The grass is
certainly green. But oh, the people are
green too! But now you are here, we will
change all this, dear. What a holiday!
You will inspire us. We will rise up, and
look into our closets, and fetch out where with
to make a good impression on the
stranger. You bring the very air of civilization
with you in your clothes and hair.
Where did you get it, Chlo—the general
air, you know? How ravishingly you do
your hair! And that little hat! Now,
who in the world but you would have a
hat like that? Oh, you rare darling! Do
you know you are greatly improved? You
are thinner, but it suits you. You always
were a beauty, you know. Yes, you were!
But you have acquired so much besides—such
an interesting air—yes, you have!—so
much expression. No one could see you
without—gospel truth, Chlo! But, yes—I
will—I will hold my tongue. Did you bring
your music at least, for there is a piano, such
as it is. Thank Heaven! You shall make
their capture with song. They shall grovel.
You know, dear, I am not really so silly as I
seem; your arriving has turned my head.
I always did adore you, but it is even better
than I remembered."

 Chloris that night, alone at last, tried
to readjust herself, to get back through this new experience her self of yesterday. The
morning of her starting from home, but sixteen
hours removed, seemed withdrawn into
a much remoter past; a screen of glittering,
crumbling, changing color was arisen between
herself and it. She interrogated her breast
curiously for that pain lately grown so familiar,
forgotten for the first time only in these
last hours; her breast did not answer by at
once producing it. She goaded it tentatively
with a sharp memory or two; it responded
sluggishly—a divinely restful torpor was
possessing it. She knelt by the window,
and looked out at the still, strong, black
mountains; instinctively she wafted profound
thanks to their rude majesties. Far,
far away in her dream at this moment, in
an infinitely small, sun-warmed, murmuring
plain, moved two tiny figures: the great
Damon, who erewhile filled the entire horizon
of her life, and the great Cytherea, who
interposed her fair shape between her and
the sun, shutting off the light of life—two
tiny black figures, in a far-off, sunshiny place
it fatigued her to think of. Only the moun tains
were big and important; and this cool,
rough bedchamber was fifteen by twelve;
only Fidele and herself and the people
seen for the first time this evening were
life-size and real.

 Stretching her tired limbs in the bed, that
had nothing to-night in common with the
rack, feeling natural sleep creep over her as
it had long not done, she remembered with
a vague joy that she was young; she divined
a time ahead—perhaps not so far ahead
either—when life would become possible
again.

 She felt as if cosily tucked in and kept
warm by the sense of Fidele's affectionate
appreciation, and the evident admiration of
her friends, called in even on this first evening
to greet her. It was good. It restored
one's lost self-confidence.

 The last thought Chloris was conscious of
was not for Damon this once, but Demetrius.
(Demetrius, I said. The reader here revolts.
Chloris, Cytherea, a Chloe apparently still to
come, and Fidele, Damon, Demetrius! Are
these names to pass off on the discriminating reader in a tale that has nothing to do with
the times of Theocritus or Addison? I confess
it, I would have deceived. The persons
in this story knew themselves by none of the
names I have set down. They had been
given at the font, and had by chance and inheritance
come into, names that represented
them far less well. Who can assume to fitly
name a babe in arms? With a pure purpose
I rechristened them. If you could know
what, for instance, was the real name of Cytherea—But
enough.)

 On the next morning arises Chloris, constating
with thankfulness that no more than
the night before is her heart bleeding at
every pore. Filled with a venerable feminine
desire to still increase the favorable impression
she is sure she has made on the inhabitants
of this high hamlet, she does her hair
more than ever engagingly, puts on her
crispest white gown with the lavender ribbons,
and her broad straw hat with roses—the
hat Damon had praised in the early part
of the season. Something stirs in her sleeping
bosom at the remembrance; she pauses in her task of pinning it on; the green-gray
eyes with the brown spots grow fixed upon
a vision, small as if seen through the wrong
end of the opera-glass: On a shining shore,
two little figures setting out in a sail-boat—only
two, for the cousin has pleaded the disagreeable
effect on her of the motion of the
sea. Chloris sits down discouraged, feeling
the blood drop from her face, and her heart
present her with as finished a pain as ever.
"It really matters so very little," she murmurs,
firmly restraining from wringing her
hands; "I only—only should like to know
how long this kind of thing may be supposed
to last!"

 Chloris and Fidele loiter about the garden
full of morning sunshine, snipping off wet
sweet-peas and roses, and reminding each
other of things. Then, to please Chloris,
they go for a stroll. Chloris is eager for a
little climb. Heated and pleasantly tired,
they come to the top of an eminence and
sit down under the only clump of trees, in
company of the unbudging horned cows,
who know their claim is good, for they got there first. Fidele, leaning against a
tree-trunk, fans herself more and more fitfully
with her hat, and presently slumbers.
Chloris, with her head in Fidele's lap, can
never weary of looking off over the faint-hued
valley which the shadows of clouds softly
overstray. In this delicious bodily relaxation
after hill-climbing in the sun, strange
peace inundates her soul, and she entertains
a superstition that it is flowing out to her
from the mountains, and lies luxuriously,
letting herself be done good to. "They
know the secret of peace," she muses in her
manner of a girl. "They cannot speak, but
the effect of their knowledge radiates from
them, and reaches us. The end of all—of
all is peace. All works towards it incessantly,
as one sees nature do towards harmony.
Through these battles, to peace.
Why can one not remember it down on the
plain?" Now a cloud obscures the sun that
gropes through it with long golden fingers;
Chloris, dreaming, ponders half wistfully
what it would be to remain here always,
begin life anew, never return where one had suffered so much, and was surely so little
missed!

 On their way home the girls meet Demetrius
in his chaise, on his rounds. He reins
in, and leans out of the leathern hood; with
arms alink the girls stand in the white road
below, in a great bath of light. They converse
a moment; Chloris's lifted face, with
the stamp on it still of her high thinking on
the hill-top, is like a flushed pearl under her
rose-laden hat.

 "You must let me show you the country,"
says Demetrius, before driving on.

 When he is gone, Chloris and Fidele naturally
fall to talking of him.

 "How is it," says Chloris, "that a man so
superior has attained his age and is merely
a doctor in a place like this?"

 "My dear, we have our ailments like the
rest. You don't grudge us a good doctor?
He was born here, and after a good number
of years down in the haunts of men came
back in a natural sort of way. His father
left him property up here. He is not ambitious;
he has an abundance of money. He practises more or less for the love of it, and
something to do. He is our most presentable
man, and I want you to appreciate our
good points in him. He adores music; the
piano I spoke of is his. He has invited us up
there; as soon as you feel inclined we will go."

 When, in a few days, Chloris consented to
go, one-half the curious population went with
her, to hear her play.

 The stiff farm-house parlor, closed nine-tenths
of the year, had been made to breathe
out its musty ice-house atmosphere; lighted
and garnished and filled with guests, it
scarcely recognized itself.

 Demetrius leaned on the instrument while
Chloris played, his untrimmed head dreamily
drooping, his eyes half closed, like a lazy
cat's in the sunshine, when a hand is stroking
it the right way. When she had finished,
and all lifted their hands and praised and
questioned her, he turned away with a sigh,
saying nothing; and yet both knew that the
truest music-lover of all was he; and when
she played again it was chiefly with the
thought of him as an audience.

  "What an air of intelligence your hands
have when you play," he said, later. "But
it is the same when you are crocheting, or
just drumming on the chair-arm. They look
as if they could talk, and utter such wise and
witty things."

 A very friendly understanding was almost
at once established between them; after
which, he being such a sensible, direct, humorous
man, well on towards middle age,
and Fidele urging it, it seemed but proper
to accept the offered seat in his chaise and
see the country to the best advantage.

 They travelled many leagues behind his
mare; they reached many points of vantage
from which to look off at the view. Their
conversation was half laughter; yet Chloris
felt a serene security in the awe she knew
she inspired.

 In the country doctor's company, such was
his effect on her and hers on him, Chloris
felt always sweetly young, and unusually
well-dressed, unusually beautiful and brilliant—as
well as experienced in the ways of the
world, and possessed of a strong and compli cated
character. With all this, something of
an impostor.

 After many rides, many conversations,
the light about Demetrius was insensibly
changed, and offered him under a different
aspect. What genuine kindliness in his
rather heavy yet well-featured face! what a
good, sane, comprehensive intelligence under
his shaggy hair! and under his country-made
waistcoat a heart suspected to be tender and
faithful! If he had done little, risen little,
circumstances were more to blame than will;
and it pierced through his mockery of himself
sometimes that he was not all satisfied
now with his condition; ambition that had
slumbered gave signs of waking. And he
was still young enough to mould his fate to
a different shape.

 Chloris, regarding him, as she told herself,
merely in the light of a specimen in which
to study human nature, concluded that the
woman who intrusted her happiness to Demetrius,
at least in the event of her being a
superior creature, would be in the main a
very fortunate one. Nothing to fear in this man from inconstancy; no account to make
with the inflammable imagination of youth;
the gracious, condescending woman would get
unbounded gratitude from his humility for
every little favor shown. Her life would be
so peaceful, so guarded from all trouble that
care can keep at bay, so surrounded with
delicate consideration.

 So the herds-grass purpled and was mown;
the mustard yellowed, and its yellow vanished;
and the apple began to redden.
Then Demetrius, with a little help from
everybody, gave a party—a party the like
of which had not been given in the sleepy
place since his sister's marriage a dozen years
before; but this Chloris from afar, as Fidele
had foretold, was inspiring the natives.

 And undoubtedly she was the queen of
the party. To see her was to know as much.
She wore a grand gown of pale purplish silk,
with a real lace bertha (the talk of the place
for nine days after), and white flowers pricked
into the shiny structure of her hair.

 There was hired music, and dancing on
the waxed kitchen-floor, and an opportunity never surpassed in the annals of the neighborhood
to get enough of good things to eat.

 Towards the end, when one-half the simple
revellers were gone, and the musicians were
silenced with feeding, and the night air
breathed in at the open windows with a feel
of great lateness in it, came a petition to
Chloris to play a piece on the piano.

 After various laughing negatives, yielding,
Chloris, whose eyes were lightsome and
dancing to-night, pushed away the stool,
and, substituting for it a chair, sat a little
sideways in this, with one arm over the
back; and, a curious little smile playing on
her lips, propped her ruffled head with its
wilted flowers on her right hand; and, while
the country innocents exchanged wondering
glances, with her nimble left hand, amply
sufficient to the task alone, began playing a
waltz—a sweet, dreamy waltz.

 When they were at last home, and Fidele,
half undressed, had come in to chat a moment
with her friend, she asked, "Did you
enjoy yourself, dearie?"

 "Immensely!" said Chloris. "How nice they all are to me! What dear, kind things
they are! By the way, though, there was
something I wanted to ask. Who is that
dark-haired, plump young woman, with black
bugle eyes, and a skin like red-and-white
paper—quite passable-looking, if she did not
look so sulky?"

 "What did she wear?"

 "Something pretentious but unbecoming.
It had a lot of bead-trimming. Now, speaking
of how nice every one and everything
was, I except that girl's manner. She was
positively rude. I did not know how to
take it. I have met her before, with all the
others, and passed her on the road, bowing
my best; but we have never more than exchanged
a word or two, so I can have done
nothing to offend her."

 Fidele was laughing.

 "Who is she?" asked Chloris.

 "That is Chloe," replied Fidele.

 "Chloe?"

 "You mustn't mind her rudeness, dearie.
She is really a good sort of creature. But
she is no doubt sorely tried."

  "What tries her? Why do you laugh?"

 "Demetrius! He was a shade partial to
her before you came—not enough to cause
comment in any place but this. And, even
here, not enough to lay himself open to
blame. It is a pity, though, that she can't
keep her feelings hidden, and must vent
her spite on you. Silly thing! I have no
patience with that kind of girl."

 Chloris's fingers became absent among the
hair they were braiding. She looked into the
lamp-flame with a vacant expression.

 Fidele plied the brush in her tangled locks,
and went on chatting.

 Suddenly Chloris, who for some time had
not spoken, laughed.

 "What is it, dear?" asked Fidele, looking
up at her friend, where she stood still staring
in the lamp-flame. "Have I said anything
funny?"

 "No, it was nothing you said. I was
thinking—my mind travelled from one thing
to another—you know how it jumps about—and
I had to laugh, before I knew, at a stupid
old circumstance—"

  "What circumstance?"

 "Oh, nothing, dear—a thing we learned in
school, in French, a fable—never mind!"

 "A fable! My dear Chloris, how interesting!
What fable?"

 "I can't quote it. I have forgotten my
French. It was about a hare—a hare who
ran away in terror of a bull, and in his flight
came to a swamp where the frogs were just
as much afraid of him. Wouldn't it be
interesting to know the rest? What the
hare did, whether he put on his fiercest outside,
and tried to make the frogs quake in
their little wet boots?"

 "What nonsense, you dear idiot! Ask
Demetrius! He will give his best consideration
to the frog question, and be impressed
with its profoundness, while Chloe wears
bead trimming and grows sage-color. Good-night,
dear. I am dreadfully sleepy."

 "I mean you shall take me to call on
Chloe some day soon. Now that I see her
face with a different idea of her, it is a nice
face! Poor child! I could never settle down
contentedly under the notion that some one disliked me; could you? Even a dog! I
have had such a happy, peaceful time here,
in this dear little place, I want every one to
feel kindly towards me when I leave."

 "You speak as if I were going to let you
go, Chloris."

 "Oh, my dearest, I don't want to talk of it.
I have put off talking of it, day after day,
yet you must know that I can only stay a
very little longer. Think of it! I came for
a month, and I have stayed—how long is it?
And father must be getting lonesome; and
he so seldom writes, and then tells me little
or nothing. And everything must be needing
me—"

 "You extraordinary girl!" exclaimed Fidele,
now very wide awake; "I swear I absolutely
do not understand you! What do you
mean? First you seem—you seem—and
then—and then suddenly—"

 Fidele could not get out her words, for
Chloris's hand was across her lips.

 "Hush!" she pleaded, quite earnestly.
"Say nothing about it! When a thing has
been spoken it seems to exist! You don't understand—I don't understand either.
Who is consistent? Who knows what he
wants? Who knows ever what he is doing?
How many creatures we crush just walking
across the grass! A path opens ahead, we
take it blindly, not knowing whither it leads.
With good reason we say we grope in the
dark. Let us have the grace, then, when a
moment's illumination is granted us, to go
by its light. You don't know what I mean;
I scarcely know myself. But don't try to
keep me, dear! Remain at my side every
minute that is left of my stay here; see me
to the train without the shadow of an adventure—and
I will love you all my life!"

 And a few days later the train that had
brought Chloris picked her up again, all
flushed with Fidele's last kisses, and flew
with her homeward.

 She looked out of the window with other
eyes than those she had first turned upon
the mountains. Yet tears were in them, too,
as she said, "Good-bye, dears! Your little
sister leaves you, made quite well again.
But never will she cease to love you. You shall be always in her dreams. And she
will come back one day. When God sends
her sorrows she will take refuge again with
you."

 All through the first hours of being rushed
along across the brilliant fading land, that
she looked at, scarcely seeing, she retained a
sense of exaltation. She seemed to herself
as a sword after the proofs of furnace and
ice-brook. She could have laughed to think
of the philosopher that was going home in
place of the pallid victim of an almost pathological
sensibility.

 The mountains were dwindling to little
hills; the latter-year sun was too barely
bright: a crude earth-color and a sombre
green took place of the angelic vague green
and blue and pink of the dewier, earlier
period. The plain was opening with its more
trivial detail. Chloris's mind descended to
its level, and projected itself with a limited
emotion into the circumstances of the approaching
home-coming. She felt prepared
to endure whatever awaited her with grace
and dignity; she felt sure, indeed, that she should feel very little. "I have learned the
secret of life," she said to herself; "I have
weighed and measured everything."

 At this same moment an elderly gentleman
who had a daughter was thinking how
touchingly young and inexperienced his
fellow-traveller looked; in his old heart he
felt sorry for her, somehow, for being so
young.

 "I have weighed and measured everything,"
she said. "God is real, God lasts,
and the love of Him. Human passion
passes away. One might almost say that it
does not exist. It is like a physical pain:
it tortures, you try to locate it, you fix your
mind upon the presumed seat of it—it is not
there, there is no pain; and presently, when
you are well, you cannot call up a remembrance
of the sensation. I feel fitted to
write a book on this subject. I thought I
could never endure my life without Damon—dear,
dear Damon! Yet I live and am
improved in health. And, blinded by I shall
never be able to explain what mist, I was
beginning to adapt my mind to the thought of life with Demetrius, whom I pictured out
of all proportion happy and grateful to me.
Why more grateful than another? Thank
God I was delivered from committing such
a blunder! Ah, if I could teach Chloe all
that I have learned! But she does not need
it; she gets what she wants, for beyond a
doubt Demetrius in time goes back to her.
I—I am armed now at every point. I have
a defence against every circumstance. The
secret is: Nothing matters, but God above.
And, knowing this, I mean to be very sweet
to all at home, more thoughtful of every one,
more generous of all myself—"

 She was running between familiar orchards
and fields; the image of reaching home became
very present, and a sweetness pervaded
her rising excitement at the thought of touching
so soon the home-hands. The mountains
were thrown back to the horizon of her mind.
Between the sandy hummocks, beyond the
level salt meadows which she had left green
and found russet, she caught glimpses of a
great sapphire line. She began looking
eagerly for the farm-house that meant she was within a minute of her journey's end.
It flashed past. She gathered up her things;
she came out on the platform, and with a
joyous heart looked for her father's gray face
and his hand extended to help her down.

 He was not there, and she got off the train
alone, half-conscious of a dog-cart not far,
with a horse behaving as a horse should not
at the locomotive. The superbly indifferent
iron monster puffed off, dragging after it its
train; the indignant horse quieted down.
She heard her name called; the voice was
the man's in the dog-cart, it was Damon's.
The philosopher hurried towards him with
an insanely beating heart, an uplifted, greeting,
beaming face.

 He helped her in, and his trickle of answers
met her stream of questions, and her stream
of answers his trickle of questions, as they
jogged, tilting along between the dusty roadsides.
The warm flood of her home-coming
sensations subsided a little, and she turned
to look at him, to take a fond inventory of
his face—dear old faithful friend, so kind to
fetch her himself! Her heart tightened. What was gone wrong with Damon?—Damon,
whom she had been picturing so
happy, and was just rousing her spirit to
question casually concerning Cytherea.
Even at that moment they were approaching
her dwelling, when the question, if she
could make her voice right, not too indifferent,
nor yet too interested, would seem so in
place.

 The grass on the lawn was long and uneven,
constellated with twinkling autumn
dandelions; the windows were shuttered, the
veranda was empty, the chimney smokeless;
a forgotten hammock rope, blackened and
twisted by the rain, swung from a branch in
front of the deserted house, thumping faintly
against the tree-trunk. Chloris turned
her lengthened face towards Damon; he
lifted to hers a pair of very miserable eyes,
and said, in an unresonant voice, "You
should have got back in time for the cattle-fair.
It was better than usual this year.
Cookson's little mare took a prize."

 "You don't mean it!" faltered Chloris,
and looking straight ahead set her lips hard, to keep down an impetuous flood of hatred
for Cytherea.

 She saw the propriety of continuing to
talk; but she could not keep her mind on it.
Damon's powers of conversation, too, had
failed him. He kept a stolid face to the
horse's head; and they drove in silence to
her door, where, alighting, she was swallowed
in a sea of affectionate fatherly and auntly
embraces.

 "I may stay to tea, mayn't I?" asked
Damon, dully, from his corner, where he
seemed sitting in the cold.

 Chloris gave him a place beside herself,
and treated him like a sick, beloved child;
but so tactfully, he could know only that it
soothed.

 She let him lie on the sofa, afterwards,
while she played, and the others slept in the
upper chambers.

 She played with upturned face, pale and
gentle and full of understanding; her eyebrows
lifted, her eyes very large and kind.
She would have thought that Damon slept,
but that now and again he sighed.

  When at last she stopped to look for something
among her music, to go on with, he got
up and came to the piano-side. "I am so
glad you have got back," he said, from all his
heart; "you are such a brick. Good Lord,
how I have missed you—"

 He turned away and went aimlessly to the
window, and stood looking out. "I suppose
it is time I went," he said. "But I hate to
go home! I don't know what is come to me,
I can't sleep these nights."

 Chloris had gone to the window, too, and
stood beside him, her indulgent young face,
that wore a world-old expression, turned on
the dimly glimmering white petunia-beds
outside.

 "Would you—won't you come out for a
little stroll, Chloris? Run for your shawl,
there is a dear girl, and let us go over to the
beach. It isn't really late, and I am so restless,
and I don't want to go alone, and it is
so stuffy in my room at home."

 Chloris, without a word of demur, took
her wrap and followed him. They walked
side by side in silence; the sense they must have in common of the beauty of the night
might at first take lieu of conversation;
when that sense must be outworn, they still
thought their thoughts in silence. Chloris
knew the relief it is not to pretend; Damon
thought only of himself in this hour.

 It was she, after a while, that led—tall,
slender figure a step ahead of him, walking
swiftly, with a sort of intrepidity. With his
head a little bowed, his hands behind him,
he followed.

 She led him to the beach, and without
regard for time or fitness of things, farther
and farther along the smooth sands, away
from home; then, by a long loop, back to
the homeward road, as if with the determination
to tire him out. She herself was conscious
of no fatigue. She felt like a spirit;
her uplifted eyes seemed so expanded that
they could take in all the radiant firmament.

 At last, as if awaking, he stopped and
vaguely looked about, saying, "I am ready
to drop! Good Lord, how far have you
been taking me? Let us sit down a moment
and rest."

  They were not far from home, on the edge
of a familiar pine-grove that ran down to the
lapping inland sea. She sank on the dry
pine-needles; he dropped beside her, and,
tearing off his cap, unquestioningly laid his
head in her lap.

 "Does it ache?" she asked, softly.

 "Yes," he murmured. "Rub it."

 She passed her hand with a measured
motion across his forehead, pushing up the
heavy hair. She felt his face for an instant
press closer to her knees; volumes of gratitude
seemed expressed in the impulsive
movement. She continued her stroking
with a quiet, sisterly hand, her swelling heart
suddenly choking her. She had him back,
that she knew beyond a doubt. Broken,
disillusioned, his heart seared by the image
of another, he was hers, as he lay there
thinking of that other. Hers to help, to
heal, to make love her as much as she loved
him. And a flood of human passion, the
sensation she had decided—God forgive her!—disposed
of forever, surged in her. Her
eyes brimmed over with happy tears. Why should there be any feeling of bitterness
mixed in a feeling so sweet? Why should
the hurt to one's vanity be remembered in
such a situation? Why not be finally glad
to give more than one received, offer something
whole for something broken, bless
beyond all desert? No—no—that other
could never have loved him so! Fate had
meant well by him in putting her out of
reach; this sorrow of his should pass away
and be as if it had never been. Chloris felt
in herself such inexhaustible wells of tenderness
and patience, she knew hers was the
good title; she knew she could be sufficient—make
Damon forget. Her heart sang a
song of praise and victory, while her hand
smoothed his forehead with the fancy that
it brushed away the image of Cytherea, fatal
line by line.

 Ineffable fatigue drew her down from high
serene thoughts to thoughts nearer earth.
She ached; waves of unnatural sensation
swept through her, but she would not move.
The weight of his dear head was better than
ease.

  While she took patience till he should be
ready to rise and go sensibly home to bed, a
whimsical image formed in her brain: Herself,
and to one side of her, a little higher,
Cytherea, and to the other, a little lower,
Chloe—and beyond Chloe, in the descending
line, some poor woman, not pretty or winning
at all, to whom Chloe must appear a half-divinity;
and above Cytherea, in the ascending
line, another fairer than she, for, when all
was said, there must be in this world women
even fairer than the great Cytherea, of whom
she, perchance, lying awake in her queenly
bed, would think with anguish, confessing
herself helpless to struggle. Poor Cytherea,
then, in her turn! Chloris framed a sincere
wish for her continued happiness, and that
in the event of despised love God should
grant her to become a philosopher. And
her imagination went on feebly, whimsically,
weaving. Still another fairer still creature
above Cytherea's victress—still another at
the other end, to whom the envier of Chloe
should be an object of envy—and so on, till
the chain seemed to extend from the seraphs down to the last of the most degraded race,
and take a slightly humorous aspect. "It
pleases the powers to be merry," thought
Chloris, and was conscious of no irreverence
in the conceit.

 "Wake up, Chloris!" came Damon's voice,
sounding more as it had used to sound, before
he was so grown-up, and had untoward
things happen to him in his sentiments.

 "I have not been asleep!" she said, sheepishly,
"except below my knees."

 "I won't contradict you, but when I struck
a light you were nodding and smiling away
to yourself like a little China mandarin.
Have you any idea of the time it is? Well,
I won't enlighten you. What a crazy
thing we have been doing! Come, dear,
let me help you up. I hope to Heaven you
haven't taken cold. Hello, can't you walk
straight? What a brute I am! Take my
arm—"

 And laughing weakly and wearily, they set
out staggering across the dim stubble-field
that separated them from home.

 "Dear old Chloris!" Damon murmured, pressing her arm to his side. "Best girl in
the universe! You can never think what a
comfort it is to have you home again. I feel
more like myself. I think that to-night I
shall sleep."

 THE END