THE CLOAK

 BY NIKOLAY V. GOGOL

  I

n the department
      of——, but it is better not to mention the department. The
      touchiest things in the world are departments, regiments, courts of
      justice, in a word, all branches of public service. Each individual
      nowadays thinks all society insulted in his person. Quite recently, a
      complaint was received from a district chief of police in which he plainly
      demonstrated that all the imperial institutions were going to the dogs,
      and that the Czar’s sacred name was being taken in vain; and in
      proof he appended to the complaint a romance, in which the district chief
      of police is made to appear about once in every ten pages, and sometimes
      in a downright drunken condition. Therefore, in order to avoid all
      unpleasantness, it will be better to designate the department in question,
      as a certain department.

 So, in a certain department there was a certain official—not a very
      notable one, it must be allowed—short of stature, somewhat
      pock-marked, red-haired, and mole-eyed, with a bald forehead, wrinkled
      cheeks, and a complexion of the kind known as sanguine. The St. Petersburg
      climate was responsible for this. As for his official rank—with us
      Russians the rank comes first—he was what is called a perpetual
      titular councillor, over which, as is well known, some writers make merry
      and crack their jokes, obeying the praiseworthy custom of attacking those
      who cannot bite back.

 His family name was Bashmachkin. This name is evidently derived from
      bashmak (shoe); but, when, at what time, and in what manner, is not known.
      His father and grandfather, and all the Bashmachkins, always wore boots,
      which were resoled two or three times a year. His name was Akaky
      Akakiyevich. It may strike the reader as rather singular and far-fetched;
      but he may rest assured that it was by no means far-fetched, and that the
      circumstances were such that it would have been impossible to give him any
      other.

 This was how it came about.

 Akaky Akakiyevich was born, if my memory fails me not, in the evening on
      the 23rd of March. His mother, the wife of a Government official, and a
      very fine woman, made all due arrangements for having the child baptised.
      She was lying on the bed opposite the door; on her right stood the
      godfather, Ivan Ivanovich Eroshkin, a most estimable man, who served as
      the head clerk of the senate; and the godmother, Arina Semyonovna
      Bielobrinshkova, the wife of an officer of the quarter, and a woman of
      rare virtues. They offered the mother her choice of three names, Mokiya,
      Sossiya, or that the child should be called after the martyr Khozdazat.
      “No,” said the good woman, “all those names are poor.”
      In order to please her, they opened the calendar at another place; three
      more names appeared, Triphily, Dula, and Varakhasy. “This is awful,”
      said the old woman. “What names! I truly never heard the like. I
      might have put up with Varadat or Varukh, but not Triphily and Varakhasy!”
      They turned to another page and found Pavsikakhy and Vakhtisy. “Now
      I see,” said the old woman, “that it is plainly fate. And
      since such is the case, it will be better to name him after his father.
      His father’s name was Akaky, so let his son’s name be Akaky
      too.” In this manner he became Akaky Akakiyevich. They christened
      the child, whereat he wept, and made a grimace, as though he foresaw that
      he was to be a titular councillor.

 In this manner did it all come about. We have mentioned it in order that
      the reader might see for himself that it was a case of necessity, and that
      it was utterly impossible to give him any other name.

 When and how he entered the department, and who appointed him, no one
      could remember. However much the directors and chiefs of all kinds were
      changed, he was always to be seen in the same place, the same attitude,
      the same occupation—always the letter-copying clerk—so that it
      was afterwards affirmed that he had been born in uniform with a bald head.
      No respect was shown him in the department. The porter not only did not
      rise from his seat when he passed, but never even glanced at him, any more
      than if a fly had flown through the reception-room. His superiors treated
      him in coolly despotic fashion. Some insignificant assistant to the head
      clerk would thrust a paper under his nose without so much as saying,
      “Copy,” or, “Here’s an interesting little case,”
      or anything else agreeable, as is customary amongst well-bred officials.
      And he took it, looking only at the paper, and not observing who handed it
      to him, or whether he had the right to do so; simply took it, and set
      about copying it.

 The young officials laughed at and made fun of him, so far as their
      official wit permitted; told in his presence various stories concocted
      about him, and about his landlady, an old woman of seventy; declared that
      she beat him; asked when the wedding was to be; and strewed bits of paper
      over his head, calling them snow. But Akaky Akakiyevich answered not a
      word, any more than if there had been no one there besides himself. It
      even had no effect upon his work. Amid all these annoyances he never made
      a single mistake in a letter. But if the joking became wholly unbearable,
      as when they jogged his head, and prevented his attending to his work, he
      would exclaim:

 “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”

 And there was something strange in the words and the voice in which they
      were uttered. There was in it something which moved to pity; so much so
      that one young man, a newcomer, who, taking pattern by the others, had
      permitted himself to make sport of Akaky, suddenly stopped short, as
      though all about him had undergone a transformation, and presented itself
      in a different aspect. Some unseen force repelled him from the comrades
      whose acquaintance he had made, on the supposition that they were decent,
      well-bred men. Long afterwards, in his gayest moments, there recurred to
      his mind the little official with the bald forehead, with his
      heart-rending words, “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”
      In these moving words, other words resounded—“I am thy
      brother.” And the young man covered his face with his hand; and many
      a time afterwards, in the course of his life, shuddered at seeing how much
      inhumanity there is in man, how much savage coarseness is concealed
      beneath refined, cultured, worldly refinement, and even, O God! in that
      man whom the world acknowledges as honourable and upright.

 It would be difficult to find another man who lived so entirely for his
      duties. It is not enough to say that Akaky laboured with zeal; no, he
      laboured with love. In his copying, he found a varied and agreeable
      employment. Enjoyment was written on his face; some letters were even
      favourites with him; and when he encountered these, he smiled, winked, and
      worked with his lips, till it seemed as though each letter might be read
      in his face, as his pen traced it. If his pay had been in proportion to
      his zeal, he would, perhaps, to his great surprise, have been made even a
      councillor of state. But he worked, as his companions, the wits, put it,
      like a horse in a mill.

 However, it would be untrue to say that no attention was paid to him. One
      director being a kindly man, and desirous of rewarding him for his long
      service, ordered him to be given something more important than mere
      copying. So he was ordered to make a report of an already concluded
      affair, to another department; the duty consisting simply in changing the
      heading and altering a few words from the first to the third person. This
      caused him so much toil, that he broke into a perspiration, rubbed his
      forehead, and finally said, “No, give me rather something to copy.”
      After that they let him copy on forever.

 Outside this copying, it appeared that nothing existed for him. He gave no
      thought to his clothes. His uniform was not green, but a sort of
      rusty-meal colour. The collar was low, so that his neck, in spite of the
      fact that it was not long, seemed inordinately so as it emerged from it,
      like the necks of the plaster cats which pedlars carry about on their
      heads. And something was always sticking to his uniform, either a bit of
      hay or some trifle. Moreover, he had a peculiar knack, as he walked along
      the street, of arriving beneath a window just as all sorts of rubbish was
      being flung out of it; hence he always bore about on his hat scraps of
      melon rinds, and other such articles. Never once in his life did he give
      heed to what was going on every day to the street; while it is well known
      that his young brother officials trained the range of their glances till
      they could see when any one’s trouser-straps came undone upon the
      opposite sidewalk, which always brought a malicious smile to their faces.
      But Akaky Akakiyevich saw in all things the clean, even strokes of his
      written lines; and only when a horse thrust his nose, from some unknown
      quarter, over his shoulder, and sent a whole gust of wind down his neck
      from his nostrils, did he observe that he was not in the middle of a line,
      but in the middle of the street.

 On reaching home, he sat down at once at the table, sipped his
      cabbage-soup up quickly, and swallowed a bit of beef with onions, never
      noticing their taste, and gulping down everything with flies and anything
      else which the Lord happened to send at the moment. When he saw that his
      stomach was beginning to swell, he rose from the table, and copied papers
      which he had brought home. If there happened to be none, he took copies
      for himself, for his own gratification, especially if the document was
      noteworthy, not on account of its style, but of its being addressed to
      some distinguished person.

 Even at the hour when the grey St. Petersburg sky had quite disappeared,
      and all the official world had eaten or dined, each as he could, in
      accordance with the salary he received and his own fancy; when, all were
      resting from the department jar of pens, running to and fro, for their own
      and other people’s indispensable occupations’, and from all
      the work that an uneasy man makes willingly for himself, rather than what
      is necessary; when, officials hasten to dedicate to pleasure the time
      which is left to them, one bolder than the rest, going to the theatre;
      another; into the street looking under the bonnets; another, wasting his
      evening in compliments to some pretty girl, the star of a small official
      circle; another—and this is the common case of all—visiting
      his comrades on the third or fourth floor, in two small rooms with an
      ante-room or kitchen, and some pretensions to fashion, such as a lamp or
      some other trifle which has cost many a sacrifice of dinner or pleasure
      trip; in a word, at the hour when all officials disperse among the
      contracted quarters of their friends, to play whist, as they sip their tea
      from glasses with a kopek’s worth of sugar, smoke long pipes, relate
      at time some bits of gossip which a Russian man can never, under any
      circumstances, refrain from, and when there is nothing else to talk of,
      repeat eternal anecdotes about the commandant to whom they had sent word
      that the tails of the horses on the Falconet Monument had been cut off;
      when all strive to divert themselves, Akaky Akakiyevich indulged in no
      kind of diversion. No one could even say that he had seen him at any kind
      of evening party. Having written to his heart’s content, he lay down
      to sleep, smiling at the thought of the coming day—of what God might
      send him to copy on the morrow.

 Thus flowed on the peaceful life of the man, who, with a salary of four
      hundred rubles, understood how to be content with his lot; and thus it
      would have continued to flow on, perhaps, to extreme old age, were it not
      that there are various ills strewn along the path of life for titular
      councillors as well as for private, actual, court, and every other species
      of councillor, even to those who never give any advice or take any
      themselves.

 There exists in St. Petersburg a powerful foe of all who receive a salary
      of four hundred rubles a year, or there-abouts. This foe is no other than
      the Northern cold, although it is said to be very healthy. At nine o’clock
      in the morning, at the very hour when the streets are filled with men
      bound for the various official departments, it begins to bestow such
      powerful and piercing nips on all noses impartially, that the poor
      officials really do not know what to do with them. At an hour, when the
      foreheads of even those who occupy exalted positions ache with the cold,
      and tears start to their eyes, the poor titular councillors are sometimes
      quite unprotected. Their only salvation lies in traversing as quickly as
      possible, in their thin little cloaks, five or six streets, and then
      warming their feet in the porter’s room, and so thawing all their
      talents and qualifications for official service, which had become frozen
      on the way.

 Akaky Akakiyevich had felt for some time that his back and shoulders were
      paining with peculiar poignancy, in spite of the fact that he tried to
      traverse the distance with all possible speed. He began finally to wonder
      whether the fault did not lie in his cloak. He examined it thoroughly at
      home, and discovered that in two places, namely, on the back and
      shoulders, it had become thin as gauze. The cloth was worn to such a
      degree that he could see through it, and the lining had fallen into
      pieces. You must know that Akaky Akakiyevich’s cloak served as an
      object of ridicule to the officials. They even refused it the noble name
      of cloak, and called it a cape. In fact, it was of singular make, its
      collar diminishing year by year to serve to patch its other parts. The
      patching did not exhibit great skill on the part of the tailor, and was,
      in fact, baggy and ugly. Seeing how the matter stood, Akaky Akakiyevich
      decided that it would be necessary to take the cloak to Petrovich, the
      tailor, who lived somewhere on the fourth floor up a dark staircase, and
      who, in spite of his having but one eye and pock-marks all over his face,
      busied himself with considerable success in repairing the trousers and
      coats of officials and others; that is to say, when he was sober and not
      nursing some other scheme in his head.

 It is not necessary to say much about this tailor, but as it is the custom
      to have the character of each personage in a novel clearly defined there
      is no help for it, so here is Petrovich the tailor. At first he was called
      only Grigory, and was some gentleman’s serf. He commenced calling
      himself Petrovich from the time when he received his free papers, and
      further began to drink heavily on all holidays, at first on the great
      ones, and then on all church festivals without discrimination, wherever a
      cross stood in the calendar. On this point he was faithful to ancestral
      custom; and when quarrelling with his wife, he called her a low female and
      a German. As we have mentioned his wife, it will be necessary to say a
      word or two about her. Unfortunately, little is known of her beyond the
      fact that Petrovich had a wife, who wore a cap and a dress, but could not
      lay claim to beauty, at least, no one but the soldiers of the guard even
      looked under her cap when they met her.

 Ascending the staircase which led to Petrovich’s room—which
      staircase was all soaked with dish-water and reeked with the smell of
      spirits which affects the eyes, and is an inevitable adjunct to all dark
      stairways in St. Petersburg houses—ascending the stairs, Akaky
      Akakiyevich pondered how much Petrovich would ask, and mentally resolved
      not to give more than two rubles. The door was open, for the mistress, in
      cooking some fish, had raised such a smoke in the kitchen that not even
      the beetles were visible. Akaky Akakiyevich passed through the kitchen
      unperceived, even by the housewife, and at length reached a room where he
      beheld Petrovich seated on a large unpainted table, with his legs tucked
      under him like a Turkish pasha. His feet were bare, after the fashion of
      tailors as they sit at work; and the first thing which caught the eye was
      his thumb, with a deformed nail thick and strong as a turtle’s
      shell. About Petrovich’s neck hung a skein of silk and thread, and
      upon his knees lay some old garment. He had been trying unsuccessfully for
      three minutes to thread his needle, and was enraged at the darkness and
      even at the thread, growling in a low voice, “It won’t go
      through, the barbarian! you pricked me, you rascal!”

 Akaky Akakiyevich was vexed at arriving at the precise moment when
      Petrovich was angry. He liked to order something of Petrovich when he was
      a little downhearted, or, as his wife expressed it, “when he had
      settled himself with brandy, the one-eyed devil!” Under such
      circumstances Petrovich generally came down in his price very readily, and
      even bowed and returned thanks. Afterwards, to be sure, his wife would
      come, complaining that her husband had been drunk, and so had fixed the
      price too low; but, if only a ten-kopek piece were added then the matter
      would be settled. But now it appeared that Petrovich was in a sober
      condition, and therefore rough, taciturn, and inclined to demand, Satan
      only knows what price. Akaky Akakiyevich felt this, and would gladly have
      beat a retreat, but he was in for it. Petrovich screwed up his one eye
      very intently at him, and Akaky Akakiyevich involuntarily said, “How
      do you do, Petrovich?”

 “I wish you a good morning, sir,” said Petrovich squinting at
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s hands, to see what sort of booty he had brought.

 “Ah! I—to you, Petrovich, this—” It must be known
      that Akaky Akakiyevich expressed himself chiefly by prepositions, adverbs,
      and scraps of phrases which had no meaning whatever. If the matter was a
      very difficult one, he had a habit of never completing his sentences, so
      that frequently, having begun a phrase with the words, “This, in
      fact, is quite—” he forgot to go on, thinking he had already
      finished it.

 “What is it?” asked Petrovich, and with his one eye scanned
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s whole uniform from the collar down to the cuffs,
      the back, the tails and the button-holes, all of which were well known to
      him, since they were his own handiwork. Such is the habit of tailors; it
      is the first thing they do on meeting one.

 “But I, here, this—Petrovich—a cloak, cloth—here
      you see, everywhere, in different places, it is quite strong—it is a
      little dusty and looks old, but it is new, only here in one place it is a
      little—on the back, and here on one of the shoulders, it is a little
      worn, yes, here on this shoulder it is a little—do you see? That is
      all. And a little work—”

 Petrovich took the cloak, spread it out, to begin with, on the table,
      looked at it hard, shook his head, reached out his hand to the window-sill
      for his snuff-box, adorned with the portrait of some general, though what
      general is unknown, for the place where the face should have been had been
      rubbed through by the finger and a square bit of paper had been pasted
      over it. Having taken a pinch of snuff, Petrovich held up the cloak, and
      inspected it against the light, and again shook his head. Then he turned
      it, lining upwards, and shook his head once more. After which he again
      lifted the general-adorned lid with its bit of pasted paper, and having
      stuffed his nose with snuff, dosed and put away the snuff-box, and said
      finally, “No, it is impossible to mend it. It is a wretched garment!”

 Akaky Akakiyevich’s heart sank at these words.

 “Why is it impossible, Petrovich?” he said, almost in the
      pleading voice of a child. “All that ails it is, that it is worn on
      the shoulders. You must have some pieces—”

 “Yes, patches could be found, patches are easily found,” said
      Petrovich, “but there’s nothing to sew them to. The thing is
      completely rotten. If you put a needle to it—see, it will give way.”

 “Let it give way, and you can put on another patch at once.”

 “But there is nothing to put the patches on to. There’s no use
      in strengthening it. It is too far gone. It’s lucky that it’s
      cloth, for, if the wind were to blow, it would fly away.”

 “Well, strengthen it again. How this, in fact—”

 “No,” said Petrovich decisively, “there is nothing to be
      done with it. It’s a thoroughly bad job. You’d better, when
      the cold winter weather comes on, make yourself some gaiters out of it,
      because stockings are not warm. The Germans invented them in order to make
      more money.” Petrovich loved on all occasions to have a fling at the
      Germans. “But it is plain you must have a new cloak.”

 At the word “new” all grew dark before Akaky Akakiyevich’s
      eyes, and everything in the room began to whirl round. The only thing he
      saw clearly was the general with the paper face on the lid of Petrovich’s
      snuff-box. “A new one?” said he, as if still in a dream.
      “Why, I have no money for that.”

 “Yes, a new one,” said Petrovich, with barbarous composure.

 “Well, if it came to a new one, how—it—”

 “You mean how much would it cost?”

 “Yes.”

 “Well, you would have to lay out a hundred and fifty or more,”
      said Petrovich, and pursed up his lips significantly. He liked to produce
      powerful effects, liked to stun utterly and suddenly, and then to glance
      sideways to see what face the stunned person would put on the matter.

 “A hundred and fifty rubles for a cloak!” shrieked poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, perhaps for the first time in his life, for his voice had
      always been distinguished for softness.

 “Yes, sir,” said Petrovich, “for any kind of cloak. If
      you have a marten fur on the collar, or a silk-lined hood, it will mount
      up to two hundred.”

 “Petrovich, please,” said Akaky Akakiyevich in a beseeching
      tone, not hearing, and not trying to hear, Petrovich’s words, and
      disregarding all his “effects,” “some repairs, in order
      that it may wear yet a little longer.”

 “No, it would only be a waste of time and money,” said
      Petrovich. And Akaky Akakiyevich went away after these words, utterly
      discouraged. But Petrovich stood for some time after his departure, with
      significantly compressed lips, and without betaking himself to his work,
      satisfied that he would not be dropped, and an artistic tailor employed.

 Akaky Akakiyevich went out into the street as if in a dream. “Such
      an affair!” he said to himself. “I did not think it had come
      to—” and then after a pause, he added, “Well, so it is!
      see what it has come to at last! and I never imagined that it was so!”
      Then followed a long silence, after which he exclaimed, “Well, so it
      is! see what already—nothing unexpected that—it would be
      nothing—what a strange circumstance!” So saying, instead of
      going home, he went in exactly the opposite direction without suspecting
      it. On the way, a chimney-sweep bumped up against him, and blackened his
      shoulder, and a whole hatful of rubbish landed on him from the top of a
      house which was building. He did not notice it, and only when he ran
      against a watchman, who, having planted his halberd beside him, was
      shaking some snuff from his box into his horny hand, did he recover
      himself a little, and that because the watchman said, “Why are you
      poking yourself into a man’s very face? Haven’t you the
      pavement?” This caused him to look about him, and turn towards home.

 There only, he finally began to collect his thoughts, and to survey his
      position in its clear and actual light, and to argue with himself,
      sensibly and frankly, as with a reasonable friend, with whom one can
      discuss private and personal matters. “No,” said Akaky
      Akakiyevich, “it is impossible to reason with Petrovich now. He is
      that—evidently, his wife has been beating him. I’d better go
      to him on Sunday morning. After Saturday night he will be a little
      cross-eyed and sleepy, for he will want to get drunk, and his wife won’t
      give him any money, and at such a time, a ten-kopek piece in his hand will—he
      will become more fit to reason with, and then the cloak and that—”
      Thus argued Akaky Akakiyevich with himself regained his courage, and
      waited until the first Sunday, when, seeing from afar that Petrovich’s
      wife had left the house, he went straight to him.

 Petrovich’s eye was indeed very much askew after Saturday. His head
      drooped, and he was very sleepy; but for all that, as soon as he knew what
      it was a question of, it seemed as though Satan jogged his memory. “Impossible,”
      said he. “Please to order a new one.” Thereupon Akaky
      Akakiyevich handed over the ten-kopek piece. “Thank you, sir. I will
      drink your good health,” said Petrovich. “But as for the
      cloak, don’t trouble yourself about it; it is good for nothing. I
      will make you a capital new one, so let us settle about it now.”

 Akaky Akakiyevich was still for mending it, but Petrovich would not hear
      of it, and said, “I shall certainly have to make you a new one, and
      you may depend upon it that I shall do my best. It may even be, as the
      fashion goes, that the collar can be fastened by silver hooks under a
      flap.”

 Then Akaky Akakiyevich saw that it was impossible to get along without a
      new cloak, and his spirit sank utterly. How, in fact, was it to be done?
      Where was the money to come from? He must have some new trousers, and pay
      a debt of long standing to the shoemaker for putting new tops to his old
      boots, and he must order three shirts from the seamstress, and a couple of
      pieces of linen. In short, all his money must be spent. And even if the
      director should be so kind as to order him to receive forty-five or even
      fifty rubles instead of forty, it would be a mere nothing, a mere drop in
      the ocean towards the funds necessary for a cloak, although he knew that
      Petrovich was often wrong-headed enough to blurt out some outrageous
      price, so that even his own wife could not refrain from exclaiming,
      “Have you lost your senses, you fool?” At one time he would
      not work at any price, and now it was quite likely that he had named a
      higher sum than the cloak would cost.

 But although he knew that Petrovich would undertake to make a cloak for
      eighty rubles, still, where was he to get the eighty rubles from? He might
      possibly manage half. Yes, half might be procured, but where was the other
      half to come from? But the reader must first be told where the first half
      came from.

 Akaky Akakiyevich had a habit of putting, for every ruble he spent, a
      groschen into a small box, fastened with lock and key, and with a slit in
      the top for the reception of money. At the end of every half-year he
      counted over the heap of coppers, and changed it for silver. This he had
      done for a long time, and in the course of years, the sum had mounted up
      to over forty rubles. Thus he had one half on hand. But where was he to
      find the other half? Where was he to get another forty rubles from? Akaky
      Akakiyevich thought and thought, and decided that it would be necessary to
      curtail his ordinary expenses, for the space of one year at least, to
      dispense with tea in the evening, to burn no candles, and, if there was
      anything which he must do, to go into his landlady’s room, and work
      by her light. When he went into the street, he must walk as lightly as he
      could, and as cautiously, upon the stones, almost upon tiptoe, in order
      not to wear his heels down in too short a time. He must give the laundress
      as little to wash as possible; and, in order not to wear out his clothes,
      he must take them off as soon as he got home, and wear only his cotton
      dressing-gown, which had been long and carefully saved.

 To tell the truth, it was a little hard for him at first to accustom
      himself to these deprivations. But he got used to them at length, after a
      fashion, and all went smoothly. He even got used to being hungry in the
      evening, but he made up for it by treating himself, so to say, in spirit,
      by bearing ever in mind the idea of his future cloak. From that time
      forth, his existence seemed to become, in some way, fuller, as if he were
      married, or as if some other man lived in him, as if, in fact, he were not
      alone, and some pleasant friend had consented to travel along life’s
      path with him, the friend being no other than the cloak, with thick
      wadding and a strong lining incapable of wearing out. He became more
      lively, and even his character grew firmer, like that of a man who has
      made up his mind, and set himself a goal. From his face and gait, doubt
      and indecision, all hesitating and wavering disappeared of themselves.
      Fire gleamed in his eyes, and occasionally the boldest and most daring
      ideas flitted through his mind. Why not, for instance, have marten fur on
      the collar? The thought of this almost made him absent-minded. Once, in
      copying a letter, he nearly made a mistake, so that he exclaimed almost
      aloud, “Ugh!” and crossed himself. Once, in the course of
      every month, he had a conference with Petrovich on the subject of the
      cloak, where it would be better to buy the cloth, and the colour, and the
      price. He always returned home satisfied, though troubled, reflecting that
      the time would come at last when it could all be bought, and then the
      cloak made.

 The affair progressed more briskly than he had expected. For beyond all
      his hopes, the director awarded neither forty nor forty-five rubles for
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s share, but sixty. Whether he suspected that
      Akaky Akakiyevich needed a cloak, or whether it was merely chance, at all
      events, twenty extra rubles were by this means provided. This circumstance
      hastened matters. Two or three months more of hunger and Akaky Akakiyevich
      had accumulated about eighty rubles. His heart, generally so quiet, began
      to throb. On the first possible day, he went shopping in company with
      Petrovich. They bought some very good cloth, and at a reasonable rate too,
      for they had been considering the matter for six months, and rarely let a
      month pass without their visiting the shops to enquire prices. Petrovich
      himself said that no better cloth could be had. For lining, they selected
      a cotton stuff, but so firm and thick, that Petrovich declared it to be
      better than silk, and even prettier and more glossy. They did not buy the
      marten fur, because it was, in fact, dear, but in its stead, they picked
      out the very best of cat-skin which could be found in the shop, and which
      might, indeed, be taken for marten at a distance.

 Petrovich worked at the cloak two whole weeks, for there was a great deal
      of quilting; otherwise it would have been finished sooner. He charged
      twelve rubles for the job, it could not possibly have been done for less.
      It was all sewed with silk, in small, double seams, and Petrovich went
      over each seam afterwards with his own teeth, stamping in various
      patterns.

 It was—it is difficult to say precisely on what day, but probably
      the most glorious one in Akaky Akakiyevich’s life, when Petrovich at
      length brought home the cloak. He brought it in the morning, before the
      hour when it was necessary to start for the department. Never did a cloak
      arrive so exactly in the nick of time, for the severe cold had set in, and
      it seemed to threaten to increase. Petrovich brought the cloak himself as
      befits a good tailor. On his countenance was a significant expression,
      such as Akaky Akakiyevich had never beheld there. He seemed fully sensible
      that he had done no small deed, and crossed a gulf separating tailors who
      put in linings, and execute repairs, from those who make new things. He
      took the cloak out of the pocket-handkerchief in which he had brought it.
      The handkerchief was fresh from the laundress, and he put it in his pocket
      for use. Taking out the cloak, he gazed proudly at it, held it up with
      both hands, and flung it skilfully over the shoulders of Akaky
      Akakiyevich. Then he pulled it and fitted it down behind with his hand,
      and he draped it around Akaky Akakiyevich without buttoning it. Akaky
      Akakiyevich, like an experienced man, wished to try the sleeves. Petrovich
      helped him on with them, and it turned out that the sleeves were
      satisfactory also. In short, the cloak appeared to be perfect, and most
      seasonable. Petrovich did not neglect to observe that it was only because
      he lived in a narrow street, and had no signboard, and had known Akaky
      Akakiyevich so long, that he had made it so cheaply; but that if he had
      been in business on the Nevsky Prospect, he would have charged
      seventy-five rubles for the making alone. Akaky Akakiyevich did not care
      to argue this point with Petrovich. He paid him, thanked him, and set out
      at once in his new cloak for the department. Petrovich followed him, and
      pausing in the street, gazed long at the cloak in the distance, after
      which he went to one side expressly to run through a crooked alley, and
      emerge again into the street beyond to gaze once more upon the cloak from
      another point, namely, directly in front.

 Meantime Akaky Akakiyevich went on in holiday mood. He was conscious every
      second of the time that he had a new cloak on his shoulders, and several
      times he laughed with internal satisfaction. In fact, there were two
      advantages, one was its warmth, the other its beauty. He saw nothing of
      the road, but suddenly found himself at the department. He took off his
      cloak in the ante-room, looked it over carefully, and confided it to the
      special care of the attendant. It is impossible to say precisely how it
      was that every one in the department knew at once that Akaky Akakiyevich
      had a new cloak, and that the “cape” no longer existed. All
      rushed at the same moment into the ante-room to inspect it. They
      congratulated him, and said pleasant things to him, so that he began at
      first to smile, and then to grow ashamed. When all surrounded him, and
      said that the new cloak must be “christened,” and that he must
      at least give them all a party, Akaky Akakiyevich lost his head
      completely, and did not know where he stood, what to answer, or how to get
      out of it. He stood blushing all over for several minutes, trying to
      assure them with great simplicity that it was not a new cloak, that it was
      in fact the old “cape.”

 At length one of the officials, assistant to the head clerk, in order to
      show that he was not at all proud, and on good terms with his inferiors,
      said:

 “So be it, only I will give the party instead of Akaky Akakiyevich;
      I invite you all to tea with me to-night. It just happens to be my
      name-day too.”

 The officials naturally at once offered the assistant clerk their
      congratulations, and accepted the invitation with pleasure. Akaky
      Akakiyevich would have declined; but all declared that it was
      discourteous, that it was simply a sin and a shame, and that he could not
      possibly refuse. Besides, the notion became pleasant to him when he
      recollected that he should thereby have a chance of wearing his new cloak
      in the evening also.

 That whole day was truly a most triumphant festival for Akaky Akakiyevich.
      He returned home in the most happy frame of mind, took off his cloak, and
      hung it carefully on the wall, admiring afresh the cloth and the lining.
      Then he brought out his old, worn-out cloak, for comparison. He looked at
      it, and laughed, so vast was the difference. And long after dinner he
      laughed again when the condition of the “cape” recurred to his
      mind. He dined cheerfully, and after dinner wrote nothing, but took his
      ease for a while on the bed, until it got dark. Then he dressed himself
      leisurely, put on his cloak, and stepped out into the street.

 Where the host lived, unfortunately we cannot say. Our memory begins to
      fail us badly. The houses and streets in St. Petersburg have become so
      mixed up in our head that it is very difficult to get anything out of it
      again in proper form. This much is certain, that the official lived in the
      best part of the city; and therefore it must have been anything but near
      to Akaky Akakiyevich’s residence. Akaky Akakiyevich was first
      obliged to traverse a kind of wilderness of deserted, dimly-lighted
      streets. But in proportion as he approached the official’s quarter
      of the city, the streets became more lively, more populous, and more
      brilliantly illuminated. Pedestrians began to appear; handsomely dressed
      ladies were more frequently encountered; the men had otter skin collars to
      their coats; shabby sleigh-men with their wooden, railed sledges stuck
      over with brass-headed nails, became rarer; whilst on the other hand, more
      and more drivers in red velvet caps, lacquered sledges and bear-skin coats
      began to appear, and carriages with rich hammer-cloths flew swiftly
      through the streets, their wheels scrunching the snow.

 Akaky Akakiyevich gazed upon all this as upon a novel sight. He had not
      been in the streets during the evening for years. He halted out of
      curiosity before a shop-window, to look at a picture representing a
      handsome woman, who had thrown off her shoe, thereby baring her whole foot
      in a very pretty way; whilst behind her the head of a man with whiskers
      and a handsome moustache peeped through the doorway of another room. Akaky
      Akakiyevich shook his head, and laughed, and then went on his way. Why did
      he laugh? Either because he had met with a thing utterly unknown, but for
      which every one cherishes, nevertheless, some sort of feeling, or else he
      thought, like many officials, “Well, those French! What is to be
      said? If they do go in for anything of that sort, why—” But
      possibly he did not think at all.

 Akaky Akakiyevich at length reached the house in which the head clerk’s
      assistant lodged. He lived in fine style. The staircase was lit by a lamp,
      his apartment being on the second floor. On entering the vestibule, Akaky
      Akakiyevich beheld a whole row of goloshes on the floor. Among them, in
      the centre of the room, stood a samovar, humming and emitting clouds of
      steam. On the walls hung all sorts of coats and cloaks, among which there
      were even some with beaver collars, or velvet facings. Beyond, the buzz of
      conversation was audible, and became clear and loud, when the servant came
      out with a trayful of empty glasses, cream-jugs and sugar-bowls. It was
      evident that the officials had arrived long before, and had already
      finished their first glass of tea.

 Akaky Akakiyevich, having hung up his own cloak, entered the inner room.
      Before him all at once appeared lights, officials, pipes, and card-tables,
      and he was bewildered by a sound of rapid conversation rising from all the
      tables, and the noise of moving chairs. He halted very awkwardly in the
      middle of the room, wondering what he ought to do. But they had seen him.
      They received him with a shout, and all thronged at once into the
      ante-room, and there took another look at his cloak. Akaky Akakiyevich,
      although somewhat confused, was frank-hearted, and could not refrain from
      rejoicing when he saw how they praised his cloak. Then, of course, they
      all dropped him and his cloak, and returned, as was proper, to the tables
      set out for whist.

 All this, the noise, the talk, and the throng of people, was rather
      overwhelming to Akaky Akakiyevich. He simply did not know where he stood,
      or where to put his hands, his feet, and his whole body. Finally he sat
      down by the players, looked at the cards, gazed at the face of one and
      another, and after a while began to gape, and to feel that it was
      wearisome, the more so, as the hour was already long past when he usually
      went to bed. He wanted to take leave of the host, but they would not let
      him go, saying that he must not fail to drink a glass of champagne, in
      honour of his new garment. In the course of an hour, supper, consisting of
      vegetable salad, cold veal, pastry, confectioner’s pies, and
      champagne, was served. They made Akaky Akakiyevich drink two glasses of
      champagne, after which he felt things grow livelier.

 Still, he could not forget that it was twelve o’clock, and that he
      should have been at home long ago. In order that the host might not think
      of some excuse for detaining him, he stole out of the room quickly, sought
      out, in the ante-room, his cloak, which, to his sorrow, he found lying on
      the floor, brushed it, picked off every speck upon it, put it on his
      shoulders, and descended the stairs to the street.

 In the street all was still bright. Some petty shops, those permanent
      clubs of servants and all sorts of folks, were open. Others were shut,
      but, nevertheless, showed a streak of light the whole length of the
      door-crack, indicating that they were not yet free of company, and that
      probably some domestics, male and female, were finishing their stories and
      conversations, whilst leaving their masters in complete ignorance as to
      their whereabouts. Akaky Akakiyevich went on in a happy frame of mind. He
      even started to run, without knowing why, after some lady, who flew past
      like a flash of lightning. But he stopped short, and went on very quietly
      as before, wondering why he had quickened his pace. Soon there spread
      before him these deserted streets which are not cheerful in the daytime,
      to say no thing of the evening. Now they were even more dim and lonely.
      The lanterns began to grow rarer, oil, evidently, had been less liberally
      supplied. Then came wooden houses and fences. Not a soul anywhere; only
      the snow sparkled in the streets, and mournfully veiled the low-roofed
      cabins with their closed shutters. He approached the spot where the street
      crossed a vast square with houses barely visible on its farther side, a
      square which seemed a fearful desert.

 Afar, a tiny spark glimmered from some watchman’s-box, which seemed
      to stand on the edge of the world. Akaky Akakiyevich’s cheerfulness
      diminished at this point in a marked degree. He entered the square, not
      without an involuntary sensation of fear, as though his heart warned him
      of some evil. He glanced back, and on both sides it was like a sea about
      him. “No, it is better not to look,” he thought, and went on,
      closing his eyes. When he opened them, to see whether he was near the end
      of the square, he suddenly beheld, standing just before his very nose,
      some bearded individuals of precisely what sort, he could not make out.
      All grew dark before his eyes, and his heart throbbed.

 “Of course, the cloak is mine!” said one of them in a loud
      voice, seizing hold of his collar. Akaky Akakiyevich was about to shout
      “Help!” when the second man thrust a fist, about the size of
      an official’s head, at his very mouth, muttering, “Just you
      dare to scream!”

 Akaky Akakiyevich felt them strip off his cloak, and give him a kick. He
      fell headlong upon the snow, and felt no more.

 In a few minutes he recovered consciousness, and rose to his feet, but no
      one was there. He felt that it was cold in the square, and that his cloak
      was gone. He began to shout, but his voice did not appear to reach the
      outskirts of the square. In despair, but without ceasing to shout, he
      started at a run across the square, straight towards the watch-box, beside
      which stood the watchman, leaning on his halberd, and apparently curious
      to know what kind of a customer was running towards him shouting. Akaky
      Akakiyevich ran up to him, and began in a sobbing voice to shout that he
      was asleep, and attended to nothing, and did not see when a man was
      robbed. The watchman replied that he had seen two men stop him in the
      middle of the square, but supposed that they were friends of his, and
      that, instead of scolding vainly, he had better go to the police on the
      morrow, so that they might make a search for whoever had stolen the cloak.

 Akaky Akakiyevich ran home and arrived in a state of complete disorder,
      his hair which grew very thinly upon his temples and the back of his head
      all tousled, his body, arms and legs, covered with snow. The old woman,
      who was mistress of his lodgings, on hearing a terrible knocking, sprang
      hastily from her bed, and, with only one shoe on, ran to open the door,
      pressing the sleeve of her chemise to her bosom out of modesty. But when
      she had opened it, she fell back on beholding Akaky Akakiyevich in such a
      condition. When he told her about the affair, she clasped her hands, and
      said that he must go straight to the district chief of police, for his
      subordinate would turn up his nose, promise well, and drop the matter
      there. The very best thing to do, therefore, would be to go to the
      district chief, whom she knew, because Finnish Anna, her former cook, was
      now nurse at his house. She often saw him passing the house, and he was at
      church every Sunday, praying, but at the same time gazing cheerfully at
      everybody; so that he must be a good man, judging from all appearances.
      Having listened to this opinion, Akaky Akakiyevich betook himself sadly to
      his room. And how he spent the night there, any one who can put himself in
      another’s place may readily imagine.

 Early in the morning, he presented himself at the district chief’s,
      but was told the official was asleep. He went again at ten and was again
      informed that he was asleep. At eleven, and they said, “The
      superintendent is not at home.” At dinner time, and the clerks in
      the ante-room would not admit him on any terms, and insisted upon knowing
      his business. So that at last, for once in his life, Akaky Akakiyevich
      felt an inclination to show some spirit, and said curtly that he must see
      the chief in person, that they ought not to presume to refuse him
      entrance, that he came from the department of justice, and that when he
      complained of them, they would see.

 The clerks dared make no reply to this, and one of them went to call the
      chief, who listened to the strange story of the theft of the coat. Instead
      of directing his attention to the principal points of the matter, he began
      to question Akaky Akakiyevich. Why was he going home so late? Was he in
      the habit of doing so, or had he been to some disorderly house? So that
      Akaky Akakiyevich got thoroughly confused, and left him, without knowing
      whether the affair of his cloak was in proper train or not.

 All that day, for the first time in his life, he never went near the
      department. The next day he made his appearance, very pale, and in his old
      cape, which had become even more shabby. The news of the robbery of the
      cloak touched many, although there were some officials present who never
      lost an opportunity, even such a one as the present, of ridiculing Akaky
      Akakiyevich. They decided to make a collection for him on the spot, but
      the officials had already spent a great deal in subscribing for the
      director’s portrait, and for some book, at the suggestion of the
      head of that division, who was a friend of the author; and so the sum was
      trifling.

 One of them, moved by pity, resolved to help Akaky Akakiyevich with some
      good advice, at least, and told him that he ought not to go to the police,
      for although it might happen that a police-officer, wishing to win the
      approval of his superiors, might hunt up the cloak by some means, still,
      his cloak would remain in the possession of the police if he did not offer
      legal proof that it belonged to him. The best thing for him, therefore,
      would be to apply to a certain prominent personage; since this prominent
      personage, by entering into relation with the proper persons, could
      greatly expedite the matter.

 As there was nothing else to be done, Akaky Akakiyevich decided to go to
      the prominent personage. What was the exact official position of the
      prominent personage, remains unknown to this day. The reader must know
      that the prominent personage had but recently become a prominent
      personage, having up to that time been only an insignificant person.
      Moreover, his present position was not considered prominent in comparison
      with others still more so. But there is always a circle of people to whom
      what is insignificant in the eyes of others, is important enough.
      Moreover, he strove to increase his importance by sundry devices. For
      instance, he managed to have the inferior officials meet him on the
      staircase when he entered upon his service; no one was to presume to come
      directly to him, but the strictest etiquette must be observed; the
      collegiate recorder must make a report to the government secretary, the
      government secretary to the titular councillor, or whatever other man was
      proper, and all business must come before him in this manner. In Holy
      Russia, all is thus contaminated with the love of imitation; every man
      imitates and copies his superior. They even say that a certain titular
      councillor, when promoted to the head of some small separate office,
      immediately partitioned off a private room for himself, called it the
      audience chamber, and posted at the door a lackey with red collar and
      braid, who grasped the handle of the door, and opened to all comers,
      though the audience chamber would hardly hold an ordinary writing table.

 The manners and customs of the prominent personage were grand and
      imposing, but rather exaggerated. The main foundation of his system was
      strictness. “Strictness, strictness, and always strictness!”
      he generally said; and at the last word he looked significantly into the
      face of the person to whom he spoke. But there was no necessity for this,
      for the halfscore of subordinates, who formed the entire force of the
      office, were properly afraid. On catching sight of him afar off, they left
      their work, and waited, drawn up in line, until he had passed through the
      room. His ordinary converse with his inferiors smacked of sternness, and
      consisted chiefly of three phrases: “How dare you?” “Do
      you know whom you are speaking to?” “Do you realise who is
      standing before you?”

 Otherwise he was a very kind-hearted man, good to his comrades, and ready
      to oblige. But the rank of general threw him completely off his balance.
      On receiving any one of that rank, he became confused, lost his way, as it
      were, and never knew what to do. If he chanced to be amongst his equals,
      he was still a very nice kind of man, a very good fellow in many respects,
      and not stupid, but the very moment that he found himself in the society
      of people but one rank lower than himself, he became silent. And his
      situation aroused sympathy, the more so, as he felt himself that he might
      have been making an incomparably better use of his time. In his eyes,
      there was sometimes visible a desire to join some interesting conversation
      or group, but he was kept back by the thought, “Would it not be a
      very great condescension on his part? Would it not be familiar? And would
      he not thereby lose his importance?” And in consequence of such
      reflections, he always remained in the same dumb state, uttering from time
      to time a few monosyllabic sounds, and thereby earning the name of the
      most wearisome of men.

 To this prominent personage Akaky Akakiyevich presented himself, and this
      at the most unfavourable time for himself, though opportune for the
      prominent personage. The prominent personage was in his cabinet,
      conversing very gaily with an old acquaintance and companion of his
      childhood, whom he had not seen for several years, and who had just
      arrived, when it was announced to him that a person named Bashmachkin had
      come. He asked abruptly, “Who is he?”—“Some
      official,” he was informed. “Ah, he can wait! This is no time
      for him to call,” said the important man.

 It must be remarked here that the important man lied outrageously. He had
      said all he had to say to his friend long before, and the conversation had
      been interspersed for some time with very long pauses, during which they
      merely slapped each other on the leg, and said, “You think so, Ivan
      Abramovich!” “Just so, Stepan Varlamovich!”
      Nevertheless, he ordered that the official should be kept waiting, in
      order to show his friend, a man who had not been in the service for a long
      time, but had lived at home in the country, how long officials had to wait
      in his ante-room.

 At length, having talked himself completely out, and more than that,
      having had his fill of pauses, and smoked a cigar in a very comfortable
      arm-chair with reclining back, he suddenly seemed to recollect, and said
      to the secretary, who stood by the door with papers of reports, “So
      it seems that there is an official waiting to see me. Tell him that he may
      come in.” On perceiving Akaky Akakiyevich’s modest mien and
      his worn uniform, he turned abruptly to him, and said, “What do you
      want?” in a curt hard voice, which he had practised in his room in
      private, and before the looking-glass, for a whole week before being
      raised to his present rank.

 Akaky Akakiyevich, who was already imbued with a due amount of fear,
      became somewhat confused, and as well as his tongue would permit,
      explained, with a rather more frequent addition than usual of the word
      “that” that his cloak was quite new, and had been stolen in
      the most inhuman manner; that he had applied to him, in order that he
      might, in some way, by his intermediation—that he might enter into
      correspondence with the chief of police, and find the cloak.

 For some inexplicable reason, this conduct seemed familiar to the
      prominent personage.

 “What, my dear sir!” he said abruptly, “are you not
      acquainted with etiquette? To whom have you come? Don’t you know how
      such matters are managed? You should first have presented a petition to
      the office. It would have gone to the head of the department, then to the
      chief of the division, then it would have been handed over to the
      secretary, and the secretary would have given it to me.”

 “But, your excellency,” said Akaky Akakiyevich, trying to
      collect his small handful of wits, and conscious at the same time that he
      was perspiring terribly, “I, your excellency, presumed to trouble
      you because secretaries—are an untrustworthy race.”

 “What, what, what!” said the important personage. “Where
      did you get such courage? Where did you get such ideas? What impudence
      towards their chiefs and superiors has spread among the young generation!”
      The prominent personage apparently had not observed that Akaky Akakiyevich
      was already in the neighbourhood of fifty. If he could be called a young
      man, it must have been in comparison with some one who was seventy.
      “Do you know to whom you are speaking? Do you realise who is
      standing before you? Do you realise it? Do you realise it, I ask you!”
      Then he stamped his foot, and raised his voice to such a pitch that it
      would have frightened even a different man from Akaky Akakiyevich.

 Akaky Akakiyevich’s senses failed him. He staggered, trembled in
      every limb, and, if the porters had not run in to support him, would have
      fallen to the floor. They carried him out insensible. But the prominent
      personage, gratified that the effect should have surpassed his
      expectations, and quite intoxicated with the thought that his word could
      even deprive a man of his senses, glanced sideways at his friend in order
      to see how he looked upon this, and perceived, not without satisfaction,
      that his friend was in a most uneasy frame of mind, and even beginning on
      his part, to feel a trifle frightened.

 Akaky Akakiyevich could not remember how he descended the stairs, and got
      into the street. He felt neither his hands nor feet. Never in his life had
      he been so rated by any high official, let alone a strange one. He went
      staggering on through the snow-storm, which was blowing in the streets,
      with his mouth wide open. The wind, in St. Petersburg fashion, darted upon
      him from all quarters, and down every cross-street. In a twinkling it had
      blown a quinsy into his throat, and he reached home unable to utter a
      word. His throat was swollen, and he lay down on his bed. So powerful is
      sometimes a good scolding!

 The next day a violent fever developed. Thanks to the generous assistance
      of the St. Petersburg climate, the malady progressed more rapidly than
      could have been expected, and when the doctor arrived, he found, on
      feeling the sick man’s pulse, that there was nothing to be done,
      except to prescribe a poultice, so that the patient might not be left
      entirely without the beneficent aid of medicine. But at the same time, he
      predicted his end in thirty-six hours. After this he turned to the
      landlady, and said, “And as for you, don’t waste your time on
      him. Order his pine coffin now, for an oak one will be too expensive for
      him.”

 Did Akaky Akakiyevich hear these fatal words? And if he heard them, did
      they produce any overwhelming effect upon him? Did he lament the
      bitterness of his life?—We know not, for he continued in a delirious
      condition. Visions incessantly appeared to him, each stranger than the
      other. Now he saw Petrovich, and ordered him to make a cloak, with some
      traps for robbers, who seemed to him to be always under the bed; and he
      cried every moment to the landlady to pull one of them from under his
      coverlet. Then he inquired why his old mantle hung before him when he had
      a new cloak. Next he fancied that he was standing before the prominent
      person, listening to a thorough setting-down and saying, “Forgive
      me, your excellency!” but at last he began to curse, uttering the
      most horrible words, so that his aged landlady crossed herself, never in
      her life having heard anything of the kind from him, and more so as these
      words followed directly after the words “your excellency.”
      Later on he talked utter nonsense, of which nothing could be made, all
      that was evident being that these incoherent words and thoughts hovered
      ever about one thing, his cloak.

 At length poor Akaky Akakiyevich breathed his last. They sealed up neither
      his room nor his effects, because, in the first place, there were no
      heirs, and, in the second, there was very little to inherit beyond a
      bundle of goose-quills, a quire of white official paper, three pairs of
      socks, two or three buttons which had burst off his trousers, and the
      mantle already known to the reader. To whom all this fell, God knows. I
      confess that the person who told me this tale took no interest in the
      matter. They carried Akaky Akakiyevich out, and buried him.

 And St. Petersburg was left without Akaky Akakiyevich, as though he had
      never lived there. A being disappeared, who was protected by none, dear to
      none, interesting to none, and who never even attracted to himself the
      attention of those students of human nature who omit no opportunity of
      thrusting a pin through a common fly and examining it under the
      microscope. A being who bore meekly the jibes of the department, and went
      to his grave without having done one unusual deed, but to whom,
      nevertheless, at the close of his life, appeared a bright visitant in the
      form of a cloak, which momentarily cheered his poor life, and upon him,
      thereafter, an intolerable misfortune descended, just as it descends upon
      the heads of the mighty of this world!

 Several days after his death, the porter was sent from the department to
      his lodgings, with an order for him to present himself there immediately,
      the chief commanding it. But the porter had to return unsuccessful, with
      the answer that he could not come; and to the question, “Why?”
      replied, “Well, because he is dead! he was buried four days ago.”
      In this manner did they hear of Akaky Akakiyevich’s death at the
      department. And the next day a new official sat in his place, with a
      handwriting by no means so upright, but more inclined and slanting.

 But who could have imagined that this was not really the end of Akaky
      Akakiyevich, that he was destined to raise a commotion after death, as if
      in compensation for his utterly insignificant life? But so it happened,
      and our poor story unexpectedly gains a fantastic ending.

 A rumour suddenly spread through St. Petersburg, that a dead man had taken
      to appearing on the KaFlinkin Bridge, and its vicinity, at night in the
      form of an official seeking a stolen cloak, and that, under the pretext of
      its being the stolen cloak, he dragged, without regard to rank or calling,
      every one’s cloak from his shoulders, be it cat-skin, beaver, fox,
      bear, sable, in a word, every sort of fur and skin which men adopted for
      their covering. One of the department officials saw the dead man with his
      own eyes, and immediately recognised in him Akaky Akakiyevich. This,
      however, inspired him with such terror, that he ran off with all his
      might, and therefore did not scan the dead man closely, but only saw how
      the latter threatened him from afar with his finger. Constant complaints
      poured in from all quarters, that the backs and shoulders, not only of
      titular but even of court councillors, were exposed to the danger of a
      cold, on account of the frequent dragging off of their cloaks.

 Arrangements were made by the police to catch the corpse, alive or dead,
      at any cost, and punish him as an example to others, in the most severe
      manner. In this they nearly succeeded, for a watchman, on guard in
      Kirinshkin Lane, caught the corpse by the collar on the very scene of his
      evil deeds, when attempting to pull off the frieze cloak of a retired
      musician. Having seized him by the collar, he summoned, with a shout, two
      of his comrades, whom he enjoined to hold him fast, while he himself felt
      for a moment in his boot, in order to draw out his snuff-box, and refresh
      his frozen nose. But the snuff was of a sort which even a corpse could not
      endure. The watchman having closed his right nostril with his finger, had
      no sooner succeeded in holding half a handful up to the left, than the
      corpse sneezed so violently that he completely filled the eyes of all
      three. While they raised their hands to wipe them, the dead man vanished
      completely, so that they positively did not know whether they had actually
      had him in their grip at all. Thereafter the watchmen conceived such a
      terror of dead men that they were afraid even to seize the living, and
      only screamed from a distance. “Hey, there! go your way!” So
      the dead official began to appear even beyond the KaFlinkin Bridge,
      causing no little terror to all timid people.

 But we have totally neglected that certain prominent personage who may
      really be considered as the cause of the fantastic turn taken by this true
      history. First of all, justice compels us to say, that after the departure
      of poor, annihilated Akaky Akakiyevich, he felt something like remorse.
      Suffering was unpleasant to him, for his heart was accessible to many good
      impulses, in spite of the fact that his rank often prevented his showing
      his true self. As soon as his friend had left his cabinet, he began to
      think about poor Akaky Akakiyevich. And from that day forth, poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, who could not bear up under an official reprimand, recurred
      to his mind almost every day. The thought troubled him to such an extent,
      that a week later he even resolved to send an official to him, to learn
      whether he really could assist him. And when it was reported to him that
      Akaky Akakiyevich had died suddenly of fever, he was startled, hearkened
      to the reproaches of his conscience, and was out of sorts for the whole
      day.

 Wishing to divert his mind in some way and drive away the disagreeable
      impression, he set out that evening for one of his friends’ houses,
      where he found quite a large party assembled. What was better, nearly
      every one was of the same rank as himself, so that he need not feel in the
      least constrained. This had a marvellous effect upon his mental state. He
      grew expansive, made himself agreeable in conversation, in short, he
      passed a delightful evening. After supper he drank a couple of glasses of
      champagne—not a bad recipe for cheerfulness, as every one knows. The
      champagne inclined him to various adventures, and he determined not to
      return home, but to go and see a certain well-known lady, of German
      extraction, Karolina Ivanovna, a lady, it appears, with whom he was on a
      very friendly footing.

 It must be mentioned that the prominent personage was no longer a young
      man, but a good husband and respected father of a family. Two sons, one of
      whom was already in the service, and a good-looking, sixteen-year-old
      daughter, with a slightly arched but pretty little nose, came every
      morning to kiss his hand and say, “ Bon jour , papa.” His
      wife, a still fresh and good-looking woman, first gave him her hand to
      kiss, and then, reversing the procedure, kissed his. But the prominent
      personage, though perfectly satisfied in his domestic relations,
      considered it stylish to have a friend in another quarter of the city.
      This friend was scarcely prettier or younger than his wife; but there are
      such puzzles in the world, and it is not our place to judge them. So the
      important personage descended the stairs, stepped into his sledge, said to
      the coachman, “To Karolina Ivanovna’s,” and, wrapping
      himself luxuriously in his warm cloak, found himself in that delightful
      frame of mind than which a Russian can conceive nothing better, namely,
      when you think of nothing yourself, yet when the thoughts creep into your
      mind of their own accord, each more agreeable than the other, giving you
      no trouble either to drive them away, or seek them. Fully satisfied, he
      recalled all the gay features of the evening just passed and all the mots
      which had made the little circle laugh. Many of them he repeated in a low
      voice, and found them quite as funny as before; so it is not surprising
      that he should laugh heartily at them. Occasionally, however, he was
      interrupted by gusts of wind, which, coming suddenly, God knows whence or
      why, cut his face, drove masses of snow into it, filled out his
      cloak-collar like a sail, or suddenly blew it over his head with
      supernatural force, and thus caused him constant trouble to disentangle
      himself.

 Suddenly the important personage felt some one clutch him firmly by the
      collar. Turning round, he perceived a man of short stature, in an old,
      worn uniform, and recognised, not without terror, Akaky Akakiyevich. The
      official’s face was white as snow, and looked just like a corpse’s.
      But the horror of the important personage transcended all bounds when he
      saw the dead man’s mouth open, and heard it utter the following
      remarks, while it breathed upon him the terrible odour of the grave:
      “Ah, here you are at last! I have you, that—by the collar! I
      need your cloak. You took no trouble about mine, but reprimanded me. So
      now give up your own.”

 The pallid prominent personage almost died of fright. Brave as he was in
      the office and in the presence of inferiors generally, and although, at
      the sight of his manly form and appearance, every one said, “Ugh!
      how much character he has!” at this crisis, he, like many possessed
      of an heroic exterior, experienced such terror, that, not without cause,
      he began to fear an attack of illness. He flung his cloak hastily from his
      shoulders and shouted to his coachman in an unnatural voice, “Home
      at full speed!” The coachman, hearing the tone which is generally
      employed at critical moments, and even accompanied by something much more
      tangible, drew his head down between his shoulders in case of an
      emergency, flourished his whip, and flew on like an arrow. In a little
      more than six minutes the prominent personage was at the entrance of his
      own house. Pale, thoroughly scared, and cloakless, he went home instead of
      to Karolina Ivanovna’s, reached his room somehow or other, and
      passed the night in the direst distress; so that the next morning over
      their tea, his daughter said, “You are very pale to-day, papa.”
      But papa remained silent, and said not a word to any one of what had
      happened to him, where he had been, or where he had intended to go.

 This occurrence made a deep impression upon him. He even began to say,
      “How dare you? Do you realise who is standing before you?”
      less frequently to the under-officials, and, if he did utter the words, it
      was only after first having learned the bearings of the matter. But the
      most noteworthy point was, that from that day forward the apparition of
      the dead official ceased to be seen. Evidently the prominent personage’s
      cloak just fitted his shoulders. At all events, no more instances of his
      dragging cloaks from people’s shoulders were heard of. But many
      active and solicitous persons could by no means reassure themselves, and
      asserted that the dead official still showed himself in distant parts of
      the city.

 In fact, one watchman in Kolomen saw with his own eyes the apparition come
      from behind a house. But the watchman was not a strong man, so he was
      afraid to arrest him, and followed him in the dark, until, at length, the
      apparition looked round, paused, and inquired, “What do you want?”
      at the same time showing such a fist as is never seen on living men. The
      watchman said, “Nothing,” and turned back instantly. But the
      apparition was much too tall, wore huge moustaches, and, directing its
      steps apparently towards the Obukhov Bridge, disappeared in the darkness
      of the night.