COCO
    

      Throughout the whole countryside the Lucas farn, was known as “the
      Manor.” No one knew why. The peasants doubtless attached to this
      word, “Manor,” a meaning of wealth and of splendor, for this
      farm was undoubtedly the largest, richest and the best managed in the
      whole neighborhood.
    

      The immense court, surrounded by five rows of magnificent trees, which
      sheltered the delicate apple trees from the harsh wind of the plain,
      inclosed in its confines long brick buildings used for storing fodder and
      grain, beautiful stables built of hard stone and made to accommodate
      thirty horses, and a red brick residence which looked like a little
      chateau.
    

      Thanks for the good care taken, the manure heaps were as little offensive
      as such things can be; the watch-dogs lived in kennels, and countless
      poultry paraded through the tall grass.
    

      Every day, at noon, fifteen persons, masters, farmhands and the women
      folks, seated themselves around the long kitchen table where the soup was
      brought in steaming in a large, blue-flowered bowl.
    

      The beasts-horses, cows, pigs and sheep-were fat, well fed and clean.
      Maitre Lucas, a tall man who was getting stout, would go round three times
      a day, overseeing everything and thinking of everything.
    

      A very old white horse, which the mistress wished to keep until its
      natural death, because she had brought it up and had always used it, and
      also because it recalled many happy memories, was housed, through sheer
      kindness of heart, at the end of the stable.
    

      A young scamp about fifteen years old, Isidore Duval by name, and called,
      for convenience, Zidore, took care of this pensioner, gave him his measure
      of oats and fodder in winter, and in summer was supposed to change his
      pasturing place four times a day, so that he might have plenty of fresh
      grass.
    

      The animal, almost crippled, lifted with difficulty his legs, large at the
      knees and swollen above the hoofs. His coat, which was no longer curried,
      looked like white hair, and his long eyelashes gave to his eyes a sad
      expression.
    

      When Zidore took the animal to pasture, he had to pull on the rope with
      all his might, because it walked so slowly; and the youth, bent over and
      out of breath, would swear at it, exasperated at having to care for this
      old nag.
    

      The farmhands, noticing the young rascal's anger against Coco, were amused
      and would continually talk of the horse to Zidore, in order to exasperate
      him. His comrades would make sport with him. In the village he was called
      Coco-Zidore.
    

      The boy would fume, feeling an unholy desire to revenge himself on the
      horse. He was a thin, long-legged, dirty child, with thick, coarse,
      bristly red hair. He seemed only half-witted, and stuttered as though
      ideas were unable to form in his thick, brute-like mind.
    

      For a long time he had been unable to understand why Coco should be kept,
      indignant at seeing things wasted on this useless beast. Since the horse
      could no longer work, it seemed to him unjust that he should be fed; he
      revolted at the idea of wasting oats, oats which were so expensive, on
      this paralyzed old plug. And often, in spite of the orders of Maitre
      Lucas, he would economize on the nag's food, only giving him half measure.
      Hatred grew in his confused, childlike mind, the hatred of a stingy, mean,
      fierce, brutal and cowardly peasant.
    

      When summer came he had to move the animal about in the pasture. It was
      some distance away. The rascal, angrier every morning, would start, with
      his dragging step, across the wheat fields. The men working in the fields
      would shout to him, jokingly:
    

      “Hey, Zidore, remember me to Coco.”
    

      He would not answer; but on the way he would break off a switch, and, as
      soon as he had moved the old horse, he would let it begin grazing; then,
      treacherously sneaking up behind it, he would slash its legs. The animal
      would try to escape, to kick, to get away from the blows, and run around
      in a circle about its rope, as though it had been inclosed in a circus
      ring. And the boy would slash away furiously, running along behind, his
      teeth clenched in anger.
    

      Then he would go away slowly, without turning round, while the horse
      watched him disappear, his ribs sticking out, panting as a result of his
      unusual exertions. Not until the blue blouse of the young peasant was out
      of sight would he lower his thin white head to the grass.
    

      As the nights were now warm, Coco was allowed to sleep out of doors, in
      the field behind the little wood. Zidore alone went to see him. The boy
      threw stones at him to amuse himself. He would sit down on an embankment
      about ten feet away and would stay there about half an hour, from time to
      time throwing a sharp stone at the old horse, which remained standing tied
      before his enemy, watching him continually and not daring to eat before he
      was gone.
    

      This one thought persisted in the mind of the young scamp: “Why feed
      this horse, which is no longer good for anything?” It seemed to him
      that this old nag was stealing the food of the others, the goods of man
      and God, that he was even robbing him, Zidore, who was working.
    

      Then, little by little, each day, the boy began to shorten the length of
      rope which allowed the horse to graze.
    

      The hungry animal was growing thinner, and starving. Too feeble to break
      his bonds, he would stretch his head out toward the tall, green, tempting
      grass, so near that he could smell, and yet so far that he could not touch
      it.
    

      But one morning Zidore had an idea: it was, not to move Coco any more. He
      was tired of walking so far for that old skeleton. He came, however, in
      order to enjoy his vengeance. The beast watched him anxiously. He did not
      beat him that day. He walked around him with his hands in his pockets. He
      even pretended to change his place, but he sank the stake in exactly the
      same hole, and went away overjoyed with his invention.
    

      The horse, seeing him leave, neighed to call him back; but the rascal
      began to run, leaving him alone, entirely alone in his field, well tied
      down and without a blade of grass within reach.
    

      Starving, he tried to reach the grass which he could touch with the end of
      his nose. He got on his knees, stretching out his neck and his long,
      drooling lips. All in vain. The old animal spent the whole day in useless,
      terrible efforts. The sight of all that green food, which stretched out on
      all sides of him, served to increase the gnawing pangs of hunger.
    

      The scamp did not return that day. He wandered through the woods in search
      of nests.
    

      The next day he appeared upon the scene again. Coco, exhausted, had lain
      down. When he saw the boy, he got up, expecting at last to have his place
      changed.
    

      But the little peasant did not even touch the mallet, which was lying on
      the ground. He came nearer, looked at the animal, threw at his head a
      clump of earth which flattened out against the white hair, and he started
      off again, whistling.
    

      The horse remained standing as long as he could see him; then, knowing
      that his attempts to reach the near-by grass would be hopeless, he once
      more lay down on his side and closed his eyes.
    

      The following day Zidore did not come.
    

      When he did come at last, he found Coco still stretched out; he saw that
      he was dead.
    

      Then he remained standing, looking at him, pleased with what he had done,
      surprised that it should already be all over. He touched him with his
      foot, lifted one of his legs and then let it drop, sat on him and remained
      there, his eyes fixed on the grass, thinking of nothing. He returned to
      the farm, but did not mention the accident, because he wished to wander
      about at the hours when he used to change the horse's pasture. He went to
      see him the next day. At his approach some crows flew away. Countless
      flies were walking over the body and were buzzing around it. When he
      returned home, he announced the event. The animal was so old that nobody
      was surprised. The master said to two of the men:
    

      “Take your shovels and dig a hole right where he is.”
    

      The men buried the horse at the place where he had died of hunger. And the
      grass grew thick, green and vigorous, fed by the poor body.