A COUNTRY COTTAGE
    

Two young people
      who had not long been married were walking up and down the platform of a
      little country station. His arm was round her waist, her head was almost
      on his shoulder, and both were happy.
    

      The moon peeped up from the drifting cloudlets and frowned, as it seemed,
      envying their happiness and regretting her tedious and utterly superfluous
      virginity. The still air was heavy with the fragrance of lilac and wild
      cherry. Somewhere in the distance beyond the line a corncrake was calling.
    

      “How beautiful it is, Sasha, how beautiful!” murmured the
      young wife. “It all seems like a dream. See, how sweet and inviting
      that little copse looks! How nice those solid, silent telegraph posts are!
      They add a special note to the landscape, suggesting humanity,
      civilization in the distance. . . . Don’t you think it’s
      lovely when the wind brings the rushing sound of a train?”
    

      “Yes. . . . But what hot little hands you’ve got. . . That’s
      because you’re excited, Varya. . . . What have you got for our
      supper to-night?”
    

      “Chicken and salad. . . . It’s a chicken just big enough for
      two . . . . Then there is the salmon and sardines that were sent from
      town.”
    

      The moon as though she had taken a pinch of snuff hid her face behind a
      cloud. Human happiness reminded her of her own loneliness, of her solitary
      couch beyond the hills and dales.
    

      “The train is coming!” said Varya, “how jolly!”
    

      Three eyes of fire could be seen in the distance. The stationmaster came
      out on the platform. Signal lights flashed here and there on the line.
    

      “Let’s see the train in and go home,” said Sasha,
      yawning. “What a splendid time we are having together, Varya, it’s
      so splendid, one can hardly believe it’s true!”
    

      The dark monster crept noiselessly alongside the platform and came to a
      standstill. They caught glimpses of sleepy faces, of hats and shoulders at
      the dimly lighted windows.
    

      “Look! look!” they heard from one of the carriages. “Varya
      and Sasha have come to meet us! There they are! . . . Varya! . . . Varya.
      . . . Look!”
    

      Two little girls skipped out of the train and hung on Varya’s neck.
      They were followed by a stout, middle-aged lady, and a tall, lanky
      gentleman with grey whiskers; behind them came two schoolboys, laden with
      bags, and after the schoolboys, the governess, after the governess the
      grandmother.
    

      “Here we are, here we are, dear boy!” began the whiskered
      gentleman, squeezing Sasha’s hand. “Sick of waiting for us, I
      expect! You have been pitching into your old uncle for not coming down all
      this time, I daresay! Kolya, Kostya, Nina, Fifa . . . children! Kiss your
      cousin Sasha! We’re all here, the whole troop of us, just for three
      or four days. . . . I hope we shan’t be too many for you? You mustn’t
      let us put you out!”
    

      At the sight of their uncle and his family, the young couple were
      horror-stricken. While his uncle talked and kissed them, Sasha had a
      vision of their little cottage: he and Varya giving up their three little
      rooms, all the pillows and bedding to their guests; the salmon, the
      sardines, the chicken all devoured in a single instant; the cousins
      plucking the flowers in their little garden, spilling the ink, filled the
      cottage with noise and confusion; his aunt talking continually about her
      ailments and her papa’s having been Baron von Fintich. . . .
    

      And Sasha looked almost with hatred at his young wife, and whispered:
    

      “It’s you they’ve come to see! . . . Damn them!”
    

      “No, it’s you,” answered Varya, pale with anger. “They’re
      your relations! they’re not mine!”
    

      And turning to her visitors, she said with a smile of welcome: “Welcome
      to the cottage!”
    

      The moon came out again. She seemed to smile, as though she were glad she
      had no relations. Sasha, turning his head away to hide his angry
      despairing face, struggled to give a note of cordial welcome to his voice
      as he said:
    

      “It is jolly of you! Welcome to the cottage!”