COWARD
    

      In society he was called “Handsome Signoles.” His name was
      Vicomte Gontran-Joseph de Signoles.
    

      An orphan, and possessed of an ample fortune, he cut quite a dash, as it
      is called. He had an attractive appearance and manner, could talk well,
      had a certain inborn elegance, an air of pride and nobility, a good
      mustache, and a tender eye, that always finds favor with women.
    

      He was in great request at receptions, waltzed to perfection, and was
      regarded by his own sex with that smiling hostility accorded to the
      popular society man. He had been suspected of more than one love affair,
      calculated to enhance the reputation of a bachelor. He lived a happy,
      peaceful life—a life of physical and mental well-being. He had won
      considerable fame as a swordsman, and still more as a marksman.
    

      “When the time comes for me to fight a duel,” he said, “I
      shall choose pistols. With such a weapon I am sure to kill my man.”
    

      One evening, having accompanied two women friends of his with their
      husbands to the theatre, he invited them to take some ice cream at
      Tortoni's after the performance. They had been seated a few minutes in the
      restaurant when Signoles noticed that a man was staring persistently at
      one of the ladies. She seemed annoyed, and lowered her eyes. At last she
      said to her husband:
    

      “There's a man over there looking at me. I don't know him; do you?”
    

      The husband, who had noticed nothing, glanced across at the offender, and
      said:
    

      “No; not in the least.”
    

      His wife continued, half smiling, half angry:
    

      “It's very tiresome! He quite spoils my ice cream.”
    

      The husband shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Nonsense! Don't take any notice of him. If we were to bother our
      heads about all the ill-mannered people we should have no time for
      anything else.”
    

      But the vicomte abruptly left his seat. He could not allow this insolent
      fellow to spoil an ice for a guest of his. It was for him to take
      cognizance of the offence, since it was through him that his friends had
      come to the restaurant. He went across to the man and said:
    

      “Sir, you are staring at those ladies in a manner I cannot permit. I
      must ask you to desist from your rudeness.”
    

      The other replied:
    

      “Let me alone, will you!”
    

      “Take care, sir,” said the vicomte between his teeth, “or
      you will force me to extreme measures.”
    

      The man replied with a single word—a foul word, which could be heard
      from one end of the restaurant to the other, and which startled every one
      there. All those whose backs were toward the two disputants turned round;
      all the others raised their heads; three waiters spun round on their heels
      like tops; the two lady cashiers jumped, as if shot, then turned their
      bodies simultaneously, like two automata worked by the same spring.
    

      There was dead silence. Then suddenly a sharp, crisp sound. The vicomte
      had slapped his adversary's face. Every one rose to interfere. Cards were
      exchanged.
    

      When the vicomte reached home he walked rapidly up and down his room for
      some minutes. He was in a state of too great agitation to think
      connectedly. One idea alone possessed him: a duel. But this idea aroused
      in him as yet no emotion of any kind. He had done what he was bound to do;
      he had proved himself to be what he ought to be. He would be talked about,
      approved, congratulated. He repeated aloud, speaking as one does when
      under the stress of great mental disturbance:
    

      “What a brute of a man!” Then he sat down, and began to
      reflect. He would have to find seconds as soon as morning came. Whom
      should he choose? He bethought himself of the most influential and
      best-known men of his acquaintance. His choice fell at last on the Marquis
      de la Tour-Noire and Colonel Bourdin-a nobleman and a soldier. That would
      be just the thing. Their names would carry weight in the newspapers. He
      was thirsty, and drank three glasses of water, one after another; then he
      walked up and down again. If he showed himself brave, determined, prepared
      to face a duel in deadly earnest, his adversary would probably draw back
      and proffer excuses. He picked up the card he had taken from his pocket
      and thrown on a table. He read it again, as he had already read it, first
      at a glance in the restaurant, and afterward on the way home in the light
      of each gas lamp: “Georges Lamil, 51 Rue Moncey.” That was
      all.
    

      He examined closely this collection of letters, which seemed to him
      mysterious, fraught with many meanings. Georges Lamil! Who was the man?
      What was his profession? Why had he stared so at the woman? Was it not
      monstrous that a stranger, an unknown, should thus all at once upset one's
      whole life, simply because it had pleased him to stare rudely at a woman?
      And the vicomte once more repeated aloud:
    

      “What a brute!”
    

      Then he stood motionless, thinking, his eyes still fixed on the card.
      Anger rose in his heart against this scrap of paper—a resentful
      anger, mingled with a strange sense of uneasiness. It was a stupid
      business altogether! He took up a penknife which lay open within reach,
      and deliberately stuck it into the middle of the printed name, as if he
      were stabbing some one.
    

      So he would have to fight! Should he choose swords or pistols?—for
      he considered himself as the insulted party. With the sword he would risk
      less, but with the pistol there was some chance of his adversary backing
      out. A duel with swords is rarely fatal, since mutual prudence prevents
      the combatants from fighting close enough to each other for a point to
      enter very deep. With pistols he would seriously risk his life; but, on
      the other hand, he might come out of the affair with flying colors, and
      without a duel, after all.
    

      “I must be firm,” he said. “The fellow will be afraid.”
    

      The sound of his own voice startled him, and he looked nervously round the
      room. He felt unstrung. He drank another glass of water, and then began
      undressing, preparatory to going to bed.
    

      As soon as he was in bed he blew out the light and shut his eyes.
    

      “I have all day to-morrow,” he reflected, “for setting
      my affairs in order. I must sleep now, in order to be calm when the time
      comes.”
    

      He was very warm in bed, but he could not succeed in losing consciousness.
      He tossed and turned, remained for five minutes lying on his back, then
      changed to his left side, then rolled over to his right. He was thirsty
      again, and rose to drink. Then a qualm seized him:
    

      “Can it be possible that I am afraid?”
    

      Why did his heart beat so uncontrollably at every well-known sound in his
      room? When the clock was about to strike, the prefatory grating of its
      spring made him start, and for several seconds he panted for breath, so
      unnerved was he.
    

      He began to reason with himself on the possibility of such a thing:
      “Could I by any chance be afraid?”
    

      No, indeed; he could not be afraid, since he was resolved to proceed to
      the last extremity, since he was irrevocably determined to fight without
      flinching. And yet he was so perturbed in mind and body that he asked
      himself:
    

      “Is it possible to be afraid in spite of one's self?”
    

      And this doubt, this fearful question, took possession of him. If an
      irresistible power, stronger than his own will, were to quell his courage,
      what would happen? He would certainly go to the place appointed; his will
      would force him that far. But supposing, when there, he were to tremble or
      faint? And he thought of his social standing, his reputation, his name.
    

      And he suddenly determined to get up and look at himself in the glass. He
      lighted his candle. When he saw his face reflected in the mirror he
      scarcely recognized it. He seemed to see before him a man whom he did not
      know. His eyes looked disproportionately large, and he was very pale.
    

      He remained standing before the mirror. He put out his tongue, as if to
      examine the state of his health, and all at once the thought flashed into
      his mind:
    

      “At this time the day after to-morrow I may be dead.”
    

      And his heart throbbed painfully.
    

      “At this time the day after to-morrow I may be dead. This person in
      front of me, this 'I' whom I see in the glass, will perhaps be no more.
      What! Here I am, I look at myself, I feel myself to be alive—and yet
      in twenty-four hours I may be lying on that bed, with closed eyes, dead,
      cold, inanimate.”
    

      He turned round, and could see himself distinctly lying on his back on the
      couch he had just quitted. He had the hollow face and the limp hands of
      death.
    

      Then he became afraid of his bed, and to avoid seeing it went to his
      smoking-room. He mechanically took a cigar, lighted it, and began walking
      back and forth. He was cold; he took a step toward the bell, to wake his
      valet, but stopped with hand raised toward the bell rope.
    

      “He would see that I am afraid!”
    

      And, instead of ringing, he made a fire himself. His hands quivered
      nervously as they touched various objects. His head grew dizzy, his
      thoughts confused, disjointed, painful; a numbness seized his spirit, as
      if he had been drinking.
    

      And all the time he kept on saying:
    

      “What shall I do? What will become of me?”
    

      His whole body trembled spasmodically; he rose, and, going to the window,
      drew back the curtains.
    

      The day—a summer day-was breaking. The pink sky cast a glow on the
      city, its roofs, and its walls. A flush of light enveloped the awakened
      world, like a caress from the rising sun, and the glimmer of dawn kindled
      new hope in the breast of the vicomte. What a fool he was to let himself
      succumb to fear before anything was decided—before his seconds had
      interviewed those of Georges Lamil, before he even knew whether he would
      have to fight or not!
    

      He bathed, dressed, and left the house with a firm step.
    

      He repeated as he went:
    

      “I must be firm—very firm. I must show that I am not afraid.”
    

      His seconds, the marquis and the colonel, placed themselves at his
      disposal, and, having shaken him warmly by the hand, began to discuss
      details.
    

      “You want a serious duel?” asked the colonel.
    

      “Yes—quite serious,” replied the vicomte.
    

      “You insist on pistols?” put in the marquis.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Do you leave all the other arrangements in our hands?”
    

      With a dry, jerky voice the vicomte answered:
    

      “Twenty paces—at a given signal—the arm to be raised,
      not lowered—shots to be exchanged until one or other is seriously
      wounded.”
    

      “Excellent conditions,” declared the colonel in a satisfied
      tone. “You are a good shot; all the chances are in your favor.”
    

      And they parted. The vicomte returned home to wait for them. His
      agitation, only temporarily allayed, now increased momentarily. He felt,
      in arms, legs and chest, a sort of trembling—a continuous vibration;
      he could not stay still, either sitting or standing. His mouth was
      parched, and he made every now and then a clicking movement of the tongue,
      as if to detach it from his palate.
    

      He attempted, to take luncheon, but could not eat. Then it occurred to him
      to seek courage in drink, and he sent for a decanter of rum, of which he
      swallowed, one after another, six small glasses.
    

      A burning warmth, followed by a deadening of the mental faculties, ensued.
      He said to himself:
    

      “I know how to manage. Now it will be all right!”
    

      But at the end of an hour he had emptied the decanter, and his agitation
      was worse than ever. A mad longing possessed him to throw himself on the
      ground, to bite, to scream. Night fell.
    

      A ring at the bell so unnerved him that he had not the strength to rise to
      receive his seconds.
    

      He dared not even to speak to them, wish them good-day, utter a single
      word, lest his changed voice should betray him.
    

      “All is arranged as you wished,” said the colonel. “Your
      adversary claimed at first the privilege of the offended part; but he
      yielded almost at once, and accepted your conditions. His seconds are two
      military men.”
    

      “Thank you,” said the vicomte.
    

      The marquis added:
    

      “Please excuse us if we do not stay now, for we have a good deal to
      see to yet. We shall want a reliable doctor, since the duel is not to end
      until a serious wound has been inflicted; and you know that bullets are
      not to be trifled with. We must select a spot near some house to which the
      wounded party can be carried if necessary. In fact, the arrangements will
      take us another two or three hours at least.”
    

      The vicomte articulated for the second time:
    

      “Thank you.”
    

      “You're all right?” asked the colonel. “Quite calm?”
    

      “Perfectly calm, thank you.”
    

      The two men withdrew.
    

      When he was once more alone he felt as though he should go mad. His
      servant having lighted the lamps, he sat down at his table to write some
      letters. When he had traced at the top of a sheet of paper the words:
      “This is my last will and testament,” he started from his
      seat, feeling himself incapable of connected thought, of decision in
      regard to anything.
    

      So he was going to fight! He could no longer avoid it. What, then,
      possessed him? He wished to fight, he was fully determined to fight, and
      yet, in spite of all his mental effort, in spite of the exertion of all
      his will power, he felt that he could not even preserve the strength
      necessary to carry him through the ordeal. He tried to conjure up a
      picture of the duel, his own attitude, and that of his enemy.
    

      Every now and then his teeth chattered audibly. He thought he would read,
      and took down Chateauvillard's Rules of Dueling. Then he said:
    

      “Is the other man practiced in the use of the pistol? Is he well
      known? How can I find out?”
    

      He remembered Baron de Vaux's book on marksmen, and searched it from end
      to end. Georges Lamil was not mentioned. And yet, if he were not an adept,
      would he have accepted without demur such a dangerous weapon and such
      deadly conditions?
    

      He opened a case of Gastinne Renettes which stood on a small table, and
      took from it a pistol. Next he stood in the correct attitude for firing,
      and raised his arm. But he was trembling from head to foot, and the weapon
      shook in his grasp.
    

      Then he said to himself:
    

      “It is impossible. I cannot fight like this.”
    

      He looked at the little black, death-spitting hole at the end of the
      pistol; he thought of dishonor, of the whispers at the clubs, the smiles
      in his friends' drawing-rooms, the contempt of women, the veiled sneers of
      the newspapers, the insults that would be hurled at him by cowards.
    

      He still looked at the weapon, and raising the hammer, saw the glitter of
      the priming below it. The pistol had been left loaded by some chance, some
      oversight. And the discovery rejoiced him, he knew not why.
    

      If he did not maintain, in presence of his opponent, the steadfast bearing
      which was so necessary to his honor, he would be ruined forever. He would
      be branded, stigmatized as a coward, hounded out of society! And he felt,
      he knew, that he could not maintain that calm, unmoved demeanor. And yet
      he was brave, since the thought that followed was not even rounded to a
      finish in his mind; but, opening his mouth wide, he suddenly plunged the
      barrel of the pistol as far back as his throat, and pressed the trigger.
    

      When the valet, alarmed at the report, rushed into the room he found his
      master lying dead upon his back. A spurt of blood had splashed the white
      paper on the table, and had made a great crimson stain beneath the words:
    

      “This is my last will and testament.”