CUPID'S ARROWS.
    

  Pit where the buffalo cooled his hide,
  By the hot sun emptied, and blistered and dried;
  Log in the reh-grass, hidden and alone;
  Bund where the earth-rat's mounds are strown;
  Cave in the bank where the sly stream steals;
  Aloe that stabs at the belly and heels,
  Jump if you dare on a steed untried—Safer it is to go wide—
  go wide!
  Hark, from in front where the best men ride:—
  “Pull to the off, boys! Wide! Go wide!”
                —The Peora Hunt.


      Once upon a time there lived at Simla a very pretty girl, the daughter of
      a poor but honest District and Sessions Judge. She was a good girl, but
      could not help knowing her power and using it.
    

      Her Mamma was very anxious about her daughter's future, as all good Mammas
      should be.
    

      When a man is a Commissioner and a bachelor and has the right of wearing
      open-work jam-tart jewels in gold and enamel on his clothes, and of going
      through a door before every one except a Member of Council, a
      Lieutenant-Governor, or a Viceroy, he is worth marrying. At least, that is
      what ladies say. There was a Commissioner in Simla, in those days, who
      was, and wore, and did, all I have said. He was a plain man—an ugly
      man—the ugliest man in Asia, with two exceptions. His was a face to
      dream about and try to carve on a pipe-head afterwards. His name was
      Saggott—Barr-Saggott—Anthony Barr-Saggott and six letters to
      follow.
    

      Departmentally, he was one of the best men the Government of India owned.
      Socially, he was like a blandishing gorilla.
    

      When he turned his attentions to Miss Beighton, I believe that Mrs.
    

      Beighton wept with delight at the reward Providence had sent her in her
      old age.
    

      Mr. Beighton held his tongue. He was an easy-going man.
    

      Now a Commissioner is very rich. His pay is beyond the dreams of avarice—is
      so enormous that he can afford to save and scrape in a way that would
      almost discredit a Member of Council. Most Commissioners are mean; but
      Barr-Saggott was an exception. He entertained royally; he horsed himself
      well; he gave dances; he was a power in the land; and he behaved as such.
    

      Consider that everything I am writing of took place in an almost
      pre-historic era in the history of British India. Some folk may remember
      the years before lawn-tennis was born when we all played croquet. There
      were seasons before that, if you will believe me, when even croquet had
      not been invented, and archery—which was revived in England in 1844—was
      as great a pest as lawn-tennis is now. People talked learnedly about
      “holding” and “loosing,” “steles,” “reflexed bows,” “56-pound bows,”
       “backed” or “self-yew bows,” as we talk about “rallies,” “volleys,”
       “smashes,” “returns,” and “16-ounce rackets.”
     

      Miss Beighton shot divinely over ladies' distance—60 yards, that is—and
      was acknowledged the best lady archer in Simla. Men called her “Diana of
      Tara-Devi.”
     

      Barr-Saggott paid her great attention; and, as I have said, the heart of
      her mother was uplifted in consequence. Kitty Beighton took matters more
      calmly. It was pleasant to be singled out by a Commissioner with letters
      after his name, and to fill the hearts of other girls with bad feelings.
      But there was no denying the fact that Barr-Saggott was phenomenally ugly;
      and all his attempts to adorn himself only made him more grotesque. He was
      not christened “The Langur”—which means gray ape—for nothing.
      It was pleasant, Kitty thought, to have him at her feet, but it was better
      to escape from him and ride with the graceless Cubbon—the man in a
      Dragoon Regiment at Umballa—the boy with a handsome face, and no
      prospects. Kitty liked Cubbon more than a little. He never pretended for a
      moment the he was anything less than head over heels in love with her; for
      he was an honest boy. So Kitty fled, now and again, from the stately
      wooings of Barr-Saggott to the company of young Cubbon, and was scolded by
      her Mamma in consequence. “But, Mother,” she said, “Mr. Saggott is such—such
      a—is so FEARFULLY ugly, you know!”
     

      “My dear,” said Mrs. Beighton, piously, “we cannot be other than an
      all-ruling Providence has made us. Besides, you will take precedence of
      your own Mother, you know! Think of that and be reasonable.”
     

      Then Kitty put up her little chin and said irreverent things about
      precedence, and Commissioners, and matrimony. Mr. Beighton rubbed the top
      of his head; for he was an easy-going man.
    

      Late in the season, when he judged that the time was ripe, Barr-Saggott
      developed a plan which did great credit to his administrative powers. He
      arranged an archery tournament for ladies, with a most sumptuous
      diamond-studded bracelet as prize.
    

      He drew up his terms skilfully, and every one saw that the bracelet was a
      gift to Miss Beighton; the acceptance carrying with it the hand and the
      heart of Commissioner Barr-Saggott. The terms were a St. Leonard's Round—thirty-six
      shots at sixty yards—under the rules of the Simla Toxophilite
      Society.
    

      All Simla was invited. There were beautifully arranged tea-tables under
      the deodars at Annandale, where the Grand Stand is now; and, alone in its
      glory, winking in the sun, sat the diamond bracelet in a blue velvet case.
      Miss Beighton was anxious—almost too anxious to compete. On the
      appointed afternoon, all Simla rode down to Annandale to witness the
      Judgment of Paris turned upside down.
    

      Kitty rode with young Cubbon, and it was easy to see that the boy was
      troubled in his mind. He must be held innocent of everything that
      followed. Kitty was pale and nervous, and looked long at the bracelet.
      Barr-Saggott was gorgeously dressed, even more nervous than Kitty, and
      more hideous than ever.
    

      Mrs. Beighton smiled condescendingly, as befitted the mother of a
      potential Commissioneress, and the shooting began; all the world standing
      in a semicircle as the ladies came out one after the other.
    

      Nothing is so tedious as an archery competition. They shot, and they shot,
      and they kept on shooting, till the sun left the valley, and little
      breezes got up in the deodars, and people waited for Miss Beighton to
      shoot and win. Cubbon was at one horn of the semicircle round the
      shooters, and Barr-Saggott at the other. Miss Beighton was last on the
      list. The scoring had been weak, and the bracelet, PLUS Commissioner
      Barr-Saggott, was hers to a certainty.
    

      The Commissioner strung her bow with his own sacred hands. She stepped
      forward, looked at the bracelet, and her first arrow went true to a hair—full
      into the heart of the “gold”—counting nine points.
    

      Young Cubbon on the left turned white, and his Devil prompted Barr-Saggott
      to smile. Now horses used to shy when Barr-Saggott smiled.
    

      Kitty saw that smile. She looked to her left-front, gave an almost
      imperceptible nod to Cubbon, and went on shooting.
    

      I wish I could describe the scene that followed. It was out of the
      ordinary and most improper. Miss Kitty fitted her arrows with immense
      deliberation, so that every one might see what she was doing. She was a
      perfect shot; and her 46-pound bow suited her to a nicety. She pinned the
      wooden legs of the target with great care four successive times. She
      pinned the wooden top of the target once, and all the ladies looked at
      each other. Then she began some fancy shooting at the white, which, if you
      hit it, counts exactly one point. She put five arrows into the white. It
      was wonderful archery; but, seeing that her business was to make “golds”
       and win the bracelet, Barr-Saggott turned a delicate green like young
      water-grass. Next, she shot over the target twice, then wide to the left
      twice—always with the same deliberation—while a chilly hush
      fell over the company, and Mrs. Beighton took out her handkerchief. Then
      Kitty shot at the ground in front of the target, and split several arrows.
      Then she made a red—or seven points—just to show what she
      could do if she liked, and finished up her amazing performance with some
      more fancy shooting at the target-supports. Here is her score as it was
      picked off:—
    

  Gold. Red. Blue. Black. White. Total Hits.  Total Score Miss Beighton
  1      1    0     0      5        7                  21


      Barr-Saggott looked as if the last few arrowheads had been driven into his
      legs instead of the target's, and the deep stillness was broken by a
      little snubby, mottled, half-grown girl saying in a shrill voice of
      triumph: “Then I'VE won!”
     

      Mrs. Beighton did her best to bear up; but she wept in the presence of the
      people. No training could help her through such a disappointment. Kitty
      unstrung her bow with a vicious jerk, and went back to her place, while
      Barr-Saggott was trying to pretend that he enjoyed snapping the bracelet
      on the snubby girl's raw, red wrist. It was an awkward scene—most
      awkward. Every one tried to depart in a body and leave Kitty to the mercy
      of her Mamma.
    

      But Cubbon took her away instead, and—the rest isn't worth printing.