DARKNESS

  A

YOUNG peasant,
      with white eyebrows and eyelashes and broad cheekbones, in a torn
      sheepskin and big black felt overboots, waited till the Zemstvo doctor had
      finished seeing his patients and came out to go home from the hospital;
      then he went up to him, diffidently.

 “Please, your honour,” he said.

 “What do you want?”

 The young man passed the palm of his hand up and over his nose, looked at
      the sky, and then answered:

 “Please, your honour. . . . You’ve got my brother Vaska the
      blacksmith from Varvarino in the convict ward here, your honour. . . .”

 “Yes, what then?”

 “I am Vaska’s brother, you see. . . . Father has the two of
      us: him, Vaska, and me, Kirila; besides us there are three sisters, and
      Vaska’s a married man with a little one. . . . There are a lot of us
      and no one to work. . . . In the smithy it’s nearly two years now
      since the forge has been heated. I am at the cotton factory, I can’t
      do smith’s work, and how can father work? Let alone work, he can’t
      eat properly, he can’t lift the spoon to his mouth.”

 “What do you want from me?”

 “Be merciful! Let Vaska go!”

 The doctor looked wonderingly at Kirila, and without saying a word walked
      on. The young peasant ran on in front and flung himself in a heap at his
      feet.

 “Doctor, kind gentleman!” he besought him, bAlinking and again
      passing his open hand over his nose. “Show heavenly mercy; let Vaska
      go home! We shall remember you in our prayers for ever! Your honour, let
      him go! They are all starving! Mother’s wailing day in, day out,
      Vaska’s wife’s wailing . . . it’s worse than death! I
      don’t care to look upon the light of day. Be merciful; let him go,
      kind gentleman!”

 “Are you stupid or out of your senses?” asked the doctor
      angrily. “How can I let him go? Why, he is a convict.”

 Kirila began crying. “Let him go!”

 “Tfoo, queer fellow! What right have I? Am I a gaoler or what? They
      brought him to the hospital for me to treat him, but I have as much right
      to let him out as I have to put you in prison, silly fellow!”

 “But they have shut him up for nothing! He was in prison a year
      before the trial, and now there is no saying what he is there for. It
      would have been a different thing if he had murdered someone, let us say,
      or stolen horses; but as it is, what is it all about?”

 “Very likely, but how do I come in?”

 “They shut a man up and they don’t know themselves what for.
      He was drunk, your honour, did not know what he was doing, and even hit
      father on the ear and scratched his own cheek on a branch, and two of our
      fellows—they wanted some Turkish tobacco, you see-began telling him
      to go with them and break into the Armenian’s shop at night for
      tobacco. Being drunk, he obeyed them, the fool. They broke the lock, you
      know, got in, and did no end of mischief; they turned everything upside
      down, broke the windows, and scattered the flour about. They were drunk,
      that is all one can say! Well, the constable turned up . . . and with one
      thing and another they took them off to the magistrate. They have been a
      whole year in prison, and a week ago, on the Wednesday, they were all
      three tried in the town. A soldier stood behind them with a gun . . .
      people were sworn in. Vaska was less to blame than any, but the gentry
      decided that he was the ringleader. The other two lads were sent to
      prison, but Vaska to a convict battalion for three years. And what for?
      One should judge like a Christian!”

 “I have nothing to do with it, I tell you again. Go to the
      authorities.”

 “I have been already! I’ve been to the court; I have tried to
      send in a petition—they wouldn’t take a petition; I have been
      to the police captain, and I have been to the examining magistrate, and
      everyone says, ‘It is not my business!’ Whose business is it,
      then? But there is no one above you here in the hospital; you do what you
      like, your honour.”

 “You simpleton,” sighed the doctor, “once the jury have
      found him guilty, not the governor, not even the minister, could do
      anything, let alone the police captain. It’s no good your trying to
      do anything!”

 “And who judged him, then?”

 “The gentlemen of the jury. . . .”

 “They weren’t gentlemen, they were our peasants! Andrey Guryev
      was one; Aloshka Huk was one.”

 “Well, I am cold talking to you. . . .”

 The doctor waved his hand and walked quickly to his own door. Kirila was
      on the point of following him, but, seeing the door slam, he stopped.

 For ten minutes he stood motionless in the middle of the hospital yard,
      and without putting on his cap stared at the doctor’s house, then he
      heaved a deep sigh, slowly scratched himself, and walked towards the gate.

 “To whom am I to go?” he muttered as he came out on to the
      road. “One says it is not his business, another says it is not his
      business. Whose business is it, then? No, till you grease their hands you
      will get nothing out of them. The doctor says that, but he keeps looking
      all the while at my fist to see whether I am going to give him a blue
      note. Well, brother, I’ll go, if it has to be to the governor.”

 Shifting from one foot to the other and continually looking round him in
      an objectless way, he trudged lazily along the road and was apparently
      wondering where to go. . . . It was not cold and the snow faintly crunched
      under his feet. Not more than half a mile in front of him the wretched
      little district town in which his brother had just been tried lay
      outstretched on the hill. On the right was the dark prison with its red
      roof and sentry-boxes at the corners; on the left was the big town copse,
      now covered with hoar-frost. It was still; only an old man, wearing a
      woman’s short jacket and a huge cap, was walking ahead, coughing and
      shouting to a cow which he was driving to the town.

 “Good-day, grandfather,” said Kirila, overtaking him.

 “Good-day. . . .”

 “Are you driving it to the market?”

 “No,” the old man answered lazily.

 “Are you a townsman?”

 They got into conversation; Kirila told him what he had come to the
      hospital for, and what he had been talking about to the doctor.

 “The doctor does not know anything about such matters, that is a
      sure thing,” the old man said to him as they were both entering the
      town; “though he is a gentleman, he is only taught to cure by every
      means, but to give you real advice, or, let us say, write out a petition
      for you—that he cannot do. There are special authorities to do that.
      You have been to the justice of the peace and to the police captain—they
      are no good for your business either.”

 “Where am I to go?”

 “The permanent member of the rural board is the chief person for
      peasants’ affairs. Go to him, Mr. Sineokov.”

 “The one who is at Zolotovo?”

 “Why, yes, at Zolotovo. He is your chief man. If it is anything that
      has to do with you peasants even the police captain has no authority
      against him.”

 “It’s a long way to go, old man. . . . I dare say it’s
      twelve miles and may be more.”

 “One who needs something will go seventy.”

 “That is so. . . . Should I send in a petition to him, or what?”

 “You will find out there. If you should have a petition the clerk
      will write you one quick enough. The permanent member has a clerk.”

 After parting from the old man Kirila stood still in the middle of the
      square, thought a little, and walked back out of the town. He made up his
      mind to go to Zolotovo.

 Five days later, as the doctor was on his way home after seeing his
      patients, he caught sight of Kirila again in his yard. This time the young
      peasant was not alone, but with a gaunt, very pale old man who nodded his
      head without ceasing, like a pendulum, and mumbled with his lips.

 “Your honour, I have come again to ask your gracious mercy,”
      began Kirila. “Here I have come with my father. Be merciful, let
      Vaska go! The permanent member would not talk to me. He said: ‘Go
      away!’”

 “Your honour,” the old man hissed in his throat, raising his
      twitching eyebrows, “be merciful! We are poor people, we cannot
      repay your honour, but if you graciously please, Kiryushka or Vaska can
      repay you in work. Let them work.”

 “We will pay with work,” said Kirila, and he raised his hand
      above his head as though he would take an oath. “Let him go! They
      are starving, they are crying day and night, your honour!”

 The young peasant bent a rapid glance on his father, pulled him by the
      sleeve, and both of them, as at the word of command, fell at the doctor’s
      feet. The latter waved his hand in despair, and, without looking round,
      walked quickly in at his door.