DEAD WOMAN'S SECRET
    

      The woman had died without pain, quietly, as a woman should whose life had
      been blameless. Now she was resting in her bed, lying on her back, her
      eyes closed, her features calm, her long white hair carefully arranged as
      though she had done it up ten minutes before dying. The whole pale
      countenance of the dead woman was so collected, so calm, so resigned that
      one could feel what a sweet soul had lived in that body, what a quiet
      existence this old soul had led, how easy and pure the death of this
      parent had been.
    

      Kneeling beside the bed, her son, a magistrate with inflexible principles,
      and her daughter, Marguerite, known as Sister Eulalie, were weeping as
      though their hearts would break. She had, from childhood up, armed them
      with a strict moral code, teaching them religion, without weakness, and
      duty, without compromise. He, the man, had become a judge and handled the
      law as a weapon with which he smote the weak ones without pity. She, the
      girl, influenced by the virtue which had bathed her in this austere
      family, had become the bride of the Church through her loathing for man.
    

      They had hardly known their father, knowing only that he had made their
      mother most unhappy, without being told any other details.
    

      The nun was wildly-kissing the dead woman's hand, an ivory hand as white
      as the large crucifix lying across the bed. On the other side of the long
      body the other hand seemed still to be holding the sheet in the death
      grasp; and the sheet had preserved the little creases as a memory of those
      last movements which precede eternal immobility.
    

      A few light taps on the door caused the two sobbing heads to look up, and
      the priest, who had just come from dinner, returned. He was red and out of
      breath from his interrupted digestion, for he had made himself a strong
      mixture of coffee and brandy in order to combat the fatigue of the last
      few nights and of the wake which was beginning.
    

      He looked sad, with that assumed sadness of the priest for whom death is a
      bread winner. He crossed himself and approaching with his professional
      gesture: “Well, my poor children! I have come to help you pass these
      last sad hours.” But Sister Eulalie suddenly arose. “Thank
      you, father, but my brother and I prefer to remain alone with her. This is
      our last chance to see her, and we wish to be together, all three of us,
      as we—we—used to be when we were small and our poor mo—mother——”
    

      Grief and tears stopped her; she could not continue.
    

      Once more serene, the priest bowed, thinking of his bed. “As you
      wish, my children.” He kneeled, crossed himself, prayed, arose and
      went out quietly, murmuring: “She was a saint!”
    

      They remained alone, the dead woman and her children. The ticking of the
      clock, hidden in the shadow, could be heard distinctly, and through the
      open window drifted in the sweet smell of hay and of woods, together with
      the soft moonlight. No other noise could be heard over the land except the
      occasional croaking of the frog or the chirping of some belated insect. An
      infinite peace, a divine melancholy, a silent serenity surrounded this
      dead woman, seemed to be breathed out from her and to appease nature
      itself.
    

      Then the judge, still kneeling, his head buried in the bed clothes, cried
      in a voice altered by grief and deadened by the sheets and blankets:
      “Mamma, mamma, mamma!” And his sister, frantically striking
      her forehead against the woodwork, convulsed, twitching and trembling as
      in an epileptic fit, moaned: “Jesus, Jesus, mamma, Jesus!” And
      both of them, shaken by a storm of grief, gasped and choked.
    

      The crisis slowly calmed down and they began to weep quietly, just as on
      the sea when a calm follows a squall.
    

      A rather long time passed and they arose and looked at their dead. And the
      memories, those distant memories, yesterday so dear, to-day so torturing,
      came to their minds with all the little forgotten details, those little
      intimate familiar details which bring back to life the one who has left.
      They recalled to each other circumstances, words, smiles, intonations of
      the mother who was no longer to speak to them. They saw her again happy
      and calm. They remembered things which she had said, and a little motion
      of the hand, like beating time, which she often used when emphasizing
      something important.
    

      And they loved her as they never had loved her before. They measured the
      depth of their grief, and thus they discovered how lonely they would find
      themselves.
    

      It was their prop, their guide, their whole youth, all the best part of
      their lives which was disappearing. It was their bond with life, their
      mother, their mamma, the connecting link with their forefathers which they
      would thenceforth miss. They now became solitary, lonely beings; they
      could no longer look back.
    

      The nun said to her brother: “You remember how mamma used always to
      read her old letters; they are all there in that drawer. Let us, in turn,
      read them; let us live her whole life through tonight beside her! It would
      be like a road to the cross, like making the acquaintance of her mother,
      of our grandparents, whom we never knew, but whose letters are there and
      of whom she so often spoke, do you remember?”
    

      Out of the drawer they took about ten little packages of yellow paper,
      tied with care and arranged one beside the other. They threw these relics
      on the bed and chose one of them on which the word “Father”
      was written. They opened and read it.
    

      It was one of those old-fashioned letters which one finds in old family
      desk drawers, those epistles which smell of another century. The first one
      started: “My dear,” another one: “My beautiful little
      girl,” others: “My dear child,” or: “My dear
      (laughter).” And suddenly the nun began to read aloud, to read over
      to the dead woman her whole history, all her tender memories. The judge,
      resting his elbow on the bed, was listening with his eyes fastened on his
      mother. The motionless body seemed happy.
    

      Sister Eulalie, interrupting herself, said suddenly:
    

      “These ought to be put in the grave with her; they ought to be used
      as a shroud and she ought to be buried in it.” She took another
      package, on which no name was written. She began to read in a firm voice:
      “My adored one, I love you wildly. Since yesterday I have been
      suffering the tortures of the damned, haunted by our memory. I feel your
      lips against mine, your eyes in mine, your breast against mine. I love
      you, I love you! You have driven me mad. My arms open, I gasp, moved by a
      wild desire to hold you again. My whole soul and body cries out for you,
      wants you. I have kept in my mouth the taste of your kisses—”
    

      The judge had straightened himself up. The nun stopped reading. He
      snatched the letter from her and looked for the signature. There was none,
      but only under the words, “The man who adores you,” the name
      “Henry.” Their father's name was Rene. Therefore this was not
      from him. The son then quickly rummaged through the package of letters,
      took one out and read: “I can no longer live without your caresses.”
      Standing erect, severe as when sitting on the bench, he looked unmoved at
      the dead woman. The nun, straight as a statue, tears trembling in the
      corners of her eyes, was watching her brother, waiting. Then he crossed
      the room slowly, went to the window and stood there, gazing out into the
      dark night.
    

      When he turned around again Sister Eulalie, her eyes dry now, was still
      standing near the bed, her head bent down.
    

      He stepped forward, quickly picked up the letters and threw them pell-mell
      back into the drawer. Then he closed the curtains of the bed.
    

      When daylight made the candles on the table turn pale the son slowly left
      his armchair, and without looking again at the mother upon whom he had
      passed sentence, severing the tie that united her to son and daughter, he
      said slowly: “Let us now retire, sister.”