FROM THE DIARY OF A VIOLENT-TEMPERED MAN

  I

AM a serious
      person and my mind is of a philosophic bent. My vocation is the study of
      finance. I am a student of financial law and I have chosen as the subject
      of my dissertation—the Past and Future of the Dog Licence. I need
      hardly point out that young ladies, songs, moonlight, and all that sort of
      silliness are entirely out of my line.

 Morning. Ten o’clock. My maman pours me out a cup of coffee.
      I drink it and go out on the little balcony to set to work on my
      dissertation. I take a clean sheet of paper, dip the pen into the ink, and
      write out the title: “The Past and Future of the Dog Licence.”

 After thinking a little I write: “Historical Survey. We may deduce
      from some allusions in Herodotus and Xenophon that the origin of the tax
      on dogs goes back to . . . .”

 But at that point I hear footsteps that strike me as highly suspicious. I
      look down from the balcony and see below a young lady with a long face and
      a long waist. Her name, I believe, is Nadenka or Varenka, it really does
      not matter which. She is looking for something, pretends not to have
      noticed me, and is humming to herself:

 “Dost thou remember that song full of tenderness?”

 I read through what I have written and want to continue, but the young
      lady pretends to have just caught sight of me, and says in a mournful
      voice:

 “Good morning, Nikolay Andreitch. Only fancy what a misfortune I
      have had! I went for a walk yesterday and lost the little ball off my
      bracelet!”

 I read through once more the opening of my dissertation, I trim up the
      tail of the letter “g” and mean to go on, but the young lady
      persists.

 “Nikolay Andreitch,” she says, “won’t you see me
      home? The Karelins have such a huge dog that I simply daren’t pass
      it alone.”

 There is no getting out of it. I lay down my pen and go down to her.
      Nadenka (or Varenka) takes my arm and we set off in the direction of her
      villa.

 When the duty of walking arm-in-arm with a lady falls to my lot, for some
      reason or other I always feel like a peg with a heavy cloak hanging on it.
      Nadenka (or Varenka), between ourselves, of an ardent temperament (her
      grandfather was an Armenian), has a peculiar art of throwing her whole
      weight on one’s arm and clinging to one’s side like a leech.
      And so we walk along.

 As we pass the Karelins’, I see a huge dog, who reminds me of the
      dog licence. I think with despair of the work I have begun and sigh.

 “What are you sighing for?” asks Nadenka (or Varenka), and
      heaves a sigh herself.

 Here I must digress for a moment to explain that Nadenka or Varenka (now I
      come to think of it, I believe I have heard her called Mashenka) imagines,
      I can’t guess why, that I am in love with her, and therefore thinks
      it her duty as a humane person always to look at me with compassion and to
      soothe my wound with words.

 “Listen,” said she, stopping. “I know why you are
      sighing. You are in love, yes; but I beg you for the sake of our
      friendship to believe that the girl you love has the deepest respect for
      you. She cannot return your love; but is it her fault that her heart has
      long been another’s?”

 Mashenka’s nose begins to swell and turn red, her eyes fill with
      tears: she evidently expects some answer from me, but, fortunately, at
      this moment we arrive. Mashenka’s mamma, a good-natured woman but
      full of conventional ideas, is sitting on the terrace: glancing at her
      daughter’s agitated face, she looks intently at me and sighs, as
      though saying to herself: “Ah, these young people! they don’t
      even know how to keep their secrets to themselves!”

 On the terrace with her are several young ladies of various colours and a
      retired officer who is staying in the villa next to ours. He was wounded
      during the last war in the left temple and the right hip. This unfortunate
      man is, like myself, proposing to devote the summer to literary work. He
      is writing the “Memoirs of a Military Man.” Like me, he begins
      his honourable labours every morning, but before he has written more than
      “I was born in . . .” some Varenka or Mashenka is sure to
      appear under his balcony, and the wounded hero is borne off under guard.

 All the party sitting on the terrace are engaged in preparing some
      miserable fruit for jam. I make my bows and am about to beat a retreat,
      but the young ladies of various colours seize my hat with a squeal and
      insist on my staying. I sit down. They give me a plate of fruit and a
      hairpin. I begin taking the seeds out.

 The young ladies of various colours talk about men: they say that
      So-and-So is nice-looking, that So-and-So is handsome but not nice, that
      somebody else is nice but ugly, and that a fourth would not have been
      bad-looking if his nose were not like a thimble, and so on.

 “And you, Monsieur Nicolas ,” says Varenka’s
      mamma, turning to me, “are not handsome, but you are attractive. . .
      . There is something about your face. . . . In men, though, it’s not
      beauty but intelligence that matters,” she adds, sighing.

 The young ladies sigh, too, and drop their eyes . . . they agree that the
      great thing in men is not beauty but intelligence. I steal a glance
      sideways at a looking-glass to ascertain whether I really am attractive. I
      see a shaggy head, a bushy beard, moustaches, eyebrows, hair on my cheeks,
      hair up to my eyes, a perfect thicket with a solid nose sticking up out of
      it like a watch-tower. Attractive! h’m!

 “But it’s by the qualities of your soul, after all, that you
      will make your way, Nicolas ,” sighs Nadenka’s mamma, as
      though affirming some secret and original idea of her own.

 And Nadenka is sympathetically distressed on my account, but the
      conviction that a man passionately in love with her is sitting opposite is
      obviously a source of the greatest enjoyment to her.

 When they have done with men, the young ladies begin talking about love.
      After a long conversation about love, one of the young ladies gets up and
      goes away. Those that remain begin to pick her to pieces. Everyone agrees
      that she is stupid, unbearable, ugly, and that one of her shoulder-blades
      sticks out in a shocking way.

 But at last, thank goodness! I see our maid. My maman has sent her
      to call me in to dinner. Now I can make my escape from this uncongenial
      company and go back to my work. I get up and make my bows.

 Varenka’s maman , Varenka herself, and the variegated young
      ladies surround me, and declare that I cannot possibly go, because I
      promised yesterday to dine with them and go to the woods to look for
      mushrooms. I bow and sit down again. My soul is boiling with rage, and I
      feel that in another moment I may not be able to answer for myself, that
      there may be an explosion, but gentlemanly feeling and the fear of
      committing a breach of good manners compels me to obey the ladies. And I
      obey them.

 We sit down to dinner. The wounded officer, whose wound in the temple has
      affected the muscles of the left cheek, eats as though he had a bit in his
      mouth. I roll up little balls of bread, think about the dog licence, and,
      knowing the ungovernable violence of my temper, try to avoid speaking.
      Nadenka looks at me sympathetically.

 Soup, tongue and peas, roast fowl, and compôte. I have no appetite, but
      eat from politeness.

 After dinner, while I am standing alone on the terrace, smoking, Nadenka’s
      mamma comes up to me, presses my hand, and says breathlessly:

 “Don’t despair, Nicolas! She has such a heart, . . .
      such a heart! . . .”

 We go towards the wood to gather mushrooms. Varenka hangs on my arm and
      clings to my side. My sufferings are indescribable, but I bear them in
      patience.

 We enter the wood.

 “Listen, Monsieur Nicolas,” says Nadenka, sighing. “Why
      are you so melancholy? And why are you so silent?”

 Extraordinary girl she is, really! What can I talk to her about? What have
      we in common?

 “Oh, do say something!” she begs me.

 I begin trying to think of something popular, something within the range
      of her understanding. After a moment’s thought I say:

 “The cutting down of forests has been greatly detrimental to the
      prosperity of Russia. . . .”

 “Nicolas,” sighs Nadenka, and her nose begins to turn red,
      “Nicolas, I see you are trying to avoid being open with me. . . .
      You seem to wish to punish me by your silence. Your feeling is not
      returned, and you wish to suffer in silence, in solitude . . . it is too
      awful, Nicolas!” she cries impulsively seizing my hand, and I see
      her nose beginning to swell. “What would you say if the girl you
      love were to offer you her eternal friendship?”

 I mutter something incoherent, for I really can’t think what to say
      to her.

 In the first place, I’m not in love with any girl at all; in the
      second, what could I possibly want her eternal friendship for? and,
      thirdly, I have a violent temper.

 Mashenka (or Varenka) hides her face in her hands and murmurs, as though
      to herself:

 “He will not speak; . . . it is clear that he will have me make the
      sacrifice! I cannot love him, if my heart is still another’s . . .
      but . . . I will think of it. . . . Very good, I will think of it . . . I
      will prove the strength of my soul, and perhaps, at the cost of my own
      happiness, I will save this man from suffering!” . . .

 I can make nothing out of all this. It seems some special sort of puzzle.

 We go farther into the wood and begin picking mushrooms. We are perfectly
      silent the whole time. Nadenka’s face shows signs of inward
      struggle. I hear the bark of dogs; it reminds me of my dissertation, and I
      sigh heavily. Between the trees I catch sight of the wounded officer
      limping painfully along. The poor fellow’s right leg is lame from
      his wound, and on his left arm he has one of the variegated young ladies.
      His face expresses resignation to destiny.

 We go back to the house to drink tea, after which we play croquet and
      listen to one of the variegated young ladies singing a song: “No,
      no, thou lovest not, no, no.” At the word “no” she
      twists her mouth till it almost touches one ear.

 “ Charmant! ” wail the other young ladies, “ Charmant! ”

 The evening comes on. A detestable moon creeps up behind the bushes. There
      is perfect stillness in the air, and an unpleasant smell of freshly cut
      hay. I take up my hat and try to get away.

 “I have something I must say to you!” Mashenka whispers to me
      significantly, “don’t go away!”

 I have a foreboding of evil, but politeness obliges me to remain. Mashenka
      takes my arm and leads me away to a garden walk. By this time her whole
      figure expresses conflict. She is pale and gasping for breath, and she
      seems absolutely set on pulling my right arm out of the socket. What can
      be the matter with her?

 “Listen!” she mutters. “No, I cannot! No! . . .”
      She tries to say something, but hesitates. Now I see from her face that
      she has come to some decision. With gleaming eyes and swollen nose she
      snatches my hand, and says hurriedly, “ Nicolas , I am yours!
      Love you I cannot, but I promise to be true to you!”

 Then she squeezes herself to my breast, and at once springs away.

 “Someone is coming,” she whispers. “Farewell! . . .
      To-morrow at eleven o’clock I will be in the arbour. . . . Farewell!”

 And she vanishes. Completely at a loss for an explanation of her conduct
      and suffering from a painful palpitation of the heart, I make my way home.
      There the “Past and Future of the Dog Licence” is awaiting me,
      but I am quite unable to work. I am furious. . . . I may say, my anger is
      terrible. Damn it all! I allow no one to treat me like a boy, I am a man
      of violent temper, and it is not safe to trifle with me!

 When the maid comes in to call me to supper, I shout to her: “Go out
      of the room!” Such hastiness augurs nothing good.

 Next morning. Typical holiday weather. Temperature below freezing, a
      cutting wind, rain, mud, and a smell of naphthaline, because my maman has taken all her wraps out of her trunks. A devilish morning! It is the
      7th of August, 1887, the date of the solar eclipse. I may here remark that
      at the time of an eclipse every one of us may, without special
      astronomical knowledge, be of the greatest service. Thus, for example,
      anyone of us can (1) take the measurement of the diameters of the sun and
      the moon; (2) sketch the corona of the sun; (3) take the temperature; (4)
      take observations of plants and animals during the eclipse; (5) note down
      his own impressions, and so on.

 It is a matter of such exceptional importance that I lay aside the “Past
      and Future of the Dog Licence” and make up my mind to observe the
      eclipse.

 We all get up very early, and I divide the work as follows: I am to
      measure the diameter of the sun and moon; the wounded officer is to sketch
      the corona; and the other observations are undertaken by Mashenka and the
      variegated young ladies.

 We all meet together and wait.

 “What is the cause of the eclipse?” asks Mashenka.

 I reply: “A solar eclipse occurs when the moon, moving in the plane
      of the ecliptic, crosses the line joining the centres of the sun and the
      earth.”

 “And what does the ecliptic mean?”

 I explain. Mashenka listens attentively.

 “Can one see through the smoked glass the line joining the centres
      of the sun and the earth?” she enquires.

 I reply that this is only an imaginary line, drawn theoretically.

 “If it is only an imaginary line, how can the moon cross it?”
      Varenka says, wondering.

 I make no reply. I feel my spleen rising at this naïve question.

 “It’s all nonsense,” says Mashenka’s maman .
      “Impossible to tell what’s going to happen. You’ve never
      been in the sky, so what can you know of what is to happen with the sun
      and moon? It’s all fancy.”

 At that moment a black patch begins to move over the sun. General
      confusion follows. The sheep and horses and cows run bellowing about the
      fields with their tails in the air. The dogs howl. The bugs, thinking
      night has come on, creep out of the cracks in the walls and bite the
      people who are still in bed.

 The deacon, who was engaged in bringing some cucumbers from the market
      garden, jumped out of his cart and hid under the bridge; while his horse
      walked off into somebody else’s yard, where the pigs ate up all the
      cucumbers. The excise officer, who had not slept at home that night, but
      at a lady friend’s, dashed out with nothing on but his nightshirt,
      and running into the crowd shouted frantically: “Save yourself, if
      you can!”

 Numbers of the lady visitors, even young and pretty ones, run out of their
      villas without even putting their slippers on. Scenes occur which I
      hesitate to describe.

 “Oh, how dreadful!” shriek the variegated young ladies.
      “It’s really too awful!”

 “Mesdames, watch!” I cry. “Time is precious!”

 And I hasten to measure the diameters. I remember the corona, and look
      towards the wounded officer. He stands doing nothing.

 “What’s the matter?” I shout. “How about the
      corona?”

 He shrugs his shoulders and looks helplessly towards his arms. The poor
      fellow has variegated young ladies on both sides of him, clinging to him
      in terror and preventing him from working. I seize a pencil and note down
      the time to a second. That is of great importance. I note down the
      geographical position of the point of observation. That, too, is of
      importance. I am just about to measure the diameter when Mashenka seizes
      my hand, and says:

 “Do not forget to-day, eleven o’clock.”

 I withdraw my hand, feeling every second precious, try to continue my
      observations, but Varenka clutches my arm and clings to me. Pencil, pieces
      of glass, drawings—all are scattered on the grass. Hang it! It’s
      high time the girl realized that I am a man of violent temper, and when I
      am roused my fury knows no bounds, I cannot answer for myself.

 I try to continue, but the eclipse is over.

 “Look at me!” she whispers tenderly.

 Oh, that is the last straw! Trying a man’s patience like that can
      but have a fatal ending. I am not to blame if something terrible happens.
      I allow no one to make a laughing stock of me, and, God knows, when I am
      furious, I advise nobody to come near me, damn it all! There’s
      nothing I might not do! One of the young ladies, probably noticing from my
      face what a rage I am in, and anxious to propitiate me, says:

 “I did exactly what you told me, Nikolay Andreitch; I watched the
      animals. I saw the grey dog chasing the cat just before the eclipse, and
      wagging his tail for a long while afterwards.”

 So nothing came of the eclipse after all.

 I go home. Thanks to the rain, I work indoors instead of on the balcony.
      The wounded officer has risked it, and has again got as far as “I
      was born in . . .” when I see one of the variegated young ladies
      pounce down on him and bear him off to her villa.

 I cannot work, for I am still in a fury and suffering from palpitation of
      the heart. I do not go to the arbour. It is impolite not to, but, after
      all, I can’t be expected to go in the rain.

 At twelve o’clock I receive a letter from Mashenka, a letter full of
      reproaches and entreaties to go to the arbour, addressing me as “thou.”
      At one o’clock I get a second letter, and at two, a third . . . . I
      must go. . . . But before going I must consider what I am to say to her. I
      will behave like a gentleman.

 To begin with, I will tell her that she is mistaken in supposing that I am
      in love with her. That’s a thing one does not say to a lady as a
      rule, though. To tell a lady that one’s not in love with her, is
      almost as rude as to tell an author he can’t write.

 The best thing will be to explain my views of marriage.

 I put on my winter overcoat, take an umbrella, and walk to the arbour.

 Knowing the hastiness of my temper, I am afraid I may be led into speaking
      too strongly; I will try to restrain myself.

 I find Nadenka still waiting for me. She is pale and in tears. On seeing
      me she utters a cry of joy, flings herself on my neck, and says:

 “At last! You are trying my patience. . . . Listen, I have not slept
      all night. . . . I have been thinking and thinking. . . . I believe that
      when I come to know you better I shall learn to love you. . . .”

 I sit down, and begin to unfold my views of marriage. To begin with, to
      clear the ground of digressions and to be as brief as possible, I open
      with a short historical survey. I speak of marriage in ancient Egypt and
      India, then pass to more recent times, a few ideas from Schopenhauer.
      Mashenka listens attentively, but all of a sudden, through some strange
      incoherence of ideas, thinks fit to interrupt me:

 “Nicolas, kiss me!” she says.

 I am embarrassed and don’t know what to say to her. She repeats her
      request. There seems no avoiding it. I get up and bend over her long face,
      feeling as I do so just as I did in my childhood when I was lifted up to
      kiss my grandmother in her coffin. Not content with the kiss, Mashenka
      leaps up and impulsively embraces me. At that instant, Mashenka’s maman appears in the doorway of the arbour. . . . She makes a face as though in
      alarm, and saying “sh-sh” to someone with her, vanishes like
      Mephistopheles through the trapdoor.

 Confused and enraged, I return to our villa. At home I find Varenka’s maman embracing my maman with tears in her eyes. And my maman weeps and says:

 “I always hoped for it!”

 And then, if you please, Nadenka’s maman comes up to me,
      embraces me, and says:

 “May God bless you! . . . Mind you love her well. . . . Remember the
      sacrifice she is making for your sake!”

 And here I am at my wedding. At the moment I write these last words, my
      best man is at my side, urging me to make haste. These people have no idea
      of my character! I have a violent temper, I cannot always answer for
      myself! Hang it all! God knows what will come of it! To lead a violent,
      desperate man to the altar is as unwise as to thrust one’s hand into
      the cage of a ferocious tiger. We shall see, we shall see!

  





   





 And so, I am married. Everybody congratulates me and Varenka keeps
      clinging to me and saying:

 “Now you are mine, mine; do you understand that? Tell me that you
      love me!” And her nose swells as she says it.

 I learn from my best man that the wounded officer has very cleverly
      escaped the snares of Hymen. He showed the variegated young lady a medical
      certificate that owing to the wound in his temple he was at times mentally
      deranged and incapable of contracting a valid marriage. An inspiration! I
      might have got a certificate too. An uncle of mine drank himself to death,
      another uncle was extremely absent-minded (on one occasion he put a lady’s
      muff on his head in mistake for his hat), an aunt of mine played a great
      deal on the piano, and used to put out her tongue at gentlemen she did not
      like. And my ungovernable temper is a very suspicious symptom.

 But why do these great ideas always come too late? Why?

  





   

  









 IN THE DARK

  A

FLY of medium
      size made its way into the nose of the assistant procurator, Gagin. It may
      have been impelled by curiosity, or have got there through frivolity or
      accident in the dark; anyway, the nose resented the presence of a foreign
      body and gave the signal for a sneeze. Gagin sneezed, sneezed impressively
      and so shrilly and loudly that the bed shook and the springs creaked.
      Gagin’s wife, Marya Mihalovna, a full, plump, fair woman, started,
      too, and woke up. She gazed into the darkness, sighed, and turned over on
      the other side. Five minutes afterwards she turned over again and shut her
      eyes more firmly but she could not get to sleep again. After sighing and
      tossing from side to side for a time, she got up, crept over her husband,
      and putting on her slippers, went to the window.

 It was dark outside. She could see nothing but the outlines of the trees
      and the roof of the stables. There was a faint pallor in the east, but
      this pallor was beginning to be clouded over. There was perfect stillness
      in the air wrapped in slumber and darkness. Even the watchman, paid to
      disturb the stillness of night, was silent; even the corncrake—the
      only wild creature of the feathered tribe that does not shun the proximity
      of summer visitors—was silent.

 The stillness was broken by Marya Mihalovna herself. Standing at the
      window and gazing into the yard, she suddenly uttered a cry. She fancied
      that from the flower garden with the gaunt, clipped poplar, a dark figure
      was creeping towards the house. For the first minute she thought it was a
      cow or a horse, then, rubbing her eyes, she distinguished clearly the
      outlines of a man.

 Then she fancied the dark figure approached the window of the kitchen and,
      standing still a moment, apparently undecided, put one foot on the window
      ledge and disappeared into the darkness of the window.

 “A burglar!” flashed into her mind and a deathly pallor
      overspread her face.

 And in one instant her imagination had drawn the picture so dreaded by
      lady visitors in country places—a burglar creeps into the kitchen,
      from the kitchen into the dining-room . . . the silver in the cupboard . .
      . next into the bedroom . . . an axe . . . the face of a brigand . . .
      jewelry. . . . Her knees gave way under her and a shiver ran down her
      back.

 “Vassya!” she said, shaking her husband, “ Basile! Vassily Prokovitch! Ah! mercy on us, he might be dead! Wake up, Basile ,
      I beseech you!”

 “W-well?” grunted the assistant procurator, with a deep inward
      breath and a munching sound.

 “For God’s sake, wake up! A burglar has got into the kitchen!
      I was standing at the window looking out and someone got in at the window.
      He will get into the dining-room next . . . the spoons are in the
      cupboard! Basile! They broke into Mavra Yegorovna’s last
      year.”

 “Wha—what’s the matter?”

 “Heavens! he does not understand. Do listen, you stupid! I tell you
      I’ve just seen a man getting in at the kitchen window! Pelagea will
      be frightened and . . . and the silver is in the cupboard!”

 “Stuff and nonsense!”

 “ Basile , this is unbearable! I tell you of a real danger and
      you sleep and grunt! What would you have? Would you have us robbed and
      murdered?”

 The assistant procurator slowly got up and sat on the bed, filling the air
      with loud yawns.

 “Goodness knows what creatures women are!” he muttered.
      “Can’t leave one in peace even at night! To wake a man for
      such nonsense!”

 “But, Basile , I swear I saw a man getting in at the window!”

 “Well, what of it? Let him get in. . . . That’s pretty sure to
      be Pelagea’s sweetheart, the fireman.”

 “What! what did you say?”

 “I say it’s Pelagea’s fireman come to see her.”

 “Worse than ever!” shrieked Marya Mihalovna. “That’s
      worse than a burglar! I won’t put up with cynicism in my house!”

 “Hoity-toity! We are virtuous! . . . Won’t put up with
      cynicism? As though it were cynicism! What’s the use of firing off
      those foreign words? My dear girl, it’s a thing that has happened
      ever since the world began, sanctified by tradition. What’s a
      fireman for if not to make love to the cook?”

 “No, Basile! It seems you don’t know me! I cannot face
      the idea of such a . . . such a . . . in my house. You must go this minute
      into the kitchen and tell him to go away! This very minute! And to-morrow
      I’ll tell Pelagea that she must not dare to demean herself by such
      proceedings! When I am dead you may allow immorality in your house, but
      you shan’t do it now! . . . Please go!”

 “Damn it,” grumbled Gagin, annoyed. “Consider with your
      microscopic female brain, what am I to go for?”

 “ Basile , I shall faint! . . .”

 Gagin cursed, put on his slippers, cursed again, and set off to the
      kitchen. It was as dark as the inside of a barrel, and the assistant
      procurator had to feel his way. He groped his way to the door of the
      nursery and waked the nurse.

 “Vassilissa,” he said, “you took my dressing-gown to
      brush last night—where is it?”

 “I gave it to Pelagea to brush, sir.”

 “What carelessness! You take it away and don’t put it back—now
      I’ve to go without a dressing-gown!”

 On reaching the kitchen, he made his way to the corner in which on a box
      under a shelf of saucepans the cook slept.

 “Pelagea,” he said, feeling her shoulder and giving it a
      shake, “Pelagea! Why are you pretending? You are not asleep! Who was
      it got in at your window just now?”

 “Mm . . . m . . . good morning! Got in at the window? Who could get
      in?”

 “Oh come, it’s no use your trying to keep it up! You’d
      better tell your scamp to clear out while he can! Do you hear? He’s
      no business to be here!”

 “Are you out of your senses, sir, bless you? Do you think I’d
      be such a fool? Here one’s running about all day long, never a
      minute to sit down and then spoken to like this at night! Four roubles a
      month . . . and to find my own tea and sugar and this is all the credit I
      get for it! I used to live in a tradesman’s house, and never met
      with such insult there!”

 “Come, come—no need to go over your grievances! This very
      minute your grenadier must turn out! Do you understand?”

 “You ought to be ashamed, sir,” said Pelagea, and he could
      hear the tears in her voice. “Gentlefolks . . . educated, and yet
      not a notion that with our hard lot . . . in our life of toil”—she
      burst into tears. “It’s easy to insult us. There’s no
      one to stand up for us.”

 “Come, come . . . I don’t mind! Your mistress sent me. You may
      let a devil in at the window for all I care!”

 There was nothing left for the assistant procurator but to acknowledge
      himself in the wrong and go back to his spouse.

 “I say, Pelagea,” he said, “you had my dressing-gown to
      brush. Where is it?”

 “Oh, I am so sorry, sir; I forgot to put it on your chair. It’s
      hanging on a peg near the stove.”

 Gagin felt for the dressing-gown by the stove, put it on, and went quietly
      back to his room.

 When her husband went out Marya Mihalovna got into bed and waited. For the
      first three minutes her mind was at rest, but after that she began to feel
      uneasy.

 “What a long time he’s gone,” she thought. “It’s
      all right if he is there . . . that immoral man . . . but if it’s a
      burglar?”

 And again her imagination drew a picture of her husband going into the
      dark kitchen . . . a blow with an axe . . . dying without uttering a
      single sound . . . a pool of blood! . . .

 Five minutes passed . . . five and a half . . . at last six. . . . A cold
      sweat came out on her forehead.

 “ Basile! ” she shrieked, “ Basile! ”

 “What are you shouting for? I am here.” She heard her husband’s
      voice and steps. “Are you being murdered?”

 The assistant procurator went up to the bedstead and sat down on the edge
      of it.

 “There’s nobody there at all,” he said. “It was
      your fancy, you queer creature. . . . You can sleep easy, your fool of a
      Pelagea is as virtuous as her mistress. What a coward you are! What a . .
      . .”

 And the deputy procurator began teasing his wife. He was wide awake now
      and did not want to go to sleep again.

 “You are a coward!” he laughed. “You’d better go
      to the doctor to-morrow and tell him about your hallucinations. You are a
      neurotic!”

 “What a smell of tar,” said his wife—“tar or
      something . . . onion . . . cabbage soup!”

 “Y-yes! There is a smell . . . I am not sleepy. I say, I’ll
      light the candle. . . . Where are the matches? And, by the way, I’ll
      show you the photograph of the procurator of the Palace of Justice. He
      gave us all a photograph when he said good-bye to us yesterday, with his
      autograph.”

 Gagin struck a match against the wall and lighted a candle. But before he
      had moved a step from the bed to fetch the photographs he heard behind him
      a piercing, heartrending shriek. Looking round, he saw his wife’s
      large eyes fastened upon him, full of amazement, horror, and wrath. . . .

 “You took your dressing-gown off in the kitchen?” she said,
      turning pale.

 “Why?”

 “Look at yourself!”

 The deputy procurator looked down at himself, and gasped.

 Flung over his shoulders was not his dressing-gown, but the fireman’s
      overcoat. How had it come on his shoulders? While he was settling that
      question, his wife’s imagination was drawing another picture, awful
      and impossible: darkness, stillness, whispering, and so on, and so on.