DISCOVERY
    

      The steamer was crowded with people and the crossing promised to be good.
      I was going from Havre to Trouville.
    

      The ropes were thrown off, the whistle blew for the last time, the whole
      boat started to tremble, and the great wheels began to revolve, slowly at
      first, and then with ever-increasing rapidity.
    

      We were gliding along the pier, black with people. Those on board were
      waving their handkerchiefs, as though they were leaving for America, and
      their friends on shore were answering in the same manner.
    

      The big July sun was shining down on the red parasols, the light dresses,
      the joyous faces and on the ocean, barely stirred by a ripple. When we
      were out of the harbor, the little vessel swung round the big curve and
      pointed her nose toward the distant shore which was barely visible through
      the early morning mist. On our left was the broad estuary of the Seine,
      her muddy water, which never mingles with that of the ocean, making large
      yellow streaks clearly outlined against the immense sheet of the pure
      green sea.
    

      As soon as I am on a boat I feel the need of walking to and fro, like a
      sailor on watch. Why? I do not know. Therefore I began to thread my way
      along the deck through the crowd of travellers. Suddenly I heard my name
      called. I turned around. I beheld one of my old friends, Henri Sidoine,
      whom I had not seen for ten years.
    

      We shook hands and continued our walk together, talking of one thing or
      another. Suddenly Sidoine, who had been observing the crowd of passengers,
      cried out angrily:
    

      “It's disgusting, the boat is full of English people!”
    

      It was indeed full of them. The men were standing about, looking over the
      ocean with an all-important air, as though to say: “We are the
      English, the lords of the sea! Here we are!”
    

      The young girls, formless, with shoes which reminded one of the naval
      constructions of their fatherland, wrapped in multi-colored shawls, were
      smiling vacantly at the magnificent scenery. Their small heads, planted at
      the top of their long bodies, wore English hats of the strangest build.
    

      And the old maids, thinner yet, opening their characteristic jaws to the
      wind, seemed to threaten one with their long, yellow teeth. On passing
      them, one could notice the smell of rubber and of tooth wash.
    

      Sidoine repeated, with growing anger:
    

      “Disgusting! Can we never stop their coming to France?”
    

      I asked, smiling:
    

      “What have you got against them? As far as I am concerned, they
      don't worry me.”
    

      He snapped out:
    

      “Of course they don't worry you! But I married one of them.”
    

      I stopped and laughed at him.
    

      “Go ahead and tell me about it. Does she make you very unhappy?”
    

      He shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “No, not exactly.”
    

      “Then she—is not true to you?”
    

      “Unfortunately, she is. That would be cause for a divorce, and I
      could get rid of her.”
    

      “Then I'm afraid I don't understand!”
    

      “You don't understand? I'm not surprised. Well, she simply learned
      how to speak French—that's all! Listen.
    

      “I didn't have the least desire of getting married when I went to
      spend the summer at Etretat two years ago. There is nothing more dangerous
      than watering-places. You have no idea how it suits young girls. Paris is
      the place for women and the country for young girls.
    

      “Donkey rides, surf-bathing, breakfast on the grass, all these
      things are traps set for the marriageable man. And, really, there is
      nothing prettier than a child about eighteen, running through a field or
      picking flowers along the road.
    

      “I made the acquaintance of an English family who were stopping at
      the same hotel where I was. The father looked like those men you see over
      there, and the mother was like all other Englishwomen.
    

      “They had two sons, the kind of boys who play rough games with
      balls, bats or rackets from morning till night; then came two daughters,
      the elder a dry, shrivelled-up Englishwoman, the younger a dream of
      beauty, a heavenly blonde. When those chits make up their minds to be
      pretty, they are divine. This one had blue eyes, the kind of blue which
      seems to contain all the poetry, all the dreams, all the hopes and
      happiness of the world!
    

      “What an infinity of dreams is caused by two such eyes! How well
      they answer the dim, eternal question of our heart!
    

      “It must not be forgotten either that we Frenchmen adore foreign
      women. As soon as we meet a Russian, an Italian, a Swede, a Spaniard, or
      an Englishwoman with a pretty face, we immediately fall in love with her.
      We enthuse over everything which comes from outside—clothes, hats,
      gloves, guns and—women. But what a blunder!
    

      “I believe that that which pleases us in foreign women is their
      accent. As soon as a woman speaks our language badly we think she is
      charming, if she uses the wrong word she is exquisite and if she jabbers
      in an entirely unintelligible jargon, she becomes irresistible.
    

      “My little English girl, Kate, spoke a language to be marvelled at.
      At the beginning I could understand nothing, she invented so many new
      words; then I fell absolutely in love with this queer, amusing dialect.
      All maimed, strange, ridiculous terms became delightful in her mouth.
      Every evening, on the terrace of the Casino, we had long conversations
      which resembled spoken enigmas.
    

      “I married her! I loved her wildly, as one can only love in a dream.
      For true lovers only love a dream which has taken the form of a woman.
    

      “Well, my dear fellow, the most foolish thing I ever did was to give
      my wife a French teacher. As long as she slaughtered the dictionary and
      tortured the grammar I adored her. Our conversations were simple. They
      revealed to me her surprising gracefulness and matchless elegance; they
      showed her to me as a wonderful speaking jewel, a living doll made to be
      kissed, knowing, after a fashion, how to express what she loved. She
      reminded me of the pretty little toys which say 'papa' and 'mamma' when
      you pull a string.
    

      “Now she talks—badly—very badly. She makes as many
      mistakes as ever—but I can understand her.
    

      “I have opened my doll to look inside—and I have seen. And now
      I have to talk to her!
    

      “Ah! you don't know, as I do, the opinions, the ideas, the theories
      of a well-educated young English girl, whom I can blame in nothing, and
      who repeats to me from morning till night sentences from a French reader
      prepared in England for the use of young ladies' schools.
    

      “You have seen those cotillon favors, those pretty gilt papers,
      which enclose candies with an abominable taste. I have one of them. I tore
      it open. I wished to eat what was inside and it disgusted me so that I
      feel nauseated at seeing her compatriots.
    

      “I have married a parrot to whom some old English governess might
      have taught French. Do you understand?”
    

      The harbor of Trouville was now showing its wooden piers covered with
      people.
    

      I said:
    

      “Where is your wife?”
    

      He answered:
    

      “I took her back to Etretat.”
    

      “And you, where are you going?”
    

      “I? Oh, I am going to rest up here at Trouville.”
    

      Then, after a pause, he added:
    

      “You have no idea what a fool a woman can be at times!”