DOES THE RACE OF MAN LOVE A LORD?

  Often a quite assified remark becomes sanctified by use and petrified by
        custom; it is then a permanency, its term of activity a geologic period.



 The day after the arrival of Prince Henry I met an English friend, and he
      rubbed his hands and broke out with a remark that was charged to the brim
      with joy—joy that was evidently a pleasant salve to an old sore
      place:

 “Many a time I've had to listen without retort to an old saying that is
      irritatingly true, and until now seemed to offer no chance for a return
      jibe: 'An Englishman does dearly love a lord'; but after this I shall talk
      back, and say, 'How about the Americans?'”

 It is a curious thing, the currency that an idiotic saying can get. The
      man that first says it thinks he has made a discovery. The man he says it
      to, thinks the same. It departs on its travels, is received everywhere
      with admiring acceptance, and not only as a piece of rare and acute
      observation, but as being exhaustively true and profoundly wise; and so it
      presently takes its place in the world's list of recognized and
      established wisdoms, and after that no one thinks of examining it to see
      whether it is really entitled to its high honors or not. I call to mind
      instances of this in two well-established proverbs, whose dullness is not
      surpassed by the one about the Englishman and his love for a lord: one of
      them records the American's Adoration of the Almighty Dollar, the other
      the American millionaire-girl's ambition to trade cash for a title, with a
      husband thrown in.

 It isn't merely the American that adores the Almighty Dollar, it is the
      human race. The human race has always adored the hatful of shells, or the
      bale of calico, or the half-bushel of brass rings, or the handful of steel
      fish-hooks, or the houseful of black wives, or the zareba full of cattle,
      or the two-score camels and asses, or the factory, or the farm, or the
      block of buildings, or the railroad bonds, or the bank stock, or the
      hoarded cash, or—anything that stands for wealth and consideration
      and independence, and can secure to the possessor that most precious of
      all things, another man's envy. It was a dull person that invented the
      idea that the American's devotion to the dollar is more strenuous than
      another's.

 Rich American girls do buy titles, but they did not invent that idea; it
      had been worn threadbare several hundred centuries before America was
      discovered. European girls still exploit it as briskly as ever; and, when
      a title is not to be had for the money in hand, they buy the husband
      without it. They must put up the “dot,” or there is no trade. The
      commercialization of brides is substantially universal, except in America.
      It exists with us, to some little extent, but in no degree approaching a
      custom.

 “The Englishman dearly loves a lord.”

 What is the soul and source of this love? I think the thing could be more
      correctly worded:

 “The human race dearly envies a lord.”

 That is to say, it envies the lord's place. Why? On two accounts, I think:
      its Power and its Conspicuousness.

 Where Conspicuousness carries with it a Power which, by the light of our
      own observation and experience, we are able to measure and comprehend, I
      think our envy of the possessor is as deep and as passionate as is that of
      any other nation. No one can care less for a lord than the backwoodsman,
      who has had no personal contact with lords and has seldom heard them
      spoken of; but I will not allow that any Englishman has a profounder envy
      of a lord than has the average American who has lived long years in a
      European capital and fully learned how immense is the position the lord
      occupies.

 Of any ten thousand Americans who eagerly gather, at vast inconvenience,
      to get a glimpse of Prince Henry, all but a couple of hundred will be
      there out of an immense curiosity; they are burning up with desire to see
      a personage who is so much talked about. They envy him; but it is
      Conspicuousness they envy mainly, not the Power that is lodged in his
      royal quality and position, for they have but a vague and spectral
      knowledge and appreciation of that; through their environment and
      associations they have been accustomed to regard such things lightly, and
      as not being very real; consequently, they are not able to value them
      enough to consumingly envy them.

 But, whenever an American (or other human being) is in the presence, for
      the first time, of a combination of great Power and Conspicuousness which
      he thoroughly understands and appreciates, his eager curiosity and
      pleasure will be well-sodden with that other passion—envy—whether
      he suspects it or not. At any time, on any day, in any part of America,
      you can confer a happiness upon any passing stranger by calling his
      attention to any other passing stranger and saying:

 “Do you see that gentleman going along there? It is Mr. Rockefeller.”

 Watch his eye. It is a combination of power and conspicuousness which the
      man understands.

 When we understand rank, we always like to rub against it. When a man is
      conspicuous, we always want to see him. Also, if he will pay us an
      attention we will manage to remember it. Also, we will mention it now and
      then, casually; sometimes to a friend, or if a friend is not handy, we
      will make out with a stranger.

 Well, then, what is rank, and what is conspicuousness? At once we think of
      kings and aristocracies, and of world-wide celebrities in soldierships,
      the arts, letters, etc., and we stop there. But that is a mistake. Rank
      holds its court and receives its homage on every round of the ladder, from
      the emperor down to the rat-catcher; and distinction, also, exists on
      every round of the ladder, and commands its due of deference and envy.

 To worship rank and distinction is the dear and valued privilege of all
      the human race, and it is freely and joyfully exercised in democracies as
      well as in monarchies—and even, to some extent, among those
      creatures whom we impertinently call the Lower Animals. For even they have
      some poor little vanities and foibles, though in this matter they are
      paupers as compared to us.

 A Chinese Emperor has the worship of his four hundred millions of
      subjects, but the rest of the world is indifferent to him. A Christian
      Emperor has the worship of his subjects and of a large part of the
      Christian world outside of his domains; but he is a matter of indifference
      to all China. A king, class A, has an extensive worship; a king, class B,
      has a less extensive worship; class C, class D, class E get a steadily
      diminishing share of worship; class L (Sultan of Zanzibar), class P
      (Sultan of Sulu), and class W (half-king of Samoa), get no worship at all
      outside their own little patch of sovereignty.

 Take the distinguished people along down. Each has his group of
      homage-payers. In the navy, there are many groups; they start with the
      Secretary and the Admiral, and go down to the quartermaster—and
      below; for there will be groups among the sailors, and each of these
      groups will have a tar who is distinguished for his battles, or his
      strength, or his daring, or his profanity, and is admired and envied by
      his group. The same with the army; the same with the literary and
      journalistic craft; the publishing craft; the cod-fishery craft; Standard
      Oil; U. S. Steel; the class A hotel—and the rest of the alphabet in
      that line; the class A prize-fighter—and the rest of the alphabet in
      his line—clear down to the lowest and obscurest six-boy gang of
      little gamins, with its one boy that can thrash the rest, and to whom he
      is king of Samoa, bottom of the royal race, but looked up to with a most
      ardent admiration and envy.

 There is something pathetic, and funny, and pretty, about this human
      race's fondness for contact with power and distinction, and for the
      reflected glory it gets out of it. The king, class A, is happy in the
      state banquet and the military show which the emperor provides for him,
      and he goes home and gathers the queen and the princelings around him in
      the privacy of the spare room, and tells them all about it, and says:

 “His Imperial Majesty put his hand upon my shoulder in the most friendly
      way—just as friendly and familiar, oh, you can't imagine it!—and
      everybody seeing him do it; charming, perfectly charming!”

 The king, class G, is happy in the cold collation and the police parade
      provided for him by the king, class B, and goes home and tells the family
      all about it, and says:

 “And His Majesty took me into his own private cabinet for a smoke and a
      chat, and there we sat just as sociable, and talking away and laughing and
      chatting, just the same as if we had been born in the same bunk; and all
      the servants in the anteroom could see us doing it! Oh, it was too lovely
      for anything!”

 The king, class Q, is happy in the modest entertainment furnished him by
      the king, class M, and goes home and tells the household about it, and is
      as grateful and joyful over it as were his predecessors in the gaudier
      attentions that had fallen to their larger lot.

 Emperors, kings, artisans, peasants, big people, little people—at
      the bottom we are all alike and all the same; all just alike on the
      inside, and when our clothes are off, nobody can tell which of us is
      which. We are unanimous in the pride we take in good and genuine
      compliments paid us, and distinctions conferred upon us, in attentions
      shown. There is not one of us, from the emperor down, but is made like
      that. Do I mean attentions shown us by the guest? No, I mean simply
      flattering attentions, let them come whence they may. We despise no source
      that can pay us a pleasing attention—there is no source that is
      humble enough for that. You have heard a dear little girl say to a frowzy
      and disreputable dog: “He came right to me and let me pat him on the head,
      and he wouldn't let the others touch him!” and you have seen her eyes
      dance with pride in that high distinction. You have often seen that. If
      the child were a princess, would that random dog be able to confer the
      like glory upon her with his pretty compliment? Yes; and even in her
      mature life and seated upon a throne, she would still remember it, still
      recall it, still speak of it with frank satisfaction. That charming and
      lovable German princess and poet, Carmen Sylva, Queen of Roumania,
      remembers yet that the flowers of the woods and fields “talked to her”
       when she was a girl, and she sets it down in her latest book; and that the
      squirrels conferred upon her and her father the valued compliment of not
      being afraid of them; and “once one of them, holding a nut between its
      sharp little teeth, ran right up against my father”—it has the very
      note of “He came right to me and let me pat him on the head”—“and
      when it saw itself reflected in his boot it was very much surprised, and
      stopped for a long time to contemplate itself in the polished leather”—then
      it went its way. And the birds! she still remembers with pride that “they
      came boldly into my room,” when she had neglected her “duty” and put no
      food on the window-sill for them; she knew all the wild birds, and forgets
      the royal crown on her head to remember with pride that they knew her;
      also that the wasp and the bee were personal friends of hers, and never
      forgot that gracious relationship to her injury: “never have I been stung
      by a wasp or a bee.” And here is that proud note again that sings in that
      little child's elation in being singled out, among all the company of
      children, for the random dog's honor-conferring attentions. “Even in the
      very worst summer for wasps, when, in lunching out of doors, our table was
      covered with them and every one else was stung, they never hurt me.”

 When a queen whose qualities of mind and heart and character are able to
      add distinction to so distinguished a place as a throne, remembers with
      grateful exultation, after thirty years, honors and distinctions conferred
      upon her by the humble, wild creatures of the forest, we are helped to
      realize that complimentary attentions, homage, distinctions, are of no
      caste, but are above all cast—that they are a nobility-conferring
      power apart.

 We all like these things. When the gate-guard at the railway-station
      passes me through unchallenged and examines other people's tickets, I feel
      as the king, class A, felt when the emperor put the imperial hand on his
      shoulder, “everybody seeing him do it”; and as the child felt when the
      random dog allowed her to pat his head and ostracized the others; and as
      the princess felt when the wasps spared her and stung the rest; and I felt
      just so, four years ago in Vienna (and remember it yet), when the helmeted
      police shut me off, with fifty others, from a street which the Emperor was
      to pass through, and the captain of the squad turned and saw the situation
      and said indignantly to that guard:

 “Can't you see it is the Herr Mark Twain? Let him through!”

 It was four years ago; but it will be four hundred before I forget the
      wind of self-complacency that rose in me, and strained my buttons when I
      marked the deference for me evoked in the faces of my fellow-rabble, and
      noted, mingled with it, a puzzled and resentful expression which said, as
      plainly as speech could have worded it: “And who in the nation is the Herr
      Mark Twain um gotteswillen? ”

 How many times in your life have you heard this boastful remark:

 “I stood as close to him as I am to you; I could have put out my hand and
      touched him.”

 We have all heard it many and many a time. It was a proud distinction to
      be able to say those words. It brought envy to the speaker, a kind of
      glory; and he basked in it and was happy through all his veins. And who
      was it he stood so close to? The answer would cover all the grades.
      Sometimes it was a king; sometimes it was a renowned highwayman; sometimes
      it was an unknown man killed in an extraordinary way and made suddenly
      famous by it; always it was a person who was for the moment the subject of
      public interest of a village.

 “I was there, and I saw it myself.” That is a common and envy-compelling
      remark. It can refer to a battle; to a hanging; to a coronation; to the
      killing of Jumbo by the railway-train; to the arrival of Jenny Lind at the
      Battery; to the meeting of the President and Prince Henry; to the chase of
      a murderous maniac; to the disaster in the tunnel; to the explosion in the
      subway; to a remarkable dog-fight; to a village church struck by
      lightning. It will be said, more or less causally, by everybody in America
      who has seen Prince Henry do anything, or try to. The man who was absent
      and didn't see him to anything, will scoff. It is his privilege; and he
      can make capital out of it, too; he will seem, even to himself, to be
      different from other Americans, and better. As his opinion of his superior
      Americanism grows, and swells, and concentrates and coagulates, he will go
      further and try to belittle the distinction of those that saw the Prince
      do things, and will spoil their pleasure in it if he can. My life has been
      embittered by that kind of person. If you are able to tell of a special
      distinction that has fallen to your lot, it gravels them; they cannot bear
      it; and they try to make believe that the thing you took for a special
      distinction was nothing of the kind and was meant in quite another way.
      Once I was received in private audience by an emperor. Last week I was
      telling a jealous person about it, and I could see him wince under it, see
      him bite, see him suffer. I revealed the whole episode to him with
      considerable elaboration and nice attention to detail. When I was through,
      he asked me what had impressed me most. I said:

 “His Majesty's delicacy. They told me to be sure and back out from the
      presence, and find the door-knob as best I could; it was not allowable to
      face around. Now the Emperor knew it would be a difficult ordeal for me,
      because of lack of practice; and so, when it was time to part, he turned,
      with exceeding delicacy, and pretended to fumble with things on his desk,
      so I could get out in my own way, without his seeing me.”

 It went home! It was vitriol! I saw the envy and disgruntlement rise in
      the man's face; he couldn't keep it down. I saw him try to fix up
      something in his mind to take the bloom off that distinction. I enjoyed
      that, for I judged that he had his work cut out for him. He struggled
      along inwardly for quite a while; then he said, with a manner of a person
      who has to say something and hasn't anything relevant to say:

 “You said he had a handful of special-brand cigars on the table?”

 “Yes; I never saw anything to match them.”

 I had him again. He had to fumble around in his mind as much as another
      minute before he could play; then he said in as mean a way as I ever heard
      a person say anything:

 “He could have been counting the cigars, you know.”

 I cannot endure a man like that. It is nothing to him how unkind he is, so
      long as he takes the bloom off. It is all he cares for.

 “An Englishman (or other human being) does dearly love a lord,” (or other
      conspicuous person.) It includes us all. We love to be noticed by the
      conspicuous person; we love to be associated with such, or with a
      conspicuous event, even in a seventh-rate fashion, even in the
      forty-seventh, if we cannot do better. This accounts for some of our
      curious tastes in mementos. It accounts for the large private trade in the
      Prince of Wales's hair, which chambermaids were able to drive in that
      article of commerce when the Prince made the tour of the world in the long
      ago—hair which probably did not always come from his brush, since
      enough of it was marketed to refurnish a bald comet; it accounts for the
      fact that the rope which lynches a negro in the presence of ten thousand
      Christian spectators is salable five minutes later at two dollars and
      inch; it accounts for the mournful fact that a royal personage does not
      venture to wear buttons on his coat in public.

 We do love a lord—and by that term I mean any person whose situation
      is higher than our own. The lord of the group, for instance: a group of
      peers, a group of millionaires, a group of hoodlums, a group of sailors, a
      group of newsboys, a group of saloon politicians, a group of college
      girls. No royal person has ever been the object of a more delirious
      loyalty and slavish adoration than is paid by the vast Tammany herd to its
      squalid idol of Wantage. There is not a bifurcated animal in that
      menagerie that would not be proud to appear in a newspaper picture in his
      company. At the same time, there are some in that organization who would
      scoff at the people who have been daily pictured in company with Prince
      Henry, and would say vigorously that they would not consent to be
      photographed with him—a statement which would not be true in any
      instance. There are hundreds of people in America who would frankly say to
      you that they would not be proud to be photographed in a group with the
      Prince, if invited; and some of these unthinking people would believe it
      when they said it; yet in no instance would it be true. We have a large
      population, but we have not a large enough one, by several millions, to
      furnish that man. He has not yet been begotten, and in fact he is not
      begettable.

 You may take any of the printed groups, and there isn't a person in the
      dim background who isn't visibly trying to be vivid; if it is a crowd of
      ten thousand—ten thousand proud, untamed democrats, horny-handed
      sons of toil and of politics, and fliers of the eagle—there isn't
      one who is trying to keep out of range, there isn't one who isn't plainly
      meditating a purchase of the paper in the morning, with the intention of
      hunting himself out in the picture and of framing and keeping it if he
      shall find so much of his person in it as his starboard ear.

 We all love to get some of the drippings of Conspicuousness, and we will
      put up with a single, humble drip, if we can't get any more. We may
      pretend otherwise, in conversation; but we can't pretend it to ourselves
      privately—and we don't. We do confess in public that we are the
      noblest work of God, being moved to it by long habit, and teaching, and
      superstition; but deep down in the secret places of our souls we recognize
      that, if we are the noblest work, the less said about it the
      better.

 We of the North poke fun at the South for its fondness of titles—a
      fondness for titles pure and simple, regardless of whether they are
      genuine or pinchbeck. We forget that whatever a Southerner likes the rest
      of the human race likes, and that there is no law of predilection lodged
      in one people that is absent from another people. There is no variety in
      the human race. We are all children, all children of the one Adam, and we
      love toys. We can soon acquire that Southern disease if some one will give
      it a start. It already has a start, in fact. I have been personally
      acquainted with over eighty-four thousand persons who, at one time or
      another in their lives, have served for a year or two on the staffs of our
      multitudinous governors, and through that fatality have been generals
      temporarily, and colonels temporarily, and judge-advocates temporarily;
      but I have known only nine among them who could be hired to let the title
      go when it ceased to be legitimate. I know thousands and thousands of
      governors who ceased to be governors away back in the last century; but I
      am acquainted with only three who would answer your letter if you failed
      to call them “Governor” in it. I know acres and acres of men who have done
      time in a legislature in prehistoric days, but among them is not half an
      acre whose resentment you would not raise if you addressed them as “Mr.”
       instead of “Hon.” The first thing a legislature does is to convene in an
      impressive legislative attitude, and get itself photographed. Each member
      frames his copy and takes it to the woods and hangs it up in the most
      aggressively conspicuous place in his house; and if you visit the house
      and fail to inquire what that accumulation is, the conversation will be
      brought around to it by that aforetime legislator, and he will show you a
      figure in it which in the course of years he has almost obliterated with
      the smut of his finger-marks, and say with a solemn joy, “It's me!”

 Have you ever seen a country Congressman enter the hotel breakfast-room in
      Washington with his letters?—and sit at his table and let on to read
      them?—and wrinkle his brows and frown statesman-like?—keeping
      a furtive watch-out over his glasses all the while to see if he is being
      observed and admired?—those same old letters which he fetches in
      every morning? Have you seen it? Have you seen him show off? It is the sight of the national capital. Except one; a pathetic one. That is the
      ex-Congressman: the poor fellow whose life has been ruined by a two-year
      taste of glory and of fictitious consequence; who has been superseded, and
      ought to take his heartbreak home and hide it, but cannot tear himself
      away from the scene of his lost little grandeur; and so he lingers, and
      still lingers, year after year, unconsidered, sometimes snubbed, ashamed
      of his fallen estate, and valiantly trying to look otherwise; dreary and
      depressed, but counterfeiting breeziness and gaiety, hailing with chummy
      familiarity, which is not always welcomed, the more-fortunates who are
      still in place and were once his mates. Have you seen him? He clings
      piteously to the one little shred that is left of his departed distinction—the
      “privilege of the floor”; and works it hard and gets what he can out of
      it. That is the saddest figure I know of.

 Yes, we do so love our little distinctions! And then we loftily scoff at a
      Prince for enjoying his larger ones; forgetting that if we only had his
      chance—ah! “Senator” is not a legitimate title. A Senator has no
      more right to be addressed by it than have you or I; but, in the several
      state capitals and in Washington, there are five thousand Senators who
      take very kindly to that fiction, and who purr gratefully when you call
      them by it—which you may do quite unrebuked. Then those same
      Senators smile at the self-constructed majors and generals and judges of
      the South!

 Indeed, we do love our distinctions, get them how we may. And we work them
      for all they are worth. In prayer we call ourselves “worms of the dust,”
       but it is only on a sort of tacit understanding that the remark shall not
      be taken at par. We —worms of the dust! Oh, no, we are not
      that. Except in fact; and we do not deal much in fact when we are
      contemplating ourselves.

 As a race, we do certainly love a lord—let him be Croker, or a duke,
      or a prize-fighter, or whatever other personage shall chance to be the
      head of our group. Many years ago, I saw a greasy youth in overalls
      standing by the Herald office, with an expectant look in his face.
      Soon a large man passed out, and gave him a pat on the shoulder. That was
      what the boy was waiting for—the large man's notice. The pat made
      him proud and happy, and the exultation inside of him shone out through
      his eyes; and his mates were there to see the pat and envy it and wish
      they could have that glory. The boy belonged down cellar in the
      press-room, the large man was king of the upper floors, foreman of the
      composing-room. The light in the boy's face was worship, the foreman was
      his lord, head of his group. The pat was an accolade. It was as precious
      to the boy as it would have been if he had been an aristocrat's son and
      the accolade had been delivered by his sovereign with a sword. The
      quintessence of the honor was all there; there was no difference in
      values; in truth there was no difference present except an artificial one—clothes.

 All the human race loves a lord—that is, loves to look upon or be
      noticed by the possessor of Power or Conspicuousness; and sometimes
      animals, born to better things and higher ideals, descend to man's level
      in this matter. In the Jardin des Plantes I have see a cat that was so
      vain of being the personal friend of an elephant that I was ashamed of
      her.