DORASTUS

 She had large violet eyes, of a melancholy
effect, and fine honey-colored hair, flowing
smoothly over her ears. She looked excessively
meek and always a little apprehensive,
as if accustomed to reproaches, yet never
quite hardened to them. One easily supposed
her to be an orphan.

 She lived with an aunt, her mother's half-sister,
considerably older and less pleasing
than her mother in that charming woman's
brief day. Her cousins were all older than
she; the girls were so perfect in every respect
that intimacy between her and them was out
of the question; the son, a big, blunt young
man, was mostly away, and, when at home,
too much taken up with other interests to be
more than just aware of the violet eyes. So, life was very dull for Emmeline—"Emmie"
she was familiarly called.

 She went often of an evening to her
mother's grave, and, sitting beside it, reflected
how it was in keeping with the general
sadness of things that there should be no
prospect of any change for her in all the
years of her life, no change from the present
weary round of aunt and cousins, of sterile
duties and insipid pleasures.

 And there, by her mother's grave, came
the very change she was sighing for. She sat
on the sward, musingly watching the square
tower of the church grow gray against
the delicate, flushed sky, when she became
aware of a stranger going from stone to stone
in the fading light, examining the inscriptions.
At first she was afraid. While she debated
whether to hide or flee, the stranger approached,
and in a foreign voice and accent
asked some common question about the
place. She could not answer readily for a foolish
shame mixed with terror. She got to her
feet, blushing, then turning pale. It could be
none other than the astonishing fiddler who had played the night before in the hall at
Colthorpe, and who could, they said, make
your hair rise on end by the power of weird,
unearthly music, or your eyes dissolve with
tenderness—as he chose. She stared without
speech into his dark, peculiar face. And he,
seeing that she was discomfited, instead of
apologizing and withdrawing, undertook, in a
tone as persuasive as his violin's, to set her at
ease. And when a few days later he disappeared
from that part of the world, the violet
eyes disappeared too.

 Aunt Lucretia in time received a letter,
asking her forgiveness and announcing Emmie's
marriage.

 She did not grant her forgiveness until
several years later, after due savoring of sad,
black-bordered letters from Emmie, imploring
kindness. Her husband, after a brief illness,
was dead; her little boy and she were left
alone, without anything in the world. She acknowledged
her fault so humbly; she owned
so freely that her marriage had been excessively—deservedly—wretched;
she longed
so desperately to be taken back into her old home, that Lucretia found herself relenting.
Her daughters were now married and lived
at a distance; she felt daily more and more
the need of a female companion. Her son,
after reading the young widow's pitiful appeals,
protested that it would be inhuman to
refuse her a shelter. It was decided that she
should be allowed to come, and in time the
big, blunt Gregory, of whom she had been
afraid in old days, went a long stretch of the
journey to meet her, for that had seemed to
him requisite, though to his mother superfluous.
He even crossed the arm of sea that
she must presently be crossing, with no apparent
purpose but to cross it again with her.

 When the boat was well out at sea and
the passengers had disposed themselves
in patience about the deck, he marched up
and down, as did several of the others, and,
while avoiding to look like one in search,
sought diligently the remembered face of his
cousin.

 It was a cheerless gray day. The sea was
quiet; the boat pitched but slightly. He
was not long unsuccessful; when he had satis fied
himself that she was not in the crowd on
the windside, he went to lee and saw her
sitting almost alone. She might have gone
there for warmth. She did not seem to
notice that cinders and fine soot were raining
down upon her. He found himself disinclined
to accost her at once; he went to lean
where he could watch her without pointed
appearance of curiosity.

 She looked mournful in her black things—not
the new, crisp crape of well-to-do bereavement,
but a poor gentlewoman's ordinary
shabby black. Her cheeks had lost their
pretty roundness; the effect of her eyes was
more than ever melancholy. The pale little
face, set in its faint-colored hair, framed in
its black bonnet, might pass a hundred times
unnoticed: it had little to arrest the attention;
but attention, by whatever chance
once secured, must be followed by a gentle,
compassionate interest in the breast of the
beholder. This emotion felt Gregory.

 She sat on one of the ship's benches, hugging
her black wrap about her, hiding in it
her little gloveless hands. A bundle was on her lap, at her feet a large bag. She looked
wearily off over the crumpled leaden plain,
and now and then called: "Dorastus! Dorastus!"

 At that, a toddling bundle came towards
her, never near enough to be caught, and
toddled off again, coming and going busily,
with muttered baby soliloquy. He was a
comical little figure, clumsily muffled against
the cold, with a pointed knit cap drawn well
down over his ears. If he ignored her call,
she rose and fetched him, shaking his little
hand and bidding him not to go again so far
from mother. He dragged at his arm, squealing
the while she exhorted, and almost tumbled
over when she let him loose. Then he
resumed his interrupted play.

 After a time he seemed to tire of it. He
came to his mother and, touching the bag at
her feet, unintelligibly demanded something.
She shook her head. He seemed to repeat
his demand. "No, no, Dorastus—mother
can't!" she said, fretfully. Then this dot of
humanity made himself formidable. Gregory
watched in surprise the little imperious face become disquietingly like an angry man's.
He hammered with both small fists on his
mother's knee, and stamped and loudly sputtered.
She caught his arms for a moment
and held them quiet; mother and child
looked each other in the face, his strange,
unbabyish, heavy-browed eyes flaming, hers
lit with a low smouldering resentment. He
struggled from her grasp, and at last, as his
conduct was beginning to attract attention,
she stooped, vanquished, and, bruising her
fingers on the awkward buckles, undid the
bag.

 Gregory at this point approached and
spoke to her by name. She lifted her face,
her eyes full of helpless tears. She reddened
faintly on recognizing him. She handed
the boy a diminutive toy-fiddle from the
bag. Pacified, he retired at a little distance
and, while his mamma and the gentleman
entered into conversation, scraped seriously,
the tassel on the tip of his cap bobbing with
his funny little airs de tte .

 "How good of you, how good of you—how
comforting to me!" she said, her forlorn face softly brightening; "I was getting so
tired of taking care of myself! I have never
travelled alone, and—and I am so timid—"

 How different seemed the old house to
Emmie returning! She settled down in it
with the sense of passionate contentment. I
can imagine in a dove restored to the cote
after escaping the fowler's snare and the rage
of wintry storms. How shut it was against
the cold! how safe from arrogant men demanding
money! Life in it now seemed to
her one round of luxurious pleasures: one
could sleep undisturbed, tea and buttered
bread came as regularly as the desire for
them; flowers bloomed at every season on
mantel-shelf and table; the grate glowed as
if to glow were no more than a grate's nature.
There was undeniably the domestic tyrant
still; but what a mild one by comparison!
Aunt Lucretia might be peremptory and
critical and contradictory: to Emmie in these
days she personated a benevolent Providence.
It is possible that the lady's disposition had
softened towards her niece: her superior
daughters were removed, and the little widow with her manifold experiences was unquestionably
a person more interesting to have
about than the moping girl of yore.

 The two ladies, sitting together with their
wools, in undertones talked over Emmie's
married miseries. She was as ready with her
confidences as Aunt Lucretia with her listening
ear. There seemed no end to what she
had to tell or the number of times she might
relate the same incident and be heard out with
tolerance. She was glad of some one to whom
to unburden her heart of its accumulated
grievance; she could not but be a little glad,
too, now it was well over, that so much that
was unusual had happened to her, since it lent
her this importance. Aunt Lucretia gave a
great deal of good advice—said what she would
have done in like case; Emmie accepted it
with as much humble gratitude as if it had
still been of service. She concurred with all
her heart in her aunt's unqualified condemnation
of her first lapse from the respectable
path—her elopement; she declared with perfect
sincerity that she was puzzled to explain
how it all happened—certainly before a week had been over the folly of it had
stared her in the face.

 The young widow, when she had taken
her aunt through scenes of rage and jealousy
that made that matron's nostrils open
as a war-horse's, and had shown up the petty
tyrannies and meannesses of a bad-tempered,
vindictive, vain man, afflicted with a set of
morbidly tense nerves, would sometimes inconsistently
betray a sort of pride in the
fact that she had been adored by this erratic
being, whose ill-treatment of her came partly
from that fact; also a certain pride in the
assurance she had had on every side, of his
being a great artist who might have risen to
fortune had he been blessed with a different
constitution. A prince had once, in token of
his appreciation, bestowed on him a jewelled
order; Emmie wished she had not been
forced to sell it when he was ill. She herself
could not judge of his playing—she
could not abide the sound of a violin—but
the star might be accounted a proof of his
ability.

 "You were too meek, my dear," said Lucretia, conclusively, after a tale of oppression;
"I should have taken a stand."

 "Dear aunt," said Emmie, pensively considering
her relative's size and the cast of
her features, "I think you would. He would
have been afraid of you. If I displeased him,
he said I was rebellious because I felt myself
bolstered up by the admiration of whoever
in the inn had happened to give me
a passing glance, and he would torment me
until I swore I loved him with every thought
of my life. Sometimes, when he had made
me cry, he would cry, too—I hate that in a
man, aunt!—and go on tormenting me until
I said I forgave him—"

 "Ah, I should have taught him a lesson!"

 "Yes, aunt, you would. But I swore whatever
he pleased. If I was sulky, he was as
likely as not to sit up all night, wailing on
his violin when I wanted to sleep. He always
took remote chambers at inns, for the
privilege of playing at night, if he pleased.
If I complained, he said that if I had liked
the music it would have soothed me to sleep,
and if I did not like it, it was well I should be kept awake. He was very sore on the
point of my not being in love with his
music."

 "I should like to see a man play the fiddle
in my bedroom!" said Aunt Lucretia, with a
face of danger.

 And Emmie, from this lady's example and
counsel, got a retrospective courage that enabled
her in memory, now that she was well-fed,
well-dressed, and possessed of the assurance
that goes with those conditions, to
bring the stormy scenes with her husband to
an end more honorable to herself. She could
imagine herself even braving him—when,
perhaps, would come in sight Dorastus. Then
her heart would sink in consciousness of its
folly. There was no contending for her with
a nature like that. That baby could bend
her to his will even as the father had done.
He was so little now that she could not strive
with him to any enduring advantage; and
when he would be bigger, she felt it already,
no revolt of hers would be of use. The tyranny
was handed down from father to son, with
the sensitiveness and the jealousy. She look ed
over at the little, intrepid face sometimes
with a sort of slave's aversion: every day he
would be more like that other; he kept him
disagreeably alive now in her memory with
the tricks of his face, the difficulties of his
temper. She only hoped, in an unformed
way as yet, that before he grew to make
himself heavily felt something might have
arisen for her protection.

 She made him pretty things with a mother's
full indulgence, caressed him in due
measure, and gave dutiful attention to his
every request; but deep in her heart and in
her eye was a reservation. And in him,
though he could hardly frame speech, seemed
an inherited suspicion of this want of loyalty
in her, a consciousness of her appeal to something
outside, against him. In his baby
rages he seemed aware, by an instinct beyond
his understanding, that she did not care for
them, except that they made her uncomfortable,
and he beat her with all his fierce little
strength for it. She belonged strictly to him,
and there was always treachery in the air; so
he must be foes with all surrounding her, and most severe with herself, whom he idolatrously
loved.

 Often, if they were alone and she did nothing
to cross him, but treated respectfully his
every whim, he rewarded her gravely with
such tokens of his devotion as he could devise.
If they were out under the trees, he
would make a hundred little voyages and
from each bring back some treasure, flower
or pebble, that he dropped in her lap, watching
her face to see if she were appropriately
pleased. If she were busy with her stitching
and after a time forgot to acknowledge his
gift, he would make known his disgust by
taking everything from her and stamping it
under foot; but if she wisely kept her whole
mind on him, and gave him praise and smiles,
and admired his offerings, he would multiply
his efforts to please her, get her things the
most difficult and perilous to obtain, stones
that were heavy, insects that were frightful,
parade before her every little accomplishment,
be dbonnaire and royal, and expose
his true worshipping heart to his servant.

 Woe if in such moments of expansion Gregory came out on the lawn and took the
empty seat on the rustic bench beside Emmie!
The child would know nothing of a
divided allegiance, and showed his sense of
outrage by a prompt attack on both, whom
he seemed to think equally conspirators
against his peace. They stood his babbled
vituperation and baby blows with smiling patience
for a little, trying to converse coherently
under them; then, when he burst into
angry tears, with a sigh the mother bore him
off to be lectured and calmed, resuming her
conversation with Gregory at a more opportune
moment. Before Gregory she never
spoke of her husband.

 With the passing months her cheek got
back its freshness, her eye its clear brightness.
Now a haunting fear awoke in her
breast: Aunt Lucretia was wearying of
her presence. She had heard all of her injuries
till the story was stale. She was beginning
to find fault with her just as of old,
to set her back in her place now and then
with the former terrible abruptness, and
that place a very low one. The poor little woman accepted all abjectly, shuddering at
the possibility of being again cast on the
world with her child. She went about with
reddened eyelids and a look of pathetic nervousness,
hushing Dorastus whenever he
lifted his voice, doing her pitiful best that
neither should give offence. Gregory could
not look on in patience: he laid the gentle
afflicted creature's tremors forever by asking
her to become his wife.

 His mother left the house and went to
abide with her daughters. But in time she
became reconciled to what was unalterable
and returned to her ancient seat of government,
allowing her age to be cheered by
the sight of her favorite child's happiness.
Little sons and daughters, his wife gave him
four, among whom prevailed straw-colored
hair and eyes of the admired flower tint. The
old house was gay as at early dawn a tree
full of gossiping birds.

 So to Emmie was raised a mighty salvation;
against Dorastus arrayed themselves
innocent yellow heads, like so many insuperable
golden lances.

  When the children were called into the
drawing-room to be shown to the company,
a visitor was sure to ask, "And who is this
little man?" meaning Dorastus; so unlikely
did it appear that he could be of his mother's
kindred. To the golden hen, her golden
brood. How in seriousness call a chick the
little black creature with the large beak and
the piercing eyes?

 And as unlike his brothers as he was
physically, so unlike he remained in disposition.
By all the children as by Dorastus
himself the difference in kind was felt. He
remained solitary among them and at odds
with all. They set him down a domineering,
bad-tempered thing, and he summed
them up scornfully as a pack of pudding-heads.
It was not plain to any one why
he thought himself superior: his actual
accomplishments were somewhat less than
ordinary. Bullet-headed, downright Hector,
his brother nearest in age, could beat
him at any sport, and when their differences
brought them to blows was rather more than
half sure of victory over his senior, inferior to him in size and art; Martin was cleverer than
he at his books; the little girls even could
give him points in conduct—yet his attitude
of every minute insisted upon it that he was
better than any of them, and that his mother
was more particularly his mother than she
was theirs. Emmie, it is true, did not reprove
him quite as she did Hector; he was allowed
more than the others the full swing of his
temperament. His step-father punctiliously
refrained from meddling with him, and if he
made trouble with his temper and his pride
Emmie warned her nice-natured children not
to irritate him, to make allowances for him.
Insensibly that qualified the relation between
Dorastus and his mother. That negative
indulgence he felt, however dimly, did not
prove him a favorite: it made him a sort of
alien. He became more reserved in his demands
upon his mother. There were too
many yellow heads for one boy to contend
with successfully by ordinary means. He
still held to it bravely in his attitude towards
his brothers and sisters that he was better
than they, and that his mother belonged ex clusively
to him, but herself he troubled less
and less with his jealousy and his claims. It
might have seemed at last almost as if she
were become indifferent to him. Absorbed
by her domestic cares, she had scarcely perceived
the change.

 The cares were many, but pleasant in their
nature. Gregory was steadily, lazily kind,
the children were healthy, she herself was in
the beautiful full bloom of life—she found it
good. She had almost forgotten the bitter
taste of her beginnings, when one night, startled
from a deep sleep, she lay in the dark
awhile and wondered that she should dream
so clearly of hearing the long, low wail of a
violin. It had recreated about her in an instant
the atmosphere of old days. She lay
as she had lain often enough, with lead upon
her heart, a dead sense of there being no escape
in view from this slavery, this poverty,
this succession of weary travel and third-rate
inns, this nerve-racking sound of the violin
penetrating through the brain as a red-hot
needle—no release from this unrelenting
master, this terrible added burden of baby. She shook herself free from what she thought
the remaining effect of a nightmare; she had
seemed for a moment to smell the very essence
her first husband used on his hair,
mixed with the flat odor of the small Dutch
inn-chamber in which Dorastus was born.
She turned over on her side to sleep again,
when she became assured that she heard a
violin. She listened through her thick heart-beats,
a thrill of superstitious horror stiffening
her skin. She knew it unreasonable, but
could not dispel her fear. She rose sitting
in bed, becoming at last fully awake. Still
she heard the violin, sounding faintly, as if
from some distant part of the house. Then
she thought. It had been these long years
in the garret, the treasured Amati he had
made her swear to keep for his child. The
child had found it.

 She could not fall to sleep again, she must
satisfy herself.

 She slipped her feet into their shoes, got
her dressing-gown about her, and crept
through the shadowy corridor, up the stair,
to where Dorastus slept. Since he would be the master, whoever shared his room, which
was obviously unfair to his room-mate, he
had been allotted a little chamber by himself
in a somewhat remote part of the house.

 As she approached it, the sound of the
violin came more and more clear to her.
She stopped and leaned against the balusters,
yielding to a soul-sickness that had its
rise in she scarce knew which, memory or
foreboding. She listened curiously. It was
strange playing, though simple, subdued to
not wound the night silence; unordinary as
it was, there was nothing tentative about it,
the hands seemed going to it with a fine
boldness, a delicate natural skill. The mother
felt not a moment's joy.

 She came to the door, opened it noiselessly,
and stood in the doorway with her candle
shining upward in her wide eyes, her solemn
face.

 Dorastus stopped playing, and said, with a
gleeful, short laugh, "I knew it would make
you come!"

 As Emmie had expected, he held the
Amati. He had thrown off his jacket and tie and stood in his shirt-sleeves, with his
neck bare. His dark eyes were burning and
dancing; his black hair was ruffled and
pushed up on end; his face was hotly
flushed. His whole attitude had in it something
new, finely expressive of conscious
power.

 "I knew it would make you come!" he
said, with a triumphant nod.

 She entered and set down her light on the
little chest of drawers. "You ought not to
play at night," she said, faintly. "It disturbs
people's sleep."

 "It wouldn't wake them !" he exclaimed,
scornfully, "and if it did I shouldn't care,
as long as they didn't come and bother. I
wanted to call you, to make you come to
me. I was sure I could. Are you cold,
little mother dear? Get into my bed."

 He laid down his instrument; he came
where she stood, with her silken hair tumbling
over her shoulders, and felt her chilled
hands.

 "No, no," she said, irritably, taking them
from him, "it is unheard of, playing at this hour of the night. I must go." But she
went mechanically to sit on the edge of his
bed, that had not been lain in that night,
and still kept towards him that wondering,
dismayed face.

 "How did it sound?" asked the boy, whose
excitement seemed to dull his perception, so
that he remained unchilled by her want of
warmth. "Did it say plainly, Arise, wrap
your sky-blue gown about you, never mind
tying up your gold hair, light your light, and
come gliding through the shadow of the
sleeping house, to your dear son, the only
one who loves you, in his solitary room, far
from all the others? That is what I meant
it should say, but towards the end I meant
it to say something else, towards the end it
was explaining. Did you understand that
part?"

 "How did you find it?" asked Emmie,
still in her faint voice. "Why did you take
it without asking our permission? Who
taught you to play on it?"

 The boy laughed again his gleeful laugh.
He got on to the bed beside her and sat with his chin in his hand, his glowing face
full of pride in himself. "Ah, how I found
it, when it was up in the garret? It was like
that story of the Greek fellow—what's his
name?—dressed like a girl. When the peddler
brought shawls and ribbons and things,
and a sword hidden among them, he took
the sword, and the peddler knew by that sign
that he was a man. In the garret there
were old hoop-skirts, and broken mousetraps,
and bird-cages, and boxes full of
religious books and things—but my hand
went straight to the violin!"

 "Tell me the truth, Dorastus," spoke his
mother, wearily.

 "Well, then, after talking with a certain
person, I concluded that it must be there.
I looked for it and found it, months and
months ago. I took it and learned to play,
to give you a surprise. Do you think I can
ever play as my father did?"

 "Whom have you heard speak of your
fathers playing, Dorastus?"

 "Aha! There is some one who remembers
him at this very place—who heard him just once and never forgot it. I might as
well tell you: it is the brother of the inn-keeper's
wife at Colthorpe; he used to be
the hostler, but is too old now. He plays
the violin himself, at weddings, sometimes,
and dances—but not much, dear. He taught
me, but I have gone far ahead—oh, far ahead
of him now! He knows when it is good,
however, and you should hear what he says
of me and my playing. You must see him
and ask him. He had climbed up from outside
into the window when once my father
played at Colthorpe, and he can speak of it
as if it had happened yesterday. (He says
that I am very like my father, that any one
would know me who had seen him. He
knew, before asking, whose son I was.
Only, my father wore his hair long; well,
I will wear my hair long!) He says that,
as he played, every trouble he had ever
had came back to him, even the death of a
dog, and he could not help crying—but he
liked it; he enjoyed feeling bad. And he
says that it made him see plain before him,
but not very plain either, a lot of things he had only heard folks talk about—the shepherds
in the East, for instance, with the
angels singing good-will in a hole in the
clouds. And he knew for sure, he says,
how it would have felt if the girl he wanted
hadn't married some one else and gone to
live away, but had taken him. I asked him,
the other day, if I could make him feel those
things. He said, 'Not yet, not quite yet;'
but he thought I was beginning. He has a
number of music sheets; I can read the
notes much quicker than he already, though
he taught me. But I don't care for those;
there must be others much better than those!
Those are nothing! I like better what I
make up myself than I do those. Did you
notice—but no, you must have been too far—how
quickly I can play some passages?
My left fingers go like a spider, and it is so
easy for them! Giles says my hand is like
my father's—he remembers it—a true violinist's
hand. I feel that it can do anything,
dear—anything! And I mean that it shall
do such things! Look at it, mother!" and
he held up the thin, unboyishly delicate, angular hand, stronger in appearance than
the rest of his body. "Is it like my father's?
You are the one, of course, that remembers
best. Is it like my father's?"

 "Oh, yes—yes!" she almost moaned.

 He did not seem to perceive her impatience,
but contemplated his own hand a
little while, calmly sure that he must be an
object of pride to her now. "It is quite
unlike Hector's, at least. I should like to
see him try to play with his pink paws!"

 "He might not be able to play," said
Emmie, "but he will, I dare say, do something
quite as useful."

 "There is nothing quite so useful!" cried
the boy superbly, and laughed again in his
perverse glee. "It is more useful than anything
you can invent to say that Hector is
going to do. Hector! Hector will be a
rabbit-raiser; he likes rabbits better than
anything. But I will come with my violin
and make the rabbits stand up on their hind-legs
and stare; I will play softly, wheedlingly,
going slowly backwards towards the woods,
and they will all come after me, without stop ping
for a nibble. I will lead them away,
away, all the flock of little, round-backed,
skipping things—just as I made you get out
of bed and come up here."

 "I came to tell you to stop, foolish boy.
I didn't want you to wake the others. It
was very inconsiderate in you—very inconsiderate.
And I am not sure that I am
pleased with you for taking a thing so valuable—it
is worth a great deal of money—unknown
to me, or for doing things in secret,
or for having dealings with people I know
nothing of—hostlers and inn-keepers' wives.
You certainly play nicely—"

 "Ah, did you truly think I did, mother?"
he asked, eagerly. "You ought to know; you
used to hear himself. Now, tell me, dear—"

 "But I am not at all sure"—she interrupted
him, lamely querulous—"that the
violin—You have been so underhanded,
and I see now how you waste your time—it
explains your being so bad with your lessons.
I am not at all sure that the violin
ought not to be taken from you."

 "I shall not give it up!" Dorastus said instantly, and it might be perfectly understood
that he would struggle with his last
breath to keep it, doing as much damage as
in him lay to his opposers.

 Emmie, quite pale, looked into his face,
that had fully returned from its mood of
happy pride, and he looked into hers, as
they had looked already when he was but a
baby. Then, seeing what she had always
seen, she tossed up her hands with a little
helpless, womanish motion, and complained:
"Oh, I am so cold, and I feel so ill! It is
like a horrid dream—and I am miserable."
She rose and pulled her things about her
to go, tears shining on her cheek.

 Dorastus, who had leaped up and laid his
hand resolutely on his violin and bow, if they
should be in any immediate danger, watched
her with a strange face. His jaw was iron.
When, as she reached the door, he unclinched
his teeth to speak, his face worked in
spite of him and tears gushed from his eyes.
"You never understand anything!" he exploded,
in a harsh, angry voice all his pride
could not keep from breaking. Then, with the indignant scorn of a child for a grown-up
person who seems to him out of all nature
dull—"Go!" he said, beating his arms violently
about, "Go! Go!"

 So Dorastus retained the violin, and defiantly
played on it, in and out of season. His
mother's failure to be pleased with his playing
seemed to have cut her off, in his estimation,
from all right to an opinion. It is true
that after the first night she armed herself
with patience towards a situation she could
not change. She did not cross the boy more
than her conscience positively enjoined; he
might play since he pleased, but must not
neglect his studies in pursuit of a vain pastime.

 In spite of her, his studies suffered. He
felt no humiliation now that Hector or any
should be ahead of him with books; he could
have been far ahead of them if he had chosen,
but they could under no circumstance
have done what he did. Of these things he
was proudly convinced, and he declared them
without hesitation. His almost untutored
playing took on a strange audacity, a fantas tical
quality that made it pleasing to none in
the household. That did not disturb him;
he pursued triumphantly in the direction repugnant
to them, taking their disapproval to
naturally point to its excellence. Sometimes,
half in scorn, he would play for the little
girls the simple melodies they knew, to show
them that he could do that, too, if he chose;
full tenderly could he play them and delight
their gentle hearts, but he preferred, if he
could catch an unprejudiced soul for audience,
a housemaid for instance, to set her opposite
to him and play to her from his head,
then question her as to what the music had
made her think of, helping her to detail her
impressions, expressing his contempt freely
if the music had not had on her the desired
effect, but hugging her if she happened to
answer as he wanted.

 Whenever he had a holiday, or took one,
he disappeared with his instrument, returning
with a conqueror's mien, out of place in a
boy with whom every one is displeased, and
who has had nothing to eat. It was felt by
all how he was in these days not friends with anybody, nor anybody friends with him. It
suited his pride to carry off the situation as
if he had been a king among boors.

 Her eldest child's conduct began at last to
be something of a grievance to Emmie. She
appealed to no one for help to reduce him to
obedience. She would not have dared do
that; an intimate sense forbade it, a scruple
which would have had no voice, perhaps, had
she loved him more. She excused and up-held
him in her little wars with Lucretia, and
respected Gregory's reluctance to interfere
with him, founded in justice on the consciousness
of a deep-seated, invincible dislike; but
she fretted under his undutifulness and only
refrained from satisfying the desire to attempt
asserting her power over him, though it
should be futile as ever, in the idea that, at
the worst, he would soon be leaving home,
with Hector, for school, when the detested
violin must be given up and stronger hands
than her own find a way to bend his obstinate
spirit. At the same time, in a corner of her
heart, she felt unreasonably, unaccountably
hurt, as perhaps she would have felt if Dorastus's father had suddenly ceased from
his persecutions and she had known by that
sign that, worm as he was, he had ceased to
care for her.

 "This is all very well; but when you get
to school—" Phrases begun on that line
became frequent in Dorastus's ear as the
time approached. He heard them with a
singularly bright eye.

 The two boys set out for school together,
under the guardianship of the tutor. Consternation
fell on the family when it was
known that Dorastus had been missed on
the way. The boy was traced to London;
there he was easily lost among the millions
of its inhabitants.

 While the question was in discussion
whether it behooved Gregory himself to travel
to London and institute a search for the
runaway, came a letter from the boy, making
it easily decent for his step-father to leave
the stinging weed to get its growth where it
might without being a nuisance, and reconciling
his mother to letting him take his
chances as he pleased, since he was so sure they were brilliant—very brilliant, those
chances.

 His certainty of himself, his enthusiasm,
were such that gradually they communicated
themselves in a degree to her. Why not?
After all, his father, they had said, was a
great man; princes had honored him. An
involuntary respect crept through her for
Dorastus's daring. It seemed advisable at
least to give him the opportunity he wanted;
the more that the process of finding him,
bringing him back in what to him would
seem ignominy, and thereafter keeping watch
over him, was uncomfortable to think of.

 His letter was to his mother, a mixture of
boyishness and manliness, more frank than
any speech she had had from him in a long
time. It vaguely stirred her heart; for it
seemed to restore to her something that possessing
she had not prized, but, careful economist,
did not like to think lost.

 "You must promise that I shall not be
troubled by any attempt to get me back. I
will do anything terrible if I am trapped.
Don't you see that I couldn't go to school with Hector, who is younger? We should be
put in classes together, for a while at least,
and I couldn't stand it. Besides, I haven't
the time, I have so much to do! Besides, I
couldn't go on living with those people forever.
I don't mean that you shall, either. I
won't tell you all now, but after a time you
may know that there is to be a house much
better than theirs for you to live in, with me.
You shall have everything much better. But
I will not tell you more. Only, you can be
perfectly sure of it. You will not think that
I came away without caring about leaving
you. I was afraid you would guess something
if I hugged you before them as I
wanted to, but I had been to your room in
the night, and any of your gowns you put on
is full of your son's kisses. If I thought you
would show this letter, I think that I should
never in my life write you again. If you
should send me any money, I should return
it at once or destroy it, so please don't do it,
it would make me angry. I know that we
had nothing when we came to their house,
except the violin. One of the servants told me how we came. What do you suppose
keeping me all these years has cost? When
I can, I mean to give them double; you can
tell him so, if you choose. I can't now, but
what I can do is to take nothing more from
them. You need not be anxious about me.
I am prepared, because I have long known
what I meant to do, and I can take care of
myself. I have met several persons already
who know of my father; it seems to be something
here to be his son, though not at home,
except to one man, and he a hostler. Well,
I will show them—you, too, dear mother. I
don't mean to vex or grieve you, mother,
dear. If I have vexed you, I know I shall
make you forgive me some day, before long,
perhaps, when I shall have made you understand.
You can write me at the Tartar's
Head, but if you hunted me there, or information
concerning me, you would never find
me, I vow."

 Other letters came from time to time,
written in fine spirits always, referring, but
mysteriously, to fine successes. Emmie felt
a certain modesty about these letters. She communicated what was in them with reserve,
and adopted towards inquirers the tone
of discretion that the letters had with herself.
But she found herself often brooding
over the contents. They charmed the imagination;
they sounded like things one
read. It was so remarkable, this circumstance
of a poor boy, a boy of her own, arriving in
a great city, with little but his violin, and by
sounds merely forcing the things one values
to come to him, as he had spoken fancifully
once, she remembered, of making a flock of
rabbits follow him into the woods. He wrote
little very definite, but dropped telling hints
of how he had played before this great man
and that man of importance, and this one had
said—the other had promised. He had been
called upon to perform at a certain levee, and
out of his fee had bought the things he was
sending; he had money to spare. And there
came a parcel of presents for Emmie and the
little girls, by which all were greatly impressed.
Dorastus's rank in the memory of his
family rose a degree. Now, on looking back,
each knew that he had always foreseen how, with that powerful will, Dorastus must be
able to hew his way through difficulties and
compel circumstances to serve him. He was
looked on rather as a man than a boy, even
as he looked on himself. His mother was
grateful to him for seeming to efface the
weak foolishness out of her first marriage:
she was justified in her latter days, and
proved a virgin full of good sense. She
wrote Dorastus encouraging letters. Her
good words got glowing answers: surely it
would not be long; he was working with all
his might. But they must be patient, for
success as a material recompense was slow;
and he hinted with the effect of a sigh at
rivalries, at the density of the public mind.
Yet talent must inevitably triumph in the
end and manly effort meet its reward.

 When Hector came home for his holidays
he found it just a little stupid to have been
a good boy. The personage in the general
mind seemed to be his undisciplined half-brother.
He contrived, however, in the
course of weeks, to fix a good deal of attention
on himself. He restored the balance to his mother's mind. Dorastus sank into his
natural place in relation to her other children.
She waited in serene patience—sometimes
with a passing touch of scepticism, the reflection
of some outsider's attitude, oftener with
childish perfection of faith—for the developments
he announced in letters somewhat decreasing
in frequency, but preserving their
early tone of hopefulness.

 So time passed. The unusual became the
usual and lost consideration, according to its
habit.

 Then the sisters-in-law, those perfect
daughters, mothers, and wives, came to visit
the head of the house in the home of their
girlhood. They brought maids and children
and chattels manifold.

 Now these ladies had been in London, and
Emmie heard much from them of the glories
and greatness of that city; she had long opportunity
to learn respect for their manners
and gowns, which alike came from there.
They had not happened upon Dorastus; they
could not remember hearing of him, and as
that seemed to make it plain to Emmie they had not been in the most polite places, they
explained that the city was so large and populous
you might not come across a person in
a lifetime.

 They left on a rainy autumn morning.
Emmie, with her forehead against the glass,
watched their carriages dwindling, dwindling.
Gone, with all their patterns for gowns, with
the last sweet thing in worsted-work; gone,
with their fashionable conversation, the art
of which she had not had quite time yet to
master. But even if she had become perfect
in all, as they, of what use could it have been
to her here? she asked, turning from the
dripping window-pane.

 She moved with an air of being the moon
by day. The sickness of the decaying year
seemed to have got into her blood; she felt
as if she herself were the perishing summer,
which had somehow been wasted. She said
over her children's ages with a sort of terror,
a sense of time having stolen a march on her;
she was vaguely panic-stricken to think there
was so little of the good time of life left before
her. She sought the mirror to divert her mind with trying on again the bonnet
the sisters had bestowed on her, pronouncing
it so becoming. Under the severe gray light
the face she saw reflected held more than
ever to her discontented eyes a forecast of
the cheerless coming days when the rose
should be withered, the gold gone. The
deadly quiet of the country, the silence of
the well-regulated house, suddenly seemed to
her an outrage, a roof incontrovertible that
no one cared what happened to her. Gregory
in particular did not care. Else would
he not have comprehended that movement
and novelty and gayety alone could at this
pass save her from the insidious oncreeping
evil that encouraged hard lines between
the pale cheek and the drooping mouth?
Clearly he did not care. He cared for
nothing but not to be disturbed after dinner.
In this connection she thought over
many a subtle wrong she had been putting
up with for years. She thought of Dorastus,
from whom this husband, with his
royal indifference, allowed her to be so long
separated; Dorastus, who as she looked to him, turning from the lukewarm, apathetic
tribe surrounding her, seemed an embodiment
of swiftness and strength, a tempered
steel blade to rely on, a flame at which to
warm the numb hands of the heart. Ah,
well, he was making a home for her with him,
yonder in the living city. She lost sight of
the mirror into which she was staring; she
saw that home. Suddenly it seemed to her
she could not live longer without seeing her
boy. She rose with the energy of true inspiration.
It was such an obviously legitimate
desire, this desire to behold again her
own flesh and blood, that she need not be
at pains to fabricate palliation or excuse for
it. She sought Gregory directly. She was
weary and ill, she had dreams at night, he
did not know how hard her life had become.
She wanted to see Dorastus.

 Gregory yielded.

 They came to London. They took rooms
at a quiet hotel known to him of old.

 The novelty of all, the anticipation, made
Emmie feel young again. Her violet eyes
were still childishly clear, her hair was pretty still; little was missed of the beauty of her
youth but its slender lightness.

 "No, no; you must leave it all to me,"
she said, when Gregory would have accompanied
her in her search for Dorastus. "I
have a clue which I will not betray. He has
shown, dear fellow, that he might be trusted
to take care of himself. I will bring him
home to dine with us. You may take seats
for the pantomime."

 So the good Gregory put her in the care of
a trusted driver, and saw her started on her
adventure.

 Now she was driven—it seemed to her
they were hours on the way—to the Tartar's
Head, a coffee-house of not very imposing
appearance, in a crowded part.

 Before reaching her destination she almost
wished she had let Gregory come: it was so
noisy; the air was so dingy it deadened
one's spirits despite wealth of delightful
prospects; and she must face various unknown,
perhaps unfriendly, faces before finding
his face—after which all would be well.

 She descended from the carriage with a little flutter, then with the haste of rout got
into it again, and requested the driver to
bring some one to her, as if she had been a
great person.

 A young man came out to take her commands,
a well-oiled young man in side-whiskers
and a broad shirt-front.

 Had not letters been received there addressed
to so-and-so?

 The young man was more than polite.
Inquiries were made. Such letters had been
received. The person to whom they were
addressed called for them.

 "I am his mother," said Emmie, lamely,
for she had prepared another course than
this simple one, a course involving strategy.
"Does he not live here? Where does he
live?"

 The young man continued very obliging.
He made further inquiries and came back
looking a little blank. The person came himself
and left no direction for forwarding his
letters; a letter had once been waiting several
weeks.

 "Does no one here know him?" asked his mother, nearly in tears. Of a sudden this city
seemed to her terribly large, and terribly full
of people who cared nothing for any distress
of hers. "He plays on the violin—he plays
very beautifully on the violin."

 A possibility of intelligence dawned in the
obliging young man's face, and he ran in-doors
again. He came back with a hopeful
air. "Yes, your ladyship. There is an old
man belonging to the place knows him. He
took him a letter once when he couldn't
come himself, being laid up. He didn't
want to tell at first, saying how he'd sworn.
But I let him know your ladyship was the
young man's mother, and he told. It's a
bit far."

 The waiter stepped up to the coachman
and gave him instructions. Emmie rewarded
his obligingness with bounty in proportion
to her relief at all proving so easy. Of
course some one knew him. It was part of
his boyishness to suppose he could hide,
after his light had begun shining through
the bushel, too.

 She looked out through the misty pane at the bright passing shop-windows; there
seemed to her thousands in a row, and hundreds
of carriages rolling along with her.
She liked the city again exceedingly, and
was glad to hope she might be there often
after a time; it was so various, it put life
into one. If only the murky cloud would
lift that rested on the chimney-tops, and the
rain stop making more the gray slime on the
flags.

 It was a long distance. She looked out
until she was tired and confused; then leaned
back and meditated pleasantly for a time,
then looked out again, with a little shock of
disappointment at seeing no more bright
windows.

 They were going more slowly; the streets
here were narrow, the air seemed dingier, the
houses and people looked miserable.

 She watched with a saddened interest
these that she fixed upon as the poor city-people
in their poor quarters. She was sorry
for them, but she would be relieved when
they were left behind for the gayer thoroughfares,
or the roomier, more cheerful suburbs.

  Now at the entrance of a narrow court the
carriage stopped. She wondered what could
be hindering its progress, and fidgeted while
the coachman left his box and came to the
door. He opened it with a stolid face and held
his finger to his hat, waiting for her to alight.

 "But—but"—she stammered, eying the
poverty-stricken appearance of the place,
"this cannot be it!"

 "The directions were clear, ma'am; I've
followed them," said the man, with respectful
firmness. "This is as near as I can get to the
house; there's no room to turn around in
the court."

 Emmie leaned back a moment, determined
not to stir from her cushions—the mistake
was on the face of it too stupid.

 The coachman stood waiting, a man of
patience carved in wood. Emmie eyed him
helplessly; then, seeing that the imposing
creature would be satisfied with no less from
her, with the abruptness of impatience she
alighted, and rustled into the dark court, peering
upward for the number.

 There it was. She knocked, and listened, with a heart in which strange things seemed
to be happening. To the capless woman
who opened she stammered a name, looking
for the relief of being told instantly that
none of that name lived there.

 "Three pair back, ma'am," said the woman,
who appeared like a cook, actual, past, or
potential. "But he's not in. There's no
telling how soon he will come. What name
did you say? Drastus what? Sibbie-mole?
Oh no, ma'am. Beg pardon. I listened as
far as Drastus, and answered because it's
such a curious name. Ours name is Fenton.
But, let's see. What manner of young man
might yours be? Like a foreigner, with a
large nose and black eyes, and plays the
fiddle, and wears his hair long? Dear me,
ma'am, the very same! His room's three
pair back. You wish to wait for him? This
way, then, ma'am."

 Emmie, in whom all processes of thought
had stopped in amazement, followed the
landlady as best she could up three flights
of dark stairs, and entered through the door
flung open for her.

  They stood in a little room that received
the day through a sky-light. Emmie dropped,
sitting on the edge of the narrow bed and
knotted her little gloved fingers together in
silence. She was so pale that the landlady
felt alarmed and asked if she were feeling ill.
She shook her head, and continued looking
about fearfully and in wonder.

 There was little to see, nothing that might
not have belonged to any one in the wide
world as well as to that boy; not one of these
sordid appurtenances reminded her of him,
except the music on the table—but any fiddler
might have just such music.

 She rose to her feet as if jerked by a hidden
string, and walked stiffly towards the
door, saying, "It is evidently not the one.
This one's name is Drastus Fenton, you say.
The one I seek is Dorastus Sibbemol. Good-morning,
ma'am."

 But near the door she stopped, her eyes
widening upon an object set upright in the
corner—a black wooden box, very old, scarred
and worm-eaten, mournfully resembling a
child's coffin.

  She went back to the bed, and limply
leaned against the wall. She stared over at
the box, with its peculiar wrought-iron hinges
and handle.

 "Has he been here long?" she asked, faintly,
at last, of the blowzy woman who was looking
at her with some concern, and at the same
time, in view of the lady's respectability, trying
to smooth down her untidy hair.

 She thought a moment and judged he
might have been there half a year.

 Emmie wrung her hands in an aimless way.
She felt little of pain as yet, or indignation;
only vague throes and convulsions of change,
a working of all the atoms in heart and brain
trying to adjust themselves to something
new.

 "And he is poor!" she murmured.

 "Well," said the landlady, exculpatingly,
"we are all poor folks here, ma'am. He
mostly pays his rent—I don't ask much,
but when he's behind I'm not hard on him.
He's a good lad," she went on, and as she
was a sizable woman, after a gesture of deferential
apology she took a seat, to support her in her view of lingering to angle with information
until she caught a little enlightenment.
"A good lad, but that proud! He thinks he'll
be as rich as a dook some day, with his little
fiddle!" She shook her head in compassion
and chuckled fatly over a household joke of
long standing. "He's all right in his head,
ma'am, except on that point. A poor lad
that plays in the streets is none so likely to
pick up a fortune. And such tunes as he
plays! I've always been told I'd an uncommon
ear for a catch, but to catch head or tail
of them is beyond me!"

 "He plays in the streets!"

 "Yes, poor Dook—come rain, come shine.
Sometimes he has a good day, sometimes a
bad one; but times is hard—it's not very good
at best. He's not one of them pretty-impudent
Italian boys with wheedling brown velvet
eyes. He looks too scornful, and despises
folks more than is for his own good. I have
felt hurt at it myself, ma'am, and I may say
I'm not touchy. When I've known that he
was a bit hard up and he looked hollow, and
I've asked him in neighborly to have a bite with us, he has answered me almost as if he
hated me for it—and gone hollow."

 His mother drew in her breath sharply.

 "Might you be a friend of his?" asked the
landlady. "Once when he was sick abed,
and I came up to say a good word, he got
sociabler than usual, and spoke of a lady,
a lady of quality, who'd heard him play—I
thought likely it was before he came here
with his coat so seedy—a lady who thought
he was very fine. Perhaps I don't understand
about fiddle-playing, and he is all he says.
Might you be the lady?"

 "Yes, yes, yes!" said Emmie, scarcely
knowing what she said.

 The landlady looked much interested.
"Well, now, I thought as much, for I don't
think he's any one in the world belonging to
him. He's a good lad, ma'am," she said
again, with a good-natured impulse to make
hay for a fellow-creature while this, possibly
a sun, was shining. "He deserves better
than he gets, if I do say it. He works at
them music-books for hours sometimes, at
night, till the man below is fit to go mad. But I tell him I can't put out a lodger that
pays more frequent than he, and when I
speak to Drastus he says he'll leave, though
he should have to sleep on the pavement—he
must play when he pleases. He says
that it's because he can't play as other fiddle-men
do, from a book and in a particular way,
that he can't get nothing to do but play in
the streets. So he must learn, and learn he
will, and he scrapes away like a meeting of
cats on the roof. I'm sorry he's out, ma'am.
What did you want with him, now? Couldn't
I give your message—or must you wait yourself?"

 "I will wait—I will wait."

 "He may not be home till night. He
sometimes even—"

 "Oh, leave me, my good woman!" moaned
Emmie. "What else can I do but wait?"

 And the landlady, taking pity on what
seemed to her an inordinate perturbation of
spirit, left the visitor to herself, returning
now and then to listen, and bringing up once
an inquiry from the coachman.

 Emmie remained sitting on the edge of the bed. After a time she rose and looked
with pointless minuteness at everything in
the room, opening every drawer and reading
every paper. She found all her letters tied
in a bundle and wrapped in a silk neckerchief
of her own, old, and that she had never
missed. He had few possessions, and they
made the heart sick to pore over.

 The light faded off the dull glass overhead.
With chilled fingers she felt for the candle
and lighted it. The landlady, coming up at
dark, insisted on bringing her a cup of tea.
The good creature had so disciplined her
curiosity concerning the history implied in
this gentlewoman's presence here that her
delicacy now in endeavoring to discover was
touching. Yet it went unrewarded. She
stayed for the satisfaction of seeing the lady,
who she thought looked fairly ill, refresh herself;
and when it was delayed, tried by example
to institute in the atmosphere that
cheerfulness which is conducive to a better
appetite—until asked again, with an imploring
glance from eyes like a shot dove's, to go,
for the sake of pity to go.

  Emmie now took down the few clothes
she had seen on the hooks, with a vague idea
that they required mending. She spread
them out over her lap one by one, and passed
her hand mechanically over the threadbare
places where the black was green, over certain
fringes about the holes, her heart feeling
extraordinarily large and empty and silent.
The rings on her cold hand glittered in the
stroking movement, four rich rings with
various stones, Gregory's gifts. Four—but
she had five children.

 She stretched herself suddenly on the bed
with her face in the old coat, the chill of the
room slowly seizing upon her as she lay. She
prayed in a distant, half-conscious way, without
the least illusion that such words could
persuade any one, for God to unmake everything
that had happened to her, to let her
have died, and Dorastus too, at his very birth;
for them to have both been lying in the remote
Dutch God's-acre these many years.
For one fleeting moment memory gave back
to her perfect an impression never before recalled.
She seemed to have been roused from a stupor deeper than sleep; her eyes
dwelt without wonder on what she thought
to be a cathedral, with colored windows ablaze—it
dwindled, until it was a mere night-light
glimmering. Then shadowy people placed a
little bundle in her arms. She tingled as an
instrument whose every string is touched, a
coolness rippled from her head to her feet,
she knew a state never known before or since,
a sense of unlimited wealth, a tenderness ineffable,
a trembling outgoing of all her being
to this handful of life. She heaved a great,
faint sigh, and with effort unspeakable bent
till her lips were pressed as to a warm rose-leaf.
She sank to sleep, weak unto death,
but blissfully happy—waking stronger and
in a different mood.

 She wished she might not have waked, but
been buried with her poor first baby in her
arms, having ceased to be in the single moment
wherein she completely loved it. Nothing
that had happened to her since then
seemed to her sweet; all was sicklied through
by the consciousness of a crime gone before
and daily confirmed, a woman's most mon strous,
miserable crime—not loving enough.
Nothing could make her withered, yellowed,
cheapened life right now—she should have
died at that moment. She said this over and
over again to the powers that hear us, until
all meaning had faded from it. She started,
with a sense of something going out—she
thought it must be the candle and she should
be left in the dark. She sat up, frightened
and freezing.

 The candle was burning quietly. Then, as
she scrutinized the shadows ahead, loath to
stir, she became aware of her rings having
grown loose, they were in danger of dropping
off; of her clothes having grown loose, they
let the cold in under them; she felt a prickling
at the temples, as if it were the gray
creeping through her hair; she felt her features
becoming pinched and old, beauty dropping
from them like a husk. She wanted to
cry then with a childish self-pity, but no tears
would come; she did not know how to start
the flood that she longed for to relieve her.
She felt that she could only have screamed.

 She got up to rid herself of this congeal ment,
and paced the room from corner to
corner with sweeping black gown that told
of the dusty things it had that day brushed.

 Company had come to the man below;
they were making a great deal of very jolly
noise. The candle guttered drearily; a reek
of warm cabbage climbed up the stairway to
her nostrils. She looked up on hearing a
soft tapping—the black sky-light was spattered
with silver tears, like a pall.

 She walked up and down, waiting and listening,
everything taking more and more the
quality of a dream wherein the most unnatural
things grow ordinary. She had felt with
a numbed sort of cowardly loathing that every
moment brought her nearer to a black
stream of realizing grief and remorse into
which willy-nilly she must descend; but now
it seemed in accordance with every known
law that she should be here, destined to go
on walking so forever, never arriving, nor
anything ever changing. She heard herself
say aloud in a light, indifferent tone, "He
will never come. He will never come."

 For a moment she remembered Gregory, whose image seemed to rise out of the dim
past: Gregory in the warm light of the hotel
coffee-room, where dinner was set on a little
table for three, dinner with wine-glasses of
two shapes, and fruit and confectionery in
crystal dishes. The thought worked upon
her as a sweet smell in sea-sickness. All
that had to do with Gregory seemed of negative
importance; let him wait and wonder
and worry. She felt hard-hearted towards
him and all prosperous things.

 A burst of voices reached her through the
floor; they were rough and hoarse, their
mirth had turned to wrangling. It was so
horribly lonely here! If they were suddenly
possessed to climb the stairs, to burst in
upon her! There was a crash of glass—she
screamed; then a laugh—she shuddered—and
the noise grew less. She breathed again, but,
feeling her knees weaken, went back to the bed,
and sat listening in fascination for the murmuring
sounds to develop again into a quarrel.

 Suddenly, without the warning of gradually
approaching sounds she had prepared herself
for, she heard footsteps just outside.

  She knew them. An impulse to flee seized
her. She looked about for a place to hide
in, a place to get through, to jump from.
She could not bear to see him, she felt as a
murderess whose victim's ghost is upon her.
His image flashed before her, pinched with
hunger and cold, worn, embittered with disappointment,
terrible with its long unrequited
love turned to hatred—gray, with glassy eyes.

 She looked wildly, but she could not move.
Besides, it was too late, a hand was on the
door.

 As it opened, a deep stillness fell upon
her, a suspension of all.

 A spell seemed to snap with his coming
into the range of the candle-light; it was as
to a child locked all night in a graveyard the
cock-crow that lays the ghosts and heralds
the day. She took a feeble breath and her
heart gave a warm little throb. The very
face! only, a young man's face rather than a
boy's, thinner and bolder than ever, but,
thank Heaven! not pathetic, not heart-breaking—but
with red where red should be, with
living light in the eyes.

  He held his violin; he was meanly clad,
and his woollen muffler was of a cheap and
dismal tint no mother would have chosen for
him.

 He looked in surprise at the lighted candle,
and quickly cast his eyes about, frowning
to see who had taken this liberty. He
caught sight of her, blinked and narrowed
his eyes, to distinguish.

 She could not make a sound, or bring a
vestige of expression to her face, or lift the
pale little hands from her black lap—but sat
transfixed under his questioning stare.

 He took a few steps, uttered a jubilant
shout, and dashed towards her with outstretched
arms—But he stopped before
reaching her. He gave a glance around the
horrible little room, a glance at her face with
the eyes full of stern sadness, of reproach for
the many, many lies he had told her. Abruptly
he turned his back to her and dropped
on his knees beside the table, saying furiously
in disjointed syllables as he pressed his
working face against his arms. "You won't
understand! You never understand any thing!
I think sometimes that you are a
fool!"

 But he felt her soft icy hands tremble
about his head, he felt her fluttering breath
in his neck. She was kneeling beside him,
saying in choked whispers in the intervals of
lifting her poor lips from his wet face, "Don't
speak!—Don't speak!"

 She was straining him to her with a passionate
tenderness never shown another being,
raining on him the sweetest kisses.

 Both fell to crying as if their hearts would
break.