[

265 ] 

‘DOT’S CLAIM.’

 It

was evening in the German Arms at Schwartzdorf.
Great fires blazed in all the rooms of that old-fashioned
hostelry, welcome enough on entering from the chill, wild
weather ruling over the mountainland outside.

 Tired with a heavy day’s work at inspecting the mining
claims, which were beginning to attract notice to this
secluded spot, it was with a feeling of satisfaction that,
after tea, I drew a chair up to the fire, lit my pipe, and
made myself comfortable.

 Presently there was a knock at the door and, in response
to my ‘Come in,’ there entered the man who told
me this story.

 In his hand he carried a canvas bag, whose contents
he emptied on the table with the remark, ‘I thought
perhaps you might like to see these.’

 Very beautiful they were, without doubt—quartz, ironstone
and gold, mingled in the most fantastic manner;
grotesque attempts by Nature’s untrained fingers at
crosses, hearts, stars, and other shapes defying name.

 ‘We got these the last shot knocking off to-night,’ said [

266 ]

the owner of the pretty things as I asked him to sit
down. ‘You might remember me tellin’ you as I didn’t
think we was very far from the main reef. I believe we
got it now in good earnest. Same lead as is in “Dot’s
Claim.” Same sort o’ country. Reef runnin’ with the
same dip. An’ you knows yourself, sir, as they took
forty-five pound weight o’ specimens richer than them
out o’ “Dot’s” this mornin’.’

 ‘I beg your pardon,’ I said after a hasty glance at my
note-book, ‘but I don’t remember any such name. I
thought, too, that I had seen all the most important
claims.’

 ‘Why, of course,’ he replied, ‘I forgot! It’s only a
few of us old hands as knows the story as calls it Dot’s
now. When the big company took it from Fairleigh
they names it the “El Dorado.” I reckon t’other was
too short—didn’t sound high enough for ’em. But if it
hasn’t the best right to the old name I’d like to know the
reason why.’

 ‘El Dorado,’ I remarked; ‘why that’s the original
prospector’s claim.’

 My visitor nodded, saying, ‘An’ I’m No. 2 South.’

 ‘Ward and party?’ I inquired, referring again to my
memos.

 ‘That’s it. I’m Ward.’

 ‘Well, then, Mr Ward, I want to hear that story you
hinted at just now. Kindly touch that bell at your
elbow. Thanks.’

 It may have been only fancy, but I thought that
between blooming Gretchen journeying to and fro with [

267 ]

hot water, tumblers, sugar, etc., etc., and my lucky
reefer glances passed betokening a more than casual
acquaintance.

 ‘Yes, Gretchen, you may as well leave the kettle.’

 I am trying to air my German, but fail lamentably,
judging from the expression on the girl’s full, fresh-coloured
features as she struggles to avoid laughing.
Even my visitor smiles. Everything is German here—bar,
luckily, the beds. Outside the wind howled and
beat against the curtained windows, and the rain fell
dully on the shingled roof, and the roar of the Broken
River came to our ears between the storm gusts.

 Inside, the fire flickered and fell, sending deep
shadows over the pine-panelled walls and the grave
handsome face of my companion, the first fruits of whose
labour shone sullenly under the shaded lamplight.
From a distant room rose and died away faintly the
chorus of some song of the Fatherland.

 ‘Now,’ said I, as Gretchen finally closed the door,
‘now for the story.’

 ‘Well,’ commenced Ward, after getting his pipe into
good going order, ‘it’s over eight years ago since I came
here from the West Coast—Hokitika. I’d been diggin’
there. But my luck was clean out, so I chucked it up,
an’, after a lot of knockin’ about, settles down here—would
you believe it?—farmin’!

 ‘Now I know’d as much about farmin’ as a cow does
o’ reefin’. Cert’nly my mate—for there was a pair of
us—had been scarin’ crows for a farmer in the Old
Country when he was a boy. That wasn’t much. [

268 ]

Still, on the strength o’ that experience, he used to give
himself airs.

 ‘I think it was two years afore we got a crop o’
anythin’. Then it was potaters. When we tried
to sell ’em we couldn’t get an offer. Everybody had
potaters. So we just turned to an’ lived on ’em.
They’re fillin’, doubtless. But potaters and fish, an’
fish an’ potaters for a change, all the year round, gets
tiresome in the long run.

 ‘I often wonder now what could have possessed me
an’ Bill to go in for such a thing as farmin’. But
there, when a chap’s luck’s out diggin’, he’s glad to
tackle anythin’ for a change!

 ‘Presently one or two more, men with fam’lies,
settles close to us and tries to make a livin’. It
didn’t amount to much. Then up comes a string
o’ Germans, trampin’ along from the coast, carryin’
furniture an’ tools, beds—ay, even their old women—on
their backs. An’ they settles, an’ starts the
same game—clearin’, an’ ploughin’, an’ sowin’. But
I couldn’t see as any of ’em was makin’ a pile.
They worked like bullocks, women an’ all, late
an’ early. The harder they worked, the poorer
they seemed to get. Bill an’ me had a pound
or two saved up for a rainy day. But they had
nothin’; an’ how they lived was a mystery. So,
you see, takin’ things all round, it was high time
somethin’ turned up. An’ somethin’ did. The next
farm to us belonged to a married couple. He
was a runaway sailor. She’d been a passenger [

269 ]

on board. They had one child, just turned four
year old, an’ they was both fair wrapped up in
that kid.

 ‘If Dot’s—Dot was his pet name—finger only ached,
the work might go to Jericho.

 ‘An’ indeed he were a most loveable little chap.
With regards to him, we was all of us ’most as
bad as the father an’ mother, the way we played
with him an’ petted him. There was no denyin’
Dot of anythin’ once he looked at you out o’ those
big blue eyes o’ his. And the knowledgeableness of
him! No wonder Jim Fairleigh an’ his missis thought
the sun rose every mornin’ out o’ the back o’ their
boy’s neck.’

 Here Ward paused and queried,—

 ‘Married man, sir?’

 ‘No,’ I replied.

 ‘No more ’m I,’ he continued, ‘or I don’t s’pose I’d
be here yarning a night like this.’

 ‘It’s a wonder,’ I said, ‘that none of these jolly-looking Fräuleins about here have been able to take
your fancy.’

 ‘Well, to tell the truth,’ he replied, with, however,
a rather conscious expression on his face, ‘I think
what those poor Fairleighs went through rather scared
me of marryin’.

 ‘But, as I was sayin’, farmin’ didn’t seem to agree
with my mate, Bill—that’s him you seen at the claim
to-day—spite o’ his past experience, any more’n it did
with me. He

done the business, by-the-bye, quite [

270 ]

lately with a bouncin’ gal—Lieschen Hertzog—an’ now
stays at home o’ nights.

 ‘We had a note or two left. We had also a crop
o’ potaters an’ some punkins. But no one wanted ’em—wouldn’t
buy ’em at any price. In fact, you couldn’t
give ’em away in those times.

 ‘The Fairleighs an’, I think, all of us, were pretty
much in the same box. As I said before, it was time
somethin’ turned up.

 ‘It was a wild night. Bill an’ me was lyin’ in our
stretchers readin’. About ten o’clock, open flies the
door, an’ in bolts Fairleigh drippin’ wet, no hat on,
an’ pale as a ghost, an’ stands there like a statue,
starin’ at us, without a word.

 ‘“In God’s name what’s the matter?” I says at
last. With that he flaps his hands about, so-fashion,
an’ sings out, “Dot’s lost in the ranges!”

 ‘You may bet that shook us up a bit! You’ve
seen the Broken Ranges for yourself, an’ can judge
what chance a delicate little kiddy like Dot’d have
among them rocks an’ scrub on a worse night than this is.

 ‘That fool of a sailor-man, if you’ll believe me, an’
his wife had been out sence dark searchin’ for the
child, ’stead o’ rousin’ the settlement. Presently, to
make matters worse, it appears that he’d lost the
woman too—got separated in the scrub, an’ couldn’t
find her again. Just by a fluke, while on the Black
Hill yonder, he’d caught the glimper o’ sparks from
our chimney. He was covered with cuts and bruises
an’ goin’ cranky fast when he got to the hut.

 [

271 ] 

‘Bill had gone to tell the news; an’ in a very few
minutes a whole crowd o’ Fritzes, an’ Hanses, an’ Hermans,
an Gottliebs was turned out an’ ready for a start.

 ‘They didn’t want no coaxing. All they says was
‘ Ach Gott! ’ an’ they was fit for anythin’. By no manner
o’ means a bad lot,’ here commented Ward, ‘when you
comes to get in with ’em an’ know ’em like. Honest as
the light, an’ as hard-workin’ as a bullock. Slow, maybe,
but very sure. Full o’ pluck as a soger-ant. Clannish
as the Scotties, an’ as savin’. I’ve got some real good
friends among ’em now. An’ their women-folks, too,
is amazin’ handy—make you up a square feed out o’ a
head o’ cabbage an’ a bit o’ greenhide, I do believe,
if they was put to it.

 ‘Cert’nly their lingo ’s the dead finish at first, till you
gets used to it. I can Deutsch gesprechen , myself, now,
more’n a little.

 ‘However, that’s neither here nor there.

 ‘Bill, my mate, as I told you, as much as me, havin’
got full o’ farmin’, we used to take a prospectin’ trip
now and then among the ranges. But we never rose
the colour. Never found a thing, ’cept scrub turkeys’
eggs. Anyhow, we knew the country better’n the Germans,
an’ took the lead.

 ‘Pitch dark it were, with heavy squalls, an’ the river
roarin’ along half a banker.

 ‘Fairleigh, after a stiff nip o’ rum, began to find his
senses again sufficient to give us the right course.

 ‘Such scramblin’, an’ coo-eein’

, an’ slippin’, an’ tearin’
about the Bush in the dark never, I should think, [

272 ]

happened before. But we managed to keep in some
sort o’ line an’ cover a goodish track o’ country.

 ‘We must ha’ gone fully five miles into the ranges, an’
Bill an’ me was gettin’ to the end of our tether in that
direction, when we found Mrs Fairleigh. Karl Itzig
nearly falls over her, lyin’ stretched out on a big flat
rock.

 ‘We thought she was dead; but, after a while, she
comes to, light-headed, though, and not able to tell us
anythin’. So we sends her home with a couple o’ the
chaps carryin’ her.

 ‘Well, we searched till daylight—rainin’ cats an’ dogs
all the time. And we searched all the next day without
any luck. That evenin’ it cleared-up bright at sundown.
Then Fairleigh gives in complete, an’ has to be carried
home to his wife.

 ‘After a camp an’ a snack the moon rose, an’ we
at it afresh. But we ’bouted ship now; for I was sure
we’d overrun ourselves. There was full fifty of us, an’
we circled, takin’ in all the country we could. You
see, we was hopin’ for fresh tracks, an’ we went with our
noses on the groun’ like a lot of dogs on the scent
of an old man kangaroo, only a sight slower.

 ‘’Bout midnight I sees somethin’ shinin’. It was the
steel buckle on the front o’ poor Dot’s shoe. Only
one of ’em, an’ all soaked through with rain. No tracks;
so we reckoned he’d been here last night in the heaviest
of it.

 ‘That little bit o’ leather put us in better heart. But
it wasn’t to be. The sun was just risin’, when, pretty [

273 ]

near done up, me an’ Bill an’ Wilhelm Reinhardt comes
out o’ the scrub on to a small bald knob, an’ there,
on a bare patch, lies Dot, stone dead, with his blue eyes
wide open, starin’ at the sky, an’ the long curly hair,
as his mother used to be so proud of, all matted with
sand and rain.

 ‘Four crows was sittin’ overright him on the limb
of a tree. I don’t believe the poor little fellow ’d been
dead very long—in the chill o’ the early hours o’ that
mornin’ likely. In one hand he had a bit o’ stick.
With the other he held his pinny, gathered up tight,
same as you’ve seen kiddies do when they’re carryin’
somethin’.

 ‘A real pitiful sight it were. It was as much as
Bill an’ me could stand. As for Wilhelm, he just sits
down aside the body an’ fair blubbers out.

 ‘Well, with our coo-ees

, the rest comes up in twos
an’ threes. Most of the Germans started to keep
Wilhelm company. Foreigners, I think, must be either
softer-hearted than us, or ain’t ashamed o’ showin’ what
they feel. Anyhow, there wasn’t a dry eye among them
Germans when they gathered round little Dot.

 ‘Presently we starts to rig a sort o’ stretcher with
coats and a couple o’ saplin’s.

 ‘Then Bill lifts the body up, an’ as he does out from
the pinny drops four o’ the beautifullest specimens you’d
ever wish to see—them on the table ain’t a patch on
’em.

 ‘I twigs them at once. So did three or four more
old digger chaps.

 [

274 ] 

‘Then we takes a squint around, an’ there, right
against our noses, as one might say, ran the reef, with
bits o’ gold stickin’ out o’ the surface-stone an’ glimperin’
in the sun.

 ‘I don’t believe the Germans tumbled for a while.
You see they was all new chums. Most likely none of
’em hadn’t ever seen a natural bit o’ gold afore.

 ‘But the others did, quick. An’, presently, a rather
hot sort o’ argument begins to rise.

 ‘For a short time me an’ Bill stands and listens to
the wranglin’. Then I looks at Bill, and he nods his
head, and I shoves my spoke in.

 ‘“Look here, chaps!” I says, “this may be only a
surface leader, as some of you appears to think, or it
may be a pile. I don’t care a damn which it is! It’s
Fairleigh’s first say. His kid, as lies there dead, found it!
An’, by the Lord, his father’s goin’ to be first served!
I’m goin’ now to peg out what I considers a fair prospectin’
claim for him. That’ll be seen to after. When
that’s done you can strike in as you likes. If you
objects to that you ain’t men. Bill, here, ’ll back me
up, an’, if you don’t like it, we’ll do it in spite o’ you.
We’re all poor enough, God knows! But none of us
ain’t just lost an only child, an’ self an’ wife gone half
mad with the sorrow of it.”

 ‘Well, sir, the Germans, who was beginning to drop
to how the thing lay, set up a big shout o’ “ Hoch!
Hoch! ” meanin’ in their lingo, “Hooray.” An’ the
rest, what was right enough at bottom, an’ only wanted
showin’ like what was the fair an’ square thing to do, [

275 ]

quick agreed. All ’cept, that is, one flash sort of a joker
from the Barossa. But, while I steps the groun’, Bill
put such a head on him in half-a-dozen rounds that his
own mother wouldn’t know him again.

 ‘It were only a couple o’ miles in a straight line from
the settlement, through the ranges, to that bit of a bald
hill.

 ‘Exactly, almost, where you stood to-day, lookin’
at the windin’ plant o’ the El Dorado, was where we
found Dot.

 ‘When the field was proclaimed the Warden didn’t
have much alteration to make in the p.c. I’d marked
off for Fairleigh.

 ‘You see it was only one man’s groun’ then. An’ it
turned out rich from the jump. An’ it’s gettin’ better
every foot. None o’ the others, as the Company’s
bought an’ ’malgamated with it, although joinin’, can
touch “Dot’s.”

 ‘But Fairleigh’s never to say held up his head sence
that night.

 ‘A week after we buried the child we carried the
mother to rest beside him.

 ‘Fairleigh must be a rich man now. Everythin’ he
touches, as the sayin’ is, seems to turn to gold. He
can’t go wrong. But he seldom comes a-nigh the place.
One of the first things he done when “Dot’s” turned
up such trumps, was to put five thousand pounds to
mine and Bill’s credit in the A——

bank. But we
never touched it. Ever sence that night our luck’s been
right in. First we sells out No. 1 North to the Company [

276 ]

at a pretty stiff figure. Then we buys out No. 2 South
an’ seemingly we’ve struck it again, an’ rich.’

 ‘And, now,’ I remark as my friend, his yarn finished,
sits gazing meditatively at the glowing logs,—‘and, now,
all you want is a wife. Follow your mate’s example, and
make a home where you’re making your money.’

 Ward shook his head, smiling doubtfully, and, knocking
the ashes out of his pipe, rose to go.

 Just then Gretchen, buxom, and smiling also, appeared
bearing a huge back-log in her arms. And when I saw
the way my companion sprang up and rushed to meet
and relieve her of the burden, and heard the guttural
whispering that took place before the lump of timber
reached its destination, I thought that, ere very long, all
doubts would be dissipated, and that, even then, I sat
within measurable distance of the future Mrs Ward.