DREAMS
    

      They had just dined together, five old friends, a writer, a doctor and
      three rich bachelors without any profession.
    

      They had talked about everything, and a feeling of lassitude came over
      them, that feeling which precedes and leads to the departure of guests
      after festive gatherings. One of those present, who had for the last five
      minutes been gazing silently at the surging boulevard dotted with
      gas-lamps, with its rattling vehicles, said suddenly:
    

      “When you've nothing to do from morning till night, the days are
      long.”
    

      “And the nights too,” assented the guest who sat next to him.
      “I sleep very little; pleasures fatigue me; conversation is
      monotonous. Never do I come across a new idea, and I feel, before talking
      to any one, a violent longing to say nothing and to listen to nothing. I
      don't know what to do with my evenings.”
    

      The third idler remarked:
    

      “I would pay a great deal for anything that would help me to pass
      just two pleasant hours every day.”
    

      The writer, who had just thrown his overcoat across his arm, turned round
      to them, and said:
    

      “The man who could discover a new vice and introduce it among his
      fellow creatures, even if it were to shorten their lives, would render a
      greater service to humanity than the man who found the means of securing
      to them eternal salvation and eternal youth.”
    

      The doctor burst out laughing, and, while he chewed his cigar, he said:
    

      “Yes, but it is not so easy to discover it. Men have however
      crudely, been seeking for—and working for the object you refer to
      since the beginning of the world. The men who came first reached
      perfection at once in this way. We are hardly equal to them.”
    

      One of the three idlers murmured:
    

      “What a pity!”
    

      Then, after a minute's pause, he added:
    

      “If we could only sleep, sleep well, without feeling hot or cold,
      sleep with that perfect unconsciousness we experience on nights when we
      are thoroughly fatigued, sleep without dreams.”
    

      “Why without dreams?” asked the guest sitting next to him.
    

      The other replied:
    

      “Because dreams are not always pleasant; they are always fantastic,
      improbable, disconnected; and because when we are asleep we cannot have
      the sort of dreams we like. We ought to dream waking.”
    

      “And what's to prevent you?” asked the writer.
    

      The doctor flung away the end of his cigar.
    

      “My dear fellow, in order to dream when you are awake, you need
      great power and great exercise of will, and when you try to do it, great
      weariness is the result. Now, real dreaming, that journey of our thoughts
      through delightful visions, is assuredly the sweetest experience in the
      world; but it must come naturally, it must not be provoked in a painful,
      manner, and must be accompanied by absolute bodily comfort. This power of
      dreaming I can give you, provided you promise that you will not abuse it.”
    

      The writer shrugged his shoulders:
    

      “Ah! yes, I know—hasheesh, opium, green tea—artificial
      paradises. I have read Baudelaire, and I even tasted the famous drug,
      which made me very sick.”
    

      But the doctor, without stirring from his seat, said:
    

      “No; ether, nothing but ether; and I would suggest that you literary
      men should use it sometimes.”
    

      The three rich bachelors drew closer to the doctor.
    

      One of them said:
    

      “Explain to us the effects of it.”
    

      And the doctor replied:
    

      “Let us put aside big words, shall we not? I am not talking of
      medicine or morality; I am talking of pleasure. You give yourselves up
      every day to excesses which consume your lives. I want to indicate to you
      a new sensation, possible only to intelligent men—let us say even
      very intelligent men—dangerous, like everything else that
      overexcites our organs, but exquisite. I might add that you would require
      a certain preparation, that is to say, practice, to feel in all their
      completeness the singular effects of ether.
    

      “They are different from the effects of hasheesh, of opium, or
      morphia, and they cease as soon as the absorption of the drug is
      interrupted, while the other generators of day dreams continue their
      action for hours.
    

      “I am now going to try to analyze these feelings as clearly as
      possible. But the thing is not easy, so facile, so delicate, so almost
      imperceptible, are these sensations.
    

      “It was when I was attacked by violent neuralgia that I made use of
      this remedy, which since then I have, perhaps, slightly abused.
    

      “I had acute pains in my head and neck, and an intolerable heat of
      the skin, a feverish restlessness. I took up a large bottle of ether, and,
      lying down, I began to inhale it slowly.
    

      “At the end of some minutes I thought I heard a vague murmur, which
      ere long became a sort of humming, and it seemed to me that all the
      interior of my body had become light, light as air, that it was dissolving
      into vapor.
    

      “Then came a sort of torpor, a sleepy sensation of comfort, in spite
      of the pains which still continued, but which had ceased to make
      themselves felt. It was one of those sensations which we are willing to
      endure and not any of those frightful wrenches against which our tortured
      body protests.
    

      “Soon the strange and delightful sense of emptiness which I felt in
      my chest extended to my limbs, which, in their turn, became light, as
      light as if the flesh and the bones had been melted and the skin only were
      left, the skin necessary to enable me to realize the sweetness of living,
      of bathing in this sensation of well-being. Then I perceived that I was no
      longer suffering. The pain had gone, melted away, evaporated. And I heard
      voices, four voices, two dialogues, without understanding what was said.
      At one time there were only indistinct sounds, at another time a word
      reached my ear. But I recognized that this was only the humming I had
      heard before, but emphasized. I was not asleep; I was not awake; I
      comprehended, I felt, I reasoned with the utmost clearness and depth, with
      extraordinary energy and intellectual pleasure, with a singular
      intoxication arising from this separation of my mental faculties.
    

      “It was not like the dreams caused by hasheesh or the somewhat
      sickly visions that come from opium; it was an amazing acuteness of
      reasoning, a new way of seeing, judging and appreciating the things of
      life, and with the certainty, the absolute consciousness that this was the
      true way.
    

      “And the old image of the Scriptures suddenly came back to my mind.
      It seemed to me that I had tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, that all the
      mysteries were unveiled, so much did I find myself under the sway of a
      new, strange and irrefutable logic. And arguments, reasonings, proofs rose
      up in a heap before my brain only to be immediately displaced by some
      stronger proof, reasoning, argument. My head had, in fact, become a
      battleground of ideas. I was a superior being, armed with invincible
      intelligence, and I experienced a huge delight at the manifestation of my
      power.
    

      “It lasted a long, long time. I still kept inhaling the ether from
      my flagon. Suddenly I perceived that it was empty.”
    

      The four men exclaimed at the same time:
    

      “Doctor, a prescription at once for a liter of ether!”
    

      But the doctor, putting on his hat, replied:
    

      “As to that, certainly not; go and let some one else poison you!”
    

      And he left them.
    

      Ladies and gentlemen, what is your opinion on the subject?