ELEONORA

 Sub conservatione formae specificae salva anima. Raymond Lully .

 I AM come of a race noted for vigor of fancy and ardor of passion. Men
      have called me mad; but the question is not yet settled, whether madness
      is or is not the loftiest intelligence—whether much that is glorious—whether
      all that is profound—does not spring from disease of thought—from
      moods of mind exalted at the expense of the general intellect. They who
      dream by day are cognizant of many things which escape those who dream
      only by night. In their gray visions they obtain glimpses of eternity, and
      thrill, in awakening, to find that they have been upon the verge of the
      great secret. In snatches, they learn something of the wisdom which is of
      good, and more of the mere knowledge which is of evil. They penetrate,
      however, rudderless or compassless into the vast ocean of the “light
      ineffable,” and again, like the adventures of the Nubian geographer,
      “agressi sunt mare tenebrarum, quid in eo esset exploraturi.”

 We will say, then, that I am mad. I grant, at least, that there are two
      distinct conditions of my mental existence—the condition of a lucid
      reason, not to be disputed, and belonging to the memory of events forming
      the first epoch of my life—and a condition of shadow and doubt,
      appertaining to the present, and to the recollection of what constitutes
      the second great era of my being. Therefore, what I shall tell of the
      earlier period, believe; and to what I may relate of the later time, give
      only such credit as may seem due, or doubt it altogether, or, if doubt it
      ye cannot, then play unto its riddle the Oedipus.

 She whom I loved in youth, and of whom I now pen calmly and distinctly
      these remembrances, was the sole daughter of the only sister of my mother
      long departed. Eleonora was the name of my cousin. We had always dwelled
      together, beneath a tropical sun, in the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass.
      No unguided footstep ever came upon that vale; for it lay away up among a
      range of giant hills that hung beetling around about it, shutting out the
      sunlight from its sweetest recesses. No path was trodden in its vicinity;
      and, to reach our happy home, there was need of putting back, with force,
      the foliage of many thousands of forest trees, and of crushing to death
      the glories of many millions of fragrant flowers. Thus it was that we
      lived all alone, knowing nothing of the world without the valley—I,
      and my cousin, and her mother.

 From the dim regions beyond the mountains at the upper end of our
      encircled domain, there crept out a narrow and deep river, brighter than
      all save the eyes of Eleonora; and, winding stealthily about in mazy
      courses, it passed away, at length, through a shadowy gorge, among hills
      still dimmer than those whence it had issued. We called it the “River
      of Silence”; for there seemed to be a hushing influence in its flow.
      No murmur arose from its bed, and so gently it wandered along, that the
      pearly pebbles upon which we loved to gaze, far down within its bosom,
      stirred not at all, but lay in a motionless content, each in its own old
      station, shining on gloriously forever.

 The margin of the river, and of the many dazzling rivulets that glided
      through devious ways into its channel, as well as the spaces that extended
      from the margins away down into the depths of the streams until they
      reached the bed of pebbles at the bottom,—these spots, not less than
      the whole surface of the valley, from the river to the mountains that
      girdled it in, were carpeted all by a soft green grass, thick, short,
      perfectly even, and vanilla-perfumed, but so besprinkled throughout with
      the yellow buttercup, the white daisy, the purple violet, and the ruby-red
      asphodel, that its exceeding beauty spoke to our hearts in loud tones, of
      the love and of the glory of God.

 And, here and there, in groves about this grass, like wildernesses of
      dreams, sprang up fantastic trees, whose tall slender stems stood not
      upright, but slanted gracefully toward the light that peered at noon-day
      into the centre of the valley. Their mark was speckled with the vivid
      alternate splendor of ebony and silver, and was smoother than all save the
      cheeks of Eleonora; so that, but for the brilliant green of the huge
      leaves that spread from their summits in long, tremulous lines, dallying
      with the Zephyrs, one might have fancied them giant serpents of Syria
      doing homage to their sovereign the Sun.

 Hand in hand about this valley, for fifteen years, roamed I with Eleonora
      before Love entered within our hearts. It was one evening at the close of
      the third lustrum of her life, and of the fourth of my own, that we sat,
      locked in each other’s embrace, beneath the serpent-like trees, and
      looked down within the water of the River of Silence at our images
      therein. We spoke no words during the rest of that sweet day, and our
      words even upon the morrow were tremulous and few. We had drawn the God
      Eros from that wave, and now we felt that he had enkindled within us the
      fiery souls of our forefathers. The passions which had for centuries
      distinguished our race, came thronging with the fancies for which they had
      been equally noted, and together breathed a delirious bliss over the
      Valley of the Many-Colored Grass. A change fell upon all things. Strange,
      brilliant flowers, star-shaped, burn out upon the trees where no flowers
      had been known before. The tints of the green carpet deepened; and when,
      one by one, the white daisies shrank away, there sprang up in place of
      them, ten by ten of the ruby-red asphodel. And life arose in our paths;
      for the tall flamingo, hitherto unseen, with all gay glowing birds,
      flaunted his scarlet plumage before us. The golden and silver fish haunted
      the river, out of the bosom of which issued, little by little, a murmur
      that swelled, at length, into a lulling melody more divine than that of
      the harp of Aeolus-sweeter than all save the voice of Eleonora. And now,
      too, a voluminous cloud, which we had long watched in the regions of
      Hesper, floated out thence, all gorgeous in crimson and gold, and settling
      in peace above us, sank, day by day, lower and lower, until its edges
      rested upon the tops of the mountains, turning all their dimness into
      magnificence, and shutting us up, as if forever, within a magic
      prison-house of grandeur and of glory.

 The loveliness of Eleonora was that of the Seraphim; but she was a maiden
      artless and innocent as the brief life she had led among the flowers. No
      guile disguised the fervor of love which animated her heart, and she
      examined with me its inmost recesses as we walked together in the Valley
      of the Many-Colored Grass, and discoursed of the mighty changes which had
      lately taken place therein.

 At length, having spoken one day, in tears, of the last sad change which
      must befall Humanity, she thenceforward dwelt only upon this one sorrowful
      theme, interweaving it into all our converse, as, in the songs of the bard
      of Schiraz, the same images are found occurring, again and again, in every
      impressive variation of phrase.

 She had seen that the finger of Death was upon her bosom—that, like
      the ephemeron, she had been made perfect in loveliness only to die; but
      the terrors of the grave to her lay solely in a consideration which she
      revealed to me, one evening at twilight, by the banks of the River of
      Silence. She grieved to think that, having entombed her in the Valley of
      the Many-Colored Grass, I would quit forever its happy recesses,
      transferring the love which now was so passionately her own to some maiden
      of the outer and everyday world. And, then and there, I threw myself
      hurriedly at the feet of Eleonora, and offered up a vow, to herself and to
      Heaven, that I would never bind myself in marriage to any daughter of
      Earth—that I would in no manner prove recreant to her dear memory,
      or to the memory of the devout affection with which she had blessed me.
      And I called the Mighty Ruler of the Universe to witness the pious
      solemnity of my vow. And the curse which I invoked of Him and of her, a
      saint in Helusion should I prove traitorous to that promise, involved a
      penalty the exceeding great horror of which will not permit me to make
      record of it here. And the bright eyes of Eleonora grew brighter at my
      words; and she sighed as if a deadly burthen had been taken from her
      breast; and she trembled and very bitterly wept; but she made acceptance
      of the vow, (for what was she but a child?) and it made easy to her the
      bed of her death. And she said to me, not many days afterward, tranquilly
      dying, that, because of what I had done for the comfort of her spirit she
      would watch over me in that spirit when departed, and, if so it were
      permitted her return to me visibly in the watches of the night; but, if
      this thing were, indeed, beyond the power of the souls in Paradise, that
      she would, at least, give me frequent indications of her presence, sighing
      upon me in the evening winds, or filling the air which I breathed with
      perfume from the censers of the angels. And, with these words upon her
      lips, she yielded up her innocent life, putting an end to the first epoch
      of my own.

 Thus far I have faithfully said. But as I pass the barrier in Time’s
      path, formed by the death of my beloved, and proceed with the second era
      of my existence, I feel that a shadow gathers over my brain, and I
      mistrust the perfect sanity of the record. But let me on.—Years
      dragged themselves along heavily, and still I dwelled within the Valley of
      the Many-Colored Grass; but a second change had come upon all things. The
      star-shaped flowers shrank into the stems of the trees, and appeared no
      more. The tints of the green carpet faded; and, one by one, the ruby-red
      asphodels withered away; and there sprang up, in place of them, ten by
      ten, dark, eye-like violets, that writhed uneasily and were ever
      encumbered with dew. And Life departed from our paths; for the tall
      flamingo flaunted no longer his scarlet plumage before us, but flew sadly
      from the vale into the hills, with all the gay glowing birds that had
      arrived in his company. And the golden and silver fish swam down through
      the gorge at the lower end of our domain and bedecked the sweet river
      never again. And the lulling melody that had been softer than the
      wind-harp of Aeolus, and more divine than all save the voice of Eleonora,
      it died little by little away, in murmurs growing lower and lower, until
      the stream returned, at length, utterly, into the solemnity of its
      original silence. And then, lastly, the voluminous cloud uprose, and,
      abandoning the tops of the mountains to the dimness of old, fell back into
      the regions of Hesper, and took away all its manifold golden and gorgeous
      glories from the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass.

 Yet the promises of Eleonora were not forgotten; for I heard the sounds of
      the swinging of the censers of the angels; and streams of a holy perfume
      floated ever and ever about the valley; and at lone hours, when my heart
      beat heavily, the winds that bathed my brow came unto me laden with soft
      sighs; and indistinct murmurs filled often the night air, and once—oh,
      but once only! I was awakened from a slumber, like the slumber of death,
      by the pressing of spiritual lips upon my own.

 But the void within my heart refused, even thus, to be filled. I longed
      for the love which had before filled it to overflowing. At length the
      valley pained me through its memories of Eleonora, and I left it for ever
      for the vanities and the turbulent triumphs of the world.

 I found myself within a strange city, where all things might have served
      to blot from recollection the sweet dreams I had dreamed so long in the
      Valley of the Many-Colored Grass. The pomps and pageantries of a stately
      court, and the mad clangor of arms, and the radiant loveliness of women,
      bewildered and intoxicated my brain. But as yet my soul had proved true to
      its vows, and the indications of the presence of Eleonora were still given
      me in the silent hours of the night. Suddenly these manifestations they
      ceased, and the world grew dark before mine eyes, and I stood aghast at
      the burning thoughts which possessed, at the terrible temptations which
      beset me; for there came from some far, far distant and unknown land, into
      the gay court of the king I served, a maiden to whose beauty my whole
      recreant heart yielded at once—at whose footstool I bowed down
      without a struggle, in the most ardent, in the most abject worship of
      love. What, indeed, was my passion for the young girl of the valley in
      comparison with the fervor, and the delirium, and the spirit-lifting
      ecstasy of adoration with which I poured out my whole soul in tears at the
      feet of the ethereal Ermengarde?—Oh, bright was the seraph
      Ermengarde! and in that knowledge I had room for none other.—Oh,
      divine was the angel Ermengarde! and as I looked down into the depths of
      her memorial eyes, I thought only of them—and of her.

 I wedded;—nor dreaded the curse I had invoked; and its bitterness
      was not visited upon me. And once—but once again in the silence of
      the night; there came through my lattice the soft sighs which had forsaken
      me; and they modelled themselves into familiar and sweet voice, saying:

 “Sleep in peace!—for the Spirit of Love reigneth and ruleth,
      and, in taking to thy passionate heart her who is Ermengarde, thou art
      absolved, for reasons which shall be made known to thee in Heaven, of thy
      vows unto Eleonora.”

  

  









 NOTES TO THIS VOLUME

  

  









 Notes — Scheherazade

 (*1) The coralites.

 (*2) “One of the most remarkable natural curiosities in Texas is a
      petrified forest, near the head of Pasigno river. It consists of several
      hundred trees, in an erect position, all turned to stone. Some trees, now
      growing, are partly petrified. This is a startling fact for natural
      philosophers, and must cause them to modify the existing theory of
      petrification.— Kennedy .

 This account, at first discredited, has since been corroborated by the
      discovery of a completely petrified forest, near the head waters of the
      Cheyenne, or Chienne river, which has its source in the Black Hills of the
      rocky chain.

 There is scarcely, perhaps, a spectacle on the surface of the globe more
      remarkable, either in a geological or picturesque point of view than that
      presented by the petrified forest, near Cairo. The traveller, having
      passed the tombs of the caliphs, just beyond the gates of the city,
      proceeds to the southward, nearly at right angles to the road across the
      desert to Suez, and after having travelled some ten miles up a low barren
      valley, covered with sand, gravel, and sea shells, fresh as if the tide
      had retired but yesterday, crosses a low range of sandhills, which has for
      some distance run parallel to his path. The scene now presented to him is
      beyond conception singular and desolate. A mass of fragments of trees, all
      converted into stone, and when struck by his horse’s hoof ringing
      like cast iron, is seen to extend itself for miles and miles around him,
      in the form of a decayed and prostrate forest. The wood is of a dark brown
      hue, but retains its form in perfection, the pieces being from one to
      fifteen feet in length, and from half a foot to three feet in thickness,
      strewed so closely together, as far as the eye can reach, that an Egyptian
      donkey can scarcely thread its way through amongst them, and so natural
      that, were it in Scotland or Ireland, it might pass without remark for
      some enormous drained bog, on which the exhumed trees lay rotting in the
      sun. The roots and rudiments of the branches are, in many cases, nearly
      perfect, and in some the worm-holes eaten under the bark are readily
      recognizable. The most delicate of the sap vessels, and all the finer
      portions of the centre of the wood, are perfectly entire, and bear to be
      examined with the strongest magnifiers. The whole are so thoroughly
      silicified as to scratch glass and are capable of receiving the highest
      polish.— Asiatic Magazine .

 (*3) The Mammoth Cave of Kentucky.

 (*4) In Iceland, 1783.

 (*5) “During the eruption of Hecla, in 1766, clouds of this kind
      produced such a degree of darkness that, at Glaumba, which is more than
      fifty leagues from the mountain, people could only find their way by
      groping. During the eruption of Vesuvius, in 1794, at Caserta, four
      leagues distant, people could only walk by the light of torches. On the
      first of May, 1812, a cloud of volcanic ashes and sand, coming from a
      volcano in the island of St. Vincent, covered the whole of Barbadoes,
      spreading over it so intense a darkness that, at mid-day, in the open air,
      one could not perceive the trees or other objects near him, or even a
      white handkerchief placed at the distance of six inches from the eye. “—Murray,
      p. 215, Phil. edit. 

 (*6) In the year 1790, in the Caraccas during an earthquake a portion of
      the granite soil sank and left a lake eight hundred yards in diameter, and
      from eighty to a hundred feet deep. It was a part of the forest of Aripao
      which sank, and the trees remained green for several months under the
      water.”— Murray , p. 221

 (*7) The hardest steel ever manufactured may, under the action of a
      blowpipe, be reduced to an impalpable powder, which will float readily in
      the atmospheric air.

 (*8) The region of the Niger. See Simmona’s Colonial Magazine .

 (*9) The Myrmeleon-lion-ant. The term “monster” is equally
      applicable to small abnormal things and to great, while such epithets as
      “vast” are merely comparative. The cavern of the myrmeleon is
      vast in comparison with the hole of the common red ant. A grain of silex
      is also a “rock.”

 (*10) The Epidendron, Flos Aeris, of the family of the Orchideae ,
      grows with merely the surface of its roots attached to a tree or other
      object, from which it derives no nutriment—subsisting altogether
      upon air.

 (*11) The Parasites, such as the wonderful Rafflesia Arnaldii .

 (*12) Schouw advocates a class of plants that grow upon living
      animals—the Plantae  Epizoae . Of this class are the Fuci and Algae .

  Mr. J. B. Williams, of Salem, Mass. , presented the “National
      Institute” with an insect from New Zealand, with the following
      description: “‘ The Hotte , a decided caterpillar, or
      worm, is found gnawing at the root of the Rota tree, with a plant
      growing out of its head. This most peculiar and extraordinary insect
      travels up both the Rota and Ferriri trees, and entering
      into the top, eats its way, perforating the trunk of the trees until it
      reaches the root, and dies, or remains dormant, and the plant propagates
      out of its head; the body remains perfect and entire, of a harder
      substance than when alive. From this insect the natives make a coloring
      for tattooing.

 (*13) In mines and natural caves we find a species of cryptogamous fungus that emits an intense phosphorescence.

 (*14) The orchis, scabius and valisneria.

 (*15) The corolla of this flower ( Aristolochia Clematitis ), which
      is tubular, but terminating upwards in a ligulate limb, is inflated into a
      globular figure at the base. The tubular part is internally beset with
      stiff hairs, pointing downwards. The globular part contains the pistil,
      which consists merely of a germen and stigma, together with the
      surrounding stamens. But the stamens, being shorter than the germen,
      cannot discharge the pollen so as to throw it upon the stigma, as the
      flower stands always upright till after impregnation. And hence, without
      some additional and peculiar aid, the pollen must necessarily fan down to
      the bottom of the flower. Now, the aid that nature has furnished in this
      case, is that of the Tiputa Pennicornis , a small insect, which
      entering the tube of the corrolla in quest of honey, descends to the
      bottom, and rummages about till it becomes quite covered with pollen; but
      not being able to force its way out again, owing to the downward position
      of the hairs, which converge to a point like the wires of a mouse-trap,
      and being somewhat impatient of its confinement it brushes backwards and
      forwards, trying every corner, till, after repeatedly traversing the
      stigma, it covers it with pollen sufficient for its impregnation, in
      consequence of which the flower soon begins to droop, and the hairs to
      shrink to the sides of the tube, effecting an easy passage for the escape
      of the insect.”— Rev. P. Keith-System of Physiological
      Botany .

 (*16) The bees—ever since bees were—have been constructing
      their cells with just such sides, in just such number, and at just such
      inclinations, as it has been demonstrated (in a problem involving the
      profoundest mathematical principles) are the very sides, in the very
      number, and at the very angles, which will afford the creatures the most
      room that is compatible with the greatest stability of structure.

 During the latter part of the last century, the question arose among
      mathematicians—“to determine the best form that can be given
      to the sails of a windmill, according to their varying distances from the
      revolving vanes, and likewise from the centres of the revoloution.”
      This is an excessively complex problem, for it is, in other words, to find
      the best possible position at an infinity of varied distances and at an
      infinity of points on the arm. There were a thousand futile attempts to
      answer the query on the part of the most illustrious mathematicians, and
      when at length, an undeniable solution was discovered, men found that the
      wings of a bird had given it with absolute precision ever since the first
      bird had traversed the air.

 (*17) He observed a flock of pigeons passing betwixt Frankfort and the
      Indian territory, one mile at least in breadth; it took up four hours in
      passing, which, at the rate of one mile per minute, gives a length of 240
      miles; and, supposing three pigeons to each square yard, gives
      2,230,272,000 Pigeons.—“ Travels in Canada and the United
      States,” by Lieut. F. Hall. 

 (*18) The earth is upheld by a cow of a blue color, having horns four
      hundred in number.”— Sale’s Koran .

 (*19) “The Entozoa , or intestinal worms, have repeatedly been
      observed in the muscles, and in the cerebral substance of men.”—See
      Wyatt’s Physiology, p. 143.

 (*20) On the Great Western Railway, between London and Exeter, a speed of
      71 miles per hour has been attained. A train weighing 90 tons was whirled
      from Paddington to Didcot (53 miles) in 51 minutes.

 (*21) The Eccalobeion 

 (*22) Maelzel’s Automaton Chess-player.

 (*23) Babbage’s Calculating Machine.

 (*24) Chabert , and since him, a hundred others.

 (*25) The Electrotype.

 (*26) Wollaston made of platinum for the field of views in a
      telescope a wire one eighteen-thousandth part of an inch in thickness. It
      could be seen only by means of the microscope.

 (*27) Newton demonstrated that the retina beneath the influence of the
      violet ray of the spectrum, vibrated 900,000,000 of times in a second.

 (*28) Voltaic pile.

 (*29) The Electro Telegraph Printing Apparatus.

 (*30) The Electro telegraph transmits intelligence instantaneously- at
      least at so far as regards any distance upon the earth.

 (*31) Common experiments in Natural Philosophy. If two red rays from two
      luminous points be admitted into a dark chamber so as to fall on a white
      surface, and differ in their length by 0.0000258 of an inch, their
      intensity is doubled. So also if the difference in length be any
      whole-number multiple of that fraction. A multiple by 2 1/4, 3 1/4, &c.,
      gives an intensity equal to one ray only; but a multiple by 2 1/2, 3 1/2,
      &c., gives the result of total darkness. In violet rays similar
      effects arise when the difference in length is 0.000157 of an inch; and
      with all other rays the results are the same—the difference varying
      with a uniform increase from the violet to the red.

 “Analogous experiments in respect to sound produce analogous
      results.”

 (*32) Place a platina crucible over a spirit lamp, and keep it a red heat;
      pour in some sulphuric acid, which, though the most volatile of bodies at
      a common temperature, will be found to become completely fixed in a hot
      crucible, and not a drop evaporates—being surrounded by an
      atmosphere of its own, it does not, in fact, touch the sides. A few drops
      of water are now introduced, when the acid, immediately coming in contact
      with the heated sides of the crucible, flies off in sulphurous acid vapor,
      and so rapid is its progress, that the caloric of the water passes off
      with it, which falls a lump of ice to the bottom; by taking advantage of
      the moment before it is allowed to remelt, it may be turned out a lump of
      ice from a red-hot vessel.

 (*33) The Daguerreotype.

 (*34) Although light travels 167,000 miles in a second, the distance of 61
      Cygni (the only star whose distance is ascertained) is so inconceivably
      great, that its rays would require more than ten years to reach the earth.
      For stars beyond this, 20—or even 1000 years—would be a
      moderate estimate. Thus, if they had been annihilated 20, or 1000 years
      ago, we might still see them to-day by the light which started from their
      surfaces 20 or 1000 years in the past time. That many which we see daily
      are really extinct, is not impossible—not even improbable.

  

  









 Notes—Maelstrom

 (*1) See Archimedes, “ De Incidentibus in Fluido .”—lib.
      2.

  

  









 Notes—Island of the Fay

 (*1) Moraux is here derived from moeurs, and its meaning is “fashionable”
      or more strictly “of manners.”

 (*2) Speaking of the tides, Pomponius Mela, in his treatise “De Situ
      Orbis,” says “either the world is a great animal, or”
      etc

 (*3) Balzac—in substance—I do not remember the words

 (*4) Florem putares nare per liquidum aethera.—P. Commire.

  

  









 Notes — Domain of Arnheim

 (*1) An incident, similar in outline to the one here imagined, occurred,
      not very long ago, in England. The name of the fortunate heir was
      Thelluson. I first saw an account of this matter in the “Tour”
      of Prince Puckler Muskau, who makes the sum inherited ninety millions
      of pounds , and justly observes that “in the contemplation of so
      vast a sum, and of the services to which it might be applied, there is
      something even of the sublime.” To suit the views of this article I
      have followed the Prince’s statement, although a grossly exaggerated
      one. The germ, and in fact, the commencement of the present paper was
      published many years ago—previous to the issue of the first number
      of Sue’s admirable Juif Errant , which may possibly have been
      suggested to him by Muskau’s account.

  

  









 Notes—Berenice

 (*1) For as Jove, during the winter season, gives twice seven days of
      warmth, men have called this element and temperate time the nurse of the
      beautiful Halcyon— Simonides 

  





  





 THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE

 IN FIVE VOLUMES

 VOLUME 3

  



 The Raven Edition

  

 



   

 



  CONTENTS 

  



  NARRATIVE OF A. GORDON PYM