EPIPHANY
    

      I should say I did remember that Epiphany supper during the war! exclaimed
      Count de Garens, an army captain.
    

      I was quartermaster of cavalry at the time, and for a fortnight had been
      scouting in front of the German advance guard. The evening before we had
      cut down a few Uhlans and had lost three men, one of whom was that poor
      little Raudeville. You remember Joseph de Raudeville, of course.
    

      Well, on that day my commanding officer ordered me to take six troopers
      and to go and occupy the village of Porterin, where there had been five
      skirmishes in three weeks, and to hold it all night. There were not twenty
      houses left standing, not a dozen houses in that wasps' nest. So I took
      ten troopers and set out about four o'clock, and at five o'clock, while it
      was still pitch dark, we reached the first houses of Porterin. I halted
      and ordered Marchas—you know Pierre de Marchas, who afterward
      married little Martel-Auvelin, the daughter of the Marquis de Martel-Auvelin—to
      go alone into the village, and to report to me what he saw.
    

      I had selected nothing but volunteers, all men of good family. It is
      pleasant when on duty not to be forced to be on intimate terms with
      unpleasant fellows. This Marchas was as smart as possible, cunning as a
      fox and supple as a serpent. He could scent the Prussians as a dog can
      scent a hare, could discover food where we should have died of hunger
      without him, and obtained information from everybody, and information
      which was always reliable, with incredible cleverness.
    

      In ten minutes he returned. “All right,” he said; “there
      have been no Prussians here for three days. It is a sinister place, is
      this village. I have been talking to a Sister of Mercy, who is caring for
      four or five wounded men in an abandoned convent.”
    

      I ordered them to ride on, and we entered the principal street. On the
      right and left we could vaguely see roofless walls, which were hardly
      visible in the profound darkness. Here and there a light was burning in a
      room; some family had remained to keep its house standing as well as they
      were able; a family of brave or of poor people. The rain began to fall, a
      fine, icy cold rain, which froze as it fell on our cloaks. The horses
      stumbled against stones, against beams, against furniture. Marchas guided
      us, going before us on foot, and leading his horse by the bridle.
    

      “Where are you taking us to?” I asked him. And he replied:
      “I have a place for us to lodge in, and a rare good one.” And
      we presently stopped before a small house, evidently belonging to some
      proprietor of the middle class. It stood on the street, was quite
      inclosed, and had a garden in the rear.
    

      Marchas forced open the lock by means of a big stone which he picked up
      near the garden gate; then he mounted the steps, smashed in the front door
      with his feet and shoulders, lit a bit of wax candle, which he was never
      without, and went before us into the comfortable apartments of some rich
      private individual, guiding us with admirable assurance, as if he lived in
      this house which he now saw for the first time.
    

      Two troopers remained outside to take care of our horses, and Marchas said
      to stout Ponderel, who followed him: “The stables must be on the
      left; I saw that as we came in; go and put the animals up there, for we do
      not need them”; and then, turning to me, he said: “Give your
      orders, confound it all!”
    

      This fellow always astonished me, and I replied with a laugh: “I
      will post my sentinels at the country approaches and will return to you
      here.”
    

      “How many men are you going to take?”
    

      “Five. The others will relieve them at five o'clock in the evening.”
    

      “Very well. Leave me four to look after provisions, to do the
      cooking and to set the table. I will go and find out where the wine is
      hidden.”
    

      I went off, to reconnoitre the deserted streets until they ended in the
      open country, so as to post my sentries there.
    

      Half an hour later I was back, and found Marchas lounging in a great
      easy-chair, the covering of which he had taken off, from love of luxury,
      as he said. He was warming his feet at the fire and smoking an excellent
      cigar, whose perfume filled the room. He was alone, his elbows resting on
      the arms of the chair, his head sunk between his shoulders, his cheeks
      flushed, his eyes bright, and looking delighted.
    

      I heard the noise of plates and dishes in the next room, and Marchas said
*     to me, smiling in a contented manner: “This is famous; I found the
      champagne under the flight of steps outside, the brandy—fifty
      bottles of the very finest in the kitchen garden under a pear tree, which
      did not seem to me to be quite straight when I looked at it by the light
      of my lantern. As for solids, we have two fowls, a goose, a duck, and
      three pigeons. They are being cooked at this moment. It is a delightful
      district.”
    

      I sat down opposite him, and the fire in the grate was burning my nose and
      cheeks. “Where did you find this wood?” I asked. “Splendid
      wood,” he replied. “The owner's carriage. It is the paint
      which is causing all this flame, an essence of punch and varnish. A
      capital house!”
    

      I laughed, for I saw the creature was funny, and he went on: “Fancy
      this being the Epiphany! I have had a bean put into the goose dressing;
      but there is no queen; it is really very annoying!” And I repeated
      like an echo: “It is annoying, but what do you want me to do in the
      matter?” “To find some, of course.” “Some women.
      Women?—you must be mad?” “I managed to find the brandy
      under the pear tree, and the champagne under the steps; and yet there was
      nothing to guide me, while as for you, a petticoat is a sure bait. Go and
      look, old fellow.”
    

      He looked so grave, so convinced, that I could not tell whether he was
      joking or not, and so I replied: “Look here, Marchas, are you having
      a joke with me?” “I never joke on duty.” “But
      where the devil do you expect me to find any women?” “Where
      you like; there must be two or three remaining in the neighborhood, so
      ferret them out and bring them here.”
    

      I got up, for it was too hot in front of the fire, and Marchas went off:
    

      “Do you want an idea?” “Yes.” “Go and see
      the priest.” “The priest? What for?” “Ask him to
      supper, and beg him to bring a woman with him.” “The priest! A
      woman! Ha! ha! ha!”
    

      But Marchas continued with extraordinary gravity: “I am not
      laughing; go and find the priest and tell him how we are situated, and, as
      he must be horribly dull, he will come. But tell him that we want one
      woman at least, a lady, of course, since we, are all men of the world. He
      is sure to know his female parishioners on the tips of his fingers, and if
      there is one to suit us, and you manage it well, he will suggest her to
      you.”
    

      “Come, come, Marchas, what are you thinking of?” “My
      dear Garens, you can do this quite well. It will even be very funny. We
      are well bred, by Jove! and we will put on our most distinguished manners
      and our grandest style. Tell the abbe who we are, make him laugh, soften
      his heart, coax him and persuade him!” “No, it is impossible.”
    

      He drew his chair close to mine, and as he knew my special weakness, the
      scamp continued: “Just think what a swaggering thing it will be to
      do and how amusing to tell about; the whole army will talk about it, and
      it will give you a famous reputation.”
    

      I hesitated, for the adventure rather tempted me, and he persisted:
      “Come, my little Garens. You are the head of this detachment, and
      you alone can go and call on the head of the church in this neighborhood.
      I beg of you to go, and I promise you that after the war I will relate the
      whole affair in verse in the Revue de Deux Mondes. You owe this much to
      your men, for you have made them march enough during the last month.”
    

      I got up at last and asked: “Where is the priest's house?”
      “Take the second turning at the end of the street, you will see an
      avenue, and at the end of the avenue you will find the church. The
      parsonage is beside it.” As I went out, he called out: “Tell
      him the bill of fare, to make him hungry!”
    

      I discovered the ecclesiastic's little house without any difficulty; it
      was by the side of a large, ugly brick church. I knocked at the door with
      my fist, as there was neither bell nor knocker, and a loud voice from
      inside asked: “Who is there?” To which I replied: “A
      quartermaster of hussars.”
    

      I heard the noise of bolts and of a key being turned, and found myself
      face to face with a tall priest with a large stomach, the chest of a
      prizefighter, formidable hands projecting from turned-up sleeves, a red
      face, and the look of a kind man. I gave him a military salute and said:
      “Good-day, Monsieur le Cure.”
    

      He had feared a surprise, some marauders' ambush, and he smiled as he
      replied: “Good-day, my friend; come in.” I followed him into a
      small room with a red tiled floor, in which a small fire was burning, very
      different to Marchas' furnace, and he gave me a chair and said: “What
      can I do for you?” “Monsieur, allow me first of all to
      introduce myself”; and I gave him my card, which he took and read
      half aloud: “Le Comte de Garens.”
    

      I continued: “There are eleven of us here, Monsieur l'Abbe, five on
      picket duty, and six installed at the house of an unknown inhabitant. The
      names of the six are: Garens, myself; Pierre de Marchas, Ludovic de
      Ponderel, Baron d'Streillis, Karl Massouligny, the painter's son, and
      Joseph Herbon, a young musician. I have come to ask you, in their name and
      my own, to do us the honor of supping with us. It is an Epiphany supper,
      Monsieur le Cure, and we should like to make it a little cheerful.”
    

      The priest smiled and murmured: “It seems to me to be hardly a
      suitable occasion for amusing one's self.” And I replied: “We
      are fighting during the day, monsieur. Fourteen of our comrades have been
      killed in a month, and three fell as late as yesterday. It is war time. We
      stake our life at every moment; have we not, therefore, the right to amuse
      ourselves freely? We are Frenchmen, we like to laugh, and we can laugh
      everywhere. Our fathers laughed on the scaffold! This evening we should
      like to cheer ourselves up a little, like gentlemen, and not like
      soldiers; you understand me, I hope. Are we wrong?”
    

      He replied quickly: “You are quite right, my friend, and I accept
      your invitation with great pleasure.” Then he called out: “Hermance!”
    

      An old bent, wrinkled, horrible peasant woman appeared and said: “What
      do you want?” “I shall not dine at home, my daughter.”
      “Where are you going to dine then?” “With some
      gentlemen, the hussars.”
    

      I felt inclined to say: “Bring your servant with you,” just to
      see Marchas' face, but I did not venture, and continued: “Do you
      know any one among your parishioners, male or female, whom I could invite
      as well?” He hesitated, reflected, and then said: “No, I do
      not know anybody!”
    

      I persisted: “Nobody! Come, monsieur, think; it would be very nice
      to have some ladies, I mean to say, some married couples! I know nothing
      about your parishioners. The baker and his wife, the grocer, the—the—the—watchmaker—the—shoemaker—the—the
      druggist with Mrs. Druggist. We have a good spread and plenty of wine, and
      we should be enchanted to leave pleasant recollections of ourselves with
      the people here.”
    

      The priest thought again for a long time, and then said resolutely:
      “No, there is nobody.” I began to laugh. “By Jove,
      Monsieur le Cure, it is very annoying not to have an Epiphany queen, for
      we have the bean. Come, think. Is there not a married mayor, or a married
      deputy mayor, or a married municipal councillor or a schoolmaster?”
      “No, all the ladies have gone away.” “What, is there not
      in the whole place some good tradesman's wife with her good tradesman, to
      whom we might give this pleasure, for it would be a pleasure to them, a
      great pleasure under present circumstances?”
    

      But, suddenly, the cure began to laugh, and laughed so violently that he
      fairly shook, and presently exclaimed: “Ha! ha! ha! I have got what
      you want, yes. I have got what you want! Ha! ha! ha! We will laugh and
      enjoy ourselves, my children; we will have some fun. How pleased the
      ladies will be, I say, how delighted they will be! Ha! ha! Where are you
      staying?”
    

      I described the house, and he understood where it was. “Very good,”
      he said. “It belongs to Monsieur Bertin-Lavaille. I will be there in
      half an hour, with four ladies! Ha! ha! ha! four ladies!”
    

      He went out with me, still laughing, and left me, repeating: “That
      is capital; in half an hour at Bertin-Lavaille's house.”
    

      I returned quickly, very much astonished and very much puzzled. “Covers
      for how many?” Marchas asked, as soon as he saw me. “Eleven.
      There are six of us hussars, besides the priest and four ladies.” He
      was thunderstruck, and I was triumphant. He repeated: “Four ladies!
      Did you say, four ladies?” “I said four women.” “Real
      women?” “Real women.” “Well, accept my
      compliments!” “I will, for I deserve them.”
    

      He got out of his armchair, opened the door, and I saw a beautiful white
      tablecloth on a long table, round which three hussars in blue aprons were
      setting out the plates and glasses. “There are some women coming!”
      Marchas cried. And the three men began to dance and to cheer with all
      their might.
    

      Everything was ready, and we were waiting. We waited for nearly an hour,
      while a delicious smell of roast poultry pervaded the whole house. At
      last, however, a knock against the shutters made us all jump up at the
      same moment. Stout Ponderel ran to open the door, and in less than a
      minute a little Sister of Mercy appeared in the doorway. She was thin,
      wrinkled and timid, and successively greeted the four bewildered hussars
      who saw her enter. Behind her, the noise of sticks sounded on the tiled
      floor in the vestibule, and as soon as she had come into the drawing-room,
      I saw three old heads in white caps, following each other one by one, who
      came in, swaying with different movements, one inclining to the right,
      while the other inclined to the left. And three worthy women appeared,
      limping, dragging their legs behind them, crippled by illness and deformed
      through old age, three infirm old women, past service, the only three
      pensioners who were able to walk in the home presided over by Sister
      Saint-Benedict.
    

      She had turned round to her invalids, full of anxiety for them, and then,
      seeing my quartermaster's stripes, she said to me: “I am much
      obliged to you for thinking of these poor women. They have very little
      pleasure in life, and you are at the same time giving them a great treat
      and doing them a great honor.”
    

      I saw the priest, who had remained in the dark hallway, and was laughing
      heartily, and I began to laugh in my turn, especially when I saw Marchas'
      face. Then, motioning the nun to the seats, I said:
    

      “Sit down, sister; we are very proud and very happy that you have
      accepted our unpretentious invitation.”
    

      She took three chairs which stood against the wall, set them before the
      fire, led her three old women to them, settled them on them, took their
      sticks and shawls, which she put into a corner, and then, pointing to the
      first, a thin woman with an enormous stomach, who was evidently suffering
      from the dropsy, she said: “This is Mother Paumelle; whose husband
      was killed by falling from a roof, and whose son died in Africa; she is
      sixty years old.” Then she pointed to another, a tall woman, whose
      head trembled unceasingly: “This is Mother Jean-Jean, who is
      sixty-seven. She is nearly blind, for her face was terribly singed in a
      fire, and her right leg was half burned off.”
    

      Then she pointed to the third, a sort of dwarf, with protruding, round,
      stupid eyes, which she rolled incessantly in all directions, “This
      is La Putois, an idiot. She is only forty-four.”
    

      I bowed to the three women as if I were being presented to some royal
      highnesses, and turning to the priest, I said: “You are an excellent
      man, Monsieur l'Abbe, to whom all of us here owe a debt of gratitude.”
    

      Everybody was laughing, in fact, except Marchas, who seemed furious, and
      just then Karl Massouligny cried: “Sister Saint-Benedict, supper is
      on the table!”
    

      I made her go first with the priest, then I helped up Mother Paumelle,
      whose arm I took and dragged her into the next room, which was no easy
      task, for she seemed heavier than a lump of iron.
    

      Stout Ponderel gave his arm to Mother Jean-Jean, who bemoaned her crutch,
      and little Joseph Herbon took the idiot, La Putois, to the dining-room,
      which was filled with the odor of the viands.
    

      As soon as we were opposite our plates, the sister clapped her hands three
      times, and, with the precision of soldiers presenting arms, the women made
      a rapid sign of the cross, and then the priest slowly repeated the
      Benedictus in Latin. Then we sat down, and the two fowls appeared, brought
      in by Marchas, who chose to wait at table, rather than to sit down as a
      guest to this ridiculous repast.
    

      But I cried: “Bring the champagne at once!” and a cork flew
      out with the noise of a pistol, and in spite of the resistance of the
      priest and of the kind sister, the three hussars, sitting by the side of
      the three invalids, emptied their three full glasses down their throats by
      force.
    

      Massouligny, who possessed the faculty of making himself at home, and of
      being on good terms with every one, wherever he was, made love to Mother
      Paumelle in the drollest manner. The dropsical woman, who had retained her
      cheerfulness in spite of her misfortunes, answered him banteringly in a
      high falsetto voice which appeared as if it were put on, and she laughed
      so heartily at her neighbor's jokes that it was quite alarming. Little
      Herbon had seriously undertaken the task of making the idiot drunk, and
      Baron d'Streillis, whose wits were not always particularly sharp, was
      questioning old Jean-Jean about the life, the habits, and the rules of the
      hospital.
    

      The nun said to Massouligny in consternation:
    

      “Oh! oh! you will make her ill; pray do not make her laugh like
      that, monsieur. Oh! monsieur—” Then she got up and rushed at
      Herbon to take from him a full glass which he was hastily emptying down La
      Putois' throat, while the priest shook with laughter, and said to the
      sister: “Never mind; just this once, it will not hurt them. Do leave
      them alone.”
    

      After the two fowls they ate the duck, which was flanked by the three
      pigeons and the blackbird, and then the goose appeared, smoking,
      golden-brown, and diffusing a warm odor of hot, browned roast meat. La
      Paumelle, who was getting lively, clapped her hands; La Jean-Jean left off
      answering the baron's numerous questions, and La Putois uttered grunts of
      pleasure, half cries and half sighs, as little children do when one shows
      them candy. “Allow me to take charge of this animal,” the cure
      said. “I understand these sort of operations better than most
      people.” “Certainly, Monsieur l'Abbe,” and the sister
      said: “How would it be to open the window a little? They are too
      warm, and I am afraid they will be ill.”
    

      I turned to Marchas: “Open the window for a minute.” He did
      so; the cold outer air as it came in made the candles flare, and the steam
      from the goose, which the cure was scientifically carving, with a table
      napkin round his neck, whirl about. We watched him doing it, without
      speaking now, for we were interested in his attractive handiwork, and
      seized with renewed appetite at the sight of that enormous golden-brown
      bird, whose limbs fell one after another into the brown gravy at the
      bottom of the dish. At that moment, in the midst of that greedy silence
      which kept us all attentive, the distant report of a shot came in at the
      open window.
    

      I started to my feet so quickly that my chair fell down behind me, and I
      shouted: “To saddle, all of you! You, Marchas, take two men and go
      and see what it is. I shall expect you back here in five minutes.”
      And while the three riders went off at full gallop through the night, I
      got into the saddle with my three remaining hussars, in front of the steps
      of the villa, while the cure, the sister and the three old women showed
      their frightened faces at the window.
    

      We heard nothing more, except the barking of a dog in the distance. The
      rain had ceased, and it was cold, very cold, and soon I heard the gallop
      of a horse, of a single horse, coming back. It was Marchas, and I called
      out to him: “Well?” “It is nothing; Francois has wounded
      an old peasant who refused to answer his challenge: 'Who goes there?' and
      who continued to advance in spite of the order to keep off; but they are
      bringing him here, and we shall see what is the matter.”
    

      I gave orders for the horses to be put back in the stable, and I sent my
      two soldiers to meet the others, and returned to the house. Then the cure,
      Marchas, and I took a mattress into the room to lay the wounded man on;
      the sister tore up a table napkin in order to make lint, while the three
      frightened women remained huddled up in a corner.
    

      Soon I heard the rattle of sabres on the road, and I took a candle to show
      a light to the men who were returning; and they soon appeared, carrying
      that inert, soft, long, sinister object which a human body becomes when
      life no longer sustains it.
    

      They put the wounded man on the mattress that had been prepared for him,
      and I saw at the first glance that he was dying. He had the death rattle
      and was spitting up blood, which ran out of the corners of his mouth at
      every gasp. The man was covered with blood! His cheeks, his beard, his
      hair, his neck and his clothes seemed to have been soaked, to have been
      dipped in a red tub; and that blood stuck to him, and had become a dull
      color which was horrible to look at.
    

      The wounded man, wrapped up in a large shepherd's cloak, occasionally
      opened his dull, vacant eyes, which seemed stupid with astonishment, like
      those of animals wounded by a sportsman, which fall at his feet, more than
      half dead already, stupefied with terror and surprise.
    

      The cure exclaimed: “Ah, it is old Placide, the shepherd from Les
      Moulins. He is deaf, poor man, and heard nothing. Ah! Oh, God! they have
      killed the unhappy man!” The sister had opened his blouse and shirt,
      and was looking at a little blue hole in his chest, which was not bleeding
      any more. “There is nothing to be done,” she said.
    

      The shepherd was gasping terribly and bringing up blood with every last
      breath, and in his throat, to the very depth of his lungs, they could hear
      an ominous and continued gurgling. The cure, standing in front of him,
      raised his right hand, made the sign of the cross, and in a slow and
      solemn voice pronounced the Latin words which purify men's souls, but
      before they were finished, the old man's body trembled violently, as if
      something had given way inside him, and he ceased to breathe. He was dead.
    

      When I turned round, I saw a sight which was even more horrible than the
      death struggle of this unfortunate man; the three old women were standing
      up huddled close together, hideous, and grimacing with fear and horror. I
      went up to them, and they began to utter shrill screams, while La
      Jean-Jean, whose burned leg could no longer support her, fell to the
      ground at full length.
    

      Sister Saint-Benedict left the dead man, ran up to her infirm old women,
      and without a word or a look for me, wrapped their shawls round them, gave
      them their crutches, pushed them to the door, made them go out, and
      disappeared with them into the dark night.
    

      I saw that I could not even let a hussar accompany them, for the mere
      rattle of a sword would have sent them mad with fear.
    

      The cure was still looking at the dead man; but at last he turned round to
      me and said:
    

      “Oh! What a horrible thing!”