[

31 ] 

‘EX SARDANAPALUS.’

 ‘ Make

it eight bells! Go below, the starboard watch!’

 A few minutes later, and eight men sat on eight sea-chests,
looking hungrily across at one another. Between
them lay an empty meat-kid. [Footnote

]

In a box alongside were
some biscuits, black and honeycombed with weevil-holes.
Dinner was over in the Sardanapalus’

fo’c’stle, but still
her starboard watch glared hungrily at each other.

 ‘I’ve lost two good stone since I jined this starvation
hooker!’ presently growled one. ‘I ain’t never full, and
I kin feel them cussed worms out o’ the bread a-crawlin’
about in my stummick like so many snakeses.’

 ‘Same ’ere, matey,’ chimed in another. ‘A mouthful
o’ salt horse an’ a bite o’ rotten bread for breakfus, ditto
for dinner, an’ a soldier’s supper; [Footnote

]

with lime-juice an’
winegar chucked in, according to the Hack, [Footnote

]

ain’t to say
fattenin’.’

 ‘That’s wot’s the matter, when the skipper finds the
ship,’ remarked a third. ‘Yer gets yer whack, an’ ye gits
nae mair, as the Scotchies has it.’

 ‘We doesn’t even get that itself,’ put in another, who [

32 ]

was sitting on the edge of his bunk. ‘That yaller hound
of a steward gives short weight all round. TN: superfluous opening single quote Lord!’ he
continued, ‘only to think that, this time last year, I was
a-smackin’ my chops over mutton uns; an’ full and plenty
of everythin’ in the Hostralian Bush. What a hass I was
to leave it! One’d think there was some sort o’ damned
magic in the sea to be able to draw a feller a thousand
miles down from good times, good tucker, good pay, an’
all night in, with a spree whenever you felt fit.’

 ‘Too good, Billy, altogether,’ piped up a grey-headed
old chap. ‘An’ that’s what’s the matter. You gets up
the Bush, you gets as fat as a bacon hog, you lives like a
gentleman, an’, in the long run, it don’t agree with your
constitooshun. You gets the boil, [Footnote

]

an’ your liver turns
a sort o’ dandy-grey, russet-colour, and you misses the
gravy-eye [Footnote

]

trick at the wheel, an’ you misses the jumpin’
out o’ a wet bunk, all standin’ in wet clothes, and the
hissle o’ the gale in your ears, an’ the woof o’ the cold
water over your boot-tops, an’ down the small o’ your
back as ye comes a-shiverin’ an’ a-shakin’ on deck.
You’ve bin used to this sort o’ thing all your life, Billy,
an’ your liver an’ all the other innard parts gives notice
when they’re a-tired o’ the soft lyin’ an’ the good livin’
up-country, an’ drives ye back to the old life an’ the old
ways agin. That’s where the magic comes in, my
son.’

 After this there was silence for a while. Each man’s
face poked over his bunk with a short clay pipe in its [

33 ]

mouth. Strong, rank fumes of tobacco filled the
place.

 ‘I say, boys,’ suddenly exclaimed one, ‘what’s this
hooker got in her?’

 ‘General,’ replied the old man, whose name was
Nestor. ‘I heerd the customs officer at Gravesend say
as it was one o’ the walluablest general cargers as ’ad
ever left the docks.’

 ‘Well then, mates,’ said the other, ‘all I’ve got to remark
is as we’re the biggest an’ softest set o’ fools as ever
left the docks, to go a-starvin’ in this fashion, when t’other
side o’ that there bulkhead’s every sort o’ tucker you can
mention.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘Make it eight bells! Go below, the starboard watch!’

 The same eight men sat on their respective sea-chests.

 Between them stood their allowance of beef and biscuit.
But it was untouched. Yet the meal had been in
progress an hour.

 Alongside of him every man had one or more tins of
some kind of preserved provisions, out of which he was
keeping his plate supplied to an accompaniment of plain
and fancy biscuits.

 ‘Try a little o’ this ’ere fresh herrin’, Jim,’ said one to
his neighbour very politely; ‘I kin recommend it as
tasty.’

 ‘Thank ye, Billy (looking at the label, and passing his
own tin), and ’ere’s some sheep’s tongues with tomaty
sauce, which p’raps ’ll remind you on the Bush of Australier.’

 [

34 ] 

‘Ah, if we’d only a drop o’ good stuff now, to wash
these ’ere tiddlewinks down with,’ exclaimed Nestor, ‘I’d
feel happy as a king—an’ as full!’

 ‘All in good time, dad,’ remarked Billy; ‘this ’ere’s
only what the swells’d call a hinstalment—a triflin’ hinstalment
o’ what the Sardinapples

owes us for a whole
month’s out-an’-out starvin’. Just wait awhile till we
gets to the bottled ale an’ porter, which’ll likely be in
the lower tiers, an’ then we’ll begin to live like gentlemen-shellbacks
oughter.’

 ‘I votes as how we should let on to the port watch,’
presently said a man, as he finished off his repast with a
handful of muscatels and blanched almonds.

 ‘Ay,’ responded old Nestor. ‘It do seem mean, us
livin’ high, an’ them a-drawin’ their belts tighter every
day. Besides,’ added he, meditatively, ‘company is
pleasing; an’ there’ll be all the more for Pentridge. Not
that I thinks it needs come to that if we’re careful. But
(with a doubtful shake of the head) I’m afraid the grog’ll
be too much for some of us when we gits to it.’

 A word here as to the Sardanapalus

.

 She was one of the old-fashioned frigate-built ships—somewhat
slow, but comfortable. TN: punctuation invisible Carrying, as per
owner’s advertisement, ‘a first-class milch cow and surgeon,’
she was rather a favourite with that description of
passengers who, obeying a doctor’s prescription, were
obliged to take ‘a long sea voyage.’ The passage money
was very high. There were no ‘intermediates,’ no subdivisions.
A very good table was kept, and the ‘dog-basket’
and ‘menavelings’ from it alone would have [

35 ]

supplied the fo’c’stle twice over. But for these leavings
a host of ill-fed, brass-bound apprentices, boys, and
petty officers were ever on the watch—the former knowing
as crows, sharp as kites. Foremast Jack had not the
ghost of a chance with them.

 Ever since she slipped along the ways the Sardanapalus

had borne the reputation of being a ‘hungry ship.’
More than half-a-dozen times had she hauled into dock
with a collar of clean picked beef bones around her
figure-head. It was currently understood that the
skipper ‘found’ the ship. He was an Orkney man,
owned a part of her; and probably did so. She was a
regular trader at that time. She is now a custom-house
hulk in an East Indian harbour.

 The chief officer was a native of Vermont, U.S., and,
with regard to the crew, a bit of a bully. As he was
wont to often inform them, with the national snuffle intensified,—

 ‘I’m a big lump of a horse—a high-bred stepper—an’
when I kick bones fly.’

 He came out a loser by this gift, as will be presently
seen.

 Long before the opening of this yarn the crew had
remonstrated with their superiors about their food. The
captain had laughed at them, and the mate inquired
whether they imagined the Sardanapalus

had been
specially fitted out as a cook-shop for their pleasure.

 Perhaps it was this that now made them linger joyfully
over their stolen meals; and, occasionally, explore with
naked lights the ‘general’ when they ought to have [

36 ]

been sleeping on empty stomachs in their watch
below.

 It being an article of faith with the crew that the chief
mate was responsible for the cargo, they felt a thorough
pleasure in its total destruction. Nestor, old sea-lawyer
that he was, had told them that, although a parcel might
be opened and the contents abstracted, yet, could the
smallest portion of the case, cask, or whatever it chanced
to be, be produced, the mate would be held blameless.
But, on the other hand, if not a vestige of anything were
to be found to correspond with the item in the manifest,
then would the chief assuredly be mulcted in the full
value of the missing article. With this devoutly-wished-for
end in view, any light package was dragged for’ard,
handed up, and given a free passage. This was criminal
and indefensible. But they hated the Yankee with a
very hearty hatred. Had they not been able to discharge
some of it in this manner there would have surely been a
mutiny, and possibly bloodshed, before the termination
of the passage.

 In his character of ‘horse’ the mate had one day
broken a poor submissive German sailor’s ribs by repeated
kicks from his heavy sea-boots. Such things
create antipathies, even on board ship. Consignors and
consignees alike would have danced with wrath and
anguish could they have witnessed that night’s jettison.

 The forecastle was what is known as a ‘lower’ one.
A bulkhead separated the two watches. This partition
was composed of very heavy hardwood planking, on the
after side of which was the fore-hatchway, filled up to [

37 ]

within six feet of the deck by a collection of sails, rope,
water-tanks, bundles of hay for the cow, etc. Aft of
these, at about the same height, stretched the cargo. It
will thus be noticed that the Sardanapalus

was not a
‘full ship.’

 The starboard watch had removed two of the broad
massive bulk-head planks. The port watch two also.
At such times as a fresh supply of provisions was needed,
four men from each watch in turn exploited the cargo.
The others kept a look-out aft, and stood by the scuttle
to receive and give things ‘a passage.’ As time passed,
the crew, under the new regimen, began to grow fat and
jolly-looking. They worked with a will, and as a pleasure
to themselves. Also, to the utter astonishment of their
superiors, they sang and skylarked in the second dog watch.

 ‘And these,’ exclaimed the captain, ‘are the scoundrels
who growled about their food!’

 He visited the galley, and sniffed and peered into the
fo’c’sle coppers, and also cross-examined the cook and the
steward.

 ‘Give the beggars more rice,’ said he to the latter
official—a sleek, oily quadroon. ‘Let ’em have “banyan
day” three times a week. We’ll have enough meat
left then for the trip home without buying any in
port.’

 The crew grinned, but said nothing. The skipper was
bothered.

 ‘Had the fore-hatch off yesterday, didn’t you?’ he
asked the mate.

 ‘Yaas, sir,’ snuffled he.

 [

38 ] 

‘Everythin’ seem all right? No cargo shifted or
broached?’

 ‘Naw,’ replied the mate; ‘seems ’bout the saame as
when we left dock; an’ I oughter know, for I hed a sight
o’ trouble fixin’ that deadweight so’s to trim her forrard.
I wonder, naow,’ TN: original has double quote he continued with a chuckle as at some
joke, ‘how It’s

a-gettin’ on down below thar?’

 ‘Damn It

!’ answered the captain shortly, as he turned
away. He was in a bad temper that night. He hated
to hear the men jolly; and instead of lying moodily about,
silent and depressed, as of yore, in the six till eight
watch, here were both watches on the t’gallant fo’c’stle
putting all the strength of their united lungs into ‘Marching
through Georgia.’

 Such a thing had never happened to Captain Flett
before, and he took it as a personal insult. The mate,
snubbed, went down on the main-deck and put a stopper
on the singing with a yell of ‘Lee fore-braces there, and
chuck yourselves about a bit!’ The yards didn’t want
trimming in the least. So the men, who knew this,
pulled slowly and silent, each with his mouth full of
choice sweetmeats discovered the night previous.

 As yet they had found no strong liquors. But they
had found nearly everything else. ‘Dry goods’ of every
description, jewellery, clocks, firearms, stationery, patent
medicines, etc. They had commenced operations, in
the first place, under the main hatch, leaving all the fore
part of the hold untouched. Without a purposeful
search, no one would imagine cargo to have been
broached. The throwing things, except débris —empty [

39 ]

cases, bottles, baskets, etc.—overboard had been discontinued.
It took up too much time, and the labour was
too heavy. Besides, reckoning by Nestor’s calculation,
the mate’s pay-day was worth already some hundreds of
pounds less than nothing.

 But one night, coming across a case of toilet soaps,
pomades, scented oils, etc., the temptation proved irresistible,
and a stock was laid in. The love of personal
adornment runs strong at all times in Jack’s heart. On
the following Sunday morning the t’gallant fo’c’sle
resembled a barber’s shop in a big way of business. Jack
clipped and shaved and anointed himself until he fairly
shone and reeked with the produce of Rimmel. Never had
fore part of ship smelled so sweetly. The passengers staggered
about with their heads well up, sniffing delightedly.

 ‘Oh, captain,’ said one—a gushing widow whose age
was uncertain, but mourning fresh—‘we really must be
approaching some tropical climes. These are the lovely
“spicy breezes,” you know, “blowing soft o’er Ceylon’s
isle.”’

 The skipper didn’t know, but, sniffing also, answered,—

 ‘Very likely, ma’am. But there’s no islands nearer ’n
Tristan da Cunha, an’ I don’t think that there’s much
spice about that one. I expect,’ he continued, glancing
for’ard, ‘that it’s some of the hands titivatin’ themselves
up. You see, ma’am, these scamps get all sorts of
rubbishy oils and essences on an eastern voyage. One
of ’em’s evidently found a bottle or two in the locker of
his chest; and, now, he and his mates are swabbing
themselves down with it.’

 [

40 ] 

‘Dear me, how very interesting,’ replied the widow
blandly, with a languishing glance at the skipper. ‘But’ TN: closing quote invisible (as a burst of hoarse laughter came on the scented wind)
‘they’re a terribly rough set, are they not, captain? I’m
sure, but for yourself and your brave officers, I shouldn’t
feel safe for a minute. I think I heard someone say, too,
that they actually complained about their food at the
beginning of the journey.’

 This was touching the skipper on a tender spot.

 ‘At first, ma’am, at first,’ TN: original has double quote assented he severely, after a
sharp suspicious look at the somewhat faded features.
‘But they’ve found me out, now, ma’am. They know
John Flett’s up to ’em and their little games. The less
food you give a sailor, ma’am, the better he works. Full
an’ plenty’s a mistake. Give ’em a belly full an’ they’ll
growl from mornin’ till night, an’ all night through.
They’ll growl, ma’am, I do assure you, at the very best of
beef and pork, the whitest of biscuits, an’ the plumpest
of rice. Growl! They’d growl if you gave ’em toasted
angels!’

 ‘What horrible wretches!’ exclaimed the widow sympathetically.
‘And what a lot of worry you must have
with them, captain!’

 ‘No one but myself can imagine it, ma’am,’ replied
the skipper, as he moved off, meditating on the possibility
of stopping the usual dole of treacle for the Sunday
duff. That laughter from for’ard annoyed him beyond
endurance.

 Presently the cuddy went to luncheon; and the starboard
watch to its dinner.

 [

41 ] 

The lump of dark unleavened dough and hook-pot
full of molasses were there, but untouched, and awaiting
the ocean sepulchre which had been their fate for many
past Sundays.

 ‘I ralely don’t know what this is,’ said Bill, as he
helped himself to a paté de foie gras out of a dozen which
lay on the deck. ‘But whatever it is, it ain’t to be
sneezed at. Some sorter swell pie, I reckons. Talk
’bout jelly, lor! What you got there, Ned?’

 ‘Looks like soup an’ bully ’ithout the bully,’ answered
the man addressed, who was pouring a steaming mixture
out of a tin which he had just taken from over the big
slush lamp—‘But it says on the paper “Ju-li-enne.”
Sounds as if some woman had a hand in it. It don’t
go very high,’ he resumed, after a few mouthfuls, ‘seems
thinnish-like—no body—give us some o’ your meat to
mix with it, Nestor.’

 ‘’Taint meat,’ said the old man. ‘It’s what they calls
jugged ’are, and there’s no bones in it.’

 ‘Pity we couldn’t manage to hot this duff up,’ sighed
one, cutting a huge slice off a big plum pudding; ‘but
they’d smell it all over the ship.’

 ‘The cake for me!’ exclaimed another, attacking one
of Gunter’s masterpieces. ‘I ain’t seen a three-decker
like this since I was a kid, an’ used to hang about
smellin’ at the tip-top cook-shops in the Mile-End Road!’

 ‘Wade in, my bullies, an’ line yer ribs,’ croaked old
Nestor. ‘It’s the spiciest Sunday’s feed I’ve ’ad in forty
year o’ the sea. I kin do three months chokey at the
end o’ this trip, flyin’; an’ kin live on the smell of an [

42 ]

oil rag all the time! If we on’y ’ad a few nips a-piece,
now, it would be parfect!’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Midnight in the hold of the Sardanapalus

. Four
red spots moving slowly about in the thick gloom.
From the irregular, tightly-packed mass proceeds all
sorts of eerie creakings and groanings. The ship is
pitching into a head sea and, at times, a wave catching
her a thunderous slap, makes her seem to fairly stand
still and shudder all over. The atmosphere is thick,
and stuffy with an indescribable stuffiness. Presently
the four points of light clustered together.

 ‘What is it, I wonder?’ said Billy, sticking his candle
into a crevice, and pointing to a long, square, narrow
case embedded in a pile of others.

 ‘Don’t know,’ replied another, stooping. ‘Got no
marks, only “ Ex Sardinapples —With great care.” Had
any luck, you two?’

 ‘Try this,’ answered one, holding out a bottle which
old Nestor immediately clutched.

 ‘Wine o’ some sort,’ was his verdict. ‘Poor stuff—got
no grip o’ the throat—sourish. Let’s see what it sez
on the bottle. “Chat-oo Mar-goox,” read he, straddling,
with legs wide apart, and bottle and candle close to his nose.

 ‘Ay, ay,’ he continued, ‘I thought’s much. Dutch,
I reckon. Much the same kind o’ tipple as ye gets at
the dance-houses in Hamburg. We wants a warmer
drink for these ’ere latichudes—not but what it’s a cut
above that sarseperiller, an’ ’op bitters, an’ such like slush
as we bin livin’ on lately.’

 [

43 ] 

‘Well, TN: original has period ’ asked Billy, tapping the case, as he spoke,
with a short iron bar, ‘shall we see what’s in this?’

 ‘Not worth while,’ replied Nestor, who had finished
the claret, not without many grimaces—

 ‘It’s only china crockery, or somethin’ o’ that. They
always put “With great care,” an’ “This side hup” on
sich. Blast the old hooker, how she do shove her
snout into it!’

 This last, as a tremendous forward send of the ship
nearly carried him off his legs.

 Billy, however, appeared determined on seeing the
contents of the case, whose peculiar shape had aroused
his curiosity, and started to break it out by himself.
Finally the others came to his assistance, and a quarter-of-an-hour’s
work hove it up from its nest. To their
surprise it was locked and hinged. Curiosity took hold
upon them. They prised and hammered, and strove,
until, with a crash, the top flew back.

 ‘Kind o’ cork chips!’ exclaimed Nestor, taking up a
handful and putting it to his nose. ‘Poof! smells like a
chemist’s shop, full o’ camphor an’ drugs.’

 ‘’Ere’s another box inside this un,’ said Bill, who had
been groping amongst the odoriferous mass. And so it
proved; another long, narrow case, also locked and
hinged, made of some polished wood whose surface
reflected dimly the faces bending over it.

 Subjected to similar treatment with its outer shell, it,
too, soon yielded.

 As the lid, which was thickly padded, flew off under
the pressure of the iron levers, the four men shrank away [

44 ]

as if they had stumbled on a den of venomous serpents.

 On a strip of soft black velvet lay the shrouded corpse
of a man. The grizzled head rested on a pillow, and
the hands were crossed on the breast. Thin slats fitting
athwartships kept the body in position. Although
the eyes were closed, the features looked unnaturally
natural. There even seemed to be a tinge of colour in
the dead cheeks. But the artist had failed with the lips.
The upper one had shrivelled and curled up over the
white teeth, imparting a sardonic, grinning semblance to
the whole face, unutterably ghastly to look upon, especially
just then.

 This it was, and the life-like seeming of It

, that frightened
the cargo broachers so badly. And they were

terribly frightened. They were too frightened to run,
even had running been practicable. But the man who
attempts such tricks in a ship’s hold at night, and with a
heavy head sea on, comes to rapid grief at the second
step. So they just stood still, gripping each other’s
arms, and swearing under their breath, as is the wont of
the British seaman when badly scared.

 The old man, Nestor, was the first to speak. In
quavering tones he said,—

 ‘It’s only a wax himmidge.’

 ‘Nothin’ o’ the kind,’ replied Bill, the boldest of the
group, letting go his hold and coming a little closer.
‘It’s a ’barmed corpus, that’s wot It

is. I was shipmates
with one on ’em afore. A soger officer he were. He
were lashed under the mizzen-top, an’ labelled [

45 ]

“Combustibles; do not touch!” in big black letters. One fine
mornin’ he come down by the run an’ busted the case.
He was just the same’s this un, only they hadn’t put that
howdacious grin on to him. It were in the old Euryalus

,
man-o’-war, so we had to suffer him; an’ a most hunlucky
trip it were. Run her ashore twice. Took the sticks
out on her twice. Lost four men overboard. No wonder we’ve

had three weeks o’ head winds. But this joker
’ll get a free passage without much delay, if I’ve got to
give it him single-handed.’ So saying, he advanced,
picked up the lid, and began to fasten it down.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 The next morning dawned bright and clear; but the
head wind still stood, and there was a nasty lump of a
sea on. For the comparatively high latitude the air was
warm and comfortable.

 Most of the passengers came up on the poop after
breakfast. Presently, with the assistance of the skipper’s
arm, the widow began a promenade.

 ‘What an exhibition she’s making of herself! Her
husband, if she ever had one, can’t be six months dead
yet, by her mourning. She ought to be ashamed of herself—the
sly thing!’

 If the widow did not exactly hear all this, she felt it,
and cast looks of triumphant defiance at her female
friends, clustered in groups, most of them holding on to
something unassisted. Elderly unmarried convalescents,
and very spiteful, the majority.

 ‘Something—on—the—lee-quarter, sir!’ came down
from aloft.

 [

46 ] 

The skipper called for his glass, without quitting his
companion.

 ‘Keep her away a couple of points,’ he commanded,
as he brought the instrument to bear.

 ‘Can’t make it out at all,’ he went on, after a minute’s
focussing. ‘Something white, jumping up and down.
Bit of wreckage, spar, or the like, I expect. Keep her
away another point. Take a peep, ma’am. Your bright
eyes ’ll perhaps distinguish it.’

 The widow bridled coquettishly and, supported by the
skipper, put herself in what she fancied an appropriate
and elegant position.

 ‘Oh!’ she squealed presently, ‘I see it, captain; it’s
coming this way. How very interesting! “A message
from the sea,” “Strange tale of the ocean,” and all that
sort of thing, you know, that one reads about in the
papers. What an exciting adventure!’ The widow had
taken the glass from her eye whilst speaking.

 Suddenly a passenger cried,—

 ‘I see it! Look! On top of that wave!’ But even
as he spoke it disappeared.

 The starboard watch had been called aft by the second
mate to try and jam the main-yards still further into the
slack of the lee-rigging. The men now remained together
with the eager knot of passengers staring over
the quarter.

 All at once, and with startling unexpectedness, there
bobbed up on a sea almost level with the taffrail, a nude
figure, nearly upright. One arm, by some eccentric
working of the water, was jerked backwards and forwards [

47 ]

from the face with an awfully grotesque motion of throwing
kisses to the horrified watchers.

 The notion was intensified by the grin on the lifelike
features, startlingly distinct in the sunlight, as the embalmed
figure, kept erect by the greater weight of its extremities,
rose up and down, now in a hollow, now on a
crest, not ten yards away.

 ‘It’s IT

, by G—d!’ shouted Nestor, who happened to
be at the wheel.

 But no one took any notice of him in the general
confusion.

 The male passengers stood stock still, fascinated by the
spectacle. The female ones shrieked, and a couple
fainted. But louder and higher than any of them
shrieked the widow, who had got both arms around the
skipper’s neck, to which she hung, half choking him,
whilst her feet rattled frantically on the deck.

 ‘Let go, ma’am!’ he gurgled. ‘Damn it, let go, can’t you?’

 ‘It’s his ghost!’ she screamed, taking another horrified
glance at the bobbing, grimacing thing as it travelled
slowly across the broad wake. ‘What have I done,
James, that you should appear like this?’ she moaned.
‘I’m sure I thought you’d be comfortable down there!’
And here she began to laugh hysterically; and, held
forcibly on the deck by the sorely-tried skipper, went off
into a succession of violent fits.

 ‘Main topsail braces there, some of you!’ roared the
mate, who, aroused by the cry of ‘Man overboard!’
uttered by one of the boys, had rushed on deck. ‘Come
here, four hands, and clear away the life-boat.’

 [

48 ] 

‘Don’t be a fool, Mr Sparkes!’ shouted the skipper,
still struggling with the widow, who had got one hand in
his long beard and was pulling it out by the roots.

 ‘Never mind the boat!’ he panted, for the real state of
the case had broken upon him. ‘But come and take
this she-devil away! Let It

go to blazes as fast as it
likes! It’s got a fair wind, seemingly, and that’s more’n
we have!’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Anchor watch off Geelong, Victoria.

 Apparently the whole thing had quietly blown over.
When the mate, with a terribly long face, had reported
to the captain, as nearly as he could, the amount of cargo
missing, and proposed as a set-off, to put one-half of each
watch in irons until arrival, the skipper had only laughed.

 He obviously enjoyed the responsible man’s dismay.

 ‘Nothing of the sort,’ he replied. ‘We can’t do
without ’em. We’re bound to get a good blow or two
’tween here and Port Phillip Heads, and where would we
be with half the men in irons, and the rest sulking?
You’re a fool, Sparkes. I’m goin’ to smooth ’em down.
They’ll have cabin biscuits and plum-duff three times a
week from this out. And you knock off hazing ’em about
so much’—chuckling heartily at the other’s stare of
amazement—‘till we get abreast of Sandridge Pier. Then
up goes the police flag. I’ll surprise the varmin, or my
name ain’t John Flett! Meanwhile, let a couple of the
hard-bargains [Footnote

]

sling their hammocks in the after-hold. [

49 ]

That’ll stop any more larks with the cargo. Has she
been up in your watch since?’

 ‘Never seen a rag of her,’ answered the mate, who
knew well to whom the skipper referred. ‘Kept her
cabin ever since, I do believe.’

 ‘Damned good job too!’ said his superior, as he
tenderly felt his face. ‘Who’d have thought that It

was
hers anyhow!’

 But ‘hard-bargains’ have long ears. One of them
overheard the above conversation, and, reporting it to
the crew, they got ready.

 Also, on making the land, everything went wrong.
Twelve hours vain signalling for a pilot made a big hole
in the skipper’s temper. So when, at last, one came off,
and, to his astonishment, got soundly rated, with a
promise of report, he, in revenge, box-hauled the Sardanapalus

about until dark, and then brought-up
with every link of hawse out, in a particularly muddy
spot opposite Geelong.

 Anchor watch had been set; and as old Nestor struck
four bells in the chill morning and croaked hoarsely out
his ‘All’s well!’ the stars saw a crowd of men in
stockinged feet, and bearing bundles, slipping silently
aft.

 The gig was hanging at the stern-davits. Noiselessly
as greased falls could slide over greased sheaves she was
lowered without a creak or a splash.

 The man who had been standing over the cuddy
companion with a handspike joined his fellows. Fortunately—for
themselves—no one had shown up. The [

50 ]

boat pushed off, Bill sculling. The Sardanapalus

was
crewless.

 Half-an-hour afterwards, the great Australian Bush
took to itself sixteen hairy-breasted able seamen and
this story.

  [Footnote

:



Small wooden tub. ]

 Return to text  [Footnote

:



A smoke and a drink of water. ]

 Return to text  [Footnote

:



Merchant Seamen’s Act. ]

 Return to text  [Footnote

:



Bile. ]

 Return to text  [Footnote

:



Four till six a.m. ]

 Return to text  [Footnote

:



Apprentices. ]

 Return to text