FALSE DAWN.

 Tonight God knows what thing shall tide,
     The Earth is racked and faint—
   Expectant, sleepless, open-eyed;
   And we, who from the Earth were made,
     Thrill with our Mother's pain.
                —In Durance.

 No man will ever know the exact truth of this story; though women may
      sometimes whisper it to one another after a dance, when they are putting
      up their hair for the night and comparing lists of victims. A man, of
      course, cannot assist at these functions. So the tale must be told from
      the outside—in the dark—all wrong.

 Never praise a sister to a sister, in the hope of your compliments
      reaching the proper ears, and so preparing the way for you later on.
      Sisters are women first, and sisters afterwards; and you will find that
      you do yourself harm.

 Saumarez knew this when he made up his mind to propose to the elder Miss
      Copleigh. Saumarez was a strange man, with few merits, so far as men could
      see, though he was popular with women, and carried enough conceit to stock
      a Viceroy's Council and leave a little over for the Commander-in-Chief's
      Staff. He was a Civilian. Very many women took an interest in Saumarez,
      perhaps, because his manner to them was offensive. If you hit a pony over
      the nose at the outset of your acquaintance, he may not love you, but he
      will take a deep interest in your movements ever afterwards. The elder
      Miss Copleigh was nice, plump, winning and pretty. The younger was not so
      pretty, and, from men disregarding the hint set forth above, her style was
      repellant and unattractive. Both girls had, practically, the same figure,
      and there was a strong likeness between them in look and voice; though no
      one could doubt for an instant which was the nicer of the two.

 Saumarez made up his mind, as soon as they came into the station from
      Behar, to marry the elder one. At least, we all made sure that he would,
      which comes to the same thing. She was two and twenty, and he was
      thirty-three, with pay and allowances of nearly fourteen hundred rupees a
      month. So the match, as we arranged it, was in every way a good one.
      Saumarez was his name, and summary was his nature, as a man once said.
      Having drafted his Resolution, he formed a Select Committee of One to sit
      upon it, and resolved to take his time. In our unpleasant slang, the
      Copleigh girls “hunted in couples.” That is to say, you could do nothing
      with one without the other. They were very loving sisters; but their
      mutual affection was sometimes inconvenient. Saumarez held the
      balance-hair true between them, and none but himself could have said to
      which side his heart inclined; though every one guessed. He rode with them
      a good deal and danced with them, but he never succeeded in detaching them
      from each other for any length of time.

 Women said that the two girls kept together through deep mistrust, each
      fearing that the other would steal a march on her. But that has nothing to
      do with a man. Saumarez was silent for good or bad, and as business—likely
      attentive as he could be, having due regard to his work and his polo.
      Beyond doubt both girls were fond of him.

 As the hot weather drew nearer, and Saumarez made no sign, women said that
      you could see their trouble in the eyes of the girls—that they were
      looking strained, anxious, and irritable. Men are quite blind in these
      matters unless they have more of the woman than the man in their
      composition, in which case it does not matter what they say or think. I
      maintain it was the hot April days that took the color out of the Copleigh
      girls' cheeks. They should have been sent to the Hills early. No one—man
      or woman—feels an angel when the hot weather is approaching. The
      younger sister grew more cynical—not to say acid—in her ways;
      and the winningness of the elder wore thin. There was more effort in it.

 Now the Station wherein all these things happened was, though not a little
      one, off the line of rail, and suffered through want of attention. There
      were no gardens or bands or amusements worth speaking of, and it was
      nearly a day's journey to come into Lahore for a dance. People were
      grateful for small things to interest them.

 About the beginning of May, and just before the final exodus of
      Hill-goers, when the weather was very hot and there were not more than
      twenty people in the Station, Saumarez gave a moonlight riding-picnic at
      an old tomb, six miles away, near the bed of the river. It was a “Noah's
      Ark” picnic; and there was to be the usual arrangement of quarter-mile
      intervals between each couple, on account of the dust. Six couples came
      altogether, including chaperons. Moonlight picnics are useful just at the
      very end of the season, before all the girls go away to the Hills. They
      lead to understandings, and should be encouraged by chaperones; especially
      those whose girls look sweetish in riding habits. I knew a case once. But
      that is another story. That picnic was called the “Great Pop Picnic,”
       because every one knew Saumarez would propose then to the eldest Miss
      Copleigh; and, beside his affair, there was another which might possibly
      come to happiness.

 The social atmosphere was heavily charged and wanted clearing.

 We met at the parade-ground at ten: the night was fearfully hot.

 The horses sweated even at walking-pace, but anything was better than
      sitting still in our own dark houses. When we moved off under the full
      moon we were four couples, one triplet, and Mr. Saumarez rode with the
      Copleigh girls, and I loitered at the tail of the procession, wondering
      with whom Saumarez would ride home. Every one was happy and contented; but
      we all felt that things were going to happen. We rode slowly: and it was
      nearly midnight before we reached the old tomb, facing the ruined tank, in
      the decayed gardens where we were going to eat and drink. I was late in
      coming up; and before I went into the garden, I saw that the horizon to
      the north carried a faint, dun-colored feather. But no one would have
      thanked me for spoiling so well-managed an entertainment as this picnic—and
      a dust-storm, more or less, does no great harm.

 We gathered by the tank. Some one had brought out a banjo—which is a
      most sentimental instrument—and three or four of us sang.

 You must not laugh at this. Our amusements in out-of-the-way Stations are
      very few indeed. Then we talked in groups or together, lying under the
      trees, with the sun-baked roses dropping their petals on our feet, until
      supper was ready. It was a beautiful supper, as cold and as iced as you
      could wish; and we stayed long over it.

 I had felt that the air was growing hotter and hotter; but nobody seemed
      to notice it until the moon went out and a burning hot wind began lashing
      the orange-trees with a sound like the noise of the sea. Before we knew
      where we were, the dust-storm was on us, and everything was roaring,
      whirling darkness. The supper-table was blown bodily into the tank. We
      were afraid of staying anywhere near the old tomb for fear it might be
      blown down. So we felt our way to the orange-trees where the horses were
      picketed and waited for the storm to blow over. Then the little light that
      was left vanished, and you could not see your hand before your face. The
      air was heavy with dust and sand from the bed of the river, that filled
      boots and pockets and drifted down necks and coated eyebrows and
      moustaches. It was one of the worst dust-storms of the year.

 We were all huddled together close to the trembling horses, with the
      thunder clattering overhead, and the lightning spurting like water from a
      sluice, all ways at once. There was no danger, of course, unless the
      horses broke loose. I was standing with my head downward and my hands over
      my mouth, hearing the trees thrashing each other. I could not see who was
      next me till the flashes came.

 Then I found that I was packed near Saumarez and the eldest Miss Copleigh,
      with my own horse just in front of me. I recognized the eldest Miss
      Copleigh, because she had a pagri round her helmet, and the younger had
      not. All the electricity in the air had gone into my body and I was
      quivering and tingling from head to foot—exactly as a corn shoots
      and tingles before rain. It was a grand storm.

 The wind seemed to be picking up the earth and pitching it to leeward in
      great heaps; and the heat beat up from the ground like the heat of the Day
      of Judgment.

 The storm lulled slightly after the first half-hour, and I heard a
      despairing little voice close to my ear, saying to itself, quietly and
      softly, as if some lost soul were flying about with the wind: “O my God!”
       Then the younger Miss Copleigh stumbled into my arms, saying: “Where is my
      horse? Get my horse. I want to go home. I WANT to go home. Take me home.”

 I thought that the lightning and the black darkness had frightened her; so
      I said there was no danger, but she must wait till the storm blew over.
      She answered: “It is not THAT! It is not THAT! I want to go home! O take
      me away from here!”

 I said that she could not go till the light came; but I felt her brush
      past me and go away. It was too dark to see where. Then the whole sky was
      split open with one tremendous flash, as if the end of the world were
      coming, and all the women shrieked.

 Almost directly after this, I felt a man's hand on my shoulder and heard
      Saumarez bellowing in my ear. Through the rattling of the trees and
      howling of the wind, I did not catch his words at once, but at last I
      heard him say: “I've proposed to the wrong one! What shall I do?” Saumarez
      had no occasion to make this confidence to me. I was never a friend of
      his, nor am I now; but I fancy neither of us were ourselves just then. He
      was shaking as he stood with excitement, and I was feeling queer all over
      with the electricity.

 I could not think of anything to say except:—“More fool you for
      proposing in a dust-storm.” But I did not see how that would improve the
      mistake.

 Then he shouted: “Where's Edith—Edith Copleigh?” Edith was the
      youngest sister. I answered out of my astonishment:—“What do you
      want with HER?” Would you believe it, for the next two minutes, he and I
      were shouting at each other like maniacs—he vowing that it was the
      youngest sister he had meant to propose to all along, and I telling him
      till my throat was hoarse that he must have made a mistake! I can't
      account for this except, again, by the fact that we were neither of us
      ourselves. Everything seemed to me like a bad dream—from the
      stamping of the horses in the darkness to Saumarez telling me the story of
      his loving Edith Copleigh since the first. He was still clawing my
      shoulder and begging me to tell him where Edith Copleigh was, when another
      lull came and brought light with it, and we saw the dust-cloud forming on
      the plain in front of us. So we knew the worst was over. The moon was low
      down, and there was just the glimmer of the false dawn that comes about an
      hour before the real one. But the light was very faint, and the dun cloud
      roared like a bull. I wondered where Edith Copleigh had gone; and as I was
      wondering I saw three things together: First Maud Copleigh's face come
      smiling out of the darkness and move towards Saumarez, who was standing by
      me. I heard the girl whisper, “George,” and slide her arm through the arm
      that was not clawing my shoulder, and I saw that look on her face which
      only comes once or twice in a lifetime—when a woman is perfectly
      happy and the air is full of trumpets and gorgeous-colored fire and the
      Earth turns into cloud because she loves and is loved. At the same time, I
      saw Saumarez's face as he heard Maud Copleigh's voice, and fifty yards
      away from the clump of orange-trees I saw a brown holland habit getting
      upon a horse.

 It must have been my state of over-excitement that made me so quick to
      meddle with what did not concern me. Saumarez was moving off to the habit;
      but I pushed him back and said:—“Stop here and explain. I'll fetch
      her back!” and I ran out to get at my own horse. I had a perfectly
      unnecessary notion that everything must be done decently and in order, and
      that Saumarez's first care was to wipe the happy look out of Maud
      Copleigh's face. All the time I was linking up the curb-chain I wondered
      how he would do it.

 I cantered after Edith Copleigh, thinking to bring her back slowly on some
      pretence or another. But she galloped away as soon as she saw me, and I
      was forced to ride after her in earnest. She called back over her shoulder—“Go
      away! I'm going home. Oh, go away!” two or three times; but my business
      was to catch her first, and argue later. The ride just fitted in with the
      rest of the evil dream. The ground was very bad, and now and again we
      rushed through the whirling, choking “dust-devils” in the skirts of the
      flying storm. There was a burning hot wind blowing that brought up a
      stench of stale brick-kilns with it; and through the half light and
      through the dust-devils, across that desolate plain, flickered the brown
      holland habit on the gray horse. She headed for the Station at first. Then
      she wheeled round and set off for the river through beds of burnt down
      jungle-grass, bad even to ride a pig over. In cold blood I should never
      have dreamed of going over such a country at night, but it seemed quite
      right and natural with the lightning crackling overhead, and a reek like
      the smell of the Pit in my nostrils. I rode and shouted, and she bent
      forward and lashed her horse, and the aftermath of the dust-storm came up
      and caught us both, and drove us downwind like pieces of paper.

 I don't know how far we rode; but the drumming of the horse-hoofs and the
      roar of the wind and the race of the faint blood-red moon through the
      yellow mist seemed to have gone on for years and years, and I was
      literally drenched with sweat from my helmet to my gaiters when the gray
      stumbled, recovered himself, and pulled up dead lame. My brute was used up
      altogether. Edith Copleigh was in a sad state, plastered with dust, her
      helmet off, and crying bitterly. “Why can't you let me alone?” she said.
      “I only wanted to get away and go home. Oh, PLEASE let me go!”

 “You have got to come back with me, Miss Copleigh. Saumarez has something
      to say to you.”

 It was a foolish way of putting it; but I hardly knew Miss Copleigh; and,
      though I was playing Providence at the cost of my horse, I could not tell
      her in as many words what Saumarez had told me. I thought he could do that
      better himself. All her pretence about being tired and wanting to go home
      broke down, and she rocked herself to and fro in the saddle as she sobbed,
      and the hot wind blew her black hair to leeward. I am not going to repeat
      what she said, because she was utterly unstrung.

 This, if you please, was the cynical Miss Copleigh. Here was I, almost an
      utter stranger to her, trying to tell her that Saumarez loved her and she
      was to come back to hear him say so! I believe I made myself understood,
      for she gathered the gray together and made him hobble somehow, and we set
      off for the tomb, while the storm went thundering down to Umballa and a
      few big drops of warm rain fell. I found out that she had been standing
      close to Saumarez when he proposed to her sister and had wanted to go home
      and cry in peace, as an English girl should. She dabbled her eyes with her
      pocket-handkerchief as we went along, and babbled to me out of sheer
      lightness of heart and hysteria. That was perfectly unnatural; and yet, it
      seemed all right at the time and in the place. All the world was only the
      two Copleigh girls, Saumarez and I, ringed in with the lightning and the
      dark; and the guidance of this misguided world seemed to lie in my hands.

 When we returned to the tomb in the deep, dead stillness that followed the
      storm, the dawn was just breaking and nobody had gone away. They were
      waiting for our return. Saumarez most of all.

 His face was white and drawn. As Miss Copleigh and I limped up, he came
      forward to meet us, and, when he helped her down from her saddle, he
      kissed her before all the picnic. It was like a scene in a theatre, and
      the likeness was heightened by all the dust-white, ghostly-looking men and
      women under the orange-trees, clapping their hands, as if they were
      watching a play—at Saumarez's choice. I never knew anything so
      un-English in my life.

 Lastly, Saumarez said we must all go home or the Station would come out to
      look for us, and WOULD I be good enough to ride home with Maud Copleigh?
      Nothing would give me greater pleasure, I said.

 So, we formed up, six couples in all, and went back two by two; Saumarez
      walking at the side of Edith Copleigh, who was riding his horse.

 The air was cleared; and little by little, as the sun rose, I felt we were
      all dropping back again into ordinary men and women and that the “Great
      Pop Picnic” was a thing altogether apart and out of the world—never
      to happen again. It had gone with the dust-storm and the tingle in the hot
      air.

 I felt tired and limp, and a good deal ashamed of myself as I went in for
      a bath and some sleep.

 There is a woman's version of this story, but it will never be written.
      ... unless Maud Copleigh cares to try.