[

136 ] 

FAR INLAND FOOTBALL.

 ‘ Frightfully

dull, isn’t it?’ said the Doctor.

 ‘Dull’s no name for it,’ said the Clerk of Petty
Sessions; ‘this is the awfullest hole I ever was in.’ TN: closing quote invisible

 ‘Never knew it so bad,’ chimed in the Chemist
and the Saddler, who were on this frosty night drinking
whisky hot in the snug parlour of the Shamrock
Inn in the little township of Crupperton.

 ‘I tell you what,’ said the C.P.S. presently; ‘I see
by the paper they’ve started a football club at Cantleville.
Why shouldn’t we do the same? It’ll help to
pass away the time, anyhow.’ TN: closing quote invisible

 The Doctor pricked up his ears with interest. The
Chemist seconded the motion enthusiastically.

 ‘A capital idea,’ said he, ‘and, although I never
have played, I’ll go in for it. It’s simple enough, I
should imagine.’

 ‘Simple!’ said the C.P.S., who had once seen a
match in Sydney. ‘It’s as easy as tea-drinking. There’s
no expense, except the first one of the ball. It’s not
like cricket, you know, where you’re TN: original reads "your" always putting your
hands in your pockets for something or other.’

 [

137 ] 

‘I’ll give ten shillings, Mr Brown,’ said the Doctor
softly.

 ‘Same here,’ said the Chemist.

 ‘How do you play it?’ asked the Saddler, and the
Blacksmith, and the Constable, who had just dropped
in for a warm and a yarn that chilly evening.

 ‘Well,’ explained the C.P.S., who had ideas, ‘first
you get your ball. Then you put up a couple of
sticks with a cross one on the top of ’em. Then you
measure a distance, say one hundred yards by, say, fifty,
on a level bit of ground, and put up another set of
sticks. Then you get your men, and pick sides, and
pop the ball down in the middle, and wade in. For
instance,’ he continued, ‘s’pose we’re playing Saddlestrap.
Well, then, d’ye see, we’ve got one goal—that’s
what they call the sticks—and they’ve got the other.
We’ve to try and block ’em from kicking the ball
over our cross-bar, and do our best, meantime, to send
it over theirs. It’s just a splendid game for this
weather, and nothing could well be simpler.’

 More men came in, the idea caught; a club was
formed, and that very night the C.P.S. wrote to the
capital for a ball ‘of the best make and the latest
fashion.’

 But it was a very long way to the capital. So, in
the interval, the C.P.S., who was an enterprising young
Native, procured and erected goal-posts and cross-bars
of barked pine; and very business-like they looked
with a little pink flag fluttering from the summit of
each.

 [

138 ] 

At last the new ball arrived. But, to the secret
astonishment of the C.P.S., in place of being round it
was oval. However, he was not going to expose his
ignorance and imperil the reputation already earned as
an exponent of the game, so he only said,—

 ‘I sent for the very best they had, and I can see
we’ve got our money’s worth. I’ll take her home and
blow her up ready for to-morrow.’

 For a long time the ball seemed to go in any
direction but the right one, kick they never so hardly;
whilst, as a rule, the strongest and most terrific
kickers produced the least effect.

 They tried the aggravating thing in every position
they could think of, and, for a considerable period,
without much success.

 It was a sight worth seeing to watch the Blacksmith,
after scooping a little hollow in the ground and
placing the ball perpendicularly therein, retire and
prepare for action. Opening his shoulders and spitting
on his hands, he would come heavily charging
down, and putting the whole force of fifteen stone
into his right foot, deliver a tremendous kick; then
stand amazed to see the ball, after twirling meekly
up for a few yards, drop on his head instead of
soaring between the posts as it should have done.

 ‘I’m out of practice myself—haven’t played for
years, in fact,’ said the C.P.S. when explanation as
to this erratic behaviour was demanded. ‘It’s simply
a matter of practice, you know, like everything else.’

 But all the same for a long time, deep down in [

139 ]

his heart, there was a horrible misgiving that the thing
was not a football at all—that it should have been
round. At last, by dint of constant perseverance,
some of the men began to kick fairly well—kick
goals even from a good distance.

 The first difficulty arose from a lack of side-boundaries.
Hence, at times, a kicking, struggling,
shouting mob might be seen half-a-mile away, at
the far end of the main street, whereas it should
have been in front of the post-office.

 To remedy this state of affairs, the C.P.S. drove in
pegs at what was voted ‘a fair thing’ to serve as guides.
When the ball was sent beyond the pegs no one pursued,
and little boys stationed there kicked it back
again. TN: original has comma Also, the cows, pigs and goats of Crupperton,
who must have imagined that a lunatic asylum had taken
possession of their feeding grounds, returned, and henceforth
fed peacefully about the grass-grown streets and
allotments at the lower end of the township. Presently,
to vary the monotony, the Cruppertonians got up a
match amongst themselves for drinks—East versus West
was the title of it. But it never went beyond the first
scrimmage, if that can be called a first where all was one
big scrimmage, caused by two compact bodies of men
fighting for the possession of a ball. Out of this quickly
emerged the Chemist with, as he averred, a fractured
wrist. Anyhow, he wore a bandage, and played no
more.

 Then the Blacksmith accused the Saddler of kicking
him on the shins, wilfully and of malice prepense. For [

140 ]

some time past there had been bad blood between
these two, and the fight that ensued was so gorgeous
that the game was quite forgotten in the excitement
of it.

 Presently, the village of Saddlestrap, a little lower
down the river, in emulation of its larger neighbour,
started football also.

 The Saddlestraps mostly got their living by tankmaking,
were locally known as ‘Thicklegs,’ and were a
pretty rough lot. So that, when a match was arranged
between the two places, fun was foretold.

 The rules of the Saddlestrap club were, like those of
the Crupperton one, simplicity itself, consisting, as they
did, of the solitary axiom—‘Kick whatever or wherever
you can, only kick.’

 Therefore, as remarked, fun was expected. The
C.P.S. chose his team carefully, and with an eye to
weight and size. Superior fleetness, he rightly imagined,
would have but little to do with the result of the
day’s sport.

 With the exception of half-a-dozen of the townspeople,
the Crupperton players consisted of young fellows from a
couple of stations adjoining. Therefore, the Saddlestraps
somewhat contemptuously dubbed their opponents
‘Pastorialites.’

 The Doctor pleaded exemption on account of his age,
and was, therefore, appointed ‘Referee.’

 For a while the play was somewhat weak and desultory,
and lacking in effect. The ball was continually
being sent outside the pegs, and the urchins stationed [

141 ]

there were kept busy. But, at length, to the delight of
the spectators, consisting of the entire population of the
two townships, there was a hot scrimmage. ‘For all the
world like a lot o’ dorgs a-worryin’ a ’possum!’ as one
excited bystander yelled, whilst the crowd surged around
the mixed-up heap of humanity, the outside ring of which
was frantically kicking and shoving at the prostrate inner
one, serving friend and foe alike.

 ‘A very manly and interesting game,’ remarked the
Doctor, placidly ringing his bell for ‘Spell, oh!’ whilst
the Chemist ran to his shop for plaster and bandage.

 Presently, the undermost man of all was dragged
out, torn and gory, and spitting teeth from a broken
jaw.

 Him the Doctor caused to be carried to the nearest
house, and, after attending to his wounds, returned
hurriedly to the field, where his coadjutor was looking to
the minor casualties, and both teams were refreshing
themselves with rum, and boasting of their prowess.

 The Doctor rang his bell, and play was resumed. It
was, he explained, unhealthy to dawdle about in such
weather and after severe exertion.

 As the C.P.S. pointed out very eloquently that night
at the banquet, football was a game in which people
must learn to give and take, and that, until this had
been fully understood and practised, the game would
never get beyond an initial stage.

 This was probably the reason that on a Saddlestrap in
full pursuit of the ball being deliberately tripped up by a
‘Pastorialite,’ and sent headlong to mother earth, which [

142 ]

was hard and knobby, in place of rising and going on
with the game, he began to punch the tripper.

 Five minutes afterwards might be seen the curious
spectacle of a ball lying neglected in the centre of the
ground, whilst outside raged a big fight of thirty.

 For a time the trouble was strictly confined to the
two teams. But when it was observed that Crupperton
was getting the worst of it, partisans quickly peeled off
and took sides; so that, directly, both townships were up
to their eyes in fight, and the Doctor seriously contemplated
sending for professional assistance to Cantleville.

 For some time victory hovered in the balance. But
men fight well on their own ground, and at last the
Saddlestraps broke and fled for their horses and buggies.
Those who stayed behind did so simply because there
was no doctor in their native village.

 A banquet for both teams had been prepared at the
leading (and only) hotel. But there was only a
remnant of one side that felt like banqueting, so the
gaps were filled by residents who had been prominent
in the fray.

 The C.P.S., with a couple of beautifully blackened
eyes, took the chair. At the other end of the table
presided the Constable, whose features presented a
curiously intricate study in diachylon, many of the
Saddlestraps having seized a mean opportunity of wiping
off old scores.

 Speeches and toasts were made and drunk, and
football enthusiastically voted the king of all games. [

143 ]

As the Blacksmith—whose arm was in a sling—observed,
‘It was a fair an’ square game. A man know’d what
he’d got to do at it. There wasn’t no tiddleywinkin’
in the thing.’

 The Doctor had been too busy to come early; but
he dropped in for a minute or so during the evening,
and with great fire, and amidst much applause, made
a splendid speech. In its course he quoted Gordon’s
well-known lines—‘A game’s not worth a rap for a
rational man to play,’ etc.; and also adapted that
saying of the ‘Iron Duke’s’ about the battle of
Waterloo being won upon the British football
grounds.

 It was decidedly the ‘speech of the evening,’ and
was greeted with hearty cheers as, concluding, he retired
to look after his patients.

 But Crupperton was very sore next morning; and
for a whole week there was no more football. Then
they looked about them for more victims to their
prowess. But they found none at all near home.

 At last, in despair, and in defiance of the advice of
the C.P.S., the executive challenged Cantleville itself—agreeing
to journey thither. In due course, and after
the C.F.C. had recovered from its surprise, and consulted
a ‘Gazetteer,’ it accepted.

 Cantleville was a very long distance away. Moreover,
it was the ‘City’ of those inland parts, and the headquarters
of the Civil Service therein. Therefore the
C.P.S. and the Constable discreetly refused to accompany
their fellows. One of the pair, at least, had [

144 ]

doubts as to whether Cantleville played the Crupperton
game.

 So the Blacksmith was elected Captain. ‘You’d
better stay at home,’ said the C.P.S., ‘the chaps over
there are regular swells, up to all the latest dodges, and
they wear uniforms. Besides they may not quite understand
our rules.’

 ‘Then we’ll teach ’em,’ said the Blacksmith. But the
question of a uniform troubled him. So he took counsel
with his now fast friend the Saddler, and the result
was that everyone packed a stiffly-starched white shirt
and a pair of black trousers into his valise.

 ‘How about your uniforms now?’ said the Blacksmith,
‘nothin’ can’t be neater’n that.’

 So they went forth to battle, accompanied by the
good wishes of the populace; but neither by Doctor
nor Chemist. There were plenty of both at Cantleville.
Also they were wise in their generation, and had
doubts.

 Communication in these days was limited. Cantleville
news arrived via Sydney, and the newspapers were
a week old when delivered. So that the team brought
its own tidings home. They had not had a good time.
They had also been heavily fined, and they proposed to
go afield no more. The Blacksmith and the Saddler,
who had ‘taken it out,’ were the last to appear.

 ‘I suppose you play Rugby rules?’ had asked blandly
the Secretary of the C.F.C., as he curiously surveyed
the ‘Bushies’ on their arrival.

 ‘No, we don’t,’ said the Blacksmith. ‘We plays [

145 ]

Crupperton,’ and no more questions were asked. But
when it was seen what Crupperton rules meant, backs,
half-backs, forwards, and all the rest of it, struck and
refused to continue. Instead, they took to chaffing the
‘black and white magpies.’

 Whereupon, Crupperton, putting the question of football
on one side, went at its opponents à la Saddlestrap.
Their places, however, they presently found taken by
policemen. These latter every man handled to
the best of his ability, and had to pay for accordingly.

 ‘Shoo!’ said the Blacksmith, as he finished. ‘They’re
nothin’ but a lot o’ tiddleywinkers up there. Let’s
have another match with Saddlestrap.’