FAREWELL!
    

      The two friends were getting near the end of their dinner. Through the
      cafe windows they could see the Boulevard, crowded with people. They could
      feel the gentle breezes which are wafted over Paris on warm summer
      evenings and make you feel like going out somewhere, you care not where,
      under the trees, and make you dream of moonlit rivers, of fireflies and of
      larks.
    

      One of the two, Henri Simon, heaved a deep sigh and said:
    

      “Ah! I am growing old. It's sad. Formerly, on evenings like this, I
      felt full of life. Now, I only feel regrets. Life is short!”
    

      He was perhaps forty-five years old, very bald and already growing stout.
    

      The other, Pierre Carnier, a trifle older, but thin and lively, answered:
    

      “Well, my boy, I have grown old without noticing it in the least. I
      have always been merry, healthy, vigorous and all the rest. As one sees
      oneself in the mirror every day, one does not realize the work of age, for
      it is slow, regular, and it modifies the countenance so gently that the
      changes are unnoticeable. It is for this reason alone that we do not die
      of sorrow after two or three years of excitement. For we cannot understand
      the alterations which time produces. In order to appreciate them one would
      have to remain six months without seeing one's own face —then, oh,
      what a shock!
    

      “And the women, my friend, how I pity the poor beings! All their
      joy, all their power, all their life, lies in their beauty, which lasts
      ten years.
    

      “As I said, I aged without noticing it; I thought myself practically
      a youth, when I was almost fifty years old. Not feeling the slightest
      infirmity, I went about, happy and peaceful.
    

      “The revelation of my decline came to me in a simple and terrible
      manner, which overwhelmed me for almost six months—then I became
      resigned.
    

      “Like all men, I have often been in love, but most especially once.
    

      “I met her at the seashore, at Etretat, about twelve years ago,
      shortly after the war. There is nothing prettier than this beach during
      the morning bathing hour. It is small, shaped like a horseshoe, framed by
      high while cliffs, which are pierced by strange holes called the 'Portes,'
      one stretching out into the ocean like the leg of a giant, the other short
      and dumpy. The women gather on the narrow strip of sand in this frame of
      high rocks, which they make into a gorgeous garden of beautiful gowns. The
      sun beats down on the shores, on the multicolored parasols, on the
      blue-green sea; and all is gay, delightful, smiling. You sit down at the
      edge of the water and you watch the bathers. The women come down, wrapped
      in long bath robes, which they throw off daintily when they reach the
      foamy edge of the rippling waves; and they run into the water with a rapid
      little step, stopping from time to time for a delightful little thrill
      from the cold water, a short gasp.
    

      “Very few stand the test of the bath. It is there that they can be
      judged, from the ankle to the throat. Especially on leaving the water are
      the defects revealed, although water is a powerful aid to flabby skin.
    

      “The first time that I saw this young woman in the water, I was
      delighted, entranced. She stood the test well. There are faces whose
      charms appeal to you at first glance and delight you instantly. You seem
      to have found the woman whom you were born to love. I had that feeling and
      that shock.
    

      “I was introduced, and was soon smitten worse than I had ever been
      before. My heart longed for her. It is a terrible yet delightful thing
      thus to be dominated by a young woman. It is almost torture, and yet
      infinite delight. Her look, her smile, her hair fluttering in the wind,
      the little lines of her face, the slightest movement of her features,
      delighted me, upset me, entranced me. She had captured me, body and soul,
      by her gestures, her manners, even by her clothes, which seemed to take on
      a peculiar charm as soon as she wore them. I grew tender at the sight of
      her veil on some piece of furniture, her gloves thrown on a chair. Her
      gowns seemed to me inimitable. Nobody had hats like hers.
    

      “She was married, but her husband came only on Saturday, and left on
      Monday. I didn't cencern myself about him, anyhow. I wasn't jealous of
      him, I don't know why; never did a creature seem to me to be of less
      importance in life, to attract my attention less than this man.
    

      “But she! how I loved her! How beautiful, graceful and young she
      was! She was youth, elegance, freshness itself! Never before had I felt so
      strongly what a pretty, distinguished, delicate, charming, graceful being
      woman is. Never before had I appreciated the seductive beauty to be found
      in the curve of a cheek, the movement of a lip, the pinkness of an ear,
      the shape of that foolish organ called the nose.
    

      “This lasted three months; then I left for America, overwhelmed with
      sadness. But her memory remained in me, persistent, triumphant. From far
      away I was as much hers as I had been when she was near me. Years passed
      by, and I did not forget her. The charming image of her person was ever
      before my eyes and in my heart. And my love remained true to her, a quiet
      tenderness now, something like the beloved memory of the most beautiful
      and the most enchanting thing I had ever met in my life.
    

      “Twelve years are not much in a lifetime! One does not feel them
      slip by. The years follow each other gently and quickly, slowly yet
      rapidly, each one is long and yet so soon over! They add up so rapidly,
      they leave so few traces behind them, they disappear so completely, that,
      when one turns round to look back over bygone years, one sees nothing and
      yet one does not understand how one happens to be so old. It seemed to me,
      really, that hardly a few months separated me from that charming season on
      the sands of Etretat.
    

      “Last spring I went to dine with some friends at Maisons-Laffitte.
    

      “Just as the train was leaving, a big, fat lady, escorted by four
      little girls, got into my car. I hardly looked at this mother hen, very
      big, very round, with a face as full as the moon framed in an enormous,
      beribboned hat.
    

      “She was puffing, out of breath from having been forced to walk
      quickly. The children began to chatter. I unfolded my paper and began to
      read.
    

      “We had just passed Asnieres, when my neighbor suddenly turned to me
      and said:
    

      “'Excuse me, sir, but are you not Monsieur Garnier?'
    

      “'Yes, madame.'
    

      “Then she began to laugh, the pleased laugh of a good woman; and yet
      it was sad.
    

      “'You do not seem to recognize me.'
    

      “I hesitated. It seemed to me that I had seen that face somewhere;
      but where? when? I answered:
    

      “'Yes—and no. I certainly know you, and yet I cannot recall
      your name.'
    

      “She blushed a little:
    

      “'Madame Julie Lefevre.'
    

      “Never had I received such a shock. In a second it seemed to me as
      though it were all over with me! I felt that a veil had been torn from my
      eyes and that I was going to make a horrible and heartrending discovery.
    

      “So that was she! That big, fat, common woman, she! She had become
      the mother of these four girls since I had last her. And these little
      beings surprised me as much as their mother. They were part of her; they
      were big girls, and already had a place in life. Whereas she no longer
      counted, she, that marvel of dainty and charming gracefulness. It seemed
      to me that I had seen her but yesterday, and this is how I found her
      again! Was it possible? A poignant grief seized my heart; and also a
      revolt against nature herself, an unreasoning indignation against this
      brutal, infarious act of destruction.
    

      “I looked at her, bewildered. Then I took her hand in mine, and
      tears came to my eyes. I wept for her lost youth. For I did not know this
      fat lady.
    

      “She was also excited, and stammered:
    

      “'I am greatly changed, am I not? What can you expect—everything
      has its time! You see, I have become a mother, nothing but a good mother.
      Farewell to the rest, that is over. Oh! I never expected you to recognize
      me if we met. You, too, have changed. It took me quite a while to be sure
      that I was not mistaken. Your hair is all white. Just think! Twelve years
      ago! Twelve years! My oldest girl is already ten.'
    

      “I looked at the child. And I recognized in her something of her
      mother's old charm, but something as yet unformed, something which
      promised for the future. And life seemed to me as swift as a passing
      train.
    

      “We had reached. Maisons-Laffitte. I kissed my old friend's hand. I
      had found nothing utter but the most commonplace remarks. I was too much
      upset to talk.
    

      “At night, alone, at home, I stood in front of the mirror for a long
      time, a very long time. And I finally remembered what I had been, finally
      saw in my mind's eye my brown mustache, my black hair and the youthful
      expression of my face. Now I was old. Farewell!”