FATHER MATTHEW

 We had just left Rouen and were galloping along the road to Jumieges. The
      light carriage flew along across the level country. Presently the horse
      slackened his pace to walk up the hill of Cantelen.

 One sees there one of the most magnificent views in the world. Behind us
      lay Rouen, the city of churches, with its Gothic belfries, sculptured like
      ivory trinkets; before us Saint Sever, the manufacturing suburb, whose
      thousands of smoking chimneys rise amid the expanse of sky, opposite the
      thousand sacred steeples of the old city.

 On the one hand the spire of the cathedral, the highest of human
      monuments, on the other the engine of the power-house, its rival, and
      almost as high, and a metre higher than the tallest pyramid in Egypt.

 Before us wound the Seine, with its scattered islands and bordered by
      white banks, covered with a forest on the right and on the left immense
      meadows, bounded by another forest yonder in the distance.

 Here and there large ships lay at anchor along the banks of the wide
      river. Three enormous steam boats were starting out, one behind the other,
      for Havre, and a chain of boats, a bark, two schooners and a brig, were
      going upstream to Rouen, drawn by a little tug that emitted a cloud of
      black smoke.

 My companion, a native of the country, did not glance at this wonderful
      landscape, but he smiled continually; he seemed to be amused at his
      thoughts. Suddenly he cried:

 “Ah, you will soon see something comical—Father Matthew's
      chapel. That is a sweet morsel, my boy.”

 I looked at him in surprise. He continued:

 “I will give you a whiff of Normandy that will stay by you. Father
      Matthew is the handsomest Norman in the province and his chapel is one of
      the wonders of the world, nothing more nor less. But I will first give you
      a few words of explanation.

 “Father Matthew, who is also called Father 'La Boisson,' is an old
      sergeant-major who has come back to his native land. He combines in
      admirable proportions, making a perfect whole, the humbug of the old
      soldier and the sly roguery of the Norman. On his return to Normandy,
      thanks to influence and incredible cleverness, he was made doorkeeper of a
      votive chapel, a chapel dedicated to the Virgin and frequented chiefly by
      young women who have gone astray . . . . He composed and had painted a
      special prayer to his 'Good Virgin.' This prayer is a masterpiece of
      unintentional irony, of Norman wit, in which jest is blended with fear of
      the saint and with the superstitious fear of the secret influence of
      something. He has not much faith in his protectress, but he believes in
      her a little through prudence, and he is considerate of her through
      policy.

 “This is how this wonderful prayer begins:

 “'Our good Madame Virgin Mary, natural protectress of girl mothers
      in this land and all over the world, protect your servant who erred in a
      moment of forgetfulness . . .'

 “It ends thus:

 “'Do not forget me, especially when you are with your holy spouse,
      and intercede with God the Father that he may grant me a good husband,
      like your own.'

 “This prayer, which was suppressed by the clergy of the district, is
      sold by him privately, and is said to be very efficacious for those who
      recite it with unction.

 “In fact he talks of the good Virgin as the valet de chambre of a
      redoubted prince might talk of his master who confided in him all his
      little private secrets. He knows a number of amusing anecdotes at his
      expense which he tells confidentially among friends as they sit over their
      glasses.

 “But you will see for yourself.

 “As the fees coming from the Virgin did not appear sufficient to
      him, he added to the main figure a little business in saints. He has them
      all, or nearly all. There was not room enough in the chapel, so he stored
      them in the wood-shed and brings them forth as soon as the faithful ask
      for them. He carved these little wooden statues himself—they are
      comical in the extreme—and painted them all bright green one year
      when they were painting his house. You know that saints cure diseases, but
      each saint has his specialty, and you must not confound them or make any
      blunders. They are as jealous of each other as mountebanks.

 “In order that they may make no mistake, the old women come and
      consult Matthew.

 “'For diseases of the ear which saint is the best?'

 “'Why, Saint Osyme is good and Saint Pamphilius is not bad.' But
      that is not all.

 “As Matthew has some time to spare, he drinks; but he drinks like a
      professional, with conviction, so much so that he is intoxicated regularly
      every evening. He is drunk, but he is aware of it. He is so well aware of
      it that he notices each day his exact degree of intoxication. That is his
      chief occupation; the chapel is a secondary matter.

 “And he has invented—listen and catch on—he has invented
      the 'Saoulometre.'

 “There is no such instrument, but Matthew's observations are as
      precise as those of a mathematician. You may hear him repeating
      incessantly: 'Since Monday I have had more than forty-five,' or else 'I
      was between fifty-two and fifty-eight,' or else 'I had at least sixty-six
      to seventy,' or 'Hullo, cheat, I thought I was in the fifties and here I
      find I had had seventy-five!'

 “He never makes a mistake.

 “He declares that he never reached his limit, but as he acknowledges
      that his observations cease to be exact when he has passed ninety, one
      cannot depend absolutely on the truth of that statement.

 “When Matthew acknowledges that he has passed ninety, you may rest
      assured that he is blind drunk.

 “On these occasions his wife, Melie, another marvel, flies into a
      fury. She waits for him at the door of the house, and as he enters she
      roars at him:

 “'So there you are, slut, hog, giggling sot!'

 “Then Matthew, who is not laughing any longer, plants himself
      opposite her and says in a severe tone:

 “'Be still, Melie; this is no time to talk; wait till to-morrow.'

 “If she keeps on shouting at him, he goes up to her and says in a
      shaky voice:

 “'Don't bawl any more. I have had about ninety; I am not counting
      any more. Look out, I am going to hit you!'

 “Then Melie beats a retreat.

 “If, on the following day, she reverts to the subject, he laughs in
      her face and says:

 “'Come, come! We have said enough. It is past. As long as I have not
      reached my limit there is no harm done. But if I go past that, I will
      allow you to correct me, my word on it!'”

 We had reached the top of the hill. The road entered the delightful forest
      of Roumare.

 Autumn, marvellous autumn, blended its gold and purple with the remaining
      traces of verdure. We passed through Duclair. Then, instead of going on to
      Jumieges, my friend turned to the left and, taking a crosscut, drove in
      among the trees.

 And presently from the top of a high hill we saw again the magnificent
      valley of the Seine and the winding river beneath us.

 At our right a very small slate-covered building, with a bell tower as
      large as a sunshade, adjoined a pretty house with green Venetian blinds,
      and all covered with honeysuckle and roses.

 “Here are some friends!” cried a big voice, and Matthew
      appeared on the threshold. He was a man about sixty, thin and with a
      goatee and long, white mustache.

 My friend shook him by the hand and introduced me, and Matthew took us
      into a clean kitchen, which served also as a dining-room. He said:

 “I have no elegant apartment, monsieur. I do not like to get too far
      away from the food. The saucepans, you see, keep me company.” Then,
      turning to my friend:

 “Why did you come on Thursday? You know quite well that this is the
      day I consult my Guardian Saint. I cannot go out this afternoon.”

 And running to the door, he uttered a terrific roar: “Melie!”
      which must have startled the sailors in the ships along the stream in the
      valley below.

 Melie did not reply.

 Then Matthew winked his eye knowingly.

 “She is not pleased with me, you see, because yesterday I was in the
      nineties.”

 My friend began to laugh. “In the nineties, Matthew! How did you
      manage it?”

 “I will tell you,” said Matthew. “Last year I found only
      twenty rasieres (an old dry measure) of apricots. There are no more, but
      those are the only things to make cider of. So I made some, and yesterday
      I tapped the barrel. Talk of nectar! That was nectar. You shall tell me
      what you think of it. Polyte was here, and we sat down and drank a glass
      and another without being satisfied (one could go on drinking it until
      to-morrow), and at last, with glass after glass, I felt a chill at my
      stomach. I said to Polyte: 'Supposing we drink a glass of cognac to warm
      ourselves?' He agreed. But this cognac, it sets you on fire, so that we
      had to go back to the cider. But by going from chills to heat and heat to
      chills, I saw that I was in the nineties. Polyte was not far from his
      limit.”

 The door opened and Melie appeared. At once, before bidding us good-day,
      she cried:

 “Great hog, you have both of you reached your limit!”

 “Don't say that, Melie; don't say that,” said Matthew, getting
      angry. “I have never reached my limit.”

 They gave us a delicious luncheon outside beneath two lime trees, beside
      the little chapel and overlooking the vast landscape. And Matthew told us,
      with a mixture of humor and unexpected credulity, incredible stories of
      miracles.

 We had drunk a good deal of delicious cider, sparkling and sweet, fresh
      and intoxicating, which he preferred to all other drinks, and were smoking
      our pipes astride our chairs when two women appeared.

 They were old, dried up and bent. After greeting us they asked for Saint
      Blanc. Matthew winked at us as he replied:

 “I will get him for you.” And he disappeared in his wood shed.
      He remained there fully five minutes. Then he came back with an expression
      of consternation. He raised his hands.

 “I don't know where he is. I cannot find him. I am quite sure that I
      had him.” Then making a speaking trumpet of his hands, he roared
      once more:

 “Meli-e-a!”

 “What's the matter?” replied his wife from the end of the
      garden.

 “Where's Saint Blanc? I cannot find him in the wood shed.”

 Then Melie explained it this way:

 “Was not that the one you took last week to stop up a hole in the
      rabbit hutch?”

 Matthew gave a start.

 “By thunder, that may be!” Then turning to the women, he said:

 “Follow me.”

 They followed him. We did the same, almost choking with suppressed
      laughter.

 Saint Blanc was indeed stuck into the earth like an ordinary stake,
      covered with mud and dirt, and forming a corner for the rabbit hutch.

 As soon as they perceived him, the two women fell on their knees, crossed
      themselves and began to murmur an “Oremus.” But Matthew darted
      toward them.

 “Wait,” he said, “you are in the mud; I will get you a
      bundle of straw.”

 He went to fetch the straw and made them a priedieu. Then, looking at his
      muddy saint and doubtless afraid of bringing discredit on his business, he
      added:

 “I will clean him off a little for you.”

 He took a pail of water and a brush and began to scrub the wooden image
      vigorously, while the two old women kept on praying.

 When he had finished he said:

 “Now he is all right.” And he took us back to the house to
      drink another glass.

 As he was carrying the glass to his lips he stopped and said in a rather
      confused manner:

 “All the same, when I put Saint Blanc out with the rabbits I thought
      he would not make any more money. For two years no one had asked for him.
      But the saints, you see, they are never out of date.”

  

  









 ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 11.

 GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others

  

  









 VOLUME XI.