FORGIVENESS

 She had been brought up in one of those families who live entirely to
      themselves, apart from all the rest of the world. Such families know
      nothing of political events, although they are discussed at table; for
      changes in the Government take place at such a distance from them that
      they are spoken of as one speaks of a historical event, such as the death
      of Louis XVI or the landing of Napoleon.

 Customs are modified in course of time, fashions succeed one another, but
      such variations are taken no account of in the placid family circle where
      traditional usages prevail year after year. And if some scandalous episode
      or other occurs in the neighborhood, the disreputable story dies a natural
      death when it reaches the threshold of the house. The father and mother
      may, perhaps, exchange a few words on the subject when alone together some
      evening, but they speak in hushed tones—for even walls have ears.
      The father says, with bated breath:

 “You've heard of that terrible affair in the Rivoil family?”

 And the mother answers:

 “Who would have dreamed of such a thing? It's dreadful.”

 The children suspected nothing, and arrive in their turn at years of
      discretion with eyes and mind blindfolded, ignorant of the real side of
      life, not knowing that people do not think as they speak, and do not speak
      as they act; or aware that they should live at war, or at all events, in a
      state of armed peace, with the rest of mankind; not suspecting the fact
      that the simple are always deceived, the sincere made sport of, the good
      maltreated.

 Some go on till the day of their death in this blind probity and loyalty
      and honor, so pure-minded that nothing can open their eyes.

 Others, undeceived, but without fully understanding, make mistakes, are
      dismayed, and become desperate, believing themselves the playthings of a
      cruel fate, the wretched victims of adverse circumstances, and
      exceptionally wicked men.

 The Savignols married their daughter Bertha at the age of eighteen. She
      wedded a young Parisian, George Baron by name, who had dealings on the
      Stock Exchange. He was handsome, well-mannered, and apparently all that
      could be desired. But in the depths of his heart he somewhat despised his
      old-fashioned parents-in-law, whom he spoke of among his intimates as
      “my dear old fossils.”

 He belonged to a good family, and the girl was rich. They settled down in
      Paris.

 She became one of those provincial Parisians whose name is legion. She
      remained in complete ignorance of the great city, of its social side, its
      pleasures and its customs—just as she remained ignorant also of
      life, its perfidy and its mysteries.

 Devoted to her house, she knew scarcely anything beyond her own street;
      and when she ventured into another part of Paris it seemed to her that she
      had accomplished a long and arduous journey into some unknown, unexplored
      city. She would then say to her husband in the evening:

 “I have been through the boulevards to-day.”

 Two or three times a year her husband took her to the theatre. These were
      events the remembrance of which never grew dim; they provided subjects of
      conversation for long afterward.

 Sometimes three months afterward she would suddenly burst into laughter,
      and exclaim:

 “Do you remember that actor dressed up as a general, who crowed like
      a cock?”

 Her friends were limited to two families related to her own. She spoke of
      them as “the Martinets” and “the Michelins.”

 Her husband lived as he pleased, coming home when it suited him —sometimes
      not until dawn—alleging business, but not putting himself out
      overmuch to account for his movements, well aware that no suspicion would
      ever enter his wife's guileless soul.

 But one morning she received an anonymous letter.

 She was thunderstruck—too simple-minded to understand the infamy of
      unsigned information and to despise the letter, the writer of which
      declared himself inspired by interest in her happiness, hatred of evil,
      and love of truth.

 This missive told her that her husband had had for two years past, a
      sweetheart, a young widow named Madame Rosset, with whom he spent all his
      evenings.

 Bertha knew neither how to dissemble her grief nor how to spy on her
      husband. When he came in for lunch she threw the letter down before him,
      burst into tears, and fled to her room.

 He had time to take in the situation and to prepare his reply. He knocked
      at his wife's door. She opened it at once, but dared not look at him. He
      smiled, sat down, drew her to his knee, and in a tone of light raillery
      began:

 “My dear child, as a matter of fact, I have a friend named Madame
      Rosset, whom I have known for the last ten years, and of whom I have a
      very high opinion. I may add that I know scores of other people whose
      names I have never mentioned to you, seeing that you do not care for
      society, or fresh acquaintances, or functions of any sort. But, to make
      short work of such vile accusations as this, I want you to put on your
      things after lunch, and we'll go together and call on this lady, who will
      very soon become a friend of yours, too, I am quite sure.”

 She embraced her husband warmly, and, moved by that feminine spirit of
      curiosity which will not be lulled once it is aroused, consented to go and
      see this unknown widow, of whom she was, in spite of everything, just the
      least bit jealous. She felt instinctively that to know a danger is to be
      already armed against it.

 She entered a small, tastefully furnished flat on the fourth floor of an
      attractive house. After waiting five minutes in a drawing-room rendered
      somewhat dark by its many curtains and hangings, a door opened, and a very
      dark, short, rather plump young woman appeared, surprised and smiling.

 George introduced them:

 “My wife—Madame Julie Rosset.”

 The young widow uttered a half-suppressed cry of astonishment and joy, and
      ran forward with hands outstretched. She had not hoped, she said, to have
      this pleasure, knowing that Madame Baron never saw any one, but she was
      delighted to make her acquaintance. She was so fond of George (she said
      “George” in a familiar, sisterly sort of way) that, she had
      been most anxious to know his young wife and to make friends with her,
      too.

 By the end of a month the two new friends were inseparable. They saw each
      other every day, sometimes twice a day, and dined together every evening,
      sometimes at one house, sometimes at the other. George no longer deserted
      his home, no longer talked of pressing business. He adored his own
      fireside, he said.

 When, after a time, a flat in the house where Madame Rosset lived became
      vacant Madame Baron hastened to take it, in order to be near her friend
      and spend even more time with her than hitherto.

 And for two whole years their friendship was without a cloud, a friendship
      of heart and mind—absolute, tender, devoted. Bertha could hardly
      speak without bringing in Julie's name. To her Madame Rosset represented
      perfection.

 She was utterly happy, calm and contented.

 But Madame Rosset fell ill. Bertha hardly left her side. She spent her
      nights with her, distracted with grief; even her husband seemed
      inconsolable.

 One morning the doctor, after leaving the invalid's bedside, took George
      and his wife aside, and told them that he considered Julie's condition
      very grave.

 As soon as he had gone the grief-stricken husband and wife sat down
      opposite each other and gave way to tears. That night they both sat up
      with the patient. Bertha tenderly kissed her friend from time to time,
      while George stood at the foot of the bed, his eyes gazing steadfastly on
      the invalid's face.

 The next day she was worse.

 But toward evening she declared she felt better, and insisted that her
      friends should go back to their own apartment to dinner.

 They were sitting sadly in the dining-room, scarcely even attempting to
      eat, when the maid gave George a note. He opened it, turned pale as death,
      and, rising from the table, said to his wife in a constrained voice:

 “Wait for me. I must leave you a moment. I shall be back in ten
      minutes. Don't go away on any account.”

 And he hurried to his room to get his hat.

 Bertha waited for him, a prey to fresh anxiety. But, docile in everything,
      she would not go back to her friend till he returned.

 At length, as he did not reappear, it occurred to her to visit his room
      and see if he had taken his gloves. This would show whether or not he had
      had a call to make.

 She saw them at the first glance. Beside them lay a crumpled paper,
      evidently thrown down in haste.

 She recognized it at once as the note George had received.

 And a burning temptation, the first that had ever assailed her urged her
      to read it and discover the cause of her husband's abrupt departure. Her
      rebellious conscience protested but a devouring and fearful curiosity
      prevailed. She seized the paper, smoothed it out, recognized the
      tremulous, penciled writing as Julie's, and read:

 “Come alone and kiss me, my poor dear. I am dying.”

 At first she did not understand, the idea of Julie's death being her
      uppermost thought. But all at once the true meaning of what she read burst
      in a flash upon her; this penciled note threw a lurid light upon her whole
      existence, revealed the whole infamous truth, all the treachery and
      perfidy of which she had been the victim. She understood the long years of
      deceit, the way in which she had been made their puppet. She saw them
      again, sitting side by side in the evening, reading by lamplight out of
      the same book, glancing at each other at the end of each page.

 And her poor, indignant, suffering, bleeding heart was cast into the
      depths of a despair which knew no bounds.

 Footsteps drew near; she fled, and shut herself in her own room.

 Presently her husband called her:

 “Come quickly! Madame Rosset is dying.”

 Bertha appeared at her door, and with trembling lips replied:

 “Go back to her alone; she does not need me.”

 He looked at her stupidly, dazed with grief, and repeated:

 “Come at once! She's dying, I tell you!”

 Bertha answered:

 “You would rather it were I.”

 Then at last he understood, and returned alone to the dying woman's
      bedside.

 He mourned her openly, shamelessly, indifferent to the sorrow of the wife
      who no longer spoke to him, no longer looked at him; who passed her life
      in solitude, hedged round with disgust, with indignant anger, and praying
      night and day to God.

 They still lived in the same house, however, and sat opposite each other
      at table, in silence and despair.

 Gradually his sorrow grew less acute; but she did not forgive him.

 And so their life went on, hard and bitter for them both.

 For a whole year they remained as complete strangers to each other as if
      they had never met. Bertha nearly lost her reason.

 At last one morning she went out very early, and returned about eight
      o'clock bearing in her hands an enormous bouquet of white roses. And she
      sent word to her husband that she wanted to speak to him. He came-anxious
      and uneasy.

 “We are going out together,” she said. “Please carry
      these flowers; they are too heavy for me.”

 A carriage took them to the gate of the cemetery, where they alighted.
      Then, her eyes filling with tears, she said to George:

 “Take me to her grave.”

 He trembled, and could not understand her motive; but he led the way,
      still carrying the flowers. At last he stopped before a white marble slab,
      to which he pointed without a word.

 She took the bouquet from him, and, kneeling down, placed it on the grave.
      Then she offered up a silent, heartfelt prayer.

 Behind her stood her husband, overcome by recollections of the past.

 She rose, and held out her hands to him.

 “If you wish it, we will be friends,” she said.