FRIEND JOSEPH

 They had been great friends all winter in Paris. As is always the case,
      they had lost sight of each other after leaving school, and had met again
      when they were old and gray-haired. One of them had married, but the other
      had remained in single blessedness.

 M. de Meroul lived for six months in Paris and for six months in his
      little chateau at Tourbeville. Having married the daughter of a
      neighboring squire, he had lived a good and peaceful life in the
      indolence of a man who has nothing to do. Of a calm and quiet disposition,
      and not over-intelligent he used to spend his time quietly regretting the
      past, grieving over the customs and institutions of the day and
      continually repeating to his wife, who would lift her eyes, and sometimes
      her hands, to heaven, as a sign of energetic assent: “Good gracious!
      What a government!”

 Madame de Meroul resembled her husband intellectually as though she had
      been his sister. She knew, by tradition, that one should above all respect
      the Pope and the King!

 And she loved and respected them from the bottom of her heart, without
      knowing them, with a poetic fervor, with an hereditary devotion, with the
      tenderness of a wellborn woman. She was good to, the marrow of her bones.
      She had had no children, and never ceased mourning the fact.

 On meeting his old friend, Joseph Mouradour, at a ball, M. de Meroul was
      filled with a deep and simple joy, for in their youth they had been
      intimate friends.

 After the first exclamations of surprise at the changes which time had
      wrought in their bodies and countenances, they told each other about their
      lives since they had last met.

 Joseph Mouradour, who was from the south of France, had become a
      government official. His manner was frank; he spoke rapidly and without
      restraint, giving his opinions without any tact. He was a Republican, one
      of those good fellows who do not believe in standing on ceremony, and who
      exercise an almost brutal freedom of speech.

 He came to his friend's house and was immediately liked for his easy
      cordiality, in spite of his radical ideas. Madame de Meroul would exclaim:

 “What a shame! Such a charming man!”

 Monsieur de Meroul would say to his friend in a serious and confidential
      tone of voice; “You have no idea the harm that you are doing your
      country.” He loved him all the same, for nothing is stronger than
      the ties of childhood taken up again at a riper age. Joseph Mouradour
      bantered the wife and the husband, calling them “my amiable snails,”
      and sometimes he would solemnly declaim against people who were behind the
      times, against old prejudices and traditions.

 When he was once started on his democratic eloquence, the couple, somewhat
      ill at ease, would keep silent from politeness and good-breeding; then the
      husband would try to turn the conversation into some other channel in
      order to avoid a clash. Joseph Mouradour was only seen in the intimacy of
      the family.

 Summer came. The Merouls had no greater pleasure than to receive their
      friends at their country home at Tourbeville. It was a good, healthy
      pleasure, the enjoyments of good people and of country proprietors. They
      would meet their friends at the neighboring railroad station and would
      bring them back in their carriage, always on the lookout for compliments
      on the country, on its natural features, on the condition of the roads, on
      the cleanliness of the farm-houses, on the size of the cattle grazing in
      the fields, on everything within sight.

 They would call attention to the remarkable speed with which their horse
      trotted, surprising for an animal that did heavy work part of the year
      behind a plow; and they would anxiously await the opinion of the newcomer
      on their family domain, sensitive to the least word, and thankful for the
      slightest good intention.

 Joseph Mouradour was invited, and he accepted the invitation.

 Husband and wife had come to the train, delighted to welcome him to their
      home. As soon as he saw them, Joseph Mouradour jumped from the train with
      a briskness which increased their satisfaction. He shook their hands,
      congratulated them, overwhelmed them with compliments.

 All the way home he was charming, remarking on the height of the trees,
      the goodness of the crops and the speed of the horse.

 When he stepped on the porch of the house, Monsieur de Meroul said, with a
      certain friendly solemnity:

 “Consider yourself at home now.”

 Joseph Mouradour answered:

 “Thanks, my friend; I expected as much. Anyhow, I never stand on
      ceremony with my friends. That's how I understand hospitality.”

 Then he went upstairs to dress as a farmer, he said, and he came back all
      togged out in blue linen, with a little straw hat and yellow shoes, a
      regular Parisian dressed for an outing. He also seemed to become more
      vulgar, more jovial, more familiar; having put on with his country clothes
      a free and easy manner which he judged suitable to the surroundings. His
      new manners shocked Monsieur and Madame de Meroul a little, for they
      always remained serious and dignified, even in the country, as though
      compelled by the two letters preceding their name to keep up a certain
      formality even in the closest intimacy.

 After lunch they all went out to visit the farms, and the Parisian
      astounded the respectful peasants by his tone of comradeship.

 In the evening the priest came to dinner, an old, fat priest, accustomed
      to dining there on Sundays, but who had been especially invited this day
      in honor of the new guest.

 Joseph, on seeing him, made a wry face. Then he observed him with
      surprise, as though he were a creature of some peculiar race, which he had
      never been able to observe at close quarters. During the meal he told some
      rather free stories, allowable in the intimacy of the family, but which
      seemed to the Merouls a little out of place in the presence of a minister
      of the Church. He did not say, “Monsieur l'abbe,” but simply,
      “Monsieur.” He embarrassed the priest greatly by philosophical
      discussions about diverse superstitions current all over the world. He
      said: “Your God, monsieur, is of those who should be respected, but
      also one of those who should be discussed. Mine is called Reason; he has
      always been the enemy of yours.”

 The Merouls, distressed, tried to turn the trend of the conversation. The
      priest left very early.

 Then the husband said, very quietly:

 “Perhaps you went a little bit too far with the priest.”

 But Joseph immediately exclaimed:

 “Well, that's pretty good! As if I would be on my guard with a
      shaveling! And say, do me the pleasure of not imposing him on me any more
      at meals. You can both make use of him as much as you wish, but don't
      serve him up to your friends, hang it!”

 “But, my friends, think of his holy—”

 Joseph Mouradour interrupted him:

 “Yes, I know; they have to be treated like 'rosieres.' But let them
      respect my convictions, and I will respect theirs!”

 That was all for that day.

 As soon as Madame de Meroul entered the parlor, the next morning, she
      noticed in the middle of the table three newspapers which made her start
      the Voltaire, the Republique-Francaise and the Justice. Immediately Joseph
      Mouradour, still in blue, appeared on the threshold, attentively reading
      the Intransigeant. He cried:

 “There's a great article in this by Rochefort. That fellow is a
      wonder!”

 He read it aloud, emphasizing the parts which especially pleased him, so
      carried away by enthusiasm that he did not notice his friend's entrance.
      Monsieur de Meroul was holding in his hand the Gaulois for himself, the
      Clarion for his wife.

 The fiery prose of the master writer who overthrew the empire, spouted
      with violence, sung in the southern accent, rang throughout the peaceful
      parsons seemed to spatter the walls and century-old furniture with a hail
      of bold, ironical and destructive words.

 The man and the woman, one standing, the other sitting, were listening
      with astonishment, so shocked that they could not move.

 In a burst of eloquence Mouradour finished the last paragraph, then
      exclaimed triumphantly:

 “Well! that's pretty strong!”

 Then, suddenly, he noticed the two sheets which his friend was carrying,
      and he, in turn, stood speechless from surprise. Quickly walking toward
      him he demanded angrily:

 “What are you doing with those papers?”

 Monsieur de Meroul answered hesitatingly:

 “Why—those—those are my papers!”

 “Your papers! What are you doing—making fun of me? You will do
      me the pleasure of reading mine; they will limber up your ideas, and as
      for yours—there! that's what I do with them.”

 And before his astonished host could stop him, he had seized the two
      newspapers and thrown them out of the window. Then he solemnly handed the
      Justice to Madame de Meroul, the Voltaire to her husband, while he sank
      down into an arm-chair to finish reading the Intransigeant.

 The couple, through delicacy, made a pretense of reading a little, they
      then handed him back the Republican sheets, which they handled gingerly,
      as though they might be poisoned.

 He laughed and declared:

 “One week of this regime and I will have you converted to my ideas.”

 In truth, at the end of a week he ruled the house. He had closed the door
      against the priest, whom Madame de Meroul had to visit secretly; he had
      forbidden the Gaulois and the Clarion to be brought into the house, so
      that a servant had to go mysteriously to the post-office to get them, and
      as soon as he entered they would be hidden under sofa cushions; he
      arranged everything to suit himself—always charming, always
      good-natured, a jovial and all-powerful tyrant.

 Other friends were expected, pious and conservative friends. The unhappy
      couple saw the impossibility of having them there then, and, not knowing
      what to do, one evening they announced to Joseph Mouradour that they would
      be obliged to absent themselves for a few days, on business, and they
      begged him to stay on alone. He did not appear disturbed, and answered:

 “Very well, I don't mind! I will wait here as long as you wish. I
      have already said that there should be no formality between friends. You
      are perfectly right-go ahead and attend to your business. It will not
      offend me in the least; quite the contrary, it will make me feel much more
      completely one of the family. Go ahead, my friends, I will wait for you!”

 Monsieur and Madame de Meroul left the following day.

 He is still waiting for them.