GENERAL WASHINGTON'S NEGRO BODY-SERVANT

 A Biographical Sketch

 The stirring part of this celebrated colored man's life properly began
      with his death—that is to say, the notable features of his biography
      began with the first time he died. He had been little heard of up to that
      time, but since then we have never ceased to hear of him; we have never
      ceased to hear of him at stated, unfailing intervals. His was a most
      remarkable career, and I have thought that its history would make a
      valuable addition to our biographical literature. Therefore, I have
      carefully collated the materials for such a work, from authentic sources,
      and here present them to the public. I have rigidly excluded from these
      pages everything of a doubtful character, with the object in view of
      introducing my work into the schools for the instruction of the youth of
      my country.

 The name of the famous body-servant of General Washington was George.
      After serving his illustrious master faithfully for half a century, and
      enjoying throughout this long term his high regard and confidence, it
      became his sorrowful duty at last to lay that beloved master to rest in
      his peaceful grave by the Potomac. Ten years afterward—in 1809—full
      of years and honors, he died himself, mourned by all who knew him. The Boston
      Gazette of that date thus refers to the event:

  George, the favorite body-servant of the lamented Washington, died in
        Richmond, Va., last Tuesday, at the ripe age of 95 years. His intellect
        was unimpaired, and his memory tenacious, up to within a few minutes of
        his decease. He was present at the second installation of Washington as
        President, and also at his funeral, and distinctly remembered all the
        prominent incidents connected with those noted events.



 From this period we hear no more of the favorite body-servant of General
      Washington until May, 1825, at which time he died again. A Philadelphia
      paper thus speaks of the sad occurrence:

  At Macon, Ga., last week, a colored man named George, who was the
        favorite body-servant of General Washington, died at the advanced age of
        95 years. Up to within a few hours of his dissolution he was in full
        possession of all his faculties, and could distinctly recollect the
        second installation of Washington, his death and burial, the surrender
        of Cornwallis, the battle of Trenton, the griefs and hardships of Valley
        Forge, etc. Deceased was followed to the grave by the entire population
        of Macon.



 On the Fourth of July, 1830, and also of 1834 and 1836, the subject of
      this sketch was exhibited in great state upon the rostrum of the orator of
      the day, and in November of 1840 he died again. The St. Louis Republican of the 25th of that month spoke as follows:

  “ANOTHER RELIC OF THE REVOLUTION GONE.”

 “George, once the favorite body-servant of General Washington, died
        yesterday at the house of Mr. John Leavenworth in this city, at the
        venerable age of 95 years. He was in the full possession of his
        faculties up to the hour of his death, and distinctly recollected the
        first and second installations and death of President Washington, the
        surrender of Cornwallis, the battles of Trenton and Monmouth, the
        sufferings of the patriot army at Valley Forge, the proclamation of the
        Declaration of Independence, the speech of Patrick Henry in the Virginia
        House of Delegates, and many other old-time reminiscences of stirring
        interest. Few white men die lamented as was this aged negro. The funeral
        was very largely attended.”



 During the next ten or eleven years the subject of this sketch appeared at
      intervals at Fourth-of-July celebrations in various parts of the country,
      and was exhibited upon the rostrum with flattering success. But in the
      fall of 1855 he died again. The California papers thus speak of the event:

  ANOTHER OLD HERO GONE

 Died, at Dutch Flat, on the 7th of March, George (once the confidential
        body-servant of General Washington), at the great age of 95 years. His
        memory, which did not fail him till the last, was a wonderful storehouse
        of interesting reminiscences. He could distinctly recollect the first
        and second installations and death of President Washington, the
        surrender of Cornwallis, the battles of Trenton and Monmouth, and Bunker
        Hill, the proclamation of the Declaration of Independence, and
        Braddock's defeat. George was greatly respected in Dutch Flat, and it is
        estimated that there were 10,000 people present at his funeral.



 The last time the subject of this sketch died was in June, 1864; and until
      we learn the contrary, it is just to presume that he died permanently this
      time. The Michigan papers thus refer to the sorrowful event:

  ANOTHER CHERISHED REMNANT OF THE REVOLUTION GONE

 George, a colored man, and once the favorite body-servant of George
        Washington, died in Detroit last week, at the patriarchal age of 95
        years. To the moment of his death his intellect was unclouded, and he
        could distinctly remember the first and second installations and death
        of Washington, the surrender of Cornwallis, the battles of Trenton and
        Monmouth, and Bunker Hill, the proclamation of the Declaration of
        Independence, Braddock's defeat, the throwing over of the tea in Boston
        harbor, and the landing of the Pilgrims. He died greatly respected, and
        was followed to the grave by a vast concourse of people.



 The faithful old servant is gone! We shall never see him more until he
      turns up again. He has closed his long and splendid career of dissolution,
      for the present, and sleeps peacefully, as only they sleep who have earned
      their rest. He was in all respects a remarkable man. He held his age
      better than any celebrity that has figured in history; and the longer he
      lived the stronger and longer his memory grew. If he lives to die again,
      he will distinctly recollect the discovery of America.

 The above resume of his biography I believe to be substantially correct,
      although it is possible that he may have died once or twice in obscure
      places where the event failed of newspaper notoriety. One fault I find in
      all the notices of his death I have quoted, and this ought to be
      corrected. In them he uniformly and impartially died at the age of 95.
      This could not have been. He might have done that once, or maybe twice,
      but he could not have continued it indefinitely. Allowing that when he
      first died, he died at the age of 95, he was 151 years old when he died
      last, in 1864. But his age did not keep pace with his recollections. When
      he died the last time, he distinctly remembered the landing of the
      Pilgrims, which took place in 1620. He must have been about twenty years
      old when he witnessed that event, wherefore it is safe to assert that the
      body-servant of General Washington was in the neighborhood of two hundred
      and sixty or seventy years old when he departed this life finally.

 Having waited a proper length of time, to see if the subject of his sketch
      had gone from us reliably and irrevocably, I now publish his biography
      with confidence, and respectfully offer it to a mourning nation.

 P.S.—I see by the papers that this infamous old fraud has just died
      again, in Arkansas. This makes six times that he is known to have died,
      and always in a new place. The death of Washington's body-servant has
      ceased to be a novelty; it's charm is gone; the people are tired of it;
      let it cease. This well-meaning but misguided negro has now put six
      different communities to the expense of burying him in state, and has
      swindled tens of thousands of people into following him to the grave under
      the delusion that a select and peculiar distinction was being conferred
      upon them. Let him stay buried for good now; and let that newspaper suffer
      the severest censure that shall ever, in all the future time, publish to
      the world that General Washington's favorite colored body-servant has died
      again.