A GENTLEMAN FRIEND

 THE charming Vanda, or, as she was described in her passport, the
      "Honourable Citizen Nastasya Kanavkin," found herself, on leaving the
      hospital, in a position she had never been in before: without a home to go
      to or a farthing in her pocket. What was she to do?

 The first thing she did was to visit a pawn-broker's and pawn her
      turquoise ring, her one piece of jewellery. They gave her a rouble for the
      ring . . . but what can you get for a rouble? You can't buy for that sum a
      fashionable short jacket, nor a big hat, nor a pair of bronze shoes, and
      without those things she had a feeling of being, as it were, undressed.
      She felt as though the very horses and dogs were staring and laughing at
      the plainness of her dress. And clothes were all she thought about: the
      question what she should eat and where she should sleep did not trouble
      her in the least.

 "If only I could meet a gentleman friend," she thought to herself, "I
      could get some money. . . . There isn't one who would refuse me, I know. .
      ."

 But no gentleman she knew came her way. It would be easy enough to meet
      them in the evening at the "Renaissance," but they wouldn't let her in at
      the "Renaissance" in that shabby dress and with no hat. What was she to
      do?

 After long hesitation, when she was sick of walking and sitting and
      thinking, Vanda made up her mind to fall back on her last resource: to go
      straight to the lodgings of some gentleman friend and ask for money.

 She pondered which to go to. "Misha is out of the question; he's a married
      man. . . . The old chap with the red hair will be at his office at this
      time. . ."

 Vanda remembered a dentist, called Finkel, a converted Jew, who six months
      ago had given her a bracelet, and on whose head she had once emptied a
      glass of beer at the supper at the German Club. She was awfully pleased at
      the thought of Finkel.

 "He'll be sure to give it me, if only I find him at home," she thought, as
      she walked in his direction. "If he doesn't, I'll smash all the lamps in
      the house."

 Before she reached the dentist's door she thought out her plan of action:
      she would run laughing up the stairs, dash into the dentist's room and
      demand twenty-five roubles. But as she touched the bell, this plan seemed
      to vanish from her mind of itself. Vanda began suddenly feeling frightened
      and nervous, which was not at all her way. She was bold and saucy enough
      at drinking parties, but now, dressed in everyday clothes, feeling herself
      in the position of an ordinary person asking a favour, who might be
      refused admittance, she felt suddenly timid and humiliated. She was
      ashamed and frightened.

 "Perhaps he has forgotten me by now," she thought, hardly daring to pull
      the bell. "And how can I go up to him in such a dress, looking like a
      beggar or some working girl?"

 And she rang the bell irresolutely.

 She heard steps coming: it was the porter.

 "Is the doctor at home?" she asked.

 She would have been glad now if the porter had said "No," but the latter,
      instead of answering ushered her into the hall, and helped her off with
      her coat. The staircase impressed her as luxurious, and magnificent, but
      of all its splendours what caught her eye most was an immense
      looking-glass, in which she saw a ragged figure without a fashionable
      jacket, without a big hat, and without bronze shoes. And it seemed strange
      to Vanda that, now that she was humbly dressed and looked like a laundress
      or sewing girl, she felt ashamed, and no trace of her usual boldness and
      sauciness remained, and in her own mind she no longer thought of herself
      as Vanda, but as the Nastasya Kanavkin she used to be in the old days. . .
      .

 "Walk in, please," said a maidservant, showing her into the
      consulting-room. "The doctor will be here in a minute. Sit down."

 Vanda sank into a soft arm-chair.

 "I'll ask him to lend it me," she thought; "that will be quite proper,
      for, after all, I do know him. If only that servant would go. I don't like
      to ask before her. What does she want to stand there for?"

 Five minutes later the door opened and Finkel came in. He was a tall, dark
      Jew, with fat cheeks and bulging eyes. His cheeks, his eyes, his chest,
      his body, all of him was so well fed, so loathsome and repellent! At the
      "Renaissance" and the German Club he had usually been rather tipsy, and
      would spend his money freely on women, and be very long-suffering and
      patient with their pranks (when Vanda, for instance, poured the beer over
      his head, he simply smiled and shook his finger at her): now he had a
      cross, sleepy expression and looked solemn and frigid like a police
      captain, and he kept chewing something.

 "What can I do for you?" he asked, without looking at Vanda.

 Vanda looked at the serious countenance of the maid and the smug figure of
      Finkel, who apparently did not recognize her, and she turned red.

 "What can I do for you?" repeated the dentist a little irritably.

 "I've got toothache," murmured Vanda.

 "Aha! . . . Which is the tooth? Where?"

 Vanda remembered she had a hole in one of her teeth.

 "At the bottom . . . on the right . . ." she said.

 "Hm! . . . Open your mouth."

 Finkel frowned and, holding his breath, began examining the tooth.

 "Does it hurt?" he asked, digging into it with a steel instrument.

 "Yes," Vanda replied, untruthfully.

 "Shall I remind him?" she was wondering. "He would be sure to remember me.
      But that servant! Why will she stand there?"

 Finkel suddenly snorted like a steam-engine right into her mouth, and
      said:

 "I don't advise you to have it stopped. That tooth will never be worth
      keeping anyhow."

 After probing the tooth a little more and soiling Vanda's lips and gums
      with his tobacco-stained fingers, he held his breath again, and put
      something cold into her mouth. Vanda suddenly felt a sharp pain, cried
      out, and clutched at Finkel's hand.

 "It's all right, it's all right," he muttered; "don't you be frightened!
      That tooth would have been no use to you, anyway . . . you must be brave.
      . ."

 And his tobacco-stained fingers, smeared with blood, held up the tooth to
      her eyes, while the maid approached and put a basin to her mouth.

 "You wash out your mouth with cold water when you get home, and that will
      stop the bleeding," said Finkel.

 He stood before her with the air of a man expecting her to go, waiting to
      be left in peace.

 "Good-day," she said, turning towards the door.

 "Hm! . . . and how about my fee?" enquired Finkel, in a jesting tone.

 "Oh, yes!" Vanda remembered, blushing, and she handed the Jew the rouble
      that had been given her for her ring.

 When she got out into the street she felt more overwhelmed with shame than
      before, but now it was not her poverty she was ashamed of. She was
      unconscious now of not having a big hat and a fashionable jacket. She
      walked along the street, spitting blood, and brooding on her life, her
      ugly, wretched life, and the insults she had endured, and would have to
      endure to-morrow, and next week, and all her life, up to the very day of
      her death.

 "Oh! how awful it is! My God, how fearful!"

 Next day, however, she was back at the "Renaissance," and dancing there.
      She had on an enormous new red hat, a new fashionable jacket, and bronze
      shoes. And she was taken out to supper by a young merchant up from Kazan.