GOD SEES THE TRUTH, BUT WAITS

 BY LEO N. TOLSTOY

  I

n the town of
      Vladimir lived a young merchant named Ivan Dmitrich Aksionov. He had two
      shops and a house of his own.

 Aksionov was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun,
      and very fond of singing. When quite a young man he had been given to
      drink, and was riotous when he had had too much; but after he married he
      gave up drinking, except now and then.

 One summer Aksionov was going to the Nizhny Fair, and as he bade good-bye
      to his family, his wife said to him, “Ivan Dmitrich, do not start
      to-day; I have had a bad dream about you.”

 Aksionov laughed, and said, “You are afraid that when I get to the
      fair I shall go on a spree.”

 His wife replied: “I do not know what I am afraid of; all I know is
      that I had a bad dream. I dreamt you returned from the town, and when you
      took off your cap I saw that your hair was quite grey.”

 Aksionov laughed. “That’s a lucky sign,” said he.
      “See if I don’t sell out all my goods, and bring you some
      presents from the fair.”

 So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.

 When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew, and they
      put up at the same inn for the night. They had some tea together, and then
      went to bed in adjoining rooms.

 It was not Aksionov’s habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel
      while it was still cool, he aroused his driver before dawn, and told him
      to put in the horses.

 Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who lived in a
      cottage at the back), paid his bill, and continued his journey.

 When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the horses to be
      fed. Aksionov rested awhile in the passage of the inn, then he stepped out
      into the porch, and, ordering a samovar to be heated, got out his guitar
      and began to play.

 Suddenly a troika drove up with tinkling bells and an official alighted,
      followed by two soldiers. He came to Aksionov and began to question him,
      asking him who he was and whence he came. Aksionov answered him fully, and
      said, “Won’t you have some tea with me?” But the
      official went on cross-questioning him and asking him. “Where did
      you spend last night? Were you alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you
      see the other merchant this morning? Why did you leave the inn before
      dawn?”

 Aksionov wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he described
      all that had happened, and then added, “Why do you cross-question me
      as if I were a thief or a robber? I am travelling on business of my own,
      and there is no need to question me.”

 Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, “I am the
      police-officer of this district, and I question you because the merchant
      with whom you spent last night has been found with his throat cut. We must
      search your things.”

 They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer unstrapped
      Aksionov’s luggage and searched it. Suddenly the officer drew a
      knife out of a bag, crying, “Whose knife is this?”

 Aksionov looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from his bag, he
      was frightened.

 “How is it there is blood on this knife?”

 Aksionov tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only
      stammered: “I—don’t know—not mine.” Then the
      police-officer said: “This morning the merchant was found in bed
      with his throat cut. You are the only person who could have done it. The
      house was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is this
      blood-stained knife in your bag and your face and manner betray you! Tell
      me how you killed him, and how much money you stole?”

 Aksionov swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the merchant after
      they had had tea together; that he had no money except eight thousand
      rubles of his own, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was
      broken, his face pale, and he trembled with fear as though he went guilty.

 The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksionov and to put him in
      the cart. As they tied his feet together and flung him into the cart,
      Aksionov crossed himself and wept. His money and goods were taken from
      him, and he was sent to the nearest town and imprisoned there. Enquiries
      as to his character were made in Vladimir. The merchants and other
      inhabitants of that town said that in former days he used to drink and
      waste his time, but that he was a good man. Then the trial came on: he was
      charged with murdering a merchant from Ryazan, and robbing him of twenty
      thousand rubles.

 His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children
      were all quite small; one was a baby at her breast. Taking them all with
      her, she went to the town where her husband was in jail. At first she was
      not allowed to see him; but after much begging, she obtained permission
      from the officials, and was taken to him. When she saw her husband in
      prison-dress and in chains, shut up with thieves and criminals, she fell
      down, and did not come to her senses for a long time. Then she drew her
      children to her, and sat down near him. She told him of things at home,
      and asked about what had happened to him. He told her all, and she asked,
      “What can we do now?”

 “We must petition the Czar not to let an innocent man perish.”

 His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Czar, but it had not
      been accepted.

 Aksionov did not reply, but only looked downcast.

 Then his wife said, “It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had
      turned grey. You remember? You should not have started that day.”
      And passing her fingers through his hair, she said: “Vanya dearest,
      tell your wife the truth; was it not you who did it?”

 “So you, too, suspect me!” said Aksionov, and, hiding his face
      in his hands, he began to weep. Then a soldier came to say that the wife
      and children must go away; and Aksionov said good-bye to his family for
      the last time.

 When they were gone, Aksionov recalled what had been said, and when he
      remembered that his wife also had suspected him, he said to himself,
      “It seems that only God can know the truth; it is to Him alone we
      must appeal, and from Him alone expect mercy.”

 And Aksionov wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only prayed to
      God.

 Aksionov was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was
      flogged with a knot, and when the wounds made by the knot were healed, he
      was driven to Siberia with other convicts.

 For twenty-six years Aksionov lived as a convict in Siberia. His hair
      turned white as snow, and his beard grew long, thin, and grey. All his
      mirth went; he stooped; he walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed,
      but he often prayed.

 In prison Aksionov learnt to make boots, and earned a little money, with
      which he bought The Lives of the Saints . He read this book when
      there was light enough in the prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church
      he read the lessons and sang in the choir; for his voice was still good.

 The prison authorities liked Aksionov for his meekness, and his
      fellow-prisoners respected him: they called him “Grandfather,”
      and “The Saint.” When they wanted to petition the prison
      authorities about anything, they always made Aksionov their spokesman, and
      when there were quarrels among the prisoners they came to him to put
      things right, and to judge the matter.

 No news reached Aksionov from his home, and he did not even know if his
      wife and children were still alive.

 One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the evening the
      old prisoners collected round the new ones and asked them what towns or
      villages they came from, and what they were sentenced for. Among the rest
      Aksionov sat down near the newcomers, and listened with downcast air to
      what was said.

 One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a
      closely-cropped grey beard, was telling the others what he had been
      arrested for.

 “Well, friends,” he said, “I only took a horse that was
      tied to a sledge, and I was arrested and accused of stealing. I said I had
      only taken it to get home quicker, and had then let it go; besides, the
      driver was a personal friend of mine. So I said, ‘It’s all
      right.’ 'No,’ said they, ‘you stole it.’ But how
      or where I stole it they could not say. I once really did something wrong,
      and ought by rights to have come here long ago, but that time I was not
      found out. Now I have been sent here for nothing at all... Eh, but it’s
      lies I’m telling you; I’ve been to Siberia before, but I did
      not stay long.”

 “Where are you from?” asked some one.

 “From Vladimir. My family are of that town. My name is Makar, and
      they also call me Semyonich.”

 Aksionov raised his head and said: “Tell me, Semyonich, do you know
      anything of the merchants Aksionov of Vladimir? Are they still alive?”

 “Know them? Of course I do. The Aksionovs are rich, though their
      father is in Siberia: a sinner like ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran’dad,
      how did you come here?”

 Aksionov did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighed, and
      said, “For my sins I have been in prison these twenty-six years.”

 “What sins?” asked Makar Semyonich.

 But Aksionov only said, “Well, well—I must have deserved it!”
      He would have said no more, but his companions told the newcomers how
      Aksionov came to be in Siberia; how some one had killed a merchant, and
      had put the knife among Aksionov’s things, and Aksionov had been
      unjustly condemned.

 When Makar Semyonich heard this, he looked at Aksionov, slapped his own knee, and exclaimed, “Well, this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But
      how old you’ve grown, Gran’dad!”

 The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen
      Aksionov before; but Makar Semyonich did not reply. He only said: “It’s
      wonderful that we should meet here, lads!”

 These words made Aksionov wonder whether this man knew who had killed the
      merchant; so he said, “Perhaps, Semyonich, you have heard of that
      affair, or maybe you’ve seen me before?”

 “How could I help hearing? The world’s full of rumours. But it’s
      a long time ago, and I’ve forgotten what I heard.”

 “Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?” asked Aksionov.

 Makar Semyonich laughed, and replied: “It must have been him in
      whose bag the knife was found! If some one else hid the knife there,
      ‘He’s not a thief till he’s caught,’ as the saying
      is. How could any one put a knife into your bag while it was under your
      head? It would surely have woke you up.”

 When Aksionov heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had
      killed the merchant. He rose and went away. All that night Aksionov lay
      awake. He felt terribly unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his mind.
      There was the image of his wife as she was when he parted from her to go
      to the fair. He saw her as if she were present; her face and her eyes rose
      before him; he heard her speak and laugh. Then he saw his children, quite
      little, as they were at that time: one with a little cloak on, another at
      his mother’s breast. And then he remembered himself as he used to
      be-young and merry. He remembered how he sat playing the guitar in the
      porch of the inn where he was arrested, and how free from care he had
      been. He saw, in his mind, the place where he was flogged, the
      executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the convicts, all
      the twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The
      thought of it all made him so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.

 “And it’s all that villain’s doing!” thought
      Aksionov. And his anger was so great against Makar Semyonich that he
      longed for vengeance, even if he himself should perish for it. He kept
      repeating prayers all night, but could get no peace. During the day he did
      not go near Makar Semyonich, nor even look at him.

 A fortnight passed in this way. Aksionov could not sleep at night, and was
      so miserable that he did not know what to do.

 One night as he was walking about the prison he noticed some earth that
      came rolling out from under one of the shelves on which the prisoners
      slept. He stopped to see what it was. Suddenly Makar Semyonich crept out
      from under the shelf, and looked up at Aksionov with frightened face.
      Aksionov tried to pass without looking at him, but Makar seized his hand
      and told him that he had dug a hole under the wall, getting rid of the
      earth by putting it into his high-boots, and emptying it out every day on
      the road when the prisoners were driven to their work.

 “Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you
      blab, they’ll flog the life out of me, but I will kill you first.”

 Aksionov trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew his hand
      away, saying, “I have no wish to escape, and you have no need to
      kill me; you killed me long ago! As to telling of you—I may do so or
      not, as God shall direct.”

 Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers
      noticed that one or other of the prisoners emptied some earth out of his
      boots. The prison was searched and the tunnel found. The Governor came and
      questioned all the prisoners to find out who had dug the hole. They all
      denied any knowledge of it. Those who knew would not betray Makar
      Semyonich, knowing he would be flogged almost to death. At last the
      Governor turned to Aksionov whom he knew to be a just man, and said:

 “You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?”

 Makar Semyonich stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the
      Governor and not so much as glancing at Aksionov. Aksionov’s lips
      and hands trembled, and for a long time he could not utter a word. He
      thought, “Why should I screen him who ruined my life? Let him pay
      for what I have suffered. But if I tell, they will probably flog the life
      out of him, and maybe I suspect him wrongly. And, after all, what good
      would it be to me?”

 “Well, old man,” repeated the Governor, “tell me the
      truth: who has been digging under the wall?”

 Aksionov glanced at Makar Semyonich, and said, “I cannot say, your
      honour. It is not God’s will that I should tell! Do what you like
      with me; I am in your hands.”

 However much the Governor tried, Aksionov would say no more, and so the
      matter had to be left.

 That night, when Aksionov was lying on his bed and just beginning to doze,
      some one came quietly and sat down on his bed. He peered through the
      darkness and recognised Makar.

 “What more do you want of me?” asked Aksionov. “Why have
      you come here?”

 Makar Semyonich was silent. So Aksionov sat up and said, “What do
      you want? Go away, or I will call the guard!”

 Makar Semyonich bent close over Aksionov, and whispered, “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!”

 “What for?” asked Aksionov.

 “It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your
      things. I meant to kill you too, but I heard a noise outside, so I hid the
      knife in your bag and escaped out of the window.”

 Aksionov was silent, and did not know what to say. Makar Semyonich slid
      off the bed-shelf and knelt upon the ground. “Ivan Dmitrich,”
      said he, “forgive me! For the love of God, forgive me! I will
      confess that it was I who killed the merchant, and you will be released
      and can go to your home.”

 “It is easy for you to talk,” said Aksionov, “but I have
      suffered for you these twenty-six years. Where could I go to now?... My
      wife is dead, and my children have forgotten me. I have nowhere to go...”

 Makar Semyonich did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!” he cried. “When they flogged me with
      the knot it was not so hard to bear as it is to see you now ... yet you
      had pity on me, and did not tell. For Christ’s sake forgive me,
      wretch that I am!” And he began to sob.

 When Aksionov heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep. “God will
      forgive you!” said he. “Maybe I am a hundred times worse than
      you.” And at these words his heart grew light, and the longing for
      home left him. He no longer had any desire to leave the prison, but only
      hoped for his last hour to come.

 In spite of what Aksionov had said, Makar Semyonich confessed his guilt.
      But when the order for his release came, Aksionov was already dead.