GOUSSIEV

  I

T was already dark and would soon be night.

 Goussiev, a private on long leave, raised himself a little in his hammock
      and said in a whisper:

 "Can you hear me, Pavel Ivanich? A soldier at Souchan told me that their
      boat ran into an enormous fish and knocked a hole in her bottom."

 The man of condition unknown whom he addressed, and whom everybody in the
      hospital-ship called Pavel Ivanich, was silent, as if he had not heard.

 And once more there was silence.... The wind whistled through the rigging,
      the screw buzzed, the waves came washing, the hammocks squeaked, but to
      all these sounds their ears were long since accustomed and it seemed as
      though everything were wrapped in sleep and silence. It was very
      oppressive. The three patients—two soldiers and a sailor—who
      had played cards all day were now asleep and tossing to and fro.

 The vessel began to shake. The hammock under Goussiev slowly heaved up and
      down, as though it were breathing—one, two, three.... Something
      crashed on the floor and began to tinkle: the jug must have fallen down.

 "The wind has broken loose...." said Goussiev, listening attentively.

 This time Pavel Ivanich coughed and answered irritably:

 "You spoke just now of a ship colliding with a large fish, and now you
      talk of the wind breaking loose.... Is the wind a dog to break loose?"

 "That's what people say."

 "Then people are as ignorant as you.... But what do they not say? You
      should keep a head on your shoulders and think. Silly idiot!"

 Pavel Ivanich was subject to seasickness. When the ship rolled he would
      get very cross, and the least trifle would upset him, though Goussiev
      could never see anything to be cross about. What was there unusual in his
      story about the fish or in his saying that the wind had broken loose?
      Suppose the fish were as big as a mountain and its back were as hard as a
      sturgeon's, and suppose that at the end of the wood there were huge stone
      walls with the snarling winds chained up to them.... If they do not break
      loose, why then do they rage over the sea as though they were possessed,
      and rush about like dogs? If they are not chained, what happens to them
      when it is calm?

 Goussiev thought for a long time of a fish as big as a mountain, and of
      thick rusty chains; then he got tired of that and began to think of his
      native place whither he was returning after five years' service in the Far
      East. He saw with his mind's eye the great pond covered with snow.... On
      one side of the pond was a brick-built pottery, with a tall chimney
      belching clouds of black smoke, and on the other side was the village....
      From the yard of the fifth house from the corner came his brother Alency
      in a sledge; behind him sat his little son Vanka in large felt boots, and
      his daughter Akulka, also in felt boots. Alency is tipsy, Vanka laughs,
      and Akulka's face is hidden—she is well wrapped up.

 "The children will catch cold ..." thought Goussiev. "God grant them," he
      whispered, "a pure right mind that they may honour their parents and be
      better than their father and mother...."

 "The boots want soling," cried the sick sailor in a deep voice. "Aye,
      aye."

 The thread of Goussiev's thoughts was broken, and instead of the pond,
      suddenly—without rhyme or reason—he saw a large bull's head
      without eyes, and the horse and sledge did not move on, but went round and
      round in a black mist. But still he was glad he had seen his dear ones. He
      gasped for joy, and his limbs tingled and his fingers throbbed.

 "God suffered me to see them!" he muttered, and opened his eyes and looked
      round in the darkness for water.

 He drank, then lay down again, and once more the sledge skimmed along, and
      he saw the bull's head without eyes, black smoke, clouds of it. And so on
      till dawn.

 II

 At first through the darkness there appeared only a blue circle, the
      port-hole, then Goussiev began slowly to distinguish the man in the next
      hammock, Pavel Ivanich. He was sleeping in a sitting position, for if he
      lay down he could not breathe. His face was grey; his nose long and sharp,
      and his eyes were huge, because he was so thin; his temples were sunk, his
      beard scanty, the hair on his head long.... By his face it was impossible
      to tell his class: gentleman, merchant, or peasant; judging by his
      appearance and long hair he looked almost like a recluse, a lay-brother,
      but when he spoke—he was not at all like a monk. He was losing
      strength through his cough and his illness and the suffocating heat, and
      he breathed heavily and was always moving his dry lips. Noticing that
      Goussiev was looking at him, he turned toward him and said:

 "I'm beginning to understand.... Yes.... Now I understand."

 "What do you understand, Pavel Ivanich?"

 "Yes.... It was strange to me at first, why you sick men, instead of being
      kept quiet, should be on this steamer, where the heat is stifling, and
      stinking, and pitching and tossing, and must be fatal to you; but now it
      is all clear to me.... Yes. The doctors sent you to the steamer to get rid
      of you. They got tired of all the trouble you gave them, brutes like you.

 ...You don't pay them; you only give a lot of trouble, and if you die you
      spoil their reports. Therefore you are just cattle, and there is no
      difficulty in getting rid of you.... They only need to lack conscience and
      humanity, and to deceive the owners of the steamer. We needn't worry about
      the first, they are experts by nature; but the second needs a certain
      amount of practice. In a crowd of four hundred healthy soldiers and
      sailors—five sick men are never noticed; so you were carried up to
      the steamer, mixed with a healthy lot who were counted in such a hurry
      that nothing wrong was noticed, and when the steamer got away they saw
      fever-stricken and consumptive men lying helpless on the deck...."

 Goussiev could not make out what Pavel Ivanich was talking about; thinking
      he was being taken to task, he said by way of excusing himself:

 "I lay on the deck because when we were taken off the barge I caught a
      chill."

 "Shocking!" said Pavel Ivanich. "They know quite well that you can't last
      out the voyage, and yet they send you here! You may get as far as the
      Indian Ocean, but what then? It is awful to think of.... And that's all
      the return you get for faithful unblemished service!"

 Pavel Ivanich looked very angry, and smote his forehead and gasped:

 "They ought to be shown up in the papers. There would be an awful row."

 The two sick soldiers and the sailor were already up and had begun to play
      cards, the sailor propped up in his hammock, and the soldiers squatting
      uncomfortably on the floor. One soldier had his right arm in a sling and
      his wrist was tightly bandaged so that he had to hold the cards in his
      left hand or in the crook of his elbow. The boat was rolling violently so
      that it was impossible to get up or to drink tea or to take medicine.

 "You were an orderly?" Pavel Ivanich asked Goussiev.

 "That's it. An orderly."

 "My God, my God!" said Pavel Ivanich sorrowfully. "To take a man from his
      native place, drag him fifteen thousand miles, drive him into consumption
      ... and what for? I ask you. To make him an orderly to some Captain
      Farthing or Midshipman Hole! Where's the sense of it?"

 "It's not a bad job, Pavel Ivanich. You get up in the morning, clean the
      boots, boil the samovar, tidy up the room, and then there is nothing to
      do. The lieutenant draws plans all day long, and you can pray to God if
      you like—or read books—or go out into the streets. It's a good
      enough life."

 "Yes. Very good! The lieutenant draws plans, and you stay in the kitchen
      all day long and suffer from homesickness.... Plans.... Plans don't
      matter. It's human life that matters! Life doesn't come again. One should
      be sparing of it."

 "Certainly Pavel Ivanich. A bad man meets no quarter, either at home, or
      in the army, but if you live straight, and do as you are told, then no one
      will harm you. They are educated and they understand.... For five years
      now I've never been in the cells and I've only been thrashed once—touch
      wood!"

 "What was that for?"

 "Fighting. I have a heavy fist, Pavel Ivanich. Four Chinamen came into our
      yard: they were carrying wood, I think, but I don't remember. Well, I was
      bored. I went for them and one of them got a bloody nose. The lieutenant
      saw it through the window and gave me a thick ear."

 "You poor fool," muttered Pavel Ivanich. "You don't understand anything."

 He was completely exhausted with the tossing of the boat and shut his
      eyes; his head fell back and then flopped forward onto his chest. He tried
      several times to lie down, but in vain, for he could not breathe.

 "And why did you go for the four Chinamen?" he asked after a while.

 "For no reason. They came into the yard and I went for them."

 Silence fell.... The gamblers played for a couple of hours, absorbed and
      cursing, but the tossing of the ship tired even them; they threw the cards
      away and laid down. Once more Goussiev thought of the big pond, the
      pottery, the village. Once more the sledges skimmed along, once more Vanka
      laughed, and that fool of an Akulka opened her fur coat, and stretched out
      her feet; look, she seemed to say, look, poor people, my felt boots are
      new and not like Vanka's.

 "She's getting on for six and still she has no sense!" said Goussiev.
      "Instead of showing your boots off, why don't you bring some water to your
      soldier-uncle? I'll give you a present."

 Then came Andrea, with his firelock on his shoulder, carrying a hare he
      had shot, and he was followed by Tsaichik the cripple, who offered him a
      piece of soap for the hare; and there was the black heifer in the yard,
      and Domna sewing a shirt and crying over something, and there was the
      eyeless bull's head and the black smoke....

 Overhead there was shouting, sailors running; the sound of something heavy
      being dragged along the deck, or something had broken.... More running.
      Something wrong? Goussiev raised his head, listened and saw the two
      soldiers and the sailor playing cards again; Pavel Ivanich sitting up and
      moving his lips. It was very close, he could hardly breathe, he wanted a
      drink, but the water was warm and disgusting.... The pitching of the boat
      was now better.

 Suddenly something queer happened to one of the soldiers.... He called ace
      of diamonds, lost his reckoning and dropped his cards. He started and
      laughed stupidly and looked round.

 "In a moment, you fellows," he said and lay down on the floor.

 All were at a loss. They shouted at him but he made no reply.

 "Stiepan, are you ill?" asked the other soldier with the bandaged hand.
      "Perhaps we'd better call the priest, eh?"

 "Stiepan, drink some water," said the sailor. "Here, mate, have a drink."

 "What's the good of breaking his teeth with the jug," shouted Goussiev
      angrily. "Don't you see, you fatheads?"

 "What."

 "What!" cried Goussiev. "He's snuffed it, dead. That's what! Good God,
      what fools!..."

 III

 The rolling stopped and Pavel Ivanich cheered up. He was no longer
      peevish. His face had an arrogant, impetuous, and mocking expression. He
      looked as if he were on the point of saying: "I'll tell you a story that
      will make you die of laughter." Their port-hole was open and a soft wind
      blew in on Pavel Ivanich. Voices could be heard and the splash of oars in
      the water.... Beneath the window some one was howling in a thin, horrible
      voice; probably a Chinaman singing.

 "Yes. We are in harbour," said Pavel Ivanich, smiling mockingly. "Another
      month and we shall be in Russia. It's true; my gallant warriors, I shall
      get to Odessa and thence I shall go straight to Kharkhov. At Kharkhov I
      have a friend, a literary man. I shall go to him and I shall say, 'now, my
      friend, give up your rotten little love-stories and descriptions of
      nature, and expose the vileness of the human biped.... There's a subject
      for you.'"

 He thought for a moment and then he said:

 "Goussiev, do you know how I swindled them?"

 "Who, Pavel Ivanich?"

 "The lot out there.... You see there's only first and third class on the
      steamer, and only peasants are allowed to go third. If you have a decent
      suit, and look like a nobleman or a bourgeois, at a distance, then you
      must go first. It may break you, but you have to lay down your five
      hundred roubles. 'What's the point of such an arrangement?' I asked. 'Is
      it meant to raise the prestige of Russian intellectuals?' 'Not a bit,'
      said they. 'We don't let you go, simply because it is impossible for a
      decent man to go third. It is so vile and disgusting.' 'Yes,' said I.
      'Thanks for taking so much trouble about decent people. Anyhow, bad or no,
      I haven't got five hundred roubles as I have neither robbed the treasury
      nor exploited foreigners, nor dealt in contraband, nor flogged any one to
      death, and, therefore, I think I have a right to go first-class and to
      take rank with the intelligentsia of Russia.' But there's no convincing
      them by logic.... I had to try fraud. I put on a peasant's coat and long
      boots, and a drunken, stupid expression and went to the agent and said:
      'Give me a ticket, your Honour.'

 "'What's your position?' says the agent.

 "'Clerical,' said I. 'My father was an honest priest. He always told the
      truth to the great ones of the earth, and so he suffered much.'"

 Pavel Ivanich got tired with talking, and his breath failed him, but he
      went on:

 "Yes. I always tell the truth straight out.... I am afraid of nobody and
      nothing. There's a great difference between myself and you in that
      respect. You are dull, blind, stupid, you see nothing, and you don't
      understand what you do see. You are told that the wind breaks its chain,
      that you are brutes and worse, and you believe; you are thrashed and you
      kiss the hand that thrashes you; a swine in a raccoon pelisse robs you,
      and throws you sixpence for tea, and you say: 'Please, your Honour, let me
      kiss your hand.' You are pariahs, skunks.... I am different. I live
      consciously. I see everything, as an eagle or a hawk sees when it hovers
      over the earth, and I understand everything. I am a living protest. I see
      injustice—I protest; I see bigotry and hypocrisy—I protest; I
      see swine triumphant—I protest, and I am unconquerable. No Spanish
      inquisition can make me hold my tongue. Aye.... Cut my tongue out. I'll
      protest by gesture.... Shut me up in a dungeon—I'll shout so loud
      that I shall be heard for a mile round, or I'll starve myself, so that
      there shall be a still heavier weight on their black consciences. Kill me—and
      my ghost will return. All my acquaintances tell me: 'You are a most
      insufferable man, Pavel Ivanich!' I am proud of such a reputation. I
      served three years in the Far East, and have got bitter memories enough
      for a hundred years. I inveighed against it all. My friends write from
      Russia: 'Do not come.' But I'm going, to spite them.... Yes.... That is
      life. I understand. You can call that life."

 Goussiev was not listening, but lay looking out of the port-hole; on the
      transparent lovely turquoise water swung a boat all shining in the
      shimmering light; a fat Chinaman was sitting in it eating rice with
      chop-sticks. The water murmured softly, and over it lazily soared white
      sea-gulls.

 "It would be fun to give that fat fellow one on the back of his neck...."
      thought Goussiev, watching the fat Chinaman and yawning.

 He dozed, and it seemed to him that all the world was slumbering. Time
      slipped swiftly away. The day passed imperceptibly; imperceptibly the
      twilight fell.... The steamer was still no longer but was moving on.

 IV

 Two days passed. Pavel Ivanich no longer sat up, but lay full length; his
      eyes were closed and his nose seemed to be sharper than ever.

 "Pavel Ivanich!" called Goussiev, "Pavel Ivanich."

 Pavel Ivanich opened his eyes and moved his lips.

 "Aren't you well?"

 "It's nothing," answered Pavel Ivanich, breathing heavily. "It's nothing.
      No. I'm much better. You see I can lie down now. I'm much better."

 "Thank God for it, Pavel Ivanich."

 "When I compare myself with you, I am sorry for you ... poor devils. My
      lungs are all right; my cough comes from indigestion ... I can endure this
      hell, not to mention the Red Sea! Besides, I have a critical attitude
      toward my illness, as well as to my medicine. But you ... you are
      ignorant.... It's hard lines on you, very hard."

 The ship was running smoothly; it was calm but still stifling and hot as a
      Turkish bath; it was hard not only to speak but even to listen without an
      effort. Goussiev clasped his knees, leaned his head on them and thought of
      his native place. My God, in such heat it was a pleasure to think of snow
      and cold! He saw himself driving on a sledge, and suddenly the horses were
      frightened and bolted.... Heedless of roads, dikes, ditches they rushed
      like mad through the village, across the pond, past the works, through the
      fields.... "Hold them in!" cried the women and the passers-by. "Hold them
      in!" But why hold them in? Let the cold wind slap your face and cut your
      hands; let the lumps of snow thrown up by the horses' hoofs fall on your
      hat, down your neck and chest; let the runners of the sledge be buckled,
      and the traces and harness be torn and be damned to it! What fun when the
      sledge topples over and you are flung hard into a snow-drift; with your
      face slap into the snow, and you get up all white with your moustaches
      covered with icicles, hatless, gloveless, with your belt undone.... People
      laugh and dogs bark....

 Pavel Ivanich, with one eye half open looked at Goussiev and asked
      quietly:

 "Goussiev, did your commander steal?"

 "How do I know, Pavel Ivanich? The likes of us don't hear of it."

 A long time passed in silence. Goussiev thought, dreamed, drank water; it
      was difficult to speak, difficult to hear, and he was afraid of being
      spoken to. One hour passed, a second, a third; evening came, then night;
      but he noticed nothing as he sat dreaming of the snow.

 He could hear some one coming into the ward; voices, but five minutes
      passed and all was still.

 "God rest his soul!" said the soldier with the bandaged hand. "He was a
      restless man."

 "What?" asked Goussiev. "Who?"

 "He's dead. He has just been taken up-stairs."

 "Oh, well," muttered Goussiev with a yawn. "God rest his soul."

 "What do you think, Goussiev?" asked the bandaged soldier after some time.
      "Will he go to heaven?"

 "Who?"

 "Pavel Ivanich."

 "He will. He suffered much. Besides, he was a priest's son, and priests
      have many relations. They will pray for his soul."

 The bandaged soldier sat down on Goussiev's hammock and said in an
      undertone:

 "You won't live much longer, Goussiev. You'll never see Russia."

 "Did the doctor or the nurse tell you that?" asked Goussiev.

 "No one told me, but I can see it. You can always tell when a man is going
      to die soon. You neither eat nor drink, and you have gone very thin and
      awful to look at. Consumption. That's what it is. I'm not saying this to
      make you uneasy, but because I thought you might like to have the last
      sacrament. And if you have any money, you had better give it to the senior
      officer."

 "I have not written home," said Goussiev. "I shall die and they will never
      know."

 "They will know," said the sailor in his deep voice. "When you die they
      will put you down in the log, and at Odessa they will give a note to the
      military governor, and he will send it to your parish or wherever it
      is...."

 This conversation made Goussiev begin to feel unhappy and a vague desire
      began to take possession of him. He drank water—it was not that; he
      stretched out to the port-hole and breathed the hot, moist air—it
      was not that; he tried to think of his native place and the snow—it
      was not that.... At last he felt that he would choke if he stayed a moment
      longer in the hospital.

 "I feel poorly, mates," he said. "I want to go on deck. For Christ's sake
      take me on deck."

 Goussiev flung his arms round the soldier's neck and the soldier held him
      with his free arm and supported him up the gangway. On deck there were
      rows and rows of sleeping soldiers and sailors; so many of them that it
      was difficult to pick a way through them.

 "Stand up," said the bandaged soldier gently. "Walk after me slowly and
      hold on to my shirt...."

 It was dark. There was no light on deck or on the masts or over the sea.
      In the bows a sentry stood motionless as a statue, but he looked as if he
      were asleep. It was as though the steamer had been left to its own sweet
      will, to go where it liked.

 "They are going to throw Pavel Ivanich into the sea," said the bandaged
      soldier. "They will put him in a sack and throw him overboard."

 "Yes. That's the way they do."

 "But it's better to lie at home in the earth. Then the mother can go to
      the grave and weep over it."

 "Surely."

 There was a smell of dung and hay. With heads hanging there were oxen
      standing by the bulwark—one, two, three ... eight beasts. And there
      was a little horse. Goussiev put out his hand to pat it, but it shook its
      head, showed its teeth and tried to bite his sleeve.

 "Damn you," said Goussiev angrily.

 He and the soldier slowly made their way to the bows and stood against the
      bulwark and looked silently up and down. Above them was the wide sky,
      bright with stars, peace and tranquillity—exactly as it was at home
      in his village; but below—darkness and turbulence. Mysterious
      towering waves. Each wave seemed to strive to rise higher than the rest;
      and they pressed and jostled each other and yet others came, fierce and
      ugly, and hurled themselves into the fray.

 There is neither sense nor pity in the sea. Had the steamer been smaller,
      and not made of tough iron, the waves would have crushed it remorselessly
      and all the men in it, without distinction of good and bad. The steamer
      too seemed cruel and senseless. The large-nosed monster pressed forward
      and cut its way through millions of waves; it was afraid neither of
      darkness, nor of the wind, nor of space, nor of loneliness; it cared for
      nothing, and if the ocean had its people, the monster would crush them
      without distinction of good and bad.

 "Where are we now?" asked Goussiev.

 "I don't know. Must be the ocean."

 "There's no land in sight."

 "Why, they say we shan't see land for another seven days."

 The two soldiers looked at the white foam gleaming with phosphorescence.
      Goussiev was the first to break the silence.

 "Nothing is really horrible," he said. "You feel uneasy, as if you were in
      a dark forest. Suppose a boat were lowered and I was ordered to go a
      hundred miles out to sea to fish—I would go. Or suppose I saw a soul
      fall into the water—I would go in after him. I wouldn't go in for a
      German or a Chinaman, but I'd try to save a Russian."

 "Aren't you afraid to die?"

 "Yes. I'm afraid. I'm sorry for the people at home. I have a brother at
      home, you know, and he is not steady; he drinks, beats his wife for
      nothing at all, and my old father and mother may be brought to ruin. But
      my legs are giving way, mate, and it is hot here.... Let me go to bed."

 V

 Goussiev went back to the ward and lay down in his hammock. As before, a
      vague desire tormented him and he could not make out what it was. There
      was a congestion in his chest; a noise in his head, and his mouth was so
      dry that he could hardly move his tongue. He dozed and dreamed, and,
      exhausted by the heat, his cough and the nightmares that haunted him,
      toward morning he fell into a deep sleep. He dreamed he was in barracks,
      and the bread had just been taken out of the oven, and he crawled into the
      oven and lathered himself with a birch broom. He slept for two days and on
      the third day in the afternoon two sailors came down and carried him out
      of the ward.

 He was sewn up in sail-cloth, and to make him heavier two iron bars were
      sewn up with him. In the sail-cloth he looked like a carrot or a radish,
      broad at the top, narrow at the bottom.... Just before sunset he was taken
      on deck and laid on a board one end of which lay on the bulwark, the other
      on a box, raised up by a stool. Round him stood the invalided soldiers.

 "Blessed is our God," began the priest; "always, now and for ever and
      ever."

 "Amen!" said three sailors.

 The soldiers and the crew crossed themselves and looked askance at the
      waves. It was strange that a man should be sewn up in sail-cloth and
      dropped into the sea. Could it happen to any one?

 The priest sprinkled Goussiev with earth and bowed. A hymn was sung.

 The guard lifted up the end of the board, Goussiev slipped down it; shot
      headlong, turned over in the air, then plop! The foam covered him, for a
      moment it looked as though he was swathed in lace, but the moment passed—and
      he disappeared beneath the waves.

 He dropped down to the bottom. Would he reach it? The bottom is miles
      down, they say. He dropped down almost sixty or seventy feet, then began
      to go slower and slower, swung to and fro as though he were thinking;
      then, borne along by the current; he moved more sideways than downward.

 But soon he met a shoal of pilot-fish. Seeing a dark body, the fish
      stopped dead and sudden, all together, turned and went back. Less than a
      minute later, like arrows they darted at Goussiev, zigzagging through the
      water around him....

 Later came another dark body, a shark. Gravely and leisurely, as though it
      had not noticed Goussiev, it swam up under him, and he rolled over on its
      back; it turned its belly up, taking its ease in the warm, translucent
      water, and slowly opened its mouth with its two rows of teeth. The
      pilot-fish were wildly excited; they stopped to see what was going to
      happen. The shark played with the body, then slowly opened its mouth under
      it, touched it with its teeth, and the sail-cloth was ripped open from
      head to foot; one of the bars fell out, frightening the pilot-fish and
      striking the shark on its side, and sank to the bottom.

 And above the surface, the clouds were huddling up about the setting sun;
      one cloud was like a triumphal arch, another like a lion, another like a
      pair of scissors.... From behind the clouds came a broad green ray
      reaching up to the very middle of the sky; a little later a violet ray was
      flung alongside this, and then others gold and pink.... The sky was soft
      and lilac, pale and tender. At first beneath the lovely, glorious sky the
      ocean frowned, but soon the ocean also took on colour—sweet, joyful,
      passionate colours, almost impossible to name in human language.

  MY LIFE

 THE STORY OF A PROVINCIAL

  T

HE director said to me: "I only keep you out of
      respect for your worthy father, or you would have gone long since." I
      replied: "You flatter me, your Excellency, but I suppose I am in a
      position to go." And then I heard him saying: "Take the fellow away, he is
      getting on my nerves."

 Two days later I was dismissed. Ever since I had been grown up, to the
      great sorrow of my father, the municipal architect, I had changed my
      position nine times, going from one department to another, but all the
      departments were as like each other as drops of water; I had to sit and
      write, listen to inane and rude remarks, and just wait until I was
      dismissed.

 When I told my father, he was sitting back in his chair with his eyes
      shut. His thin, dry face, with a dove-coloured tinge where he shaved (his
      face was like that of an old Catholic organist), wore an expression of
      meek submission. Without answering my greeting or opening his eyes, he
      said:

 "If my dear wife, your mother, were alive, your life would be a constant
      grief to her. I can see the hand of Providence in her untimely death. Tell
      me, you unhappy boy," he went on, opening his eyes, "what am I to do with
      you?"

 When I was younger my relations and friends knew what to do with me; some
      advised me to go into the army as a volunteer, others were for pharmacy,
      others for the telegraph service; but now that I was twenty-four and was
      going grey at the temples and had already tried the army and pharmacy and
      the telegraph service, and every possibility seemed to be exhausted, they
      gave me no more advice, but only sighed and shook their heads.

 "What do you think of yourself?" my father went on. "At your age other
      young men have a good social position, and just look at yourself: a lazy
      lout, a beggar, living on your father!"

 And, as usual, he went on to say that young men were going to the dogs
      through want of faith, materialism, and conceit, and that amateur
      theatricals should be prohibited because they seduce young people from
      religion and their duty.

 "To-morrow we will go together, and you shall apologise to the director
      and promise to do your work conscientiously," he concluded. "You must not
      be without a position in society for a single day."

 "Please listen to me," said I firmly, though I did not anticipate gaining
      anything by speaking. "What you call a position in society is the
      privilege of capital and education. But people who are poor and uneducated
      have to earn their living by hard physical labour, and I see no reason why
      I should be an exception."

 "It is foolish and trivial of you to talk of physical labour," said my
      father with some irritation. "Do try to understand, you idiot, and get it
      into your brainless head, that in addition to physical strength you have a
      divine spirit; a sacred fire, by which you are distinguished from an ass
      or a reptile and bringing you nigh to God. This sacred fire has been kept
      alight for thousands of years by the best of mankind. Your
      great-grandfather, General Pologniev, fought at Borodino; your grandfather
      was a poet, an orator, and a marshal of the nobility; your uncle was an
      educationalist; and I, your father, am an architect! Have all the
      Polognievs kept the sacred fire alight for you to put it out?"

 "There must be justice," said I. "Millions of people have to do manual
      labour."

 "Let them. They can do nothing else! Even a fool or a criminal can do
      manual labour. It is the mark of a slave and a barbarian, whereas the
      sacred fire is given only to a few!"

 It was useless to go on with the conversation. My father worshipped
      himself and would not be convinced by anything unless he said it himself.
      Besides, I knew quite well that the annoyance with which he spoke of
      unskilled labour came not so much from any regard for the sacred fire, as
      from a secret fear that I should become a working man and the talk of the
      town. But the chief thing was that all my schoolfellows had long ago gone
      through the University and were making careers for themselves, and the son
      of the director of the State Bank was already a collegiate assessor, while
      I, an only son, was nothing! It was useless and unpleasant to go on with
      the conversation, but I still sat there and raised objections in the hope
      of making myself understood. The problem was simple and clear: how was I
      to earn my living? But he could not see its simplicity and kept on talking
      with sugary rounded phrases about Borodino and the sacred fire, and my
      uncle, and the forgotten poet who wrote bad, insincere verses, and he
      called me a brainless fool. But how I longed to be understood! In spite of
      everything, I loved my father and my sister, and from boyhood I have had a
      habit of considering them, so strongly rooted that I shall probably never
      get rid of it; whether I am right or wrong I am always afraid of hurting
      them, and go in terror lest my father's thin neck should go red with anger
      and he should have an apoplectic fit.

 "It is shameful and degrading for a man of my age to sit in a stuffy room
      and compete with a typewriting-machine," I said. "What has that to do with
      the sacred fire?"

 "Still, it is intellectual work," said my father. "But that's enough. Let
      us drop the conversation and I warn you that if you refuse to return to
      your office and indulge your contemptible inclinations, then you will lose
      my love and your sister's. I shall cut you out of my will—that I
      swear, by God!"

 With perfect sincerity, in order to show the purity of my motives, by
      which I hope to be guided all through my life, I said:

 "The matter of inheritance does not strike me as important. I renounce any
      rights I may have."

 For some unexpected reason these words greatly offended my father. He went
      purple in the face.

 "How dare you talk to me like that, you fool!" he cried to me in a thin,
      shrill voice. "You scoundrel!" And he struck me quickly and dexterously
      with a familiar movement; once—twice. "You forget yourself!"

 When I was a boy and my father struck me, I used to stand bolt upright
      like a soldier and look him straight in the face; and, exactly as if I
      were still a boy, I stood erect, and tried to look into his eyes. My
      father was old and very thin, but his spare muscles must have been as
      strong as whip-cord, for he hit very hard.

 I returned to the hall, but there he seized his umbrella and struck me
      several times over the head and shoulders; at that moment my sister opened
      the drawing-room door to see what the noise was, but immediately drew back
      with an expression of pity and horror, and said not one word in my
      defence.

 My intention not to return to the office, but to start a new working life,
      was unshakable. It only remained to choose the kind of work—and
      there seemed to be no great difficulty about that, because I was strong,
      patient, and willing. I was prepared to face a monotonous, laborious life,
      of semi-starvation, filth, and rough surroundings, always overshadowed
      with the thought of finding a job and a living. And—who knows—returning
      from work in the Great Gentry Street, I might often envy Dolyhikov, the
      engineer, who lives by intellectual work, but I was happy in thinking of
      my coming troubles. I used to dream of intellectual activity, and to
      imagine myself a teacher, a doctor, a writer, but my dreams remained only
      dreams. A liking for intellectual pleasures—like the theatre and
      reading—grew into a passion with me, but I did not know whether I
      had any capacity for intellectual work. At school I had an unconquerable
      aversion for the Greek language, so that I had to leave when I was in the
      fourth class. Teachers were got to coach me up for the fifth class, and
      then I went into various departments, spending most of my time in perfect
      idleness, and this, I was told, was intellectual work.

 My activity in the education department or in the municipal office
      required neither mental effort, nor talent, nor personal ability, nor
      creative spiritual impulse; it was purely mechanical, and such
      intellectual work seemed to me lower than manual labour. I despise it and
      I do not think that it for a moment justifies an idle, careless life,
      because it is nothing but a swindle, and only a kind of idleness. In all
      probability I have never known real intellectual work.

 It was evening. We lived in Great Gentry Street—the chief street in
      the town—and our rank and fashion walked up and down it in the
      evenings, as there were no public gardens. The street was very charming,
      and was almost as good as a garden, for it had two rows of poplar-trees,
      which smelt very sweet, especially after rain, and acacias, and tall
      trees, and apple-trees hung over the fences and hedges. May evenings, the
      scent of the lilac, the hum of the cockchafers, the warm, still air—how
      new and extraordinary it all is, though spring comes every year! I stood
      by the gate and looked at the passers-by. With most of them I had grown up
      and had played with them, but now my presence might upset them, because I
      was poorly dressed, in unfashionable clothes, and people made fun of my
      very narrow trousers and large, clumsy boots, and called them
      macaroni-on-steamboats. And I had a bad reputation in the town because I
      had no position and went to play billiards in low cafés, and had
      once been taken up, for no particular offence, by the political police.

 In a large house opposite, Dolyhikov's, the engineer's, some one was
      playing the piano. It was beginning to get dark and the stars were
      beginning to shine. And slowly, answering people's salutes, my father
      passed with my sister on his arm. He was wearing an old top hat with a
      broad curly brim.

 "Look!" he said to my sister, pointing to the sky with the very umbrella
      with which he had just struck me. "Look at the sky! Even the smallest
      stars are worlds! How insignificant man is in comparison with the
      universe."

 And he said this in a tone that seemed to convey that he found it
      extremely flattering and pleasant to be so insignificant. What an
      untalented man he was! Unfortunately, he was the only architect in the
      town, and during the last fifteen or twenty years I could not remember one
      decent house being built. When he had to design a house, as a rule he
      would draw first the hall and the drawing-room; as in olden days
      schoolgirls could only begin to dance by the fireplace, so his artistic
      ideas could only evolve from the hall and drawing-room. To them he would
      add the dining-room, nursery, study, connecting them with doors, so that
      in the end they were just so many passages, and each room had two or three
      doors too many. His houses were obscure, extremely confused, and limited.
      Every time, as though he felt something was missing, he had recourse to
      various additions, plastering them one on top of the other, and there
      would be various lobbies, and passages, and crooked staircases leading to
      the entresol, where it was only possible to stand in a stooping position,
      and where instead of a floor there would be a thin flight of stairs like a
      Russian bath, and the kitchen would always be under the house with a
      vaulted ceiling and a brick floor. The front of his houses always had a
      hard, stubborn expression, with stiff, French lines, low, squat roofs, and
      fat, pudding-like chimneys surmounted with black cowls and squeaking
      weathercocks. And somehow all the houses built by my father were like each
      other, and vaguely reminded me of a top hat, and the stiff, obstinate back
      of his head. In the course of time the people of the town grew used to my
      father's lack of talent, which took root and became our style.

 My father introduced the style into my sister's life. To begin with, he
      gave her the name of Cleopatra (and he called me Misail). When she was a
      little girl he used to frighten her by telling her about the stars and our
      ancestors; and explained the nature of life and duty to her at great
      length; and now when she was twenty-six he went on in the same way,
      allowing her to take no one's arm but his own, and somehow imagining that
      sooner or later an ardent young man would turn up and wish to enter into
      marriage with her out of admiration for his qualities. And she adored my
      father, was afraid of him, and believed in his extraordinary intellectual
      powers.

 It got quite dark and the street grew gradually empty. In the house
      opposite the music stopped. The gate was wide open and out into the
      street, careering with all its bells jingling, came a troika. It was the
      engineer and his daughter going for a drive. Time to go to bed!

 I had a room in the house, but I lived in the courtyard in a hut, under
      the same roof as the coach-house, which had been built probably as a
      harness-room—for there were big nails in the walls—but now it
      was not used, and my father for thirty years had kept his newspapers
      there, which for some reason he had bound half-yearly and then allowed no
      one to touch. Living there I was less in touch with my father and his
      guests, and I used to think that if I did not live in a proper room and
      did not go to the house every day for meals, my father's reproach that I
      was living on him lost some of its sting.

 My sister was waiting for me. She had brought me supper unknown to my
      father; a small piece of cold veal and a slice of bread. In the family
      there were sayings: "Money loves an account," or "A copeck saves a
      rouble," and so on, and my sister, impressed by such wisdom, did her best
      to cut down expenses and made us feed rather meagrely. She put the plate
      on the table, sat on my bed, and began to cry.

 "Misail," she said, "what are you doing to us?"

 She did not cover her face, her tears ran down her cheeks and hands, and
      her expression was sorrowful. She fell on the pillow, gave way to her
      tears, trembling all over and sobbing.

 "You have left your work again!" she said. "How awful!"

 "Do try to understand, sister!" I said, and because she cried I was filled
      with despair.

 As though it were deliberately arranged, the paraffin in my little lamp
      ran out, and the lamp smoked and guttered, and the old hooks in the wall
      looked terrible and their shadows flickered.

 "Spare us!" said my sister, rising up. "Father is in an awful state, and I
      am ill. I shall go mad. What will become of you?" she asked, sobbing and
      holding out her hands to me. "I ask you, I implore you, in the name of our
      dear mother, to go back to your work."

 "I cannot, Cleopatra," I said, feeling that only a little more would make
      me give in. "I cannot."

 "Why?" insisted my sister, "why? If you have not made it up with your
      chief, look for another place. For instance, why shouldn't you work on the
      railway? I have just spoken to Aniuta Blagovo, and she assures me you
      would be taken on, and she even promised to do what she could for you. For
      goodness sake, Misail, think! Think it over, I implore you!"

 We talked a little longer and I gave in. I said that the thought of
      working on the railway had never come into my head, and that I was ready
      to try.

 She smiled happily through her tears and clasped my hand, and still she
      cried, because she could not stop, and I went into the kitchen for
      paraffin.

 II

 Among the supporters of amateur theatricals, charity concerts, and tableaux
      vivants the leaders were the Azhoguins, who lived in their own house
      in Great Gentry house the Street. They used to lend their house and assume
      the necessary trouble and expense. They were a rich landowning family, and
      had about three thousand urskins , with a magnificent farm in the
      neighbourhood, but they did not care for village life and lived in the
      town summer and winter. The family consisted of a mother, a tall, spare,
      delicate lady, who had short hair, wore a blouse and a plain skirt
      à l'Anglais, and three daughters, who were spoken of, not by their
      names, but as the eldest, the middle, and the youngest; they all had ugly,
      sharp chins, and they were short-sighted, high-shouldered, dressed in the
      same style as their mother, had an unpleasant lisp, and yet they always
      took part in every play and were always doing something for charity—acting,
      reciting, singing. They were very serious and never smiled, and even in
      burlesque operettas they acted without gaiety and with a businesslike air,
      as though they were engaged in bookkeeping.

 I loved our plays, especially the rehearsals, which were frequent, rather
      absurd, and noisy, and we were always given supper after them. I had no
      part in the selection of the pieces and the casting of the characters. I
      had to look after the stage. I used to design the scenery and copy out the
      parts, and prompt and make up. And I also had to look after the various
      effects such as thunder, the singing of a nightingale, and so on. Having
      no social position, I had no decent clothes, and during rehearsals had to
      hold aloof from the others in the darkened wings and shyly say nothing.

 I used to paint the scenery in the Azhoguins' coach-house or yard. I was
      assisted by a house-painter, or, as he called himself, a decorating
      contractor, named Andrey Ivanov, a man of about fifty, tall and very thin
      and pale, with a narrow chest, hollow temples, and dark rings under his
      eyes, he was rather awful to look at. He had some kind of wasting disease,
      and every spring and autumn he was said to be on the point of death, but
      he would go to bed for a while and then get up and say with surprise: "I'm
      not dead this time!"

 In the town he was called Radish, and people said it was his real name. He
      loved the theatre as much as I, and no sooner did he hear that a play was
      in hand than he gave up all his work and went to the Azhoguins' to paint
      scenery.

 The day after my conversation with my sister I worked from morning till
      night at the Azhoguins'. The rehearsal was fixed for seven o'clock, and an
      hour before it began all the players were assembled, and the eldest, the
      middle, and the youngest Miss Azhoguin were reading their parts on the
      stage. Radish, in a long, brown overcoat with a scarf wound round his
      neck, was standing, leaning with his head against the wall, looking at the
      stage with a rapt expression. Mrs. Azhoguin went from guest to guest
      saying something pleasant to every one. She had a way of gazing into one's
      face and speaking in a hushed voice as though she were telling a secret.

 "It must be difficult to paint scenery," she said softly, coming up to me.
      "I was just talking to Mrs. Mufke about prejudice when I saw you come in.
      Mon Dieu! All my life I have struggled against prejudice. To convince the
      servants that all their superstitions are nonsense I always light three
      candles, and I begin all my important business on the thirteenth."

 The daughter of Dolyhikov, the engineer, was there, a handsome, plump,
      fair girl, dressed, as people said in our town, in Parisian style. She did
      not act, but at rehearsals a chair was put for her on the stage, and the
      plays did not begin until she appeared in the front row, to astonish
      everybody with the brilliance of her clothes. As coming from the
      metropolis, she was allowed to make remarks during rehearsals, and she did
      so with an affable, condescending smile, and it was clear that she
      regarded our plays as a childish amusement. It was said that she had
      studied singing at the Petersburg conservatoire and had sung for a winter
      season in opera. I liked her very much, and during rehearsals or the
      performance, I never took my eyes off her.

 I had taken the book and began to prompt when suddenly my sister appeared.
      Without taking off her coat and hat she came up to me and said:

 "Please come!"

 I went. Behind the stage in the doorway stood Aniuta Blagovo, also wearing
      a hat with a dark veil. She was the daughter of the vice-president of the
      Court, who had been appointed to our town years ago, almost as soon as the
      High Court was established. She was tall and had a good figure, and was
      considered indispensable for the tableaux vivants , and when she
      represented a fairy or a muse, her face would burn with shame; but she
      took no part in the plays, and would only look in at rehearsals, on some
      business, and never enter the hall. And it was evident now that she had
      only looked in for a moment.

 "My father has mentioned you," she said drily, not looking at me and
      blushing.... "Dolyhikov has promised to find you something to do on the
      railway. If you go to his house to-morrow, he will see you."

 I bowed and thanked her for her kindness.

 "And you must leave this," she said, pointing to my book.

 She and my sister went up to Mrs. Azhoguin and began to whisper, looking
      at me.

 "Indeed," said Mrs. Azhoguin, coming up to me, and gazing into my face.
      "Indeed, if it takes you from your more serious business"—she took
      the book out of my hands—"then you must hand it over to some one
      else. Don't worry, my friend. It will be all right."

 I said good-bye and left in some confusion. As I went down-stairs I saw my
      sister and Aniuta Blagovo going away; they were talking animatedly, I
      suppose about my going on the railway, and they hurried away. My sister
      had never been to a rehearsal before, and she was probably tortured by her
      conscience and by her fear of my father finding out that she had been to
      the Azhoguins' without permission.

 The next day I went to see Dolyhikov at one o'clock. The man servant
      showed me into a charming room, which was the engineer's drawing-room and
      study. Everything in it was charming and tasteful, and to a man like
      myself, unused to such things, very strange. Costly carpets, huge chairs,
      bronzes, pictures in gold and velvet frames; photographs on the walls of
      beautiful women, clever, handsome faces, and striking attitudes; from the
      drawing-room a door led straight into the garden, by a veranda, and I saw
      lilac and a table laid for breakfast, rolls, and a bunch of roses; and
      there was a smell of spring, and good cigars, and happiness—and
      everything seemed to say, here lives a man who has worked and won the
      highest happiness here on earth. At the table the engineer's daughter was
      sitting reading a newspaper.

 "Do you want my father?" she asked. "He is having a shower-bath. He will
      be down presently. Please take a chair."

 I sat down.

 "I believe you live opposite?" she asked after a short silence.

 "Yes."

 "When I have nothing to do I look out of the window. You must excuse me,"
      she added, turning to her newspaper, "and I often see you and your sister.
      She has such a kind, wistful expression."

 Dolyhikov came in. He was wiping his neck with a towel.

 "Papa, this is Mr. Pologniev," said his daughter.

 "Yes, yes. Blagovo spoke to me." He turned quickly to me, but did not hold
      out his hand. "But what do you think I can give you? I'm not bursting with
      situations. You are queer people!" he went on in a loud voice and as
      though he were scolding me. "I get about twenty people every day, as
      though I were a Department of State. I run a railway, sir. I employ hard
      labour; I need mechanics, navvies, joiners, well-sinkers, and you can only
      sit and write. That's all! You are all clerks!"

 And he exhaled the same air of happiness as his carpets and chairs. He was
      stout, healthy, with red cheeks and a broad chest; he looked clean in his
      pink shirt and wide trousers, just like a china figure of a post-boy. He
      had a round, bristling beard—and not a single grey hair—and a
      nose with a slight bridge, and bright, innocent, dark eyes.

 "What can you do?" he went on. "Nothing! I am an engineer and well-to-do,
      but before I was given this railway I worked very hard for a long time. I
      was an engine-driver for two years, I worked in Belgium as an ordinary
      lubricator. Now, my dear man, just think—what work can I offer you?"

 "I quite agree," said I, utterly abashed, not daring to meet his bright,
      innocent eyes.

 "Are you any good with the telegraph?" he asked after some thought.

 "Yes. I have been in the telegraph service."

 "Hm.... Well, we'll see. Go to Dubechnia. There's a fellow there already.
      But he is a scamp."

 "And what will my duties be?" I asked.

 "We'll see to that later. Go there now. I'll give orders. But please don't
      drivel and don't bother me with petitions or I'll kick you out."

 He turned away from me without even a nod. I bowed to him and his
      daughter, who was reading the newspaper, and went out. I felt so miserable
      that when my sister asked how the engineer had received me, I could not
      utter a single word.

 To go to Dubechnia I got up early in the morning at sunrise. There was not
      a soul in the street, the whole town was asleep, and my footsteps rang out
      with a hollow sound. The dewy poplars filled the air with a soft scent. I
      was sad and had no desire to leave the town. It seemed so nice and warm! I
      loved the green trees, the quiet sunny mornings, the ringing of the bells,
      but the people in the town were alien to me, tiresome and sometimes even
      loathsome. I neither liked nor understood them.

 I did not understand why or for what purpose those thirty-five thousand
      people lived. I knew that Kimry made a living by manufacturing boots, that
      Tula made samovars and guns, that Odessa was a port; but I did not know
      what our town was or what it did. The people in Great Gentry Street and
      two other clean streets had independent means and salaries paid by the
      Treasury, but how the people lived in the other eight streets which
      stretched parallel to each other for three miles and then were lost behind
      the hill—that was always an insoluble problem to me. And I am
      ashamed to think of the way they lived. They had neither public gardens,
      nor a theatre, nor a decent orchestra; the town and club libraries are
      used only by young Jews, so that books and magazines would lie for months
      uncut. The rich and the intelligentsia slept in close, stuffy bedrooms,
      with wooden beds infested with bugs; the children were kept in filthy,
      dirty rooms called nurseries, and the servants, even when they were old
      and respectable, slept on the kitchen floor and covered themselves with
      rags. Except in Lent all the houses smelt of bortsch , and during
      Lent of sturgeon fried in sunflower oil. The food was unsavoury, the water
      unwholesome. On the town council, at the governor's, at the archbishop's,
      everywhere there had been talk for years about there being no good, cheap
      water-supply and of borrowing two hundred thousand roubles from the
      Treasury. Even the very rich people, of whom there were about thirty in
      the town, people who would lose a whole estate at cards, used to drink the
      bad water and talk passionately about the loan—and I could never
      understand this, for it seemed to me it would be simpler for them to pay
      up the two hundred thousand.

 I did not know a single honest man in the whole town. My father took
      bribes, and imagined they were given to him out of respect for his
      spiritual qualities; the boys at the high school, in order to be promoted,
      went to lodge with the masters and paid them large sums; the wife of the
      military commandant took levies from the recruits during the recruiting,
      and even allowed them to stand her drinks, and once she was so drunk in
      church that she could not get up from her knees; during the recruiting the
      doctors also took bribes, and the municipal doctor and the veterinary
      surgeon levied taxes on the butcher shops and public houses; the district
      school did a trade in certificates which gave certain privileges in the
      civil service; the provosts took bribes from the clergy and church-wardens
      whom they controlled, and on the town council and various committees every
      one who came before them was pursued with: "One expects thanks!"—and
      thereby forty copecks had to change hands. And those who did not take
      bribes, like the High Court officials, were stiff and proud, and shook
      hands with two fingers, and were distinguished by their indifference and
      narrow-mindedness. They drank and played cards, married rich women, and
      always had a bad, insidious influence on those round them. Only the girls
      had any moral purity; most of them had lofty aspirations and were pure and
      honest at heart; but they knew nothing of life, and believed that bribes
      were given to honour spiritual qualities; and when they married, they soon
      grew old and weak, and were hopelessly lost in the mire of that vulgar,
      bourgeois existence.

 III

 A railway was being built in our district. On holidays and thereabouts the
      town was filled with crowds of ragamuffins called "railies," of whom the
      people were afraid. I used often to see a miserable wretch with a bloody
      face, and without a hat, being dragged off by the police, and behind him
      was the proof of his crime, a samovar or some wet, newly washed linen. The
      "railies" used to collect near the public houses and on the squares; and
      they drank, ate, and swore terribly, and whistled after the town
      prostitutes. To amuse these ruffians our shopkeepers used to make the cats
      and dogs drink vodka, or tie a kerosene-tin to a dog's tail, and whistle
      to make the dog come tearing along the street with the tin clattering
      after him, and making him squeal with terror and think he had some
      frightful monster hard at his heels, so that he would rush out of the town
      and over the fields until he could run no more. We had several dogs in the
      town which were left with a permanent shiver and used to crawl about with
      their tails between their legs, and people said that they could not stand
      such tricks and had gone mad.

 The station was being built five miles from the town. It was said that the
      engineer had asked for a bribe of fifty thousand roubles to bring the
      station nearer, but the municipality would only agree to forty; they would
      not give in to the extra ten thousand, and now the townspeople are sorry
      because they had to make a road to the station which cost them more.
      Sleepers and rails were fixed all along the line, and service-trains were
      running to carry building materials and labourers, and they were only
      waiting for the bridges upon which Dolyhikov was at work, and here and
      there the stations were not ready.

 Dubechnia—the name of our first station—was seventeen versts
      from the town. I went on foot. The winter and spring corn was bright
      green, shining in the morning sun. The road was smooth and bright, and in
      the distance I could see in outline the station, the hills, and the remote
      farmhouses.... How good it was out in the open! And how I longed to be
      filled with the sense of freedom, if only for that morning, to stop
      thinking of what was going on in the town, or of my needs, or even of
      eating! Nothing has so much prevented my living as the feeling of acute
      hunger, which make my finest thoughts get mixed up with thoughts of
      porridge, cutlets, and fried fish. When I stand alone in the fields and
      look up at the larks hanging marvellously in the air, and bursting with
      hysterical song, I think: "It would be nice to have some bread and
      butter." Or when I sit in the road and shut my eyes and listen to the
      wonderful sounds of a May-day, I remember how good hot potatoes smell.
      Being big and of a strong constitution I never have quite enough to eat,
      and so my chief sensation during the day is hunger, and so I can
      understand why so many people who are working for a bare living, can talk
      of nothing but food.

 At Dubechnia the station was being plastered inside, and the upper story
      of the water-tank was being built. It was close and smelt of lime, and the
      labourers were wandering lazily over piles of chips and rubbish. The
      signalman was asleep near his box with the sun pouring straight into his
      face. There was not a single tree. The telephone gave a faint hum, and
      here and there birds had alighted on it. I wandered over the heaps, not
      knowing what to do, and remembered how when I asked the engineer what my
      duties would be, he had replied: "We will see there." But what was there
      to see in such a wilderness? The plasterers were talking about the foreman
      and about one Fedot Vassilievich. I could not understand and was filled
      with embarrassment—physical embarrassment. I felt conscious of my
      arms and legs, and of the whole of my big body, and did not know what to
      do with them or where to go.

 After walking for at least a couple of hours I noticed that from the
      station to the right of the line there were telegraph-poles which after
      about one and a half or two miles ended in a white stone wall. The
      labourers said it was the office, and I decided at last that I must go
      there.

 It was a very old farmhouse, long unused. The wall of rough, white stone
      was decayed, and in places had crumbled away, and the roof of the wing,
      the blind wall of which looked toward the railway, had perished, and was
      patched here and there with tin. Through the gates there was a large yard,
      overgrown with tall grass, and beyond that, an old house with Venetian
      blinds in the windows, and a high roof, brown with rot. On either side of
      the house, to right and left, were two symmetrical wings; the windows of
      one were boarded up, while by the other, the windows of which were open,
      there were a number of calves grazing. The last telegraph-pole stood in
      the yard, and the wire went from it to the wing with the blind wall. The
      door was open and I went in. By the table at the telegraph was sitting a
      man with a dark, curly head in a canvas coat; he glared at me sternly and
      askance, but he immediately smiled and said:

 "How do you do, Profit?"

 It was Ivan Cheprakov, my school friend, who was expelled, when he was in
      the second class, for smoking. Once, during the autumn, we were out
      catching goldfinches, starlings, and hawfinches, to sell them in the
      market early in the morning when our parents were still asleep.

 We beat up flocks of starlings and shot at them with pellets, and then
      picked up the wounded, and some died in terrible agony—I can still
      remember how they moaned at night in my case—and some recovered. And
      we sold them, and swore black and blue that they were male birds. Once in
      the market I had only one starling left, which I hawked about and finally
      sold for a copeck. "A little profit!" I said to console myself, and from
      that time at school I was always known as "Little Profit," and even now,
      schoolboys and the townspeople sometimes use the name to tease me, though
      no one but myself remembers how it came about.

 Cheprakov never was strong. He was narrow-chested, round-shouldered,
      long-legged. His tie looked like a piece of string, he had no waistcoat,
      and his boots were worse than mine—with the heels worn down. He
      blinked with his eyes and had an eager expression as though he were trying
      to catch something and he was in a constant fidget.

 "You wait," he said, bustling about. "Look here!... What was I saying just
      now?"

 We began to talk. I discovered that the estate had till recently belonged
      to the Cheprakovs and only the previous autumn had passed to Dolyhikov,
      who thought it more profitable to keep his money in land than in shares,
      and had already bought three big estates in our district with the transfer
      of all mortgages. When Cheprakov's mother sold, she stipulated for the
      right to live in one of the wings for another two years and got her son a
      job in the office.

 "Why shouldn't he buy?" said Cheprakov of the engineer. "He gets a lot
      from the contractors. He bribes them all."

 Then he took me to dinner, deciding in his emphatic way that I was to live
      with him in the wing and board with his mother.

 "She is a screw," he said, "but she will not take much from you."

 In the small rooms where his mother lived there was a queer jumble; even
      the hall and the passage were stacked with furniture, which had been taken
      from the house after the sale of the estate; and the furniture was old,
      and of redwood. Mrs. Cheprakov, a very stout elderly lady, with slanting,
      Chinese eyes, sat by the window, in a big chair, knitting a stocking. She
      received me ceremoniously.

 "It is Pologniev, mother," said Cheprakov, introducing me. "He is going to
      work here."

 "Are you a nobleman?" she asked in a strange, unpleasant voice as though
      she had boiling fat in her throat.

 "Yes," I answered.

 "Sit down."

 The dinner was bad. It consisted only of a pie with unsweetened curds and
      some milk soup. Elena Nikifirovna, my hostess, was perpetually winking,
      first with one eye, then with the other. She talked and ate, but in her
      whole aspect there was a deathlike quality, and one could almost detect
      the smell of a corpse. Life hardly stirred in her, yet she had the air of
      being the lady of the manor, who had once had her serfs, and was the wife
      of a general, whose servants had to call him "Your Excellency," and when
      these miserable embers of life flared up in her for a moment, she would
      say to her son:

 "Ivan, that is not the way to hold your knife!"

 Or she would say, gasping for breath, with the preciseness of a hostess
      labouring to entertain her guest:

 "We have just sold our estate, you know. It is a pity, of course, we have
      got so used to being here, but Dolyhikov promised to make Ivan
      station-master at Dubechnia, so that we shan't have to leave. We shall
      live here on the station, which is the same as living on the estate. The
      engineer is such a nice man! Don't you think him very handsome?"

 Until recently the Cheprakovs had been very well-to-do, but with the
      general's death everything changed. Elena Nikifirovna began to quarrel
      with the neighbours and to go to law, and she did not pay her bailiffs and
      labourers; she was always afraid of being robbed—and in less than
      ten years Dubechnia changed completely.

 Behind the house there was an old garden run wild, overgrown with tall
      grass and brushwood. I walked along the terrace which was still well-kept
      and beautiful; through the glass door I saw a room with a parquet floor,
      which must have been the drawing-room. It contained an ancient piano, some
      engravings in mahogany frames on the walls—and nothing else. There
      was nothing left of the flower-garden but peonies and poppies, rearing
      their white and scarlet heads above the ground; on the paths, all huddled
      together, were young maples and elm-trees, which had been stripped by the
      cows. The growth was dense and the garden seemed impassable, and only near
      the house, where there still stood poplars, firs, and some old bricks,
      were there traces of the former avenues, and further on the garden was
      being cleared for a hay-field, and here it was no longer allowed to run
      wild, and one's mouth and eyes were no longer filled with spiders' webs,
      and a pleasant air was stirring. The further out one went, the more open
      it was, and there were cherry-trees, plum-trees, wide-spreading old
      apple-trees, lichened and held up with props, and the pear-trees were so
      tall that it was incredible that there could be pears on them. This part
      of the garden was let to the market-women of our town, and it was guarded
      from thieves and starlings by a peasant—an idiot who lived in a hut.

 The orchard grew thinner and became a mere meadow running down to the
      river, which was overgrown with reeds and withy-beds. There was a pool by
      the mill-dam, deep and full of fish, and a little mill with a straw roof
      ground and roared, and the frogs croaked furiously. On the water, which
      was as smooth as glass, circles appeared from time to time, and
      water-lilies trembled on the impact of a darting fish. The village of
      Dubechnia was on the other side of the river. The calm, azure pool was
      alluring with its promise of coolness and rest. And now all this, the
      pool, the mill, the comfortable banks of the river, belonged to the
      engineer!

 And here my new work began. I received and despatched telegrams, I wrote
      out various accounts and copied orders, claims, and reports, sent in to
      the office by our illiterate foremen and mechanics. But most of the day I
      did nothing, walking up and down the room waiting for telegrams, or I
      would tell the boy to stay in the wing, and go into the garden until the
      boy came to say the bell was ringing. I had dinner with Mrs. Cheprakov.
      Meat was served very rarely; most of the dishes were made of milk, and on
      Wednesdays and Fridays we had Lenten fare, and the food was served in pink
      plates, which were called Lenten. Mrs. Cheprakov was always blinking—the
      habit grew on her, and I felt awkward and embarrassed in her presence.

 As there was not enough work for one, Cheprakov did nothing, but slept or
      went down to the pool with his gun to shoot ducks. In the evenings he got
      drunk in the village, or at the station, and before going to bed he would
      look in the glass and say:

 "How are you, Ivan Cheprakov?"

 When he was drunk, he was very pale and used to rub his hands and laugh,
      or rather neigh, He-he-he! Out of bravado he would undress himself and run
      naked through the fields, and he used to eat flies and say they were a bit
      sour.

 IV

 Once after dinner he came running into the wing, panting, to say:

 "Your sister has come to see you."

 I went out and saw a fly standing by the steps of the house. My sister had
      brought Aniuta Blagovo and a military gentleman in a summer uniform. As I
      approached I recognised the military gentleman as Aniuta's brother, the
      doctor.

 "We've come to take you for a picnic," he said, "if you've no objection."

 My sister and Aniuta wanted to ask how I was getting on, but they were
      both silent and only looked at me. They felt that I didn't like my job,
      and tears came into my sister's eyes and Aniuta Blagovo blushed. We went
      into the orchard, the doctor first, and he said ecstatically:

 "What air! By Jove, what air!"

 He was just a boy to look at. He talked and walked like an undergraduate,
      and the look in his grey eyes was as lively, simple, and frank as that of
      a nice boy. Compared with his tall, handsome sister he looked weak and
      slight, and his little beard was thin and so was his voice—a thin
      tenor, though quite pleasant. He was away somewhere with his regiment and
      had come home on leave, and said that he was going to Petersburg in the
      autumn to take his M.D. He already had a family—a wife and three
      children; he had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      people said he was unhappily married and was not living with his wife.

 "What is the time?" My sister was uneasy. "We must go back soon, for my
      father would only let me have until six o'clock."

 "Oh, your father," sighed the doctor.

 I made tea, and we drank it sitting on a carpet in front of the terrace,
      and the doctor, kneeling, drank from his saucer, and said that he was
      perfectly happy. Then Cheprakov fetched the key and unlocked the glass
      door and we all entered the house. It was dark and mysterious and smelled
      of mushrooms, and our footsteps made a hollow sound as though there were a
      vault under the floor. The doctor stopped by the piano and touched the
      keys and it gave out a faint, tremulous, cracked but still melodious
      sound. He raised his voice and began to sing a romance, frowning and
      impatiently stamping his foot when he touched a broken key. My sister
      forgot about going home, but walked agitatedly up and down the room and
      said:

 "I am happy! I am very, very happy!"

 There was a note of surprise in her voice as though it seemed impossible
      to her that she should be happy. It was the first time in my life that I
      had seen her so gay. She even looked handsome. Her profile was not good,
      her nose and mouth somehow protruded and made her look as if she was
      always blowing, but she had beautiful, dark eyes, a pale, very delicate
      complexion, and a touching expression of kindness and sadness, and when
      she spoke she seemed very charming and even beautiful. Both she and I took
      after our mother; we were broad-shouldered, strong, and sturdy, but her
      paleness was a sign of sickness, she often coughed, and in her eyes I
      often noticed the expression common to people who are ill, but who for
      some reason conceal it. In her present cheerfulness there was something
      childish and naïve, as though all the joy which had been suppressed
      and dulled during our childhood by a strict upbringing, had suddenly
      awakened in her soul and rushed out into freedom.

 But when evening came and the fly was brought round, my sister became very
      quiet and subdued, and sat in the fly as though it were a prison-van.

 Soon they were all gone. The noise of the fly died away.... I remembered
      that Aniuta Blagovo had said not a single word to me all day.

 "A wonderful girl!" I thought "A wonderful girl."

 Lent came and every day we had Lenten dishes. I was greatly depressed by
      my idleness and the uncertainty of my position, and, slothful, hungry,
      dissatisfied with myself, I wandered over the estate and only waited for
      an energetic mood to leave the place.

 Once in the afternoon when Radish was sitting in our wing, Dolyhikov
      entered unexpectedly, very sunburnt, and grey with dust. He had been out
      on the line for three days and had come to Dubechnia on a locomotive and
      walked over. While he waited for the carriage which he had ordered to come
      out to meet him he went over the estate with his bailiff, giving orders in
      a loud voice, and then for a whole hour he sat in our wing and wrote
      letters. When telegrams came through for him, he himself tapped out the
      answers, while we stood there stiff and silent.

 "What a mess!" he said, looking angrily through the accounts. "I shall
      transfer the office to the station in a fortnight and I don't know what I
      shall do with you then."

 "I've done my best, sir," said Cheprakov.

 "Quite so. I can see what your best is. You can only draw your wages." The
      engineer looked at me and went on. "You rely on getting introductions to
      make a career for yourself with as little trouble as possible. Well, I
      don't care about introductions. Nobody helped me. Before I had this line,
      I was an engine-driver. I worked in Belgium as an ordinary lubricator. And
      what are you doing here, Panteley?" he asked, turning to Radish. "Going
      out drinking?"

 For some reason or other he called all simple people Panteley, while he
      despised men like Cheprakov and myself, and called us drunkards, beasts,
      canaille. As a rule he was hard on petty officials, and paid and dismissed
      them ruthlessly without any explanation.

 At last the carriage came for him. When he left he promised to dismiss us
      all in a fortnight; called the bailiff a fool, stretched himself out
      comfortably in the carriage, and drove away.

 "Andrey Ivanich," I said to Radish, "will you take me on as a labourer?"

 "What! Why?"

 We went together toward the town, and when the station and the farm were
      far behind us, I asked:

 "Andrey Ivanich, why did you come to Dubechnia?"

 "Firstly because some of my men are working on the line, and secondly to
      pay interest to Mrs. Cheprakov. I borrowed fifty roubles from her last
      summer, and now I pay her one rouble a month."

 The decorator stopped and took hold of my coat.

 "Misail Alereich, my friend," he went on, "I take it that if a common man
      or a gentleman takes interest, he is a wrong-doer. The truth is not in
      him."

 Radish, looking thin, pale, and rather terrible, shut his eyes, shook his
      head, and muttered in a philosophic tone:

 "The grub eats grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul. God save us
      miserable sinners!"

 V

 Radish was unpractical and he was no business man; he undertook more work
      than he could do, and when he came to payment he always lost his reckoning
      and so was always out on the wrong side. He was a painter, a glazier, a
      paper-hanger, and would even take on tiling, and I remember how he used to
      run about for days looking for tiles to make an insignificant profit. He
      was an excellent workman and would sometimes earn ten roubles a day, and
      but for his desire to be a master and to call himself a contractor, he
      would probably have made quite a lot of money.

 He himself was paid by contract and paid me and the others by the day,
      between seventy-five copecks and a rouble per day. When the weather was
      hot and dry he did various outside jobs, chiefly painting roofs. Not being
      used to it, my feet got hot, as though I were walking over a red-hot oven,
      and when I wore felt boots my feet swelled. But this was only at the
      beginning. Later on I got used to it and everything went all right. I
      lived among the people, to whom work was obligatory and unavoidable,
      people who worked like dray-horses, and knew nothing of the moral value of
      labour, and never even used the word "labour" in their talk. Among them I
      also felt like a dray-horse, more and more imbued with the necessity and
      inevitability of what I was doing, and this made my life easier, and saved
      me from doubt.

 At first everything amused me, everything was new. It was like being born
      again. I could sleep on the ground and go barefoot—and found it
      exceedingly pleasant. I could stand in a crowd of simple folks, without
      embarrassing them, and when a cab-horse fell down in the street, I used to
      run and help it up without being afraid of soiling my clothes. But, best
      of all, I was living independently and was not a burden on any one.

 The painting of roofs, especially when we mixed our own paint, was
      considered a very profitable business, and, therefore, even such good
      workmen as Radish did not shun this rough and tiresome work. In short
      trousers, showing his lean, muscular legs, he used to prowl over the roof
      like a stork, and I used to hear him sigh wearily as he worked his brush:

 "Woe, woe to us, miserable sinners!"

 He could walk as easily on a roof as on the ground. In spite of his
      looking so ill and pale and corpse-like, his agility was extraordinary;
      like any young man he would paint the cupola and the top of the church
      without scaffolding, using only ladders and a rope, and it was queer and
      strange when, standing there, far above the ground, he would rise to his
      full height and cry to the world at large:

 "Grubs eat grass, rust eats iron, lies devour the soul!"

 Or, thinking of something, he would suddenly answer his own thought:

 "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"

 When I went home from work all the people sitting outside their doors, the
      shop assistants, dogs, and their masters, used to shout after me and jeer
      spitefully, and at first it seemed monstrous and distressed me greatly.

 "Little Profit," they used to shout. "House-painter! Yellow ochre!"

 And no one treated me so unmercifully as those who had only just risen
      above the people and had quite recently had to work for their living. Once
      in the market-place as I passed the ironmonger's a can of water was
      spilled over me as if by accident, and once a stick was thrown at me. And
      once a fishmonger, a grey-haired old man, stood in my way and looked at me
      morosely and said:

 "It isn't you I'm sorry for, you fool, it's your father."

 And when my acquaintances met me they got confused. Some regarded me as a
      queer fish and a fool, and they were sorry for me; others did not know how
      to treat me and it was difficult to understand them. Once, in the daytime,
      in one of the streets off Great Gentry Street, I met Aniuta Blagovo. I was
      on my way to my work and was carrying two long brushes and a pot of paint.
      When she recognised me, Aniuta blushed.

 "Please do not acknowledge me in the street," she said nervously, sternly,
      in a trembling voice, without offering to shake hands with me, and tears
      suddenly gleamed in her eyes. "If you must be like this, then, so—so
      be it, but please avoid me in public!"

 I had left Great Gentry Street and was living in a suburb called Makarikha
      with my nurse Karpovna, a good-natured but gloomy old woman who was always
      looking for evil, and was frightened by her dreams, and saw omens and ill
      in the bees and wasps which flew into her room. And in her opinion my
      having become a working man boded no good.

 "You are lost!" she said mournfully, shaking her head. "Lost!"

 With her in her little house lived her adopted son, Prokofyi, a butcher, a
      huge, clumsy fellow, of about thirty, with ginger hair and scrubby
      moustache. When he met me in the hall, he would silently and respectfully
      make way for me, and when he was drunk he would salute me with his whole
      hand. In the evenings he used to have supper, and through the wooden
      partition I could hear him snorting and snuffling as he drank glass after
      glass.

 "Mother," he would say in an undertone.

 "Well," Karpovna would reply. She was passionately fond of him. "What is
      it, my son?"

 "I'll do you a favour, mother. I'll feed you in your old age in this vale
      of tears, and when you die I'll bury you at my own expense. So I say and
      so I'll do."

 I used to get up every day before sunrise and go to bed early. We painters
      ate heavily and slept soundly, and only during the night would we have any
      excitement. I never quarrelled with my comrades. All day long there was a
      ceaseless stream of abuse, cursing and hearty good wishes, as, for
      instance, that one's eyes should burst, or that one might be carried off
      by cholera, but, all the same, among ourselves we were very friendly. The
      men suspected me of being a religious crank and used to laugh at me
      good-naturedly, saying that even my own father denounced me, and they used
      to say that they very seldom went to church and that many of them had not
      been to confession for ten years, and they justified their laxness by
      saying that a decorator is among men like a jackdaw among birds.

 My mates respected me and regarded me with esteem; they evidently liked my
      not drinking or smoking, and leading a quiet, steady life. They were only
      rather disagreeably surprised at my not stealing the oil, or going with
      them to ask our employers for a drink. The stealing of the employers' oil
      and paint was a custom with house-painters, and was not regarded as theft,
      and it was remarkable that even so honest a man as Radish would always
      come away from work with some white lead and oil. And even respectable old
      men who had their own houses in Makarikha were not ashamed to ask for
      tips, and when the men, at the beginning or end of a job, made up to some
      vulgar fool and thanked him humbly for a few pence, I used to feel sick
      and sorry.

 With the customers they behaved like sly courtiers, and almost every day I
      was reminded of Shakespeare's Polonius.

 "There will probably be rain," a customer would say, staring at the sky.

 "It is sure to rain," the painters would agree.

 "But the clouds aren't rain-clouds. Perhaps it won't rain."

 "No, sir. It won't rain. It won't rain, sure."

 Behind their backs they generally regarded the customers ironically, and
      when, for instance, they saw a gentleman sitting on his balcony with a
      newspaper, they would say:

 "He reads newspapers, but he has nothing to eat."

 I never visited my people. When I returned from work I often found short,
      disturbing notes from my sister about my father; how he was very
      absent-minded at dinner, and then slipped away and locked himself in his
      study and did not come out for a long time. Such news upset me. I could
      not sleep, and I would go sometimes at night and walk along Great Gentry
      Street by our house, and look up at the dark windows, and try to guess if
      all was well within. On Sundays my sister would come to see me, but by
      stealth, as though she came not to see me, but my nurse. And if she came
      into my room she would look pale, with her eyes red, and at once she would
      begin to weep.

 "Father cannot bear it much longer," she would say. "If, as God forbid,
      something were to happen to him, it would be on your conscience all your
      life. It is awful, Misail! For mother's sake I implore you to mend your
      ways."

 "My dear sister," I replied. "How can I reform when I am convinced that I
      am acting according to my conscience? Do try to understand me!"

 "I know you are obeying your conscience, but it ought to be possible to do
      so without hurting anybody."

 "Oh, saints above!" the old woman would sigh behind the door. "You are
      lost. There will be a misfortune, my dear. It is bound to come."

 VI

 On Sunday, Doctor Blagovo came to see me unexpectedly. He was wearing a
      white summer uniform over a silk shirt, and high glacé boots.

 "I came to see you!" he began, gripping my hand in his hearty,
      undergraduate fashion. "I hear of you every day and I have long intended
      to go and see you to have a heart-to-heart, as they say. Things are
      awfully boring in the town; there is not a living soul worth talking to.
      How hot it is, by Jove!" he went on, taking off his tunic and standing in
      his silk shirt. "My dear fellow, let us have a talk."

 I was feeling bored and longing for other society than that of the
      decorators. I was really glad to see him.

 "To begin with," he said, sitting on my bed, "I sympathise with you
      heartily, and I have a profound respect for your present way of living. In
      the town you are misunderstood and there is nobody to understand you,
      because, as you know, it is full of Gogolian pig-faces. But I guessed what
      you were at the picnic. You are a noble soul, an honest, high-minded man!
      I respect you and think it an honour to shake hands with you. To change
      your life so abruptly and suddenly as you did, you must have passed
      through a most trying spiritual process, and to go on with it now, to live
      scrupulously by your convictions, you must have to toil incessantly both
      in mind and in heart. Now, please tell me, don't you think that if you
      spent all this force of will, intensity, and power on something else, like
      trying to be a great scholar or an artist, that your life would be both
      wider and deeper, and altogether more productive?"

 We talked and when we came to speak of physical labour, I expressed this
      idea: that it was necessary that the strong should not enslave the weak,
      and that the minority should not be a parasite on the majority, always
      sucking up the finest sap, i. e. , it was necessary that all without
      exception—the strong and the weak, the rich and the poor—should
      share equally in the struggle for existence, every man for himself, and in
      that respect there was no better means of levelling than physical labour
      and compulsory service for all.

 "You think, then," said the doctor, "that all, without, exception, should
      be employed in physical labour?"

 "Yes."

 "But don't you think that if everybody, including the best people,
      thinkers and men of science, were to take part in the struggle for
      existence, each man for himself, and took to breaking stones and painting
      roofs, it would be a serious menace to progress?"

 "Where is the danger?" I asked. "Progress consists in deeds of love, in
      the fulfilment of the moral law. If you enslave no one, and are a burden
      upon no one, what further progress do you want?"

 "But look here!" said Blagovo, suddenly losing his temper and getting up.
      "I say! If a snail in its shell is engaged in self-perfection in obedience
      to the moral law—would you call that progress?"

 "But why?" I was nettled. "If you make your neighbours feed you, clothe
      you, carry you, defend you from your enemies, their life is built up on
      slavery, and that is not progress. My view is that that is the most real
      and, perhaps, the only possible, the only progress necessary."

 "The limits of universal progress, which is common to all men, are in
      infinity, and it seems to me strange to talk of a 'possible' progress
      limited by our needs and temporal conceptions."

 "If the limits of peoples are in infinity, as you say, then it means that
      its goal is indefinite," I said. "Think of living without knowing
      definitely what for!"

 "Why not? Your 'not knowing' is not so boring as your 'knowing.' I am
      walking up a ladder which is called progress, civilisation, culture. I go
      on and on, not knowing definitely where I am going to, but surely it is
      worth while living for the sake of the wonderful ladder alone. And you
      know exactly what you are living for—that some should not enslave
      others, that the artist and the man who mixes his colours for him should
      dine together. But that is the bourgeois, kitchen side of life, and isn't
      it disgusting only to live for that? If some insects devour others, devil
      take them, let them! We need not think of them, they will perish and rot,
      however you save them from slavery—we must think of that great Cross
      which awaits all mankind in the distant future."

 Blagovo argued hotly with me, but it was noticeable that he was disturbed
      by some outside thought.

 "Your sister is not coming," he said, consulting his watch. "Yesterday she
      was at our house and said she was going to see you. You go on talking
      about slavery, slavery," he went on, "but it is a special question, and
      all these questions are solved by mankind gradually."

 We began to talk of evolution. I said that every man decides the question
      of good and evil for himself, and does not wait for mankind to solve the
      question by virtue of gradual development. Besides, evolution is a stick
      with two ends. Side by side with the gradual development of humanitarian
      ideas, there is the gradual growth of ideas of a different kind. Serfdom
      is past, and capitalism is growing. And with ideas of liberation at their
      height the majority, just as in the days of Baty, feeds, clothes, and
      defends the minority; and is left hungry, naked, and defenceless. The
      state of things harmonises beautifully with all your tendencies and
      movements, because the art of enslaving is also being gradually developed.
      We no longer flog our servants in the stables, but we give slavery more
      refined forms; at any rate, we are able to justify it in each separate
      case. Ideas remain ideas with us, but if we could, now, at the end of the
      nineteenth century, throw upon the working classes all our most unpleasant
      physiological functions, we should do so, and, of course, we should
      justify ourselves by saying that if the best people, thinkers and great
      scholars, had to waste their time on such functions, progress would be in
      serious jeopardy.

 Just then my sister entered. When she saw the doctor, she was flurried and
      excited, and at once began to say that it was time for her to go home to
      her father.

 "Cleopatra Alexeyevna," said Blagovo earnestly, laying his hands on his
      heart, "what will happen to your father if you spend half an hour with
      your brother and me?"

 He was a simple kind of man and could communicate his cheerfulness to
      others. My sister thought for a minute and began to laugh, and suddenly
      got very happy, suddenly, unexpectedly, just as she did at the picnic. We
      went out into the fields and lay on the grass, and went on with our
      conversation and looked at the town, where all the windows facing the west
      looked golden in the setting sun.

 After that Blagovo appeared every time my sister came to see me, and they
      always greeted each other as though their meeting was unexpected. My
      sister used to listen while the doctor and I argued, and her face was
      always joyful and rapturous, admiring and curious, and it seemed to me
      that a new world was slowly being discovered before her eyes, a world
      which she had not seen before even in her dreams, which now she was trying
      to divine; when the doctor was not there she was quiet and sad, and if, as
      she sat on my bed, she sometimes wept, it was for reasons of which she did
      not speak.

 In August Radish gave us orders to go to the railway. A couple of days
      before we were "driven" out of town, my father came to see me. He sat down
      and, without looking at me, slowly wiped his red face, then took out of
      his pocket our local paper and read out with deliberate emphasis on each
      word that a schoolfellow of my own age, the son of the director of the
      State Bank, had been appointed chief clerk of the Court of the Exchequer.

 "And now, look at yourself," he said, folding up the newspaper. "You are a
      beggar, a vagabond, a scoundrel! Even the bourgeoisie and other peasants
      get education to make themselves decent people, while you, a Pologniev,
      with famous, noble ancestors, go wallowing in the mire! But I did not come
      here to talk to you. I have given you up already." He went on in a choking
      voice, as he stood up: "I came here to find out where your sister is, you
      scoundrel! She left me after dinner. It is now past seven o'clock and she
      is not in. She has been going out lately without telling me, and she has
      been disrespectful—and I see your filthy, abominable influence at
      work. Where is she?"

 He had in his hands the familiar umbrella, and I was already taken aback,
      and I stood stiff and erect, like a schoolboy, waiting for my father to
      thrash me, but he saw the glance I cast at the umbrella and this probably
      checked him.

 "Live as you like!" he said. "My blessing is gone from you."

 "Good God!" muttered my old nurse behind the door. "You are lost. Oh! my
      heart feels some misfortune coming. I can feel it."

 I went to work on the railway. During the whole of August there was wind
      and rain. It was damp and cold; the corn had now been gathered in the
      fields, and on the big farms where the reaping was done with machines, the
      wheat lay not in stacks, but in heaps; and I remember how those melancholy
      heaps grew darker and darker every day, and the grain sprouted. It was
      hard work; the pouring rain spoiled everything that we succeeded in
      finishing. We were not allowed either to live or to sleep in the station
      buildings and had to take shelter in dirty, damp, mud huts where the
      "railies" had lived during the summer, and at night I could not sleep from
      the cold and the bugs crawling over my face and hands. And when we were
      working near the bridges, then the "railies" used to come out in a crowd
      to fight the painters—which they regarded as sport. They used to
      thrash us, steal our trousers, and to infuriate us and provoke us to a
      fight; they used to spoil our work, as when they smeared the signal-boxes
      with green paint. To add to all our miseries Radish began to pay us very
      irregularly. All the painting on the line was given to one contractor, who
      subcontracted with another, and he again with Radish, stipulating for
      twenty per cent commission. The job itself was unprofitable; then came the
      rains; time was wasted; we did no work and Radish had to pay his men every
      day. The starving painters nearly came to blows with him, called him a
      swindler, a bloodsucker, a Judas, and he, poor man, sighed and in despair
      raised his hands to the heavens and was continually going to Mrs.
      Cheprakov to borrow money.

 VII

 Came the rainy, muddy, dark autumn, bringing a slack time, and I used to
      sit at home three days in the week without work, or did various jobs
      outside painting; such as digging earth for ballast for twenty copecks a
      day. Doctor Blagovo had gone to Petersburg. My sister did not come to see
      me. Radish lay at home ill, expecting to die every day.

 And my mood was also autumnal; perhaps because when I became a working man
      I saw only the seamy side of the life of our town, and every day made
      fresh discoveries which brought me to despair. My fellow townsmen, both
      those of whom I had had a low opinion before, and those whom I had thought
      fairly decent, now seemed to me base, cruel, and up to any dirty trick. We
      poor people were tricked and cheated in the accounts, kept waiting for
      hours in cold passages or in the kitchen, and we were insulted and
      uncivilly treated. In the autumn I had to paper the library and two rooms
      at the club. I was paid seven copecks a piece, but was told to give a
      receipt for twelve copecks, and when I refused to do it, a respectable
      gentleman in gold spectacles, one of the stewards of the club, said to me:

 "If you say another word, you scoundrel, I'll knock you down."

 And when a servant whispered to him that I was the son of Pologniev, the
      architect, then I got flustered and blushed, but he recovered himself at
      once and said:

 "Damn him."

 In the shops we working men were sold bad meat, musty flour, and coarse
      tea. In church we were jostled by the police, and in the hospitals we were
      mulcted by the assistants and nurses, and if we could not give them bribes
      through poverty, we were given food in dirty dishes. In the post-office
      the lowest official considered it his duty to treat us as animals and to
      shout rudely and insolently: "Wait! Don't you come pushing your way in
      here!" Even the dogs, even they were hostile to us and hurled themselves
      at us with a peculiar malignancy. But what struck me most of all in my new
      position was the entire lack of justice, what the people call "forgetting
      God." Rarely a day went by without some swindle. The shopkeeper, who sold
      us oil, the contractor, the workmen, the customers themselves, all
      cheated. It was an understood thing that our rights were never considered,
      and we always had to pay for the money we had earned, going with our hats
      off to the back door.

 I was paper-hanging in one of the club-rooms, next the library, when, one
      evening as I was on the point of leaving, Dolyhikov's daughter came into
      the room carrying a bundle of books.

 I bowed to her.

 "Ah! How are you?" she said, recognising me at once and holding out her
      hand. "I am very glad to see you."

 She smiled and looked with a curious puzzled expression at my blouse and
      the pail of paste and the papers lying on the floor; I was embarrassed and
      she also felt awkward.

 "Excuse my staring at you," she said. "I have heard so much about you.
      Especially from Doctor Blagovo. He is enthusiastic about you. I have met
      your sister; she is a dear, sympathetic girl, but I could not make her see
      that there is nothing awful in your simple life. On the contrary, you are
      the most interesting man in the town."

 Once more she glanced at the pail of paste and the paper and said:

 "I asked Doctor Blagovo to bring us together, but he either forgot or had
      no time. However, we have met now. I should be very pleased if you would
      call on me. I do so want to have a talk. I am a simple person," she said,
      holding out her hand, "and I hope you will come and see me without
      ceremony. My father is away, in Petersburg."

 She went into the reading-room, with her dress rustling, and for a long
      time after I got home I could not sleep.

 During that autumn some kind soul, wishing to relieve my existence, sent
      me from time to time presents of tea and lemons, or biscuits, or roast
      pigeons. Karpovna said the presents were brought by a soldier, though from
      whom she did not know; and the soldier used to ask if I was well, if I had
      dinner every day, and if I had warm clothes. When the frost began the
      soldier came while I was out and brought a soft knitted scarf, which gave
      out a soft, hardly perceptible scent, and I guessed who my good fairy had
      been. For the scarf smelled of lily-of-the-valley, Aniuta Blagovo's
      favourite scent.

 Toward winter there was more work and things became more cheerful. Radish
      came to life again and we worked together in the cemetery church, where we
      scraped the holy shrine for gilding. It was a clean, quiet, and, as our
      mates said, a specially good job. We could do a great deal in one day, and
      so time passed quickly, imperceptibly. There was no swearing, nor
      laughing, nor loud altercations. The place compelled quiet and decency,
      and disposed one for tranquil, serious thoughts. Absorbed in our work, we
      stood or sat immovably, like statues; there was a dead silence, very
      proper to a cemetery, so that if a tool fell down, or the oil in the lamp
      spluttered, the sound would be loud and startling, and we would turn to
      see what it was. After a long silence one could hear a humming like that
      of a swarm of bees; in the porch, in an undertone, the funeral service was
      being read over a dead baby; or a painter painting a moon surrounded with
      stars on the cupola would begin to whistle quietly, and remembering
      suddenly that he was in a church, would stop; or Radish would sigh at his
      own thoughts: "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!" or above our
      heads there would be the slow, mournful tolling of a bell, and the
      painters would say it must be a rich man being brought to the church....

 The days I spent in the peace of the little church, and during the
      evenings I played billiards, or went to the gallery of the theatre in the
      new serge suit I had bought with my own hard-earned money. They were
      already beginning plays and concerts at the Azhoguins', and Radish did the
      scenery by himself. He told me about the plays and tableaux vivants at the
      Azhoguins', and I listened to him enviously. I had a great longing to take
      part in the rehearsals, but I dared not go to the Azhoguins'.

 A week before Christmas Doctor Blagovo arrived, and we resumed our
      arguments and played billiards in the evenings. When he played billiards
      he used to take off his coat, and unfasten his shirt at the neck, and
      generally try to look like a debauchee. He drank a little, but rowdily,
      and managed to spend in a cheap tavern like the Volga as much as twenty
      roubles in an evening.

 Once more my sister came to see me, and when they met they expressed
      surprise, but I could see by her happy, guilty face that these meetings
      were not accidental. One evening when we were playing billiards the doctor
      said to me:

 "I say, why don't you call on Miss Dolyhikov? You don't know Maria
      Victorovna. She is a clever, charming, simple creature."

 I told him how the engineer had received me in the spring.

 "Nonsense!" laughed the doctor. "The engineer is one thing and she is
      another. Really, my good fellow, you mustn't offend her. Go and see her
      some time. Let us go to-morrow evening. Will you?"

 He persuaded me. Next evening I donned my serge suit and with some
      perturbation set out to call on Miss Dolyhikov. The footman did not seem
      to me so haughty and formidable, or the furniture so oppressive, as on the
      morning when I had come to ask for work. Maria Victorovna was expecting me
      and greeted me as an old friend and gave my hand a warm, friendly grip.
      She was wearing a grey dress with wide sleeves, and had her hair done in
      the style which when it became the fashion a year later in our town, was
      called "dog's ears." The hair was combed back over the ears, and it made
      Maria Victorovna's face look broader, and she looked very like her father,
      whose face was broad and red and rather like a coachman's. She was
      handsome and elegant, but not young; about thirty to judge by her
      appearance, though she was not more than twenty-five.

 "Dear doctor!" she said, making me sit down. "How grateful I am to him.
      But for him, you would not have come. I am bored to death! My father has
      gone and left me alone, and I do not know what to do with myself."

 Then she began to ask where I was working, how much I got, and where I
      lived.

 "Do you only spend what you earn on yourself?" she asked.

 "Yes."

 "You are a happy man," she replied. "All the evil in life, it seems to me,
      comes from boredom and idleness, and spiritual emptiness, which are
      inevitable when one lives at other people's expense. Don't think I'm
      showing off. I mean it sincerely. It is dull and unpleasant to be rich.
      Win friends by just riches, they say, because as a rule there is and can
      be no such thing as just riches."

 She looked at the furniture with a serious, cold expression, as though she
      was making an inventory of it, and went on:

 "Ease and comfort possess a magic power. Little by little they seduce even
      strong-willed people. Father and I used to live poorly and simply, and now
      you see how we live. Isn't it strange?" she said with a shrug. "We spend
      twenty thousand roubles a year! In the provinces!"

 "Ease and comfort must not be regarded as the inevitable privilege of
      capital and education," I said. "It seems to me possible to unite the
      comforts of life with work, however hard and dirty it may be. Your father
      is rich, but, as he says, he used to be a mechanic, and just a
      lubricator."

 She smiled and shook her head thoughtfully.

 "Papa sometimes eats tiurya ," she said, "but only out of caprice."

 A bell rang and she got up.

 "The rich and the educated ought to work like the rest," she went on, "and
      if there is to be any comfort, it should be accessible to all. There
      should be no privileges. However, that's enough philosophy. Tell me
      something cheerful. Tell me about the painters. What are they like?
      Funny?"

 The doctor came. I began to talk about the painters, but, being unused to
      it, I felt awkward and talked solemnly and ponderously like an
      ethnographist. The doctor also told a few stories about working people. He
      rocked to and fro and cried, and fell on his knees, and when he was
      depicting a drunkard, lay flat on the floor. It was as good as a play, and
      Maria Victorovna laughed until she cried. Then he played the piano and
      sang in his high-pitched tenor, and Maria Victorovna stood by him and told
      him what to sing and corrected him when he made a mistake.

 "I hear you sing, too," said I.

 "Too?" cried the doctor. "She is a wonderful singer, an artist, and you
      say—too! Careful, careful!"

 "I used to study seriously," she replied, "but I have given it up now."

 She sat on a low stool and told us about her life in Petersburg, and
      imitated famous singers, mimicking their voices and mannerisms; then she
      sketched the doctor and myself in her album, not very well, but both were
      good likenesses. She laughed and made jokes and funny faces, and this
      suited her better than talking about unjust riches, and it seemed to me
      that what she had said about "riches and comfort" came not from herself,
      but was just mimicry. She was an admirable comedian. I compared her
      mentally with the girls of our town, and not even the beautiful, serious
      Aniuta Blagovo could stand up against her; the difference was as vast as
      that between a wild and a garden rose.

 We stayed to supper. The doctor and Maria Victorovna drank red wine,
      champagne, and coffee with cognac; they touched glasses and drank to
      friendship, to wit, to progress, to freedom, and never got drunk, but went
      rather red and laughed for no reason until they cried. To avoid being out
      of it I, too, drank red wine.

 "People with talent and with gifted natures," said Miss Dolyhikov, "know
      how to live and go their own way; but ordinary people like myself know
      nothing and can do nothing by themselves; there is nothing for them but to
      find some deep social current and let themselves be borne along by it."

 "Is it possible to find that which does not exist?" asked the doctor.

 "It doesn't exist because we don't see it."

 "Is that so? Social currents are the invention of modern literature. They
      don't exist here."

 A discussion began.

 "We have no profound social movements; nor have we had them," said the
      doctor. "Modern literature has invented a lot of things, and modern
      literature invented intellectual working men in village life, but go
      through all our villages and you will only find Mr. Cheeky Snout in a
      jacket or black frock coat, who will make four mistakes in the word 'one.'
      Civilised life has not begun with us yet. We have the same savagery, the
      same slavery, the same nullity as we had five hundred years ago.
      Movements, currents—all that is so wretched and puerile mixed up
      with such vulgar, catch-penny interests—and one cannot take it
      seriously. You may think you have discovered a large social movement, and
      you may follow it and devote your life in the modern fashion to such
      problems as the liberation of vermin from slavery, or the abolition of
      meat cutlets—and I congratulate you, madam. But we have to learn,
      learn, learn, and there will be plenty of time for social movements; we
      are not up to them yet, and upon my soul, we don't understand anything at
      all about them."

 "You don't understand, but I do," said Maria Victorovna. "Good Heavens!
      What a bore you are to-night."

 "It is our business to learn and learn, to try and accumulate as much
      knowledge as possible, because serious social movements come where there
      is knowledge, and the future happiness of mankind lies in science. Here's
      to science!"

 "One thing is certain. Life must somehow be arranged differently," said
      Maria Victorovna, after some silence and deep thought, "and life as it has
      been up to now is worthless. Don't let us talk about it."

 When we left her the Cathedral clock struck two.

 "Did you like her?" asked the doctor. "Isn't she a dear girl?"

 We had dinner at Maria Victorovna's on Christmas Day, and then we went to
      see her every day during the holidays. There was nobody besides ourselves,
      and she was right when she said she had no friends in the town but the
      doctor and me. We spent most of the time talking, and sometimes the doctor
      would bring a book or a magazine and read aloud. After all, he was the
      first cultivated man I had met. I could not tell if he knew much, but he
      was always generous with his knowledge because he wished others to know
      too. When he talked about medicine, he was not like any of our local
      doctors, but he made a new and singular impression, and it seemed to me
      that if he had wished he could have become a genuine scientist. And
      perhaps he was the only person at that time who had any real influence
      over me. Meeting him and reading the books he gave me, I began gradually
      to feel a need for knowledge to inspire the tedium of my work. It seemed
      strange to me that I had not known before such things as that the whole
      world consisted of sixty elements. I did not know what oil or paint was,
      and I could do without knowing. My acquaintance with the doctor raised me
      morally too. I used to argue with him, and though I usually stuck to my
      opinion, yet, through him, I came gradually to perceive that everything
      was not clear to me, and I tried to cultivate convictions as definite as
      possible so that the promptings of my conscience should be precise and
      have nothing vague about them. Nevertheless, educated and fine as he was,
      far and away the best man in the town, he was by no means perfect. There
      was something rather rude and priggish in his ways and in his trick of
      dragging talk down to discussion, and when he took off his coat and sat in
      his shirt and gave the footman a tip, it always seemed to me that culture
      was just a part of him, with the rest untamed Tartar.

 After the holidays he left once more for Petersburg. He went in the
      morning and after dinner my sister came to see me. Without taking off her
      furs, she sat silent, very pale, staring in front of her. She began to
      shiver and seemed to be fighting against some illness.

 "You must have caught a cold," I said.

 Her eyes filled with tears. She rose and went to Karpovna without a word
      to me, as though I had offended her. And a little later I heard her
      speaking in a tone of bitter reproach.

 "Nurse, what have I been living for, up to now? What for? Tell me; haven't
      I wasted my youth? During the last years I have had nothing but making up
      accounts, pouring out tea, counting the copecks, entertaining guests,
      without a thought that there was anything better in the world! Nurse, try
      to understand me, I too have human desires and I want to live and they
      have made a housekeeper of me. It is awful, awful!"

 She flung her keys against the door and they fell with a clatter in my
      room. They were the keys of the side-board, the larder, the cellar, and
      the tea-chest—the keys my mother used to carry.

 "Oh! Oh! Saints above!" cried my old nurse in terror. "The blessed
      saints!"

 When she left, my sister came into my room for her keys and said:

 "Forgive me. Something strange has been going on in me lately."

 VIII

 One evening when I came home late from Maria Victorovna's I found a young
      policeman in a new uniform in my room; he was sitting by the table
      reading.

 "At last!" he said getting up and stretching himself. "This is the third
      time I have been to see you. The governor has ordered you to go and see
      him to-morrow at nine o'clock sharp. Don't be late."

 He made me give him a written promise to comply with his Excellency's
      orders and went away. This policeman's visit and the unexpected invitation
      to see the governor had a most depressing effect on me. From my early
      childhood I have had a dread of gendarmes, police, legal officials, and I
      was tormented with anxiety as though I had really committed a crime and I
      could not sleep. Nurse and Prokofyi were also upset and could not sleep.
      And, to make things worse, nurse had an earache, and moaned and more than
      once screamed out. Hearing that I could not sleep Prokofyi came quietly
      into my room with a little lamp and sat by the table.

 "You should have a drop of pepper-brandy...." he said after some thought.
      "In this vale of tears things go on all right when you take a drop. And if
      mother had some pepper-brandy poured into her ear she would be much
      better."

 About three he got ready to go to the slaughter-house to fetch some meat.
      I knew I should not sleep until morning, and to use up the time until
      nine, I went with him. We walked with a lantern, and his boy, Nicolka, who
      was about thirteen, and had blue spots on his face and an expression like
      a murderer's, drove behind us in a sledge, urging the horse on with hoarse
      cries.

 "You will probably be punished at the governor's," said Prokofyi as we
      walked. "There is a governor's rank, and an archimandrite's rank, and an
      officer's rank, and a doctor's rank, and every profession has its own
      rank. You don't keep to yours and they won't allow it."

 The slaughter-house stood behind the cemetery, and till then I had only
      seen it at a distance. It consisted of three dark sheds surrounded by a
      grey fence, from which, when the wind was in that direction in summer,
      there came an overpowering stench. Now, as I entered the yard, I could not
      see the sheds in the darkness; I groped through horses and sledges, both
      empty and laden with meat; and there were men walking about with lanterns
      and swearing disgustingly. Prokofyi and Nicolka swore as filthily and
      there was a continuous hum from the swearing and coughing and the neighing
      of the horses.

 The place smelled of corpses and offal, the snow was thawing and already
      mixed with mud, and in the darkness it seemed to me that I was walking
      through a pool of blood.

 When we had filled the sledge with meat, we went to the butcher's shop in
      the market-place. Day was beginning to dawn. One after another the cooks
      came with baskets and old women in mantles. With an axe in his hand,
      wearing a white, blood-stained apron, Prokofyi swore terrifically and
      crossed himself, turning toward the church, and shouted so loud that he
      could be heard all over the market, avowing that he sold his meat at cost
      price and even at a loss. He cheated in weighing and reckoning, the cooks
      saw it, but, dazed by his shouting, they did not protest, but only called
      him a gallows-bird.

 Raising and dropping his formidable axe, he assumed picturesque attitudes
      and constantly uttered the sound "Hak!" with a furious expression, and I
      was really afraid of his cutting off some one's head or hand.

 I stayed in the butcher's shop the whole morning, and when at last I went
      to the governor's my fur coat smelled of meat and blood. My state of mind
      would have been appropriate for an encounter with a bear armed with no
      more than a staff. I remember a long staircase with a striped carpet, and
      a young official in a frock coat with shining buttons, who silently
      indicated the door with both hands and went in to announce me. I entered
      the hall, where the furniture was most luxurious, but cold and tasteless,
      forming a most unpleasant impression—the tall, narrow pier-glasses,
      and the bright, yellow hangings over the windows; one could see that,
      though governors changed, the furniture remained the same. The young
      official again pointed with both hands to the door and went toward a
      large, green table, by which stood a general with the Order of Vladimir at
      his neck.

 "Mr. Pologniev," he began, holding a letter in his hand and opening his
      mouth wide so that it made a round O. "I asked you to come to say this to
      you: 'Your esteemed father has applied verbally and in writing to the
      provincial marshal of nobility, to have you summoned and made to see the
      incongruity of your conduct with the title of nobleman which you have the
      honour to bear. His Excellency Alexander Pavlovich, justly thinking that
      your conduct may be subversive, and finding that persuasion may not be
      sufficient, without serious intervention on the part of the authorities,
      has given me his decision as to your case, and I agree with him.'"

 He said this quietly, respectfully, standing erect as if I was his
      superior, and his expression was not at all severe. He had a flabby, tired
      face, covered with wrinkles, with pouches under his eyes; his hair was
      dyed, and it was hard to guess his age from his appearance—fifty or
      sixty.

 "I hope," he went on, "that you will appreciate Alexander Pavlovich's
      delicacy in applying to me, not officially, but privately. I have invited
      you unofficially not as a governor, but as a sincere admirer of your
      father's. And I ask you to change your conduct and to return to the duties
      proper to your rank, or, to avoid the evil effects of your example, to go
      to some other place where you are not known and where you may do what you
      like. Otherwise I shall have to resort to extreme measures."

 For half a minute he stood in silence staring at me open-mouthed.

 "Are you a vegetarian?" he asked.

 "No, your Excellency, I eat meat."

 He sat down and took up a document, and I bowed and left.

 It was not worth while going to work before dinner. I went home and tried
      to sleep, but could not because of the unpleasant, sickly feeling from the
      slaughter-house and my conversation with the governor. And so I dragged
      through till the evening and then, feeling gloomy and out of sorts, I went
      to see Maria Victorovna. I told her about my visit to the governor and she
      looked at me in bewilderment, as if she did not believe me, and suddenly
      she began to laugh merrily, heartily, stridently, as only good-natured,
      light-hearted people can.

 "If I were to tell this in Petersburg!" she cried, nearly dropping with
      laughter, bending over the table. "If I could tell them in Petersburg!"

 IX

 Now we saw each other often, sometimes twice a day. Almost every day,
      after dinner, she drove up to the cemetery and, as she waited for me, read
      the inscriptions on the crosses and monuments. Sometimes she came into the
      church and stood by my side and watched me working. The silence, the
      simple industry of the painters and gilders, Radish's good sense, and the
      fact that outwardly I was no different from the other artisans and worked
      as they did, in a waistcoat and old shoes, and that they addressed me
      familiarly—were new to her, and she was moved by it all. Once in her
      presence a painter who was working, at a door on the roof, called down to
      me:

 "Misail, fetch me the white lead."

 I fetched him the white lead and as I came down the scaffolding she was
      moved to tears and looked at me and smiled:

 "What a dear you are!" she said.

 I have always remembered how when I was a child a green parrot got out of
      its cage in one of the rich people's houses and wandered about the town
      for a whole month, flying from one garden to another, homeless and lonely.
      And Maria Victorovna reminded me of the bird.

 "Except to the cemetery," she said with a laugh, "I have absolutely
      nowhere to go. The town bores me to tears. People read, sing, and twitter
      at the Azhoguins', but I cannot bear them lately. Your sister is shy, Miss
      Blagovo for some reason hates me. I don't like the theatre. What can I do
      with myself?"

 When I was at her house I smelled of paint and turpentine, and my hands
      were stained. She liked that. She wanted me to come to her in my ordinary
      working-clothes; but I felt awkward in them in her drawing-room, and as if
      I were in uniform, and so I always wore my new serge suit. She did not
      like that.

 "You must confess," she said once, "that you have not got used to your new
      rôle. A working-man's suit makes you feel awkward and embarrassed.
      Tell me, isn't it because you are not sure of yourself and are
      unsatisfied? Does this work you have chosen, this painting of yours,
      really satisfy you?" she asked merrily. "I know paint makes things look
      nicer and wear better, but the things themselves belong to the rich and
      after all they are a luxury. Besides you have said more than once that
      everybody should earn his living with his own hands and you earn money,
      not bread. Why don't you keep to the exact meaning of what you say? You
      must earn bread, real bread, you must plough, sow, reap, thrash, or do
      something which has to do directly with agriculture, such as keeping cows,
      digging, or building houses...."

 She opened a handsome bookcase which stood by the writing-table and said:

 "I'm telling you all this because I'm going to let you into my secret.
      Voilà. This is my agricultural library. Here are books on arable
      land, vegetable-gardens, orchard-keeping, cattle-keeping, bee-keeping: I
      read them eagerly and have studied the theory of everything thoroughly. It
      is my dream to go to Dubechnia as soon as March begins. It is wonderful
      there, amazing; isn't it? The first year I shall only be learning the work
      and getting used to it, and in the second year I shall begin to work
      thoroughly, without sparing myself. My father promised to give me
      Dubechnia as a present, and I am to do anything I like with it."

 She blushed and with mingled laughter and tears she dreamed aloud of her
      life at Dubechnia and how absorbing it would be. And I envied her. March
      would soon be here. The days were drawing out, and in the bright sunny
      afternoons the snow dripped from the roofs, and the smell of spring was in
      the air. I too longed for the country.

 And when she said she was going to live at Dubechnia, I saw at once that I
      should be left alone in the town, and I felt jealous of the bookcase with
      her books about farming. I knew and cared nothing about farming and I was
      on the point of telling her that agriculture was work for slaves, but I
      recollected that my father had once said something of the sort and I held
      my peace.

 Lent began. The engineer, Victor Ivanich, came home from Petersburg. I had
      begun to forget his existence. He came unexpectedly, not even sending a
      telegram. When I went there as usual in the evening, he was walking up and
      down the drawing-room, after a bath, with his hair cut, looking ten years
      younger, and talking. His daughter was kneeling by his trunks and taking
      out boxes, bottles, books, and handing them to Pavel the footman. When I
      saw the engineer, I involuntarily stepped back and he held out both his
      hands and smiled and showed his strong, white, cab-driver's teeth.

 "Here he is! Here he is! I'm very pleased to see you, Mr. House-painter!
      Maria told me all about you and sang your praises. I quite understand you
      and heartily approve." He took me by the arm and went on: "It is much
      cleverer and more honest to be a decent workman than to spoil State paper
      and to wear a cockade. I myself worked with my hands in Belgium. I was an
      engine-driver for five years...."

 He was wearing a short jacket and comfortable slippers, and he shuffled
      along like a gouty man waving and rubbing his hands; humming and buzzing
      and shrugging with pleasure at being at home again with his favourite
      shower-bath.

 "There's no denying," he said at supper, "there's no denying that you are
      kind, sympathetic people, but somehow as soon as you gentlefolk take on
      manual labour or try to spare the peasants, you reduce it all to
      sectarianism. You are a sectarian. You don't drink vodka. What is that but
      sectarianism?"

 To please him I drank vodka. I drank wine, too. We ate cheese, sausages,
      pastries, pickles, and all kinds of dainties that the engineer had brought
      with him, and we sampled wines sent from abroad during his absence. They
      were excellent. For some reason the engineer had wines and cigars sent
      from abroad—duty free; somebody sent him caviare and baliki gratis; he did not pay rent for his house because his landlord supplied
      the railway with kerosene, and generally he and his daughter gave me the
      impression of having all the best things in the world at their service
      free of charge.

 I went on visiting them, but with less pleasure than before. The engineer
      oppressed me and I felt cramped in his presence. I could not endure his
      clear, innocent eyes; his opinions bored me and were offensive to me, and
      I was distressed by the recollection that I had so recently been
      subordinate to this ruddy, well-fed man, and that he had been mercilessly
      rude to me. True he would put his arm round my waist and clap me kindly on
      the shoulder and approve of my way of living, but I felt that he despised
      my nullity just as much as before and only suffered me to please his
      daughter, but I could no longer laugh and talk easily, and I thought
      myself ill-mannered, and all the time was expecting him to call me
      Panteley as he did his footman Pavel. How my provincial, bourgeois pride
      rode up against him! I, a working man, a painter, going every day to the
      house of rich strangers, whom the whole town regarded as foreigners, and
      drinking their expensive wines and outlandish dishes! I could not
      reconcile this with my conscience. When I went to see them I sternly
      avoided those whom I met on the way, and looked askance at them like a
      real sectarian, and when I left the engineer's house I was ashamed of
      feeling so well-fed.

 But chiefly I was afraid of falling in love. Whether walking in the
      street, or working, or talking to my mates, I thought all the time of
      going to Maria Victorovna's in the evening, and always had her voice, her
      laughter, her movements with me. And always as I got ready to go to her, I
      would stand for a long time in front of the cracked mirror tying my
      necktie; my serge suit seemed horrible to me, and I suffered, but at the
      same time, despised myself for feeling so small. When she called to me
      from another room to say that she was not dressed yet and to ask me to
      wait a bit, and I could hear her dressing, I was agitated and felt as
      though the floor was sinking under me. And when I saw a woman in the
      street, even at a distance, I fell to comparing her figure with hers, and
      it seemed to me that all our women and girls were vulgar, absurdly
      dressed, and without manners; and such comparisons roused in me a feeling
      of pride; Maria Victorovna was better than all of them. And at night I
      dreamed of her and myself.

 Once at supper the engineer and I ate a whole lobster. When I reached home
      I remember that the engineer had twice called me "my dear fellow," and I
      thought that they treated me as they might have done a big, unhappy dog,
      separated from his master, and that they were amusing themselves with me,
      and that they would order me away like a dog when they were bored with me.
      I began to feel ashamed and hurt; went to the point of tears, as though I
      had been insulted, and, raising my eyes to the heavens, I vowed to put an
      end to it all.

 Next day I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. Late at night, when it was quite
      dark and pouring with rain, I walked up and down Great Gentry Street,
      looking at the windows. At the Azhoguins' everybody was asleep and the
      only light was in one of the top windows; old Mrs. Azhoguin was sitting in
      her room embroidering by candle-light and imagining herself to be fighting
      against prejudice. It was dark in our house and opposite, at the
      Dolyhikovs' the windows were lit up, but it was impossible to see anything
      through the flowers and curtains. I kept on walking up and down the
      street; I was soaked through with the cold March rain. I heard my father
      come home from the club; he knocked at the door; in a minute a light
      appeared at a window and I saw my sister walking quickly with her lamp and
      hurriedly arranging her thick hair. Then my father paced up and down the
      drawing-room, talking and rubbing his hands, and my sister sat still in a
      corner, lost in thought, not listening to him....

 But soon they left the room and the light was put out.... I looked at the
      engineer's house and that too was now dark. In the darkness and the rain I
      felt desperately lonely. Cast out at the mercy of Fate, and I felt how,
      compared with my loneliness, and my suffering, actual and to come, all my
      work and all my desires and all that I had hitherto thought and read, were
      vain and futile. Alas! The activities and thoughts of human beings are not
      nearly so important as their sorrows! And not knowing exactly what I was
      doing I pulled with all my might at the bell at the Dolyhikovs' gate,
      broke it, and ran away down the street like a little boy, full of fear,
      thinking they would rush out at once and recognise me. When I stopped to
      take breath at the end of the street, I could hear nothing but the falling
      rain and far away a night-watchman knocking on a sheet of iron.

 For a whole week I did not go to the Dolyhikovs'. I sold my serge suit. I
      had no work and I was once more half-starved, earning ten or twenty
      copecks a day, when possible, by disagreeable work. Floundering knee-deep
      in the mire, putting out all my strength, I tried to drown my memories and
      to punish myself for all the cheeses and pickles to which I had been
      treated at the engineer's. Still, no sooner did I go to bed, wet and
      hungry, than my untamed imagination set to work to evolve wonderful,
      alluring pictures, and to my amazement I confessed that I was in love,
      passionately in love, and I fell sound asleep feeling that the hard life
      had only made my body stronger and younger.

 One evening it began, most unseasonably, to snow, and the wind blew from
      the north, exactly as if winter had begun again. When I got home from work
      I found Maria Victorovna in my room. She was in her furs with her hands in
      her muff.

 "Why don't you come to see me?" she asked, looking at me with her bright
      sagacious eyes, and I was overcome with joy and stood stiffly in front of
      her, just as I had done with my father when he was going to thrash me; she
      looked straight into my face and I could see by her eyes that she
      understood why I was overcome.

 "Why don't you come to see me?" she repeated. "You don't want to come? I
      had to come to you."

 She got up and came close to me.

 "Don't leave me," she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "I am lonely,
      utterly lonely."

 She began to cry and said, covering her face with her muff:

 "Alone! Life is hard, very hard, and in the whole world I have no one but
      you. Don't leave me!"

 Looking for her handkerchief to dry her tears, she gave a smile; we were
      silent for some time, then I embraced and kissed her, and the pin in her
      hat scratched my face and drew blood.

 And we began to talk as though we had been dear to each other for a long,
      long time.

 X

 In a couple of days she sent me to Dubechnia and I was beyond words
      delighted with it. As I walked to the station, and as I sat in the train,
      I laughed for no reason and people thought me drunk. There were snow and
      frost in the mornings still, but the roads were getting dark, and there
      were rooks cawing above them.

 At first I thought of arranging the side wing opposite Mrs. Cheprakov's
      for myself and Masha, but it appeared that doves and pigeons had taken up
      their abode there and it would be impossible to cleanse it without
      destroying a great number of nests. We would have to live willy-nilly in
      the uncomfortable rooms with Venetian blinds in the big house. The
      peasants called it a palace; there were more than twenty rooms in it, and
      the only furniture was a piano and a child's chair, lying in the attic,
      and even if Masha brought all her furniture from town we should not
      succeed in removing the impression of frigid emptiness and coldness. I
      chose three small rooms with windows looking on to the garden, and from
      early morning till late at night I was at work in them, glazing the
      windows, hanging paper, blocking up the chinks and holes in the floor. It
      was an easy, pleasant job. Every now and then I would run to the river to
      see if the ice was breaking and all the while I dreamed of the starlings
      returning. And at night when I thought of Masha I would be filled with an
      inexpressibly sweet feeling of an all-embracing joy to listen to the rats
      and the wind rattling and knocking above the ceiling; it was like an old
      hobgoblin coughing in the attic.

 The snow was deep; there was a heavy fall at the end of March, but it
      thawed rapidly, as if by magic, and the spring floods rushed down so that
      by the beginning of April the starlings were already chattering and yellow
      butterflies fluttered in the garden. The weather was wonderful. Every day
      toward evening I walked toward the town to meet Masha, and how delightful
      it was to walk along the soft, drying road with bare feet! Half-way I
      would sit down and look at the town, not daring to go nearer. The sight of
      it upset me, I was always wondering how my acquaintances would behave
      toward me when they heard of my love. What would my father say? I was
      particularly worried by the idea that my life was becoming more
      complicated, and that I had entirely lost control of it, and that she was
      carrying me off like a balloon, God knows whither. I had already given up
      thinking how to make a living, and I thought—indeed, I cannot
      remember what I thought.

 Masha used to come in a carriage. I would take a seat beside her and
      together, happy and free, we used to drive to Dubechnia. Or, having waited
      till sunset, I would return home, weary and disconsolate, wondering why
      Masha had not come, and then by the gate or in the garden I would find my
      darling. She would come by the railway and walk over from the station.
      What a triumph she had then! In her plain, woollen dress, with a simple
      umbrella, but keeping a trim, fashionable figure and expensive, Parisian
      boots—she was a gifted actress playing the country girl. We used to
      go over the house, and plan out the rooms, and the paths, and the
      vegetable-garden, and the beehives. We already had chickens and ducks and
      geese which we loved because they were ours. We had oats, clover,
      buckwheat, and vegetable seeds all ready for sowing, and we used to
      examine them all and wonder what the crops would be like, and everything
      Masha said to me seemed extraordinarily clever and fine. This was the
      happiest time of my life.

 Soon after Easter we were married in the parish church in the village of
      Kurilovka three miles from Dubechnia. Masha wanted everything to be
      simple; by her wish our bridesmen were peasant boys, only one deacon sang,
      and we returned from the church in a little, shaky cart which she drove
      herself. My sister was the only guest from the town. Masha had sent her a
      note a couple of days before the wedding. My sister wore a white dress and
      white gloves.... During the ceremony she cried softly for joy and emotion,
      and her face had a maternal expression of infinite goodness. She was
      intoxicated with our happiness and smiled as though she were breathing a
      sweet perfume, and when I looked at her I understood that there was
      nothing in the world higher in her eyes than love, earthly love, and that
      she was always dreaming of love, secretly, timidly, yet passionately. She
      embraced Masha and kissed her, and, not knowing how to express her
      ecstasy, she said to her of me:

 "He is a good man! A very good man."

 Before she left us, she put on her ordinary clothes, and took me into the
      garden to have a quiet talk.

 "Father is very hurt that you have not written to him," she said. "You
      should have asked for his blessing. But, at heart, he is very pleased. He
      says that this marriage will raise you in the eyes of society, and that
      under Maria Victorovna's influence you will begin to adopt a more serious
      attitude toward life. In the evening now we talk about nothing but you;
      and yesterday he even said, 'our Misail.' I was delighted. He has
      evidently thought of a plan and I believe he wants to set you an example
      of magnanimity, and that he will be the first to talk of reconciliation.
      It is quite possible that one of these days he will come and see you
      here."

 She made the sign of the cross over me and said:

 "Well, God bless you. Be happy. Aniuta Blagovo is a very clever girl. She
      says of your marriage that God has sent you a new ordeal. Well? Married
      life is not made up only of joy but of suffering as well. It is impossible
      to avoid it."

 Masha and I walked about three miles with her, and then walked home
      quietly and silently, as though it were a rest for both of us. Masha had
      her hand on my arm. We were at peace and there was no need to talk of
      love; after the wedding we grew closer to each other and dearer, and it
      seemed as though nothing could part us.

 "Your sister is a dear, lovable creature," said Masha, "but looks as
      though she had lived in torture. Your father must be a terrible man."

 I began to tell her how my sister and I had been brought up and how absurd
      and full of torture our childhood had been. When she heard that my father
      had thrashed me quite recently she shuddered and clung to me:

 "Don't tell me any more," she said. "It is too horrible."

 And now she did not leave me. We lived in the big house, in three rooms,
      and in the evenings we bolted the door that led to the empty part of the
      house, as though some one lived there whom we did not know and feared. I
      used to get up early, at dawn, and begin working. I repaired the carts;
      made paths in the garden, dug the beds, painted the roofs. When the time
      came to sow oats, I tried to plough and harrow, and sow and did it all
      conscientiously, and did not leave it all to the labourer. I used to get
      tired, and my face and feet used to burn with the rain and the sharp cold
      wind. But work in the fields did not attract me. I knew nothing about
      agriculture and did not like it; perhaps because my ancestors were not
      tillers of the soil and pure town blood ran in my veins. I loved nature
      dearly; I loved the fields and the meadows and the garden, but the peasant
      who turns the earth with his plough, shouting at his miserable horse,
      ragged and wet, with bowed shoulders, was to me an expression of wild,
      rude, ugly force, and as I watched his clumsy movements I could not help
      thinking of the long-passed legendary life, when men did not yet know the
      use of fire. The fierce bull which led the herd, and the horses that
      stampeded through the village, filled me with terror, and all the large
      creatures, strong and hostile, a ram with horns, a gander, or a watch-dog
      seemed to me to be symbolical of some rough, wild force. These prejudices
      used to be particularly strong in me in bad weather, when heavy clouds
      hung over the black plough-lands. But worst of all was that when I was
      ploughing or sowing, and a few peasants stood and watched how I did it, I
      no longer felt the inevitability and necessity of the work and it seemed
      to me that I was trifling my time away.

 I used to go through the gardens and the meadow to the mill. It was leased
      by Stiepan, a Kurilovka peasant; handsome, swarthy, with a black beard—an
      athletic appearance. He did not care for mill work and thought it tiresome
      and unprofitable, and he only lived at the mill to escape from home. He
      was a saddler and always smelled of tan and leather. He did not like
      talking, was slow and immovable, and used to hum "U-lu-lu-lu," sitting on
      the bank or in the doorway of the mill. Sometimes his wife and
      mother-in-law used to come from Kurilovka to see him; they were both fair,
      languid, soft, and they used to bow to him humbly and call him Stiepan
      Petrovich. And he would not answer their greeting with a word or a sign,
      but would turn where he sat on the bank and hum quietly: "U-lu-lu-lu."
      There would be a silence for an hour or two. His mother-in-law and his
      wife would whisper to each other, get up and look expectantly at him for
      some time, waiting for him to look at them, and then they would bow humbly
      and say in sweet, soft voices:

 "Good-bye, Stiepan Petrovich."

 And they would go away. After that, Stiepan would put away the bundle of
      cracknels or the shirt they had left for him and sigh and give a wink in
      their direction and say:

 "The female sex!"

 The mill was worked with both wheels day and night. I used to help
      Stiepan, I liked it, and when he went away I was glad to take his place.

 XI

 After a spell of warm bright weather we had a season of bad roads. It
      rained and was cold all through May. The grinding of the millstones and
      the drip of the rain induced idleness and sleep. The floor shook, the
      whole place smelled of flour, and this too made one drowsy. My wife in a
      short fur coat and high rubber boots used to appear twice a day and she
      always said the same thing:

 "Call this summer! It is worse than October!"

 We used to have tea together and cook porridge, or sit together for hours
      in silence thinking the rain would never stop. Once when Stiepan went away
      to a fair, Masha stayed the night in the mill. When we got up we could not
      tell what time it was for the sky was overcast; the sleepy cocks at
      Dubechnia were crowing, and the corncrakes were trilling in the meadow; it
      was very, very early.... My wife and I walked down to the pool and drew up
      the bow-net that Stiepan had put out in our presence the day before. There
      was one large perch in it and a crayfish angrily stretched out his claws.

 "Let them go," said Masha. "Let them be happy too."

 Because we got up very early and had nothing to do, the day seemed very
      long, the longest in my life. Stiepan returned before dusk and I went back
      to the farmhouse.

 "Your father came here to-day," said Masha.

 "Where is he?"

 "He has gone. I did not receive him."

 Seeing my silence and feeling that I was sorry for my father, she said:

 "We must be logical. I did not receive him and sent a message to ask him
      not to trouble us again and not to come and see us."

 In a moment I was outside the gates, striding toward the town to make it
      up with my father. It was muddy, slippery, cold. For the first time since
      our marriage I suddenly felt sad, and through my brain, tired with the
      long day, there flashed the thought that perhaps I was not living as I
      ought; I got more and more tired and was gradually overcome with weakness,
      inertia; I had no desire to move or to think, and after walking for some
      time, I waved my hand and went home.

 In the middle of the yard stood the engineer in a leather coat with a
      hood. He was shouting:

 "Where's the furniture? There was some good Empire furniture, pictures,
      vases. There's nothing left! Damn it, I bought the place with the
      furniture!"

 Near him stood Moissey, Mrs. Cheprakov's bailiff, fumbling with his cap; a
      lank fellow of about twenty-five, with a spotty face and little, impudent
      eyes; one side of his face was larger than the other as though he had been
      lain on.

 "Yes, Right Honourable Sir, you bought it without the furniture," he said
      sheepishly. "I remember that clearly."

 "Silence!" shouted the engineer, going red in the face, and beginning to
      shake, and his shout echoed through the garden.

 XII

 When I was busy in the garden or the yard, Moissey would stand with his
      hands behind his back and stare at me impertinently with his little eyes.
      And this used to irritate me to such an extent that I would put aside my
      work and go away.

 We learned from Stiepan that Moissey had been Mrs. Cheprakov's lover. I
      noticed that when people went to her for money they used to apply to
      Moissey first, and once I saw a peasant, a charcoal-burner, black all
      over, grovel at his feet. Sometimes after a whispered conversation Moissey
      would hand over the money himself without saying anything to his mistress,
      from which I concluded that the transaction was settled on his own
      account.

 He used to shoot in our garden, under our very windows, steal food from
      our larder, borrow our horses without leave, and we were furious, feeling
      that Dubechnia was no longer ours, and Masha used to go pale and say:

 "Have we to live another year and a half with these creatures?"

 Ivan Cheprakov, the son, was a guard on the railway. During the winter he
      got very thin and weak, so that he got drunk on one glass of vodka, and
      felt cold out of the sun. He hated wearing his guard's uniform and was
      ashamed of it, but found his job profitable because he could steal candles
      and sell them. My new position gave him a mixed feeling of astonishment,
      envy, and vague hope that something of the sort might happen to him. He
      used to follow Masha with admiring eyes, and to ask me what I had for
      dinner nowadays, and his ugly, emaciated face used to wear a sweet, sad
      expression, and he used to twitch his fingers as though he could feel my
      happiness with them.

 "I say, Little Profit," he would say excitedly, lighting and relighting
      his cigarette; he always made a mess wherever he stood because he used to
      waste a whole box of matches on one cigarette. "I say, my life is about as
      beastly as it could be. Every little squirt of a soldier can shout: 'Here
      guard! Here!' I have such a lot in the trains and you know, mine's a
      rotten life! My mother has ruined me! I heard a doctor say in the train,
      if the parents are loose, their children become drunkards or criminals.
      That's it."

 Once he came staggering into the yard. His eyes wandered aimlessly and he
      breathed heavily; he laughed and cried, and said something in a kind of
      frenzy, and through his thickly uttered words I could only hear: "My
      mother? Where is my mother?" and he wailed like a child crying, because it
      has lost its mother in a crowd. I led him away into the garden and laid
      him down under a tree, and all that day and through the night Masha and I
      took it in turns to stay with him. He was sick and Masha looked with
      disgust at his pale, wet face and said:

 "Are we to have these creatures on the place for another year and a half?
      It is awful! Awful!"

 And what a lot of trouble the peasants gave us! How many disappointments
      we had at the outset, in the spring, when we so longed to be happy! My
      wife built a school. I designed the school for sixty boys, and the Zemstvo
      Council approved the design, but recommended our building the school at
      Kurilovka, the big village, only three miles away; besides the Kurilovka
      school, where the children of four villages, including that of Dubechnia,
      were taught, was old and inadequate and the floor was so rotten that the
      children were afraid to walk on it. At the end of March Masha, by her own
      desire, was appointed trustee of the Kurilovka school, and at the
      beginning of April we called three parish meetings and persuaded the
      peasants that the school was old and inadequate, and that it was necessary
      to build a new one. A member of the Zemstvo Council and the elementary
      school inspector came down too and addressed them. After each meeting we
      were mobbed and asked for a pail of vodka; we felt stifled in the crowd
      and soon got tired and returned home dissatisfied and rather abashed. At
      last the peasants allotted a site for the school and undertook to cart the
      materials from the town. And as soon as the spring corn was sown, on the
      very first Sunday, carts set out from Kurilovka and Dubechnia to fetch the
      bricks for the foundations. They went at dawn and returned late in the
      evening. The peasants were drunk and said they were tired out.

 The rain and the cold continued, as though deliberately, all through May.
      The roads were spoiled and deep in mud. When the carts came from town they
      usually drove to our horror, into our yard! A horse would appear in the
      gate, straddling its fore legs, with its big belly heaving; before it came
      into the yard it would strain and heave and after it would come a ten-yard
      beam in a four-wheeled wagon, wet and slimy; alongside it, wrapped up to
      keep the rain out, never looking where he was going and splashing through
      the puddles, a peasant would walk with the skirt of his coat tucked up in
      his belt. Another cart would appear with planks; then a third with a beam;
      then a fourth ... and the yard in front of the house would gradually be
      blocked up with horses, beams, planks. Peasants, men and women with their
      heads wrapped up and their skirts tucked up, would stare morosely at our
      windows, kick up a row and insist on the lady of the house coming out to
      them; and they would curse and swear. And in a corner Moissey would stand,
      and it seemed to us that he delighted in our discomfiture.

 "We won't cart any more!" the peasants shouted. "We are tired to death!
      Let her go and cart it herself!"

 Pale and scared, thinking they would any minute break into the house,
      Masha would send them money for a pail of vodka; after which the noise
      would die down and the long beams would go jolting out of the yard.

 When I went to look at the building my wife would get agitated and say:

 "The peasants are furious. They might do something to you. No. Wait. I'll
      go with you."

 We used to drive over to Kurilovka together and then the carpenters would
      ask for tips. The framework was ready for the foundations to be laid, but
      the masons never came and when at last the masons did come it was apparent
      that there was no sand; somehow it had been forgotten that sand was
      wanted. Taking advantage of our helplessness, the peasants asked thirty
      copecks a load, although it was less than a quarter of a mile from the
      building to the river where the sand was to be fetched, and more than five
      hundred loads were needed. There were endless misunderstandings, wrangles,
      and continual begging. My wife was indignant and the building contractor,
      Petrov, an old man of seventy, took her by the hand and said:

 "You look here! Look here! Just get me sand and I'll find ten men and have
      the work done in two days. Look here!"

 Sand was brought, but two, four days, a week passed and still there yawned
      a ditch where the foundations were to be.

 "I shall go mad," cried my wife furiously. "What wretches they are! What
      wretches!"

 During these disturbances Victor Ivanich used to come and see us. He used
      to bring hampers of wine and dainties, and eat for a long time, and then
      go to sleep on the terrace and snore so that the labourers shook their
      heads and said:

 "He's all right!"

 Masha took no pleasure in his visits. She did not believe in him, and yet
      she used to ask his advice; when, after a sound sleep after dinner, he got
      up out of humour, and spoke disparagingly of our domestic arrangements,
      and said he was sorry he had ever bought Dubechnia which had cost him so
      much, and poor Masha looked miserably anxious and complained to him, he
      would yawn and say the peasants ought to be flogged.

 He called our marriage and the life we were living a comedy, and used to
      say it was a caprice, a whimsy.

 "She did the same sort of thing once before," he told me. "She fancied
      herself as an opera singer, and ran away from me. It took me two months to
      find her, and my dear fellow, I wasted a thousand roubles on telegrams
      alone."

 He had dropped calling me a sectarian or the House-painter; and no longer
      approved of my life as a working man, but he used to say:

 "You are a queer fish! An abnormality. I don't venture to prophesy, but
      you will end badly!"

 Masha slept poorly at nights and would sit by the window of our bedroom
      thinking. She no longer laughed and made faces at supper. I suffered, and
      when it rained, every drop cut into my heart like a bullet, and I could
      have gone on my knees to Masha and apologised for the weather. When the
      peasants made a row in the yard, I felt that it was my fault. I would sit
      for hours in one place, thinking only how splendid and how wonderful Masha
      was. I loved her passionately, and I was enraptured by everything she did
      and said. Her taste was for quiet indoor occupation; she loved to read for
      hours and to study; she who knew about farm-work only from books,
      surprised us all by her knowledge and the advice she gave was always
      useful, and when applied was never in vain. And in addition she had the
      fineness, the taste, and the good sense, the very sound sense which only
      very well-bred people possess!

 To such a woman, with her healthy, orderly mind, the chaotic environment
      with its petty cares and dirty tittle-tattle, in which we lived, was very
      painful. I could see that, and I, too, could not sleep at night. My brain
      whirled and I could hardly choke back my tears. I tossed about, not
      knowing what to do.

 I used to rush to town and bring Masha books, newspapers, sweets, flowers,
      and I used to go fishing with Stiepan, dragging for hours, neck-deep in
      cold water, in the rain, to catch an eel by way of varying our fare. I
      used humbly to ask the peasants not to shout, and I gave them vodka,
      bribed them, promised them anything they asked. And what a lot of other
      foolish things I did!

 At last the rain stopped. The earth dried up. I used to get up in the
      morning and go into the garden—dew shining on the flowers, birds and
      insects shrilling, not a cloud in the sky, and the garden, the meadow, the
      river were so beautiful, perfect but for the memory of the peasants and
      the carts and the engineer. Masha and I used to drive out in a car to see
      how the oats were coming on. She drove and I sat behind; her shoulders
      were always a little hunched, and the wind would play with her hair.

 "Keep to the right!" she shouted to the passers-by.

 "You are like a coachman!" I once said to her.

 "Perhaps. My grandfather, my father's father, was a coachman. Didn't you
      know?" she asked, turning round, and immediately she began to mimic the
      way the coachmen shout and sing.

 "Thank God!" I thought, as I listened to her. "Thank God!"

 And again I remember the peasants, the carts, the engineer....

 XIII

 Doctor Blagovo came over on a bicycle. My sister began to come often. Once
      more we talked of manual labour and progress, and the mysterious Cross
      awaiting humanity in the remote future. The doctor did not like our life,
      because it interfered with our discussions and he said it was unworthy of
      a free man to plough, and reap, and breed cattle, and that in time all
      such elementary forms of the struggle for existence would be left to
      animals and machines, while men would devote themselves exclusively to
      scientific investigation. And my sister always asked me to let her go home
      earlier, and if she stayed late, or for the night, she was greatly
      distressed.

 "Good gracious, what a baby you are," Masha used to say reproachfully. "It
      is quite ridiculous."

 "Yes, it is absurd," my sister would agree. "I admit it is absurd, but
      what can I do if I have not the power to control myself. It always seems
      to me that I am doing wrong."

 During the haymaking my body, not being used to it, ached all over;
      sitting on the terrace in the evening, I would suddenly fall asleep and
      they would all laugh at me. They would wake me up and make me sit down to
      supper. I would be overcome with drowsiness and in a stupor saw lights,
      faces, plates, and heard voices without understanding what they were
      saying. And I used to get up early in the morning and take my scythe, or
      go to the school and work there all day.

 When I was at home on holidays I noticed that my wife and sister were
      hiding something from me and even seemed to be avoiding me. My wife was
      tender with me as always, but she had some new thought of her own which
      she did not communicate to me. Certainly her exasperation with the
      peasants had increased and life was growing harder and harder for her, but
      she no longer complained to me. She talked more readily to the doctor than
      to me, and I could not understand why.

 It was the custom in our province for the labourers to come to the farm in
      the evenings to be treated to vodka, even the girls having a glass. We did
      not keep the custom; the haymakers and the women used to come into the
      yard and stay until late in the evening, waiting for vodka, and then they
      went away cursing. And then Masha used to frown and relapse into silence
      or whisper irritably to the doctor:

 "Savages! Barbarians!"

 Newcomers to the villages were received ungraciously, almost with
      hostility; like new arrivals at a school. At first we were looked upon as
      foolish, soft-headed people who had bought the estate because we did not
      know what to do with our money. We were laughed at. The peasants grazed
      their cattle in our pasture and even in our garden, drove our cows and
      horses into the village and then came and asked for compensation. The
      whole village used to come into our yard and declare loudly that in mowing
      we had cut the border of common land which did not belong to us; and as we
      did not know our boundaries exactly we used to take their word for it and
      pay a fine. But afterward it appeared that we had been in the right. They
      used to bark the young lime-trees in our woods. A Dubechnia peasant, a
      money-lender, who sold vodka without a licence, bribed our labourers to
      help him cheat us in the most treacherous way; he substituted old wheels
      for the new on our wagons, stole our ploughing yokes and sold them back to
      us, and so on. But worst of all was the building at Kurilovka. There the
      women at night stole planks, bricks, tiles, iron; the bailiff and his
      assistants made a search; the women were each fined two roubles by the
      village council, and then the whole lot of them got drunk on the money.

 When Masha found out, she would say to the doctor and my sister:

 "What beasts! It is horrible! Horrible!"

 And more than once I heard her say she was sorry she had decided to build
      the school.

 "You must understand," the doctor tried to point out, "that if you build a
      school or undertake any good work, it is not for the peasants, but for the
      sake of culture and the future. The worse the peasants are the more reason
      there is for building a school. Do understand!"

 There was a loss of confidence in his voice, and it seemed to me that he
      hated the peasants as much as Masha.

 Masha used often to go to the mill with my sister and they would say
      jokingly that they were going to have a look at Stiepan because he was so
      handsome. Stiepan it appeared was reserved and silent only with men, and
      in the company of women was free and talkative. Once when I went down to
      the river to bathe I involuntarily overheard a conversation. Masha and
      Cleopatra, both in white, were sitting on the bank under the broad shade
      of a willow and Stiepan was standing near with his hands behind his back,
      saying:

 "But are peasants human beings? Not they; they are, excuse me, brutes,
      beasts, and thieves. What does a peasant's life consist of? Eating and
      drinking, crying for cheaper food, bawling in taverns, without decent
      conversation, or behaviour or manners. Just an ignorant beast! He lives in
      filth, his wife and children live in filth; he sleeps in his clothes;
      takes the potatoes out of the soup with his fingers, drinks down a black
      beetle with his kvass —because he won't trouble to fish it
      out!"

 "It is because of their poverty!" protested my sister.

 "What poverty? Of course there is want, but there are different kinds of
      necessity. If a man is in prison, or is blind, say, or has lost his legs,
      then he is in a bad way and God help him; but if he is at liberty and in
      command of his senses, if he has eyes and hands and strength, then, good
      God, what more does he want? It is lamentable, my lady, ignorance, but not
      poverty. If you kind people, with your education, out of charity try to
      help him, then he will spend your money in drink, like the swine he is, or
      worse still, he will open a tavern and begin to rob the people on the
      strength of your money. You say—poverty. But does a rich peasant
      live any better? He lives like a pig, too, excuse me, a clodhopper, a
      blusterer, a big-bellied blockhead, with a swollen red mug—makes me
      want to hit him in the eye, the blackguard. Look at Larion of Dubechnia—he
      is rich, but all the same he barks the trees in your woods just like the
      poor; and he is a foul-mouthed brute, and his children are foul-mouthed,
      and when he is drunk he falls flat in the mud and goes to sleep. They are
      all worthless, my lady. It is just hell to live with them in the village.
      The village sticks in my gizzard, and I thank God, the King of heaven,
      that I am well fed and clothed, and that I am a free man; I can live where
      I like, I don't want to live in the village and nobody can force me to do
      it. They say: 'You have a wife.' They say: 'You are obliged to live at
      home with your wife.' Why? I have not sold myself to her."

 "Tell me, Stiepan. Did you marry for love?" asked Masha.

 "What love is there in a village?" Stiepan answered with a smile. "If you
      want to know, my lady, it is my second marriage. I do not come from
      Kurilovka, but from Zalegosch, and I went to Kurilovka when I married. My
      father did not want to divide the land up between us—there are five
      of us. So I bowed to it and cut adrift and went to another village to my
      wife's family. My first wife died when she was young."

 "What did she die of?"

 "Foolishness. She used to sit and cry. She was always crying for no reason
      at all and so she wasted away. She used to drink herbs to make herself
      prettier and it must have ruined her inside. And my second wife at
      Kurilovka—what about her? A village woman, a peasant; that's all.
      When the match was being made I was nicely had; I thought she was young,
      nice to look at and clean. Her mother was clean enough, drank coffee and,
      chiefly because they were a clean lot, I got married. Next day we sat down
      to dinner and I told my mother-in-law to fetch me a spoon. She brought me
      a spoon and I saw her wipe it with her finger. So that, thought I, is
      their cleanliness! I lived with them for a year and went away. Perhaps I
      ought to have married a town girl"—he went on after a silence. "They
      say a wife is a helpmate to her husband. What do I want with a helpmate? I
      can look after myself. But you talk to me sensibly and soberly, without
      giggling all the while. He—he—he! What is life without a good
      talk?"

 Stiepan suddenly stopped and relapsed into his dreary, monotonous
      "U-lu-lu-lu." That meant that he had noticed me.

 Masha used often to visit the mill, she evidently took pleasure in her
      talks with Stiepan; he abused the peasants so sincerely and convincingly—and
      this attracted her to him. When she returned from the mill the idiot who
      looked after the garden used to shout after her:

 "Paloshka! Hullo, Paloshka!" And he would bark at her like a dog: "Bow,
      wow!"

 And she would stop and stare at him as if she found in the idiot's barking
      an answer to her thought, and perhaps he attracted her as much as
      Stiepan's abuse. And at home she would find some unpleasant news awaiting
      her, as that the village geese had ruined the cabbages in the
      kitchen-garden, or that Larion had stolen the reins, and she would shrug
      her shoulders with a smile and say:

 "What can you expect of such people?"

 She was exasperated and a fury was gathering in her soul, and I, on the
      other hand, was getting used to the peasants and more and more attracted
      to them. For the most part, they were nervous, irritable, absurd people;
      they were people with suppressed imaginations, ignorant, with a bare, dull
      outlook, always dazed by the same thought of the grey earth, grey days,
      black bread; they were people driven to cunning, but, like birds, they
      only hid their heads behind the trees—they could not reason. They
      did not come to us for the twenty roubles earned by haymaking, but for the
      half-pail of vodka, though they could buy four pails of vodka for the
      twenty roubles. Indeed they were dirty, drunken, and dishonest, but for
      all that one felt that the peasant life as a whole was sound at the core.
      However clumsy and brutal the peasant might look as he followed his
      antiquated plough, and however he might fuddle himself with vodka, still,
      looking at him more closely, one felt that there was something vital and
      important in him, something that was lacking in Masha and the doctor, for
      instance, namely, that he believes that the chief thing on earth is truth,
      that his and everybody's salvation lies in truth, and therefore above all
      else on earth he loves justice. I used to say to my wife that she was
      seeing the stain on the window, but not the glass itself; and she would be
      silent or, like Stiepan, she would hum, "U-lu-lu-lu...." When she, good,
      clever actress that she was, went pale with fury and then harangued the
      doctor in a trembling voice about drunkenness and dishonesty; her
      blindness confounded and appalled me. How could she forget that her
      father, the engineer, drank, drank heavily, and that the money with which
      he bought Dubechnia was acquired by means of a whole series of impudent,
      dishonest swindles? How could she forget?

 XIV

 And my sister, too, was living with her own private thoughts which she hid
      from me. She used often to sit whispering with Masha. When I went up to
      her, she would shrink away, and her eyes would look guilty and full of
      entreaty. Evidently there was something going on in her soul of which she
      was afraid or ashamed. To avoid meeting me in the garden or being left
      alone with me she clung to Masha and I hardly ever had a chance to talk to
      her except at dinner.

 One evening, on my way home from the school, I came quietly through the
      garden. It had already begun to grow dark. Without noticing me or hearing
      footsteps, my sister walked round an old wide-spreading apple-tree,
      perfectly noiselessly like a ghost. She was in black, and walked very
      quickly, up and down, up and down, with her eyes on the ground. An apple
      fell from the tree, she started at the noise, stopped and pressed her
      hands to her temples. At that moment I went up to her.

 In an impulse of tenderness, which suddenly came rushing to my heart, with
      tears in my eyes, somehow remembering our mother and our childhood, I took
      hold of her shoulders and kissed her.

 "What is the matter?" I asked. "You are suffering. I have seen it for a
      long time now. Tell me, what is the matter?"

 "I am afraid...." she murmured, with a shiver.

 "What's the matter with you?" I inquired. "For God's sake, be frank!"

 "I will, I will be frank. I will tell you the whole truth. It is so hard,
      so painful to conceal anything from you!... Misail, I am in love." She
      went on in a whisper. "Love, love.... I am happy, but I am afraid."

 I heard footsteps and Doctor Blagovo appeared among the trees. He was
      wearing a silk shirt and high boots. Clearly they had arranged a
      rendezvous by the apple-tree. When she saw him she flung herself
      impulsively into his arms with a cry of anguish, as though he was being
      taken away from her:

 "Vladimir! Vladimir!"

 She clung to him, and gazed eagerly at him and only then I noticed how
      thin and pale she had become. It was especially noticeable through her
      lace collar, which I had known for years, for it now hung loosely about
      her slim neck. The doctor was taken aback, but controlled himself at once,
      and said, as he stroked her hair:

 "That's enough. Enough!... Why are you so nervous? You see, I have come."

 We were silent for a time, bashfully glancing at each other. Then we all
      moved away and I heard the doctor saying to me:

 "Civilised life has not yet begun with us. The old console themselves with
      saying that, if there is nothing now, there was something in the forties
      and the sixties; that is all right for the old ones, but we are young and
      our brains are not yet touched with senile decay. We cannot console
      ourselves with such illusions. The beginning of Russia was in 862, and
      civilised Russia, as I understand it, has not yet begun."

 But I could not bother about what he was saying. It was very strange, but
      I could not believe that my sister was in love, that she had just been
      walking with her hand on the arm of a stranger and gazing at him tenderly.
      My sister, poor, frightened, timid, downtrodden creature as she was, loved
      a man who was already married and had children! I was full of pity without
      knowing why; the doctor's presence was distasteful to me and I could not
      make out what was to come of such a love.

 XV

 Masha and I drove over to Kurilovka for the opening of the school.

 "Autumn, autumn, autumn...." said Masha, looking about her. Summer had
      passed. There were no birds and only the willows were green.

 Yes. Summer had passed. The days were bright and warm, but it was fresh in
      the mornings; the shepherds went out in their sheepskins, and the dew
      never dried all day on the asters in the garden. There were continual
      mournful sounds and it was impossible to tell whether it was a shutter
      creaking on its rusty hinges or the cranes flying—and one felt so
      well and so full of the desire for life!

 "Summer has passed...." said Masha. "Now we can both make up our accounts.
      We have worked hard and thought a great deal and we are the better for it—all
      honour and praise to us; we have improved ourselves; but have our
      successes had any perceptible influence on the life around us, have they
      been of any use to a single person? No! Ignorance, dirt, drunkenness, a
      terribly high rate of infant mortality—everything is just as it was,
      and no one is any the better for your having ploughed and sown and my
      having spent money and read books. Evidently we have only worked and
      broadened our minds for ourselves."

 I was abashed by such arguments and did not know what to think.

 "From beginning to end we have been sincere," I said, "and if a man is
      sincere, he is right."

 "Who denies that? We have been right but we have been wrong in our way of
      setting about it. First of all, are not our very ways of living wrong? You
      want to be useful to people, but by the mere fact of buying an estate you
      make it impossible to be so. Further, if you work, dress, and eat like a
      peasant you lend your authority and approval to the clumsy clothes, and
      their dreadful houses and their dirty beards.... On the other hand,
      suppose you work for a long, long time, all you life, and in the end
      obtain some practical results—what will your results amount to, what
      can they do against such elemental forces as wholesale ignorance, hunger,
      cold, and degeneracy? A drop in the ocean! Other methods of fighting are
      necessary, strong, bold, quick! If you want to be useful then you must
      leave the narrow circle of common activity and try to act directly on the
      masses! First of all, you need vigorous, noisy, propaganda. Why are art
      and music, for instance, so much alive and so popular and so powerful?
      Because the musician or the singer influences thousands directly. Art,
      wonderful art!" She looked wistfully at the sky and went on: "Art gives
      wings and carries you far, far away. If you are bored with dirt and
      pettifogging interests, if you are exasperated and outraged and indignant,
      rest and satisfaction are only to be found in beauty."

 As we approached Kurilovka the weather was fine, clear, and joyous. In the
      yards the peasants were thrashing and there was a smell of corn and straw.
      Behind the wattled hedges the fruit-trees were reddening and all around
      the trees were red or golden. In the church-tower the bells were ringing,
      the children were carrying ikons to the school and singing the Litany of
      the Virgin. And how clear the air was, and how high the doves soared!

 The Te Deum was sung in the schoolroom. Then the Kurilovka peasants
      presented Masha with an ikon, and the Dubechnia peasants gave her a large
      cracknel and a gilt salt-cellar. And Masha began to weep.

 "And if we have said anything out of the way or have been discontented,
      please forgive us," said an old peasant, bowing to us both.

 As we drove home Masha looked back at the school. The green roof which I
      had painted glistened in the sun, and we could see it for a long time. And
      I felt that Masha's glances were glances of farewell.

 XVI

 In the evening she got ready to go to town.

 She had often been to town lately to stay the night. In her absence I
      could not work, and felt listless and disheartened; our big yard seemed
      dreary, disgusting, and deserted; there were ominous noises in the garden,
      and without her the house, the trees, the horses were no longer "ours."

 I never went out but sat all the time at her writing-table among her books
      on farming and agriculture, those deposed favourites, wanted no more,
      which looked out at me so shamefacedly from the bookcase. For hours
      together, while it struck seven, eight, nine, and the autumn night crept
      up as black as soot to the windows, I sat brooding over an old glove of
      hers, or the pen she always used, and her little scissors. I did nothing
      and saw clearly that everything I had done before, ploughing, sowing, and
      felling trees, had only been because she wanted it. And if she told me to
      clean out a well, when I had to stand waist-deep in water, I would go and
      do it, without trying to find out whether the well wanted cleaning or not.
      And now, when she was away, Dubechnia with its squalor, its litter, its
      slamming shutters, with thieves prowling about it day and night, seemed to
      me like a chaos in which work was entirely useless. And why should I work,
      then? Why trouble and worry about the future, when I felt that the ground
      was slipping away from under me, that my position at Dubechnia was hollow,
      that, in a word, the same fate awaited me as had befallen the books on
      agriculture? Oh! what anguish it was at night, in the lonely hours, when I
      lay listening uneasily, as though I expected some one any minute to call
      out that it was time for me to go away. I was not sorry to leave
      Dubechnia, my sorrow was for my love, for which it seemed that autumn had
      already begun. What a tremendous happiness it is to love and to be loved,
      and what a horror it is to feel that you are beginning to topple down from
      that lofty tower!

 Masha returned from town toward evening on the following day. She was
      dissatisfied with something, but concealed it and said only: "Why have the
      winter windows been put in? It will be stifling." I opened two of the
      windows. We did not feel like eating, but we sat down and had supper.

 "Go and wash your hands," she said. "You smell of putty."

 She had brought some new illustrated magazines from town and we both read
      them after supper. They had supplements with fashion-plates and patterns.
      Masha just glanced at them and put them aside to look at them carefully
      later on; but one dress, with a wide, bell-shaped skirt and big sleeves
      interested her, and for a moment she looked at it seriously and
      attentively.

 "That's not bad," she said.

 "Yes, it would suit you very well," said I. "Very well."

 And I admired the dress, only because she liked it, and went on tenderly:

 "A wonderful, lovely dress! Lovely, wonderful, Masha. My dear Masha!"

 And tears began to drop on the fashion-plate.

 "Wonderful Masha...." I murmured. "Dear, darling Masha...."

 She went and lay down and I sat still for an hour and looked at the
      illustrations.

 "You should not have opened the windows," she called from the bedroom.
      "I'm afraid it will be cold. Look how the wind is blowing in!"

 I read the miscellany, about the preparation of cheap fish, and the size
      of the largest diamond in the world. Then I chanced on the picture of the
      dress she had liked and I imagined her at a ball, with a fan, and bare
      shoulders, a brilliant, dazzling figure, well up in music and painting and
      literature, and how insignificant and brief my share in her life seemed to
      be!

 Our coming together, our marriage, was only an episode, one of many in the
      life of this lively, highly gifted creature. All the best things in the
      world, as I have said, were at her service, and she had them for nothing;
      even ideas and fashionable intellectual movements served her pleasure, a
      diversion in her existence, and I was only the coachman who drove her from
      one infatuation to another. Now I was no longer necessary to her; she
      would fly away and I should be left alone.

 As if in answer to my thoughts a desperate scream suddenly came from the
      yard:

 "Mur-der!"

 It was a shrill female voice, and exactly as though it were trying to
      imitate it, the wind also howled dismally in the chimney. Half a minute
      passed and again it came through the sound of the wind, but as though from
      the other end of the yard:

 "Mur-der!"

 "Misail, did you hear that?" said my wife in a hushed voice. "Did you
      hear?"

 She came out of the bedroom in her nightgown, with her hair down, and
      stood listening and staring out of the dark window.

 "Somebody is being murdered!" she muttered. "It only wanted that!"

 I took my gun and went out; it was very dark outside; a violent wind was
      blowing so that it was hard to stand up. I walked to the gate and
      listened; the trees were moaning; the wind went whistling through them,
      and in the garden the idiot's dog was howling. Beyond the gate it was
      pitch dark; there was not a light on the railway. And just by the wing,
      where the offices used to be, I suddenly heard a choking cry:

 "Mur-der!"

 "Who is there?" I called.

 Two men were locked in a struggle. One had nearly thrown the other, who
      was resisting with all his might. And both were breathing heavily.

 "Let go!" said one of them and I recognised Ivan Cheprakov. It was he who
      had cried out in a thin, falsetto voice. "Let go, damn you, or I'll bite
      your hands!"

 The other man I recognised as Moissey. I parted them and could not resist
      hitting Moissey in the face twice. He fell down, then got up, and I struck
      him again.

 "He tried to kill me," he muttered. "I caught him creeping to his mother's
      drawer.... I tried to shut him up in the wing for safety."

 Cheprakov was drunk and did not recognise me. He stood gasping for breath
      as though trying to get enough wind to shriek again.

 I left them and went back to the house. My wife was lying on the bed,
      fully dressed. I told her what had happened in the yard and did not keep
      back the fact that I had struck Moissey.

 "Living in the country is horrible," she said. "And what a long night it
      is!"

 "Mur-der!" we heard again, a little later.

 "I'll go and part them," I said.

 "No. Let them kill each other," she said with an expression of disgust.

 She lay staring at the ceiling, listening, and I sat near her, not daring
      to speak and feeling that it was my fault that screams of "murder" came
      from the yard and the night was so long.

 We were silent and I waited impatiently for the light to peep in at the
      window. And Masha looked as though she had wakened from a long sleep and
      was astonished to find herself, so clever, so educated, so refined, cast
      away in this miserable provincial hole, among a lot of petty, shallow
      people, and to think that she could have so far forgotten herself as to
      have been carried away by one of them and to have been his wife for more
      than half a year. It seemed to me that we were all the same to her—myself,
      Moissey, Cheprakov; all swept together into the drunken, wild scream of
      "murder"—myself, our marriage, our work, and the muddy roads of
      autumn; and when she breathed or stirred to make herself more comfortable
      I could read in her eyes: "Oh, if the morning would come quicker!"

 In the morning she went away.

 I stayed at Dubechnia for another three days, waiting for her; then I
      moved all our things into one room, locked it, and went to town. When I
      rang the bell at the engineer's, it was evening, and the lamps were alight
      in Great Gentry Street. Pavel told me that nobody was at home; Victor
      Ivanich had gone to Petersburg and Maria Victorovna must be at a rehearsal
      at the Azhoguins'. I remember the excitement with which I went to the
      Azhoguins', and how my heart thumped and sank within me, as I went
      up-stairs and stood for a long while on the landing, not daring to enter
      that temple of the Muses! In the hall, on the table, on the piano, on the
      stage, there were candles burning; all in threes, for the first
      performance was fixed for the thirteenth, and the dress rehearsal was on
      Monday—the unlucky day. A fight against prejudice! All the lovers of
      dramatic art were assembled; the eldest, the middle, and the youngest Miss
      Azhoguin were walking about the stage, reading their parts. Radish was
      standing still in a corner all by himself, with his head against the wall,
      looking at the stage with adoring eyes, waiting for the beginning of the
      rehearsal. Everything was just the same!

 I went toward my hostess to greet her, when suddenly everybody began to
      say "Ssh" and to wave their hands to tell me not to make such a noise.
      There was a silence. The top of the piano was raised, a lady sat down,
      screwing up her short-sighted eyes at the music, and Masha stood by the
      piano, dressed up, beautiful, but beautiful in an odd new way, not at all
      like the Masha who used to come to see me at the mill in the spring. She
      began to sing:

 "Why do I love thee, straight night?"

 It was the first time since I had known her that I had heard her sing. She
      had a fine, rich, powerful voice, and to hear her sing was like eating a
      ripe, sweet-scented melon. She finished the song and was applauded. She
      smiled and looked pleased, made play with her eyes, stared at the music,
      plucked at her dress exactly like a bird which has broken out of its cage
      and preens its wings at liberty. Her hair was combed back over her ears,
      and she had a sly defiant expression on her face, as though she wished to
      challenge us all, or to shout at us, as though we were horses: "Gee up,
      old things!"

 And at that moment she must have looked very like her grandfather, the
      coachman.

 "You here, too?" she asked, giving me her hand. "Did you hear me sing? How
      did you like it?" And, without waiting for me to answer she went on: "You
      arrived very opportunely. I'm going to Petersburg for a short time
      to-night. May I?"

 At midnight I took her to the station. She embraced me tenderly, probably
      out of gratitude, because I did not pester her with useless questions, and
      she promised to write to me, and I held her hands for a long time and
      kissed them, finding it hard to keep back my tears, and not saying a word.

 And when the train moved, I stood looking at the receding lights, kissed
      her in my imagination and whispered:

 "Masha dear, wonderful Masha!..."

 I spent the night at Mikhokhov, at Karpovna's, and in the morning I worked
      with Radish, upholstering the furniture at a rich merchant's, who had
      married his daughter to a doctor.

 XVII

 On Sunday afternoon my sister came to see me and had tea with me.

 "I read a great deal now," she said, showing me the books she had got out
      of the town library on her way. "Thanks to your wife and Vladimir. They
      awakened my self-consciousness. They saved me and have made me feel that I
      am a human being. I used not to sleep at night for worrying: 'What a lot
      of sugar has been wasted during the week.' 'The cucumbers must not be
      oversalted!' I don't sleep now, but I have quite different thoughts. I am
      tormented with the thought that half my life has passed so foolishly and
      half-heartedly. I despise my old life. I am ashamed of it. And I regard my
      father now as an enemy. Oh, how grateful I am to your wife! And Vladimir.
      He is such a wonderful man! They opened my eyes."

 "It is not good that you can't sleep," I said.

 "You think I am ill? Not a bit. Vladimir sounded me and says I am
      perfectly healthy. But health is not the point. That doesn't matter so
      much.... Tell me, am I right?"

 She needed moral support. That was obvious. Masha had gone, Doctor Blagovo
      was in Petersburg, and there was no one except myself in the town, who
      could tell her that she was right. She fixed her eyes on me, trying to
      read my inmost thoughts, and if I were sad in her presence, she always
      took it upon herself and was depressed. I had to be continually on my
      guard, and when she asked me if she was right, I hastened to assure her
      that she was right and that I had a profound respect for her.

 "You know, they have given me a part at the Azhoguins'," she went on. "I
      wanted to act. I want to live. I want to drink deep of life; I have no
      talent whatever, and my part is only ten lines, but it is immeasurably
      finer and nobler than pouring out tea five times a day and watching to see
      that the cook does not eat the sugar left over. And most of all I want to
      let father see that I too can protest."

 After tea she lay down on my bed and stayed there for some time, with her
      eyes closed, and her face very pale.

 "Just weakness!" she said, as she got up. "Vladimir said all town girls
      and women are anæmic from lack of work. What a clever man Vladimir
      is! He is right; wonderfully right! We do need work!"

 Two days later she came to rehearsal at the Azhoguins' with her part in
      her hand. She was in black, with a garnet necklace, and a brooch that
      looked at a distance like a pasty, and she had enormous earrings, in each
      of which sparkled a diamond. I felt uneasy when I saw her; I was shocked
      by her lack of taste. The others noticed too that she was unsuitably
      dressed and that her earrings and diamonds were out of place. I saw their
      smiles and heard some one say jokingly:

 "Cleopatra of Egypt!"

 She was trying to be fashionable, and easy, and assured, and she seemed
      affected and odd. She lost her simplicity and her charm.

 "I just told father that I was going to a rehearsal," she began, coming up
      to me, "and he shouted that he would take his blessing from me, and he
      nearly struck me. Fancy," she added, glancing at her part, "I don't know
      my part. I'm sure to make a mistake. Well, the die is cast," she said
      excitedly; "the die is cast."

 She felt that all the people were looking at her and were all amazed at
      the important step she had taken and that they were all expecting
      something remarkable from her, and it was impossible to convince her that
      nobody took any notice of such small uninteresting persons as she and I.

 She had nothing to do until the third act, and her part, a guest, a
      country gossip, consisted only in standing by the door, as if she were
      overhearing something, and then speaking a short monologue. For at least
      an hour and a half before her cue, while the others were walking, reading,
      having tea, quarrelling, she never left me and kept on mumbling her part,
      and dropping her written copy, imagining that everybody was looking at
      her, and waiting for her to come on, and she patted her hair with a
      trembling hand and said:

 "I'm sure to make a mistake.... You don't know how awful I feel! I am as
      terrified as if I were going to the scaffold."

 At last her cue came.

 "Cleopatra Alexeyevna—your cue!" said the manager.

 She walked on to the middle of the stage with an expression of terror on
      her face; she looked ugly and stiff, and for half a minute was speechless,
      perfectly motionless, except for her large earrings which wabbled on
      either side of her face.

 "You can read your part, the first time," said some one.

 I could see that she was trembling so that she could neither speak nor
      open her part, and that she had entirely forgotten the words and I had
      just made up my mind to go up and say something to her when she suddenly
      dropped down on her knees in the middle of the stage and sobbed loudly.

 There was a general stir and uproar. And I stood quite still by the wings,
      shocked by what had happened, not understanding at all, not knowing what
      to do. I saw them lift her up and lead her away. I saw Aniuta Blagovo come
      up to me. I had not seen her in the hall before and she seemed to have
      sprung up from the floor. She was wearing a hat and veil, and as usual
      looked as if she had only dropped in for a minute.

 "I told her not to try to act," she said angrily, biting out each word,
      with her cheeks blushing. "It is folly! You ought to have stopped her!"

 Mrs. Azhoguin came up in a short jacket with short sleeves. She had
      tobacco ash on her thin, flat bosom.

 "My dear, it is too awful!" she said, wringing her hands, and as usual,
      staring into my face. "It is too awful!... Your sister is in a
      condition.... She is going to have a baby! You must take her away at
      once...."

 In her agitation she breathed heavily. And behind her, stood her three
      daughters, all thin and flat-chested like herself, and all huddled
      together in their dismay. They were frightened, overwhelmed just as if a
      convict had been caught in the house. What a shame! How awful! And this
      was the family that had been fighting the prejudices and superstitions of
      mankind all their lives; evidently they thought that all the prejudices
      and superstitions of mankind were to be found in burning three candles and
      in the number thirteen, or the unlucky day—Monday.

 "I must request ... request ..." Mrs. Azhoguin kept on saying, compressing
      her lips and accentuating the quest . "I must request you to take
      her away."

 XVIII

 A little later my sister and I were walking along the street. I covered
      her with the skirt of my overcoat; we hurried along through by-streets,
      where there were no lamps, avoiding the passers-by, and it was like a
      flight. She did not weep any more, but stared at me with dry eyes. It was
      about twenty minutes' walk to Mikhokhov, whither I was taking her, and in
      that short time we went over the whole of our lives, and talked over
      everything, and considered the position and pondered....

 We decided that we could not stay in the town, and that when I could get
      some money, we would go to some other place. In some of the houses the
      people were asleep already, and in others they were playing cards; we
      hated those houses, were afraid of them, and we talked of the fanaticism,
      callousness, and nullity of these respectable families, these lovers of
      dramatic art whom we had frightened so much, and I wondered how those
      stupid, cruel, slothful, dishonest people were better than the drunken and
      superstitious peasants of Kurilovka, or how they were better than animals,
      which also lose their heads when some accident breaks the monotony of
      their lives, which are limited by their instincts. What would happen to my
      sister if she stayed at home? What moral torture would she have to
      undergo, talking to my father and meeting acquaintances every day? I
      imagined it all and there came into my memory people I had known who had
      been gradually dropped by their friends and relations, and I remember the
      tortured dogs which had gone mad, and sparrows plucked alive and thrown
      into the water—and a whole long series of dull, protracted
      sufferings which I had seen going on in the town since my childhood; and I
      could not conceive what the sixty thousand inhabitants lived for, why they
      read the Bible, why they prayed, why they skimmed books and magazines.
      What good was all that had been written and said, if they were in the same
      spiritual darkness and had the same hatred of freedom, as if they were
      living hundreds and hundreds of years ago? The builder spends his time
      putting up houses all over the town, and yet would go down to his grave
      saying "galdary" for "gallery." And the sixty thousand inhabitants had
      read and heard of truth and mercy and freedom for generations, but to the
      bitter end they would go on lying from morning to night, tormenting one
      another, fearing and hating freedom as a deadly enemy.

 "And so, my fate is decided," said my sister when we reached home. "After
      what has happened I can never go there again. My God, how good it
      is! I feel at peace."

 She lay down at once. Tears shone on her eyelashes, but her expression was
      happy. She slept soundly and softly, and it was clear that her heart was
      easy and that she was at rest. For a long, long time she had not slept so
      well.

 So we began to live together. She was always singing and said she felt
      very well, and I took back the books we had borrowed from the library
      unread, because she gave up reading; she only wanted to dream and to talk
      of the future. She would hum as she mended my clothes or helped Karpovna
      with the cooking, or talk of her Vladimir, of his mind, and his goodness,
      and his fine manners, and his extraordinary learning. And I agreed with
      her, though I no longer liked the doctor. She wanted to work, to be
      independent, and to live by herself, and she said she would become a
      school-teacher or a nurse as soon as her health allowed, and she would
      scrub the floors and do her own washing. She loved her unborn baby
      passionately, and she knew already the colour of his eyes and the shape of
      his hands and how he laughed. She liked to talk of his upbringing, and
      since the best man on earth was Vladimir, all her ideas were reduced to
      making the boy as charming as his father. There was no end to her chatter,
      and everything she talked about filled her with a lively joy. Sometimes I,
      too, rejoiced, though I knew not why.

 She must have infected me with her dreaminess, for I, too, read nothing
      and just dreamed. In the evenings, in spite of being tired, I used to pace
      up and down the room with my hands in my pockets, talking about Masha.

 "When do you think she will return?" I used to ask my sister. "I think
      she'll be back at Christmas. Not later. What is she doing there?"

 "If she doesn't write to you, it means she must be coming soon."

 "True," I would agree, though I knew very well that there was nothing to
      make Masha return to our town.

 I missed her very much, but I could not help deceiving myself and wanted
      others to deceive me. My sister was longing for her doctor, I for Masha,
      and we both laughed and talked and never saw that we were keeping Karpovna
      from sleeping. She would lie on the stove and murmur:

 "The samovar tinkled this morning. Tink-led! That bodes nobody any good,
      my merry friends!"

 Nobody came to the house except the postman who brought my sister letters
      from the doctor, and Prokofyi, who used to come in sometimes in the
      evening and glance secretly at my sister, and then go into the kitchen and
      say:

 "Every class has its ways, and if you're too proud to understand that, the
      worse for you in this vale of tears."

 He loved the expression—vale of tears. And—about Christmas
      time—when I was going through the market, he called me into his
      shop, and without giving me his hand, declared that he had some important
      business to discuss. He was red in the face with the frost and with vodka;
      near him by the counter stood Nicolka of the murderous face, holding a
      bloody knife in his hand.

 "I want to be blunt with you," began Prokofyi. "This business must not
      happen because, as you know, people will neither forgive you nor us for
      such a vale of tears. Mother, of course, is too dutiful to say anything
      unpleasant to you herself, and tell you that your sister must go somewhere
      else because of her condition, but I don't want it either, because I do
      not approve of her behaviour."

 I understood and left the shop. That very day my sister and I went to
      Radish's. We had no money for a cab, so we went on foot; I carried a
      bundle with all our belongings on my back, my sister had nothing in her
      hands, and she was breathless and kept coughing and asking if we would
      soon be there.

 XIX

 At last there came a letter from Masha.

 "My dear, kind M. A.," she wrote, "my brave, sweet angel, as the old
      painter calls you, good-bye. I am going to America with my father for the
      exhibition. In a few days I shall be on the ocean—so far from
      Dubechnia. It is awful to think of! It is vast and open like the sky and I
      long for it and freedom. I rejoice and dance about and you see how
      incoherent my letter is. My dear Misail, give me my freedom. Quick, tear
      the thread which still holds and binds us. My meeting and knowing you was
      a ray from heaven, which brightened my existence. But, you know, my
      becoming your wife was a mistake, and the knowledge of the mistake weighs
      me down, and I implore you on my knees, my dear, generous friend, quick—quick—before
      I go over the sea—wire that you will agree to correct our mutual
      mistake, remove then the only burden on my wings, and my father, who will
      be responsible for the whole business, has promised me not to overwhelm
      you with formalities. So, then, I am free of the whole world? Yes?

 "Be happy. God bless you. Forgive my wickedness.

 "I am alive and well. I am squandering money on all sorts of follies, and
      every minute I thank God that such a wicked woman as I am has no children.
      I am singing and I am a success, but it is not a passing whim. No. It is
      my haven, my convent cell where I go for rest. King David had a ring with
      an inscription: 'Everything passes.' When one is sad, these words make one
      cheerful; and when one is cheerful, they make one sad. And I have got a
      ring with the words written in Hebrew, and this talisman will keep me from
      losing my heart and head. Or does one need nothing but consciousness of
      freedom, because, when one is free, one wants nothing, nothing, nothing.
      Snap the thread then. I embrace you and your sister warmly. Forgive and
      forget your M."

 My sister had one room. Radish, who had been ill and was recovering, was
      in the other. Just as I received this letter, my sister went into the
      painter's room and sat by his side and began to read to him. She read
      Ostrovsky or Gogol to him every day, and he used to listen, staring
      straight in front of him, never laughing, shaking his head, and every now
      and then muttering to himself:

 "Anything may happen! Anything may happen!"

 If there was anything ugly in what she read, he would say vehemently,
      pointing to the book:

 "There it is! Lies! That's what lies do!"

 Stories used to attract him by their contents as well as by their moral
      and their skilfully complicated plot, and he used to marvel at him ,
      though he never called him by his name.

 "How well he has managed it."

 Now my sister read a page quickly and then stopped, because her breath
      failed her. Radish held her hand, and moving his dry lips he said in a
      hoarse, hardly audible voice:

 "The soul of the righteous is white and smooth as chalk; and the soul of
      the sinner is as a pumice-stone. The soul of the righteous is clear oil,
      and the soul of the sinner is coal-tar. We must work and sorrow and pity,"
      he went on. "And if a man does not work and sorrow he will not enter the
      kingdom of heaven. Woe, woe to the well fed, woe to the strong, woe to the
      rich, woe to the usurers! They will not see the kingdom of heaven. Grubs
      eat grass, rust eats iron...."

 "And lies devour the soul," said my sister, laughing.

 I read the letter once more. At that moment the soldier came into the
      kitchen who had brought in twice a week, without saying from whom, tea,
      French bread, and pigeons, all smelling of scent. I had no work and used
      to sit at home for days together, and probably the person who sent us the
      bread knew that we were in want.

 I heard my sister talking to the soldier and laughing merrily. Then she
      lay down and ate some bread and said to me:

 "When you wanted to get away from the office and become a house-painter,
      Aniuta Blagovo and I knew from the very beginning that you were right, but
      we were afraid to say so. Tell me what power is it that keeps us from
      saying what we feel? There's Aniuta Blagovo. She loves you, adores you,
      and she knows that you are right. She loves me, too, like a sister, and
      she knows that I am right, and in her heart she envies me, but some power
      prevents her coming to see us. She avoids us. She is afraid."

 My sister folded her hands across her bosom and said rapturously:

 "If you only knew how she loves you! She confessed it to me and to no one
      else, very hesitatingly, in the dark. She used to take me out into the
      garden, into the dark, and begin to tell me in a whisper how dear you were
      to her. You will see that she will never marry because she loves you. Are
      you sorry for her?"

 "Yes."

 "It was she sent the bread. She is funny. Why should she hide herself? I
      used to be silly and stupid, but I left all that and I am not afraid of
      any one, and I think and say aloud what I like—and I am happy. When
      I lived at home I had no notion of happiness, and now I would not change
      places with a queen."

 Doctor Blagovo came. He had got his diploma and was now living in the
      town, at his father's, taking a rest. After which he said he would go back
      to Petersburg. He wanted to devote himself to vaccination against typhus,
      and, I believe, cholera; he wanted to go abroad to increase his knowledge
      and then to become a University professor. He had already left the army
      and wore serge clothes, with well-cut coats, wide trousers, and expensive
      ties. My sister was enraptured with his pins and studs and his red-silk
      handkerchief, which, out of swagger, he wore in his outside breast-pocket.
      Once, when we had nothing to do, she and I fell to counting up his suits
      and came to the conclusion that he must have at least ten. It was clear
      that he still loved my sister, but never once, even in joke, did he talk
      of taking her to Petersburg or abroad with him, and I could not imagine
      what would happen to her if she lived, or what was to become of her child.
      But she was happy in her dreams and would not think seriously of the
      future. She said he could go wherever he liked and even cast her aside, if
      only he were happy himself, and what had been was enough for her.

 Usually when he came to see us he would sound her very carefully, and ask
      her to drink some milk with some medicine in it. He did so now. He sounded
      her and made her drink a glass of milk, and the room began to smell of
      creosote.

 "That's a good girl," he said, taking the glass from her. "You must not
      talk much, and you have been chattering like a magpie lately. Please, be
      quiet."

 She began to laugh and he came into Radish's room, where I was sitting,
      and tapped me affectionately on the shoulder.

 "Well, old man, how are you?" he asked, bending over the patient.

 "Sir," said Radish, only just moving his lips. "Sir, I make so bold.... We
      are all in the hands of God, and we must all die.... Let me tell you the
      truth, sir.... You will never enter the kingdom of heaven."

 And suddenly I lost consciousness and was caught up into a dream: it was
      winter, at night, and I was standing in the yard of the slaughter-house
      with Prokofyi by my side, smelling of pepper-brandy; I pulled myself
      together and rubbed my eyes and then I seemed to be going to the
      governor's for an explanation. Nothing of the kind ever happened to me,
      before or after, and I can only explain these strange dreams like
      memories, by ascribing them to overstrain of the nerves. I lived again
      through the scene in the slaughter-house and the conversation with the
      governor, and at the same time I was conscious of its unreality.

 When I came to myself I saw that I was not at home, but standing with the
      doctor by a lamp in the street.

 "It is sad, sad," he was saying with tears running down his cheeks. "She
      is happy and always laughing and full of hope. But, poor darling, her
      condition is hopeless. Old Radish hates me and keeps trying to make me
      understand that I have wronged her. In his way he is right, but I have my
      point of view, too, and I do not repent of what has happened. It is
      necessary to love. We must all love. That's true, isn't it? Without love
      there would be no life, and a man who avoids and fears love is not free."

 We gradually passed to other subjects. He began to speak of science and
      his dissertation which had been very well received in Petersburg. He spoke
      enthusiastically and thought no more of my sister, or of his going, or of
      myself. Life was carrying him away. She has America and a ring with an
      inscription, I thought, and he has his medical degree and his scientific
      career, and my sister and I are left with the past.

 When we parted I stood beneath the lamp and read my letter again. And I
      remembered vividly how she came to me at the mill that spring morning and
      lay down and covered herself with my fur coat—pretending to be just
      a peasant woman. And another time—also in the early morning—when
      we pulled the bow-net out of the water, and the willows on the bank
      showered great drops of water on us and we laughed....

 All was dark in our house in Great Gentry Street. I climbed the fence,
      and, as I used to do in old days, I went into the kitchen by the back door
      to get a little lamp. There was nobody in the kitchen. On the stove the
      samovar was singing merrily, all ready for my father. "Who pours out my
      father's tea now?" I thought. I took the lamp and went on to the shed and
      made a bed of old newspapers and lay down. The nails in the wall looked
      ominous as before and their shadows flickered. It was cold. I thought I
      saw my sister coming in with my supper, but I remembered at once that she
      was ill at Radish's, and it seemed strange to me that I should have
      climbed the fence and be lying in the cold shed. My mind was blurred and
      filled with fantastic imaginations.

 A bell rang; sounds familiar from childhood; first the wire rustled along
      the wall, and then there was a short, melancholy tinkle in the kitchen. It
      was my father returning from the club. I got up and went into the kitchen.
      Akhsinya, the cook, clapped her hands when she saw me and began to cry:

 "Oh, my dear," she said in a whisper. "Oh, my dear! My God!"

 And in her agitation she began to pluck at her apron. On the window-sill
      were two large bottles of berries soaking in vodka. I poured out a cup and
      gulped it down, for I was very thirsty. Akhsinya had just scrubbed the
      table and the chairs, and the kitchen had the good smell which kitchens
      always have when the cook is clean and tidy. This smell and the trilling
      of the cricket used to entice us into the kitchen when we were children,
      and there we used to be told fairy-tales, and we played at kings and
      queens....

 "And where is Cleopatra?" asked Akhsinya hurriedly, breathlessly. "And
      where is your hat, sir? And they say your wife has gone to Petersburg."

 She had been with us in my mother's time and used to bathe Cleopatra and
      me in a tub, and we were still children to her, and it was her duty to
      correct us. In a quarter of an hour or so she laid bare all her thoughts,
      which she had been storing up in her quiet kitchen all the time I had been
      away. She said the doctor ought to be made to marry Cleopatra—we
      would only have to frighten him a bit and make him send in a nicely
      written application, and then the archbishop would dissolve his first
      marriage, and it would be a good thing to sell Dubechnia without saying
      anything to my wife, and to bank the money in my own name; and if my
      sister and I went on our knees to our father and asked him nicely, then
      perhaps he would forgive us; and we ought to pray to the Holy Mother to
      intercede for us....

 "Now, sir, go and talk to him," she said, when we heard my father's cough.
      "Go, speak to him, and beg his pardon. He won't bite your head off."

 I went in. My father was sitting at his desk working on the plan of a
      bungalow with Gothic windows and a stumpy tower like the lookout of a
      fire-station—an immensely stiff and inartistic design. As I entered
      the study I stood so that I could not help seeing the plan. I did not know
      why I had come to my father, but I remember that when I saw his thin face,
      red neck, and his shadow on the wall, I wanted to throw my arms round him
      and, as Akhsinya had bid me, to beg his pardon humbly; but the sight of
      the bungalow with the Gothic windows and the stumpy tower stopped me.

 "Good evening," I said.

 He glanced at me and at once cast his eyes down on his plan.

 "What do you want?" he asked after a while.

 "I came to tell you that my sister is very ill. She is dying," I said
      dully.

 "Well?" My father sighed, took off his spectacles and laid them on the
      table. "As you have sown, so you must reap. I want you to remember how you
      came to me two years ago, and on this very spot I asked you to give up
      your delusions, and I reminded you of your honour, your duty, your
      obligations to your ancestors, whose traditions must be kept sacred. Did
      you listen to me? You spurned my advice and clung to your wicked opinions;
      furthermore, you dragged your sister into your abominable delusions and
      brought about her downfall and her shame. Now you are both suffering for
      it. As you have sown, so you must reap."

 He paced up and down the study as he spoke. Probably he thought that I had
      come to him to admit that I was wrong, and probably he was waiting for me
      to ask his help for my sister and myself. I was cold, but I shook as
      though I were in a fever, and I spoke with difficulty in a hoarse voice.

 "And I must ask you to remember," I said, "that on this very spot I
      implored you to try to understand me, to reflect, and to think what we
      were living for and to what end, and your answer was to talk about my
      ancestors and my grandfather who wrote verses. Now you are told that your
      only daughter is in a hopeless condition and you talk of ancestors and
      traditions!... And you can maintain such frivolity when death is near and
      you have only five or ten years left to live!"

 "Why did you come here?" asked my father sternly, evidently affronted at
      my reproaching him with frivolity.

 "I don't know. I love you. I am more sorry than I can say that we are so
      far apart. That is why I came. I still love you, but my sister has finally
      broken with you. She does not forgive you and will never forgive you. Your
      very name fills her with hatred of her past life."

 "And who is to blame?" cried my father. "You, you scoundrel!"

 "Yes. Say that I am to blame," I said. "I admit that I am to blame for
      many things, but why is your life, which you have tried to force on us, so
      tedious and frigid, and ungracious, why are there no people in any of the
      houses you have built during the last thirty years from whom I could learn
      how to live and how to avoid such suffering? These houses of yours are
      infernal dungeons in which mothers and daughters are persecuted, children
      are tortured.... My poor mother! My unhappy sister! One needs to drug
      oneself with vodka, cards, scandal; cringe, play the hypocrite, and go on
      year after year designing rotten houses, not to see the horror that lurks
      in them. Our town has been in existence for hundreds of years, and during
      the whole of that time it has not given the country one useful man—not
      one! You have strangled in embryo everything that was alive and joyous! A
      town of shopkeepers, publicans, clerks, and hypocrites, an aimless, futile
      town, and not a soul would be the worse if it were suddenly razed to the
      ground."

 "I don't want to hear you, you scoundrel," said my father, taking a ruler
      from his desk. "You are drunk! You dare come into your father's presence
      in such a state! I tell you for the last time, and you can tell this to
      your strumpet of a sister, that you will get nothing from me. I have torn
      my disobedient children out of my heart, and if they suffer through their
      disobedience and obstinacy I have no pity for them. You may go back where
      you came from! God has been pleased to punish me through you. I will
      humbly bear my punishment and, like Job, I find consolation in suffering
      and unceasing toil. You shall not cross my threshold until you have mended
      your ways. I am a just man, and everything I say is practical good sense,
      and if you had any regard for yourself, you would remember what I have
      said, and what I am saying now."

 I threw up my hands and went out; I do not remember what happened that
      night or next day.

 They say that I went staggering through the street without a hat, singing
      aloud, with crowds of little boys shouting after me:

 "Little Profit! Little Profit!"

 XX

 If I wanted to order a ring, I would have it inscribed: "Nothing passes."
      I believe that nothing passes without leaving some trace, and that every
      little step has some meaning for the present and the future life.

 What I lived through was not in vain. My great misfortunes, my patience,
      moved the hearts of the people of the town and they no longer call me
      "Little Profit," they no longer laugh at me and throw water over me as I
      walk through the market. They got used to my being a working man and see
      nothing strange in my carrying paint-pots and glazing windows; on the
      contrary, they give me orders, and I am considered a good workman and the
      best contractor, after Radish, who, though he recovered and still paints
      the cupolas of the church without scaffolding, is not strong enough to
      manage the men, and I have taken his place and go about the town touting
      for orders, and take on and sack the men, and lend money at exorbitant
      interest. And now that I am a contractor I can understand how it is
      possible to spend several days hunting through the town for slaters to
      carry out a trifling order. People are polite to me, and address me
      respectfully and give me tea in the houses where I work, and send the
      servant to ask me if I would like dinner. Children and girls often come
      and watch me with curious, sad eyes.

 Once I was working in the governor's garden, painting the summer-house
      marble. The governor came into the summer-house, and having nothing better
      to do, began to talk to me, and I reminded him how he had once sent for me
      to caution me. For a moment he stared at my face, opened his mouth like a
      round O, waved his hands, and said:

 "I don't remember."

 I am growing old, taciturn, crotchety, strict; I seldom laugh, and people
      say I am growing like Radish, and, like him, I bore the men with my
      aimless moralising.

 Maria Victorovna, my late wife, lives abroad, and her father is making a
      railway somewhere in the Eastern provinces and buying land there. Doctor
      Blagovo is also abroad. Dubechnia has passed to Mrs. Cheprakov, who bought
      it from the engineer after haggling him into a twenty-per-cent reduction
      in the price. Moissey walks about in a bowler hat; he often drives into
      town in a trap and stops outside the bank. People say he has already
      bought an estate on a mortgage, and is always inquiring at the bank about
      Dubechnia, which he also intends to buy. Poor Ivan Cheprakov used to hang
      about the town, doing nothing and drinking. I tried to give him a job in
      our business, and for a time he worked with us painting roofs and glazing,
      and he rather took to it, and, like a regular house-painter, he stole the
      oil, and asked for tips, and got drunk. But it soon bored him. He got
      tired of it and went back to Dubechnia, and some time later I was told by
      the peasants that he had been inciting them to kill Moissey one night and
      rob Mrs. Cheprakov.

 My father has got very old and bent, and just takes a little walk in the
      evening near his house.

 When we had the cholera, Prokofyi cured the shopkeepers with pepper-brandy
      and tar and took money for it, and as I read in the newspaper, he was
      flogged for libelling the doctors as he sat in his shop. His boy Nicolka
      died of cholera. Karpovna is still alive, and still loves and fears her
      Prokofyi. Whenever she sees me she sadly shakes her head and says with a
      sigh:

 "Poor thing. You are lost!"

 On week-days I am busy from early morning till late at night. And on
      Sundays and holidays I take my little niece (my sister expected a boy, but
      a girl was born) and go with her to the cemetery, where I stand or sit and
      look at the grave of my dear one, and tell the child that her mother is
      lying there.

 Sometimes I find Aniuta Blagovo by the grave. We greet each other and
      stand silently, or we talk of Cleopatra, and the child, and the sadness of
      this life. Then we leave the cemetery and walk in silence and she lags
      behind—on purpose, to avoid staying with me. The little girl,
      joyful, happy, with her eyes half-closed against the brilliant sunlight,
      laughs and holds out her little hands to her, and we stop and together we
      fondle the darling child.

 And when we reach the town, Aniuta Blagovo, blushing and agitated, says
      good-bye, and walks on alone, serious and circumspect.... And, to look at
      her, none of the passers-by could imagine that she had just been walking
      by my side and even fondling the child.

  





 The Bet and Other Stories

  





  

 I

 It was a dark autumn night. The old banker was pacing from corner to
      corner of his study, recalling to his mind the party he gave in the autumn
      fifteen years ago. There were many clever people at the party and much
      interesting conversation. They talked among other things of capital
      punishment. The guests, among them not a few scholars and journalists, for
      the most part disapproved of capital punishment. They found it obsolete as
      a means of punishment, unfitted to a Christian State and immoral. Some of
      them thought that capital punishment should be replaced universally by
      life-imprisonment.

 "I don't agree with you," said the host. "I myself have experienced
      neither capital punishment nor life-imprisonment, but if one may judge a
      priori, then in my opinion capital punishment is more moral and more
      humane than imprisonment. Execution kills instantly, life-imprisonment
      kills by degrees. Who is the more humane executioner, one who kills you in
      a few seconds or one who draws the life out of you incessantly, for
      years?"

 "They're both equally immoral," remarked one of the guests, "because their
      purpose is the same, to take away life. The State is not God. It has no
      right to take away that which it cannot give back, if it should so
      desire."

 Among the company was a lawyer, a young man of about twenty-five. On being
      asked his opinion, he said:

 "Capital punishment and life-imprisonment are equally immoral; but if I
      were offered the choice between them, I would certainly choose the second.
      It's better to live somehow than not to live at all."

 There ensued a lively discussion. The banker who was then younger and more
      nervous suddenly lost his temper, banged his fist on the table, and
      turning to the young lawyer, cried out:

 "It's a lie. I bet you two millions you wouldn't stick in a cell even for
      five years."

 "If that's serious," replied the lawyer, "then I bet I'll stay not five
      but fifteen."

 "Fifteen! Done!" cried the banker. "Gentlemen, I stake two millions."

 "Agreed. You stake two millions, I my freedom," said the lawyer.

 So this wild, ridiculous bet came to pass. The banker, who at that time
      had too many millions to count, spoiled and capricious, was beside himself
      with rapture. During supper he said to the lawyer jokingly:

 "Come to your senses, young man, before it's too late. Two millions are
      nothing to me, but you stand to lose three or four of the best years of
      your life. I say three or four, because you'll never stick it out any
      longer. Don't forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary is much
      heavier than enforced imprisonment. The idea that you have the right to
      free yourself at any moment will poison the whole of your life in the
      cell. I pity you."

 And now the banker pacing from corner to corner, recalled all this and
      asked himself:

 "Why did I make this bet? What's the good? The lawyer loses fifteen years
      of his life and I throw away two millions. Will it convince people that
      capital punishment is worse or better than imprisonment for life. No, No!
      all stuff and rubbish. On my part, it was the caprice of a well-fed man;
      on the lawyer's, pure greed of gold."

 He recollected further what happened after the evening party. It was
      decided that the lawyer must undergo his imprisonment under the strictest
      observation, in a garden-wing of the banker's house. It was agreed that
      during the period he would be deprived of the right to cross the
      threshold, to see living people, to hear human voices, and to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was permitted to have a musical instrument, to
      read books, to write letters, to drink wine and smoke tobacco. By the
      agreement he could communicate, but only in silence, with the outside
      world through a little window specially constructed for this purpose.
      Everything necessary, books, music, wine, he could receive in any quantity
      by sending a note through the window. The agreement provided for all the
      minutest details, which made the confinement strictly solitary, and it
      obliged the lawyer to remain exactly fifteen years from twelve o'clock of
      November 14th 1870 to twelve o'clock of November 14th 1885. The least
      attempt on his part to violate the conditions, to escape if only for two
      minutes before the time freed the banker from the obligation to pay him
      the two millions.

 During the first year of imprisonment, the lawyer, as far as it was
      possible to judge from his short notes, suffered terribly from loneliness
      and boredom. From his wing day and night came the sound of the piano. He
      rejected wine and tobacco. "Wine," he wrote, "excites desires, and desires
      are the chief foes of a prisoner; besides, nothing is more boring than to
      drink good wine alone," and tobacco spoils the air in his room. During the
      first year the lawyer was sent books of a light character; novels with a
      complicated love interest, stories of crime and fantasy, comedies, and so
      on.

 In the second year the piano was heard no longer and the lawyer asked only
      for classics. In the fifth year, music was heard again, and the prisoner
      asked for wine. Those who watched him said that during the whole of that
      year he was only eating, drinking, and lying on his bed. He yawned often
      and talked angrily to himself. Books he did not read. Sometimes at nights
      he would sit down to write. He would write for a long time and tear it all
      up in the morning. More than once he was heard to weep.

 In the second half of the sixth year, the prisoner began zealously to
      study languages, philosophy, and history. He fell on these subjects so
      hungrily that the banker hardly had time to get books enough for him. In
      the space of four years about six hundred volumes were bought at his
      request. It was while that passion lasted that the banker received the
      following letter from the prisoner: "My dear gaoler, I am writing these
      lines in six languages. Show them to experts. Let them read them. If they
      do not find one single mistake, I beg you to give orders to have a gun
      fired off in the garden. By the noise I shall know that my efforts have
      not been in vain. The geniuses of all ages and countries speak in
      different languages; but in them all burns the same flame. Oh, if you knew
      my heavenly happiness now that I can understand them!" The prisoner's
      desire was fulfilled. Two shots were fired in the garden by the banker's
      order.

 Later on, after the tenth year, the lawyer sat immovable before his table
      and read only the New Testament. The banker found it strange that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred erudite volumes, should have
      spent nearly a year in reading one book, easy to understand and by no
      means thick. The New Testament was then replaced by the history of
      religions and theology.

 During the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an
      extraordinary amount, quite haphazard. Now he would apply himself to the
      natural sciences, then would read Byron or Shakespeare. Notes used to come
      from him in which he asked to be sent at the same time a book on
      chemistry, a text-book of medicine, a novel, and some treatise on
      philosophy or theology. He read as though he were swimming in the sea
      among the broken pieces of wreckage, and in his desire to save his life
      was eagerly grasping one piece after another.

 II

 The banker recalled all this, and thought:

 "To-morrow at twelve o'clock he receives his freedom. Under the agreement,
      I shall have to pay him two millions. If I pay, it's all over with me. I
      am ruined for ever...."

 Fifteen years before he had too many millions to count, but now he was
      afraid to ask himself which he had more of, money or debts. Gambling on
      the Stock-Exchange, risky speculation, and the recklessness of which he
      could not rid himself even in old age, had gradually brought his business
      to decay; and the fearless, self-confident, proud man of business had
      become an ordinary banker, trembling at every rise and fall in the market.

 "That cursed bet," murmured the old man clutching his head in despair....
      "Why didn't the man die? He's only forty years old. He will take away my
      last farthing, marry, enjoy life, gamble on the Exchange, and I will look
      on like an envious beggar and hear the same words from him every day: 'I'm
      obliged to you for the happiness of my life. Let me help you.' No, it's
      too much! The only escape from bankruptcy and disgrace—is that the
      man should die."

 The clock had just struck three. The banker was listening. In Ike house
      everyone was asleep, and one could hear only the frozen trees whining
      outside the windows. Trying to make no sound, he took out of his safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house. The garden was dark and cold. It was
      raining. A keen damp wind hovered howling over all the garden and gave the
      trees no rest. Though he strained his eyes, the banker could see neither
      the ground, nor the white statues, nor the garden-wing, nor the trees.
      Approaching the place where the garden wing stood, he called the watchman
      twice. There was no answer. Evidently the watchman had taken shelter from
      the bad weather and was now asleep somewhere in the kitchen or the
      greenhouse.

 "If I have the courage to fulfil my intention," thought the old man, "the
      suspicion will fall on the watchman first of all."

 In the darkness he groped for the stairs and the door and entered the hall
      of the gardenwing, then poked his way into a narrow passage and struck a
      match. Not a soul was there. Someone's bed, with no bedclothes on it,
      stood there, and an iron stove was dark in the corner. The seals on the
      door that led into the prisoner's room were unbroken.

 When the match went out, the old man, trembling from agitation, peeped
      into the little window.

 In the prisoner's room a candle was burning dim. The prisoner himself sat
      by the table. Only his back, the hair on his head and his hands were
      visible. On the table, the two chairs, the carpet by the table open books
      were strewn.

 Five minutes passed and the prisoner never once stirred. Fifteen years
      confinement had taught him to sit motionless. The banker tapped on the
      window with his finger, but the prisoner gave no movement in reply. Then
      the banker cautiously tore the seals from the door and put the key into
      the lock. The rusty lock gave a hoarse groan and the door creaked. The
      banker expected instantly to hear a cry of surprise and the sound of
      steps. Three minutes passed and it was as quiet behind the door as it had
      been before. He made up his mind to enter. Before the table sat a man,
      unlike an ordinary human being. It was a skeleton, with tight-drawn skin,
      with a woman's long curly hair, and a shaggy beard. The colour of his face
      was yellow, of an earthy shade; the cheeks were sunken, the back long and
      narrow, and the hand upon which he leaned his hairy head was so lean and
      skinny that it was painful to look upon. His hair was already silvering
      with grey, and no one who glanced at the senile emaciation of the face
      would have believed that he was only forty years old. On the table, before
      his bended head, lay a sheet of paper on which something was written in a
      tiny hand.

 "Poor devil," thought the banker, "he's asleep and probably seeing
      millions in his dreams. I have only to take and throw this half-dead thing
      on the bed, smother him a moment with the pillow, and the most careful
      examination will find no trace of unnatural death. But, first, let us read
      what he has written here."

 The banker took the sheet from the table and read:

 "To-morrow at twelve o'clock midnight, I shall obtain my freedom and the
      right to mix with people. But before I leave this room and see the sun I
      think it necessary to say a few words to you. On my own clear conscience
      and before God who sees me I declare to you that I despise freedom, life,
      health, and all that your books call the blessings of the world.

 "For fifteen years I have diligently studied earthly life. True, I saw
      neither the earth nor the people, but in your books I drank fragrant wine,
      sang songs, hunted deer and wild boar in the forests, loved women.... And
      beautiful women, like clouds ethereal, created by the magic of your poets'
      genius, visited me by night and whispered me wonderful tales, which made
      my head drunken. In your books I climbed the summits of Elbruz and Mont
      Blanc and saw from thence how the sun rose in the morning, and in the
      evening overflowed the sky, the ocean and the mountain ridges with a
      purple gold. I saw from thence how above me lightnings glimmered cleaving
      the clouds; I saw green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, cities; I heard
      syrens singing, and the playing of the pipes of Pan; I touched the wings
      of beautiful devils who came flying to me to speak of God.... In your
      books I cast myself into bottomless abysses, worked miracles, burned
      cities to the ground, preached new religions, conquered whole
      countries....

 "Your books gave me wisdom. All that unwearying human thought created in
      the centuries is compressed to a little lump in my skull. I know that I am
      more clever than you all.

 "And I despise your books, despise all wordly blessings and wisdom.
      Everything is void, frail, visionary and delusive like a mirage. Though
      you be proud and wise and beautiful, yet will death wipe you from the face
      of the earth like the mice underground; and your posterity, your history,
      and the immortality of your men of genius will be as frozen slag, burnt
      down together with the terrestrial globe.

 "You are mad, and gone the wrong way. You take lie for truth and ugliness
      for beauty. You would marvel if by certain conditions there should
      suddenly grow on apple and orange trees, instead of fruit, frogs and
      lizards, and if roses should begin to breathe the odour of a sweating
      horse. So do I marvel at you, who have bartered heaven for earth. I do not
      want to understand you.

 "That I may show you in deed my contempt for that by which you live, I
      waive the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise, and which I
      now despise. That I may deprive myself of my right to them, I shall come
      out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
      violate the agreement."

 When he had read, the banker put the sheet on the table, kissed the head
      of the strange man, and began to weep. He went out of the wing. Never at
      any other time, not even after his terrible losses on the Exchange, had he
      felt such contempt for himself as now. Coming home, he lay down on his
      bed, but agitation and tears kept him long from sleep....

 The next morning the poor watchman came running to him and told him that
      they had seen the man who lived in the wing climbing through the window
      into the garden. He had gone to the gate and disappeared. Together with
      his servants the banker went instantly to the wing and established the
      escape of his prisoner. To avoid unnecessary rumours he took the paper
      with the renunciation from the table and, on his return, locked it in his
      safe.