Her First Ball

 Exactly when the ball began Leila would have found it hard to say. Perhaps her
first real partner was the cab. It did not matter that she shared the cab with
the Sheridan girls and their brother. She sat back in her own little corner of
it, and the bolster on which her hand rested felt like the sleeve of an unknown
young man’s dress suit; and away they bowled, past waltzing lamp-posts
and houses and fences and trees.

 “Have you really never been to a ball before, Leila? But, my child, how
too weird—” cried the Sheridan girls.

 “Our nearest neighbour was fifteen miles,” said Leila softly,
gently opening and shutting her fan.

 Oh dear, how hard it was to be indifferent like the others! She tried not to
smile too much; she tried not to care. But every single thing was so new and
exciting... Meg’s tuberoses, Jose’s long loop of amber,
Laura’s little dark head, pushing above her white fur like a flower
through snow. She would remember for ever. It even gave her a pang to see her
cousin Laurie throw away the wisps of tissue paper he pulled from the
fastenings of his new gloves. She would like to have kept those wisps as a
keepsake, as a remembrance. Laurie leaned forward and put his hand on
Laura’s knee.

 “Look here, darling,” he said. “The third and the ninth as
usual. Twig?”

 Oh, how marvellous to have a brother! In her excitement Leila felt that if
there had been time, if it hadn’t been impossible, she couldn’t
have helped crying because she was an only child, and no brother had ever said
“Twig?” to her; no sister would ever say, as Meg said to Jose that
moment, “I’ve never known your hair go up more successfully than it
has to-night!”

 But, of course, there was no time. They were at the drill hall already; there
were cabs in front of them and cabs behind. The road was bright on either side
with moving fan-like lights, and on the pavement gay couples seemed to float
through the air; little satin shoes chased each other like birds.

 “Hold on to me, Leila; you’ll get lost,” said Laura.

 “Come on, girls, let’s make a dash for it,” said Laurie.

 Leila put two fingers on Laura’s pink velvet cloak, and they were somehow
lifted past the big golden lantern, carried along the passage, and pushed into
the little room marked “Ladies.” Here the crowd was so great there
was hardly space to take off their things; the noise was deafening. Two benches
on either side were stacked high with wraps. Two old women in white aprons ran
up and down tossing fresh armfuls. And everybody was pressing forward trying to
get at the little dressing-table and mirror at the far end.

 A great quivering jet of gas lighted the ladies’ room. It couldn’t
wait; it was dancing already. When the door opened again and there came a burst
of tuning from the drill hall, it leaped almost to the ceiling.

 Dark girls, fair girls were patting their hair, tying ribbons again, tucking
handkerchiefs down the fronts of their bodices, smoothing marble-white gloves.
And because they were all laughing it seemed to Leila that they were all
lovely.

 “Aren’t there any invisible hair-pins?” cried a voice.
“How most extraordinary! I can’t see a single invisible
hair-pin.”

 “Powder my back, there’s a darling,” cried some one else.

 “But I must have a needle and cotton. I’ve torn simply miles and
miles of the frill,” wailed a third.

 Then, “Pass them along, pass them along!” The straw basket of
programmes was tossed from arm to arm. Darling little pink-and-silver
programmes, with pink pencils and fluffy tassels. Leila’s fingers shook
as she took one out of the basket. She wanted to ask some one, “Am I
meant to have one too?” but she had just time to read: “Waltz 3. Two, Two in a Canoe. Polka 4. Making the Feathers Fly ,”
when Meg cried, “Ready, Leila?” and they pressed their way through
the crush in the passage towards the big double doors of the drill hall.

 Dancing had not begun yet, but the band had stopped tuning, and the noise was
so great it seemed that when it did begin to play it would never be heard.
Leila, pressing close to Meg, looking over Meg’s shoulder, felt that even
the little quivering coloured flags strung across the ceiling were talking. She
quite forgot to be shy; she forgot how in the middle of dressing she had sat
down on the bed with one shoe off and one shoe on and begged her mother to ring
up her cousins and say she couldn’t go after all. And the rush of longing
she had had to be sitting on the veranda of their forsaken up-country home,
listening to the baby owls crying “More pork” in the moonlight, was
changed to a rush of joy so sweet that it was hard to bear alone. She clutched
her fan, and, gazing at the gleaming, golden floor, the azaleas, the lanterns,
the stage at one end with its red carpet and gilt chairs and the band in a
corner, she thought breathlessly, “How heavenly; how simply
heavenly!”

 All the girls stood grouped together at one side of the doors, the men at the
other, and the chaperones in dark dresses, smiling rather foolishly, walked
with little careful steps over the polished floor towards the stage.

 “This is my little country cousin Leila. Be nice to her. Find her
partners; she’s under my wing,” said Meg, going up to one girl
after another.

 Strange faces smiled at Leila—sweetly, vaguely. Strange voices answered,
“Of course, my dear.” But Leila felt the girls didn’t really
see her. They were looking towards the men. Why didn’t the men begin?
What were they waiting for? There they stood, smoothing their gloves, patting
their glossy hair and smiling among themselves. Then, quite suddenly, as if
they had only just made up their minds that that was what they had to do, the
men came gliding over the parquet. There was a joyful flutter among the girls.
A tall, fair man flew up to Meg, seized her programme, scribbled something; Meg
passed him on to Leila. “May I have the pleasure?” He ducked and
smiled. There came a dark man wearing an eyeglass, then cousin Laurie with a
friend, and Laura with a little freckled fellow whose tie was crooked. Then
quite an old man—fat, with a big bald patch on his head—took her
programme and murmured, “Let me see, let me see!” And he was a long
time comparing his programme, which looked black with names, with hers. It
seemed to give him so much trouble that Leila was ashamed. “Oh, please
don’t bother,” she said eagerly. But instead of replying the fat
man wrote something, glanced at her again. “Do I remember this bright
little face?” he said softly. “Is it known to me of yore?” At
that moment the band began playing; the fat man disappeared. He was tossed away
on a great wave of music that came flying over the gleaming floor, breaking the
groups up into couples, scattering them, sending them spinning....

 Leila had learned to dance at boarding school. Every Saturday afternoon the
boarders were hurried off to a little corrugated iron mission hall where Miss
Eccles (of London) held her “select” classes. But the difference
between that dusty-smelling hall—with calico texts on the walls, the poor
terrified little woman in a brown velvet toque with rabbit’s ears
thumping the cold piano, Miss Eccles poking the girls’ feet with her long
white wand—and this was so tremendous that Leila was sure if her partner
didn’t come and she had to listen to that marvellous music and to watch
the others sliding, gliding over the golden floor, she would die at least, or
faint, or lift her arms and fly out of one of those dark windows that showed
the stars.

 “Ours, I think—” Some one bowed, smiled, and offered her his
arm; she hadn’t to die after all. Some one’s hand pressed her
waist, and she floated away like a flower that is tossed into a pool.

 “Quite a good floor, isn’t it?” drawled a faint voice close
to her ear.

 “I think it’s most beautifully slippery,” said Leila.

 “Pardon!” The faint voice sounded surprised. Leila said it again.
And there was a tiny pause before the voice echoed, “Oh, quite!”
and she was swung round again.

 He steered so beautifully. That was the great difference between dancing with
girls and men, Leila decided. Girls banged into each other, and stamped on each
other’s feet; the girl who was gentleman always clutched you so.

 The azaleas were separate flowers no longer; they were pink and white flags
streaming by.

 “Were you at the Bells’ last week?” the voice came again. It
sounded tired. Leila wondered whether she ought to ask him if he would like to
stop.

 “No, this is my first dance,” said she.

 Her partner gave a little gasping laugh. “Oh, I say,” he protested.

 “Yes, it is really the first dance I’ve ever been to.” Leila
was most fervent. It was such a relief to be able to tell somebody. “You
see, I’ve lived in the country all my life up till now....”

 At that moment the music stopped, and they went to sit on two chairs against
the wall. Leila tucked her pink satin feet under and fanned herself, while she
blissfully watched the other couples passing and disappearing through the swing
doors.

 “Enjoying yourself, Leila?” asked Jose, nodding her golden head.

 Laura passed and gave her the faintest little wink; it made Leila wonder for a
moment whether she was quite grown up after all. Certainly her partner did not
say very much. He coughed, tucked his handkerchief away, pulled down his
waistcoat, took a minute thread off his sleeve. But it didn’t matter.
Almost immediately the band started and her second partner seemed to spring
from the ceiling.

 “Floor’s not bad,” said the new voice. Did one always begin
with the floor? And then, “Were you at the Neaves’ on
Tuesday?” And again Leila explained. Perhaps it was a little strange that
her partners were not more interested. For it was thrilling. Her first ball!
She was only at the beginning of everything. It seemed to her that she had
never known what the night was like before. Up till now it had been dark,
silent, beautiful very often—oh yes—but mournful somehow. Solemn.
And now it would never be like that again—it had opened dazzling bright.

 “Care for an ice?” said her partner. And they went through the
swing doors, down the passage, to the supper room. Her cheeks burned, she was
fearfully thirsty. How sweet the ices looked on little glass plates and how
cold the frosted spoon was, iced too! And when they came back to the hall there
was the fat man waiting for her by the door. It gave her quite a shock again to
see how old he was; he ought to have been on the stage with the fathers and
mothers. And when Leila compared him with her other partners he looked shabby.
His waistcoat was creased, there was a button off his glove, his coat looked as
if it was dusty with French chalk.

 “Come along, little lady,” said the fat man. He scarcely troubled
to clasp her, and they moved away so gently, it was more like walking than
dancing. But he said not a word about the floor. “Your first dance,
isn’t it?” he murmured.

 “How did you know?”

 “Ah,” said the fat man, “that’s what it is to be
old!” He wheezed faintly as he steered her past an awkward couple.
“You see, I’ve been doing this kind of thing for the last thirty
years.”

 “Thirty years?” cried Leila. Twelve years before she was born!

 “It hardly bears thinking about, does it?” said the fat man
gloomily. Leila looked at his bald head, and she felt quite sorry for him.

 “I think it’s marvellous to be still going on,” she said
kindly.

 “Kind little lady,” said the fat man, and he pressed her a little
closer, and hummed a bar of the waltz. “Of course,” he said,
“you can’t hope to last anything like as long as that. No-o,”
said the fat man, “long before that you’ll be sitting up there on
the stage, looking on, in your nice black velvet. And these pretty arms will
have turned into little short fat ones, and you’ll beat time with such a
different kind of fan—a black bony one.” The fat man seemed to
shudder. “And you’ll smile away like the poor old dears up there,
and point to your daughter, and tell the elderly lady next to you how some
dreadful man tried to kiss her at the club ball. And your heart will ache,
ache”—the fat man squeezed her closer still, as if he really was
sorry for that poor heart—“because no one wants to kiss you now.
And you’ll say how unpleasant these polished floors are to walk on, how
dangerous they are. Eh, Mademoiselle Twinkletoes?” said the fat man
softly.

 Leila gave a light little laugh, but she did not feel like laughing. Was
it—could it all be true? It sounded terribly true. Was this first ball
only the beginning of her last ball, after all? At that the music seemed to
change; it sounded sad, sad; it rose upon a great sigh. Oh, how quickly things
changed! Why didn’t happiness last for ever? For ever wasn’t a bit
too long.

 “I want to stop,” she said in a breathless voice. The fat man led
her to the door.

 “No,” she said, “I won’t go outside. I won’t sit
down. I’ll just stand here, thank you.” She leaned against the
wall, tapping with her foot, pulling up her gloves and trying to smile. But
deep inside her a little girl threw her pinafore over her head and sobbed. Why
had he spoiled it all?

 “I say, you know,” said the fat man, “you mustn’t take
me seriously, little lady.”

 “As if I should!” said Leila, tossing her small dark head and
sucking her underlip....

 Again the couples paraded. The swing doors opened and shut. Now new music was
given out by the bandmaster. But Leila didn’t want to dance any more. She
wanted to be home, or sitting on the veranda listening to those baby owls. When
she looked through the dark windows at the stars, they had long beams like
wings....

 But presently a soft, melting, ravishing tune began, and a young man with curly
hair bowed before her. She would have to dance, out of politeness, until she
could find Meg. Very stiffly she walked into the middle; very haughtily she put
her hand on his sleeve. But in one minute, in one turn, her feet glided,
glided. The lights, the azaleas, the dresses, the pink faces, the velvet
chairs, all became one beautiful flying wheel. And when her next partner bumped
her into the fat man and he said, “Par don ,” she smiled at
him more radiantly than ever. She didn’t even recognize him again.