HIS WEDDED WIFE.

 Cry “Murder!” in the market-place, and each
   Will turn upon his neighbor anxious eyes
   That ask:—“Art thou the man?”
    We hunted Cain,
   Some centuries ago, across the world,
   That bred the fear our own misdeeds maintain
   Today.
              —Vibart's Moralities.

 Shakespeare says something about worms, or it may be giants or beetles,
      turning if you tread on them too severely. The safest plan is never to
      tread on a worm—not even on the last new subaltern from Home, with
      his buttons hardly out of their tissue paper, and the red of sappy English
      beef in his cheeks. This is the story of the worm that turned. For the
      sake of brevity, we will call Henry Augustus Ramsay Faizanne, “The Worm,”
       although he really was an exceedingly pretty boy, without a hair on his
      face, and with a waist like a girl's when he came out to the Second
      “Shikarris” and was made unhappy in several ways. The “Shikarris” are a
      high-caste regiment, and you must be able to do things well—play a
      banjo or ride more than a little, or sing, or act—to get on with
      them.

 The Worm did nothing except fall off his pony, and knock chips out of
      gate-posts with his trap. Even that became monotonous after a time. He
      objected to whist, cut the cloth at billiards, sang out of tune, kept very
      much to himself, and wrote to his Mamma and sisters at Home. Four of these
      five things were vices which the “Shikarris” objected to and set
      themselves to eradicate. Every one knows how subalterns are, by brother
      subalterns, softened and not permitted to be ferocious. It is good and
      wholesome, and does no one any harm, unless tempers are lost; and then
      there is trouble. There was a man once—but that is another story.

 The “Shikarris” shikarred The Worm very much, and he bore everything
      without winking. He was so good and so anxious to learn, and flushed so
      pink, that his education was cut short, and he was left to his own devices
      by every one except the Senior Subaltern, who continued to make life a
      burden to The Worm. The Senior Subaltern meant no harm; but his chaff was
      coarse, and he didn't quite understand where to stop. He had been waiting
      too long for his company; and that always sours a man. Also he was in
      love, which made him worse.

 One day, after he had borrowed The Worm's trap for a lady who never
      existed, had used it himself all the afternoon, had sent a note to The
      Worm purporting to come from the lady, and was telling the Mess all about
      it, The Worm rose in his place and said, in his quiet, ladylike voice:
      “That was a very pretty sell; but I'll lay you a month's pay to a month's
      pay when you get your step, that I work a sell on you that you'll remember
      for the rest of your days, and the Regiment after you when you're dead or
      broke.” The Worm wasn't angry in the least, and the rest of the Mess
      shouted. Then the Senior Subaltern looked at The Worm from the boots
      upwards, and down again, and said, “Done, Baby.” The Worm took the rest of
      the Mess to witness that the bet had been taken, and retired into a book
      with a sweet smile.

 Two months passed, and the Senior Subaltern still educated The Worm, who
      began to move about a little more as the hot weather came on. I have said
      that the Senior Subaltern was in love. The curious thing is that a girl
      was in love with the Senior Subaltern. Though the Colonel said awful
      things, and the Majors snorted, and married Captains looked unutterable
      wisdom, and the juniors scoffed, those two were engaged.

 The Senior Subaltern was so pleased with getting his Company and his
      acceptance at the same time that he forgot to bother The Worm. The girl
      was a pretty girl, and had money of her own. She does not come into this
      story at all.

 One night, at the beginning of the hot weather, all the Mess, except The
      Worm, who had gone to his own room to write Home letters, were sitting on
      the platform outside the Mess House. The Band had finished playing, but no
      one wanted to go in. And the Captains' wives were there also. The folly of
      a man in love is unlimited.

 The Senior Subaltern had been holding forth on the merits of the girl he
      was engaged to, and the ladies were purring approval, while the men
      yawned, when there was a rustle of skirts in the dark, and a tired, faint
      voice lifted itself:

 “Where's my husband?”

 I do not wish in the least to reflect on the morality of the “Shikarris;”
       but it is on record that four men jumped up as if they had been shot.
      Three of them were married men. Perhaps they were afraid that their wives
      had come from Home unbeknownst. The fourth said that he had acted on the
      impulse of the moment. He explained this afterwards.

 Then the voice cried:—“Oh, Lionel!” Lionel was the Senior
      Subaltern's name. A woman came into the little circle of light by the
      candles on the peg-tables, stretching out her hands to the dark where the
      Senior Subaltern was, and sobbing. We rose to our feet, feeling that
      things were going to happen and ready to believe the worst. In this bad,
      small world of ours, one knows so little of the life of the next man—which,
      after all, is entirely his own concern—that one is not surprised
      when a crash comes. Anything might turn up any day for any one. Perhaps
      the Senior Subaltern had been trapped in his youth. Men are crippled that
      way occasionally. We didn't know; we wanted to hear; and the Captains'
      wives were as anxious as we. If he HAD been trapped, he was to be excused;
      for the woman from nowhere, in the dusty shoes, and gray travelling dress,
      was very lovely, with black hair and great eyes full of tears. She was
      tall, with a fine figure, and her voice had a running sob in it pitiful to
      hear. As soon as the Senior Subaltern stood up, she threw her arms round
      his neck, and called him “my darling,” and said she could not bear waiting
      alone in England, and his letters were so short and cold, and she was his
      to the end of the world, and would he forgive her. This did not sound
      quite like a lady's way of speaking. It was too demonstrative.

 Things seemed black indeed, and the Captains' wives peered under their
      eyebrows at the Senior Subaltern, and the Colonel's face set like the Day
      of Judgment framed in gray bristles, and no one spoke for a while.

 Next the Colonel said, very shortly:—“Well, Sir?” and the woman
      sobbed afresh. The Senior Subaltern was half choked with the arms round
      his neck, but he gasped out:—“It's a d——d lie! I never
      had a wife in my life!” “Don't swear,” said the Colonel. “Come into the
      Mess. We must sift this clear somehow,” and he sighed to himself, for he
      believed in his “Shikarris,” did the Colonel.

 We trooped into the ante-room, under the full lights, and there we saw how
      beautiful the woman was. She stood up in the middle of us all, sometimes
      choking with crying, then hard and proud, and then holding out her arms to
      the Senior Subaltern. It was like the fourth act of a tragedy. She told us
      how the Senior Subaltern had married her when he was Home on leave
      eighteen months before; and she seemed to know all that we knew, and more
      too, of his people and his past life. He was white and ashy gray, trying
      now and again to break into the torrent of her words; and we, noting how
      lovely she was and what a criminal he looked, esteemed him a beast of the
      worst kind. We felt sorry for him, though.

 I shall never forget the indictment of the Senior Subaltern by his wife.
      Nor will he. It was so sudden, rushing out of the dark, unannounced, into
      our dull lives. The Captains' wives stood back; but their eyes were
      alight, and you could see that they had already convicted and sentenced
      the Senior Subaltern. The Colonel seemed five years older. One Major was
      shading his eyes with his hand and watching the woman from underneath it.
      Another was chewing his moustache and smiling quietly as if he were
      witnessing a play. Full in the open space in the centre, by the
      whist-tables, the Senior Subaltern's terrier was hunting for fleas. I
      remember all this as clearly as though a photograph were in my hand. I
      remember the look of horror on the Senior Subaltern's face. It was rather
      like seeing a man hanged; but much more interesting. Finally, the woman
      wound up by saying that the Senior Subaltern carried a double F. M. in
      tattoo on his left shoulder. We all knew that, and to our innocent minds
      it seemed to clinch the matter. But one of the Bachelor Majors said very
      politely:—“I presume that your marriage certificate would be more to
      the purpose?”

 That roused the woman. She stood up and sneered at the Senior Subaltern
      for a cur, and abused the Major and the Colonel and all the rest. Then she
      wept, and then she pulled a paper from her breast, saying imperially:—“Take
      that! And let my husband—my lawfully wedded husband—read it
      aloud—if he dare!”

 There was a hush, and the men looked into each other's eyes as the Senior
      Subaltern came forward in a dazed and dizzy way, and took the paper. We
      were wondering as we stared, whether there was anything against any one of
      us that might turn up later on. The Senior Subaltern's throat was dry;
      but, as he ran his eye over the paper, he broke out into a hoarse cackle
      of relief, and said to the woman:—“You young blackguard!”

 But the woman had fled through a door, and on the paper was written:—“This
      is to certify that I, The Worm, have paid in full my debts to the Senior
      Subaltern, and, further, that the Senior Subaltern is my debtor, by
      agreement on the 23d of February, as by the Mess attested, to the extent
      of one month's Captain's pay, in the lawful currency of the India Empire.”

 Then a deputation set off for The Worm's quarters and found him, betwixt
      and between, unlacing his stays, with the hat, wig, serge dress, etc., on
      the bed. He came over as he was, and the “Shikarris” shouted till the
      Gunners' Mess sent over to know if they might have a share of the fun. I
      think we were all, except the Colonel and the Senior Subaltern, a little
      disappointed that the scandal had come to nothing. But that is human
      nature. There could be no two words about The Worm's acting. It leaned as
      near to a nasty tragedy as anything this side of a joke can. When most of
      the Subalterns sat upon him with sofa-cushions to find out why he had not
      said that acting was his strong point, he answered very quietly:—“I
      don't think you ever asked me. I used to act at Home with my sisters.” But
      no acting with girls could account for The Worm's display that night.
      Personally, I think it was in bad taste.

 Besides being dangerous. There is no sort of use in playing with fire,
      even for fun.

 The “Shikarris” made him President of the Regimental Dramatic Club; and,
      when the Senior Subaltern paid up his debt, which he did at once, The Worm
      sank the money in scenery and dresses. He was a good Worm; and the
      “Shikarris” are proud of him. The only drawback is that he has been
      christened “Mrs. Senior Subaltern;” and as there are now two Mrs. Senior
      Subalterns in the Station, this is sometimes confusing to strangers.

 Later on, I will tell you of a case something like, this, but with all the
      jest left out and nothing in it but real trouble.