HIS AVENGER
    

      When M. Antoine Leuillet married the widow, Madame Mathilde Souris, he had
      already been in love with her for ten years.
    

      M. Souris has been his friend, his old college chum. Leuillet was very
      much attached to him, but thought he was somewhat of a simpleton. He would
      often remark: “That poor Souris who will never set the world on
      fire.”
    

      When Souris married Miss Mathilde Duval, Leuillet was astonished and
      somewhat annoyed, as he was slightly devoted to her, himself. She was the
      daughter of a neighbor, a former proprietor of a draper's establishment
      who had retired with quite a small fortune. She married Souris for his
      money.
    

      Then Leuillet thought he would start a flirtation with his friend's wife.
      He was a good-looking man, intelligent and also rich. He thought it would
      be all plain sailing, but he was mistaken. Then he really began to admire
      her with an admiration that his friendship for the husband obliged him to
      keep within the bounds of discretion, making him timid and embarrassed.
      Madame Souris believing that his presumptions had received a wholesome
      check now treated him as a good friend. This went on for nine years.
    

      One morning a messenger brought Leuillet a distracted note from the poor
      woman. Souris had just died suddenly from the rupture of an aneurism. He
      was dreadfully shocked, for they were just the same age. But almost
      immediately a feeling of profound joy, of intense relief, of emancipation
      filled his being. Madame Souris was free.
    

      He managed, however, to assume the sad, sympathetic expression that was
      appropriate, waited the required time, observed all social appearances. At
      the end of fifteen months he married the widow.
    

      This was considered to be a very natural, and even a generous action. It
      was the act of a good friend of an upright man.
    

      He was happy at last, perfectly happy.
    

      They lived in the most cordial intimacy, having understood and appreciated
      each other from the first. They had no secrets from one another and even
      confided to each other their most secret thoughts. Leuillet loved his wife
      now with a quiet and trustful affection; he loved her as a tender, devoted
      companion who is an equal and a confidante. But there lingered in his mind
      a strange and inexplicable bitterness towards the defunct Souris, who had
      first been the husband of this woman, who had had the flower of her youth
      and of her soul, and had even robbed her of some of her poetry. The memory
      of the dead husband marred the happiness of the living husband, and this
      posthumous jealousy tormented his heart by day and by night.
    

      The consequence was he talked incessantly of Souris, asked about a
      thousand personal and secret minutia, wanted to know all about his habits
      and his person. And he sneered at him even in his grave, recalling with
      self-satisfaction his whims, ridiculing his absurdities, dwelling on his
      faults.
    

      He would call to his wife all over the house:
    

      “Hallo, Mathilde!”
    

      “Here I am, dear.”
    

      “Come here a moment.”
    

      She would come, always smiling, knowing well that he would say something
      about Souris and ready to flatter her new husband's inoffensive mania.
    

      “Tell me, do you remember one day how Souris insisted on explaining
      to me that little men always commanded more affection than big men?”
    

      And he made some remarks that were disparaging to the deceased, who was a
      small man, and decidedly flattering to himself, Leuillet, who was a tall
      man.
    

      Mme. Leuillet allowed him to think he was right, quite right, and she
      laughed heartily, gently ridiculing her former husband for the sake of
      pleasing the present one, who always ended by saying:
    

      “All the same, what a ninny that Souris was!”
    

      They were happy, quite happy, and Leuillet never ceased to show his
      devotion to his wife.
    

      One night, however, as they lay awake, Leuillet said as he kissed his
      wife:
    

      “See here, dearie.”
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Was Souris—I don't exactly know how to say it—was
      Souris very loving?”
    

      She gave him a kiss for reply and murmured “Not as loving as you
      are, mon chat.”
    

      He was flattered in his self-love and continued:
    

      “He must have been—a ninny—was he not?”
    

      She did not reply. She only smiled slyly and hid her face in her husband's
      neck.
    

      “He must have been a ninny and not—not—not smart?”
    

      She shook her head slightly to imply, “No—not at all smart.”
    

      He continued:
    

      “He must have been an awful nuisance, eh?”
    

      This time she was frank and replied:
    

      “Oh yes!”
    

      He kissed her again for this avowal and said:
    

      “What a brute he was! You were not happy with him?”
    

      “No,” she replied. “It was not always pleasant.”
    

      Leuillet was delighted, forming in his mind a comparison, much in his own
      favor, between his wife's former and present position. He was silent for a
      time, and then with a burst of laughter he asked:
    

      “Tell me?”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Will you be frank, very frank with me?”
    

      “Why yes, my dear.”
    

      “Well then, tell me truly did you never feel tempted to—to—to
      deceive that imbecile Souris?”
    

      Mme. Leuillet said: “Oh!” pretending to be shocked and hid her
      face again on her husband's shoulder. But he saw that she was laughing.
    

      “Come now, own up,” he persisted. “He looked like a
      ninny, that creature! It would be funny, so funny! Good old Souris! Come,
      come, dearie, you do not mind telling me, me, of all people.”
    

      He insisted on the “me” thinking that if she had wished to
      deceive Souris she would have chosen him, and he was trembling in
      anticipation of her avowal, sure that if she had not been a virtuous woman
      she would have encouraged his own attentions.
    

      But she did not answer, laughing still, as at the recollection of
      something exceedingly comical.
    

      Leuillet, in his turn began to laugh, thinking he might have been the
      lucky man, and he muttered amid his mirth: “That poor Souris, that
      poor Souris, oh, yes, he looked like a fool!”
    

      Mme. Leuillet was almost in spasms of laughter.
    

      “Come, confess, be frank. You know I will not mind.”
    

      Then she stammered out, almost choking with laughter: “Yes, yes.”
    

      “Yes, what?” insisted her husband. “Come, tell all.”
    

      She was quieter now and putting her mouth to her husband's ear, she
      whispered: “Yes, I did deceive him.”
    

      He felt a chill run down his back and to his very bones, and he stammered
      out, dumfounded: “You—you—deceived him—criminally?”
    

      She still thought he was amused and replied: “Yes—yes,
      absolutely.”
    

      He was obliged to sit up to recover his breath, he was so shocked and
      upset at what he had heard.
    

      She had become serious, understanding too late what she had done.
    

      “With whom?” said Leuillet at length.
    

      She was silent seeking some excuse.
    

      “A young man,” she replied at length.
    

      He turned suddenly toward her and said drily:
    

      “I did not suppose it was the cook. I want to know what young man,
      do you hear?”
    

      She did not answer.
    

      He snatched the covers from her face, repeating:
    

      “I want to know what young man, do you hear?”
    

      Then she said sorrowfully: “I was only in fun.” But he was
      trembling with rage. “What? How? You were only in fun? You were
      making fun of me, then? But I am not satisfied, do you hear? I want the
      name of the young man!”
    

      She did not reply, but lay there motionless.
    

      He took her by the arm and squeezed it, saying: “Do you understand
      me, finally? I wish you to reply when I speak to you.”
    

      “I think you are going crazy,” she said nervously, “let
      me alone!”
    

      He was wild with rage, not knowing what to say, exasperated, and he shook
      her with all his might, repeating:
    

      “Do you hear me, do you hear me?”
    

      She made an abrupt effort to disengage herself and the tips of her fingers
      touched her husband's nose. He was furious, thinking she had tried to hit
      him, and he sprang upon her holding her down; and boxing her ears with all
      his might, he cried: “Take that, and that, there, there, wretch!”
    

      When he was out of breath and exhausted, he rose and went toward the
      dressing table to prepare a glass of eau sucree with orange flower, for he
      felt as if he should faint.
    

      She was weeping in bed, sobbing bitterly, for she felt as if her happiness
      was over, through her own fault.
    

      Then, amidst her tears, she stammered out:
    

      “Listen, Antoine, come here, I told you a lie, you will understand,
      listen.”
    

      And prepared to defend herself now, armed with excuses and artifice, she
      raised her disheveled head with its nightcap all awry.
    

      Turning toward her, he approached, ashamed of having struck her, but
      feeling in the bottom of his heart as a husband, a relentless hatred
      toward this woman who had deceived the former husband, Souris.