HIS CHANCE IN LIFE.
    

     Then a pile of heads be laid—
     Thirty thousand heaped on high—
     All to please the Kafir maid,
     Where the Oxus ripples by.

     Grimly spake Atulla Khan:—
     “Love hath made this thing a Man.”
              —Oatta's Story.


      If you go straight away from Levees and Government House Lists, past
      Trades' Balls—far beyond everything and everybody you ever knew in
      your respectable life—you cross, in time, the Border line where the
      last drop of White blood ends and the full tide of Black sets in. It would
      be easier to talk to a new-made Duchess on the spur of the moment than to
      the Borderline folk without violating some of their conventions or hurting
      their feelings. The Black and the White mix very quaintly in their ways.
      Sometimes the White shows in spurts of fierce, childish pride—which
      is Pride of Race run crooked—and sometimes the Black in still
      fiercer abasement and humility, half heathenish customs and strange,
      unaccountable impulses to crime. One of these days, this people—understand
      they are far lower than the class whence Derozio, the man who imitated
      Byron, sprung—will turn out a writer or a poet; and then we shall
      know how they live and what they feel. In the meantime, any stories about
      them cannot be absolutely correct in fact or inference.
    

      Miss Vezzis came from across the Borderline to look after some children
      who belonged to a lady until a regularly ordained nurse could come out.
      The lady said Miss Vezzis was a bad, dirty nurse and inattentive. It never
      struck her that Miss Vezzis had her own life to lead and her own affairs
      to worry over, and that these affairs were the most important things in
      the world to Miss Vezzis.
    

      Very few mistresses admit this sort of reasoning. Miss Vezzis was as black
      as a boot, and to our standard of taste, hideously ugly.
    

      She wore cotton-print gowns and bulged shoes; and when she lost her temper
      with the children, she abused them in the language of the Borderline—which
      is part English, part Portuguese, and part Native. She was not attractive;
      but she had her pride, and she preferred being called “Miss Vezzis.”
     

      Every Sunday she dressed herself wonderfully and went to see her Mamma,
      who lived, for the most part, on an old cane chair in a greasy tussur-silk
      dressing-gown and a big rabbit-warren of a house full of Vezzises,
      Pereiras, Ribieras, Lisboas and Gansalveses, and a floating population of
      loafers; besides fragments of the day's bazar, garlic, stale incense,
      clothes thrown on the floor, petticoats hung on strings for screens, old
      bottles, pewter crucifixes, dried immortelles, pariah puppies, plaster
      images of the Virgin, and hats without crowns. Miss Vezzis drew twenty
      rupees a month for acting as nurse, and she squabbled weekly with her
      Mamma as to the percentage to be given towards housekeeping.
    

      When the quarrel was over, Michele D'Cruze used to shamble across the low
      mud wall of the compound and make love to Miss Vezzis after the fashion of
      the Borderline, which is hedged about with much ceremony. Michele was a
      poor, sickly weed and very black; but he had his pride. He would not be
      seen smoking a huqa for anything; and he looked down on natives as only a
      man with seven-eighths native blood in his veins can. The Vezzis Family
      had their pride too. They traced their descent from a mythical plate-layer
      who had worked on the Sone Bridge when railways were new in India, and
      they valued their English origin. Michele was a Telegraph Signaller on Rs.
      35 a month. The fact that he was in Government employ made Mrs. Vezzis
      lenient to the shortcomings of his ancestors.
    

      There was a compromising legend—Dom Anna the tailor brought it from
      Poonani—that a black Jew of Cochin had once married into the D'Cruze
      family; while it was an open secret that an uncle of Mrs. D'Cruze was at
      that very time doing menial work, connected with cooking, for a Club in
      Southern India! He sent Mrs D'Cruze seven rupees eight annas a month; but
      she felt the disgrace to the family very keenly all the same.
    

      However, in the course of a few Sundays, Mrs. Vezzis brought herself to
      overlook these blemishes and gave her consent to the marriage of her
      daughter with Michele, on condition that Michele should have at least
      fifty rupees a month to start married life upon. This wonderful prudence
      must have been a lingering touch of the mythical plate-layer's Yorkshire
      blood; for across the Borderline people take a pride in marrying when they
      please—not when they can.
    

      Having regard to his departmental prospects, Miss Vezzis might as well
      have asked Michele to go away and come back with the Moon in his pocket.
      But Michele was deeply in love with Miss Vezzis, and that helped him to
      endure. He accompanied Miss Vezzis to Mass one Sunday, and after Mass,
      walking home through the hot stale dust with her hand in his, he swore by
      several Saints, whose names would not interest you, never to forget Miss
      Vezzis; and she swore by her Honor and the Saints—the oath runs
      rather curiously; “In nomine Sanctissimae—” (whatever the name of
      the she-Saint is) and so forth, ending with a kiss on the forehead, a kiss
      on the left cheek, and a kiss on the mouth—never to forget Michele.
    

      Next week Michele was transferred, and Miss Vezzis dropped tears upon the
      window-sash of the “Intermediate” compartment as he left the Station.
    

      If you look at the telegraph-map of India you will see a long line
      skirting the coast from Backergunge to Madras. Michele was ordered to
      Tibasu, a little Sub-office one-third down this line, to send messages on
      from Berhampur to Chicacola, and to think of Miss Vezzis and his chances
      of getting fifty rupees a month out of office hours. He had the noise of
      the Bay of Bengal and a Bengali Babu for company; nothing more. He sent
      foolish letters, with crosses tucked inside the flaps of the envelopes, to
      Miss Vezzis.
    

      When he had been at Tibasu for nearly three weeks his chance came.
    

      Never forget that unless the outward and visible signs of Our Authority
      are always before a native he is as incapable as a child of understanding
      what authority means, or where is the danger of disobeying it. Tibasu was
      a forgotten little place with a few Orissa Mohamedans in it. These,
      hearing nothing of the Collector-Sahib for some time, and heartily
      despising the Hindu Sub-Judge, arranged to start a little Mohurrum riot of
      their own. But the Hindus turned out and broke their heads; when, finding
      lawlessness pleasant, Hindus and Mahomedans together raised an aimless
      sort of Donnybrook just to see how far they could go. They looted each
      other's shops, and paid off private grudges in the regular way. It was a
      nasty little riot, but not worth putting in the newspapers.
    

      Michele was working in his office when he heard the sound that a man never
      forgets all his life—the “ah-yah” of an angry crowd.
    

      [When that sound drops about three tones, and changes to a thick, droning
      ut, the man who hears it had better go away if he is alone.] The Native
      Police Inspector ran in and told Michele that the town was in an uproar
      and coming to wreck the Telegraph Office.
    

      The Babu put on his cap and quietly dropped out of the window; while the
      Police Inspector, afraid, but obeying the old race-instinct which
      recognizes a drop of White blood as far as it can be diluted, said:—“What
      orders does the Sahib give?”
     

      The “Sahib” decided Michele. Though horribly frightened, he felt that, for
      the hour, he, the man with the Cochin Jew and the menial uncle in his
      pedigree, was the only representative of English authority in the place.
      Then he thought of Miss Vezzis and the fifty rupees, and took the
      situation on himself. There were seven native policemen in Tibasu, and
      four crazy smooth-bore muskets among them. All the men were gray with
      fear, but not beyond leading. Michele dropped the key of the telegraph
      instrument, and went out, at the head of his army, to meet the mob. As the
      shouting crew came round a corner of the road, he dropped and fired; the
      men behind him loosing instinctively at the same time.
    

      The whole crowd—curs to the backbone—yelled and ran; leaving
      one man dead, and another dying in the road. Michele was sweating with
      fear, but he kept his weakness under, and went down into the town, past
      the house where the Sub-Judge had barricaded himself. The streets were
      empty. Tibasu was more frightened than Michele, for the mob had been taken
      at the right time.
    

      Michele returned to the Telegraph-Office, and sent a message to Chicacola
      asking for help. Before an answer came, he received a deputation of the
      elders of Tibasu, telling him that the Sub-Judge said his actions
      generally were “unconstitional,” and trying to bully him. But the heart of
      Michele D'Cruze was big and white in his breast, because of his love for
      Miss Vezzis, the nurse-girl, and because he had tasted for the first time
      Responsibility and Success. Those two make an intoxicating drink, and have
      ruined more men than ever has Whiskey. Michele answered that the Sub-Judge
      might say what he pleased, but, until the Assistant Collector came, the
      Telegraph Signaller was the Government of India in Tibasu, and the elders
      of the town would be held accountable for further rioting. Then they bowed
      their heads and said: “Show mercy!” or words to that effect, and went back
      in great fear; each accusing the other of having begun the rioting.
    

      Early in the dawn, after a night's patrol with his seven policemen,
      Michele went down the road, musket in hand, to meet the Assistant
      Collector, who had ridden in to quell Tibasu. But, in the presence of this
      young Englishman, Michele felt himself slipping back more and more into
      the native, and the tale of the Tibasu Riots ended, with the strain on the
      teller, in an hysterical outburst of tears, bred by sorrow that he had
      killed a man, shame that he could not feel as uplifted as he had felt
      through the night, and childish anger that his tongue could not do justice
      to his great deeds. It was the White drop in Michele's veins dying out,
      though he did not know it.
    

      But the Englishman understood; and, after he had schooled those men of
      Tibasu, and had conferred with the Sub-Judge till that excellent official
      turned green, he found time to draught an official letter describing the
      conduct of Michele. Which letter filtered through the Proper Channels, and
      ended in the transfer of Michele up-country once more, on the Imperial
      salary of sixty-six rupees a month.
    

      So he and Miss Vezzis were married with great state and ancientry; and now
      there are several little D'Cruzes sprawling about the verandahs of the
      Central Telegraph Office.
    

      But, if the whole revenue of the Department he serves were to be his
      reward Michele could never, never repeat what he did at Tibasu for the
      sake of Miss Vezzis the nurse-girl.
    

      Which proves that, when a man does good work out of all proportion to his
      pay, in seven cases out of nine there is a woman at the back of the
      virtue.
    

      The two exceptions must have suffered from sunstroke.