HOW TO TELL A STORY

 The Humorous Story an American Development.—Its Difference from
      Comic and Witty Stories

 I do not claim that I can tell a story as it ought to be told. I only
      claim to know how a story ought to be told, for I have been almost daily
      in the company of the most expert story-tellers for many years.

 There are several kinds of stories, but only one difficult kind—the
      humorous. I will talk mainly about that one. The humorous story is
      American, the comic story is English, the witty story is French. The
      humorous story depends for its effect upon the manner of the
      telling; the comic story and the witty story upon the matter .

 The humorous story may be spun out to great length, and may wander around
      as much as it pleases, and arrive nowhere in particular; but the comic and
      witty stories must be brief and end with a point. The humorous story
      bubbles gently along, the others burst.

 The humorous story is strictly a work of art—high and delicate art—and
      only an artist can tell it; but no art is necessary in telling the comic
      and the witty story; anybody can do it. The art of telling a humorous
      story—understand, I mean by word of mouth, not print—was
      created in America, and has remained at home.

 The humorous story is told gravely; the teller does his best to conceal
      the fact that he even dimly suspects that there is anything funny about
      it; but the teller of the comic story tells you beforehand that it is one
      of the funniest things he has ever heard, then tells it with eager
      delight, and is the first person to laugh when he gets through. And
      sometimes, if he has had good success, he is so glad and happy that he
      will repeat the “nub” of it and glance around from face to face,
      collecting applause, and then repeat it again. It is a pathetic thing to
      see.

 Very often, of course, the rambling and disjointed humorous story finishes
      with a nub, point, snapper, or whatever you like to call it. Then the
      listener must be alert, for in many cases the teller will divert attention
      from that nub by dropping it in a carefully casual and indifferent way,
      with the pretense that he does not know it is a nub.

 Artemus Ward used that trick a good deal; then when the belated audience
      presently caught the joke he would look up with innocent surprise, as if
      wondering what they had found to laugh at. Dan Setchell used it before
      him, Nye and Riley and others use it today.

 But the teller of the comic story does not slur the nub; he shouts it at
      you—every time. And when he prints it, in England, France, Germany,
      and Italy, he italicizes it, puts some whopping exclamation-points after
      it, and sometimes explains it in a parenthesis. All of which is very
      depressing, and makes one want to renounce joking and lead a better life.

 Let me set down an instance of the comic method, using an anecdote which
      has been popular all over the world for twelve or fifteen hundred years.
      The teller tells it in this way:

 THE WOUNDED SOLDIER

 In the course of a certain battle a soldier whose leg had been shot off
      appealed to another soldier who was hurrying by to carry him to the rear,
      informing him at the same time of the loss which he had sustained;
      whereupon the generous son of Mars, shouldering the unfortunate, proceeded
      to carry out his desire. The bullets and cannon-balls were flying in all
      directions, and presently one of the latter took the wounded man's head
      off—without, however, his deliverer being aware of it. In no long
      time he was hailed by an officer, who said:

 “Where are you going with that carcass?”

 “To the rear, sir—he's lost his leg!”

 “His leg, forsooth?” responded the astonished officer; “you mean his head,
      you booby.”

 Whereupon the soldier dispossessed himself of his burden, and stood
      looking down upon it in great perplexity. At length he said:

 “It is true, sir, just as you have said.” Then after a pause he added,
      “But he TOLD me IT WAS HIS LEG!!!!!”

 Here the narrator bursts into explosion after explosion of thunderous
      horse-laughter, repeating that nub from time to time through his gasping
      and shriekings and suffocatings.

 It takes only a minute and a half to tell that in its comic-story form;
      and isn't worth the telling, after all. Put into the humorous-story form
      it takes ten minutes, and is about the funniest thing I have ever listened
      to—as James Whitcomb Riley tells it.

 He tells it in the character of a dull-witted old farmer who has just
      heard it for the first time, thinks it is unspeakably funny, and is trying
      to repeat it to a neighbor. But he can't remember it; so he gets all mixed
      up and wanders helplessly round and round, putting in tedious details that
      don't belong in the tale and only retard it; taking them out
      conscientiously and putting in others that are just as useless; making
      minor mistakes now and then and stopping to correct them and explain how
      he came to make them; remembering things which he forgot to put in in
      their proper place and going back to put them in there; stopping his
      narrative a good while in order to try to recall the name of the soldier
      that was hurt, and finally remembering that the soldier's name was not
      mentioned, and remarking placidly that the name is of no real importance,
      anyway—better, of course, if one knew it, but not essential, after
      all—and so on, and so on, and so on.

 The teller is innocent and happy and pleased with himself, and has to stop
      every little while to hold himself in and keep from laughing outright; and
      does hold in, but his body quakes in a jelly-like way with interior
      chuckles; and at the end of the ten minutes the audience have laughed
      until they are exhausted, and the tears are running down their faces.

 The simplicity and innocence and sincerity and unconsciousness of the old
      farmer are perfectly simulated, and the result is a performance which is
      thoroughly charming and delicious. This is art—and fine and
      beautiful, and only a master can compass it; but a machine could tell the
      other story.

 To string incongruities and absurdities together in a wandering and
      sometimes purposeless way, and seem innocently unaware that they are
      absurdities, is the basis of the American art, if my position is correct.
      Another feature is the slurring of the point. A third is the dropping of a
      studied remark apparently without knowing it, as if one where thinking
      aloud. The fourth and last is the pause.

 Artemus Ward dealt in numbers three and four a good deal. He would begin
      to tell with great animation something which he seemed to think was
      wonderful; then lose confidence, and after an apparently absent-minded
      pause add an incongruous remark in a soliloquizing way; and that was the
      remark intended to explode the mine—and it did.

 For instance, he would say eagerly, excitedly, “I once knew a man in New
      Zealand who hadn't a tooth in his head”—here his animation would die
      out; a silent, reflective pause would follow, then he would say dreamily,
      and as if to himself, “and yet that man could beat a drum better than any
      man I ever saw.”

 The pause is an exceedingly important feature in any kind of story, and a
      frequently recurring feature, too. It is a dainty thing, and delicate, and
      also uncertain and treacherous; for it must be exactly the right length—no
      more and no less—or it fails of its purpose and makes trouble. If
      the pause is too short the impressive point is passed, and the audience
      have had time to divine that a surprise is intended—and then you
      can't surprise them, of course.

 On the platform I used to tell a negro ghost story that had a pause in
      front of the snapper on the end, and that pause was the most important
      thing in the whole story. If I got it the right length precisely, I could
      spring the finishing ejaculation with effect enough to make some
      impressible girl deliver a startled little yelp and jump out of her seat—and
      that was what I was after. This story was called “The Golden Arm,” and was
      told in this fashion. You can practice with it yourself—and mind you
      look out for the pause and get it right.

 THE GOLDEN ARM

 Once 'pon a time dey wuz a monsus mean man, en he live 'way out in de
      prairie all 'lone by hisself, 'cep'n he had a wife. En bimeby she died, en
      he tuck en toted her way out dah in de prairie en buried her. Well, she
      had a golden arm—all solid gold, fum de shoulder down. He wuz
      pow'ful mean—pow'ful; en dat night he couldn't sleep, caze he want
      dat golden arm so bad.

 When it come midnight he couldn't stan' it no mo'; so he git up, he did,
      en tuck his lantern en shoved out thoo de storm en dug her up en got de
      golden arm; en he bent his head down 'gin de win', en plowed en plowed en
      plowed thoo de snow. Den all on a sudden he stop (make a considerable
      pause here, and look startled, and take a listening attitude) en say: “My lan' , what's dat?”

 En he listen—en listen—en de win' say (set your teeth together
      and imitate the wailing and wheezing singsong of the wind), “Bzzz-z-zzz”—en
      den, way back yonder whah de grave is, he hear a voice !—he
      hear a voice all mix' up in de win'—can't hardly tell 'em 'part—
      “Bzzz—zzz—W-h-o—g-o-t—m-y—g-o-l-d-e-n arm? ”
       (You must begin to shiver violently now.)

 En he begin to shiver en shake, en say, “Oh, my! Oh , my lan'!” en
      de win' blow de lantern out, en de snow en sleet blow in his face en mos'
      choke him, en he start a-plowin' knee-deep toward home mos' dead, he so
      sk'yerd—en pooty soon he hear de voice agin, en (pause) it 'us comin after him! “Bzzz—zzz—zzz W-h-o—g-o-t—m-y—g-o-l-d-e-n— arm ?”

 When he git to de pasture he hear it agin—closter now, en a-comin'! —a-comin'
      back dah in de dark en de storm—(repeat the wind and the voice).
      When he git to de house he rush upstairs en jump in de bed en kiver up,
      head and years, en lay da shiverin' en shakin'—en den way out dah he
      hear it agin! —en a- comin' ! En bimeby he hear (pause—awed,
      listening attitude)—pat—pat—pat Hit's a-comin'
      upstairs! Den he hear de latch, en he know it's in de room!

 Den pooty soon he know it's a- stannin' by de bed! (Pause.) Den—he
      know it's a- bendin' down over him —en he cain't skasely git
      his breath! Den—den—he seem to feel someth'n' c-o-l-d ,
      right down 'most agin his head! (Pause.)

 Den de voice say, right at his year —“W-h-o—g-o-t—m-y
      g-o-l-d-e-n arm? ” (You must wail it out very plaintively and
      accusingly; then you stare steadily and impressively into the face of the
      farthest-gone auditor—a girl, preferably—and let that
      awe-inspiring pause begin to build itself in the deep hush. When it has
      reached exactly the right length, jump suddenly at that girl and yell, “ You've got it!”)

 If you've got the pause right, she'll fetch a dear little yelp and
      spring right out of her shoes. But you must get the pause right;
      and you will find it the most troublesome and aggravating and uncertain
      thing you ever undertook.