HUNTING THE DECEITFUL TURKEY

 When I was a boy my uncle and his big boys hunted with the rifle, the
      youngest boy Fred and I with a shotgun—a small single-barrelled
      shotgun which was properly suited to our size and strength; it was not
      much heavier than a broom. We carried it turn about, half an hour at a
      time. I was not able to hit anything with it, but I liked to try. Fred and
      I hunted feathered small game, the others hunted deer, squirrels, wild
      turkeys, and such things. My uncle and the big boys were good shots. They
      killed hawks and wild geese and such like on the wing; and they didn't
      wound or kill squirrels, they stunned them. When the dogs treed a
      squirrel, the squirrel would scamper aloft and run out on a limb and
      flatten himself along it, hoping to make himself invisible in that way—and
      not quite succeeding. You could see his wee little ears sticking up. You
      couldn't see his nose, but you knew where it was. Then the hunter,
      despising a “rest” for his rifle, stood up and took offhand aim at the
      limb and sent a bullet into it immediately under the squirrel's nose, and
      down tumbled the animal, unwounded, but unconscious; the dogs gave him a
      shake and he was dead. Sometimes when the distance was great and the wind
      not accurately allowed for, the bullet would hit the squirrel's head; the
      dogs could do as they pleased with that one—the hunter's pride was
      hurt, and he wouldn't allow it to go into the gamebag.

 In the first faint gray of the dawn the stately wild turkeys would be
      stalking around in great flocks, and ready to be sociable and answer
      invitations to come and converse with other excursionists of their kind.
      The hunter concealed himself and imitated the turkey-call by sucking the
      air through the leg-bone of a turkey which had previously answered a call
      like that and lived only just long enough to regret it. There is nothing
      that furnishes a perfect turkey-call except that bone. Another of Nature's
      treacheries, you see. She is full of them; half the time she doesn't know
      which she likes best—to betray her child or protect it. In the case
      of the turkey she is badly mixed: she gives it a bone to be used in
      getting it into trouble, and she also furnishes it with a trick for
      getting itself out of the trouble again. When a mamma-turkey answers an
      invitation and finds she has made a mistake in accepting it, she does as
      the mamma-partridge does—remembers a previous engagement—and
      goes limping and scrambling away, pretending to be very lame; and at the
      same time she is saying to her not-visible children, “Lie low, keep still,
      don't expose yourselves; I shall be back as soon as I have beguiled this
      shabby swindler out of the country.”

 When a person is ignorant and confiding, this immoral device can have
      tiresome results. I followed an ostensibly lame turkey over a considerable
      part of the United States one morning, because I believed in her and could
      not think she would deceive a mere boy, and one who was trusting her and
      considering her honest. I had the single-barrelled shotgun, but my idea
      was to catch her alive. I often got within rushing distance of her, and
      then made my rush; but always, just as I made my final plunge and put my
      hand down where her back had been, it wasn't there; it was only two or
      three inches from there and I brushed the tail-feathers as I landed on my
      stomach—a very close call, but still not quite close enough; that
      is, not close enough for success, but just close enough to convince me
      that I could do it next time. She always waited for me, a little piece
      away, and let on to be resting and greatly fatigued; which was a lie, but
      I believed it, for I still thought her honest long after I ought to have
      begun to doubt her, suspecting that this was no way for a high-minded bird
      to be acting. I followed, and followed, and followed, making my periodical
      rushes, and getting up and brushing the dust off, and resuming the voyage
      with patient confidence; indeed, with a confidence which grew, for I could
      see by the change of climate and vegetation that we were getting up into
      the high latitudes, and as she always looked a little tireder and a little
      more discouraged after each rush, I judged that I was safe to win, in the
      end, the competition being purely a matter of staying power and the
      advantage lying with me from the start because she was lame.

 Along in the afternoon I began to feel fatigued myself. Neither of us had
      had any rest since we first started on the excursion, which was upwards of
      ten hours before, though latterly we had paused awhile after rushes, I
      letting on to be thinking about something else; but neither of us sincere,
      and both of us waiting for the other to call game but in no real hurry
      about it, for indeed those little evanescent snatches of rest were very
      grateful to the feelings of us both; it would naturally be so, skirmishing
      along like that ever since dawn and not a bite in the meantime; at least
      for me, though sometimes as she lay on her side fanning herself with a
      wing and praying for strength to get out of this difficulty a grasshopper
      happened along whose time had come, and that was well for her, and
      fortunate, but I had nothing—nothing the whole day.

 More than once, after I was very tired, I gave up taking her alive, and
      was going to shoot her, but I never did it, although it was my right, for
      I did not believe I could hit her; and besides, she always stopped and
      posed, when I raised the gun, and this made me suspicious that she knew
      about me and my marksmanship, and so I did not care to expose myself to
      remarks.

 I did not get her, at all. When she got tired of the game at last, she
      rose from almost under my hand and flew aloft with the rush and whir of a
      shell and lit on the highest limb of a great tree and sat down and crossed
      her legs and smiled down at me, and seemed gratified to see me so
      astonished.

 I was ashamed, and also lost; and it was while wandering the woods hunting
      for myself that I found a deserted log cabin and had one of the best meals
      there that in my life-days I have eaten. The weed-grown garden was full of
      ripe tomatoes, and I ate them ravenously, though I had never liked them
      before. Not more than two or three times since have I tasted anything that
      was so delicious as those tomatoes. I surfeited myself with them, and did
      not taste another one until I was in middle life. I can eat them now, but
      I do not like the look of them. I suppose we have all experienced a
      surfeit at one time or another. Once, in stress of circumstances, I ate
      part of a barrel of sardines, there being nothing else at hand, but since
      then I have always been able to get along without sardines.