IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE
    

   Hurrah! hurrah! a soldier's life for me!
   Shout, boys, shout! for it makes you jolly and free.
             —The Ramrod Corps.


      People who have seen, say that one of the quaintest spectacles of human
      frailty is an outbreak of hysterics in a girls' school. It starts without
      warning, generally on a hot afternoon among the elder pupils. A girl
      giggles till the giggle gets beyond control. Then she throws up her head,
      and cries, “Honk, honk, honk,” like a wild goose, and tears mix with the
      laughter. If the mistress be wise she will rap out something severe at
      this point to check matters. If she be tender-hearted, and send for a
      drink of water, the chances are largely in favor of another girl laughing
      at the afflicted one and herself collapsing. Thus the trouble spreads, and
      may end in half of what answers to the Lower Sixth of a boys' school
      rocking and whooping together. Given a week of warm weather, two stately
      promenades per diem, a heavy mutton and rice meal in the middle of the
      day, a certain amount of nagging from the teachers, and a few other
      things, some amazing effects develop. At least this is what folk say who
      have had experience.
    

      Now, the Mother Superior of a Convent and the Colonel of a British
      Infantry Regiment would be justly shocked at any comparison being made
      between their respective charges. But it is a fact that, under certain
      circumstances, Thomas in bulk can be worked up into dithering, rippling
      hysteria. He does not weep, but he shows his trouble unmistakably, and the
      consequences get into the newspapers, and all the good people who hardly
      know a Martini from a Snider say: “Take away the brute's ammunition!”
     

      Thomas isn't a brute, and his business, which is to look after the
      virtuous people, demands that he shall have his ammunition to his hand. He
      doesn't wear silk stockings, and he really ought to be supplied with a new
      Adjective to help him to express his opinions; but, for all that, he is a
      great man. If you call him “the heroic defender of the national honor” one
      day, and “a brutal and licentious soldiery” the next, you naturally
      bewilder him, and he looks upon you with suspicion. There is nobody to
      speak for Thomas except people who have theories to work off on him; and
      nobody understands Thomas except Thomas, and he does not always know what
      is the matter with himself.
    

      That is the prologue. This is the story:
    

      Corporal Slane was engaged to be married to Miss Jhansi M'Kenna, whose
      history is well known in the regiment and elsewhere. He had his Colonel's
      permission, and, being popular with the men, every arrangement had been
      made to give the wedding what Private Ortheris called “eeklar.” It fell in
      the heart of the hot weather, and, after the wedding, Slane was going up
      to the Hills with the Bride. None the less, Slane's grievance was that the
      affair would Be only a hired-carriage wedding, and he felt that the
      “eeklar” of that was meagre. Miss M'Kenna did not care so much. The
      Sergeant's wife was helping her to make her wedding-dress, and she was
      very busy. Slane was, just then, the only moderately contented man in
      barracks. All the rest were more or less miserable.
    

      And they had so much to make them happy, too. All their work was over at
      eight in the morning, and for the rest of the day they could lie on their
      backs and smoke Canteen-plug and swear at the punkah-coolies. They enjoyed
      a fine, full flesh meal in the middle of the day, and then threw
      themselves down on their cots and sweated and slept till it was cool
      enough to go out with their “towny,” whose vocabulary contained less than
      six hundred words, and the Adjective, and whose views on every conceivable
      question they had heard many times before.
    

      There was the Canteen, of course, and there was the Temperance Room with
      the second-hand papers in it; but a man of any profession cannot read for
      eight hours a day in a temperature of 96 degrees or 98 degrees in the
      shade, running up sometimes to 103 degrees at midnight. Very few men, even
      though they get a pannikin of flat, stale, muddy beer and hide it under
      their cots, can continue drinking for six hours a day. One man tried, but
      he died, and nearly the whole regiment went to his funeral because it gave
      them something to do. It was too early for the excitement of fever or
      cholera. The men could only wait and wait and wait, and watch the shadow
      of the barrack creeping across the blinding white dust. That was a gay
      life.
    

      They lounged about cantonments—it was too hot for any sort of game,
      and almost too hot for vice—and fuddled themselves in the evening,
      and filled themselves to distension with the healthy nitrogenous food
      provided for them, and the more they stoked the less exercise they took
      and more explosive they grew. Then tempers began to wear away, and men
      fell a-brooding over insults real or imaginary, for they had nothing else
      to think of. The tone of the repartees changed, and instead of saying
      light-heartedly: “I'll knock your silly face in,” men grew laboriously
      polite and hinted that the cantonments were not big enough for themselves
      and their enemy, and that there would be more space for one of the two in
      another place.
    

      It may have been the Devil who arranged the thing, but the fact of the
      case is that Losson had for a long time been worrying Simmons in an
      aimless way. It gave him occupation. The two had their cots side by side,
      and would sometimes spend a long afternoon swearing at each other; but
      Simmons was afraid of Losson and dared not challenge him to a fight. He
      thought over the words in the hot still nights, and half the hate he felt
      toward Losson be vented on the wretched punkah-coolie.
    

      Losson bought a parrot in the bazar, and put it into a little cage, and
      lowered the cage into the cool darkness of a well, and sat on the
      well-curb, shouting bad language down to the parrot. He taught it to say:
      “Simmons, ye so-oor,” which means swine, and several other things entirely
      unfit for publication. He was a big gross man, and he shook like a jelly
      when the parrot had the sentence correctly. Simmons, however, shook with
      rage, for all the room were laughing at him—the parrot was such a
      disreputable puff of green feathers and it looked so human when it
      chattered. Losson used to sit, swinging his fat legs, on the side of the
      cot, and ask the parrot what it thought of Simmons. The parrot would
      answer: “Simmons, ye so-oor.” “Good boy,” Losson used to say, scratching
      the parrot's head; “ye 'ear that, Sim?”
     

      And Simmons used to turn over on his stomach and make answer: “I 'ear.
      Take 'eed you don't 'ear something one of these days.”
     

      In the restless nights, after he had been asleep all day, fits of blind
      rage came upon Simmons and held him till he trembled all over, while he
      thought in how many different ways he would slay Losson. Sometimes he
      would picture himself trampling the life out of the man, with heavy
      ammunition-boots, and at others smashing in his face with the butt, and at
      others jumping on his shoulders and dragging the head back till the
      neckbone cracked. Then his mouth would feel hot and fevered, and he would
      reach out for another sup of the beer in the pannikin.
    

      But the fancy that came to him most frequently and stayed with him longest
      was one connected with the great roll of fat under Losson's right ear. He
      noticed it first on a moonlight night, and thereafter it was always before
      his eyes. It was a fascinating roll of fat. A man could get his hand upon
      it and tear away one side of the neck; or he could place the muzzle of a
      rifle on it and blow away all the head in a flash. Losson had no right to
      be sleek and contented and well-to-do, when he, Simmons, was the butt of
      the room, Some day, perhaps, he would show those who laughed at the
      “Simmons, ye so-oor” joke, that he was as good as the rest, and held a
      man's life in the crook of his forefinger. When Losson snored, Simmons
      hated him more bitterly than ever. Why should Losson be able to sleep when
      Simmons had to stay awake hour after hour, tossing and turning on the
      tapes, with the dull liver pain gnawing into his right side and his head
      throbbing and aching after Canteen? He thought over this for many nights,
      and the world became unprofitable to him. He even blunted his naturally
      fine appetite with beer and tobacco; and all the while the parrot talked
      at and made a mock of him.
    

      The heat continued and the tempers wore away more quickly than before. A
      Sergeant's wife died of heat-apoplexy in the night, and the rumor ran
      abroad that it was cholera. Men rejoiced openly, hoping that it would
      spread and send them into camp. But that was a false alarm.
    

      It was late on a Tuesday evening, and the men were waiting in the deep
      double verandas for “Last Posts,” when Simmons went to the box at the foot
      of his bed, took out his pipe, and slammed the lid down with a bang that
      echoed through the deserted barrack like the crack of a rifle. Ordinarily
      speaking, the men would have taken no notice; but their nerves were
      fretted to fiddle-strings. They jumped up, and three or four clattered
      into the barrack-room only to find Simmons kneeling by his box.
    

      “Owl It's you, is it?” they said and laughed foolishly. “We t h o u g h t
      'twas”—Simmons rose slowly. If the accident had so shaken his
      fellows, what would not the reality do?
    

      “You thought it was—did you? And what makes you think?” he said,
      lashing himself into madness as he went on; “to Hell with your thinking,
      ye dirty spies.”
     

      “Simmons, ye so-oor,” chuckled the parrot in the veranda, sleepily,
      recognizing a well-known voice. Now that was absolutely all.
    

      The tension snapped. Simmons fell back on the arm-rack deliberately,—the
      men were at the far end of the room,—and took out his rifle and
      packet of ammunition. “Don't go playing the goat, Sim!” said Losson. “Put
      it down,” but there was a quaver in his voice. Another man stooped,
      slipped his boot and hurled it at Simmons's head. The prompt answer was a
      shot which, fired at random, found its billet in Losson's throat. Losson
      fell forward without a word, and the others scattered.
    

      “You thought it was!” yelled Simmons. “You're drivin' me to it! I tell you
      you're drivin' me to it! Get up, Losson, an' don't lie shammin' there—you
      an' your blasted parrit that druv me to it!”
     

      But there was an unaffected reality about Losson's pose that showed
      Simmons what he had done. The men were still clamoring on the veranda.
      Simmons appropriated two more packets of ammunition and ran into the
      moonlight, muttering: “I'll make a night of it. Thirty roun's, an' the
      last for myself. Take you that, you dogs!”
     

      He dropped on one knee and fired into the brown of the men on the veranda,
      but the bullet flew high, and landed in the brickwork with a vicious phat
      that made some of the younger ones turn pale. It is, as musketry theorists
      observe, one thing to fire and another to be fired at.
    

      Then the instinct of the chase flared up. The news spread from barrack to
      barrack, and the men doubled out intent on the capture of Simmons, the
      wild beast, who was heading for the Cavalry parade-ground, stopping now
      and again to send back a shot and a curse in the direction of his
      pursuers.
    

      “I'll learn you to spy on me!” he shouted; “I'll learn you to give me
      dorg's names! Come on the 'ole lot o' you! Colonel John Anthony Deever,
      C.B.!”—he turned toward the Infantry Mess and shook his rifle—“you
      think yourself the devil of a man—but I tell you that if you put
      your ugly old carcass outside o' that door, I'll make you the
      poorest-lookin' man in the army. Come out, Colonel John Anthony Deever,
      C.B.! Come out and see me practiss on the rainge. I'm the crack shot of
      the 'ole bloomin' battalion.” In proof of which statement Simmons fired at
      the lighted windows of the mess-house.
    

      “Private Simmons, E Comp'ny, on the Cavalry p'rade-ground, Sir, with
      thirty rounds,” said a Sergeant breathlessly to the Colonel. “Shootin'
      right and lef', Sir. Shot Private Losson. What's to be done, Sir?”
     

      Colonel John Anthony Deever, C.B., sallied out, only to be saluted by s
      spurt of dust at his feet.
    

      “Pull up!” said the Second in Command; “I don't want my step in that way,
      Colonel. He's as dangerous as a mad dog.”
     

      “Shoot him like one, then,” said the Colonel, bitterly, “if he won't take
      his chance, My regiment, too! If it had been the Towheads I could have
      under stood.”
     

      Private Simmons had occupied a strong position near a well on the edge of
      the parade-ground, and was defying the regiment to come on. The regiment
      was not anxious to comply, for there is small honor in being shot by a
      fellow-private. Only Corporal Slane, rifle in band, threw himself down on
      the ground, and wormed his way toward the well.
    

      “Don't shoot,” said he to the men round him; “like as not you'll hit me.
      I'll catch the beggar, livin'.”
     

      Simmons ceased shouting for a while, and the noise of trap-wheels could be
      heard across the plain. Major Oldyn, commanding the Horse Battery, was
      coming back from a dinner in the Civil Lines; was driving after his usual
      custom—that is to say, as fast as the horse could go.
    

      “A orf'cer! A blooming spangled orf'cer,” shrieked Simmons; “I'll make a
      scarecrow of that orf'cer!” The trap stopped.
    

      “What's this?” demanded the Major of Gunners. “You there, drop your
      rifle.”
     

      “Why, it's Jerry Blazes! I ain't got no quarrel with you, Jerry Blazes.
      Pass frien', an' all's well!”
     

      But Jerry Blazes had not the faintest intention of passing a dangerous
      murderer. He was, as his adoring Battery swore long and fervently, without
      knowledge of fear, and they were surely the best judges, for Jerry Blazes,
      it was notorious, had done his possible to kill a man each time the
      Battery went out.
    

      He walked toward Simmons, with the intention of rushing him, and knocking
      him down.
    

      “Don't make me do it, Sir,” said Simmons; “I ain't got nothing agin you.
      Ah! you would?”—the Major broke into a run—“Take that then!”
     

      The Major dropped with a bullet through his shoulder, and Simmons stood
      over him. He had lost the satisfaction of killing Losson in the desired
      way: hut here was a helpless body to his hand. Should be slip in another
      cartridge, and blow off the head, or with the butt smash in the white
      face? He stopped to consider, and a cry went up from the far side of the
      parade-ground: “He's killed Jerry Blazes!” But in the shelter of the
      well-pillars Simmons was safe except when he stepped out to fire. “I'll
      blow yer 'andsome 'ead off, Jerry Blazes,” said Simmons, reflectively.
      “Six an' three is nine an one is ten, an' that leaves me another nineteen,
      an' one for myself.” He tugged at the string of the second packet of
      ammunition. Corporal Slane crawled out of the shadow of a bank into the
      moonlight.
    

      “I see you!” said Simmons. “Come a bit furder on an' I'll do for you.”
     

      “I'm comm',” said Corporal Slane, briefly; “you've done a bad day's work,
      Sim. Come out 'ere an' come back with me.”
     

      “Come to,”—laughed Simmons, sending a cartridge home with his thumb.
      “Not before I've settled you an' Jerry Blazes.”
     

      The Corporal was lying at full length in the dust of the parade-ground, a
      rifle under him. Some of the less-cautious men in the distance shouted:
      “Shoot 'im! Shoot 'im, Slane!”
     

      “You move 'and or foot, Slane,” said Simmons, “an' I'll kick Jerry Blazes'
      'ead in, and shoot you after.”
     

      “I ain't movin',” said the Corporal, raising his head; “you daren't 'it a
      man on 'is legs. Let go o' Jerry Blazes an' come out o' that with your
      fistes. Come an' 'it me. You daren't, you bloomin' dog-shooter!”
     

      “I dare.”
     

      “You lie, you man-sticker. You sneakin', Sheeny butcher, you lie. See
      there!” Slane kicked the rifle away, and stood up in the peril of his
      life. “Come on, now!”
     

      The temptation was more than Simmons could resist, for the Corporal in his
      white clothes offered a perfect mark.
    

      “Don't misname me,” shouted Simmons, firing as he spoke. The shot missed,
      and the shooter, blind with rage, threw his rifle down and rushed at Slane
      from the protection of the well. Within striking distance, he kicked
      savagely at Slane's stomach, but the weedy Corporal knew something of
      Simmons's weakness, and knew, too, the deadly guard for that kick. Bowing
      forward and drawing up his right leg till the heel of the right foot was
      set some three inches above the inside of the left knee-cap, he met the
      blow standing on one leg—exactly as Gonds stand when they meditate—and
      ready for the fall that would follow. There was an oath, the Corporal fell
      over his own left as shinbone met shinbone, and the Private collapsed, his
      right leg broken an inch above the ankle.
    

      “'Pity you don't know that guard, Sim,” said Slane, spitting out the dust
      as he rose. Then raising his voice, “Come an' take him orf. I've bruk 'is
      leg.” This was not strictly true, for the Private had accomplished his own
      downfall, since it is the special merit of that leg-guard that the harder
      the kick the greater the kicker's discomfiture.
    

      Slane walked to Jerry Blazes and hung over him with ostentatious anxiety,
      while Simmons, weeping with pain, was carried away. “'Ope you ain't 'urt
      badly, Sir,” said Slane. The Major had fainted, and there was an ugly,
      ragged hole through the top of his arm. Slane knelt down and murmured.
      “S'elp me, I believe 'e's dead. Well, if that ain't my blooming luck all
      over!”
     

      But the Major was destined to lead his Battery afield for many a long day
      with unshaken nerve. He was removed, and nursed and petted into
      convalescence, while the Battery discussed the wisdom of capturing
      Simmons, and blowing him from a gun. They idolized their Major, and his
      reappearance on parade brought about a scene nowhere provided for in the
      Army Regulations.
    

      Great, too, was the glory that fell to Slane's share. The Gunners would
      have made him drunk thrice a day for at least a fortnight. Even the
      Colonel of his own regiment complimented him upon his coolness, and the
      local paper called him a hero. These things did not puff him up. When the
      Major offered him money and thanks, the virtuous Corporal took the one and
      put aside the other. But he had a request to make and prefaced it with
      many a “Beg y'pardon, Sir.” Could the Major see his way to letting the
      Slane-M'Kenna wedding be adorned by the presence of four Battery horses to
      pull a hired barouche? The Major could, and so could the Battery.
      Excessively so. It was a gorgeous wedding.
    


      “Wot did I do it for?” said Corporal Slane. “For the 'orses O' course.
      Jhansi ain't a beauty to look at, but I wasn't goin' to 'ave a hired
      turn-out. Jerry Blazes? If I 'adn't 'a' wanted something, Sim might ha'
      blowed Jerry Blazes' blooming 'ead into Hirish stew for aught I'd 'a'
      cared.”
     

      And they hanged Private Simmons—hanged him as high as Haman in
      hollow square of the regiment; and the Colonel said it was Drink; and the
      Chaplain was sure it was the Devil; and Simmons fancied it was both, but
      he didn't know, and only hoped his fate would be a warning to his
      companions; and half a dozen “intelligent publicists” wrote six beautiful
      leading articles on “'The Prevalence of Crime in the Army.”
     

      But not a soul thought of comparing the “bloody-minded Simmons” to the
      squawking, gaping schoolgirl with which this story opens.