IN THE SPRING
    

      With the first day of spring, when the awakening earth puts on its garment
      of green, and the warm, fragrant air fans our faces and fills our lungs
      and appears even to penetrate to our hearts, we experience a vague,
      undefined longing for freedom, for happiness, a desire to run, to wander
      aimlessly, to breathe in the spring. The previous winter having been
      unusually severe, this spring feeling was like a form of intoxication in
      May, as if there were an overabundant supply of sap.
    

      One morning on waking I saw from my window the blue sky glowing in the sun
      above the neighboring houses. The canaries hanging in the windows were
      singing loudly, and so were the servants on every floor; a cheerful noise
      rose up from the streets, and I went out, my spirits as bright as the day,
      to go—I did not exactly know where. Everybody I met seemed to be
      smiling; an air of happiness appeared to pervade everything in the warm
      light of returning spring. One might almost have said that a breeze of
      love was blowing through the city, and the sight of the young women whom I
      saw in the streets in their morning toilets, in the depths of whose eyes
      there lurked a hidden tenderness, and who walked with languid grace,
      filled my heart with agitation.
    

      Without knowing how or why, I found myself on the banks of the Seine.
      Steamboats were starting for Suresnes, and suddenly I was seized by an
      unconquerable desire to take a walk through the woods. The deck of the
      Mouche was covered with passengers, for the sun in early spring draws one
      out of the house, in spite of themselves, and everybody moves about, goes
      and comes and talks to his neighbor.
    

      I had a girl neighbor; a little work-girl, no doubt, who possessed the
      true Parisian charm: a little head, with light curly hair, which looked
      like a shimmer of light as it danced in the wind, came down to her ears,
      and descended to the nape of her neck, where it became such fine,
      light-colored clown that one could scarcely see it, but felt an
      irresistible desire to shower kisses on it.
    

      Under my persistent gaze, she turned her head toward me, and then
      immediately looked down, while a slight crease at the side of her mouth,
      that was ready to break out into a smile, also showed a fine, silky, pale
      down which the sun was gilding a little.
    

      The calm river grew wider; the atmosphere was warm and perfectly still,
      but a murmur of life seemed to fill all space.
    

      My neighbor raised her eyes again, and this time, as I was still looking
      at her, she smiled decidedly. She was charming, and in her passing glance
      I saw a thousand things, which I had hitherto been ignorant of, for I
      perceived unknown depths, all the charm of tenderness, all the poetry
      which we dream of, all the happiness which we are continually in search
      of. I felt an insane longing to open my arms and to carry her off
      somewhere, so as to whisper the sweet music of words of love into her
      ears.
    

      I was just about to address her when somebody touched me on the shoulder,
      and as I turned round in some surprise, I saw an ordinary-looking man, who
      was neither young nor old, and who gazed at me sadly.
    

      “I should like to speak to you,” he said.
    

      I made a grimace, which he no doubt saw, for he added:
    

      “It is a matter of importance.”
    

      I got up, therefore, and followed him to the other end of the boat and
      then he said:
    

      “Monsieur, when winter comes, with its cold, wet and snowy weather,
      your doctor says to you constantly: 'Keep your feet warm, guard against
      chills, colds, bronchitis, rheumatism and pleurisy.'
    

      “Then you are very careful, you wear flannel, a heavy greatcoat and
      thick shoes, but all this does not prevent you from passing two months in
      bed. But when spring returns, with its leaves and flowers, its warm, soft
      breezes and its smell of the fields, all of which causes you vague
      disquiet and causeless emotion, nobody says to you:
    

      “'Monsieur, beware of love! It is lying in ambush everywhere; it is
      watching for you at every corner; all its snares are laid, all its weapons
      are sharpened, all its guiles are prepared! Beware of love! Beware of
      love! It is more dangerous than brandy, bronchitis or pleurisy! It never
      forgives and makes everybody commit irreparable follies.'
    

      “Yes, monsieur, I say that the French Government ought to put large
      public notices on the walls, with these words: 'Return of spring. French
      citizens, beware of love!' just as they put: 'Beware of paint:
    

      “However, as the government will not do this, I must supply its
      place, and I say to you: 'Beware of love!' for it is just going to seize
      you, and it is my duty to inform you of it, just as in Russia they inform
      any one that his nose is frozen.”
    

      I was much astonished at this individual, and assuming a dignified manner,
      I said:
    

      “Really, monsieur, you appear to me to be interfering in a matter
      which is no concern of yours.”
    

      He made an abrupt movement and replied:
    

      “Ah! monsieur, monsieur! If I see that a man is in danger of being
      drowned at a dangerous spot, ought I to let him perish? So just listen to
      my story and you will see why I ventured to speak to you like this.
    

      “It was about this time last year that it occurred. But, first of
      all, I must tell you that I am a clerk in the Admiralty, where our chiefs,
      the commissioners, take their gold lace as quill-driving officials
      seriously, and treat us like forecastle men on board a ship. Well, from my
      office I could see a small bit of blue sky and the swallows, and I felt
      inclined to dance among my portfolios.
    

      “My yearning for freedom grew so intense that, in spite of my
      repugnance, I went to see my chief, a short, bad-tempered man, who was
      always in a rage. When I told him that I was not well, he looked at me and
      said: 'I do not believe it, monsieur, but be off with you! Do you think
      that any office can go on with clerks like you?' I started at once and
      went down the Seine. It was a day like this, and I took the Mouche, to go
      as far as Saint Cloud. Ah! what a good thing it would have been if my
      chief had refused me permission to leave the office that day!
    

      “I seemed to myself to expand in the sun. I loved everything—the
      steamer, the river, the trees, the houses and my fellow-passengers. I felt
      inclined to kiss something, no matter what; it was love, laying its snare.
      Presently, at the Trocadero, a girl, with a small parcel in her hand, came
      on board and sat down opposite me. She was decidedly pretty, but it is
      surprising, monsieur, how much prettier women seem to us when the day is
      fine at the beginning of the spring. Then they have an intoxicating charm,
      something quite peculiar about them. It is just like drinking wine after
      cheese.
    

      “I looked at her and she also looked at me, but only occasionally,
      as that girl did at you, just now; but at last, by dint of looking at each
      other constantly, it seemed to me that we knew each other well enough to
      enter into conversation, and I spoke to her and she replied. She was
      decidedly pretty and nice and she intoxicated me, monsieur!
    

      “She got out at Saint-Cloud, and I followed her. She went and
      delivered her parcel, and when she returned the boat had just started. I
      walked by her side, and the warmth of the 'air made us both sigh. 'It
      would be very nice in the woods,' I said. 'Indeed, it would!' she replied.
      'Shall we go there for a walk, mademoiselie?'
    

      “She gave me a quick upward look, as if to see exactly what I was
      like, and then, after a little hesitation, she accepted my proposal, and
      soon we were there, walking side by side. Under the foliage, which was
      still rather scanty, the tall, thick, bright green grass was inundated by
      the sun, and the air was full of insects that were also making love to one
      another, and birds were singing in all directions. My companion began to
      jump and to run, intoxicated by the air and the smell of the country, and
      I ran and jumped, following her example. How silly we are at times,
      monsieur!
    

      “Then she sang unrestrainedly a thousand things, opera airs and the
      song of Musette! The song of Musette! How poetical it seemed to me, then!
      I almost cried over it. Ah! Those silly songs make us lose our heads; and,
      believe me, never marry a woman who sings in the country, especially if
      she sings the song of Musette!
    

      “She soon grew tired, and sat down on a grassy slope, and I sat at
      her feet and took her hands, her little hands, that were so marked with
      the needle, and that filled me with emotion. I said to myself:
    

      “'These are the sacred marks of toil.' Oh! monsieur, do you know
      what those sacred marks of toil mean? They mean all the gossip of the
      workroom, the whispered scandal, the mind soiled by all the filth that is
      talked; they mean lost chastity, foolish chatter, all the wretchedness of
      their everyday life, all the narrowness of ideas which belongs to women of
      the lower orders, combined to their fullest extent in the girl whose
      fingers bear the sacred marks of toil.
    

      “Then we looked into each other's eyes for a long while. Oh! what
      power a woman's eye has! How it agitates us, how it invades our very
      being, takes possession of us, and dominates us! How profound it seems,
      how full of infinite promises! People call that looking into each other's
      souls! Oh! monsieur, what humbug! If we could see into each other's souls,
      we should be more careful of what we did. However, I was captivated and
      was crazy about her and tried to take her into my arms, but she said:
      'Paws off!'. Then I knelt down and opened my heart to her and poured out
      all the affection that was suffocating me. She seemed surprised at my
      change of manner and gave me a sidelong glance, as if to say, 'Ah! so that
      is the way women make a fool of you, old fellow! Very well, we will see.'
    

      “In love, monsieur, we are always novices, and women artful dealers.
    

      “No doubt I could have had her, and I saw my own stupidity later,
      but what I wanted was not a woman's person, it was love, it was the ideal.
      I was sentimental, when I ought to have been using my time to a better
      purpose.
    

      “As soon as she had had enough of my declarations of affection, she
      got up, and we returned to Saint-Cloud, and I did not leave her until we
      got to Paris; but she had looked so sad as we were returning, that at last
      I asked her what was the matter. 'I am thinking,' she replied, 'that this
      has been one of those days of which we have but few in life.' My heart
      beat so that it felt as if it would break my ribs.
    

      “I saw her on the following Sunday, and the next Sunday, and every
      Sunday. I took her to Bougival, Saint-Germain, Maisons-Lafitte, Poissy; to
      every suburban resort of lovers.
    

      “The little jade, in turn, pretended to love me, until, at last, I
      altogether lost my head, and three months later I married her.
    

      “What can you expect, monsieur, when a man is a clerk, living alone,
      without any relations, or any one to advise him? One says to one's self:
      'How sweet life would be with a wife!'
    

      “And so one gets married and she calls you names from morning till
      night, understands nothing, knows nothing, chatters continually, sings the
      song of Musette at the, top of her voice (oh! that song of Musette, how
      tired one gets of it!); quarrels with the charcoal dealer, tells the
      janitor all her domestic details, confides all the secrets of her bedroom
      to the neighbor's servant, discusses her husband with the tradespeople and
      has her head so stuffed with stupid stories, with idiotic superstitions,
      with extraordinary ideas and monstrous prejudices, that I—for what I
      have said applies more particularly to myself—shed tears of
      discouragement every time I talk to her.”
    

      He stopped, as he was rather out of breath and very much moved, and I
      looked at him, for I felt pity for this poor, artless devil, and I was
      just going to give him some sort of answer, when the boat stopped. We were
      at Saint-Cloud.
    

      The little woman who had so taken my fancy rose from her seat in order to
      land. She passed close to me, and gave me a sidelong glance and a furtive
      smile, one of those smiles that drive you wild. Then she jumped on the
      landing-stage. I sprang forward to follow her, but my neighbor laid hold
      of my arm. I shook myself loose, however, whereupon he seized the skirt of
      my coat and pulled me back, exclaiming: “You shall not go! you shall
      not go!” in such a loud voice that everybody turned round and
      laughed, and I remained standing motionless and furious, but without
      venturing to face scandal and ridicule, and the steamboat started.
    

      The little woman on the landing-stage looked at me as I went off with an
      air of disappointment, while my persecutor rubbed his hands and whispered
      to me:
    

      “You must acknowledge that I have done you a great service.”