IN THE WOOD

 As the mayor was about to sit down to breakfast, word was brought to him
      that the rural policeman, with two prisoners, was awaiting him at the
      Hotel de Ville. He went there at once and found old Hochedur standing
      guard before a middle-class couple whom he was regarding with a severe
      expression on his face.

 The man, a fat old fellow with a red nose and white hair, seemed utterly
      dejected; while the woman, a little roundabout individual with shining
      cheeks, looked at the official who had arrested them, with defiant eyes.

 “What is it? What is it, Hochedur?”

 The rural policeman made his deposition: He had gone out that morning at
      his usual time, in order to patrol his beat from the forest of Champioux
      as far as the boundaries of Argenteuil. He had not noticed anything
      unusual in the country except that it was a fine day, and that the wheat
      was doing well, when the son of old Bredel, who was going over his vines,
      called out to him: “Here, Daddy Hochedur, go and have a look at the
      outskirts of the wood. In the first thicket you will find a pair of
      pigeons who must be a hundred and thirty years old between them!”

 He went in the direction indicated, entered the thicket, and there he
      heard words which made him suspect a flagrant breach of morality.
      Advancing, therefore, on his hands and knees as if to surprise a poacher,
      he had arrested the couple whom he found there.

 The mayor looked at the culprits in astonishment, for the man was
      certainly sixty, and the woman fifty-five at least, and he began to
      question them, beginning with the man, who replied in such a weak voice
      that he could scarcely be heard.

 “What is your name?”

 “Nicholas Beaurain.”

 “Your occupation?”

 “Haberdasher, in the Rue des Martyrs, in Paris.”

 “What were you doing in the wood?”

 The haberdasher remained silent, with his eyes on his fat paunch, and his
      hands hanging at his sides, and the mayor continued:

 “Do you deny what the officer of the municipal authorities states?”

 “No, monsieur.”

 “So you confess it?”

 “Yes, monsieur.”

 “What have you to say in your defence?”

 “Nothing, monsieur.”

 “Where did you meet the partner in your misdemeanor?”

 “She is my wife, monsieur.”

 “Your wife?”

 “Yes, monsieur.”

 “Then—then—you do not live together-in Paris?”

 “I beg your pardon, monsieur, but we are living together!”

 “But in that case—you must be mad, altogether mad, my dear
      sir, to get caught playing lovers in the country at ten o'clock in the
      morning.”

 The haberdasher seemed ready to cry with shame, and he muttered: “It
      was she who enticed me! I told her it was very stupid, but when a woman
      once gets a thing into her head—you know—you cannot get it
      out.”

 The mayor, who liked a joke, smiled and replied: “In your case, the
      contrary ought to have happened. You would not be here, if she had had the
      idea only in her head.”

 Then Monsieur Beauain was seized with rage and turning to his wife, he
      said: “Do you see to what you have brought us with your poetry? And
      now we shall have to go before the courts at our age, for a breach of
      morals! And we shall have to shut up the shop, sell our good will, and go
      to some other neighborhood! That's what it has come to.”

 Madame Beaurain got up, and without looking at her husband, she explained
      herself without embarrassment, without useless modesty, and almost without
      hesitation.

 “Of course, monsieur, I know that we have made ourselves ridiculous.
      Will you allow me to plead my cause like an advocate, or rather like a
      poor woman? And I hope that you will be kind enough to send us home, and
      to spare us the disgrace of a prosecution.

 “Years ago, when I was young, I made Monsieur Beaurain's
      acquaintance one Sunday in this neighborhood. He was employed in a
      draper's shop, and I was a saleswoman in a ready-made clothing
      establishment. I remember it as if it were yesterday. I used to come and
      spend Sundays here occasionally with a friend of mine, Rose Leveque, with
      whom I lived in the Rue Pigalle, and Rose had a sweetheart, while I had
      none. He used to bring us here, and one Saturday he told me laughing that
      he should bring a friend with him the next day. I quite understood what he
      meant, but I replied that it would be no good; for I was virtuous,
      monsieur.

 “The next day we met Monsieur Beaurain at the railway station, and
      in those days he was good-looking, but I had made up my mind not to
      encourage him, and I did not. Well, we arrived at Bezons. It was a lovely
      day, the sort of day that touches your heart. When it is fine even now,
      just as it used to be formerly, I grow quite foolish, and when I am in the
      country I utterly lose my head. The green grass, the swallows flying so
      swiftly, the smell of the grass, the scarlet poppies, the daisies, all
      that makes me crazy. It is like champagne when one is not accustomed to
      it!

 “Well, it was lovely weather, warm and bright, and it seemed to
      penetrate your body through your eyes when you looked and through your
      mouth when you breathed. Rose and Simon hugged and kissed each other every
      minute, and that gave me a queer feeling! Monsieur Beaurain and I walked
      behind them, without speaking much, for when people do not know each
      other, they do not find anything to talk about. He looked timid, and I
      liked to see his embarrassment. At last we got to the little wood; it was
      as cool as in a bath there, and we four sat down. Rose and her lover
      teased me because I looked rather stern, but you will understand that I
      could not be otherwise. And then they began to kiss and hug again, without
      putting any more restraint upon themselves than if we had not been there;
      and then they whispered together, and got up and went off among the trees,
      without saying a word. You may fancy what I looked like, alone with this
      young fellow whom I saw for the first time. I felt so confused at seeing
      them go that it gave me courage, and I began to talk. I asked him what his
      business was, and he said he was a linen draper's assistant, as I told you
      just now. We talked for a few minutes, and that made him bold, and he
      wanted to take liberties with me, but I told him sharply to keep his
      place. Is not that true, Monsieur Beaurain?”

 Monsieur Beaurain, who was looking at his feet in confusion, did not
      reply, and she continued: “Then he saw that I was virtuous, and he
      began to make love to me nicely, like an honorable man, and from that time
      he came every Sunday, for he was very much in love with me. I was very
      fond of him also, very fond of him! He was a good-looking fellow,
      formerly, and in short he married me the next September, and we started in
      business in the Rue des Martyrs.

 “It was a hard struggle for some years, monsieur. Business did not
      prosper, and we could not afford many country excursions, and, besides, we
      had got out of the way of them. One has other things in one's head, and
      thinks more of the cash box than of pretty speeches, when one is in
      business. We were growing old by degrees without perceiving it, like quiet
      people who do not think much about love. One does not regret anything as
      long as one does not notice what one has lost.

 “And then, monsieur, business became better, and we were tranquil as
      to the future! Then, you see, I do not exactly know what went on in my
      mind, no, I really do not know, but I began to dream like a little
      boarding-school girl. The sight of the little carts full of flowers which
      are drawn about the streets made me cry; the smell of violets sought me
      out in my easy-chair, behind my cash box, and made my heart beat! Then I
      would get up and go out on the doorstep to look at the blue sky between
      the roofs. When one looks up at the sky from the street, it looks like a
      river which is descending on Paris, winding as it flows, and the swallows
      pass to and fro in it like fish. These ideas are very stupid at my age!
      But how can one help it, monsieur, when one has worked all one's life? A
      moment comes in which one perceives that one could have done something
      else, and that one regrets, oh! yes, one feels intense regret! Just think,
      for twenty years I might have gone and had kisses in the woods, like other
      women. I used to think how delightful it would be to lie under the trees
      and be in love with some one! And I thought of it every day and every
      night! I dreamed of the moonlight on the water, until I felt inclined to
      drown myself.

 “I did not venture to speak to Monsieur Beaurain about this at
      first. I knew that he would make fun of me, and send me back to sell my
      needles and cotton! And then, to speak the truth, Monsieur Beaurain never
      said much to me, but when I looked in the glass, I also understood quite
      well that I no longer appealed to any one!

 “Well, I made up my mind, and I proposed to him an excursion into
      the country, to the place where we had first become acquainted. He agreed
      without mistrusting anything, and we arrived here this morning, about nine
      o'clock.

 “I felt quite young again when I got among the wheat, for a woman's
      heart never grows old! And really, I no longer saw my husband as he is at
      present, but just as he was formerly! That I will swear to you, monsieur.
      As true as I am standing here I was crazy. I began to kiss him, and he was
      more surprised than if I had tried to murder him. He kept saying to me:
      'Why, you must be mad! You are mad this morning! What is the matter with
      you?' I did not listen to him, I only listened to my own heart, and I made
      him come into the wood with me. That is all. I have spoken the truth,
      Monsieur le Maire, the whole truth.”

 The mayor was a sensible man. He rose from his chair, smiled, and said:
      “Go in peace, madame, and when you again visit our forests, be more
      discreet.”