IN THE COACH-HOUSE
    

IT was between nine
      and ten o’clock in the evening. Stepan the coachman, Mihailo the
      house-porter, Alyoshka the coachman’s grandson, who had come up from
      the village to stay with his grandfather, and Nikandr, an old man of
      seventy, who used to come into the yard every evening to sell salt
      herrings, were sitting round a lantern in the big coach-house, playing
      “kings.” Through the wide-open door could be seen the whole
      yard, the big house, where the master’s family lived, the gates, the
      cellars, and the porter’s lodge. It was all shrouded in the darkness
      of night, and only the four windows of one of the lodges which was let
      were brightly lit up. The shadows of the coaches and sledges with their
      shafts tipped upwards stretched from the walls to the doors, quivering and
      cutting across the shadows cast by the lantern and the players.... On the
      other side of the thin partition that divided the coach-house from the
      stable were the horses. There was a scent of hay, and a disagreeable smell
      of salt herrings coming from old Nikandr.
    

      The porter won and was king; he assumed an attitude such as was in his
      opinion befitting a king, and blew his nose loudly on a red-checked
      handkerchief.
    

      “Now if I like I can chop off anybody’s head,” he said.
      Alyoshka, a boy of eight with a head of flaxen hair, left long uncut, who
      had only missed being king by two tricks, looked angrily and with envy at
      the porter. He pouted and frowned.
    

      “I shall give you the trick, grandfather,” he said, pondering
      over his cards; “I know you have got the queen of diamonds.”
    

      “Well, well, little silly, you have thought enough!”
    

      Alyoshka timidly played the knave of diamonds. At that moment a ring was
      heard from the yard.
    

      “Oh, hang you!” muttered the porter, getting up. “Go and
      open the gate, O king!”
    

      When he came back a little later, Alyoshka was already a prince, the
      fish-hawker a soldier, and the coachman a peasant.
    

      “It’s a nasty business,” said the porter, sitting down
      to the cards again. “I have just let the doctors out. They have not
      extracted it.”
    

      “How could they? Just think, they would have to pick open the
      brains. If there is a bullet in the head, of what use are doctors?”
    

      “He is lying unconscious,” the porter went on. “He is
      bound to die. Alyoshka, don’t look at the cards, you little puppy,
      or I will pull your ears! Yes, I let the doctors out, and the father and
      mother in... They have only just arrived. Such crying and wailing, Lord
      preserve us! They say he is the only son.... It’s a grief!”
    

      All except Alyoshka, who was absorbed in the game, looked round at the
      brightly lighted windows of the lodge.
    

      “I have orders to go to the police station tomorrow,” said the
      porter. “There will be an inquiry... But what do I know about it? I
      saw nothing of it. He called me this morning, gave me a letter, and said:
      ‘Put it in the letter-box for me.’ And his eyes were red with
      crying. His wife and children were not at home. They had gone out for a
      walk. So when I had gone with the letter, he put a bullet into his
      forehead from a revolver. When I came back his cook was wailing for the
      whole yard to hear.”
    

      “It’s a great sin,” said the fish-hawker in a husky
      voice, and he shook his head, “a great sin!”
    

      “From too much learning,” said the porter, taking a trick;
      “his wits outstripped his wisdom. Sometimes he would sit writing
      papers all night.... Play, peasant!... But he was a nice gentleman. And so
      white skinned, black-haired and tall!... He was a good lodger.”
    

      “It seems the fair sex is at the bottom of it,” said the
      coachman, slapping the nine of trumps on the king of diamonds. “It
      seems he was fond of another man’s wife and disliked his own; it
      does happen.”
    

      “The king rebels,” said the porter.
    

      At that moment there was again a ring from the yard. The rebellious king
      spat with vexation and went out. Shadows like dancing couples flitted
      across the windows of the lodge. There was the sound of voices and hurried
      footsteps in the yard.
    

      “I suppose the doctors have come again,” said the coachman.
      “Our Mihailo is run off his legs....”
    

      A strange wailing voice rang out for a moment in the air. Alyoshka looked
      in alarm at his grandfather, the coachman; then at the windows, and said:
    

      “He stroked me on the head at the gate yesterday, and said, ‘What
      district do you come from, boy?’ Grandfather, who was that howled
      just now?”
    

      His grandfather trimmed the light in the lantern and made no answer.
    

      “The man is lost,” he said a little later, with a yawn.
      “He is lost, and his children are ruined, too. It’s a disgrace
      for his children for the rest of their lives now.”
    

      The porter came back and sat down by the lantern.
    

      “He is dead,” he said. “They have sent to the almshouse
      for the old women to lay him out.”
    

      “The kingdom of heaven and eternal peace to him!” whispered
      the coachman, and he crossed himself.
    

      Looking at him, Alyoshka crossed himself too.
    

      “You can’t pray for such as him,” said the fish-hawker.
    

      “Why not?”
    

      “It’s a sin.”
    

      “That’s true,” the porter assented. “Now his soul
      has gone straight to hell, to the devil....”
    

      “It’s a sin,” repeated the fish-hawker; “such as
      he have no funeral, no requiem, but are buried like carrion with no
      respect.”
    

      The old man put on his cap and got up.
    

      “It was the same thing at our lady’s,” he said, pulling
      his cap on further. “We were serfs in those days; the younger son of
      our mistress, the General’s lady, shot himself through the mouth
      with a pistol, from too much learning, too. It seems that by law such have
      to be buried outside the cemetery, without priests, without a requiem
      service; but to save disgrace our lady, you know, bribed the police and
      the doctors, and they gave her a paper to say her son had done it when
      delirious, not knowing what he was doing. You can do anything with money.
      So he had a funeral with priests and every honor, the music played, and he
      was buried in the church; for the deceased General had built that church
      with his own money, and all his family were buried there. Only this is
      what happened, friends. One month passed, and then another, and it was all
      right. In the third month they informed the General’s lady that the
      watchmen had come from that same church. What did they want? They were
      brought to her, they fell at her feet. ‘We can’t go on
      serving, your excellency,’ they said. ‘Look out for other
      watchmen and graciously dismiss us.’ ‘What for?’ ‘No,’
      they said, ‘we can’t possibly; your son howls under the church
      all night.’”
    

      Alyoshka shuddered, and pressed his face to the coachman’s back so
      as not to see the windows.
    

      “At first the General’s lady would not listen,”
      continued the old man. “‘All this is your fancy, you simple
      folk have such notions,’ she said. ‘A dead man cannot howl.’
      Some time afterwards the watchmen came to her again, and with them the
      sacristan. So the sacristan, too, had heard him howling. The General’s
      lady saw that it was a bad job; she locked herself in her bedroom with the
      watchmen. ‘Here, my friends, here are twenty-five roubles for you,
      and for that go by night in secret, so that no one should hear or see you,
      dig up my unhappy son, and bury him,’ she said, ‘outside the
      cemetery.’ And I suppose she stood them a glass... And the watchmen
      did so. The stone with the inscription on it is there to this day, but he
      himself, the General’s son, is outside the cemetery.... O Lord,
      forgive us our transgressions!” sighed the fish-hawker. “There
      is only one day in the year when one may pray for such people: the
      Saturday before Trinity.... You mustn’t give alms to beggars for
      their sake, it is a sin, but you may feed the birds for the rest of their
      souls. The General’s lady used to go out to the crossroads every
      three days to feed the birds. Once at the cross-roads a black dog suddenly
      appeared; it ran up to the bread, and was such a... we all know what that
      dog was. The General’s lady was like a half-crazy creature for five
      days afterwards, she neither ate nor drank.... All at once she fell on her
      knees in the garden, and prayed and prayed.... Well, good-by, friends, the
      blessing of God and the Heavenly Mother be with you. Let us go, Mihailo,
      you’ll open the gate for me.”
    

      The fish-hawker and the porter went out. The coachman and Alyoshka went
      out too, so as not to be left in the coach-house.
    

      “The man was living and is dead!” said the coachman, looking
      towards the windows where shadows were still flitting to and fro. “Only
      this morning he was walking about the yard, and now he is lying dead.”
    

      “The time will come and we shall die too,” said the porter,
      walking away with the fish-hawker, and at once they both vanished from
      sight in the darkness.
    

      The coachman, and Alyoshka after him, somewhat timidly went up to the
      lighted windows. A very pale lady with large tear stained eyes, and a
      fine-looking gray headed man were moving two card-tables into the middle
      of the room, probably with the intention of laying the dead man upon them,
      and on the green cloth of the table numbers could still be seen written in
      chalk. The cook who had run about the yard wailing in the morning was now
      standing on a chair, stretching up to try and cover the looking glass with
      a towel.
    

      “Grandfather what are they doing?” asked Alyoshka in a
      whisper.
    

      “They are just going to lay him on the tables,” answered his
      grandfather. “Let us go, child, it is bedtime.”
    

      The coachman and Alyoshka went back to the coach-house. They said their
      prayers, and took off their boots. Stepan lay down in a corner on the
      floor, Alyoshka in a sledge. The doors of the coach house were shut, there
      was a horrible stench from the extinguished lantern. A little later
      Alyoshka sat up and looked about him; through the crack of the door he
      could still see a light from those lighted windows.
    

      “Grandfather, I am frightened!” he said.
    

      “Come, go to sleep, go to sleep!...”
    

      “I tell you I am frightened!”
    

      “What are you frightened of? What a baby!”
    

      They were silent.
    

      Alyoshka suddenly jumped out of the sledge and, loudly weeping, ran to his
      grandfather.
    

      “What is it? What’s the matter?” cried the coachman in a
      fright, getting up also.
    

      “He’s howling!”
    

      “Who is howling?”
    

      “I am frightened, grandfather, do you hear?”
    

      The coachman listened.
    

      “It’s their crying,” he said. “Come! there, little
      silly! They are sad, so they are crying.”
    

      “I want to go home,...” his grandson went on sobbing and
      trembling all over. “Grandfather, let us go back to the village, to
      mammy; come, grandfather dear, God will give you the heavenly kingdom for
      it....”
    

      “What a silly, ah! Come, be quiet, be quiet! Be quiet, I will light
      the lantern,... silly!”
    

      The coachman fumbled for the matches and lighted the lantern. But the
      light did not comfort Alyoshka.
    

      “Grandfather Stepan, let’s go to the village!” he
      besought him, weeping. “I am frightened here; oh, oh, how frightened
      I am! And why did you bring me from the village, accursed man?”
    

      “Who’s an accursed man? You mustn’t use such
      disrespectable words to your lawful grandfather. I shall whip you.”
    

      “Do whip me, grandfather, do; beat me like Sidor’s goat, but
      only take me to mammy, for God’s mercy!...”
    

      “Come, come, grandson, come!” the coachman said kindly.
      “It’s all right, don’t be frightened....I am frightened
      myself.... Say your prayers!”
    

      The door creaked and the porter’s head appeared. “Aren’t
      you asleep, Stepan?” he asked. “I shan’t get any sleep
      all night,” he said, coming in. “I shall be opening and
      shutting the gates all night.... What are you crying for, Alyoshka?”
    

      “He is frightened,” the coachman answered for his grandson.
    

      Again there was the sound of a wailing voice in the air. The porter said:
    

      “They are crying. The mother can’t believe her eyes.... It’s
      dreadful how upset she is.”
    

      “And is the father there?”
    

      “Yes.... The father is all right. He sits in the corner and says
      nothing. They have taken the children to relations.... Well, Stepan, shall
      we have a game of trumps?”
    

      “Yes,” the coachman agreed, scratching himself, “and
      you, Alyoshka, go to sleep. Almost big enough to be married, and
      blubbering, you rascal. Come, go along, grandson, go along....”
    

      The presence of the porter reassured Alyoshka. He went, not very
      resolutely, towards the sledge and lay down. And while he was falling
      asleep he heard a half-whisper.
    

      “I beat and cover,” said his grandfather.
    

      “I beat and cover,” repeated the porter.
    

      The bell rang in the yard, the door creaked and seemed also saying:
      “I beat and cover.” When Alyoshka dreamed of the gentleman
      and, frightened by his eyes, jumped up and burst out crying, it was
      morning, his grandfather was snoring, and the coach-house no longer seemed
      terrible.