IN THE PRIDE OF HIS YOUTH.

 “Stopped in the straight when the race was his own!
   Look at him cutting it—cur to the bone!”
    “Ask ere the youngster be rated and chidden,
   What did he carry and how was he ridden?
   Maybe they used him too much at the start;
   Maybe Fate's weight-cloths are breaking his heart.”
             —Life's Handicap.

 When I was telling you of the joke that The Worm played off on the Senior
      Subaltern, I promised a somewhat similar tale, but with all the jest left
      out. This is that tale:

 Dicky Hatt was kidnapped in his early, early youth—neither by
      landlady's daughter, housemaid, barmaid, nor cook, but by a girl so nearly
      of his own caste that only a woman could have said she was just the least
      little bit in the world below it. This happened a month before he came out
      to India, and five days after his one-and-twentieth birthday. The girl was
      nineteen—six years older than Dicky in the things of this world,
      that is to say—and, for the time, twice as foolish as he.

 Excepting, always, falling off a horse there is nothing more fatally easy
      than marriage before the Registrar. The ceremony costs less than fifty
      shillings, and is remarkably like walking into a pawn-shop. After the
      declarations of residence have been put in, four minutes will cover the
      rest of the proceedings—fees, attestation, and all. Then the
      Registrar slides the blotting-pad over the names, and says grimly, with
      his pen between his teeth:—“Now you're man and wife;” and the couple
      walk out into the street, feeling as if something were horribly illegal
      somewhere.

 But that ceremony holds and can drag a man to his undoing just as
      thoroughly as the “long as ye both shall live” curse from the altar-rails,
      with the bridesmaids giggling behind, and “The Voice that breathed o'er
      Eden” lifting the roof off. In this manner was Dicky Hatt kidnapped, and
      he considered it vastly fine, for he had received an appointment in India
      which carried a magnificent salary from the Home point of view. The
      marriage was to be kept secret for a year. Then Mrs. Dicky Hatt was to
      come out and the rest of life was to be a glorious golden mist. That was
      how they sketched it under the Addison Road Station lamps; and, after one
      short month, came Gravesend and Dicky steaming out to his new life, and
      the girl crying in a thirty-shillings a week bed-and-living room, in a
      back street off Montpelier Square near the Knightsbridge Barracks.

 But the country that Dicky came to was a hard land, where “men” of
      twenty-one were reckoned very small boys indeed, and life was expensive.
      The salary that loomed so large six thousand miles away did not go far.
      Particularly when Dicky divided it by two, and remitted more than the fair
      half, at 1-6, to Montpelier Square. One hundred and thirty-five rupees out
      of three hundred and thirty is not much to live on; but it was absurd to
      suppose that Mrs. Hatt could exist forever on the 20 pounds held back by
      Dicky, from his outfit allowance. Dicky saw this, and remitted at once;
      always remembering that Rs. 700 were to be paid, twelve months later, for
      a first-class passage out for a lady. When you add to these trifling
      details the natural instincts of a boy beginning a new life in a new
      country and longing to go about and enjoy himself, and the necessity for
      grappling with strange work—which, properly speaking, should take up
      a boy's undivided attention—you will see that Dicky started
      handicapped. He saw it himself for a breath or two; but he did not guess
      the full beauty of his future.

 As the hot weather began, the shackles settled on him and ate into his
      flesh. First would come letters—big, crossed, seven sheet letters—from
      his wife, telling him how she longed to see him, and what a Heaven upon
      earth would be their property when they met.

 Then some boy of the chummery wherein Dicky lodged would pound on the door
      of his bare little room, and tell him to come out and look at a pony—the
      very thing to suit him. Dicky could not afford ponies. He had to explain
      this. Dicky could not afford living in the chummery, modest as it was. He
      had to explain this before he moved to a single room next the office where
      he worked all day. He kept house on a green oil-cloth table-cover, one
      chair, one charpoy, one photograph, one tooth-glass, very strong and
      thick, a seven-rupee eight-anna filter, and messing by contract at
      thirty-seven rupees a month. Which last item was extortion. He had no
      punkah, for a punkah costs fifteen rupees a month; but he slept on the
      roof of the office with all his wife's letters under his pillow. Now and
      again he was asked out to dinner where he got both a punkah and an iced
      drink. But this was seldom, for people objected to recognizing a boy who
      had evidently the instincts of a Scotch tallow-chandler, and who lived in
      such a nasty fashion. Dicky could not subscribe to any amusement, so he
      found no amusement except the pleasure of turning over his Bank-book and
      reading what it said about “loans on approved security.” That cost
      nothing. He remitted through a Bombay Bank, by the way, and the Station
      knew nothing of his private affairs.

 Every month he sent Home all he could possibly spare for his wife—and
      for another reason which was expected to explain itself shortly and would
      require more money.

 About this time, Dicky was overtaken with the nervous, haunting fear that
      besets married men when they are out of sorts. He had no pension to look
      to. What if he should die suddenly, and leave his wife unprovided for? The
      thought used to lay hold of him in the still, hot nights on the roof, till
      the shaking of his heart made him think that he was going to die then and
      there of heart-disease.

 Now this is a frame of mind which no boy has a right to know. It is a
      strong man's trouble; but, coming when it did, it nearly drove poor
      punkah-less, perspiring Dicky Hatt mad. He could tell no one about it.

 A certain amount of “screw” is as necessary for a man as for a
      billiard-ball. It makes them both do wonderful things. Dicky needed money
      badly, and he worked for it like a horse. But, naturally, the men who
      owned him knew that a boy can live very comfortably on a certain income—pay
      in India is a matter of age, not merit, you see, and if their particular
      boy wished to work like two boys, Business forbid that they should stop
      him! But Business forbid that they should give him an increase of pay at
      his present ridiculously immature age! So Dicky won certain rises of
      salary—ample for a boy—not enough for a wife and child—certainly
      too little for the seven-hundred-rupee passage that he and Mrs. Hatt had
      discussed so lightly once upon a time. And with this he was forced to be
      content.

 Somehow, all his money seemed to fade away in Home drafts and the crushing
      Exchange, and the tone of the Home letters changed and grew querulous.
      “Why wouldn't Dicky have his wife and the baby out? Surely he had a salary—a
      fine salary—and it was too bad of him to enjoy himself in India. But
      would he—could he—make the next draft a little more elastic?”
       Here followed a list of baby's kit, as long as a Parsee's bill. Then
      Dicky, whose heart yearned to his wife and the little son he had never
      seen—which, again, is a feeling no boy is entitled to—enlarged
      the draft and wrote queer half-boy, half-man letters, saying that life was
      not so enjoyable after all and would the little wife wait yet a little
      longer? But the little wife, however much she approved of money, objected
      to waiting, and there was a strange, hard sort of ring in her letters that
      Dicky didn't understand. How could he, poor boy?

 Later on still—just as Dicky had been told—apropos of another
      youngster who had “made a fool of himself,” as the saying is—that
      matrimony would not only ruin his further chances of advancement, but
      would lose him his present appointment—came the news that the baby,
      his own little, little son, had died, and, behind this, forty lines of an
      angry woman's scrawl, saying that death might have been averted if certain
      things, all costing money, had been done, or if the mother and the baby
      had been with Dicky. The letter struck at Dicky's naked heart; but, not
      being officially entitled to a baby, he could show no sign of trouble.

 How Dicky won through the next four months, and what hope he kept alight
      to force him into his work, no one dare say. He pounded on, the
      seven-hundred-rupee passage as far away as ever, and his style of living
      unchanged, except when he launched into a new filter.

 There was the strain of his office-work, and the strain of his
      remittances, and the knowledge of his boy's death, which touched the boy
      more, perhaps, than it would have touched a man; and, beyond all, the
      enduring strain of his daily life. Gray-headed seniors, who approved of
      his thrift and his fashion of denying himself everything pleasant,
      reminded him of the old saw that says:

 “If a youth would be distinguished in his art, art, art,
    He must keep the girls away from his heart, heart, heart.”

 And Dicky, who fancied he had been through every trouble that a man is
      permitted to know, had to laugh and agree; with the last line of his
      balanced Bank-book jingling in his head day and night.

 But he had one more sorrow to digest before the end. There arrived a
      letter from the little wife—the natural sequence of the others if
      Dicky had only known it—and the burden of that letter was “gone with
      a handsomer man than you.” It was a rather curious production, without
      stops, something like this:—“She was not going to wait forever and
      the baby was dead and Dicky was only a boy and he would never set eyes on
      her again and why hadn't he waved his handkerchief to her when he left
      Gravesend and God was her judge she was a wicked woman but Dicky was worse
      enjoying himself in India and this other man loved the ground she trod on
      and would Dicky ever forgive her for she would never forgive Dicky; and
      there was no address to write to.”

 Instead of thanking his lucky stars that he was free, Dicky discovered
      exactly how an injured husband feels—again, not at all the knowledge
      to which a boy is entitled—for his mind went back to his wife as he
      remembered her in the thirty-shilling “suite” in Montpelier Square, when
      the dawn of his last morning in England was breaking, and she was crying
      in the bed. Whereat he rolled about on his bed and bit his fingers. He
      never stopped to think whether, if he had met Mrs. Hatt after those two
      years, he would have discovered that he and she had grown quite different
      and new persons. This, theoretically, he ought to have done. He spent the
      night after the English Mail came in rather severe pain.

 Next morning, Dicky Hatt felt disinclined to work. He argued that he had
      missed the pleasure of youth. He was tired, and he had tasted all the
      sorrow in life before three-and-twenty. His Honor was gone—that was
      the man; and now he, too, would go to the Devil—that was the boy in
      him. So he put his head down on the green oil-cloth table-cover, and wept
      before resigning his post, and all it offered.

 But the reward of his services came. He was given three days to reconsider
      himself, and the Head of the establishment, after some telegraphings, said
      that it was a most unusual step, but, in view of the ability that Mr. Hatt
      had displayed at such and such a time, at such and such junctures, he was
      in a position to offer him an infinitely superior post—first on
      probation, and later, in the natural course of things, on confirmation.
      “And how much does the post carry?” said Dicky. “Six hundred and fifty
      rupees,” said the Head slowly, expecting to see the young man sink with
      gratitude and joy.

 And it came then! The seven hundred rupee passage, and enough to have
      saved the wife, and the little son, and to have allowed of assured and
      open marriage, came then. Dicky burst into a roar of laughter—laughter
      he could not check—nasty, jangling merriment that seemed as if it
      would go on forever. When he had recovered himself he said, quite
      seriously:—“I'm tired of work. I'm an old man now. It's about time I
      retired. And I will.”

 “The boy's mad!” said the Head.

 I think he was right; but Dicky Hatt never reappeared to settle the
      question.