ITALIAN WITHOUT A MASTER

 It is almost a fortnight now that I am domiciled in a medieval villa in
      the country, a mile or two from Florence. I cannot speak the language; I
      am too old now to learn how, also too busy when I am busy, and too
      indolent when I am not; wherefore some will imagine that I am having a
      dull time of it. But it is not so. The “help” are all natives; they talk
      Italian to me, I answer in English; I do not understand them, they do not
      understand me, consequently no harm is done, and everybody is satisfied.

  



 In order to be just and fair, I throw in an Italian word when I have one,
      and this has a good influence. I get the word out of the morning paper. I
      have to use it while it is fresh, for I find that Italian words do not
      keep in this climate. They fade toward night, and next morning they are
      gone. But it is no matter; I get a new one out of the paper before
      breakfast, and thrill the domestics with it while it lasts. I have no
      dictionary, and I do not want one; I can select words by the sound, or by
      orthographic aspect. Many of them have French or German or English look,
      and these are the ones I enslave for the day's service. That is, as a
      rule. Not always. If I find a learnable phrase that has an imposing look
      and warbles musically along I do not care to know the meaning of it; I pay
      it out to the first applicant, knowing that if I pronounce it carefully he will understand it, and that's enough.

  



 Yesterday's word was avanti . It sounds Shakespearian, and probably
      means Avaunt and quit my sight. Today I have a whole phrase: sono
      dispiacentissimo . I do not know what it means, but it seems to fit in
      everywhere and give satisfaction. Although as a rule my words and phrases
      are good for one day and train only, I have several that stay by me all
      the time, for some unknown reason, and these come very handy when I get
      into a long conversation and need things to fire up with in monotonous
      stretches. One of the best ones is dov `e il gatto . It nearly
      always produces a pleasant surprise, therefore I save it up for places
      where I want to express applause or admiration. The fourth word has a
      French sound, and I think the phrase means “that takes the cake.”

 During my first week in the deep and dreamy stillness of this woodsy and
      flowery place I was without news of the outside world, and was well
      content without it. It had been four weeks since I had seen a newspaper,
      and this lack seemed to give life a new charm and grace, and to saturate
      it with a feeling verging upon actual delight. Then came a change that was
      to be expected: the appetite for news began to rise again, after this
      invigorating rest. I had to feed it, but I was not willing to let it make
      me its helpless slave again; I determined to put it on a diet, and a
      strict and limited one. So I examined an Italian paper, with the idea of
      feeding it on that, and on that exclusively. On that exclusively, and
      without help of a dictionary. In this way I should surely be well
      protected against overloading and indigestion.

 A glance at the telegraphic page filled me with encouragement. There were
      no scare-heads. That was good—supremely good. But there were
      headings—one-liners and two-liners—and that was good too; for
      without these, one must do as one does with a German paper—pay out
      precious time in finding out what an article is about, only to discover,
      in many cases, that there is nothing in it of interest to you. The
      headline is a valuable thing.

 Necessarily we are all fond of murders, scandals, swindles, robberies,
      explosions, collisions, and all such things, when we know the people, and
      when they are neighbors and friends, but when they are strangers we do not
      get any great pleasure out of them, as a rule. Now the trouble with an
      American paper is that it has no discrimination; it rakes the whole earth
      for blood and garbage, and the result is that you are daily overfed and
      suffer a surfeit. By habit you stow this muck every day, but you come by
      and by to take no vital interest in it—indeed, you almost get tired
      of it. As a rule, forty-nine-fiftieths of it concerns strangers only—people
      away off yonder, a thousand miles, two thousand miles, ten thousand miles
      from where you are. Why, when you come to think of it, who cares what
      becomes of those people? I would not give the assassination of one
      personal friend for a whole massacre of those others. And, to my mind, one
      relative or neighbor mixed up in a scandal is more interesting than a
      whole Sodom and Gomorrah of outlanders gone rotten. Give me the home
      product every time.

 Very well. I saw at a glance that the Florentine paper would suit me: five
      out of six of its scandals and tragedies were local; they were adventures
      of one's very neighbors, one might almost say one's friends. In the matter
      of world news there was not too much, but just about enough. I subscribed.
      I have had no occasion to regret it. Every morning I get all the news I
      need for the day; sometimes from the headlines, sometimes from the text. I
      have never had to call for a dictionary yet. I read the paper with ease.
      Often I do not quite understand, often some of the details escape me, but
      no matter, I get the idea. I will cut out a passage or two, then you see
      how limpid the language is:

  



  

 Il ritorno dei Beati d'Italia

 Elargizione del Re all' Ospedale italiano

 The first line means that the Italian sovereigns are coming back—they
      have been to England. The second line seems to mean that they enlarged the
      King at the Italian hospital. With a banquet, I suppose. An English
      banquet has that effect. Further:

  Il ritorno dei Sovrani 

 a Roma

 ROMA, 24, ore 22,50.— I Sovrani e le Principessine Reali si
      attendono a Roma domani alle ore 15,51.

 Return of the sovereigns to Rome, you see. Date of the telegram, Rome,
      November 24, ten minutes before twenty-three o'clock. The telegram seems
      to say, “The Sovereigns and the Royal Children expect themselves at Rome
      tomorrow at fifty-one minutes after fifteen o'clock.”

  



  

 I do not know about Italian time, but I judge it begins at midnight and
      runs through the twenty-four hours without breaking bulk. In the following
      ad, the theaters open at half-past twenty. If these are not matinees,
      20.30 must mean 8.30 P.M., by my reckoning.

  



  

 Spettacolli del di 25

  TEATRO DELLA PERGOLA—(Ore 20,30)—Opera. Boheme .

 TEATRO ALFIERI.—Compagnia drammatica Drago—(Ore 20,30)— La
        Legge .

 ALHAMBRA—(Ore 20,30)—Spettacolo variato.

 SALA EDISON—Grandioso spettacolo Cinematografico: Quo-Vadis? —Inaugurazione
        della Chiesa Russa — In coda al Direttissimo — Vedute di
        Firenze con gran movimeno — America: Transporto tronchi
        giganteschi — I ladri in casa del Diavolo — Scene comiche.

 CINEMATOGRAFO — Via Brunelleschi n. 4.—Programma
        straordinario, Don Chisciotte — Prezzi populari.



 The whole of that is intelligible to me—and sane and rational, too—except
      the remark about the Inauguration of a Russian Cheese. That one oversizes
      my hand. Gimme me five cards.

 This is a four-page paper; and as it is set in long primer leaded and has
      a page of advertisements, there is no room for the crimes, disasters, and
      general sweepings of the outside world—thanks be! Today I find only
      a single importation of the off-color sort:

  



  

 Una Principessa

  che fugge con un cocchiere

 PARIGI, 24.—Il MATIN ha da Berlino che la principessa
        Schovenbare-Waldenbure scomparve il 9 novembre. Sarebbe partita col suo
        cocchiere.

 La Principassa ha 27 anni.



 Twenty-seven years old, and scomparve—scampered—on the 9th
      November. You see by the added detail that she departed with her coachman.
      I hope Sarebbe has not made a mistake, but I am afraid the chances are
      that she has. Sono dispiacentissimo .

  



  

 There are several fires: also a couple of accidents. This is one of them:

 Grave Disgrazia Sul Ponte Vecchio

  Stammattina, circe le 7,30, mentre Giuseppe Sciatti, di anni 55, di
        Casellina e Torri, passava dal Ponte Vecchio, stando seduto sopra un
        barroccio carico di verdura, perse l' equilibrio e cadde al suolo,
        rimanendo con la gamba destra sotto una ruota del veicolo.

 Lo Sciatti fu subito raccolto da alcuni cittadini, che, per mezzo della
        pubblica vettura n. 365, lo transporto a San Giovanni di Dio.

 Ivi il medico di guardia gli riscontro la frattura della gamba destra e
        alcune lievi escoriazioni giudicandolo guaribile in 50 giorni salvo
        complicazioni.



  



  

 What it seems to say is this: “Serious Disgrace on the Old Old Bridge.
      This morning about 7.30, Mr. Joseph Sciatti, aged 55, of Casellina and
      Torri, while standing up in a sitting posture on top of a carico barrow of
      vedure (foliage? hay? vegetables?), lost his equilibrium and fell on
      himself, arriving with his left leg under one of the wheels of the
      vehicle.

 “Said Sciatti was suddenly harvested (gathered in?) by several citizens,
      who by means of public cab No. 365 transported him to St. John of God.”

 Paragraph No. 3 is a little obscure, but I think it says that the medico
      set the broken left leg—right enough, since there was nothing the
      matter with the other one—and that several are encouraged to hope
      that fifty days well fetch him around in quite giudicandolo-guaribile way,
      if no complications intervene.

 I am sure I hope so myself.

 There is a great and peculiar charm about reading news-scraps in a
      language which you are not acquainted with—the charm that always
      goes with the mysterious and the uncertain. You can never be absolutely
      sure of the meaning of anything you read in such circumstances; you are
      chasing an alert and gamy riddle all the time, and the baffling turns and
      dodges of the prey make the life of the hunt. A dictionary would spoil it.
      Sometimes a single word of doubtful purport will cast a veil of dreamy and
      golden uncertainty over a whole paragraph of cold and practical
      certainties, and leave steeped in a haunting and adorable mystery an
      incident which had been vulgar and commonplace but for that benefaction.
      Would you be wise to draw a dictionary on that gracious word? would you be
      properly grateful?

 After a couple of days' rest I now come back to my subject and seek a case
      in point. I find it without trouble, in the morning paper; a cablegram
      from Chicago and Indiana by way of Paris. All the words save one are
      guessable by a person ignorant of Italian:

  



  

 Revolverate in teatro

  PARIGI, 27.—La PATRIE ha da Chicago:

 Il guardiano del teatro dell'opera di Walace (Indiana), avendo voluto
        espellare uno spettatore che continuava a fumare malgrado il diviety,
        questo spalleggiato dai suoi amici tir`o diversi colpi di rivoltella. Il
        guardiano ripose. Nacque una scarica generale. Grande panico tra gli
        spettatori. Nessun ferito.



  Translation. —“Revolveration in Theater. Paris, 27th. La
      Patrie has from Chicago: The cop of the theater of the opera of
      Wallace, Indiana, had willed to expel a spectator which continued to smoke
      in spite of the prohibition, who, spalleggiato by his friends, tire ( Fr.
      Tire, Anglice Pulled ) manifold revolver-shots; great panic among the
      spectators. Nobody hurt.”

  



  

 It is bettable that that harmless cataclysm in the theater of the opera of
      Wallace, Indiana, excited not a person in Europe but me, and so came near
      to not being worth cabling to Florence by way of France. But it does
      excite me. It excites me because I cannot make out, for sure, what it was
      that moved the spectator to resist the officer. I was gliding along
      smoothly and without obstruction or accident, until I came to that word
      “spalleggiato,” then the bottom fell out. You notice what a rich gloom,
      what a somber and pervading mystery, that word sheds all over the whole
      Wallachian tragedy. That is the charm of the thing, that is the delight of
      it. This is where you begin, this is where you revel. You can guess and
      guess, and have all the fun you like; you need not be afraid there will be
      an end to it; none is possible, for no amount of guessing will ever
      furnish you a meaning for that word that you can be sure is the right one.
      All the other words give you hints, by their form, their sound, or their
      spelling—this one doesn't, this one throws out no hints, this one
      keeps its secret. If there is even the slightest slight shadow of a hint
      anywhere, it lies in the very meagerly suggestive fact that “spalleggiato”
       carries our word “egg” in its stomach. Well, make the most out of it, and
      then where are you at? You conjecture that the spectator which was smoking
      in spite of the prohibition and become reprohibited by the guardians, was
      “egged on” by his friends, and that was owing to that evil influence that
      he initiated the revolveration in theater that has galloped under the sea
      and come crashing through the European press without exciting anybody but
      me. But are you sure, are you dead sure, that that was the way of it? No.
      Then the uncertainty remains, the mystery abides, and with it the charm.
      Guess again.

 If I had a phrase-book of a really satisfactory sort I would study it, and
      not give all my free time to undictionarial readings, but there is no such
      work on the market. The existing phrase-books are inadequate. They are
      well enough as far as they go, but when you fall down and skin your leg
      they don't tell you what to say.