[

60 ] 

KEEPING SCHOOL AT ‘DEAD FINISH.’

 A Reminiscence of ‘The Rivers.’

 The

people at Dead Finish had never applied for such a
thing, nor dreamt of, nor wished for it, neither they nor
their children. These latter were mostly of an age now
to be of use about the house or in the field. They had
imagined themselves, these half-a-dozen or so of scattered
families hidden in the gloomy recesses of coastal scrubs,
quite secure from any officious interference with their
offspring by the Government. And, without exception,
they took it as a most uncalled-for act of tyranny, this
proposed establishment of a school and a teacher in their
midst, and well within the two-mile radius from all.

 Here was the corn just ready to be pulled and husked,
and got ready for Tuberville, and who was to do it with
Tom, Jack and Bill wasting their time at a school?

 ‘If Mr Gov’ment was here,’ growled ‘Brombee’
O’Brien, the largest selector of the lot, ‘I’d give ’im a bit
o’ my mind. Wot bizness he got, comin’ an’ takin’ the
kids just as they’re a-gittin’ handy? Why didn’t he come
afore, when they was bits o’ crawlers, an’ no use to no
one? Anyhow, me an’ the missis niver ’ad no schoolin’; [

61 ]

an’ why should they? Will learnin’ cut through a two-foot
log? Will ’rethmetic split palin’s or shingles? Will
readin’ an’ writin’ run brombees, or drive a team o’
bullocks, or ’elp to plough or ’arrer? No; it ain’t likely.
Then wot’s the good of it? Garn? Wot they givin’ us?’

 Thus Mr O’Brien, at a meeting of neighbours specially
convened to confront the unlooked-for emergency, and
whose own ideas he voices to the letter.

 And when, later, the Inspector (taken at first for the
‘Gov’ment’) puts in an appearance, the case is set
before him precisely as above. But, instead of listening
to reason, he only rated them, told them they ought
to be ashamed of themselves, and dilated largely on the
beauty and advantage of a State education at only threepence
per week each child, and one shilling for seven or
over. A paternal Government, he said, had long
mourned over their degraded and benighted condition;
and, at last, having, after much trouble, and at great
expense, secured a most accomplished gentleman as
a teacher, resolved that one of his first tasks should be
that of making Dead Finish an ornament, in place of a
reproach, to the district.

 This was, so the Inspector thought, putting the thing
neatly indeed. But it was all of no avail. They not
only unanimously refused to have anything to do with
the erection of the school, but also to receive the teacher
when he arrived. They swore, too, that their children
should not leave work for education, and in the end,
used language unrecordable here, and such as the Inspector
had never in all his life heard before. But he [

62 ]

persevered; and, bringing a couple of men from the
township fifty miles away, set them to work.

 Dead Finish was situated at the extreme head of one
of those short Australian coastal rivers whose existence
begins in boggy swamps and ends in a big sand-bar.

 The country was mountainous and scrubby, abounding
in ‘falls,’ springs, morasses, giant timber, dingoes, ticks,
leeches, and creeks. The wonder was, not that anybody
should ever have settled on it, but that, once there, they
should ever manage to get out of it, as they did once
in six months.

 But for these few families on Dead Finish Creek, the
district was totally uninhabited. It was hard to say
where they came from originally. They were not a
communicative people; but they were a hard-working,
hard-living one, whose only wish was to be left at peace
on the little patches they had hewn for themselves out of
the mighty primeval forest that, dark and solemn, walled
them in on every side. The spot chosen by the Inspector
as the site of the new school was on the extreme
edge of one of the lesser falls that ran sloping swiftly
down three hundred feet or more into a small valley,
generally full of mist and the noise of running waters.

 A mile away lived a settler named Brown, who, after
an infinity of coaxing and persuasion, and to the utter
disgust of his neighbours, had consented to receive and
board the teacher on trial. As with the rest of the Dead
Finishers, ready money was so rare that the thoughts of
that proffered twelve shillings a week tempted him, and
he fell, and became a Judas to his fellows, and a mark [

63 ]

for the finger of scorn—he and his wife and their ten
children.

 But the Inspector was jubilant; and after a last look
around the little hut, smelling of fresh-cut wood, with its
three forms, one stool, and bright, new blackboard, he
departed, congratulating himself on the satisfactory finish
of the campaign. Also he indited a minute and two
memorandums to his Department with the intimation that
‘Provisional School No. 28,890, Parish of Dead Finish,
County of Salamanca,’ was completed and ready for
occupation. Whereupon, an animated correspondence
took place, which, after lasting six months, was at last
closed by the announcement that a teacher had been
appointed. Then both sides rested from their labours,
and the Inspector, feeling that his annual holiday had
been well earned, took it.

 Meanwhile, the little building perched on the brink of
the gulf grew bleached and weather-beaten with wind and
rain and fog, and the Dead Finishers derided ‘ole
Gov’ment,’ and the Brown family emerged from Coventry TN: original reads "coventry" ,
and all was once more peace along the creek.

 The winter passed, and a young man with thin legs
and body, red hair, and freckled face, appeared in
Tuberville and remarked to the residents generally
that he would like to get to Dead Finish. He also
added that he was the ‘new teacher’ for that place. He
at once became an object of interest. People stared at
him in much the same way as did those others, of whom
we read, at Martin Chuzzlewit and the faithful Mark
Tapley on their departure for Eden. [

64 ]

The Tuberville people—the majority of them at least—knew
of the Dead Finishers only by repute. These
latter came in but twice a year to exchange corn and
hardwood for stores, potatoes, and a little cash. At
these times the programme was invariably the same.
Their business done, the long-haired, touzly-bearded men
drove their teams outside the town, and, leaving the
bullocks in charge of the wild, bare-footed, half-clad
boys, returned, and, clubbing their money, drank solidly
as long as it lasted—generally two days.

 They kept well together, and no one molested or
interfered with them. It was not worth while. Their
especial house was a short distance out, and when, borne
up on the wind, came the roar of bush revelry, strange
and uncouth, the townspeople merely remarked one to
the other that ‘Them Dead Finishers must be in again
down at Duffy’s.’

 Hence the interest taken in Mr Cruppy.

 The Dead Finishers all drank ‘rum straight,’ and
about two gallons was their respective allowance. That
safely stowed away, they took their long whips out of the
corner of the bar, called their rough cattle-dogs, lying
beside them, and made off to the wilderness again for
another fight with fire and axe against the stubborn
forest, and to raise corn enough for the next trip to market.

  [

64a ] 

[Illustration:

But presently there was a report, a cloud of smoke, and a
flash out of the little window. ( .) ]



 That half-yearly or so excursion was their one treat,
such as it was; and the toiling, hard-featured women at
home, who never got away, acquiesced tacitly in the
liquid wind-up of it. They never looked for any money
on their men’s return. What was the good of money at [

65 ]

Dead Finish? No wonder the people laughed when the
Inspector talked to them of ‘school fees.’

 At last Mr Cruppy drifted into the ‘Bushman’s Home’
in search of information. Could Mr Duffy tell him how to
get to a place called Dead Finish? No; Mr Duffy was
sorry, but he really couldn’t. All he knew about it was
that it was up in the mountains, and a rough, long road to
travel. The new teacher, was he? Well, he was pleased
to hear it, but opined that he’d find some pretty hard
cases amongst the kids up there. Did he know Mr Brown at Dead Finish? Yes, he thought he did, and a
very strong cup of tea he was. Going to stay there, was
he? Well, he hoped that Mr Brown would make him
comfortable. But, somehow, he was doubtful. As to
getting there, he would have to trust to Providence.
After a little more talk, however, Mr Cruppy discovered
that Providence, in this case, meant the sum of £4
sterling, for which the publican expressed his willingness
to do his best to find the Dead Finish.

 They were four days on the road, got bogged twice,
capsized twice, and broke the pole of the buggy before
they found Brown, who received them with more surprise
than cordiality. Foreseeing ostracism again, he wished
to go back from his agreement, and was surly to a
degree.

 He said he should get his head caved in. If no one
else did it, ‘Brombee’ O’Brien would. A week’s
payment in advance mollified him somewhat. But, if
Mr Cruppy had not been an orphan, friendless, and on
his first appointment, he would have returned with [

66 ]

Mr Duffy, who, very much to his surprise, had by the time
he reached home, fairly earned his money.

 The teacher’s bedroom was a bark lean-to; his bed
sacks stuffed with corn husks—and cobs. The food
was hominy and pork, washed down with coffee made
from corn roasted and ground. He ventured to remark
that the accommodation was rough.

 ‘It are,’ replied Mr Brown. ‘We’s rough. Take it
or leave it. We niver arst fer no schoolin’. I’ll get
stoushed over this job yet. Brombee’s got it in for me.
So’s the Simmses, an’ all the rest ov ’em.’

 With much difficulty the teacher got one of the boys
to show him the way to the school. They had to
cross Dead Finish Creek fourteen times to get there.
Regarding the youngster as his first scholar, Mr Cruppy
endeavoured to detain him, but with a yell he fled
down the mountain; and, figuratively, the fiery cross
was sent round.

 Each day the teacher went up and waited in vain. No
one came near the school. Then he essayed a journey
of remonstrance from farm to farm, got bushed, was out
for two nights, and would have been left out altogether
only that Mandy Brown, who pitied him, went away
and brought him in after running his tracks for a whole
day. Then he simply sat down and waited despairingly.
Then the Inspector came back from his holiday and
visited Dead Finish, expecting to find everything in full
swing. In his wrath he took out summonses against the
whole settlement. No notice was taken of these until
four troopers paid it a visit. Then it went into [

67 ]

Tuberville in a body, and was promptly fined and admonished.
Returning, it sent its children to school—a horde of
young barbarians, unkempt, unwashed, almost unclad,
but stout and sturdy. And it was the time of the pulling
of the corn! Therefore the elders had to work double
tides to make up for the lost labour of their offspring,
stolidly glaring at poor Cruppy as he tried to beat into
their shock heads the mystery of A B C.

 Amanda Brown was eighteen, buxom, bare-footed,
curly-haired, red-cheeked, could ride as she put it ‘anythin’
with hair on,’ use an axe like a Canadian, and was
reckoned the best hand at breaking in a young bullock
to the team of anyone about. And she, since her finding
of Cruppy in the ranges, leech-infested and draggled,
had taken him under her protection. But even she was
powerless to influence the feeling of public indignation,
daily growing stronger, against the Inspector, the teacher,
and the ‘Gov’ment,’ and which ended in Cruppy being
requested to clear out from Brown’s. As the latter put
it, ‘Mister,’ said he, ‘it ain’t no good shenaneckin’! TN: original reads "shenaneckin!'" I dussent keep you no longer. It’s as much ’s our
lives is wuth. Brombee an’ them’s gittin’ madder an’
madder. Ef you won’t slither complete, you’ll ’ave to
go an’ camp in the schoolhouse up yonder. We’ll sell
you a pot an’ a bit o’ ration, an’ ye’ll have to do the
best ye can.’ So Cruppy went, seeing nothing else for
it, and Mr Brown once more held up his head amongst
his fellows.

 Despite his lack of physique, Cruppy had a certain
amount of stubborn resistance and endurance within [

68 ]

him, often observable in red-headed people. He was,
in short, plucky, and unwilling to give in. And Mandy,
out of the largeness of her heart, helped him all she
knew how.

 For instance, when Tom O’Brien (eldest son of
‘Brombee’) made his intention known of scaring the
teacher out of Dead Finish, from Mandy came the few
words of warning and the present of the old gun and
some ammunition. Thus it happened that one night,
when awakened by eerie yells from his lonely slumber,
the teacher looked out and saw a wild figure clad in
skins, and with a pair of bullock’s horns spreading from
its head, he felt no whit dismayed. Capering and
shouting round the hut under the dim moonlight went
the weird thing, enough in that desolate spot to make
even a brave man shudder with the uncanny grotesqueness
of it.

 ,
and a flash out of the little window, and with a scream
the thing dropped, then got up again, and ran swiftly
out of sight.

 ‘Caught him fair smack, ye did,’ said Mandy, afterwards.
‘Them pellets o’ coarse salt touched ’im up
properly. He don’t set down now without lookin’
fer pillers. Tom won’t try no more gammonin’ to
be a yahoo. He’s full ’s a tick ov sich sport, he
is.’

 Other attempts were from time to time made to
frighten Cruppy out of the district, but they were of no
avail. The holidays were approaching, and he had made [

69 ]

up his mind to hold out at least until then in hopes of
getting a shift from Dead Finish.

 But one night, in melancholy mood, watching a piece
of salt beef boil, and leaning over every now and again
to take the scum off the pot, he heard the tramp of
horses outside. Opening the door cautiously, he saw
Mandy riding her own pony en cavalier , and leading
another one ready saddled.

 ‘Come along,’ she said, without dismounting. ‘They’re
on their tails proper now. Wanter git the corn shelled
for Tuberville. No more schoolin’ fer the kids. They’re
a-goin’ to put the set on ye to-night, hut an’ all. Pap,
and Brombee, an’ the Simmses, an’ Pringles, an’ the
whole push is out. They got four teams o’ bullocks an’
all the ropes an’ chains in the country, an’ they’re a-goin’
to hyste school an’ you over the sidin’. It’ll be just
one! two! three! an’ wallop ye all goes! Roll up yer
swag slippy an’ come along.’

 Cruppy, seeing at once that a crisis, not altogether
unexpected, had arrived, did as he was told.

 ‘Now,’ said Mandy, leading the way into a dense
clump of peppermint suckers, ‘le’s wait an’ see the fun.
They reckoned as how, sleepin’ so sound, you wouldn’t
know nothin’ till you struck bottom in the crik. But
they’re euchred agin.’

 As the night wore on noises broke its stillness, and
dark forms moved athwart the little open space, whilst
from far below in the gully came the faint clank of
chains and the muffled tramp of cattle.

 ‘Look,’ whispered Mandy admiringly, ‘ain’t they [

70 ]

cunnin’? There’s Pap, an’ ole Brombee, an’ young
Tom, a-sneakin’ the big rope roun’ the hut. You’d
niver ha’ woke, sleepin’ sound as ye does.’

 Even as she spoke a shrill whistle was heard. Then
from below came a tremendous volleying of whips,
accompanied by hoarse yells of ‘Gee, Brusher!
Darling up! Wah Rowdy! Spanker! Redman!’ As
the noose tightened, the school first cracked, then
toppled. The din below redoubled, and with a crash
the building disappeared bodily over the brow of the
hill.

 ‘That’s domino!’ remarked Mandy calmly. ‘There
won’t be no more schoolin’ at Dead Finish. Come
along; I’ll set ye on the track. Ye kin leave the horse
an’ saddle at Duffy’s when you gits to the township.
I shook ’em from ole Brombee. Won’t he bite when
he finds it out. But you,’ she went on, ‘needn’t be
scared. You seen him to-night doin’ his best to break
your neck. Well, so long! Give us a cheeker afore
ye goes; an’ don’t forget Mandy Brown o’ Dead
Finish.’