KIDNAPPED.
    

   There is a tide in the affairs of men,
   Which, taken any way you please, is bad,
   And strands them in forsaken guts and creeks
   No decent soul would think of visiting.

   You cannot stop the tide; but now and then,
   You may arrest some rash adventurer
   Who—h'm—will hardly thank you for your pains.
                —Vibart's Moralities.


      We are a high-caste and enlightened race, and infant-marriage is very
      shocking and the consequences are sometimes peculiar; but, nevertheless,
      the Hindu notion—which is the Continental notion—which is the
      aboriginal notion—of arranging marriages irrespective of the
      personal inclinations of the married, is sound. Think for a minute, and
      you will see that it must be so; unless, of course, you believe in
      “affinities.” In which case you had better not read this tale. How can a
      man who has never married; who cannot be trusted to pick up at sight a
      moderately sound horse; whose head is hot and upset with visions of
      domestic felicity, go about the choosing of a wife? He cannot see straight
      or think straight if he tries; and the same disadvantages exist in the
      case of a girl's fancies. But when mature, married and discreet people
      arrange a match between a boy and a girl, they do it sensibly, with a view
      to the future, and the young couple live happily ever afterwards. As
      everybody knows.
    

      Properly speaking, Government should establish a Matrimonial Department,
      efficiently officered, with a Jury of Matrons, a Judge of the Chief Court,
      a Senior Chaplain, and an Awful Warning, in the shape of a love-match that
      has gone wrong, chained to the trees in the courtyard. All marriages
      should be made through the Department, which might be subordinate to the
      Educational Department, under the same penalty as that attaching to the
      transfer of land without a stamped document. But Government won't take
      suggestions. It pretends that it is too busy. However, I will put my
      notion on record, and explain the example that illustrates the theory.
    

      Once upon a time there was a good young man—a first-class officer in
      his own Department—a man with a career before him and, possibly, a
      K. C. G. E. at the end of it. All his superiors spoke well of him, because
      he knew how to hold his tongue and his pen at the proper times. There are
      today only eleven men in India who possess this secret; and they have all,
      with one exception, attained great honor and enormous incomes.
    

      This good young man was quiet and self-contained—too old for his
      years by far. Which always carries its own punishment. Had a Subaltern, or
      a Tea-Planter's Assistant, or anybody who enjoys life and has no care for
      tomorrow, done what he tried to do not a soul would have cared. But when
      Peythroppe—the estimable, virtuous, economical, quiet, hard-working,
      young Peythroppe—fell, there was a flutter through five Departments.
    

      The manner of his fall was in this way. He met a Miss Castries—d'Castries
      it was originally, but the family dropped the d' for administrative
      reasons—and he fell in love with her even more energetically than he
      worked. Understand clearly that there was not a breath of a word to be
      said against Miss Castries—not a shadow of a breath. She was good
      and very lovely—possessed what innocent people at home call a
      “Spanish” complexion, with thick blue-black hair growing low down on her
      forehead, into a “widow's peak,” and big violet eyes under eyebrows as
      black and as straight as the borders of a Gazette Extraordinary when a big
      man dies. But—but—but—. Well, she was a VERY sweet girl
      and very pious, but for many reasons she was “impossible.” Quite so. All
      good Mammas know what “impossible” means. It was obviously absurd that
      Peythroppe should marry her. The little opal-tinted onyx at the base of
      her finger-nails said this as plainly as print. Further, marriage with
      Miss Castries meant marriage with several other Castries—Honorary
      Lieutenant Castries, her Papa, Mrs. Eulalie Castries, her Mamma, and all
      the ramifications of the Castries family, on incomes ranging from Rs. 175
      to Rs. 470 a month, and THEIR wives and connections again.
    

      It would have been cheaper for Peythroppe to have assaulted a Commissioner
      with a dog-whip, or to have burned the records of a Deputy Commissioner's
      Office, than to have contracted an alliance with the Castries. It would
      have weighted his after-career less—even under a Government which
      never forgets and NEVER forgives.
    

      Everybody saw this but Peythroppe. He was going to marry Miss Castries, he
      was—being of age and drawing a good income—and woe betide the
      house that would not afterwards receive Mrs. Virginie Saulez Peythroppe
      with the deference due to her husband's rank.
    

      That was Peythroppe's ultimatum, and any remonstrance drove him frantic.
    

      These sudden madnesses most afflict the sanest men. There was a case once—but
      I will tell you of that later on. You cannot account for the mania, except
      under a theory directly contradicting the one about the Place wherein
      marriages are made. Peythroppe was burningly anxious to put a millstone
      round his neck at the outset of his career and argument had not the least
      effect on him. He was going to marry Miss Castries, and the business was
      his own business.
    

      He would thank you to keep your advice to yourself. With a man in this
      condition, mere words only fix him in his purpose. Of course he cannot see
      that marriage out here does not concern the individual but the Government
      he serves.
    

      Do you remember Mrs. Hauksbee—the most wonderful woman in India? She
      saved Pluffles from Mrs. Reiver, won Tarrion his appointment in the
      Foreign Office, and was defeated in open field by Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil. She
      heard of the lamentable condition of Peythroppe, and her brain struck out
      the plan that saved him. She had the wisdom of the Serpent, the logical
      coherence of the Man, the fearlessness of the Child, and the triple
      intuition of the Woman. Never—no, never—as long as a tonga
      buckets down the Solon dip, or the couples go a-riding at the back of
      Summer Hill, will there be such a genius as Mrs. Hauksbee. She attended
      the consultation of Three Men on Peythroppe's case; and she stood up with
      the lash of her riding-whip between her lips and spake....... ...
    

      Three weeks later, Peythroppe dined with the Three Men, and the Gazette of
      India came in. Peythroppe found to his surprise that he had been gazetted
      a month's leave. Don't ask me how this was managed. I believe firmly that
      if Mrs. Hauksbee gave the order, the whole Great Indian Administration
      would stand on its head.
    

      The Three Men had also a month's leave each. Peythroppe put the Gazette
      down and said bad words. Then there came from the compound the soft
      “pad-pad” of camels—“thieves' camels,” the bikaneer breed that don't
      bubble and howl when they sit down and get up.
    

      After that I don't know what happened. This much is certain.
    

      Peythroppe disappeared—vanished like smoke—and the long
      foot-rest chair in the house of the Three Men was broken to splinters.
      Also a bedstead departed from one of the bedrooms.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee said that Mr. Peythroppe was shooting in Rajputana with the
      Three Men; so we were compelled to believe her.
    

      At the end of the month, Peythroppe was gazetted twenty days' extension of
      leave; but there was wrath and lamentation in the house of Castries. The
      marriage-day had been fixed, but the bridegroom never came; and the
      D'Silvas, Pereiras, and Ducketts lifted their voices and mocked Honorary
      Lieutenant Castries as one who had been basely imposed upon. Mrs. Hauksbee
      went to the wedding, and was much astonished when Peythroppe did not
      appear. After seven weeks, Peythroppe and the Three Men returned from
      Rajputana. Peythroppe was in hard, tough condition, rather white, and more
      self-contained than ever.
    

      One of the Three Men had a cut on his nose, cause by the kick of a gun.
      Twelve-bores kick rather curiously.
    

      Then came Honorary Lieutenant Castries, seeking for the blood of his
      perfidious son-in-law to be. He said things—vulgar and “impossible”
       things which showed the raw rough “ranker” below the “Honorary,” and I
      fancy Peythroppe's eyes were opened. Anyhow, he held his peace till the
      end; when he spoke briefly. Honorary Lieutenant Castries asked for a “peg”
       before he went away to die or bring a suit for breach of promise.
    

      Miss Castries was a very good girl. She said that she would have no breach
      of promise suits. She said that, if she was not a lady, she was refined
      enough to know that ladies kept their broken hearts to themselves; and, as
      she ruled her parents, nothing happened. Later on, she married a most
      respectable and gentlemanly person. He travelled for an enterprising firm
      in Calcutta, and was all that a good husband should be.
    

      So Peythroppe came to his right mind again, and did much good work, and
      was honored by all who knew him. One of these days he will marry; but he
      will marry a sweet pink-and-white maiden, on the Government House List,
      with a little money and some influential connections, as every wise man
      should. And he will never, all his life, tell her what happened during the
      seven weeks of his shooting-tour in Rajputana.
    

      But just think how much trouble and expense—for camel hire is not
      cheap, and those Bikaneer brutes had to be fed like humans—might
      have been saved by a properly conducted Matrimonial Department, under the
      control of the Director General of Education, but corresponding direct
      with the Viceroy.