KING PEST.
    

      A Tale Containing an Allegory.
    

     The gods do bear and will allow in kings
     The things which they abhor in rascal routes.

         Buckhurst’s Tragedy of Ferrex and Porrex.


      ABOUT twelve o’clock, one night in the month of October, and during
      the chivalrous reign of the third Edward, two seamen belonging to the crew
      of the “Free and Easy,” a trading schooner plying between
      Sluys and the Thames, and then at anchor in that river, were much
      astonished to find themselves seated in the tap-room of an ale-house in
      the parish of St. Andrews, London—which ale-house bore for sign the
      portraiture of a “Jolly Tar.”
    

      The room, although ill-contrived, smoke-blackened, low-pitched, and in
      every other respect agreeing with the general character of such places at
      the period—was, nevertheless, in the opinion of the grotesque groups
      scattered here and there within it, sufficiently well adapted to its
      purpose.
    

      Of these groups our two seamen formed, I think, the most interesting, if
      not the most conspicuous.
    

      The one who appeared to be the elder, and whom his companion addressed by
      the characteristic appellation of “Legs,” was at the same time
      much the taller of the two. He might have measured six feet and a half,
      and an habitual stoop in the shoulders seemed to have been the necessary
      consequence of an altitude so enormous.—Superfluities in height
      were, however, more than accounted for by deficiencies in other respects.
      He was exceedingly thin; and might, as his associates asserted, have
      answered, when drunk, for a pennant at the mast-head, or, when sober, have
      served for a jib-boom. But these jests, and others of a similar nature,
      had evidently produced, at no time, any effect upon the cachinnatory
      muscles of the tar. With high cheek-bones, a large hawk-nose, retreating
      chin, fallen under-jaw, and huge protruding white eyes, the expression of
      his countenance, although tinged with a species of dogged indifference to
      matters and things in general, was not the less utterly solemn and serious
      beyond all attempts at imitation or description.
    

      The younger seaman was, in all outward appearance, the converse of his
      companion. His stature could not have exceeded four feet. A pair of stumpy
      bow-legs supported his squat, unwieldy figure, while his unusually short
      and thick arms, with no ordinary fists at their extremities, swung off
      dangling from his sides like the fins of a sea-turtle. Small eyes, of no
      particular color, twinkled far back in his head. His nose remained buried
      in the mass of flesh which enveloped his round, full, and purple face; and
      his thick upper-lip rested upon the still thicker one beneath with an air
      of complacent self-satisfaction, much heightened by the owner’s
      habit of licking them at intervals. He evidently regarded his tall
      shipmate with a feeling half-wondrous, half-quizzical; and stared up
      occasionally in his face as the red setting sun stares up at the crags of
      Ben Nevis.
    

      Various and eventful, however, had been the peregrinations of the worthy
      couple in and about the different tap-houses of the neighbourhood during
      the earlier hours of the night. Funds even the most ample, are not always
      everlasting: and it was with empty pockets our friends had ventured upon
      the present hostelrie.
    

      At the precise period, then, when this history properly commences, Legs,
      and his fellow Hugh Tarpaulin, sat, each with both elbows resting upon the
      large oaken table in the middle of the floor, and with a hand upon either
      cheek. They were eyeing, from behind a huge flagon of unpaid-for “humming-stuff,”
      the portentous words, “No Chalk,” which to their indignation
      and astonishment were scored over the doorway by means of that very
      mineral whose presence they purported to deny. Not that the gift of
      decyphering written characters—a gift among the commonalty of that
      day considered little less cabalistical than the art of inditing—could,
      in strict justice, have been laid to the charge of either disciple of the
      sea; but there was, to say the truth, a certain twist in the formation of
      the letters—an indescribable lee-lurch about the whole—which
      foreboded, in the opinion of both seamen, a long run of dirty weather; and
      determined them at once, in the allegorical words of Legs himself, to
      “pump ship, clew up all sail, and scud before the wind.”
    

      Having accordingly disposed of what remained of the ale, and looped up the
      points of their short doublets, they finally made a bolt for the street.
      Although Tarpaulin rolled twice into the fire-place, mistaking it for the
      door, yet their escape was at length happily effected—and half after
      twelve o’clock found our heroes ripe for mischief, and running for
      life down a dark alley in the direction of St. Andrew’s Stair, hotly
      pursued by the landlady of the “Jolly Tar.”
    

      At the epoch of this eventful tale, and periodically, for many years
      before and after, all England, but more especially the metropolis,
      resounded with the fearful cry of “Plague!” The city was in a
      great measure depopulated—and in those horrible regions, in the
      vicinity of the Thames, where amid the dark, narrow, and filthy lanes and
      alleys, the Demon of Disease was supposed to have had his nativity, Awe,
      Terror, and Superstition were alone to be found stalking abroad.
    

      By authority of the king such districts were placed under ban, and all
      persons forbidden, under pain of death, to intrude upon their dismal
      solitude. Yet neither the mandate of the monarch, nor the huge barriers
      erected at the entrances of the streets, nor the prospect of that
      loathsome death which, with almost absolute certainty, overwhelmed the
      wretch whom no peril could deter from the adventure, prevented the
      unfurnished and untenanted dwellings from being stripped, by the hand of
      nightly rapine, of every article, such as iron, brass, or lead-work, which
      could in any manner be turned to a profitable account.
    

      Above all, it was usually found, upon the annual winter opening of the
      barriers, that locks, bolts, and secret cellars, had proved but slender
      protection to those rich stores of wines and liquors which, in
      consideration of the risk and trouble of removal, many of the numerous
      dealers having shops in the neighbourhood had consented to trust, during
      the period of exile, to so insufficient a security.
    

      But there were very few of the terror-stricken people who attributed these
      doings to the agency of human hands. Pest-spirits, plague-goblins, and
      fever-demons, were the popular imps of mischief; and tales so
      blood-chilling were hourly told, that the whole mass of forbidden
      buildings was, at length, enveloped in terror as in a shroud, and the
      plunderer himself was often scared away by the horrors his own
      depreciations had created; leaving the entire vast circuit of prohibited
      district to gloom, silence, pestilence, and death.
    

      It was by one of the terrific barriers already mentioned, and which
      indicated the region beyond to be under the Pest-ban, that, in scrambling
      down an alley, Legs and the worthy Hugh Tarpaulin found their progress
      suddenly impeded. To return was out of the question, and no time was to be
      lost, as their pursuers were close upon their heels. With thorough-bred
      seamen to clamber up the roughly fashioned plank-work was a trifle; and,
      maddened with the twofold excitement of exercise and liquor, they leaped
      unhesitatingly down within the enclosure, and holding on their drunken
      course with shouts and yellings, were soon bewildered in its noisome and
      intricate recesses.
    

      Had they not, indeed, been intoxicated beyond moral sense, their reeling
      footsteps must have been palsied by the horrors of their situation. The
      air was cold and misty. The paving-stones, loosened from their beds, lay
      in wild disorder amid the tall, rank grass, which sprang up around the
      feet and ankles. Fallen houses choked up the streets. The most fetid and
      poisonous smells everywhere prevailed;—and by the aid of that
      ghastly light which, even at midnight, never fails to emanate from a
      vapory and pestilential atmosphere, might be discerned lying in the
      by-paths and alleys, or rotting in the windowless habitations, the carcass
      of many a nocturnal plunderer arrested by the hand of the plague in the
      very perpetration of his robbery.
    

      —But it lay not in the power of images, or sensations, or
      impediments such as these, to stay the course of men who, naturally brave,
      and at that time especially, brimful of courage and of “humming-stuff!”
      would have reeled, as straight as their condition might have permitted,
      undauntedly into the very jaws of Death. Onward—still onward stalked
      the grim Legs, making the desolate solemnity echo and re-echo with yells
      like the terrific war-whoop of the Indian: and onward, still onward rolled
      the dumpy Tarpaulin, hanging on to the doublet of his more active
      companion, and far surpassing the latter’s most strenuous exertions
      in the way of vocal music, by bull-roarings in basso, from the profundity
      of his stentorian lungs.
    

      They had now evidently reached the strong hold of the pestilence. Their
      way at every step or plunge grew more noisome and more horrible—the
      paths more narrow and more intricate. Huge stones and beams falling
      momently from the decaying roofs above them, gave evidence, by their
      sullen and heavy descent, of the vast height of the surrounding houses;
      and while actual exertion became necessary to force a passage through
      frequent heaps of rubbish, it was by no means seldom that the hand fell
      upon a skeleton or rested upon a more fleshly corpse.
    

      Suddenly, as the seamen stumbled against the entrance of a tall and
      ghastly-looking building, a yell more than usually shrill from the throat
      of the excited Legs, was replied to from within, in a rapid succession of
      wild, laughter-like, and fiendish shrieks. Nothing daunted at sounds
      which, of such a nature, at such a time, and in such a place, might have
      curdled the very blood in hearts less irrevocably on fire, the drunken
      couple rushed headlong against the door, burst it open, and staggered into
      the midst of things with a volley of curses.
    

      The room within which they found themselves proved to be the shop of an
      undertaker; but an open trap-door, in a corner of the floor near the
      entrance, looked down upon a long range of wine-cellars, whose depths the
      occasional sound of bursting bottles proclaimed to be well stored with
      their appropriate contents. In the middle of the room stood a table—in
      the centre of which again arose a huge tub of what appeared to be punch.
      Bottles of various wines and cordials, together with jugs, pitchers, and
      flagons of every shape and quality, were scattered profusely upon the
      board. Around it, upon coffin-tressels, was seated a company of six. This
      company I will endeavor to delineate one by one.
    

      Fronting the entrance, and elevated a little above his companions, sat a
      personage who appeared to be the president of the table. His stature was
      gaunt and tall, and Legs was confounded to behold in him a figure more
      emaciated than himself. His face was as yellow as saffron—but no
      feature excepting one alone, was sufficiently marked to merit a particular
      description. This one consisted in a forehead so unusually and hideously
      lofty, as to have the appearance of a bonnet or crown of flesh superadded
      upon the natural head. His mouth was puckered and dimpled into an
      expression of ghastly affability, and his eyes, as indeed the eyes of all
      at table, were glazed over with the fumes of intoxication. This gentleman
      was clothed from head to foot in a richly-embroidered black silk-velvet
      pall, wrapped negligently around his form after the fashion of a Spanish
      cloak.—His head was stuck full of sable hearse-plumes, which he
      nodded to and fro with a jaunty and knowing air; and, in his right hand,
      he held a huge human thigh-bone, with which he appeared to have been just
      knocking down some member of the company for a song.
    

      Opposite him, and with her back to the door, was a lady of no whit the
      less extraordinary character. Although quite as tall as the person just
      described, she had no right to complain of his unnatural emaciation. She
      was evidently in the last stage of a dropsy; and her figure resembled
      nearly that of the huge puncheon of October beer which stood, with the
      head driven in, close by her side, in a corner of the chamber. Her face
      was exceedingly round, red, and full; and the same peculiarity, or rather
      want of peculiarity, attached itself to her countenance, which I before
      mentioned in the case of the president—that is to say, only one
      feature of her face was sufficiently distinguished to need a separate
      characterization: indeed the acute Tarpaulin immediately observed that the
      same remark might have applied to each individual person of the party;
      every one of whom seemed to possess a monopoly of some particular portion
      of physiognomy. With the lady in question this portion proved to be the
      mouth. Commencing at the right ear, it swept with a terrific chasm to the
      left—the short pendants which she wore in either auricle continually
      bobbing into the aperture. She made, however, every exertion to keep her
      mouth closed and look dignified, in a dress consisting of a newly starched
      and ironed shroud coming up close under her chin, with a crimpled ruffle
      of cambric muslin.
    

      At her right hand sat a diminutive young lady whom she appeared to
      patronise. This delicate little creature, in the trembling of her wasted
      fingers, in the livid hue of her lips, and in the slight hectic spot which
      tinged her otherwise leaden complexion, gave evident indications of a
      galloping consumption. An air of gave extreme haut ton, however, pervaded
      her whole appearance; she wore in a graceful and degage manner, a large
      and beautiful winding-sheet of the finest India lawn; her hair hung in
      ringlets over her neck; a soft smile played about her mouth; but her nose,
      extremely long, thin, sinuous, flexible and pimpled, hung down far below
      her under lip, and in spite of the delicate manner in which she now and
      then moved it to one side or the other with her tongue, gave to her
      countenance a somewhat equivocal expression.
    

      Over against her, and upon the left of the dropsical lady, was seated a
      little puffy, wheezing, and gouty old man, whose cheeks reposed upon the
      shoulders of their owner, like two huge bladders of Oporto wine. With his
      arms folded, and with one bandaged leg deposited upon the table, he seemed
      to think himself entitled to some consideration. He evidently prided
      himself much upon every inch of his personal appearance, but took more
      especial delight in calling attention to his gaudy-colored surtout. This,
      to say the truth, must have cost him no little money, and was made to fit
      him exceedingly well—being fashioned from one of the curiously
      embroidered silken covers appertaining to those glorious escutcheons
      which, in England and elsewhere, are customarily hung up, in some
      conspicuous place, upon the dwellings of departed aristocracy.
    

      Next to him, and at the right hand of the president, was a gentleman in
      long white hose and cotton drawers. His frame shook, in a ridiculous
      manner, with a fit of what Tarpaulin called “the horrors.” His
      jaws, which had been newly shaved, were tightly tied up by a bandage of
      muslin; and his arms being fastened in a similar way at the wrists, I
      prevented him from helping himself too freely to the liquors upon the
      table; a precaution rendered necessary, in the opinion of Legs, by the
      peculiarly sottish and wine-bibbing cast of his visage. A pair of
      prodigious ears, nevertheless, which it was no doubt found impossible to
      confine, towered away into the atmosphere of the apartment, and were
      occasionally pricked up in a spasm, at the sound of the drawing of a cork.
    

      Fronting him, sixthly and lastly, was situated a singularly stiff-looking
      personage, who, being afflicted with paralysis, must, to speak seriously,
      have felt very ill at ease in his unaccommodating habiliments. He was
      habited, somewhat uniquely, in a new and handsome mahogany coffin. Its top
      or head-piece pressed upon the skull of the wearer, and extended over it
      in the fashion of a hood, giving to the entire face an air of
      indescribable interest. Arm-holes had been cut in the sides, for the sake
      not more of elegance than of convenience; but the dress, nevertheless,
      prevented its proprietor from sitting as erect as his associates; and as
      he lay reclining against his tressel, at an angle of forty-five degrees, a
      pair of huge goggle eyes rolled up their awful whites towards the ceiling
      in absolute amazement at their own enormity.
    

      Before each of the party lay a portion of a skull, which was used as a
      drinking cup. Overhead was suspended a human skeleton, by means of a rope
      tied round one of the legs and fastened to a ring in the ceiling. The
      other limb, confined by no such fetter, stuck off from the body at right
      angles, causing the whole loose and rattling frame to dangle and twirl
      about at the caprice of every occasional puff of wind which found its way
      into the apartment. In the cranium of this hideous thing lay quantity of
      ignited charcoal, which threw a fitful but vivid light over the entire
      scene; while coffins, and other wares appertaining to the shop of an
      undertaker, were piled high up around the room, and against the windows,
      preventing any ray from escaping into the street.
    

      At sight of this extraordinary assembly, and of their still more
      extraordinary paraphernalia, our two seamen did not conduct themselves
      with that degree of decorum which might have been expected. Legs, leaning
      against the wall near which he happened to be standing, dropped his lower
      jaw still lower than usual, and spread open his eyes to their fullest
      extent: while Hugh Tarpaulin, stooping down so as to bring his nose upon a
      level with the table, and spreading out a palm upon either knee, burst
      into a long, loud, and obstreperous roar of very ill-timed and immoderate
      laughter.
    

      Without, however, taking offence at behaviour so excessively rude, the
      tall president smiled very graciously upon the intruders—nodded to
      them in a dignified manner with his head of sable plumes—and,
      arising, took each by an arm, and led him to a seat which some others of
      the company had placed in the meantime for his accommodation. Legs to all
      this offered not the slightest resistance, but sat down as he was
      directed; while the gallant Hugh, removing his coffin tressel from its
      station near the head of the table, to the vicinity of the little
      consumptive lady in the winding sheet, plumped down by her side in high
      glee, and pouring out a skull of red wine, quaffed it to their better
      acquaintance. But at this presumption the stiff gentleman in the coffin
      seemed exceedingly nettled; and serious consequences might have ensued,
      had not the president, rapping upon the table with his truncheon, diverted
      the attention of all present to the following speech:
    

      “It becomes our duty upon the present happy occasion”—
    

      “Avast there!” interrupted Legs, looking very serious, “avast
      there a bit, I say, and tell us who the devil ye all are, and what
      business ye have here, rigged off like the foul fiends, and swilling the
      snug blue ruin stowed away for the winter by my honest shipmate, Will
      Wimble the undertaker!”
    

      At this unpardonable piece of ill-breeding, all the original company half
      started to their feet, and uttered the same rapid succession of wild
      fiendish shrieks which had before caught the attention of the seamen. The
      president, however, was the first to recover his composure, and at length,
      turning to Legs with great dignity, recommenced:
    

      “Most willingly will we gratify any reasonable curiosity on the part
      of guests so illustrious, unbidden though they be. Know then that in these
      dominions I am monarch, and here rule with undivided empire under the
      title of ‘King Pest the First.’
    

      “This apartment, which you no doubt profanely suppose to be the shop
      of Will Wimble the undertaker—a man whom we know not, and whose
      plebeian appellation has never before this night thwarted our royal ears—this
      apartment, I say, is the Dais-Chamber of our Palace, devoted to the
      councils of our kingdom, and to other sacred and lofty purposes.
    

      “The noble lady who sits opposite is Queen Pest, our Serene Consort.
      The other exalted personages whom you behold are all of our family, and
      wear the insignia of the blood royal under the respective titles of
      ‘His Grace the Arch Duke Pest-Iferous’—‘His Grace
      the Duke Pest-Ilential’—‘His Grace the Duke Tem-Pest’—and
      ‘Her Serene Highness the Arch Duchess Ana-Pest.’
    

      “As regards,” continued he, “your demand of the business
      upon which we sit here in council, we might be pardoned for replying that
      it concerns, and concerns alone, our own private and regal interest, and
      is in no manner important to any other than ourself. But in consideration
      of those rights to which as guests and strangers you may feel yourselves
      entitled, we will furthermore explain that we are here this night,
      prepared by deep research and accurate investigation, to examine, analyze,
      and thoroughly determine the indefinable spirit—the incomprehensible
      qualities and nature—of those inestimable treasures of the palate,
      the wines, ales, and liqueurs of this goodly metropolis: by so doing to
      advance not more our own designs than the true welfare of that unearthly
      sovereign whose reign is over us all, whose dominions are unlimited, and
      whose name is ‘Death’.”
    

      “Whose name is Davy Jones!” ejaculated Tarpaulin, helping the
      lady by his side to a skull of liqueur, and pouring out a second for
      himself.
    

      “Profane varlet!” said the president, now turning his
      attention to the worthy Hugh, “profane and execrable wretch!—we
      have said, that in consideration of those rights which, even in thy filthy
      person, we feel no inclination to violate, we have condescended to make
      reply to thy rude and unseasonable inquiries. We nevertheless, for your
      unhallowed intrusion upon our councils, believe it our duty to mulct thee
      and thy companion in each a gallon of Black Strap—having imbibed
      which to the prosperity of our kingdom—at a single draught—and
      upon your bended knees—ye shall be forthwith free either to proceed
      upon your way, or remain and be admitted to the privileges of our table,
      according to your respective and individual pleasures.”
    

      “It would be a matter of utter impossibility,” replied Legs,
      whom the assumptions and dignity of King Pest the First had evidently
      inspired some feelings of respect, and who arose and steadied himself by
      the table as he spoke—“It would, please your majesty, be a
      matter of utter impossibility to stow away in my hold even one-fourth part
      of the same liquor which your majesty has just mentioned. To say nothing
      of the stuffs placed on board in the forenoon by way of ballast, and not
      to mention the various ales and liqueurs shipped this evening at different
      sea-ports, I have, at present, a full cargo of ‘humming stuff’
      taken in and duly paid for at the sign of the ‘Jolly Tar.’ You
      will, therefore, please your majesty, be so good as to take the will for
      the deed—for by no manner of means either can I or will I swallow
      another drop—least of all a drop of that villainous bilge-water that
      answers to the hall of ‘Black Strap.’”
    

      “Belay that!” interrupted Tarpaulin, astonished not more at
      the length of his companion’s speech than at the nature of his
      refusal—“Belay that you tubber!—and I say, Legs, none of
      your palaver! My hull is still light, although I confess you yourself seem
      to be a little top-heavy; and as for the matter of your share of the
      cargo, why rather than raise a squall I would find stowageroom for it
      myself, but”—
    

      “This proceeding,” interposed the president, “is by no
      means in accordance with the terms of the mulct or sentence, which is in
      its nature Median, and not to be altered or recalled. The conditions we
      have imposed must be fulfilled to the letter, and that without a moment’s
      hesitation—in failure of which fulfilment we decree that you do here
      be tied neck and heels together, and duly drowned as rebels in yon
      hogshead of October beer!”
    

      “A sentence!—a sentence!—a righteous and just sentence!—a
      glorious decree!—a most worthy and upright, and holy condemnation!”
      shouted the Pest family altogether. The king elevated his forehead into
      innumerable wrinkles; the gouty little old man puffed like a pair of
      bellows; the lady of the winding sheet waved her nose to and fro; the
      gentleman in the cotton drawers pricked up his ears; she of the shroud
      gasped like a dying fish; and he of the coffin looked stiff and rolled up
      his eyes.
    

      “Ugh! ugh! ugh!” chuckled Tarpaulin without heeding the
      general excitation, “ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh!
      ugh! ugh!—I was saying,” said he, “I was saying when Mr.
      King Pest poked in his marlin-spike, that as for the matter of two or
      three gallons more or less of Black Strap, it was a trifle to a tight
      sea-boat like myself not overstowed—but when it comes to drinking
      the health of the Devil (whom God assoilzie) and going down upon my marrow
      bones to his ill-favored majesty there, whom I know, as well as I know
      myself to be a sinner, to be nobody in the whole world, but Tim Hurlygurly
      the stage-player—why! it’s quite another guess sort of a
      thing, and utterly and altogether past my comprehension.”
    

      He was not allowed to finish this speech in tranquillity. At the name Tim
      Hurlygurly the whole assembly leaped from their name seats.
    

      “Treason!” shouted his Majesty King Pest the First.
    

      “Treason!” said the little man with the gout.
    

      “Treason!” screamed the Arch Duchess Ana-Pest.
    

      “Treason!” muttered the gentleman with his jaws tied up.
    

      “Treason!” growled he of the coffin.
    

      “Treason! treason!” shrieked her majesty of the mouth; and,
      seizing by the hinder part of his breeches the unfortunate Tarpaulin, who
      had just commenced pouring out for himself a skull of liqueur, she lifted
      him high into the air, and let him fall without ceremony into the huge
      open puncheon of his beloved ale. Bobbing up and down, for a few seconds,
      like an apple in a bowl of toddy, he, at length, finally disappeared amid
      the whirlpool of foam which, in the already effervescent liquor, his
      struggles easily succeeded in creating.
    

      Not tamely, however, did the tall seaman behold the discomfiture of his
      companion. Jostling King Pest through the open trap, the valiant Legs
      slammed the door down upon him with an oath, and strode towards the centre
      of the room. Here tearing down the skeleton which swung over the table, he
      laid it about him with so much energy and good will, that, as the last
      glimpses of light died away within the apartment, he succeeded in knocking
      out the brains of the little gentleman with the gout. Rushing then with
      all his force against the fatal hogshead full of October ale and Hugh
      Tarpaulin, he rolled it over and over in an instant. Out burst a deluge of
      liquor so fierce—so impetuous—so overwhelming—that the
      room was flooded from wall to wall—the loaded table was overturned—the
      tressels were thrown upon their backs—the tub of punch into the
      fire-place—and the ladies into hysterics. Piles of death-furniture
      floundered about. Jugs, pitchers, and carboys mingled promiscuously in the
      melee, and wicker flagons encountered desperately with bottles of junk.
      The man with the horrors was drowned upon the spot-the little stiff
      gentleman floated off in his coffin—and the victorious Legs, seizing
      by the waist the fat lady in the shroud, rushed out with her into the
      street, and made a bee-line for the “Free and Easy,” followed
      under easy sail by the redoubtable Hugh Tarpaulin, who, having sneezed
      three or four times, panted and puffed after him with the Arch Duchess
      Ana-Pest.
    







      THREE SUNDAYS IN A WEEK
    

      “YOU hard-headed, dunder-headed, obstinate, rusty, crusty, musty,
      fusty, old savage!” said I, in fancy, one afternoon, to my grand
      uncle Rumgudgeon—shaking my fist at him in imagination.
    

      Only in imagination. The fact is, some trivial discrepancy did exist, just
      then, between what I said and what I had not the courage to say—between
      what I did and what I had half a mind to do.
    

      The old porpoise, as I opened the drawing-room door, was sitting with his
      feet upon the mantel-piece, and a bumper of port in his paw, making
      strenuous efforts to accomplish the ditty.
    

      Remplis ton verre vide!
    

      Vide ton verre plein!
    

      “My dear uncle,” said I, closing the door gently, and
      approaching him with the blandest of smiles, “you are always so very
      kind and considerate, and have evinced your benevolence in so many—so
      very many ways—that—that I feel I have only to suggest this
      little point to you once more to make sure of your full acquiescence.”
    

      “Hem!” said he, “good boy! go on!”
    

      “I am sure, my dearest uncle (you confounded old rascal!), that you
      have no design really, seriously, to oppose my union with Kate. This is
      merely a joke of yours, I know—ha! ha! ha!—how very pleasant
      you are at times.”
    

      “Ha! ha! ha!” said he, “curse you! yes!”
    

      “To be sure—of course! I knew you were jesting. Now, uncle,
      all that Kate and myself wish at present, is that you would oblige us with
      your advice as—as regards the time—you know, uncle—in
      short, when will it be most convenient for yourself, that the wedding
      shall—shall come off, you know?”
    

      “Come off, you scoundrel!—what do you mean by that?—Better
      wait till it goes on.”
    

      “Ha! ha! ha!—he! he! he!—hi! hi! hi!—ho! ho! ho!—hu!
      hu! hu!—that’s good!—oh that’s capital—such
      a wit! But all we want just now, you know, uncle, is that you would
      indicate the time precisely.”
    

      “Ah!—precisely?”
    

      “Yes, uncle—that is, if it would be quite agreeable to
      yourself.”
    

      “Wouldn’t it answer, Bobby, if I were to leave it at random—some
      time within a year or so, for example?—must I say precisely?”
    

      “If you please, uncle—precisely.”
    

      “Well, then, Bobby, my boy—you’re a fine fellow, aren’t
      you?—since you will have the exact time I’ll—why I’ll
      oblige you for once:”
    

      “Dear uncle!”
    

      “Hush, sir!” (drowning my voice)—“I’ll
      oblige you for once. You shall have my consent—and the plum, we mus’n’t
      forget the plum—let me see! when shall it be? To-day’s Sunday—isn’t
      it? Well, then, you shall be married precisely—precisely, now mind!—when
      three Sundays come together in a week! Do you hear me, sir! What are you
      gaping at? I say, you shall have Kate and her plum when three Sundays come
      together in a week—but not till then—you young scapegrace—not
      till then, if I die for it. You know me—I’m a man of my word—now
      be off!” Here he swallowed his bumper of port, while I rushed from
      the room in despair.
    

      A very “fine old English gentleman,” was my grand-uncle
      Rumgudgeon, but unlike him of the song, he had his weak points. He was a
      little, pursy, pompous, passionate semicircular somebody, with a red nose,
      a thick scull, (sic) a long purse, and a strong sense of his own
      consequence. With the best heart in the world, he contrived, through a
      predominant whim of contradiction, to earn for himself, among those who
      only knew him superficially, the character of a curmudgeon. Like many
      excellent people, he seemed possessed with a spirit of tantalization,
      which might easily, at a casual glance, have been mistaken for
      malevolence. To every request, a positive “No!” was his
      immediate answer, but in the end—in the long, long end—there
      were exceedingly few requests which he refused. Against all attacks upon
      his purse he made the most sturdy defence; but the amount extorted from
      him, at last, was generally in direct ratio with the length of the siege
      and the stubbornness of the resistance. In charity no one gave more
      liberally or with a worse grace.
    

      For the fine arts, and especially for the belles-lettres, he entertained a
      profound contempt. With this he had been inspired by Casimir Perier, whose
      pert little query “A quoi un poete est il bon?” he was in the
      habit of quoting, with a very droll pronunciation, as the ne plus ultra of
      logical wit. Thus my own inkling for the Muses had excited his entire
      displeasure. He assured me one day, when I asked him for a new copy of
      Horace, that the translation of “Poeta nascitur non fit” was
      “a nasty poet for nothing fit”—a remark which I took in
      high dudgeon. His repugnance to “the humanities” had, also,
      much increased of late, by an accidental bias in favor of what he supposed
      to be natural science. Somebody had accosted him in the street, mistaking
      him for no less a personage than Doctor Dubble L. Dee, the lecturer upon
      quack physics. This set him off at a tangent; and just at the epoch of
      this story—for story it is getting to be after all—my
      grand-uncle Rumgudgeon was accessible and pacific only upon points which
      happened to chime in with the caprioles of the hobby he was riding. For
      the rest, he laughed with his arms and legs, and his politics were
      stubborn and easily understood. He thought, with Horsley, that “the
      people have nothing to do with the laws but to obey them.”
    

      I had lived with the old gentleman all my life. My parents, in dying, had
      bequeathed me to him as a rich legacy. I believe the old villain loved me
      as his own child—nearly if not quite as well as he loved Kate—but
      it was a dog’s existence that he led me, after all. From my first
      year until my fifth, he obliged me with very regular floggings. From five
      to fifteen, he threatened me, hourly, with the House of Correction. From
      fifteen to twenty, not a day passed in which he did not promise to cut me
      off with a shilling. I was a sad dog, it is true—but then it was a
      part of my nature—a point of my faith. In Kate, however, I had a
      firm friend, and I knew it. She was a good girl, and told me very sweetly
      that I might have her (plum and all) whenever I could badger my
      grand-uncle Rumgudgeon, into the necessary consent. Poor girl!—she
      was barely fifteen, and without this consent, her little amount in the
      funds was not come-at-able until five immeasurable summers had “dragged
      their slow length along.” What, then, to do? At fifteen, or even at
      twenty-one (for I had now passed my fifth olympiad) five years in prospect
      are very much the same as five hundred. In vain we besieged the old
      gentleman with importunities. Here was a piece de resistance (as Messieurs
      Ude and Careme would say) which suited his perverse fancy to a T. It would
      have stiffed the indignation of Job himself, to see how much like an old
      mouser he behaved to us two poor wretched little mice. In his heart he
      wished for nothing more ardently than our union. He had made up his mind
      to this all along. In fact, he would have given ten thousand pounds from
      his own pocket (Kate’s plum was her own) if he could have invented
      any thing like an excuse for complying with our very natural wishes. But
      then we had been so imprudent as to broach the subject ourselves. Not to
      oppose it under such circumstances, I sincerely believe, was not in his
      power.
    

      I have said already that he had his weak points; but in speaking of these,
      I must not be understood as referring to his obstinacy: which was one of
      his strong points—“assurement ce n’ etait pas sa foible.”
      When I mention his weakness I have allusion to a bizarre old-womanish
      superstition which beset him. He was great in dreams, portents, et id
      genus omne of rigmarole. He was excessively punctilious, too, upon small
      points of honor, and, after his own fashion, was a man of his word, beyond
      doubt. This was, in fact, one of his hobbies. The spirit of his vows he
      made no scruple of setting at naught, but the letter was a bond
      inviolable. Now it was this latter peculiarity in his disposition, of
      which Kate?s ingenuity enabled us one fine day, not long after our
      interview in the dining-room, to take a very unexpected advantage, and,
      having thus, in the fashion of all modern bards and orators, exhausted in
      prolegomena, all the time at my command, and nearly all the room at my
      disposal, I will sum up in a few words what constitutes the whole pith of
      the story.
    

      It happened then—so the Fates ordered it—that among the naval
      acquaintances of my betrothed, were two gentlemen who had just set foot
      upon the shores of England, after a year’s absence, each, in foreign
      travel. In company with these gentlemen, my cousin and I, preconcertedly
      paid uncle Rumgudgeon a visit on the afternoon of Sunday, October the
      tenth,—just three weeks after the memorable decision which had so
      cruelly defeated our hopes. For about half an hour the conversation ran
      upon ordinary topics, but at last, we contrived, quite naturally, to give
      it the following turn:
    

      CAPT. PRATT. “Well I have been absent just one year.—Just one
      year to-day, as I live—let me see! yes!—this is October the
      tenth. You remember, Mr. Rumgudgeon, I called, this day year to bid you
      good-bye. And by the way, it does seem something like a coincidence, does
      it not—that our friend, Captain Smitherton, here, has been absent
      exactly a year also—a year to-day!”
    

      SMITHERTON. “Yes! just one year to a fraction. You will remember,
      Mr. Rumgudgeon, that I called with Capt. Pratol on this very day, last
      year, to pay my parting respects.”
    

      UNCLE. “Yes, yes, yes—I remember it very well—very queer
      indeed! Both of you gone just one year. A very strange coincidence,
      indeed! Just what Doctor Dubble L. Dee would denominate an extraordinary
      concurrence of events. Doctor Dub-”
    

      KATE. (Interrupting.) “To be sure, papa, it is something strange;
      but then Captain Pratt and Captain Smitherton didn’t go altogether
      the same route, and that makes a difference, you know.”
    

      UNCLE. “I don’t know any such thing, you huzzy! How should I?
      I think it only makes the matter more remarkable, Doctor Dubble L. Dee—”
    

      KATE. “Why, papa, Captain Pratt went round Cape Horn, and Captain
      Smitherton doubled the Cape of Good Hope.”
    

      UNCLE. “Precisely!—the one went east and the other went west,
      you jade, and they both have gone quite round the world. By the by, Doctor
      Dubble L. Dee—”
    

      MYSELF. (Hurriedly.) “Captain Pratt, you must come and spend the
      evening with us to-morrow—you and Smitherton—you can tell us
      all about your voyage, and we’ll have a game of whist and—”
    

      PRATT. “Wist, my dear fellow—you forget. To-morrow will be
      Sunday. Some other evening—”
    

      KATE. “Oh, no, fie!—Robert’s not quite so bad as that.
      To-day’s Sunday.”
    

      PRATT. “I beg both your pardons—but I can’t be so much
      mistaken. I know to-morrow’s Sunday, because-”
    

      SMITHERTON. (Much surprised.) “What are you all thinking about? Wasn’t
      yesterday, Sunday, I should like to know?”
    

      ALL. “Yesterday indeed! you are out!”
    

      UNCLE. “To-day’s Sunday, I say—don’t I know?”
    

      PRATT. “Oh no!—to-morrow’s Sunday.”
    

      SMITHERTON. “You are all mad—every one of you. I am as
      positive that yesterday was Sunday as I am that I sit upon this chair.”
    

      KATE. (jumping up eagerly.) “I see it—I see it all. Papa, this
      is a judgment upon you, about—about you know what. Let me alone, and
      I’ll explain it all in a minute. It’s a very simple thing,
      indeed. Captain Smitherton says that yesterday was Sunday: so it was; he
      is right. Cousin Bobby, and uncle and I say that to-day is Sunday: so it
      is; we are right. Captain Pratt maintains that to-morrow will be Sunday:
      so it will; he is right, too. The fact is, we are all right, and thus
      three Sundays have come together in a week.”
    

      SMITHERTON. (After a pause.) “By the by, Pratt, Kate has us
      completely. What fools we two are! Mr. Rumgudgeon, the matter stands thus:
      the earth, you know, is twenty-four thousand miles in circumference. Now
      this globe of the earth turns upon its own axis—revolves—spins
      round—these twenty-four thousand miles of extent, going from west to
      east, in precisely twenty-four hours. Do you understand Mr. Rumgudgeon?-”
    

      UNCLE. “To be sure—to be sure—Doctor Dub-”
    

      SMITHERTON. (Drowning his voice.) “Well, sir; that is at the rate of
      one thousand miles per hour. Now, suppose that I sail from this position a
      thousand miles east. Of course I anticipate the rising of the sun here at
      London by just one hour. I see the sun rise one hour before you do.
      Proceeding, in the same direction, yet another thousand miles, I
      anticipate the rising by two hours—another thousand, and I
      anticipate it by three hours, and so on, until I go entirely round the
      globe, and back to this spot, when, having gone twenty-four thousand miles
      east, I anticipate the rising of the London sun by no less than
      twenty-four hours; that is to say, I am a day in advance of your time.
      Understand, eh?”
    

      UNCLE. “But Double L. Dee-”
    

      SMITHERTON. (Speaking very loud.) “Captain Pratt, on the contrary,
      when he had sailed a thousand miles west of this position, was an hour,
      and when he had sailed twenty-four thousand miles west, was twenty-four
      hours, or one day, behind the time at London. Thus, with me, yesterday was
      Sunday—thus, with you, to-day is Sunday—and thus, with Pratt,
      to-morrow will be Sunday. And what is more, Mr. Rumgudgeon, it is
      positively clear that we are all right; for there can be no philosophical
      reason assigned why the idea of one of us should have preference over that
      of the other.”
    

      UNCLE. “My eyes!—well, Kate—well, Bobby!—this is a
      judgment upon me, as you say. But I am a man of my word—mark that!
      you shall have her, boy, (plum and all), when you please. Done up, by
      Jove! Three Sundays all in a row! I’ll go, and take Dubble L. Dee’s
      opinion upon that.”
    







      THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE
    

      IN FIVE VOLUMES
    

      VOLUME FOUR
    




      The Raven Edition
    

 



 


CONTENTS