The

subaltern commanding this section of the trench sat in a hunched
position in the narrow corridor of earth topped with sandbags. His
knees drawn up to serve as a support for the writing-pad, he wrote
quickly between long pauses when he bit the end of his pencil and
stared reflectively at the brown clay wall some two feet in front of
his nose. At his side a man stood, bent and motionless, peering into
the lower end of a long box, very narrow in proportion to its length,
which he held against the side of the trench so that the other end just
rose above the wall of sandbags. Further view down the trench in that
direction was barred by the traverse—the thick dividing-wall of earth
that would localise the effect of a shell-burst or a bomb. All was
quiet. The subaltern might have imagined that only he and the look-out
at his side remained buried in this flat landscape where once two
armies had flung fire and noise and steel at one another, hidden from
the sight of those who should have come to tell him that the war was
over and the armies stolen away. He did not so imagine. Ever present
to his mind was the parallel line of sandbags, some fifty yards away,
between him and which stretched a tangle of wire overgrown with rank
grasses and tufts of corn. That parallel line was the great permanent
fact in his existence. He knew it in its every aspect better than he
had ever previously known anything on this earth. Not a spot on that
apparently deserted wall might change without his being interested to
the quick. Even as he wrote, the feeling and the knowledge of it were
concrete in his brain, constraining him to this cramped attitude.

 Since October this wall of his had fronted the other wall and now it
was June. For nine long months, through snow and rain and sunshine,
from the long nights to the long pitiless days, these two walls had
remained the same, sheltering the same lurking enmities though the
individuals who temporarily incarnated them came and went. Sometimes
ablaze with stabs of darting flame, erupting bombs lobbed with a
deceptive innocent slowness through the air, belching a mass of men
who ran and stumbled and fell in an infinite variety of ways—men who
shouted and who screamed so that their voices pierced the appalling
uproar; sometimes stretching blank across the fields in a deathly
stillness as to-day; their position had never altered. The quagmire
between them, criss-crossed with barbed wire, had grown up into a waste
of grass and nodding poppies that nearly hid what looked like bundles
of weather-stained old clothes whence came a sickening, all-pervading
smell. Behind each wall, hundreds of men had died or been carried
away, maimed and broken, a lifelong burden for some human heart. Not
a sandbag of those piled to make the parapet which sheltered the
subaltern, but might have had a man's name written on it in memoriam
of a life suddenly extinguished. The necrology of the opposing parapet
would have been as full.

 In the hush which brooded over so much death—past and to come—a
pause, it would seem, where the overhanging invisible demon of war
reflected on its work—a mood of questioning, of revolt, came over the
subaltern as he scribbled his pencilled lines.

 "On a quiet evening like this one cannot help moralising a little,"
he wrote, "wondering what it's all for and what we purchase with our
death. This constant murdering of individuals on both sides who commit
the crime of inadvertently showing an inch of head—how does this help
matters?" The sharp crack of a rifle somewhere along the trench caused
the officer to raise his head, listening with all his faculties at
strain. The look-out at his side did not stir, no report followed the
first, and he bent himself again to his letter. "I don't want to appear
squeamish, fine-stomached in this rough game, but I don't think I shall
ever be able to kill cold-bloodedly. I have been unfitted by long
centuries of culture——"

 He was interrupted by the appearance of another officer, who squirmed
himself round the traverse with a pronounced stoop necessitated by his
uncommon tallness. The fair-moustached, boyish face of the new-comer
was radiant with glee.

 "I say, Lennard!" he said impetuously. "Ripping luck! We've just bagged
Fritz! You heard the shot just now? Folwell, my sergeant, got him. Been
waiting for him for over an hour, without moving a muscle. Topping
chap, Folwell. All he said was, 'Married life don't seem to 'ave
spoilt my aim, sir.' You remember, he asked for leave to get married?"

 Lennard abandoned his letter and lit a cigarette.

 "I wonder whether Fritz was married," he said with a little malicious
smile, the ideas recently in possession of him firing a final shot in a
faint rearguard action with the returning everyday occupants.

 "Well, that's one more nuisance abated."

 "Rather!" said the other, seating himself and likewise lighting a
cigarette. "Fritz must have bagged not less than a dozen of our chaps,"
he calculated, gazing reflectively at the thin spiral of tobacco smoke
which ascended straight in the still evening air. "Well, he's gone,
thank the Lord! and we got Hans yesterday and Karl the day before. I
must have a pot at old Hermann. If we could bag him we might hope for a
quiet life."

 Lennard nodded. Each one of the German snipers—if sufficiently lucky
to carry on his profession for a day or two—acquired an individuality
and a name. Hermann was an especially dangerous neighbour who lurked
somewhere in a ruined cottage that lay between the lines where they
bent away slightly from each other. He rarely fired except to kill, and
hid himself so well that not one of the numerous patrols sent out had
succeeded in discovering his lair.

 The two subalterns chatted awhile over their cigarettes, while the red
gold of the western sky faded into rose. They talked of the little
incidents of mess and trench, magnified by their isolation from the
main stream of life, and then, harking back, of the things that once
had been so important to them in London town, and were now so dwindled
and remote. A year ago Lennard was a critic who was read, and Wilson,
the tall subaltern, a painter whose first success was hanging on the
line. Both were, or had been, highly polished products of what we
called, proudly, civilisation. As they talked the old scenes came back
to them, obliterating the present. At last Wilson rose, responsive to a
subtle inner sense of time measured, independent of his consciousness.

 "Well, so long, old thing," he said, standing up and straightening his
tall form, fatigued with so much bending. The momentary forgetfulness
was fatal. On the instant a rifle cracked and the lanky subaltern
collapsed as though his knees had been knocked from under him.

 "My God!" cried Lennard, limb-paralysed by this brutally tragic
reassertion of his environment. Trembling, his heart seeming to stop
and swell within him, he bent down to his friend. He touched mere
clothed flesh, heavy and inert, on which the flies had already settled.
They buzzed away, indignantly asserting their right of pasture. A
madness of anger at this wanton annihilation of a life that was
not just a dull living but an irradiation of the spirit, connoting
civilisation, highly conscious, swept over him. He burst into a torrent
of incoherent wrathful curses.

 "That was 'Ermann, sir," said the observer at the periscope. "I spotted
the flash, in among them bricks."

 Lennard rose, fiercely vengeful.

 "Let me look. Where did you see the flash?"

  "Three o'clock from that bit of greenstuff in the middle, sir,"
replied the man, ceding his place at the periscope. "You'll see a dark
spot—that's 'is loophole."

 Lennard gazed down into the mirror of the instrument. There was just
light enough for him to pick up the spot indicated.

 "Very good." He strode, with bent back, down the trench, muttering to
himself.

 It was night when, rifle in hand, he swung himself nimbly over the
parapet. For some minutes he lay flat on the ground at the other side,
not moving an inch. Over his head the crack of rifles and the loud,
rapid hammer taps of the Maxims recommenced their fusillade against the
heap of bricks. From the first shade of dusk he had arranged that a
constant enfilading fire be kept up on the sniper's lurking-place. He
had no intention of letting Hermann slip away—yet.

 He raised his head slightly, fixed his bearings in the gloom and then,
still prone, began to nip a way through the wire entanglements. A
German flare went up, dazzling with a ghastly light, too brilliant
for distinct vision. He lay motionless. As it descended and fizzled
out upon the ground he had a clear view of his course. He was aiming
at a point in front of the German wire, whence he could enfilade the
gap between the heap of bricks and the hostile parapet. Over his head
the hard, sharp cracks of his own men's fire followed one another
continuously. They would not cease for nearly fifteen minutes yet.
Meanwhile Hermann would be lying close. He cut and wrenched at the
wire and wriggled forward, grimly disdainful of the barbs that plucked
and tore his clothes.

 Again and again a soaring German flare stopped his progress. Clearly,
this incessant fusillade was making the enemy nervous. At each
illumination he lay as if he were one of the bundles of old clothes
that occasionally he pushed against. The British parapet darted with
fire—awoke a sympathetic crackling somewhere to the right.

 At last. He settled himself in a comfortable firing position, couched
in the long damp grass. An insect, unaware in its littleness of the
large death that whistled above its world, quitted a pendent blade,
explored his cheek.

 Crack—crack—crack! the last British rifles ceased. There was an
instant's stillness, and then yet another flare shot up from the
suspicious German trench. It fell, sizzled—illuminating the ruins that
he watched with all his faculties focussed, all his nerves coming to a
point on his trigger finger—and then the world plunged into blackness.
There was silence and impenetrable darkness.

 Minute after minute dragged slowly past in a dead hush. Finger on
trigger, every fibre tense, the prone figure waited. A primeval self
awoke in him—a savage who stalked and could indefinitely maintain his
ambush. His senses were as keen as though hyper-stimulated by some
strange drug. A grim, patient lust to kill reigned in him.

 The minutes passed slowly, slowly. He looked to one of them, not yet
arrived, as to a term. When? He felt it approaching, concentrated to
a still acuter degree his attention. The trigger seemed to be pressing
against his finger. What was that? Surely something was moving there in
the gloom—by the ruin. Why did not the flare he had ordered go up? His
whole soul went out in a desperate prayer for it as he held his breath
and strove with baffled eyes against the darkness.

 Suddenly the craved-for light shot up. Perception and trigger-pressure
were instantaneous with the flash of its discharge. A running, stooping
figure pitched headforemost before the stab of flame from the rifle.

 Immediately a vicious fire from the German parapet answered this
impertinence. The slayer lay still as death, listening with painfully
acute perception to the ugly phat! of bullets in the earth around
him. A bomb fell, burst with a deafening report and a blinding flash of
flame so close that he marvelled at his escape. By an effort of will he
choked down the cough that the fumes provoked.

 Rifle-fire at night is infectious. A sporadic and probably harmless
duel sputtered up and down the trenches. At last a gun, way back
somewhere, sent over a shell, and, as though obedient to this protest
from their big brother, the rifles were silenced, one by one. The
opposing trenches again lay in darkness and quiet.

 The subaltern, assuring himself that all was still, wriggled forward
to the body of his victim, lay full-length beside it. Quickly he ran
through the dead man's pockets, stuffed a bundle of papers into his own. Then, a rifle in each hand, he crawled back to his own parapet,
climbed over and lay down. In an instant he was sound asleep.

 It was bright morning when he awoke. High up a lark was pouring out
its cheerful song. He sat up, rubbed his eyes, saw the two rifles, and
remembered with a smile. Close by him a man was heating some coffee in
a mess-tin over a methylated flame. He asked for some and drank it with
a pleasant physical sense of his body that was still alive, and could
drink. It warmed him. Then he remembered the papers he had taken from
the unlucky Hermann. Sipping at the coffee, he read a letter that was
among them.

  "Dearest Wife and Sweetheart," it ran, "I don't altogether like the
hatred of these Englishmen that your letter expresses. They only do
their duty as we do ours, and they fight well. Would all this killing
were over and we were friends again! It is in a sacred cause, I
know—we could not let our culture be stifled—but the sacrifices are
heavy. I sometimes wonder whether the old days will ever return, and
I shall once more write songs for you to sing in London and in Paris.
I can faintly hear a nightingale somewhere, or is it you?—I must
close now, as I am just ordered off to a dangerous post, and the dawn
will soon be breaking.

 "All the love of 

 Karl

." 



 Lennard, moved by a sudden curiosity, looked at the superscription
of the envelope, ready addressed. Evidently the sniper had put it in
his pocket and for gotten to give it to his comrades before setting
out. The name was familiar. He coupled it, Karl ——. His victim was
a writer of songs that his wife loved to sing and he to hear. He sat
for a moment gazing thoughtfully at the letter, yet without definite
thoughts. Then, with a sigh, he rose.

 Instantly a bullet smacked against the sandbags, missing his head by a
couple of inches.

 "Bad shot, that," he murmured as he ducked. "Lucky thing I bagged old
Hermann!"