THE
      LADY WITH THE TOY DOG

  I

T was reported that a new face had been seen on
      the quay; a lady with a little dog. Dimitri Dimitrich Gomov, who had been
      a fortnight at Talta and had got used to it, had begun to show an interest
      in new faces. As he sat in the pavilion at Verné's he saw a young
      lady, blond and fairly tall, and wearing a broad-brimmed hat, pass along
      the quay. After her ran a white Pomeranian.

 Later he saw her in the park and in the square several times a day. She
      walked by herself, always in the same broad-brimmed hat, and with this
      white dog. Nobody knew who she was, and she was spoken of as the lady with
      the toy dog.

 "If," thought Gomov, "if she is here without a husband or a friend, it
      would be as well to make her acquaintance."

 He was not yet forty, but he had a daughter of twelve and two boys at
      school. He had married young, in his second year at the University, and
      now his wife seemed half as old again as himself. She was a tall woman,
      with dark eyebrows, erect, grave, stolid, and she thought herself an
      intellectual woman. She read a great deal, called her husband not Dimitri,
      but Demitri, and in his private mind he thought her short-witted,
      narrow-minded, and ungracious. He was afraid of her and disliked being at
      home. He had begun to betray her with other women long ago, betrayed her
      frequently, and, probably for that reason nearly always spoke ill of
      women, and when they were discussed in his presence he would maintain that
      they were an inferior race.

 It seemed to him that his experience was bitter enough to give him the
      right to call them any name he liked, but he could not live a couple of
      days without the "inferior race." With men he was bored and ill at ease,
      cold and unable to talk, but when he was with women, he felt easy and knew
      what to talk about, and how to behave, and even when he was silent with
      them he felt quite comfortable. In his appearance as in his character,
      indeed in his whole nature, there was something attractive, indefinable,
      which drew women to him and charmed them; he knew it, and he, too, was
      drawn by some mysterious power to them.

 His frequent, and, indeed, bitter experiences had taught him long ago that
      every affair of that kind, at first a divine diversion, a delicious smooth
      adventure, is in the end a source of worry for a decent man, especially
      for men like those at Moscow who are slow to move, irresolute,
      domesticated, for it becomes at last an acute and extraordinary
      complicated problem and a nuisance. But whenever he met and was interested
      in a new woman, then his experience would slip away from his memory, and
      he would long to live, and everything would seem so simple and amusing.

 And it so happened that one evening he dined in the gardens, and the lady
      in the broad-brimmed hat came up at a leisurely pace and sat at the next
      table. Her expression, her gait, her dress, her coiffure told him that she
      belonged to society, that she was married, that she was paying her first
      visit to Talta, that she was alone, and that she was bored.... There is a
      great deal of untruth in the gossip about the immorality of the place. He
      scorned such tales, knowing that they were for the most part concocted by
      people who would be only too ready to sin if they had the chance, but when
      the lady sat down at the next table, only a yard or two away from him, his
      thoughts were filled with tales of easy conquests, of trips to the
      mountains; and he was suddenly possessed by the alluring idea of a quick
      transitory liaison, a moment's affair with an unknown woman whom he knew
      not even by name.

 He beckoned to the little dog, and when it came up to him, wagged his
      finger at it. The dog began to growl. Gomov again wagged his finger.

 The lady glanced at him and at once cast her eyes down.

 "He won't bite," she said and blushed.

 "May I give him a bone?"—and when she nodded emphatically, he asked
      affably: "Have you been in Talta long?"

 "About five days."

 "And I am just dragging through my second week."

 They were silent for a while.

 "Time goes quickly," she said, "and it is amazingly boring here."

 "It is the usual thing to say that it is boring here. People live quite
      happily in dull holes like Bieliev or Zhidra, but as soon as they come
      here they say: 'How boring it is! The very dregs of dullness!' One would
      think they came from Spain."

 She smiled. Then both went on eating in silence as though they did not
      know each other; but after dinner they went off together—and then
      began an easy, playful conversation as though they were perfectly happy,
      and it was all one to them where they went or what they talked of. They
      walked and talked of how the sea was strangely luminous; the water lilac,
      so soft and warm, and athwart it the moon cast a golden streak. They said
      how stifling it was after the hot day. Gomov told her how he came from
      Moscow and was a philologist by education, but in a bank by profession;
      and how he had once wanted to sing in opera, but gave it up; and how he
      had two houses in Moscow.... And from her he learned that she came from
      Petersburg, was born there, but married at S. where she had been living
      for the last two years; that she would stay another month at Talta, and
      perhaps her husband would come for her, because, he too, needed a rest.
      She could not tell him what her husband was—Provincial
      Administration or Zemstvo Council—and she seemed to think it funny.
      And Gomov found out that her name was Anna Sergueyevna.

 In his room at night, he thought of her and how they would meet next day.
      They must do so. As he was going to sleep, it struck him that she could
      only lately have left school, and had been at her lessons even as his
      daughter was then; he remembered how bashful and gauche she was when she
      laughed and talked with a stranger—it must be, he thought, the first
      time she had been alone, and in such a place with men walking after her
      and looking at her and talking to her, all with the same secret purpose
      which she could not but guess. He thought of her slender white neck and
      her pretty, grey eyes.

 "There is something touching about her," he thought as he began to fall
      asleep.

 II

 A week passed. It was a blazing day. Indoors it was stifling, and in the
      streets the dust whirled along. All day long he was plagued with thirst
      and he came into the pavilion every few minutes and offered Anna
      Sergueyevna an iced drink or an ice. It was impossibly hot.

 In the evening, when the air was fresher, they walked to the jetty to see
      the steamer come in. There was quite a crowd all gathered to meet
      somebody, for they carried bouquets. And among them were clearly marked
      the peculiarities of Talta: the elderly ladies were youngly dressed and
      there were many generals.

 The sea was rough and the steamer was late, and before it turned into the
      jetty it had to do a great deal of manœuvring. Anna Sergueyevna
      looked through her lorgnette at the steamer and the passengers as though
      she were looking for friends, and when she turned to Gomov, her eyes
      shone. She talked much and her questions were abrupt, and she forgot what
      she had said; and then she lost her lorgnette in the crowd.

 The well-dressed people went away, the wind dropped, and Gomov and Anna
      Sergueyevna stood as though they were waiting for somebody to come from
      the steamer. Anna Sergueyevna was silent. She smelled her flowers and did
      not look at Gomov.

 "The weather has got pleasanter toward evening," he said. "Where shall we
      go now? Shall we take a carriage?"

 She did not answer.

 He fixed his eyes on her and suddenly embraced her and kissed her lips,
      and he was kindled with the perfume and the moisture of the flowers; at
      once he started and looked round; had not some one seen?

 "Let us go to your—" he murmured.

 And they walked quickly away.

 Her room was stifling, and smelled of scents which she had bought at the
      Japanese shop. Gomov looked at her and thought: "What strange chances
      there are in life!" From the past there came the memory of earlier
      good-natured women, gay in their love, grateful to him for their
      happiness, short though it might be; and of others—like his wife—who
      loved without sincerity, and talked overmuch and affectedly, hysterically,
      as though they were protesting that it was not love, nor passion, but
      something more important; and of the few beautiful cold women, into whose
      eyes there would flash suddenly a fierce expression, a stubborn desire to
      take, to snatch from life more than it can give; they were no longer in
      their first youth, they were capricious, unstable, domineering, imprudent,
      and when Gomov became cold toward them then their beauty roused him to
      hatred, and the lace on their lingerie reminded him of the scales of fish.

 But here there was the shyness and awkwardness of inexperienced youth, a
      feeling of constraint; an impression of perplexity and wonder, as though
      some one had suddenly knocked at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, "the lady
      with the toy dog" took what had happened somehow seriously, with a
      particular gravity, as though thinking that this was her downfall and very
      strange and improper. Her features seemed to sink and wither, and on
      either side of her face her long hair hung mournfully down; she sat
      crestfallen and musing, exactly like a woman taken in sin in some old
      picture.

 "It is not right," she said. "You are the first to lose respect for me."

 There was a melon on the table. Gomov cut a slice and began to eat it
      slowly. At least half an hour passed in silence.

 Anna Sergueyevna was very touching; she irradiated the purity of a simple,
      devout, inexperienced woman; the solitary candle on the table hardly
      lighted her face, but it showed her very wretched.

 "Why should I cease to respect you?" asked Gomov. "You don't know what you
      are saying."

 "God forgive me!" she said, and her eyes filled with tears. "It is
      horrible."

 "You seem to want to justify yourself."

 "How can I justify myself? I am a wicked, low woman and I despise myself.
      I have no thought of justifying myself. It is not my husband that I have
      deceived, but myself. And not only now but for a long time past. My
      husband may be a good honest man, but he is a lackey. I do not know what
      work he does, but I do know that he is a lackey in his soul. I was twenty
      when I married him. I was overcome by curiosity. I longed for something.
      'Surely,' I said to myself, 'there is another kind of life.' I longed to
      live! To live, and to live.... Curiosity burned me up.... You do not
      understand it, but I swear by God, I could no longer control myself.
      Something strange was going on in me. I could not hold myself in. I told
      my husband that I was ill and came here.... And here I have been walking
      about dizzily, like a lunatic.... And now I have become a low, filthy
      woman whom everybody may despise."

 Gomov was already bored; her simple words irritated him with their
      unexpected and inappropriate repentance; but for the tears in her eyes he
      might have thought her to be joking or playing a part.

 "I do not understand," he said quietly. "What do you want?"

 She hid her face in his bosom and pressed close to him.

 "Believe, believe me, I implore you," she said. "I love a pure, honest
      life, and sin is revolting to me. I don't know myself what I am doing.
      Simple people say: 'The devil entrapped me,' and I can say of myself: 'The
      Evil One tempted me.'"

 "Don't, don't," he murmured.

 He looked into her staring, frightened eyes, kissed her, spoke quietly and
      tenderly, and gradually quieted her and she was happy again, and they both
      began to laugh.

 Later, when they went out, there was not a soul on the quay; the town with
      its cypresses looked like a city of the dead, but the sea still roared and
      broke against the shore; a boat swung on the waves; and in it sleepily
      twinkled the light of a lantern.

 They found a cab and drove out to the Oreanda.

 "Just now in the hall," said Gomov, "I discovered your name written on the
      board—von Didenitz. Is your husband a German?"

 "No. His grandfather, I believe, was a German, but he himself is an
      Orthodox Russian."

 At Oreanda they sat on a bench, not far from the church, looked down at
      the sea and were silent. Talta was hardly visible through the morning
      mist. The tops of the hills were shrouded in motionless white clouds. The
      leaves of the trees never stirred, the cicadas trilled, and the monotonous
      dull sound of the sea, coming up from below, spoke of the rest, the
      eternal sleep awaiting us. So the sea roared when there was neither Talta
      nor Oreanda, and so it roars and will roar, dully, indifferently when we
      shall be no more. And in this continual indifference to the life and death
      of each of us, lives pent up, the pledge of our eternal salvation, of the
      uninterrupted movement of life on earth and its unceasing perfection.
      Sitting side by side with a young woman, who in the dawn seemed so
      beautiful, Gomov, appeased and enchanted by the sight of the fairy scene,
      the sea, the mountains, the clouds, the wide sky, thought how at bottom,
      if it were thoroughly explored, everything on earth was beautiful,
      everything, except what we ourselves think and do when we forget the
      higher purposes of life and our own human dignity.

 A man came up—a coast-guard—gave a look at them, then went
      away. He, too, seemed mysterious and enchanted. A steamer came over from
      Feodossia, by the light of the morning star, its own lights already put
      out.

 "There is dew on the grass," said Anna Sergueyevna after a silence.

 "Yes. It is time to go home."

 They returned to the town.

 Then every afternoon they met on the quay, and lunched together, dined,
      walked, enjoyed the sea. She complained that she slept badly, that her
      heart beat alarmingly. She would ask the same question over and over
      again, and was troubled now by jealousy, now by fear that he did not
      sufficiently respect her. And often in the square or the gardens, when
      there was no one near, he would draw her close and kiss her passionately.
      Their complete idleness, these kisses in the full daylight, given timidly
      and fearfully lest any one should see, the heat, the smell of the sea and
      the continual brilliant parade of leisured, well-dressed, well-fed people
      almost regenerated him. He would tell Anna Sergueyevna how delightful she
      was, how tempting. He was impatiently passionate, never left her side, and
      she would often brood, and even asked him to confess that he did not
      respect her, did not love her at all, and only saw in her a loose woman.
      Almost every evening, rather late, they would drive out of the town, to
      Oreanda, or to the waterfall; and these drives were always delightful, and
      the impressions won during them were always beautiful and sublime.

 They expected her husband to come. But he sent a letter in which he said
      that his eyes were bad and implored his wife to come home. Anna
      Sergueyevna began to worry.

 "It is a good thing I am going away," she would say to Gomov. "It is
      fate."

 She went in a carriage and he accompanied her. They drove for a whole day.
      When she took her seat in the car of an express-train and when the second
      bell sounded, she said:

 "Let me have another look at you.... Just one more look. Just as you are."

 She did not cry, but was sad and low-spirited, and her lips trembled.

 "I will think of you—often," she said. "Good-bye. Good-bye. Don't
      think ill of me. We part for ever. We must, because we ought not to have
      met at all. Now, good-bye."

 The train moved off rapidly. Its lights disappeared, and in a minute or
      two the sound of it was lost, as though everything were agreed to put an
      end to this sweet, oblivious madness. Left alone on the platform, looking
      into the darkness, Gomov heard the trilling of the grasshoppers and the
      humming of the telegraph-wires, and felt as though he had just woke up.
      And he thought that it had been one more adventure, one more affair, and
      it also was finished and had left only a memory. He was moved, sad, and
      filled with a faint remorse; surely the young woman, whom he would never
      see again, had not been happy with him; he had been kind to her, friendly,
      and sincere, but still in his attitude toward her, in his tone and
      caresses, there had always been a thin shadow of raillery, the rather
      rough arrogance of the successful male aggravated by the fact that he was
      twice as old as she. And all the time she had called him kind, remarkable,
      noble, so that he was never really himself to her, and had involuntarily
      deceived her....

 Here at the station, the smell of autumn was in the air, and the evening
      was cool.

 "It is time for me to go North," thought Gomov, as he left the platform.
      "It is time."

 III

 At home in Moscow, it was already like winter; the stoves were heated, and
      in the mornings, when the children were getting ready to go to school, and
      had their tea, it was dark and their nurse lighted the lamp for a short
      while. The frost had already begun. When the first snow falls, the first
      day of driving in sledges, it is good to see the white earth, the white
      roofs; one breathes easily, eagerly, and then one remembers the days of
      youth. The old lime-trees and birches, white with hoarfrost, have a kindly
      expression; they are nearer to the heart than cypresses and palm-trees,
      and with the dear familiar trees there is no need to think of mountains
      and the sea.

 Gomov was a native of Moscow. He returned to Moscow on a fine frosty day,
      and when he donned his fur coat and warm gloves, and took a stroll through
      Petrovka, and when on Saturday evening he heard the church-bells ringing,
      then his recent travels and the places he had visited lost all their
      charm. Little by little he sank back into Moscow life, read eagerly three
      newspapers a day, and said that he did not read Moscow papers as a matter
      of principle. He was drawn into a round of restaurants, clubs,
      dinner-parties, parties, and he was flattered to have his house frequented
      by famous lawyers and actors, and to play cards with a professor at the
      University club. He could eat a whole plateful of hot sielianka .

 So a month would pass, and Anna Sergueyevna, he thought, would be lost in
      the mists of memory and only rarely would she visit his dreams with her
      touching smile, just as other women had done. But more than a month
      passed, full winter came, and in his memory everything was clear, as
      though he had parted from Anna Sergueyevna only yesterday. And his memory
      was lit by a light that grew ever stronger. No matter how, through the
      voices of his children saying their lessons, penetrating to the evening
      stillness of his study, through hearing a song, or the music in a
      restaurant, or the snow-storm howling in the chimney, suddenly the whole
      thing would come to life again in his memory: the meeting on the jetty,
      the early morning with the mists on the mountains, the steamer from
      Feodossia and their kisses. He would pace up and down his room and
      remember it all and smile, and then his memories would drift into dreams,
      and the past was confused in his imagination with the future. He did not
      dream at night of Anna Sergueyevna, but she followed him everywhere, like
      a shadow, watching him. As he shut his eyes, he could see her, vividly,
      and she seemed handsomer, tenderer, younger than in reality; and he seemed
      to himself better than he had been at Talta. In the evenings she would
      look at him from the bookcase, from the fireplace, from the corner; he
      could hear her breathing and the soft rustle of her dress. In the street
      he would gaze at women's faces to see if there were not one like her....

 He was filled with a great longing to share his memories with some one.
      But at home it was impossible to speak of his love, and away from home—there
      was no one. Impossible to talk of her to the other people in the house and
      the men at the bank. And talk of what? Had he loved then? Was there
      anything fine, romantic, or elevating or even interesting in his relations
      with Anna Sergueyevna? And he would speak vaguely of love, of women, and
      nobody guessed what was the matter, and only his wife would raise her dark
      eyebrows and say:

 "Demitri, the rôle of coxcomb does not suit you at all."

 One night, as he was coming out of the club with his partner, an official,
      he could not help saying:

 "If only I could tell what a fascinating woman I met at Talta."

 The official seated himself in his sledge and drove off, but suddenly
      called:

 "Dimitri Dimitrich!"

 "Yes."

 "You were right. The sturgeon was tainted."

 These banal words suddenly roused Gomov's indignation. They seemed to him
      degrading and impure. What barbarous customs and people!

 What preposterous nights, what dull, empty days! Furious card-playing,
      gourmandising, drinking, endless conversations about the same things,
      futile activities and conversations taking up the best part of the day and
      all the best of a man's forces, leaving only a stunted, wingless life,
      just rubbish; and to go away and escape was impossible—one might as
      well be in a lunatic asylum or in prison with hard labour.

 Gomov did not sleep that night, but lay burning with indignation, and then
      all next day he had a headache. And the following night he slept badly,
      sitting up in bed and thinking, or pacing from corner to corner of his
      room. His children bored him, the bank bored him, and he had no desire to
      go out or to speak to any one.

 In December when the holidays came he prepared to go on a journey and told
      his wife he was going to Petersburg to present a petition for a young
      friend of his—and went to S. Why? He did not know. He wanted to see
      Anna Sergueyevna, to talk to her, and if possible to arrange an
      assignation.

 He arrived at S. in the morning and occupied the best room in the hotel,
      where the whole floor was covered with a grey canvas, and on the table
      there stood an inkstand grey with dust, adorned with a horseman on a
      headless horse holding a net in his raised hand. The porter gave him the
      necessary information: von Didenitz; Old Goucharno Street, his own house—not
      far from the hotel; lives well, has his own horses, every one knows him.

 Gomov walked slowly to Old Goucharno Street and found the house. In front
      of it was a long, grey fence spiked with nails.

 "No getting over a fence like that," thought Gomov, glancing from the
      windows to the fence.

 He thought: "To-day is a holiday and her husband is probably at home.
      Besides it would be tactless to call and upset her. If he sent a note then
      it might fall into her husband's hands and spoil everything. It would be
      better to wait for an opportunity." And he kept on walking up and down the
      street, and round the fence, waiting for his opportunity. He saw a beggar
      go in at the gate and the dogs attack him. He heard a piano and the sounds
      came faintly to his ears. It must be Anna Sergueyevna playing. The door
      suddenly opened and out of it came an old woman, and after her ran the
      familiar white Pomeranian. Gomov wanted to call the dog, but his heart
      suddenly began to thump and in his agitation he could not remember the
      dog's name.

 He walked on, and more and more he hated the grey fence and thought with a
      gust of irritation that Anna Sergueyevna had already forgotten him, and
      was perhaps already amusing herself with some one else, as would be only
      natural in a young woman forced from morning to night to behold the
      accursed fence. He returned to his room and sat for a long time on the
      sofa, not knowing what to do. Then he dined and afterward slept for a long
      while.

 "How idiotic and tiresome it all is," he thought as he awoke and saw the
      dark windows; for it was evening. "I've had sleep enough, and what shall I
      do to-night?"

 He sat on his bed which was covered with a cheap, grey blanket, exactly
      like those used in a hospital, and tormented himself.

 "So much for the lady with the toy dog.... So much for the great
      adventure.... Here you sit."

 However, in the morning, at the station, his eye had been caught by a
      poster with large letters: "First Performance of 'The Geisha.'" He
      remembered that and went to the theatre.

 "It is quite possible she will go to the first performance," he thought.

 The theatre was full and, as usual in all provincial theatres, there was a
      thick mist above the lights, the gallery was noisily restless; in the
      first row before the opening of the performance stood the local dandies
      with their hands behind their backs, and there in the governor's box, in
      front, sat the governor's daughter, and the governor himself sat modestly
      behind the curtain and only his hands were visible. The curtain quivered;
      the orchestra tuned up for a long time, and while the audience were coming
      in and taking their seats, Gomov gazed eagerly round.

 At last Anna Sergueyevna came in. She took her seat in the third row, and
      when Gomov glanced at her his heart ached and he knew that for him there
      was no one in the whole world nearer, dearer, and more important than she;
      she was lost in this provincial rabble, the little undistinguished woman,
      with a common lorgnette in her hands, yet she filled his whole life; she
      was his grief, his joy, his only happiness, and he longed for her; and
      through the noise of the bad orchestra with its tenth-rate fiddles, he
      thought how dear she was to him. He thought and dreamed.

 With Anna Sergueyevna there came in a young man with short side-whiskers,
      very tall, stooping; with every movement he shook and bowed continually.
      Probably he was the husband whom in a bitter mood at Talta she had called
      a lackey. And, indeed, in his long figure, his side-whiskers, the little
      bald patch on the top of his head, there was something of the lackey; he
      had a modest sugary smile and in his buttonhole he wore a University badge
      exactly like a lackey's number.

 In the first entr'acte the husband went out to smoke, and she was left
      alone. Gomov, who was also in the pit, came up to her and said in a
      trembling voice with a forced smile:

 "How do you do?"

 She looked up at him and went pale. Then she glanced at him again in
      terror, not believing her eyes, clasped her fan and lorgnette tightly
      together, apparently struggling to keep herself from fainting. Both were
      silent. She sat, he stood; frightened by her emotion, not daring to sit
      down beside her. The fiddles and flutes began to play and suddenly it
      seemed to them as though all the people in the boxes were looking at them.
      She got up and walked quickly to the exit; he followed, and both walked
      absently along the corridors, down the stairs, up the stairs, with the
      crowd shifting and shimmering before their eyes; all kinds of uniforms,
      judges, teachers, crown-estates, and all with badges; ladies shone and
      shimmered before them, like fur coats on moving rows of clothes-pegs, and
      there was a draught howling through the place laden with the smell of
      tobacco and cigar-ends. And Gomov, whose heart was thudding wildly,
      thought:

 "Oh, Lord! Why all these men and that beastly orchestra?"

 At that very moment he remembered how when he had seen Anna Sergueyevna
      off that evening at the station he had said to himself that everything was
      over between them, and they would never meet again. And now how far off
      they were from the end!

 On a narrow, dark staircase over which was written: "This Way to the
      Amphitheatre," she stopped:

 "How you frightened me!" she said, breathing heavily, still pale and
      apparently stupefied. "Oh! how you frightened me! I am nearly dead. Why
      did you come? Why?"

 "Understand me, Anna," he whispered quickly. "I implore you to
      understand...."

 She looked at him fearfully, in entreaty, with love in her eyes, gazing
      fixedly to gather up in her memory every one of his features.

 "I suffer so!" she went on, not listening to him. "All the time, I thought
      only of you. I lived with thoughts of you.... And I wanted to forget, to
      forget, but why, why did you come?"

 A little above them, on the landing, two schoolboys stood and smoked and
      looked down at them, but Gomov did not care. He drew her to him and began
      to kiss her cheeks, her hands.

 "What are you doing? What are you doing?" she said in terror, thrusting
      him away.... "We were both mad. Go away to-night. You must go away at
      once.... I implore you, by everything you hold sacred, I implore you....
      The people are coming——-"

 Some one passed them on the stairs.

 "You must go away," Anna Sergueyevna went on in a whisper. "Do you hear,
      Dimitri Dimitrich? I'll come to you in Moscow. I never was happy. Now I am
      unhappy and I shall never, never be happy, never! Don't make me suffer
      even more! I swear, I'll come to Moscow. And now let us part. My dear,
      dearest darling, let us part!"

 She pressed his hand and began to go quickly down-stairs, all the while
      looking back at him, and in her eyes plainly showed that she was most
      unhappy. Gomov stood for a while, listened, then, when all was quiet he
      found his coat and left the theatre.

 IV

 And Anna Sergueyevna began to come to him in Moscow. Once every two or
      three months she would leave S., telling her husband that she was going to
      consult a specialist in women's diseases. Her husband half believed and
      half disbelieved her. At Moscow she would stay at the "Slaviansky Bazaar"
      and send a message at once to Gomov. He would come to her, and nobody in
      Moscow knew.

 Once as he was going to her as usual one winter morning—he had not
      received her message the night before—he had his daughter with him,
      for he was taking her to school which was on the way. Great wet flakes of
      snow were falling.

 "Three degrees above freezing," he said, "and still the snow is falling.
      But the warmth is only on the surface of the earth. In the upper strata of
      the atmosphere there is quite a different temperature."

 "Yes, papa. Why is there no thunder in winter?"

 He explained this too, and as he spoke he thought of his assignation, and
      that not a living soul knew of it, or ever would know. He had two lives;
      one obvious, which every one could see and know, if they were sufficiently
      interested, a life full of conventional truth and conventional fraud,
      exactly like the lives of his friends and acquaintances; and another,
      which moved underground. And by a strange conspiracy of circumstances,
      everything that was to him important, interesting, vital, everything that
      enabled him to be sincere and denied self-deception and was the very core
      of his being, must dwell hidden away from others, and everything that made
      him false, a mere shape in which he hid himself in order to conceal the
      truth, as for instance his work in the bank, arguments at the club, his
      favourite gibe about women, going to parties with his wife—all this
      was open. And, judging others by himself, he did not believe the things he
      saw, and assumed that everybody else also had his real vital life passing
      under a veil of mystery as under the cover of the night. Every man's
      intimate existence is kept mysterious, and perhaps, in part, because of
      that civilised people are so nervously anxious that a personal secret
      should be respected.

 When he had left his daughter at school, Gomov went to the "Slaviansky
      Bazaar." He took off his fur coat down-stairs, went up and knocked quietly
      at the door. Anna Sergueyevna, wearing his favourite grey dress, tired by
      the journey, had been expecting him to come all night. She was pale, and
      looked at him without a smile, and flung herself on his breast as soon as
      he entered. Their kiss was long and lingering as though they had not seen
      each other for a couple of years.

 "Well, how are you getting on down there?" he asked. "What is your news?"

 "Wait. I'll tell you presently.... I cannot."

 She could not speak, for she was weeping. She turned her face from him and
      dried her eyes.

 "Well, let her cry a bit.... I'll wait," he thought, and sat down.

 Then he rang and ordered tea, and then, as he drank it, she stood and
      gazed out of the window.... She was weeping in distress, in the bitter
      knowledge that their life had fallen out so sadly; only seeing each other
      in secret, hiding themselves away like thieves! Was not their life
      crushed?

 "Don't cry.... Don't cry," he said.

 It was clear to him that their love was yet far from its end, which there
      was no seeing. Anna Sergueyevna was more and more passionately attached to
      him; she adored him and it was inconceivable that he should tell her that
      their love must some day end; she would not believe it.

 He came up to her and patted her shoulder fondly and at that moment he saw
      himself in the mirror.

 His hair was already going grey. And it seemed strange to him that in the
      last few years he should have got so old and ugly. Her shoulders were warm
      and trembled to his touch. He was suddenly filled with pity for her life,
      still so warm and beautiful, but probably beginning to fade and wither,
      like his own. Why should she love him so much? He always seemed to women
      not what he really was, and they loved in him, not himself, but the
      creature of their imagination, the thing they hankered for in life, and
      when they had discovered their mistake, still they loved him. And not one
      of them was happy with him. Time passed; he met women and was friends with
      them, went further and parted, but never once did he love; there was
      everything but love.

 And now at last when his hair was grey he had fallen in love, real love—for
      the first time in his life.

 Anna Sergueyevna and he loved one another, like dear kindred, like husband
      and wife, like devoted friends; it seemed to them that Fate had destined
      them for one another, and it was inconceivable that he should have a wife,
      she a husband; they were like two birds of passage, a male and a female,
      which had been caught and forced to live in separate cages. They had
      forgiven each other all the past of which they were ashamed; they forgave
      everything in the present, and they felt that their love had changed both
      of them.

 Formerly, when he felt a melancholy compunction, he used to comfort
      himself with all kinds of arguments, just as they happened to cross his
      mind, but now he was far removed from any such ideas; he was filled with a
      profound pity, and he desired to be tender and sincere....

 "Don't cry, my darling," he said. "You have cried enough.... Now let us
      talk and see if we can't find some way out."

 Then they talked it all over, and tried to discover some means of avoiding
      the necessity for concealment and deception, and the torment of living in
      different towns, and of not seeing each other for a long time. How could
      they shake off these intolerable fetters?

 "How? How?" he asked, holding his head in his hands. "How?"

 And it seemed that but a little while and the solution would be found and
      there would begin a lovely new life; and to both of them it was clear that
      the end was still very far off, and that their hardest and most difficult
      period was only just beginning.