LASTING LOVE

 It was the end of the dinner that opened the shooting season. The Marquis
      de Bertrans with his guests sat around a brightly lighted table, covered
      with fruit and flowers. The conversation drifted to love. Immediately
      there arose an animated discussion, the same eternal discussion as to
      whether it were possible to love more than once. Examples were given of
      persons who had loved once; these were offset by those who had loved
      violently many times. The men agreed that passion, like sickness, may
      attack the same person several times, unless it strikes to kill. This
      conclusion seemed quite incontestable. The women, however, who based their
      opinion on poetry rather than on practical observation, maintained that
      love, the great passion, may come only once to mortals. It resembles
      lightning, they said, this love. A heart once touched by it becomes
      forever such a waste, so ruined, so consumed, that no other strong
      sentiment can take root there, not even a dream. The marquis, who had
      indulged in many love affairs, disputed this belief.

 “I tell you it is possible to love several times with all one's
      heart and soul. You quote examples of persons who have killed themselves
      for love, to prove the impossibility of a second passion. I wager that if
      they had not foolishly committed suicide, and so destroyed the possibility
      of a second experience, they would have found a new love, and still
      another, and so on till death. It is with love as with drink. He who has
      once indulged is forever a slave. It is a thing of temperament.”

 They chose the old doctor as umpire. He thought it was as the marquis had
      said, a thing of temperament.

 “As for me,” he said, “I once knew of a love which
      lasted fifty-five years without one day's respite, and which ended only
      with death.” The wife of the marquis clasped her hands.

 “That is beautiful! Ah, what a dream to be loved in such a way! What
      bliss to live for fifty-five years enveloped in an intense, unwavering
      affection! How this happy being must have blessed his life to be so
      adored!”

 The doctor smiled.

 “You are not mistaken, madame, on this point the loved one was a
      man. You even know him; it is Monsieur Chouquet, the chemist. As to the
      woman, you also know her, the old chair-mender, who came every year to the
      chateau.” The enthusiasm of the women fell. Some expressed their
      contempt with “Pouah!” for the loves of common people did not
      interest them. The doctor continued: “Three months ago I was called
      to the deathbed of the old chair-mender. The priest had preceded me. She
      wished to make us the executors of her will. In order that we might
      understand her conduct, she told us the story of her life. It is most
      singular and touching: Her father and mother were both chair-menders. She
      had never lived in a house. As a little child she wandered about with
      them, dirty, unkempt, hungry. They visited many towns, leaving their
      horse, wagon and dog just outside the limits, where the child played in
      the grass alone until her parents had repaired all the broken chairs in
      the place. They seldom spoke, except to cry, 'Chairs! Chairs!
      Chair-mender!'

 “When the little one strayed too far away, she would be called back
      by the harsh, angry voice of her father. She never heard a word of
      affection. When she grew older, she fetched and carried the broken chairs.
      Then it was she made friends with the children in the street, but their
      parents always called them away and scolded them for speaking to the
      barefooted child. Often the boys threw stones at her. Once a kind woman
      gave her a few pennies. She saved them most carefully.

 “One day—she was then eleven years old—as she was
      walking through a country town she met, behind the cemetery, little
      Chouquet, weeping bitterly, because one of his playmates had stolen two
      precious liards (mills). The tears of the small bourgeois, one of those
      much-envied mortals, who, she imagined, never knew trouble, completely
      upset her. She approached him and, as soon as she learned the cause of his
      grief, she put into his hands all her savings. He took them without
      hesitation and dried his eyes. Wild with joy, she kissed him. He was busy
      counting his money, and did not object. Seeing that she was not repulsed,
      she threw her arms round him and gave him a hug—then she ran away.

 “What was going on in her poor little head? Was it because she had
      sacrificed all her fortune that she became madly fond of this youngster,
      or was it because she had given him the first tender kiss? The mystery is
      alike for children and for those of riper years. For months she dreamed of
      that corner near the cemetery and of the little chap. She stole a sou here
      and, there from her parents on the chair money or groceries she was sent
      to buy. When she returned to the spot near the cemetery she had two francs
      in her pocket, but he was not there. Passing his father's drug store, she
      caught sight of him behind the counter. He was sitting between a large red
      globe and a blue one. She only loved him the more, quite carried away at
      the sight of the brilliant-colored globes. She cherished the recollection
      of it forever in her heart. The following year she met him near the school
      playing marbles. She rushed up to him, threw her arms round him, and
      kissed him so passionately that he screamed, in fear. To quiet him, she
      gave him all her money. Three francs and twenty centimes! A real gold
      mine, at which he gazed with staring eyes.

 “After this he allowed her to kiss him as much as she wished. During
      the next four years she put into his hands all her savings, which he
      pocketed conscientiously in exchange for kisses. At one time it was thirty
      sous, at another two francs. Again, she only had twelve sous. She wept
      with grief and shame, explaining brokenly that it had been a poor year.
      The next time she brought five francs, in one whole piece, which made her
      laugh with joy. She no longer thought of any one but the boy, and he
      watched for her with impatience; sometimes he would run to meet her. This
      made her heart thump with joy. Suddenly he disappeared. He had gone to
      boarding school. She found this out by careful investigation. Then she
      used great diplomacy to persuade her parents to change their route and
      pass by this way again during vacation. After a year of scheming she
      succeeded. She had not seen him for two years, and scarcely recognized
      him, he was so changed, had grown taller, better looking and was imposing
      in his uniform, with its brass buttons. He pretended not to see her, and
      passed by without a glance. She wept for two days and from that time loved
      and suffered unceasingly.

 “Every year he came home and she passed him, not daring to lift her
      eyes. He never condescended to turn his head toward her. She loved him
      madly, hopelessly. She said to me:

 “'He is the only man whom I have ever seen. I don't even know if
      another exists.' Her parents died. She continued their work.

 “One day, on entering the village, where her heart always remained,
      she saw Chouquet coming out of his pharmacy with a young lady leaning on
      his arm. She was his wife. That night the chair-mender threw herself into
      the river. A drunkard passing the spot pulled her out and took her to the
      drug store. Young Chouquet came down in his dressing gown to revive her.
      Without seeming to know who she was he undressed her and rubbed her; then
      he said to her, in a harsh voice:

 “'You are mad! People must not do stupid things like that.' His
      voice brought her to life again. He had spoken to her! She was happy for a
      long time. He refused remuneration for his trouble, although she insisted.

 “All her life passed in this way. She worked, thinking always of
      him. She began to buy medicines at his pharmacy; this gave her a chance to
      talk to him and to see him closely. In this way, she was still able to
      give him money.

 “As I said before, she died this spring. When she had closed her
      pathetic story she entreated me to take her earnings to the man she loved.
      She had worked only that she might leave him something to remind him of
      her after her death. I gave the priest fifty francs for her funeral
      expenses. The next morning I went to see the Chouquets. They were
      finishing breakfast, sitting opposite each other, fat and red, important
      and self-satisfied. They welcomed me and offered me some coffee, which I
      accepted. Then I began my story in a trembling voice, sure that they would
      be softened, even to tears. As soon as Chouquet understood that he had
      been loved by 'that vagabond! that chair-mender! that wanderer!' he swore
      with indignation as though his reputation had been sullied, the respect of
      decent people lost, his personal honor, something precious and dearer to
      him than life, gone. His exasperated wife kept repeating: 'That beggar!
      That beggar!'

 “Seeming unable to find words suitable to the enormity, he stood up
      and began striding about. He muttered: 'Can you understand anything so
      horrible, doctor? Oh, if I had only known it while she was alive, I should
      have had her thrown into prison. I promise you she would not have
      escaped.'

 “I was dumfounded; I hardly knew what to think or say, but I had to
      finish my mission. 'She commissioned me,' I said, 'to give you her
      savings, which amount to three thousand five hundred francs. As what I
      have just told you seems to be very disagreeable, perhaps you would prefer
      to give this money to the poor.'

 “They looked at me, that man and woman,' speechless with amazement.
      I took the few thousand francs from out of my pocket. Wretched-looking
      money from every country. Pennies and gold pieces all mixed together. Then
      I asked:

 “'What is your decision?'

 “Madame Chouquet spoke first. 'Well, since it is the dying woman's
      wish, it seems to me impossible to refuse it.'

 “Her husband said, in a shamefaced manner: 'We could buy something
      for our children with it.'

 “I answered dryly: 'As you wish.'

 “He replied: 'Well, give it to us anyhow, since she commissioned you
      to do so; we will find a way to put it to some good purpose.'

 “I gave them the money, bowed and left.

 “The next day Chouquet came to me and said brusquely:

 “'That woman left her wagon here—what have you done with it?'

 “'Nothing; take it if you wish.'

 “'It's just what I wanted,' he added, and walked off. I called him
      back and said:

 “'She also left her old horse and two dogs. Don't you need them?'

 “He stared at me surprised: 'Well, no! Really, what would I do with
      them?'

 “'Dispose of them as you like.'

 “He laughed and held out his hand to me. I shook it. What could I
      do? The doctor and the druggist in a country village must not be at
      enmity. I have kept the dogs. The priest took the old horse. The wagon is
      useful to Chouquet, and with the money he has bought railroad stock. That
      is the only deep, sincere love that I have ever known in all my life.”

 The doctor looked up. The marquise, whose eyes were full of tears, sighed
      and said:

 “There is no denying the fact, only women know how to love.”