LETTER TO MR. B—. 

 “WEST POINT, 1831.

 “DEAR B......... Believing only a portion of my former volume to be
      worthy a second edition-that small portion I thought it as well to include
      in the present book as to republish by itself. I have therefore herein
      combined ‘Al Aaraaf’ and ‘Tamerlane’ with other
      poems hitherto unprinted. Nor have I hesitated to insert from the ‘Minor
      Poems,’ now omitted, whole lines, and even passages, to the end that
      being placed in a fairer light, and the trash shaken from them in which
      they were imbedded, they may have some chance of being seen by posterity.

 “It has been said that a good critique on a poem may be written by
      one who is no poet himself. This, according to your idea and mine of
      poetry, I feel to be false-the less poetical the critic, the less just the
      critique, and the converse. On this account, and because there are but few
      B-’s in the world, I would be as much ashamed of the world’s
      good opinion as proud of your own. Another than yourself might here
      observe, ‘Shakespeare is in possession of the world’s good
      opinion, and yet Shakespeare is the greatest of poets. It appears then
      that the world judge correctly, why should you be ashamed of their
      favorable judgment?’ The difficulty lies in the interpretation of
      the word ‘judgment’ or ‘opinion.’ The opinion is
      the world’s, truly, but it may be called theirs as a man would call
      a book his, having bought it; he did not write the book, but it is his;
      they did not originate the opinion, but it is theirs. A fool, for example,
      thinks Shakespeare a great poet-yet the fool has never read Shakespeare.
      But the fool’s neighbor, who is a step higher on the Andes of the
      mind, whose head (that is to say, his more exalted thought) is too far
      above the fool to be seen or understood, but whose feet (by which I mean
      his everyday actions) are sufficiently near to be discerned, and by means
      of which that superiority is ascertained, which but for them would never
      have been discovered-this neighbor asserts that Shakespeare is a great
      poet—the fool believes him, and it is henceforward his opinion. This neighbor’s own opinion has, in like manner, been adopted
      from one above him, and so, ascendingly, to a few gifted individuals who
      kneel around the summit, beholding, face to face, the master spirit who
      stands upon the pinnacle.

 “You are aware of the great barrier in the path of an American
      writer. He is read, if at all, in preference to the combined and
      established wit of the world. I say established; for it is with literature
      as with law or empire-an established name is an estate in tenure, or a
      throne in possession. Besides, one might suppose that books, like their
      authors, improve by travel-their having crossed the sea is, with us, so
      great a distinction. Our antiquaries abandon time for distance; our very
      fops glance from the binding to the bottom of the title-page, where the
      mystic characters which spell London, Paris, or Genoa, are precisely so
      many letters of recommendation.

 “I mentioned just now a vulgar error as regards criticism. I think
      the notion that no poet can form a correct estimate of his own writings is
      another. I remarked before that in proportion to the poetical talent would
      be the justice of a critique upon poetry. Therefore a bad poet would, I
      grant, make a false critique, and his self-love would infallibly bias his
      little judgment in his favor; but a poet, who is indeed a poet, could not,
      I think, fail of making-a just critique; whatever should be deducted on
      the score of self-love might be replaced on account of his intimate
      acquaintance with the subject; in short, we have more instances of false
      criticism than of just where one’s own writings are the test, simply
      because we have more bad poets than good. There are, of course, many
      objections to what I say: Milton is a great example of the contrary; but
      his opinion with respect to the ‘Paradise Regained’ is by no
      means fairly ascertained. By what trivial circumstances men are often led
      to assert what they do not really believe! Perhaps an inadvertent word has
      descended to posterity. But, in fact, the ‘Paradise Regained’
      is little, if at all, inferior to the ‘Paradise Lost,’ and is
      only supposed so to be because men do not like epics, whatever they may
      say to the contrary, and, reading those of Milton in their natural order,
      are too much wearied with the first to derive any pleasure from the
      second.

 “I dare say Milton preferred ‘Comus’ to either-. if
      so-justly.

 “As I am speaking of poetry, it will not be amiss to touch slightly
      upon the most singular heresy in its modern history-the heresy of what is
      called, very foolishly, the Lake School. Some years ago I might have been
      induced, by an occasion like the present, to attempt a formal refutation
      of their doctrine; at present it would be a work of supererogation. The
      wise must bow to the wisdom of such men as Coleridge and Southey, but,
      being wise, have laughed at poetical theories so prosaically exemplifled.

 “Aristotle, with singular assurance, has declared poetry the most
      philosophical of all writings*-but it required a Wordsworth to pronounce
      it the most metaphysical. He seems to think that the end of poetry is, or
      should be, instruction; yet it is a truism that the end of our existence
      is happiness; if so, the end of every separate part of our existence,
      everything connected with our existence, should be still happiness.
      Therefore the end of instruction should be happiness; and happiness is
      another name for pleasure;-therefore the end of instruction should be
      pleasure: yet we see the above-mentioned opinion implies precisely the
      reverse.

 “To proceed: ceteris paribus, he who pleases is of more
      importance to his fellow-men than he who instructs, since utility is
      happiness, and pleasure is the end already obtained which instruction is
      merely the means of obtaining.

 “I see no reason, then, why our metaphysical poets should plume
      themselves so much on the utility of their works, unless indeed they refer
      to instruction with eternity in view; in which case, sincere respect for
      their piety would not allow me to express my contempt for their judgment;
      contempt which it would be difficult to conceal, since their writings are
      professedly to be understood by the few, and it is the many who stand in
      need of salvation. In such case I should no doubt be tempted to think of
      the devil in ‘Melmoth.’ who labors indefatigably, through
      three octavo volumes, to accomplish the destruction of one or two souls,
      while any common devil would have demolished one or two thousand.

 “Against the subtleties which would make poetry a study-not a passion-it
becomes the metaphysician to reason-but the poet to protest.
Yet Wordsworth and Coleridge are men in years; the one imbued in
contemplation from his childhood; the other a giant in intellect and
learning. The diffidence, then, with which I venture to dispute their
authority would be overwhelming did I not feel, from the bottom of my
heart, that learning has little to do with the imagination-intellect
with the passions-or age with poetry.

     “‘Trifles, like straws, upon the surface flow;
     He who would search for pearls must dive below,’

 are lines which have done much mischief. As regards the greater truths,
      men oftener err by seeking them at the bottom than at the top; Truth lies
      in the huge abysses where wisdom is sought-not in the palpable palaces
      where she is found. The ancients were not always right in hiding—the
      goddess in a well; witness the light which Bacon has thrown upon
      philosophy; witness the principles of our divine faith—that moral
      mechanism by which the simplicity of a child may overbalance the wisdom of
      a man.

 “We see an instance of Coleridge’s liability to err, in his
      ‘Biographia Literaria’—professedly his literary life and
      opinions, but, in fact, a treatise de omni scibili et quibusdam aliis. He goes wrong by reason of his very profundity, and of his error we
      have a natural type in the contemplation of a star. He who regards it
      directly and intensely sees, it is true, the star, but it is the star
      without a ray-while he who surveys it less inquisitively is conscious of
      all for which the star is useful to us below-its brilliancy and its
      beauty.

 “As to Wordsworth, I have no faith in him. That he had in youth the
      feelings of a poet I believe-for there are glimpses of extreme delicacy in
      his writings-(and delicacy is the poet’s own kingdom-his El
      Dorado)-but they have the appearance of a better day recollected; and
      glimpses, at best, are little evidence of present poetic fire; we know
      that a few straggling flowers spring up daily in the crevices of the
      glacier.

 “He was to blame in wearing away his youth in contemplation with the
      end of poetizing in his manhood. With the increase of his judgment the
      light which should make it apparent has faded away. His judgment
      consequently is too correct. This may not be understood-but the old Goths
      of Germany would have understood it, who used to debate matters of
      importance to their State twice, once when drunk, and once when
      sober-sober that they might not be deficient in formality—drunk lest
      they should be destitute of vigor.

 “The long wordy discussions by which he tries to reason us into
      admiration of his poetry, speak very little in his favor: they are full of
      such assertions as this (I have opened one of his volumes at random)—‘Of
      genius the only proof is the act of doing well what is worthy to be done,
      and what was never done before;’-indeed? then it follows that in
      doing what is unworthy to be done, or what has been done before, no
      genius can be evinced; yet the picking of pockets is an unworthy act,
      pockets have been picked time immemorial, and Barrington, the pickpocket,
      in point of genius, would have thought hard of a comparison with William
      Wordsworth, the poet.

 “Again, in estimating the merit of certain poems, whether they be
      Ossian’s or Macpherson’s can surely be of little consequence,
      yet, in order to prove their worthlessness, Mr. W. has expended many pages
      in the controversy. Tantaene animis? Can great minds descend to
      such absurdity? But worse still: that he may bear down every argument in
      favor of these poems, he triumphantly drags forward a passage, in his
      abomination with which he expects the reader to sympathize. It is the
      beginning of the epic poem ‘Temora.’ ‘The blue waves of
      Ullin roll in light; the green hills are covered with day; trees shake
      their dusty heads in the breeze.’ And this this gorgeous, yet simple
      imagery, where all is alive and panting with immortality-this, William
      Wordsworth, the author of ‘Peter Bell,’ has selected for
      his contempt. We shall see what better he, in his own person, has to
      offer. Imprimis:

 “‘And now she’s at the pony’s tail,
     And now she’s at the pony’s head,
     On that side now, and now on this;
     And, almost stifled with her bliss,

     A few sad tears does Betty shed....
     She pats the pony, where or when
     She knows not.... happy Betty Foy!
     Oh, Johnny, never mind the doctor!’

 Secondly:

 “‘The dew was falling fast, the-stars began to b2151link;
     I heard a voice: it said-“Drink, pretty creature, drink!”
      And, looking o’er the hedge, be-fore me I espied
     A snow-white mountain lamb, with a-maiden at its side.
     No other sheep was near,—the lamb was all alone,
     And by a slender cord was-tether’d to a stone.’

 “Now, we have no doubt this is all true: we will believe it, indeed
      we will, Mr. W. Is it sympathy for the sheep you wish to excite? I love a
      sheep from the bottom of my heart.

 “But there are occasions, dear B-, there are occasions when even
      Wordsworth is reasonable. Even Stamboul, it is said, shall have an end,
      and the most unlucky blunders must come to a conclusion. Here is an
      extract from his preface:-

 “‘Those who have been accustomed to the phraseology of modem
      writers, if they persist in reading this book to a conclusion (impossible!)
      will, no doubt, have to struggle with feelings of awkwardness; (ha!
      ha! ha!) they will look round for poetry (ha! ha! ha! ha!), and will be
      induced to inquire by what species of courtesy these attempts have been
      permitted to assume that title.’ Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!

 “Yet, let not Mr. W. despair; he has given immortality to a wagon,
      and the bee Sophocles has transmitted to eternity a sore toe, and
      dignified a tragedy with a chorus of turkeys.

 “Of Coleridge, I can not speak but with reverence. His towering
      intellect! his gigantic power! To use an author quoted by himself, ‘Tai
      trouv? souvent que la plupart des sectes ont raison dans une bonne partie
      de ce qu’elles avancent, mais non pas en ce qu’elles nient,’
      and to employ his own language, he has imprisoned his own conceptions
      by the barrier he has erected against those of others. It is lamentable to
      think that such a mind should be buried in metaphysics, and, like the
      Nyctanthes, waste its perfume upon the night alone. In reading that man’s
      poetry, I tremble like one who stands upon a volcano, conscious from the
      very darkness bursting from the crater, of the fire and the light that are
      weltering below.

 “What is poetry?—Poetry! that Proteus-like idea, with as many
      appellations as the nine-titled Corcyra! ‘Give me,’ I demanded
      of a scholar some time ago, ‘give me a definition of poetry.’ ‘Tr?svolontiers;’ and he proceeded to his library,
      brought me a Dr. Johnson, and overwhelmed me with a definition. Shade of
      the immortal Shakespeare! I imagine to myself the scowl of your spiritual
      eye upon the profanity of that scurrilous Ursa Major. Think of poetry,
      dear B-, think of poetry, and then think of Dr. Samuel Johnson! Think of
      all that is airy and fairy-like, and then of all that is hideous and
      unwieldy; think of his huge bulk, the Elephant! and then-and then think of
      the ‘Tempest’—the ‘Midsummer-Night’s Dream’—Prospero
      Oberon—and Titania!

 “A poem, in my opinion, is opposed to a work of science by having,
      for its immediate object, pleasure, not truth; to romance, by
      having, for its object, an indefinite instead of a definite pleasure,
      being a poem only so far as this object is attained; romance presenting
      perceptible images with definite, poetry with indefinite sensations, to
      which end music is an essential, since the comprehension of sweet
      sound is our most indefinite conception. Music, when combined with a
      pleasurable idea, is poetry; music, without the idea, is simply music; the
      idea, wi thout the music, is prose, from its very definitiveness.

 “What was meant by the invective against him who had no music in his
      soul?

 “To sum up this long rigmarole, I have, dear B—, what you, no
      doubt, perceive, for the metaphysical poets as poets, the most sovereign
      contempt. That they have followers proves nothing-

 “‘No Indian prince has to his palace
     More followers than a thief to the gallows.