LIEUTENANT LARE'S MARRIAGE
    

      Since the beginning of the campaign Lieutenant Lare had taken two cannon
      from the Prussians. His general had said: “Thank you, lieutenant,”
      and had given him the cross of honor.
    

      As he was as cautious as he was brave, wary, inventive, wily and
      resourceful, he was entrusted with a hundred soldiers and he organized a
      company of scouts who saved the army on several occasions during a
      retreat.
    

      But the invading army entered by every frontier like a surging sea. Great
      waves of men arrived one after the other, scattering all around them a
      scum of freebooters. General Carrel's brigade, separated from its
      division, retreated continually, fighting each day, but remaining almost
      intact, thanks to the vigilance and agility of Lieutenant Lare, who seemed
      to be everywhere at the same moment, baffling all the enemy's cunning,
      frustrating their plans, misleading their Uhlans and killing their
      vanguards.
    

      One morning the general sent for him.
    

      “Lieutenant,” said he, “here is a dispatch from General
      de Lacere, who will be destroyed if we do not go to his aid by sunrise
      to-morrow. He is at Blainville, eight leagues from here. You will start at
      nightfall with three hundred men, whom you will echelon along the road. I
      will follow you two hours later. Study the road carefully; I fear we may
      meet a division of the enemy.”
    

      It had been freezing hard for a week. At two o'clock it began to snow, and
      by night the ground was covered and heavy white swirls concealed objects
      hard by.
    

      At six o'clock the detachment set out.
    

      Two men walked alone as scouts about three yards ahead. Then came a
      platoon of ten men commanded by the lieutenant himself. The rest followed
      them in two long columns. To the right and left of the little band, at a
      distance of about three hundred feet on either side, some soldiers marched
      in pairs.
    

      The snow, which was still falling, covered them with a white powder in the
      darkness, and as it did not melt on their uniforms, they were hardly
      distinguishable in the night amid the dead whiteness of the landscape.
    

      From time to time they halted. One heard nothing but that indescribable,
      nameless flutter of falling snow—a sensation rather than a sound, a
      vague, ominous murmur. A command was given in a low tone and when the
      troop resumed its march it left in its wake a sort of white phantom
      standing in the snow. It gradually grew fainter and finally disappeared.
      It was the echelons who were to lead the army.
    

      The scouts slackened their pace. Something was ahead of them.
    

      “Turn to the right,” said the lieutenant; “it is the
      Ronfi wood; the chateau is more to the left.”
    

      Presently the command “Halt” was passed along. The detachment
      stopped and waited for the lieutenant, who, accompanied by only ten men,
      had undertaken a reconnoitering expedition to the chateau.
    

      They advanced, creeping under the trees. Suddenly they all remained
      motionless. Around them was a dead silence. Then, quite near them, a
      little clear, musical young voice was heard amid the stillness of the
      wood.
    

      “Father, we shall get lost in the snow. We shall never reach
      Blainville.”
    

      A deeper voice replied:
    

      “Never fear, little daughter; I know the country as well as I know
      my pocket.”
    

      The lieutenant said a few words and four men moved away silently, like
      shadows.
    

      All at once a woman's shrill cry was heard through the darkness. Two
      prisoners were brought back, an old man and a young girl. The lieutenant
      questioned them, still in a low tone:
    

      “Your name?”
    

      “Pierre Bernard.”
    

      “Your profession?”
    

      “Butler to Comte de Ronfi.”
    

      “Is this your daughter?”
    

      'Yes!'
    

      “What does she do?”
    

      “She is laundress at the chateau.”
    

      “Where are you going?”
    

      “We are making our escape.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Twelve Uhlans passed by this evening. They shot three keepers and
      hanged the gardener. I was alarmed on account of the little one.”
    

      “Whither are you bound?”
    

      “To Blainville.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Because there is a French army there.”
    

      “Do you know the way?”
    

      “Perfectly.”
    

      “Well then, follow us.”
    

      They rejoined the column and resumed their march across country. The old
      man walked in silence beside the lieutenant, his daughter walking at his
      side. All at once she stopped.
    

      “Father,” she said, “I am so tired I cannot go any
      farther.”
    

      And she sat down. She was shaking with cold and seemed about to lose
      consciousness. Her father wanted to carry her, but he was too old and too
      weak.
    

      “Lieutenant,” said he, sobbing, “we shall only impede
      your march. France before all. Leave us here.”
    

      The officer had given a command. Some men had started off. They came back
      with branches they had cut, and in a minute a litter was ready. The whole
      detachment had joined them by this time.
    

      “Here is a woman dying of cold,” said the lieutenant. “Who
      will give his cape to cover her?”
    

      Two hundred capes were taken off. The young girl was wrapped up in these
      warm soldiers' capes, gently laid in the litter, and then four' hardy
      shoulders lifted her up, and like an Eastern queen borne by her slaves she
      was placed in the center of the detachment of soldiers, who resumed their
      march with more energy, more courage, more cheerfulness, animated by the
      presence of a woman, that sovereign inspiration that has stirred the old
      French blood to so many deeds of valor.
    

      At the end of an hour they halted again and every one lay down in the
      snow. Over yonder on the level country a big, dark shadow was moving. It
      looked like some weird monster stretching itself out like a serpent, then
      suddenly coiling itself into a mass, darting forth again, then back, and
      then forward again without ceasing. Some whispered orders were passed
      around among the soldiers, and an occasional little, dry, metallic click
      was heard. The moving object suddenly came nearer, and twelve Uhlans were
      seen approaching at a gallop, one behind the other, having lost their way
      in the darkness. A brilliant flash suddenly revealed to them two hundred
      men lying on the ground before them. A rapid fire was heard, which died
      away in the snowy silence, and all the twelve fell to the ground, their
      horses with them.
    

      After a long rest the march was resumed. The old man whom they had
      captured acted as guide.
    

      Presently a voice far off in the distance cried out: “Who goes
      there?”
    

      Another voice nearer by gave the countersign.
    

      They made another halt; some conferences took place. It had stopped
      snowing. A cold wind was driving the clouds, and innumerable stars were
      sparkling in the sky behind them, gradually paling in the rosy light of
      dawn.
    

      A staff officer came forward to receive the detachment. But when he asked
      who was being carried in the litter, the form stirred; two little hands
      moved aside the big blue army capes and, rosy as the dawn, with two eyes
      that were brighter than the stars that had just faded from sight, and a
      smile as radiant as the morn, a dainty face appeared.
    

      “It is I, monsieur.”
    

      The soldiers, wild with delight, clapped their hands and bore the young
      girl in triumph into the midst of the camp, that was just getting to arms.
      Presently General Carrel arrived on the scene. At nine o'clock the
      Prussians made an attack. They beat a retreat at noon.
    

      That evening, as Lieutenant Lare, overcome by fatigue, was sleeping on a
      bundle of straw, he was sent for by the general. He found the commanding
      officer in his tent, chatting with the old man whom they had come across
      during the night. As soon as he entered the tent the general took his
      hand, and addressing the stranger, said:
    

      “My dear comte, this is the young man of whom you were telling me
      just now; he is one of my best officers.”
    

      He smiled, lowered his tone, and added:
    

      “The best.”
    

      Then, turning to the astonished lieutenant, he presented “Comte de
      Ronfi-Quedissac.”
    

      The old man took both his hands, saying:
    

      “My dear lieutenant, you have saved my daughter's life. I have only
      one way of thanking you. You may come in a few months to tell me—if
      you like her.”
    

      One year later, on the very same day, Captain Lare and Miss
      Louise-Hortense-Genevieve de Ronfi-Quedissac were married in the church of
      St. Thomas Aquinas.
    

      She brought a dowry of six thousand francs, and was said to be the
      prettiest bride that had been seen that year.