LITTLE LOUISE ROQUE

 The former soldier, Mederic Rompel, familiarly called Mederic by the
      country folks, left the post office of Roily-le-Tors at the usual hour.
      After passing through the village with his long stride, he cut across the
      meadows of Villaume and reached the bank of the Brindille, following the
      path along the water's edge to the village of Carvelin, where he commenced
      to deliver his letters. He walked quickly, following the course of the
      narrow river, which frothed, murmured and boiled in its grassy bed beneath
      an arch of willows.

 Mederic went on without stopping, with only this thought in his mind:
      “My first letter is for the Poivron family, then I have one for
      Monsieur Renardet; so I must cross the wood.”

 His blue blouse, fastened round his waist by a black leather belt, moved
      in a quick, regular fashion above the green hedge of willow trees, and his
      stout stick of holly kept time with his steady tread.

 He crossed the Brindille on a bridge consisting of a tree trunk, with a
      handrail of rope, fastened at either end to a stake driven into the
      ground.

 The wood, which belonged to Monsieur Renardet, the mayor of Carvelin and
      the largest landowner in the district, consisted of huge old trees,
      straight as pillars and extending for about half a league along the left
      bank of the stream which served as a boundary to this immense dome of
      foliage. Alongside the water large shrubs had grown up in the sunlight,
      but under the trees one found nothing but moss, thick, soft and yielding,
      from which arose, in the still air, an odor of dampness and of dead wood.

 Mederic slackened his pace, took off his black cap adorned with red lace
      and wiped his forehead, for it was by this time hot in the meadows, though
      it was not yet eight o'clock in the morning.

 He had just recovered from the effects of the heat and resumed his quick
      pace when he noticed at the foot of a tree a knife, a child's small knife.
      When he picked it up he discovered a thimble and also a needlecase not far
      away.

 Having taken up these objects, he thought: “I'll entrust them to the
      mayor,” and he resumed his journey, but now he kept his eyes open,
      expecting to find something else.

 All of a sudden he stopped short, as if he had struck against a wooden
      barrier. Ten paces in front of him lay stretched on her back on the moss a
      little girl, perfectly nude, her face covered with a handkerchief. She was
      about twelve years old.

 Meredic advanced on tiptoe, as if he apprehended some danger, and he
      glanced toward the spot uneasily.

 What was this? No doubt she was asleep. Then he reflected that a person
      does not go to sleep naked at half-past seven in the morning under the
      cool trees. So, then, she must be dead, and he must be face to face with a
      crime. At this thought a cold shiver ran through his frame, although he
      was an old soldier. And then a murder was such a rare thing in the
      country, and, above all, the murder of a child, that he could not believe
      his eyes. But she had no wound-nothing save a spot of blood on her leg.
      How, then, had she been killed?

 He stopped close to her and gazed at her, while he leaned on his stick.
      Certainly he must know her, for he knew all the inhabitants of the
      district; but, not being able to get a look at her face, he could not
      guess her name. He stooped forward in order to take off the handkerchief
      which covered her face, then paused, with outstretched hand, restrained by
      an idea that occurred to him.

 Had he the right to disarrange anything in the condition of the corpse
      before the official investigation? He pictured justice to himself as a
      kind of general whom nothing escapes and who attaches as much importance
      to a lost button as to the stab of a knife in the stomach. Perhaps under
      this handkerchief evidence could be found to sustain a charge of murder;
      in fact, if such proof were there it might lose its value if touched by an
      awkward hand.

 Then he raised himself with the intention of hastening toward the mayor's
      residence, but again another thought held him back. If the little girl
      were still alive, by any chance, he could not leave her lying there in
      this way. He sank on his knees very gently, a little distance from her,
      through precaution, and extended his hand toward her foot. It was icy
      cold, with the terrible coldness of death which leaves us no longer in
      doubt. The letter carrier, as he touched her, felt his heart in his mouth,
      as he said himself afterward, and his mouth parched. Rising up abruptly,
      he rushed off under the trees toward Monsieur Renardet's house.

 He walked on faster than ever, with his stick under his arm, his hands
      clenched and his head thrust forward, while his leathern bag, filled with
      letters and newspapers, kept flapping at his side.

 The mayor's residence was at the end of the wood which served as a park,
      and one side of it was washed by the Brindille.

 It was a big square house of gray stone, very old, and had stood many a
      siege in former days, and at the end of it was a huge tower, twenty metres
      high, rising out of the water.

 From the top of this fortress one could formerly see all the surrounding
      country. It was called the Fox's tower, without any one knowing exactly
      why; and from this appellation, no doubt, had come the name Renardet,
      borne by the owners of this fief, which had remained in the same family,
      it was said, for more than two hundred years. For the Renardets formed
      part of the upper middle class, all but noble, to be met with so often in
      the province before the Revolution.

 The postman dashed into the kitchen, where the servants were taking
      breakfast, and exclaimed:

 “Is the mayor up? I want to speak to him at once.”

 Mederic was recognized as a man of standing and authority, and they
      understood that something serious had happened.

 As soon as word was brought to Monsieur Renardet, he ordered the postman
      to be sent up to him. Pale and out of breath, with his cap in his hand,
      Mederic found the mayor seated at a long table covered with scattered
      papers.

 He was a large, tall man, heavy and red-faced, strong as an ox, and was
      greatly liked in the district, although of an excessively violent
      disposition. Almost forty years old and a widower for the past six months,
      he lived on his estate like a country gentleman. His choleric temperament
      had often brought him into trouble from which the magistrates of
      Roily-le-Tors, like indulgent and prudent friends, had extricated him. Had
      he not one day thrown the conductor of the diligence from the top of his
      seat because he came near running over his retriever, Micmac? Had he not
      broken the ribs of a gamekeeper who abused him for having, gun in hand,
      passed through a neighbor's property? Had he not even caught by the collar
      the sub-prefect, who stopped over in the village during an administrative
      circuit, called by Monsieur Renardet an electioneering circuit, for he was
      opposed to the government, in accordance with family traditions.

 The mayor asked:

 “What's the matter now, Mederic?”

 “I found a little girl dead in your wood.”

 Renardet rose to his feet, his face the color of brick.

 “What do you say—a little girl?”

 “Yes, m'sieu, a little girl, quite naked, on her back, with blood on
      her, dead—quite dead!”

 The mayor gave vent to an oath:

 “By God, I'd make a bet it is little Louise Roque! I have just
      learned that she did not go home to her mother last night. Where did you
      find her?”

 The postman described the spot, gave full details and offered to conduct
      the mayor to the place.

 But Renardet became brusque:

 “No, I don't need you. Send the watchman, the mayor's secretary and
      the doctor to me at once, and resume your rounds. Quick, quick, go and
      tell them to meet me in the wood.”

 The letter carrier, a man used to discipline, obeyed and withdrew, angry
      and grieved at not being able to be present at the investigation.

 The mayor, in his turn, prepared to go out, took his big soft hat and
      paused for a few seconds on the threshold of his abode. In front of him
      stretched a wide sward, in which were three large beds of flowers in full
      bloom, one facing the house and the others at either side of it. Farther
      on the outlying trees of the wood rose skyward, while at the left, beyond
      the Brindille, which at that spot widened into a pond, could be seen long
      meadows, an entirely green flat sweep of country, intersected by trenches
      and hedges of pollard willows.

 To the right, behind the stables, the outhouses and all the buildings
      connected with the property, might be seen the village, which was wealthy,
      being mainly inhabited by cattle breeders.

 Renardet slowly descended the steps in front of his house, and, turning to
      the left, gained the water's edge, which he followed at a slow pace, his
      hand behind his back. He walked on, with bent head, and from time to time
      glanced round in search of the persons he had sent for.

 When he stood beneath the trees he stopped, took off his hat and wiped his
      forehead as Mederic had done, for the burning sun was darting its fiery
      rays on the earth. Then the mayor resumed his journey, stopped once more
      and retraced his steps. Suddenly, stooping down, he steeped his
      handkerchief in the stream that glided along at his feet and spread it
      over his head, under his hat. Drops of water flowed down his temples over
      his ears, which were always purple, over his strong red neck, and made
      their way, one after the other, under his white shirt collar.

 As nobody had appeared, he began tapping with his foot, then he called
      out:

 “Hello! Hello!”

 A voice at his right answered:

 “Hello! Hello!”

 And the doctor appeared under the trees. He was a thin little man, an
      ex-military surgeon, who passed in the neighborhood for a very skillful
      practitioner. He limped, having been wounded while in the service, and had
      to use a stick to assist him in walking.

 Next came the watchman and the mayor's secretary, who, having been sent
      for at the same time, arrived together. They looked scared, and hurried
      forward, out of breath, walking and running alternately to hasten their
      progress, and moving their arms up and down so vigorously that they seemed
      to do more work with them than with their legs.

 Renardet said to the doctor:

 “You know what the trouble is about?”

 “Yes, a child found dead in the wood by Mederic.”

 “That's quite correct. Come on!”

 They walked along, side by side, followed by the two men.

 Their steps made no sound on the moss. Their eyes were gazing ahead in
      front of them.

 Suddenly the doctor, extending his arm, said:

 “See, there she is!”

 Far ahead of them under the trees they saw something white on which the
      sun gleamed down through the branches. As they approached they gradually
      distinguished a human form lying there, its head toward the river, the
      face covered and the arms extended as though on a crucifix.

 “I am fearfully warm,” said the mayor, and stooping down, he
      again soaked his handkerchief in the water and placed it round his
      forehead.

 The doctor hastened his steps, interested by the discovery. As soon as
      they were near the corpse, he bent down to examine it without touching it.
      He had put on his pince-nez, as one does in examining some curious object,
      and turned round very quietly.

 He said, without rising:

 “Violated and murdered, as we shall prove presently. This little
      girl, moreover, is almost a woman—look at her throat.”

 The doctor lightly drew away the handkerchief which covered her face,
      which looked black, frightful, the tongue protruding, the eyes bloodshot.
      He went on:

 “By heavens! She was strangled the moment the deed was done.”

 He felt her neck.

 “Strangled with the hands without leaving any special trace, neither
      the mark of the nails nor the imprint of the fingers. Quite right. It is
      little Louise Roque, sure enough!”

 He carefully replaced the handkerchief.

 “There's nothing for me to do. She's been dead for the last hour at
      least. We must give notice of the matter to the authorities.”

 Renardet, standing up, with his hands behind his back, kept staring with a
      stony look at the little body exposed to view on the grass. He murmured:

 “What a wretch! We must find the clothes.”

 The doctor felt the hands, the arms, the legs. He said:

 “She had been bathing no doubt. They ought to be at the water's
      edge.”

 The mayor thereupon gave directions:

 “Do you, Principe” (this was his secretary), “go and
      find those clothes for me along the stream. You, Maxime” (this was
      the watchman), “hurry on toward Rouy-le-Tors and bring with you the
      magistrate with the gendarmes. They must be here within an hour. You
      understand?”

 The two men started at once, and Renardet said to the doctor:

 “What miscreant could have done such a deed in this part of the
      country?”

 The doctor murmured:

 “Who knows? Any one is capable of that. Every one in particular and
      nobody in general. No matter, it must be some prowler, some workman out of
      employment. Since we have become a Republic we meet only this kind of
      person along the roads.”

 Both of them were Bonapartists.

 The mayor went on:

 “Yes, it can only be a stranger, a passer-by, a vagabond without
      hearth or home.”

 The doctor added, with the shadow of a smile on his face:

 “And without a wife. Having neither a good supper nor a good bed, he
      became reckless. You can't tell how many men there may be in the world
      capable of a crime at a given moment. Did you know that this little girl
      had disappeared?”

 And with the end of his stick he touched one after the other the stiffened
      fingers of the corpse, resting on them as on the keys of a piano.

 “Yes, the mother came last night to look for me about nine o'clock,
      the child not having come home at seven to supper. We looked for her along
      the roads up to midnight, but we did not think of the wood. However, we
      needed daylight to carry out a thorough search.”

 “Will you have a cigar?” said the doctor.

 “Thanks, I don't care to smoke. This thing affects me so.”

 They remained standing beside the corpse of the young girl, so pale on the
      dark moss. A big blue fly was walking over the body with his lively, jerky
      movements. The two men kept watching this wandering speck.

 The doctor said:

 “How pretty it is, a fly on the skin! The ladies of the last century
      had good reason to paste them on their faces. Why has this fashion gone
      out?”

 The mayor seemed not to hear, plunged as he was in deep thought.

 But, all of a sudden, he turned round, surprised by a shrill noise. A
      woman in a cap and blue apron was running toward them under the trees. It
      was the mother, La Roque. As soon as she saw Renardet she began to shriek:

 “My little girl! Where's my little girl?” so distractedly that
      she did not glance down at the ground. Suddenly she saw the corpse,
      stopped short, clasped her hands and raised both her arms while she
      uttered a sharp, heartrending cry—the cry of a wounded animal. Then
      she rushed toward the body, fell on her knees and snatched away the
      handkerchief that covered the face. When she saw that frightful
      countenance, black and distorted, she rose to her feet with a shudder,
      then sinking to the ground, face downward, she pressed her face against
      the ground and uttered frightful, continuous screams on the thick moss.

 Her tall, thin frame, with its close-clinging dress, was palpitating,
      shaken with spasms. One could see her bony ankles and her dried-up calves
      covered with coarse blue stockings shaking horribly. She was digging the
      soil with her crooked fingers, as though she were trying to make a hole in
      which to hide herself.

 The doctor, much affected, said in a low tone:

 “Poor old woman!”

 Renardet felt a strange sensation. Then he gave vent to a sort of loud
      sneeze, and, drawing his handkerchief from his pocket, he began to weep
      internally, coughing, sobbing and blowing his nose noisily.

 He stammered:

 “Damn—damn—damned pig to do this! I would like to
see him guillotined.”

 Principe reappeared with his hands empty. He murmured:

 “I have found nothing, M'sieu le Maire, nothing at all anywhere.”

 The mayor, alarmed, replied in a thick voice, drowned in tears:

 “What is that you could not find?”

 “The little girl's clothes.”

 “Well—well—look again, and find them—or you 'll
      have to answer to me.”

 The man, knowing that the mayor would not brook opposition, set forth
      again with hesitating steps, casting a timid side glance at the corpse.

 Distant voices were heard under the trees, a confused sound, the noise of
      an approaching crowd, for Mederic had, in the course of his rounds,
      carried the news from door to door. The people of the neighborhood, dazed
      at first, had gossiped about it in the street, from one threshold to
      another. Then they gathered together. They talked over, discussed and
      commented on the event for some minutes and had now come to see for
      themselves.

 They arrived in groups, a little faltering and uneasy through fear of the
      first impression of such a scene on their minds. When they saw the body
      they stopped, not daring to advance, and speaking low. Then they grew
      bolder, went on a few steps, stopped again, advanced once more, and
      presently formed around the dead girl, her mother, the doctor and Renardet
      a close circle, restless and noisy, which crowded forward at the sudden
      impact of newcomers. And now they touched the corpse. Some of them even
      bent down to feel it with their fingers. The doctor kept them back. But
      the mayor, waking abruptly out of his torpor, flew into a rage, and
      seizing Dr. Labarbe's stick, flung himself on his townspeople, stammering:

 “Clear out—clear out—you pack of brutes—clear out!”

 And in a second the crowd of sightseers had fallen back two hundred paces.

 Mother La Roque had risen to a sitting posture and now remained weeping,
      with her hands clasped over her face.

 The crowd was discussing the affair, and young lads' eager eyes curiously
      scrutinized this nude young form. Renardet perceived this, and, abruptly
      taking off his coat, he flung it over the little girl, who was entirely
      hidden from view beneath the large garment.

 The secretary drew near quietly. The wood was filled with people, and a
      continuous hum of voices rose up under the tangled foliage of the tall
      trees.

 The mayor, in his shirt sleeves, remained standing, with his stick in his
      hands, in a fighting attitude. He seemed exasperated by this curiosity on
      the part of the people and kept repeating:

 “If one of you come nearer I'll break his head just as I would a
      dog's.”

 The peasants were greatly afraid of him. They held back. Dr. Labarbe, who
      was smoking, sat down beside La Roque and spoke to her in order to
      distract her attention. The old woman at once removed her hands from her
      face and replied with a flood of tearful words, emptying her grief in
      copious talk. She told the whole story of her life, her marriage, the
      death of her man, a cattle drover, who had been gored to death, the
      infancy of her daughter, her wretched existence as a widow without
      resources and with a child to support. She had only this one, her little
      Louise, and the child had been killed—killed in this wood. Then she
      felt anxious to see her again, and, dragging herself on her knees toward
      the corpse, she raised up one corner of the garment that covered her; then
      she let it fall again and began wailing once more. The crowd remained
      silent, eagerly watching all the mother's gestures.

 But suddenly there was a great commotion at the cry of “The
      gendarmes! the gendarmes!”

 Two gendarmes appeared in the distance, advancing at a rapid trot,
      escorting their captain and a little gentleman with red whiskers, who was
      bobbing up and down like a monkey on a big white mare.

 The watchman had just found Monsieur Putoin, the magistrate, at the moment
      when he was mounting his horse to take his daily ride, for he posed as a
      good horseman, to the great amusement of the officers.

 He dismounted, along with the captain, and pressed the hands of the mayor
      and the doctor, casting a ferret-like glance on the linen coat beneath
      which lay the corpse.

 When he was made acquainted with all the facts, he first gave orders to
      disperse the crowd, whom the gendarmes drove out of the wood, but who soon
      reappeared in the meadow and formed a hedge, a big hedge of excited and
      moving heads, on the other side of the stream.

 The doctor, in his turn, gave explanations, which Renardet noted down in
      his memorandum book. All the evidence was given, taken down and commented
      on without leading to any discovery. Maxime, too, came back without having
      found any trace of the clothes.

 This disappearance surprised everybody; no one could explain it except on
      the theory of theft, and as her rags were not worth twenty sous, even this
      theory was inadmissible.

 The magistrate, the mayor, the captain and the doctor set to work
      searching in pairs, putting aside the smallest branch along the water.

 Renardet said to the judge:

 “How does it happen that this wretch has concealed or carried away
      the clothes, and has thus left the body exposed, in sight of every one?”

 The other, crafty and sagacious, answered:

 “Ha! ha! Perhaps a dodge? This crime has been committed either by a
      brute or by a sly scoundrel. In any case, we'll easily succeed in finding
      him.”

 The noise of wheels made them turn their heads round. It was the deputy
      magistrate, the doctor and the registrar of the court who had arrived in
      their turn. They resumed their search, all chatting in an animated
      fashion.

 Renardet said suddenly:

 “Do you know that you are to take luncheon with me?”

 Every one smilingly accepted the invitation, and the magistrate, thinking
      that the case of little Louise Roque had occupied enough attention for one
      day, turned toward the mayor.

 “I can have the body brought to your house, can I not? You have a
      room in which you can keep it for me till this evening?”

 The other became confused and stammered:

 “Yes—no—no. To tell the truth, I prefer that it should
      not come into my house on account of—on account of my servants, who
      are already talking about ghosts in—in my tower, in the Fox's tower.
      You know—I could no longer keep a single one. No—I prefer not
      to have it in my house.”

 The magistrate began to smile.

 “Good! I will have it taken at once to Roily for the legal
      examination.” And, turning to his deputy, he said:

 “I can make use of your trap, can I not?”

 “Yes, certainly.”

 They all came back to the place where the corpse lay. Mother La Roque, now
      seated beside her daughter, was holding her hand and was staring right
      before her with a wandering, listless eye.

 The two doctors endeavored to lead her away, so that she might not witness
      the dead girl's removal, but she understood at once what they wanted to
      do, and, flinging herself on the body, she threw both arms round it. Lying
      on top of the corpse, she exclaimed:

 “You shall not have it—it's mine—it's mine now. They
      have killed her for me, and I want to keep her—you shall not have
      her——”

 All the men, affected and not knowing how to act, remained standing around
      her. Renardet fell on his knees and said to her:

 “Listen, La Roque, it is necessary, in order to find out who killed
      her. Without this, we could not find out. We must make a search for the
      man in order to punish him. When we have found him we'll give her up to
      you. I promise you this.”

 This explanation bewildered the woman, and a feeling of hatred manifested
      itself in her distracted glance.

 “So then they'll arrest him?”

 “Yes, I promise you that.”

 She rose up, deciding to let them do as they liked, but when the captain
      remarked:

 “It is surprising that her clothes were not found,” a new
      idea, which she had not previously thought of, abruptly entered her mind,
      and she asked:

 “Where are her clothes? They're mine. I want them. Where have they
      been put?”

 They explained to her that they had not been found. Then she demanded them
      persistently, crying and moaning.

 “They're mine—I want them. Where are they? I want them!”

 The more they tried to calm her the more she sobbed and persisted in her
      demands. She no longer wanted the body, she insisted on having the
      clothes, as much perhaps through the unconscious cupidity of a wretched
      being to whom a piece of silver represents a fortune as through maternal
      tenderness.

 And when the little body, rolled up in blankets which had been brought out
      from Renardet's house, had disappeared in the vehicle, the old woman
      standing under the trees, sustained by the mayor and the captain,
      exclaimed:

 “I have nothing, nothing, nothing in the world, not even her little
      cap —her little cap.”

 The cure, a young priest, had just arrived. He took it on himself to
      accompany the mother, and they went away together toward the village. The
      mother's grief was modified by the sugary words of the clergyman, who
      promised her a thousand compensations. But she kept repeating: “If I
      had only her little cap.” This idea now dominated every other.

 Renardet called from the distance:

 “You will lunch with us, Monsieur l'Abbe—in an hour's time.”

 The priest turned his head round and replied:

 “With pleasure, Monsieur le Maire. I'll be with you at twelve.”

 And they all directed their steps toward the house, whose gray front, with
      the large tower built on the edge of the Brindille, could be seen through
      the branches.

 The meal lasted a long time. They talked about the crime. Everybody was of
      the same opinion. It had been committed by some tramp passing there by
      mere chance while the little girl was bathing.

 Then the magistrates returned to Rouy, announcing that they would return
      next day at an early hour. The doctor and the cure went to their
      respective homes, while Renardet, after a long walk through the meadows,
      returned to the wood, where he remained walking till nightfall with slow
      steps, his hands behind his back.

 He went to bed early and was still asleep next morning when the magistrate
      entered his room. He was rubbing his hands together with a self-satisfied
      air.

 “Ha! ha! You are still sleeping! Well, my dear fellow, we have news
      this morning.”

 The mayor sat up in his bed.

 “What, pray?”

 “Oh! Something strange. You remember well how the mother clamored
      yesterday for some memento of her daughter, especially her little cap?
      Well, on opening her door this morning she found on the threshold her
      child's two little wooden shoes. This proves that the crime was
      perpetrated by some one from the district, some one who felt pity for her.
      Besides, the postman, Mederic, brought me the thimble, the knife and the
      needle case of the dead girl. So, then, the man in carrying off the
      clothes to hide them must have let fall the articles which were in the
      pocket. As for me, I attach special importance to the wooden shoes, as
      they indicate a certain moral culture and a faculty for tenderness on the
      part of the assassin. We will, therefore, if you have no objection, go
      over together the principal inhabitants of your district.”

 The mayor got up. He rang for his shaving water and said:

 “With pleasure, but it will take some time, and we may begin at
      once.”

 M. Putoin sat astride a chair.

 Renardet covered his chin with a white lather while he looked at himself
      in the glass. Then he sharpened his razor on the strop and continued:

 “The principal inhabitant of Carvelin bears the name of Joseph
      Renardet, mayor, a rich landowner, a rough man who beats guards and
      coachmen—”

 The examining magistrate burst out laughing.

 “That's enough. Let us pass on to the next.”

 “The second in importance is Pelledent, his deputy, a cattle
      breeder, an equally rich landowner, a crafty peasant, very sly, very
      close-fisted on every question of money, but incapable in my opinion of
      having perpetrated such a crime.”

 “Continue,” said M. Putoin.

 Renardet, while proceeding with his toilet, reviewed the characters of all
      the inhabitants of Carvelin. After two hours' discussion their suspicions
      were fixed on three individuals who had hitherto borne a shady reputation—a
      poacher named Cavalle, a fisherman named Paquet, who caught trout and
      crabs, and a cattle drover named Clovis. II

 The search for the perpetrator of the crime lasted all summer, but he was
      not discovered. Those who were suspected and arrested easily proved their
      innocence, and the authorities were compelled to abandon the attempt to
      capture the criminal.

 But this murder seemed to have moved the entire country in a singular
      manner. There remained in every one's mind a disquietude, a vague fear, a
      sensation of mysterious terror, springing not merely from the
      impossibility of discovering any trace of the assassin, but also and above
      all from that strange finding of the wooden shoes in front of La Roque's
      door the day after the crime. The certainty that the murderer had assisted
      at the investigation, that he was still, doubtless, living in the village,
      possessed all minds and seemed to brood over the neighborhood like a
      constant menace.

 The wood had also become a dreaded spot, a place to be avoided and
      supposed to be haunted.

 Formerly the inhabitants went there to spend every Sunday afternoon. They
      used to sit down on the moss at the feet of the huge tall trees or walk
      along the water's edge watching the trout gliding among the weeds. The
      boy's used to play bowls, hide-and-seek and other games where the ground
      had been cleared and levelled, and the girls, in rows of four or five,
      would trip along, holding one another by the arms and screaming songs with
      their shrill voices. Now nobody ventured there for fear of finding some
      corpse lying on the ground.

 Autumn arrived, the leaves began to fall from the tall trees, whirling
      round and round to the ground, and the sky could be seen through the bare
      branches. Sometimes, when a gust of wind swept over the tree tops, the
      slow, continuous rain suddenly grew heavier and became a rough storm that
      covered the moss with a thick yellow carpet that made a kind of creaking
      sound beneath one's feet.

 And the sound of the falling leaves seemed like a wail and the leaves
      themselves like tears shed by these great, sorrowful trees, that wept in
      the silence of the bare and empty wood, this dreaded and deserted wood
      where wandered lonely the soul, the little soul of little Louise Roque.

 The Brindille, swollen by the storms, rushed on more quickly, yellow and
      angry, between its dry banks, bordered by two thin, bare, willow hedges.

 And here was Renardet suddenly resuming his walks under the trees. Every
      day, at sunset, he came out of his house, descended the front steps slowly
      and entered the wood in a dreamy fashion, with his hands in his pockets,
      and paced over the damp soft moss, while a legion of rooks from all the
      neighboring haunts came thither to rest in the tall trees and then flew
      off like a black cloud uttering loud, discordant cries.

 Night came on, and Renardet was still strolling slowly under the trees;
      then, when the darkness prevented him from walking any longer, he would go
      back to the house and sink into his armchair in front of the glowing
      hearth, stretching his damp feet toward the fire.

 One morning an important bit of news was circulated through the district;
      the mayor was having his wood cut down.

 Twenty woodcutters were already at work. They had commenced at the corner
      nearest to the house and worked rapidly in the master's presence.

 And each day the wood grew thinner, losing its trees, which fell down one
      by one, as an army loses its soldiers.

 Renardet no longer walked up, and down. He remained from morning till
      night, contemplating, motionless, with his hands behind his back, the slow
      destruction of his wood. When a tree fell he placed his foot on it as if
      it were a corpse. Then he raised his eyes to the next with a kind of
      secret, calm impatience, as if he expected, hoped for something at the end
      of this slaughter.

 Meanwhile they were approaching the place where little Louise Roque had
      been found. They came to it one evening in the twilight.

 As it was dark, the sky being overcast, the woodcutters wanted to stop
      their work, putting off till next day the fall of an enormous beech tree,
      but the mayor objected to this and insisted that they should at once lop
      and cut down this giant, which had sheltered the crime.

 When the lopper had laid it bare and the woodcutters had sapped its base,
      five men commenced hauling at the rope attached to the top.

 The tree resisted; its powerful trunk, although notched to the centre, was
      as rigid as iron. The workmen, all together, with a sort of simultaneous
      motion, strained at the rope, bending backward and uttering a cry which
      timed and regulated their efforts.

 Two woodcutters standing close to the giant remained with axes in their
      grip, like two executioners ready to strike once more, and Renardet,
      motionless, with his hand on the trunk, awaited the fall with an uneasy,
      nervous feeling.

 One of the men said to him:

 “You are too near, Monsieur le Maire. When it falls it may hurt you.”

 He did not reply and did not move away. He seemed ready to catch the beech
      tree in his open arms and to cast it on the ground like a wrestler.

 All at once, at the base of the tall column of wood there was a rent which
      seemed to run to the top, like a painful shock; it bent slightly, ready to
      fall, but still resisting. The men, in a state of excitement, stiffened
      their arms, renewed their efforts with greater vigor, and, just as the
      tree came crashing down, Renardet suddenly made a forward step, then
      stopped, his shoulders raised to receive the irresistible shock, the
      mortal shock which would crush him to the earth.

 But the beech tree, having deviated a little, only rubbed against his
      loins, throwing him on his face, five metres away.

 The workmen dashed forward to lift him up. He had already arisen to his
      knees, stupefied, with bewildered eyes and passing his hand across his
      forehead, as if he were awaking from an attack of madness.

 When he had got to his feet once more the men, astonished, questioned him,
      not being able to understand what he had done. He replied in faltering
      tones that he had been dazed for a moment, or, rather, he had been
      thinking of his childhood days; that he thought he would have time to run
      under the tree, just as street boys rush in front of vehicles driving
      rapidly past; that he had played at danger; that for the past eight days
      he felt this desire growing stronger within him, asking himself each time
      a tree began to fall whether he could pass beneath it without being
      touched. It was a piece of stupidity, he confessed, but every one has
      these moments of insanity and these temptations to boyish folly.

 He made this explanation in a slow tone, searching for his words, and
      speaking in a colorless tone.

 Then he went off, saying:

 “Till to-morrow, my friends-till to-morrow.”

 As soon as he got back to his room he sat down at his table which his lamp
      lighted up brightly, and, burying his head in his hands, he began to cry.

 He remained thus for a long time, then wiped his eyes, raised his head and
      looked at the clock. It was not yet six o'clock.

 He thought:

 “I have time before dinner.”

 And he went to the door and locked it. He then came back, and, sitting
      down at his table, pulled out the middle drawer. Taking from it a
      revolver, he laid it down on his papers in full view. The barrel of the
      firearm glittered, giving out gleams of light.

 Renardet gazed at it for some time with the uneasy glance of a drunken
      man. Then he rose and began to pace up and down the room.

 He walked from one end of the apartment to the other, stopping from time
      to time, only to pace up and down again a moment afterward. Suddenly he
      opened the door of his dressing-room, steeped a towel in the water pitcher
      and moistened his forehead, as he had done on the morning of the crime.

 Then he, began walking up and down again. Each time he passed the table
      the gleaming revolver attracted his glance, tempted his hand, but he kept
      watching the clock and reflected:

 “I have still time.”

 It struck half-past six. Then he took up the revolver, opened his mouth
      wide with a frightful grimace and stuck the barrel into it as if he wanted
      to swallow it. He remained in this position for some seconds without
      moving, his finger on the trigger. Then, suddenly seized with a shudder of
      horror, he dropped the pistol on the carpet.

 He fell back on his armchair, sobbing:

 “I cannot. I dare not! My God! my God! How can I have the courage to
      kill myself?'”

 There was a knock at the door. He rose up, bewildered. A servant said:

 “Monsieur's dinner is ready.”

 He replied:

 “All right. I'm coming down.”

 Then he picked up the revolver, locked it up again in the drawer and
      looked at himself in the mirror over the mantelpiece to see whether his
      face did not look too much troubled. It was as red as usual, a little
      redder perhaps. That was all. He went down and seated himself at table.

 He ate slowly, like a man who wants to prolong the meal, who does not want
      to be alone.

 Then he smoked several pipes in the hall while the table was being
      cleared. After that he went back to his room.

 As soon as he had locked himself in he looked, under the bed, opened all
      the closets, explored every corner, rummaged through all the furniture.
      Then he lighted the candles on the mantelpiece, and, turning round several
      times, ran his eye all over the apartment with an anguish of terror that
      distorted his face, for he knew well that he would see her, as he did
      every night—little Louise Roque, the little girl he had attacked and
      afterward strangled.

 Every night the odious vision came back again. First he seemed to hear a
      kind of roaring sound, such as is made by a threshing machine or the
      distant passage of a train over a bridge. Then he commenced to gasp, to
      suffocate, and he had to unbutton his collar and his belt. He moved about
      to make his blood circulate, he tried to read, he attempted to sing. It
      was in vain. His thoughts, in spite of himself, went back to the day of
      the murder and made him begin it all over again in all its most secret
      details, with all the violent emotions he had experienced from the first
      minute to the last.

 He had felt on rising that morning, the morning of the horrible day, a
      little dizziness and headache, which he attributed to the heat, so that he
      remained in his room until breakfast time.

 After the meal he had taken a siesta, then, toward the close of the
      afternoon, he had gone out to breathe the fresh, soothing breeze under the
      trees in the wood.

 But, as soon as he was outside, the heavy, scorching air of the plain
      oppressed him still more. The sun, still high in the heavens, poured down
      on the parched soil waves of burning light. Not a breath of wind stirred
      the leaves. Every beast and bird, even the grasshoppers, were silent.
      Renardet reached the tall trees and began to walk over the moss where the
      Brindille produced a slight freshness of the air beneath the immense roof
      of branches. But he felt ill at ease. It seemed to him that an unknown,
      invisible hand was strangling him, and he scarcely thought of anything,
      having usually few ideas in his head. For the last three months only one
      thought haunted him, the thought of marrying again. He suffered from
      living alone, suffered from it morally and physically. Accustomed for ten
      years past to feeling a woman near him, habituated to her presence every
      moment, he had need, an imperious and perplexing need of such association.
      Since Madame Renardet's death he had suffered continually without knowing
      why, he had suffered at not feeling her dress brushing past him, and,
      above all, from no longer being able to calm and rest himself in her arms.
      He had been scarcely six months a widower and he was already looking about
      in the district for some young girl or some widow he might marry when his
      period of mourning was at an end.

 He had a chaste soul, but it was lodged in a powerful, herculean body, and
      carnal imaginings began to disturb his sleep and his vigils. He drove them
      away; they came back again; and he murmured from time to time, smiling at
      himself:

 “Here I am, like St. Anthony.”

 Having this special morning had several of these visions, the desire
      suddenly came into his breast to bathe in the Brindille in order to
      refresh himself and cool his blood.

 He knew of a large deep pool, a little farther down, where the people of
      the neighborhood came sometimes to take a dip in summer. He went there.

 Thick willow trees hid this clear body of water where the current rested
      and went to sleep for a while before starting on its way again. Renardet,
      as he appeared, thought he heard a light sound, a faint plashing which was
      not that of the stream on the banks. He softly put aside the leaves and
      looked. A little girl, quite naked in the transparent water, was beating
      the water with both hands, dancing about in it and dipping herself with
      pretty movements. She was not a child nor was she yet a woman. She was
      plump and developed, while preserving an air of youthful precocity, as of
      one who had grown rapidly. He no longer moved, overcome with surprise,
      with desire, holding his breath with a strange, poignant emotion. He
      remained there, his heart beating as if one of his sensuous dreams had
      just been realized, as if an impure fairy had conjured up before him this
      young creature, this little rustic Venus, rising from the eddies of the
      stream as the real Venus rose from the waves of the sea.

 Suddenly the little girl came out of the water, and, without seeing him,
      came over to where he stood, looking for her clothes in order to dress
      herself. As she approached gingerly, on account of the sharp-pointed
      stones, he felt himself pushed toward her by an irresistible force, by a
      bestial transport of passion, which stirred his flesh, bewildered his mind
      and made him tremble from head to foot.

 She remained standing some seconds behind the willow tree which concealed
      him from view. Then, losing his reason entirely, he pushed aside the
      branches, rushed on her and seized her in his arms. She fell, too
      terrified to offer any resistance, too terror-stricken to cry out. He
      seemed possessed, not understanding what he was doing.

 He woke from his crime as one wakes from a nightmare. The child burst out
      weeping.

 “Hold your tongue! Hold your tongue!” he said. “I'll
      give you money.”

 But she did not hear him and went on sobbing.

 “Come now, hold your tongue! Do hold your tongue! Keep quiet!”
      he continued.

 She kept shrieking as she tried to free herself. He suddenly realized that
      he was ruined, and he caught her by the neck to stop her mouth from
      uttering these heartrending, dreadful screams. As she continued to
      struggle with the desperate strength of a being who is seeking to fly from
      death, he pressed his enormous hands on the little throat swollen with
      screaming, and in a few seconds he had strangled her, so furiously did he
      grip her. He had not intended to kill her, but only to make her keep
      quiet.

 Then he stood up, overwhelmed with horror.

 She lay before him, her face bleeding and blackned. He was about to rush
      away when there sprang up in his agitated soul the mysterious and
      undefined instinct that guides all beings in the hour of danger.

 He was going to throw the body into the water, but another impulse drove
      him toward the clothes, which he made into a small package. Then, as he
      had a piece of twine in his pocket, he tied it up and hid it in a deep
      portion of the stream, beneath the trunk of a tree that overhung the
      Brindille.

 Then he went off at a rapid pace, reached the meadows, took a wide turn in
      order to show himself to some peasants who dwelt some distance away at the
      opposite side of the district, and came back to dine at the usual hour,
      telling his servants all that was supposed to have happened during his
      walk.

 He slept, however, that night; he slept with a heavy, brutish sleep like
      the sleep of certain persons condemned to death. He did not open his eyes
      until the first glimmer of dawn, and he waited till his usual hour for
      riding, so as to excite no suspicion.

 Then he had to be present at the inquiry as to the cause of death. He did
      so like a somnambulist, in a kind of vision which showed him men and
      things as in a dream, in a cloud of intoxication, with that sense of
      unreality which perplexes the mind at the time of the greatest
      catastrophes.

 But the agonized cry of Mother Roque pierced his heart. At that moment he
      had felt inclined to cast himself at the old woman's feet and to exclaim:

 “I am the guilty one!”

 But he had restrained himself. He went back, however, during the night to
      fish up the dead girl's wooden shoes, in order to place them on her
      mother's threshold.

 As long as the inquiry lasted, as long as it was necessary to lead justice
      astray he was calm, master of himself, crafty and smiling. He discussed
      quietly with the magistrates all the suppositions that passed through
      their minds, combated their opinions and demolished their arguments. He
      even took a keen and mournful pleasure in disturbing their investigations,
      in embroiling their ideas, in showing the innocence of those whom they
      suspected.

 But as soon as the inquiry was abandoned he became gradually nervous, more
      excitable than he had been before, although he mastered his irritability.
      Sudden noises made him start with fear; he shuddered at the slightest
      thing and trembled sometimes from head to foot when a fly alighted on his
      forehead. Then he was seized with an imperious desire for motion, which
      impelled him to take long walks and to remain up whole nights pacing up
      and down his room.

 It was not that he was goaded by remorse. His brutal nature did not lend
      itself to any shade of sentiment or of moral terror. A man of energy and
      even of violence, born to make war, to ravage conquered countries and to
      massacre the vanquished, full of the savage instincts of the hunter and
      the fighter, he scarcely took count of human life. Though he respected the
      Church outwardly, from policy, he believed neither in God nor the devil,
      expecting neither chastisement nor recompense for his acts in another
      life. His sole belief was a vague philosophy drawn from all the ideas of
      the encyclopedists of the last century, and he regarded religion as a
      moral sanction of the law, the one and the other having been invented by
      men to regulate social relations. To kill any one in a duel, or in war, or
      in a quarrel, or by accident, or for the sake of revenge, or even through
      bravado would have seemed to him an amusing and clever thing and would not
      have left more impression on his mind than a shot fired at a hare; but he
      had experienced a profound emotion at the murder of this child. He had, in
      the first place, perpetrated it in the heat of an irresistible gust of
      passion, in a sort of tempest of the senses that had overpowered his
      reason. And he had cherished in his heart, in his flesh, on his lips, even
      to the very tips of his murderous fingers a kind of bestial love, as well
      as a feeling of terrified horror, toward this little girl surprised by him
      and basely killed. Every moment his thoughts returned to that horrible
      scene, and, though he endeavored to drive this picture from his mind,
      though he put it aside with terror, with disgust, he felt it surging
      through his soul, moving about in him, waiting incessantly for the moment
      to reappear.

 Then, as evening approached, he was afraid of the shadow falling around
      him. He did not yet know why the darkness seemed frightful to him, but he
      instinctively feared it, he felt that it was peopled with terrors. The
      bright daylight did not lend itself to fears. Things and beings were
      visible then, and only natural things and beings could exhibit themselves
      in the light of day. But the night, the impenetrable night, thicker than
      walls and empty; the infinite night, so black, so vast, in which one might
      brush against frightful things; the night, when one feels that a
      mysterious terror is wandering, prowling about, appeared to him to conceal
      an unknown threatening danger, close beside him.

 What was it?

 He knew ere long. As he sat in his armchair, rather late one evening when
      he could not sleep, he thought he saw the curtain of his window move. He
      waited, uneasily, with beating heart. The drapery did not stir; then, all
      of a sudden, it moved once more. He did not venture to rise; he no longer
      ventured to breathe, and yet he was brave. He had often fought, and he
      would have liked to catch thieves in his house.

 Was it true that this curtain did move? he asked himself, fearing that his
      eyes had deceived him. It was, moreover, such a slight thing, a gentle
      flutter of drapery, a kind of trembling in its folds, less than an
      undulation caused by the wind.

 Renardet sat still, with staring eyes and outstretched neck. He sprang to
      his feet abruptly, ashamed of his fear, took four steps, seized the
      drapery with both hands and pulled it wide apart. At first he saw nothing
      but darkened glass, resembling plates of glittering ink. The night, the
      vast, impenetrable night, stretched beyond as far as the invisible
      horizon. He remained standing in front of this illimitable shadow, and
      suddenly he perceived a light, a moving light, which seemed some distance
      away.

 Then he put his face close to the window pane, thinking that a person
      looking for crabs might be poaching in the Brindille, for it was past
      midnight, and this light rose up at the edge of the stream, under the
      trees. As he was not yet able to see clearly, Renardet placed his hands
      over his eyes, and suddenly this light became an illumination, and he
      beheld little Louise Roque naked and bleeding on the moss. He recoiled,
      frozen with horror, knocked over his chair and fell over on his back. He
      remained there some minutes in anguish of mind; then he sat up and began
      to reflect. He had had a hallucination—that was all, a hallucination
      due to the fact that a night marauder was walking with a lantern in his
      hand near the water's edge. What was there astonishing, besides, in the
      circumstance that the recollection of his crime should sometimes bring
      before him the vision of the dead girl?

 He rose from the ground, swallowed a glass of wine and sat down again. He
      was thinking:

 “What am I to do if this occurs again?”

 And it would occur; he felt it; he was sure of it. Already his glance was
      drawn toward the window; it called him; it attracted him. In order to
      avoid looking at it, he turned his chair round. Then he took a book and
      tried to read, but it seemed to him that he presently heard something
      stirring behind him, and he swung round his armchair on one foot.

 The curtain was moving again; unquestionably, it moved this time. He could
      no longer have any doubt about it.

 He rushed forward and grasped it so violently that he pulled it down with
      its pole. Then he eagerly glued his face to the glass. He saw nothing. All
      was black outside, and he breathed with the joy of a man whose life has
      just been saved.

 Then he went back to his chair and sat down again, but almost immediately
      he felt a longing to look out once more through the window. Since the
      curtain had fallen down, the window made a sort of gap, fascinating and
      terrible, on the dark landscape. In order not to yield to this dangerous
      temptation, he undressed, blew out the light and closed his eyes.

 Lying on his back motionless, his skin warm and moist, he awaited sleep.
      Suddenly a great gleam of light flashed across his eyelids. He opened
      them, believing that his dwelling was on fire. All was black as before,
      and he leaned on his elbow to try to distinguish the window which had
      still for him an unconquerable attraction. By dint of, straining his eyes
      he could perceive some stars, and he rose, groped his way across the room,
      discovered the panes with his outstretched hands, and placed his forehead
      close to them. There below, under the trees, lay the body of the little
      girl gleaming like phosphorus, lighting up the surrounding darkness.

 Renardet uttered a cry and rushed toward his bed, where he lay till
      morning, his head hidden under the pillow.

 From that moment his life became intolerable. He passed his days in
      apprehension of each succeeding night, and each night the vision came back
      again. As soon as he had locked himself up in his room he strove to resist
      it, but in vain. An irresistible force lifted him up and pushed him
      against the window, as if to call the phantom, and he saw it at once,
      lying first in the spot where the crime was committed in the position in
      which it had been found.

 Then the dead girl rose up and came toward him with little steps just as
      the child had done when she came out of the river. She advanced quietly,
      passing straight across the grass and over the bed of withered flowers.
      Then she rose up in the air toward Renardet's window. She came toward him
      as she had come on the day of the crime. And the man recoiled before the
      apparition—he retreated to his bed and sank down upon it, knowing
      well that the little one had entered the room and that she now was
      standing behind the curtain, which presently moved. And until daybreak he
      kept staring at this curtain with a fixed glance, ever waiting to see his
      victim depart.

 But she did not show herself any more; she remained there behind the
      curtain, which quivered tremulously now and then.

 And Renardet, his fingers clutching the clothes, squeezed them as he had
      squeezed the throat of little Louise Roque.

 He heard the clock striking the hours, and in the stillness the pendulum
      kept ticking in time with the loud beating of his heart. And he suffered,
      the wretched man, more than any man had ever suffered before.

 Then, as soon as a white streak of light on the ceiling announced the
      approaching day, he felt himself free, alone at last, alone in his room;
      and he went to sleep. He slept several hours—a restless, feverish
      sleep in which he retraced in dreams the horrible vision of the past
      night.

 When he went down to the late breakfast he felt exhausted as after unusual
      exertion, and he scarcely ate anything, still haunted as he was by the
      fear of what he had seen the night before.

 He knew well, however, that it was not an apparition, that the dead do not
      come back, and that his sick soul, his soul possessed by one thought
      alone, by an indelible remembrance, was the only cause of his torture, was
      what brought the dead girl back to life and raised her form before his
      eyes, on which it was ineffaceably imprinted. But he knew, too, that there
      was no cure, that he would never escape from the savage persecution of his
      memory, and he resolved to die rather than to endure these tortures any
      longer.

 Then he thought of how he would kill himself, It must be something simple
      and natural, which would preclude the idea of suicide. For he clung to his
      reputation, to the name bequeathed to him by his ancestors; and if his
      death awakened any suspicion people's thoughts might be, perhaps, directed
      toward the mysterious crime, toward the murderer who could not be found,
      and they would not hesitate to accuse him of the crime.

 A strange idea came into his head, that of allowing himself to be crushed
      by the tree at the foot of which he had assassinated little Louise Roque.
      So he determined to have the wood cut down and to simulate an accident.
      But the beech tree refused to crush his ribs.

 Returning to his house, a prey to utter despair, he had snatched up his
      revolver, and then did not dare to fire it.

 The dinner bell summoned him. He could eat nothing, and he went upstairs
      again. And he did not know what to do. Now that he had escaped the first
      time, he felt himself a coward. Presently he would be ready, brave,
      decided, master of his courage and of his resolution; now he was weak and
      feared death as much as he did the dead girl.

 He faltered:

 “I dare not venture it again—I dare not venture it.”

 Then he glanced with terror, first at the revolver on the table and next
      at the curtain which hid his window. It seemed to him, moreover, that
      something horrible would occur as soon as his life was ended. Something?
      What? A meeting with her, perhaps. She was watching for him; she was
      waiting for him; she was calling him; and it was in order to seize him in
      her turn, to draw him toward the doom that would avenge her, and to lead
      him to die, that she appeared thus every night.

 He began to cry like a child, repeating:

 “I will not venture it again—I will not venture it.”

 Then he fell on his knees and murmured:

 “My God! my God!” without believing, nevertheless, in God. And
      he no longer dared, in fact, to look at his window, where he knew the
      apparition was hiding, nor at his table, where his revolver gleamed. When
      he had risen up he said:

 “This cannot last; there must be an end of it”

 The sound of his voice in the silent room made a chill of fear pass
      through his limbs, but as he could not bring himself to come to a
      determination, as he felt certain that his finger would always refuse to
      pull the trigger of his revolver, he turned round to hide his head under
      the bedclothes and began to reflect.

 He would have to find some way in which he could force himself to die, to
      play some trick on himself which would not permit of any hesitation on his
      part, any delay, any possible regrets. He envied condemned criminals who
      are led to the scaffold surrounded by soldiers. Oh! if he could only beg
      of some one to shoot him; if after confessing his crime to a true friend
      who would never divulge it he could procure death at his hand. But from
      whom could he ask this terrible service? From whom? He thought of all the
      people he knew. The doctor? No, he would talk about it afterward, most
      probably. And suddenly a fantastic idea entered his mind. He would write
      to the magistrate, who was on terms of close friendship with him, and
      would denounce himself as the perpetrator of the crime. He would in this
      letter confess everything, revealing how his soul had been tortured, how
      he had resolved to die, how he had hesitated about carrying out his
      resolution and what means he had employed to strengthen his failing
      courage. And in the name of their old friendship he would implore of the
      other to destroy the letter as soon as he had ascertained that the culprit
      had inflicted justice on himself. Renardet could rely on this magistrate;
      he knew him to be true, discreet, incapable of even an idle word. He was
      one of those men who have an inflexible conscience, governed, directed,
      regulated by their reason alone.

 Scarcely had he formed this project when a strange feeling of joy took
      possession of his heart. He was calm now. He would write his letter
      slowly, then at daybreak he would deposit it in the box nailed to the
      outside wall of his office; then he would ascend his tower to watch for
      the postman's arrival; and when the man in the blue blouse had gone away,
      he would cast himself head foremost on the rocks on which the foundations
      rested, He would take care to be seen first by the workmen who had cut
      down his wood. He could climb to the projecting stone which bore the
      flagstaff displayed on festivals, He would smash this pole with a shake
      and carry it along with him as he fell.

 Who would suspect that it was not an accident? And he would be killed
      outright, owing to his weight and the height of the tower.

 Presently he got out of bed, went over to the table and began to write. He
      omitted nothing, not a single detail of the crime, not a single detail of
      the torments of his heart, and he ended by announcing that he had passed
      sentence on himself, that he was going to execute the criminal, and begged
      his friend, his old friend, to be careful that there should never be any
      stain on his memory.

 When he had finished this letter he saw that the day had dawned.

 He closed, sealed it and wrote the address. Then he descended with light
      steps, hurried toward the little white box fastened to the outside wall in
      the corner of the farmhouse, and when he had thrown into it this letter,
      which made his hand tremble, he came back quickly, drew the bolts of the
      great door and climbed up to his tower to wait for the passing of the
      postman, who was to bear away his death sentence.

 He felt self-possessed now. Liberated! Saved!

 A cold dry wind, an icy wind passed across his face. He inhaled it eagerly
      with open mouth, drinking in its chilling kiss. The sky was red, a wintry
      red, and all the plain, whitened with frost, glistened under the first
      rays of the sun, as if it were covered with powdered glass.

 Renardet, standing up, his head bare, gazed at the vast tract of country
      before him, the meadows to the left and to the right the village whose
      chimneys were beginning to smoke in preparation for the morning meal. At
      his feet he saw the Brindille flowing amid the rocks, where he would soon
      be crushed to death. He felt new life on that beautiful frosty morning.
      The light bathed him, entered his being like a new-born hope. A thousand
      recollections assailed him, recollections of similar mornings, of rapid
      walks on the hard earth which rang beneath his footsteps, of happy days of
      shooting on the edges of pools where wild ducks sleep. All the good things
      that he loved, the good things of existence, rushed to his memory,
      penetrated him with fresh desires, awakened all the vigorous appetites of
      his active, powerful body.

 And he was about to die! Why? He was going to kill himself stupidly
      because he was afraid of a shadow-afraid of nothing! He was still rich and
      in the prime of life. What folly! All he needed was distraction, absence,
      a voyage in order to forget.

 This night even he had not seen the little girl because his mind was
      preoccupied and had wandered toward some other subject. Perhaps he would
      not see her any more? And even if she still haunted him in this house,
      certainly she would not follow him elsewhere! The earth was wide, the
      future was long.

 Why should he die?

 His glance travelled across the meadows, and he perceived a blue spot in
      the path which wound alongside the Brindille. It was Mederic coming to
      bring letters from the town and to carry away those of the village.

 Renardet gave a start, a sensation of pain shot through his breast, and he
      rushed down the winding staircase to get back his letter, to demand it
      back from the postman. Little did it matter to him now whether he was
      seen, He hurried across the grass damp from the light frost of the
      previous night and arrived in front of the box in the corner of the
      farmhouse exactly at the same time as the letter carrier.

 The latter had opened the little wooden door and drew forth the four
      papers deposited there by the inhabitants of the locality.

 Renardet said to him:

 “Good-morrow, Mederic.”

 “Good-morrow, Monsieur le Maire.”

 “I say, Mederic, I threw a letter into the box that I want back
      again. I came to ask you to give it back to me.”

 “That's all right, Monsieur le Maire—you'll get it.”

 And the postman raised his eyes. He stood petrified at the sight of
      Renardet's face. The mayor's cheeks were purple, his eyes were anxious and
      sunken, with black circles round them, his hair was unbrushed, his beard
      untrimmed, his necktie unfastened. It was evident that he had not been in
      bed.

 The postman asked:

 “Are you ill, Monsieur le Maire?”

 The other, suddenly comprehending that his appearance must be unusual,
      lost countenance and faltered:

 “Oh! no-oh! no. Only I jumped out of bed to ask you for this letter.
      I was asleep. You understand?”

 He said in reply:

 “What letter?”

 “The one you are going to give back to me.”

 Mederic now began to hesitate. The mayor's attitude did not strike him as
      natural. There was perhaps a secret in that letter, a political secret. He
      knew Renardet was not a Republican, and he knew all the tricks and
      chicanery employed at elections.

 He asked:

 “To whom is it addressed, this letter of yours?”

 “To Monsieur Putoin, the magistrate—you know, my friend,
      Monsieur Putoin!”

 The postman searched through the papers and found the one asked for. Then
      he began looking at it, turning it round and round between his fingers,
      much perplexed, much troubled by the fear of either committing a grave
      offence or of making an enemy of the mayor.

 Seeing his hesitation, Renardet made a movement for the purpose of seizing
      the letter and snatching it away from him. This abrupt action convinced
      Mederic that some important secret was at stake and made him resolve to do
      his duty, cost what it may.

 So he flung the letter into his bag and fastened it up, with the reply:

 “No, I can't, Monsieur le Maire. As long as it is for the
      magistrate, I can't.”

 A dreadful pang wrung Renardet's heart and he murmured:

 “Why, you know me well. You are even able to recognize my
      handwriting. I tell you I want that paper.”

 “I can't.”

 “Look here, Mederic, you know that I'm incapable of deceiving you—I
      tell you I want it.”

 “No, I can't.”

 A tremor of rage passed through Renardet's soul.

 “Damn it all, take care! You know that I never trifle and that I
      could get you out of your job, my good fellow, and without much delay,
      either, And then, I am the mayor of the district, after all; and I now
      order you to give me back that paper.”

 The postman answered firmly:

 “No, I can't, Monsieur le Maire.”

 Thereupon Renardet, losing his head, caught hold of the postman's arms in
      order to take away his bag; but, freeing himself by a strong effort, and
      springing backward, the letter carrier raised his big holly stick. Without
      losing his temper, he said emphatically:

 “Don't touch me, Monsieur le Maire, or I'll strike. Take care, I'm
      only doing my duty!”

 Feeling that he was lost, Renardet suddenly became humble, gentle,
      appealing to him like a whimpering child:

 “Look here, look here, my friend, give me back that letter and I'll
      recompense you—I'll give you money. Stop! stop! I'll give you a
      hundred francs, you understand—a hundred francs!”

 The postman turned on his heel and started on his journey.

 Renardet followed him, out of breath, stammering:

 “Mederic, Mederic, listen! I'll give you a thousand francs, you
      understand—a thousand francs.”

 The postman still went on without giving any answer.

 Renardet went on:

 “I'll make your fortune, you understand—whatever you wish—fifty
      thousand francs—fifty thousand francs for that letter! What does it
      matter to you? You won't? Well, a hundred thousand—I say—a
      hundred thousand francs. Do you understand? A hundred thousand francs—a
      hundred thousand francs.”

 The postman turned back, his face hard, his eye severe:

 “Enough of this, or else I'll repeat to the magistrate everything
      you have just said to me.”

 Renardet stopped abruptly. It was all over. He turned back and rushed
      toward his house, running like a hunted animal.

 Then, in his turn, Mederic stopped and watched his flight with
      stupefaction. He saw the mayor reenter his house, and he waited still, as
      if something astonishing were about to happen.

 In fact, presently the tall form of Renardet appeared on the summit of the
      Fox's tower. He ran round the platform like a madman. Then he seized the
      flagstaff and shook it furiously without succeeding in breaking it; then,
      all of a sudden, like a diver, with his two hands before him, he plunged
      into space.

 Mederic rushed forward to his assistance. He saw the woodcutters going to
      work and called out to them, telling them an accident had occurred. At the
      foot of the walls they found a bleeding body, its head crushed on a rock.
      The Brindille surrounded this rock, and over its clear, calm waters could
      be seen a long red thread of mingled brains and blood.