MADAME BAPTISTE
    

      The first thing I did was to look at the clock as I entered the
      waiting-room of the station at Loubain, and I found that I had to wait two
      hours and ten minutes for the Paris express.
    

      I had walked twenty miles and felt suddenly tired. Not seeing anything on
      the station walls to amuse me, I went outside and stood there racking my
      brains to think of something to do. The street was a kind of boulevard,
      planted with acacias, and on either side a row of houses of varying shape
      and different styles of architecture, houses such as one only sees in a
      small town, and ascended a slight hill, at the extreme end of which there
      were some trees, as though it ended in a park.
    

      From time to time a cat crossed the street and jumped over the gutters
      carefully. A cur sniffed at every tree and hunted for scraps from the
      kitchens, but I did not see a single human being, and I felt listless and
      disheartened. What could I do with myself? I was already thinking of the
      inevitable and interminable visit to the small cafe at the railway
      station, where I should have to sit over a glass of undrinkable beer and
      the illegible newspaper, when I saw a funeral procession coming out of a
      side street into the one in which I was, and the sight of the hearse was a
      relief to me. It would, at any rate, give me something to do for ten
      minutes.
    

      Suddenly, however, my curiosity was aroused. The hearse was followed by
      eight gentlemen, one of whom was weeping, while the others were chatting
      together, but there was no priest, and I thought to myself:
    

      “This is a non-religious funeral,” and then I reflected that a
      town like Loubain must contain at least a hundred freethinkers, who would
      have made a point of making a manifestation. What could it be, then? The
      rapid pace of the procession clearly proved that the body was to be buried
      without ceremony, and, consequently, without the intervention of the
      Church.
    

      My idle curiosity framed the most complicated surmises, and as the hearse
      passed me, a strange idea struck me, which was to follow it, with the
      eight gentlemen. That would take up my time for an hour, at least, and I
      accordingly walked with the others, with a sad look on my face, and, on
      seeing this, the two last turned round in surprise, and then spoke to each
      other in a low voice.
    

      No doubt they were asking each other whether I belonged to the town, and
      then they consulted the two in front of them, who stared at me in turn.
      This close scrutiny annoyed me, and to put an end to it I went up to them,
      and, after bowing, I said:
    

      “I beg your pardon, gentlemen, for interrupting your conversation,
      but, seeing a civil funeral, I have followed it, although I did not know
      the deceased gentleman whom you are accompanying.”
    

      “It was a woman,” one of them said.
    

      I was much surprised at hearing this, and asked:
    

      “But it is a civil funeral, is it not?”
    

      The other gentleman, who evidently wished to tell me all about it, then
      said: “Yes and no. The clergy have refused to allow us the use of
      the church.”
    

      On hearing this I uttered a prolonged “A-h!” of astonishment.
      I could not understand it at all, but my obliging neighbor continued:
    

      “It is rather a long story. This young woman committed suicide, and
      that is the reason why she cannot be buried with any religious ceremony.
      The gentleman who is walking first, and who is crying, is her husband.”
    

      I replied with some hesitation:
    

      “You surprise and interest me very much, monsieur. Shall I be
      indiscreet if I ask you to tell me the facts of the case? If I am
      troubling you, forget that I have said anything about the matter.”
    

      The gentleman took my arm familiarly.
    

      “Not at all, not at all. Let us linger a little behind the others,
      and I will tell it you, although it is a very sad story. We have plenty of
      time before getting to the cemetery, the trees of which you see up yonder,
      for it is a stiff pull up this hill.”
    

      And he began:
    

      “This young woman, Madame Paul Hamot, was the daughter of a wealthy
      merchant in the neighborhood, Monsieur Fontanelle. When she was a mere
      child of eleven, she had a shocking adventure; a footman attacked her and
      she nearly died. A terrible criminal case was the result, and the man was
      sentenced to penal servitude for life.
    

      “The little girl grew up, stigmatized by disgrace, isolated, without
      any companions; and grown-up people would scarcely kiss her, for they
      thought that they would soil their lips if they touched her forehead, and
      she became a sort of monster, a phenomenon to all the town. People said to
      each other in a whisper: 'You know, little Fontanelle,' and everybody
      turned away in the streets when she passed. Her parents could not even get
      a nurse to take her out for a walk, as the other servants held aloof from
      her, as if contact with her would poison everybody who came near her.
    

      “It was pitiable to see the poor child go and play every afternoon.
      She remained quite by herself, standing by her maid and looking at the
      other children amusing themselves. Sometimes, yielding to an irresistible
      desire to mix with the other children, she advanced timidly, with nervous
      gestures, and mingled with a group, with furtive steps, as if conscious of
      her own disgrace. And immediately the mothers, aunts and nurses would come
      running from every seat and take the children entrusted to their care by
      the hand and drag them brutally away.
    

      “Little Fontanelle remained isolated, wretched, without
      understanding what it meant, and then she began to cry, nearly heartbroken
      with grief, and then she used to run and hide her head in her nurse's lap,
      sobbing.
    

      “As she grew up, it was worse still. They kept the girls from her,
      as if she were stricken with the plague. Remember that she had nothing to
      learn, nothing; that she no longer had the right to the symbolical wreath
      of orange-flowers; that almost before she could read she had penetrated
      that redoubtable mystery which mothers scarcely allow their daughters to
      guess at, trembling as they enlighten them on the night of their marriage.
    

      “When she went through the streets, always accompanied by her
      governess, as if, her parents feared some fresh, terrible adventure, with
      her eyes cast down under the load of that mysterious disgrace which she
      felt was always weighing upon her, the other girls, who were not nearly so
      innocent as people thought, whispered and giggled as they looked at her
      knowingly, and immediately turned their heads absently, if she happened to
      look at them. People scarcely greeted her; only a few men bowed to her,
      and the mothers pretended not to see her, while some young blackguards
      called her Madame Baptiste, after the name of the footman who had attacked
      her.
    

      “Nobody knew the secret torture of her mind, for she hardly ever
      spoke, and never laughed, and her parents themselves appeared
      uncomfortable in her presence, as if they bore her a constant grudge for
      some irreparable fault.
    

      “An honest man would not willingly give his hand to a liberated
      convict, would he, even if that convict were his own son? And Monsieur and
      Madame Fontanelle looked on their daughter as they would have done on a
      son who had just been released from the hulks. She was pretty and pale,
      tall, slender, distinguished-looking, and she would have pleased me very
      much, monsieur, but for that unfortunate affair.
    

      “Well, when a new sub-prefect was appointed here, eighteen months
      ago, he brought his private secretary with him. He was a queer sort of
      fellow, who had lived in the Latin Quarter, it appears. He saw
      Mademoiselle Fontanelle and fell in love with her, and when told of what
      occurred, he merely said:
    

      “'Bah! That is just a guarantee for the future, and I would rather
      it should have happened before I married her than afterward. I shall live
      tranquilly with that woman.'
    

      “He paid his addresses to her, asked for her hand and married her,
      and then, not being deficient in assurance, he paid wedding calls, as if
      nothing had happened. Some people returned them, others did not; but, at
      last, the affair began to be forgotten, and she took her proper place in
      society.
    

      “She adored her husband as if he had been a god; for, you must
      remember, he had restored her to honor and to social life, had braved
      public opinion, faced insults, and, in a word, performed such a courageous
      act as few men would undertake, and she felt the most exalted and tender
      love for him.
    

      “When she became enceinte, and it was known, the most particular
      people and the greatest sticklers opened their doors to her, as if she had
      been definitely purified by maternity.
    

      “It is strange, but so it is, and thus everything was going on as
      well as possible until the other day, which was the feast of the patron
      saint of our town. The prefect, surrounded by his staff and the
      authorities, presided at the musical competition, and when he had finished
      his speech the distribution of medals began, which Paul Hamot, his private
      secretary, handed to those who were entitled to them.
    

      “As you know, there are always jealousies and rivalries, which make
      people forget all propriety. All the ladies of the town were there on the
      platform, and, in his turn, the bandmaster from the village of Mourmillon
      came up. This band was only to receive a second-class medal, for one
      cannot give first-class medals to everybody, can one? But when the private
      secretary handed him his badge, the man threw it in his face and
      exclaimed:
    

      “'You may keep your medal for Baptiste. You owe him a first-class
      one, also, just as you do me.'
    

      “There were a number of people there who began to laugh. The common
      herd are neither charitable nor refined, and every eye was turned toward
      that poor lady. Have you ever seen a woman going mad, monsieur? Well, we
      were present at the sight! She got up and fell back on her chair three
      times in succession, as if she wished to make her escape, but saw that she
      could not make her way through the crowd, and then another voice in the
      crowd exclaimed:
    

      “'Oh! Oh! Madame Baptiste!'
    

      “And a great uproar, partly of laughter and partly of indignation,
      arose. The word was repeated over and over again; people stood on tiptoe
      to see the unhappy woman's face; husbands lifted their wives up in their
      arms, so that they might see her, and people asked:
    

      “'Which is she? The one in blue?'
    

      “The boys crowed like cocks, and laughter was heard all over the
      place.
    

      “She did not move now on her state chair, but sat just as if she had
      been put there for the crowd to look at. She could not move, nor conceal
      herself, nor hide her face. Her eyelids blinked quickly, as if a vivid
      light were shining on them, and she breathed heavily, like a horse that is
      going up a steep hill, so that it almost broke one's heart to see her.
      Meanwhile, however, Monsieur Hamot had seized the ruffian by the throat,
      and they were rolling on the ground together, amid a scene of
      indescribable confusion, and the ceremony was interrupted.
    

      “An hour later, as the Hamots were returning home, the young woman,
      who had not uttered a word since the insult, but who was trembling as if
      all her nerves had been set in motion by springs, suddenly sprang over the
      parapet of the bridge and threw herself into the river before her husband
      could prevent her. The water is very deep under the arches, and it was two
      hours before her body was recovered. Of course, she was dead.”
    

      The narrator stopped and then added:
    

      “It was, perhaps, the best thing she could do under the
      circumstances. There are some things which cannot be wiped out, and now
      you understand why the clergy refused to have her taken into church. Ah!
      If it had been a religious funeral the whole town would have been present,
      but you can understand that her suicide added to the other affair and made
      families abstain from attending her funeral; and then, it is not an easy
      matter here to attend a funeral which is performed without religious
      rites.”
    

      We passed through the cemetery gates and I waited, much moved by what I
      had heard, until the coffin had been lowered into the grave, before I went
      up to the poor fellow who was sobbing violently, to press his hand warmly.
      He looked at me in surprise through his tears and then said:
    

      “Thank you, monsieur.” And I was not sorry that I had followed
      the funeral.