MADAME HUSSON'S “ROSIER”

 We had just left Gisors, where I was awakened to hearing the name of the
      town called out by the guards, and I was dozing off again when a terrific
      shock threw me forward on top of a large lady who sat opposite me.

 One of the wheels of the engine had broken, and the engine itself lay
      across the track. The tender and the baggage car were also derailed, and
      lay beside this mutilated engine, which rattled, groaned, hissed, puffed,
      sputtered, and resembled those horses that fall in the street with their
      flanks heaving, their breast palpitating, their nostrils steaming and
      their whole body trembling, but incapable of the slightest effort to rise
      and start off again.

 There were no dead or wounded; only a few with bruises, for the train was
      not going at full speed. And we looked with sorrow at the great crippled
      iron creature that could not draw us along any more, and that blocked the
      track, perhaps for some time, for no doubt they would have to send to
      Paris for a special train to come to our aid.

 It was then ten o'clock in the morning, and I at once decided to go back
      to Gisors for breakfast.

 As I was walking along I said to myself:

 “Gisors, Gisors—why, I know someone there!

 “Who is it? Gisors? Let me see, I have a friend in this town.”
      A name suddenly came to my mind, “Albert Marambot.” He was an
      old school friend whom I had not seen for at least twelve years, and who
      was practicing medicine in Gisors. He had often written, inviting me to
      come and see him, and I had always promised to do so, without keeping my
      word. But at last I would take advantage of this opportunity.

 I asked the first passer-by:

 “Do you know where Dr. Marambot lives?”

 He replied, without hesitation, and with the drawling accent of the
      Normans:

 “Rue Dauphine.”

 I presently saw, on the door of the house he pointed out, a large brass
      plate on which was engraved the name of my old chum. I rang the bell, but
      the servant, a yellow-haired girl who moved slowly, said with a Stupid
      air:

 “He isn't here, he isn't here.”

 I heard a sound of forks and of glasses and I cried:

 “Hallo, Marambot!”

 A door opened and a large man, with whiskers and a cross look on his face,
      appeared, carrying a dinner napkin in his hand.

 I certainly should not have recognized him. One would have said he was
      forty-five at least, and, in a second, all the provincial life which makes
      one grow heavy, dull and old came before me. In a single flash of thought,
      quicker than the act of extending my hand to him, I could see his life,
      his manner of existence, his line of thought and his theories of things in
      general. I guessed at the prolonged meals that had rounded out his
      stomach, his after-dinner naps from the torpor of a slow indigestion aided
      by cognac, and his vague glances cast on the patient while he thought of
      the chicken that was roasting before the fire. His conversations about
      cooking, about cider, brandy and wine, the way of preparing certain dishes
      and of blending certain sauces were revealed to me at sight of his puffy
      red cheeks, his heavy lips and his lustreless eyes.

 “You do not recognize me. I am Raoul Aubertin,” I said.

 He opened his arms and gave me such a hug that I thought he would choke
      me.

 “You have not breakfasted, have you?”

 “No.”

 “How fortunate! I was just sitting down to table and I have an
      excellent trout.”

 Five minutes later I was sitting opposite him at breakfast. I said:

 “Are you a bachelor?”

 “Yes, indeed.”

 “And do you like it here?”

 “Time does not hang heavy; I am busy. I have patients and friends. I
      eat well, have good health, enjoy laughing and shooting. I get along.”

 “Is not life very monotonous in this little town?”

 “No, my dear boy, not when one knows how to fill in the time. A
      little town, in fact, is like a large one. The incidents and amusements
      are less varied, but one makes more of them; one has fewer acquaintances,
      but one meets them more frequently. When you know all the windows in a
      street, each one of them interests you and puzzles you more than a whole
      street in Paris.

 “A little town is very amusing, you know, very amusing, very
      amusing. Why, take Gisors. I know it at the tips of my fingers, from its
      beginning up to the present time. You have no idea what queer history it
      has.”

 “Do you belong to Gisors?”

 “I? No. I come from Gournay, its neighbor and rival. Gournay is to
      Gisors what Lucullus was to Cicero. Here, everything is for glory; they
      say 'the proud people of Gisors.' At Gournay, everything is for the
      stomach; they say 'the chewers of Gournay.' Gisors despises Gournay, but
      Gournay laughs at Gisors. It is a very comical country, this.”

 I perceived that I was eating something very delicious, hard-boiled eggs
      wrapped in a covering of meat jelly flavored with herbs and put on ice for
      a few moments. I said as I smacked my lips to compliment Marambot:

 “That is good.”

 He smiled.

 “Two things are necessary, good jelly, which is hard to get, and
      good eggs. Oh, how rare good eggs are, with the yolks slightly reddish,
      and with a good flavor! I have two poultry yards, one for eggs and the
      other for chickens. I feed my laying hens in a special manner. I have my
      own ideas on the subject. In an egg, as in the meat of a chicken, in beef,
      or in mutton, in milk, in everything, one perceives, and ought to taste,
      the juice, the quintessence of all the food on which the animal has fed.
      How much better food we could have if more attention were paid to this!”

 I laughed as I said:

 “You are a gourmand?”

 “Parbleu. It is only imbeciles who are not. One is a gourmand as one
      is an artist, as one is learned, as one is a poet. The sense of taste, my
      friend, is very delicate, capable of perfection, and quite as worthy of
      respect as the eye and the ear. A person who lacks this sense is deprived
      of an exquisite faculty, the faculty of discerning the quality of food,
      just as one may lack the faculty of discerning the beauties of a book or
      of a work of art; it means to be deprived of an essential organ, of
      something that belongs to higher humanity; it means to belong to one of
      those innumerable classes of the infirm, the unfortunate, and the fools of
      which our race is composed; it means to have the mouth of an animal, in a
      word, just like the mind of an animal. A man who cannot distinguish one
      kind of lobster from another; a herring—that admirable fish that has
      all the flavors, all the odors of the sea—from a mackerel or a
      whiting; and a Cresane from a Duchess pear, may be compared to a man who
      should mistake Balzac for Eugene Sue; a symphony of Beethoven for a
      military march composed by the bandmaster of a regiment; and the Apollo
      Belvidere for the statue of General de Blaumont.

 “Who is General de Blaumont?”

 “Oh, that's true, you do not know. It is easy to tell that you do
      not belong to Gisors. I told you just now, my dear boy, that they called
      the inhabitants of this town 'the proud people of Gisors,' and never was
      an epithet better deserved. But let us finish breakfast first, and then I
      will tell you about our town and take you to see it.”

 He stopped talking every now and then while he slowly drank a glass of
      wine which he gazed at affectionately as he replaced the glass on the
      table.

 It was amusing to see him, with a napkin tied around his neck, his cheeks
      flushed, his eyes eager, and his whiskers spreading round his mouth as it
      kept working.

 He made me eat until I was almost choking. Then, as I was about to return
      to the railway station, he seized me by the arm and took me through the
      streets. The town, of a pretty, provincial type, commanded by its citadel,
      the most curious monument of military architecture of the seventh century
      to be found in France, overlooks, in its turn, a long, green valley, where
      the large Norman cows graze and ruminate in the pastures.

 The doctor quoted:

 “'Gisors, a town of 4,000 inhabitants in the department of Eure,
      mentioned in Caesar's Commentaries: Caesaris ostium, then Caesartium,
      Caesortium, Gisortium, Gisors.' I shall not take you to visit the old
      Roman encampment, the remains of which are still in existence.”

 I laughed and replied:

 “My dear friend, it seems to me that you are affected with a special
      malady that, as a doctor, you ought to study; it is called the spirit of
      provincialism.”

 He stopped abruptly.

 “The spirit of provincialism, my friend, is nothing but natural
      patriotism,” he said. “I love my house, my town and my
      province because I discover in them the customs of my own village; but if
      I love my country, if I become angry when a neighbor sets foot in it, it
      is because I feel that my home is in danger, because the frontier that I
      do not know is the high road to my province. For instance, I am a Norman,
      a true Norman; well, in spite of my hatred of the German and my desire for
      revenge, I do not detest them, I do not hate them by instinct as I hate
      the English, the real, hereditary natural enemy of the Normans; for the
      English traversed this soil inhabited by my ancestors, plundered and
      ravaged it twenty times, and my aversion to this perfidious people was
      transmitted to me at birth by my father. See, here is the statue of the
      general.”

 “What general?”

 “General Blaumont! We had to have a statue. We are not 'the proud
      people of Gisors' for nothing! So we discovered General de Blaumont. Look
      in this bookseller's window.”

 He drew me towards the bookstore, where about fifteen red, yellow and blue
      volumes attracted the eye. As I read the titles, I began to laugh
      idiotically. They read:

 Gisors, its origin, its future, by M. X. . . ., member of several learned
      societies; History of Gisors, by the Abbe A . . .; Gisors from the time of
      Caesar to the present day, by M. B. . . ., Landowner; Gisors and its
      environs, by Doctor C. D. . . .; The Glories of Gisors, by a Discoverer.

 “My friend,” resumed Marambot, “not a year, not a single
      year, you understand, passes without a fresh history of Gisors being
      published here; we now have twenty-three.”

 “And the glories of Gisors?” I asked.

 “Oh, I will not mention them all, only the principal ones. We had
      first General de Blaumont, then Baron Davillier, the celebrated ceramist
      who explored Spain and the Balearic Isles, and brought to the notice of
      collectors the wonderful Hispano-Arabic china. In literature we have a
      very clever journalist, now dead, Charles Brainne, and among those who are
      living, the very eminent editor of the Nouvelliste de Rouen, Charles
      Lapierre . . . and many others, many others.”

 We were traversing along street with a gentle incline, with a June sun
      beating down on it and driving the residents into their houses.

 Suddenly there appeared at the farther end of the street a drunken man who
      was staggering along, with his head forward his arms and legs limp. He
      would walk forward rapidly three, six, or ten steps and then stop. When
      these energetic movements landed him in the middle of the road he stopped
      short and swayed on his feet, hesitating between falling and a fresh
      start. Then he would dart off in any direction, sometimes falling against
      the wall of a house, against which he seemed to be fastened, as though he
      were trying to get in through the wall. Then he would suddenly turn round
      and look ahead of him, his mouth open and his eyes blinking in the
      sunlight, and getting away from the wall by a movement of the hips, he
      started off once more.

 A little yellow dog, a half-starved cur, followed him, barking; stopping
      when he stopped, and starting off when he started.

 “Hallo,” said Marambot, “there is Madame Husson's
      'Rosier'.

 “Madame Husson's 'Rosier',” I exclaimed in astonishment.
      “What do you mean?”

 The doctor began to laugh.

 “Oh, that is what we call drunkards round here. The name comes from
      an old story which has now become a legend, although it is true in all
      respects.”

 “Is it an amusing story?”

 “Very amusing.”

 “Well, then, tell it to me.”

 “I will.”

 There lived formerly in this town a very upright old lady who was a great
      guardian of morals and was called Mme. Husson. You know, I am telling you
      the real names and not imaginary ones. Mme. Husson took a special interest
      in good works, in helping the poor and encouraging the deserving. She was
      a little woman with a quick walk and wore a black wig. She was
      ceremonious, polite, on very good terms with the Almighty in the person of
      Abby Malon, and had a profound horror, an inborn horror of vice, and, in
      particular, of the vice the Church calls lasciviousness. Any irregularity
      before marriage made her furious, exasperated her till she was beside
      herself.

 Now, this was the period when they presented a prize as a reward of virtue
      to any girl in the environs of Paris who was found to be chaste. She was
      called a Rosiere, and Mme. Husson got the idea that she would institute a
      similar ceremony at Gisors. She spoke about it to Abbe Malon, who at once
      made out a list of candidates.

 However, Mme. Husson had a servant, an old woman called Francoise, as
      upright as her mistress. As soon as the priest had left, madame called the
      servant and said:

 “Here, Francoise, here are the girls whose names M. le cure has
      submitted to me for the prize of virtue; try and find out what reputation
      they bear in the district.”

 And Francoise set out. She collected all the scandal, all the stories, all
      the tattle, all the suspicions. That she might omit nothing, she wrote it
      all down together with her memoranda in her housekeeping book, and handed
      it each morning to Mme. Husson, who, after adjusting her spectacles on her
      thin nose, read as follows:

 Bread...........................four sous
   Milk............................two sous
   Butter .........................eight sous
Malvina Levesque got into trouble last year with Mathurin Poilu.
   Leg of mutton...................twenty-five sous
   Salt............................one sou
Rosalie Vatinel was seen in the Riboudet woods with Cesaire Pienoir, by
Mme. Onesime, the ironer, on July the 20th about dusk.
   Radishes........................one sou
   Vinegar.........................two sous
   Oxalic acid.....................two sous

 Josephine Durdent, who is not believed to have committed a fault, although
      she corresponds with young Oportun, who is in service in Rouen, and who
      sent her a present of a cap by diligence.

 Not one came out unscathed in this rigorous inquisition. Francoise
      inquired of everyone, neighbors, drapers, the principal, the teaching
      sisters at school, and gathered the slightest details.

 As there is not a girl in the world about whom gossips have not found
      something to say, there was not found in all the countryside one young
      girl whose name was free from some scandal.

 But Mme. Husson desired that the “Rosiere” of Gisors, like
      Caesar's wife, should be above suspicion, and she was horrified, saddened
      and in despair at the record in her servant's housekeeping account-book.

 They then extended their circle of inquiries to the neighboring villages;
      but with no satisfaction.

 They consulted the mayor. His candidates failed. Those of Dr. Barbesol
      were equally unlucky, in spite of the exactness of his scientific
      vouchers.

 But one morning Francoise, on returning from one of her expeditions, said
      to her mistress:

 “You see, madame, that if you wish to give a prize to anyone, there
      is only Isidore in all the country round.”

 Mme. Husson remained thoughtful. She knew him well, this Isidore, the son
      of Virginie the greengrocer. His proverbial virtue had been the delight of
      Gisors for several years, and served as an entertaining theme of
      conversation in the town, and of amusement to the young girls who loved to
      tease him. He was past twenty-one, was tall, awkward, slow and timid;
      helped his mother in the business, and spent his days picking over fruit
      and vegetables, seated on a chair outside the door.

 He had an abnormal dread of a petticoat and cast down his eyes whenever a
      female customer looked at him smilingly, and this well-known timidity made
      him the butt of all the wags in the country.

 Bold words, coarse expressions, indecent allusions, brought the color to
      his cheeks so quickly that Dr. Barbesol had nicknamed him “the
      thermometer of modesty.” Was he as innocent as he looked?
      ill-natured people asked themselves. Was it the mere presentiment of
      unknown and shameful mysteries or else indignation at the relations
      ordained as the concomitant of love that so strongly affected the son of
      Virginie the greengrocer? The urchins of the neighborhood as they ran past
      the shop would fling disgusting remarks at him just to see him cast down
      his eyes. The girls amused themselves by walking up and down before him,
      cracking jokes that made him go into the store. The boldest among them
      teased him to his face just to have a laugh, to amuse themselves, made
      appointments with him and proposed all sorts of things.

 So Madame Husson had become thoughtful.

 Certainly, Isidore was an exceptional case of notorious, unassailable
      virtue. No one, among the most sceptical, most incredulous, would have
      been able, would have dared, to suspect Isidore of the slightest
      infraction of any law of morality. He had never been seen in a cafe, never
      been seen at night on the street. He went to bed at eight o'clock and rose
      at four. He was a perfection, a pearl.

 But Mme. Husson still hesitated. The idea of substituting a boy for a
      girl, a “rosier” for a “rosiere,” troubled her,
      worried her a little, and she resolved to consult Abbe Malon.

 The abbe responded:

 “What do you desire to reward, madame? It is virtue, is it not, and
      nothing but virtue? What does it matter to you, therefore, if it is
      masculine or feminine? Virtue is eternal; it has neither sex nor country;
      it is 'Virtue.'”

 Thus encouraged, Mme. Husson went to see the mayor.

 He approved heartily.

 “We will have a fine ceremony,” he said. “And another
      year if we can find a girl as worthy as Isidore we will give the reward to
      her. It will even be a good example that we shall set to Nanterre. Let us
      not be exclusive; let us welcome all merit.”

 Isidore, who had been told about this, blushed deeply and seemed happy.

 The ceremony was fixed for the 15th of August, the festival of the Virgin
      Mary and of the Emperor Napoleon. The municipality had decided to make an
      imposing ceremony and had built the platform on the couronneaux, a
      delightful extension of the ramparts of the old citadel where I will take
      you presently.

 With the natural revulsion of public feeling, the virtue of Isidore,
      ridiculed hitherto, had suddenly become respected and envied, as it would
      bring him in five hundred francs besides a savings bank book, a mountain
      of consideration, and glory enough and to spare. The girls now regretted
      their frivolity, their ridicule, their bold manners; and Isidore, although
      still modest and timid, had now a little contented air that bespoke his
      internal satisfaction.

 The evening before the 15th of August the entire Rue Dauphine was
      decorated with flags. Oh, I forgot to tell you why this street had been
      called Rue Dauphine.

 It seems that the wife or mother of the dauphin, I do not remember which
      one, while visiting Gisors had been feted so much by the authorities that
      during a triumphal procession through the town she stopped before one of
      the houses in this street, halting the procession, and exclaimed:

 “Oh, the pretty house! How I should like to go through it! To whom
      does it belong?”

 They told her the name of the owner, who was sent for and brought, proud
      and embarrassed, before the princess. She alighted from her carriage, went
      into the house, wishing to go over it from top to bottom, and even shut
      herself in one of the rooms alone for a few seconds.

 When she came out, the people, flattered at this honor paid to a citizen
      of Gisors, shouted “Long live the dauphine!” But a rhymester
      wrote some words to a refrain, and the street retained the title of her
      royal highness, for

 “The princess, in a hurry,
        Without bell, priest, or beadle,
        But with some water only,
        Had baptized it.”

 But to come back to Isidore.

 They had scattered flowers all along the road as they do for processions
      at the Fete-Dieu, and the National Guard was present, acting on the orders
      of their chief, Commandant Desbarres, an old soldier of the Grand Army,
      who pointed with pride to the beard of a Cossack cut with a single sword
      stroke from the chin of its owner by the commandant during the retreat in
      Russia, and which hung beside the frame containing the cross of the Legion
      of Honor presented to him by the emperor himself.

 The regiment that he commanded was, besides, a picked regiment celebrated
      all through the province, and the company of grenadiers of Gisors was
      called on to attend all important ceremonies for a distance of fifteen to
      twenty leagues. The story goes that Louis Philippe, while reviewing the
      militia of Eure, stopped in astonishment before the company from Gisors,
      exclaiming:

 “Oh, who are those splendid grenadiers?”

 “The grenadiers of Gisors,” replied the general.

 “I might have known it,” murmured the king.

 So Commandant Desbarres came at the head of his men, preceded by the band,
      to get Isidore in his mother's store.

 After a little air had been played by the band beneath the windows, the
      “Rosier” himself appeared—on the threshold. He was
      dressed in white duck from head to foot and wore a straw hat with a little
      bunch of orange blossoms as a cockade.

 The question of his clothes had bothered Mme. Husson a good deal, and she
      hesitated some time between the black coat of those who make their first
      communion and an entire white suit. But Francoise, her counsellor, induced
      her to decide on the white suit, pointing out that the Rosier would look
      like a swan.

 Behind him came his guardian, his godmother, Mme. Husson, in triumph. She
      took his arm to go out of the store, and the mayor placed himself on the
      other side of the Rosier. The drums beat. Commandant Desbarres gave the
      order “Present arms!” The procession resumed its march towards
      the church amid an immense crowd of people who has gathered from the
      neighboring districts.

 After a short mass and an affecting discourse by Abbe Malon, they
      continued on their way to the couronneaux, where the banquet was served in
      a tent.

 Before taking their seats at table, the mayor gave an address. This is it,
      word for word. I learned it by heart:

 “Young man, a woman of means, beloved by the poor and respected by
      the rich, Mme. Husson, whom the whole country is thanking here, through
      me, had the idea, the happy and benevolent idea, of founding in this town
      a prize for virtue, which should serve as a valuable encouragement to the
      inhabitants of this beautiful country.

 “You, young man, are the first to be rewarded in this dynasty of
      goodness and chastity. Your name will remain at the head of this list of
      the most deserving, and your life, understand me, your whole life, must
      correspond to this happy commencement. To-day, in presence of this noble
      woman, of these soldier-citizens who have taken up their arms in your
      honor, in presence of this populace, affected, assembled to applaud you,
      or, rather, to applaud virtue, in your person, you make a solemn contract
      with the town, with all of us, to continue until your death the excellent
      example of your youth.

 “Do not forget, young man, that you are the first seed cast into
      this field of hope; give us the fruits that we expect of you.”

 The mayor advanced three steps, opened his arms and pressed Isidore to his
      heart.

 The “Rosier” was sobbing without knowing why, from a confused
      emotion, from pride and a vague and happy feeling of tenderness.

 Then the mayor placed in one hand a silk purse in which gold tingled
      —five hundred francs in gold!—and in his other hand a savings
      bank book. And he said in a solemn tone:

 “Homage, glory and riches to virtue.”

 Commandant Desbarres shouted “Bravo!” the grenadiers
      vociferated, and the crowd applauded.

 Mme. Husson wiped her eyes, in her turn. Then they all sat down at the
      table where the banquet was served.

 The repast was magnificent and seemed interminable. One course followed
      another; yellow cider and red wine in fraternal contact blended in the
      stomach of the guests. The rattle of plates, the sound of voices, and of
      music softly played, made an incessant deep hum, and was dispersed abroad
      in the clear sky where the swallows were flying. Mme. Husson occasionally
      readjusted her black wig, which would slip over on one side, and chatted
      with Abbe Malon. The mayor, who was excited, talked politics with
      Commandant Desbarres, and Isidore ate, drank, as if he had never eaten or
      drunk before. He helped himself repeatedly to all the dishes, becoming
      aware for the first time of the pleasure of having one's belly full of
      good things which tickle the palate in the first place. He had let out a
      reef in his belt and, without speaking, and although he was a little
      uneasy at a wine stain on his white waistcoat, he ceased eating in order
      to take up his glass and hold it to his mouth as long as possible, to
      enjoy the taste slowly.

 It was time for the toasts. They were many and loudly applauded. Evening
      was approaching and they had been at the table since noon. Fine, milky
      vapors were already floating in the air in the valley, the light
      night-robe of streams and meadows; the sun neared the horizon; the cows
      were lowing in the distance amid the mists of the pasture. The feast was
      over. They returned to Gisors. The procession, now disbanded, walked in
      detachments. Mme. Husson had taken Isidore's arm and was giving him a
      quantity of urgent, excellent advice.

 They stopped at the door of the fruit store, and the “Rosier”
      was left at his mother's house. She had not come home yet. Having been
      invited by her family to celebrate her son's triumph, she had taken
      luncheon with her sister after having followed the procession as far as
      the banqueting tent.

 So Isidore remained alone in the store, which was growing dark. He sat
      down on a chair, excited by the wine and by pride, and looked about him.
      Carrots, cabbages, and onions gave out their strong odor of vegetables in
      the closed room, that coarse smell of the garden blended with the sweet,
      penetrating odor of strawberries and the delicate, slight, evanescent
      fragrance of a basket of peaches.

 The “Rosier” took one of these and ate it, although he was as
      full as an egg. Then, all at once, wild with joy, he began to dance about
      the store, and something rattled in his waistcoat.

 He was surprised, and put his hand in his pocket and brought out the purse
      containing the five hundred francs, which he had forgotten in his
      agitation. Five hundred francs! What a fortune! He poured the gold pieces
      out on the counter and spread them out with his big hand with a slow,
      caressing touch so as to see them all at the same time. There were
      twenty-five, twenty-five round gold pieces, all gold! They glistened on
      the wood in the dim light and he counted them over and over, one by one.
      Then he put them back in the purse, which he replaced in his pocket.

 Who will ever know or who can tell what a terrible conflict took place in
      the soul of the “Rosier” between good and evil, the tumultuous
      attack of Satan, his artifices, the temptations which he offered to this
      timid virgin heart? What suggestions, what imaginations, what desires were
      not invented by the evil one to excite and destroy this chosen one? He
      seized his hat, Mme. Husson's saint, his hat, which still bore the little
      bunch of orange blossoms, and going out through the alley at the back of
      the house, he disappeared in the darkness.

 Virginie, the fruiterer, on learning that her son had returned, went home
      at once, and found the house empty. She waited, without thinking anything
      about it at first; but at the end of a quarter of an hour she made
      inquiries. The neighbors had seen Isidore come home and had not seen him
      go out again. They began to look for him, but could not find him. His
      mother, in alarm, went to the mayor. The mayor knew nothing, except that
      he had left him at the door of his home. Mme. Husson had just retired when
      they informed her that her protege had disappeared. She immediately put on
      her wig, dressed herself and went to Virginie's house. Virginie, whose
      plebeian soul was readily moved, was weeping copiously amid her cabbages,
      carrots and onions.

 They feared some accident had befallen him. What could it be? Commandant
      Desbarres notified the police, who made a circuit of the town, and on the
      high road to Pontoise they found the little bunch of orange blossoms. It
      was placed on a table around which the authorities were deliberating. The
      “Rosier” must have been the victim of some stratagem, some
      trick, some jealousy; but in what way? What means had been employed to
      kidnap this innocent creature, and with what object?

 Weary of looking for him without any result, Virginie, alone, remained
      watching and weeping.

 The following evening, when the coach passed by on its return from Paris,
      Gisors learned with astonishment that its “Rosier” had stopped
      the vehicle at a distance of about two hundred metres from the town, had
      climbed up on it and paid his fare, handing over a gold piece and
      receiving the change, and that he had quietly alighted in the centre of
      the great city.

 There was great excitement all through the countryside. Letters passed
      between the mayor and the chief of police in Paris, but brought no result.

 The days followed one another, a week passed.

 Now, one morning, Dr. Barbesol, who had gone out early, perceived, sitting
      on a doorstep, a man dressed in a grimy linen suit, who was sleeping with
      his head leaning against the wall. He approached him and recognized
      Isidore. He tried to rouse him, but did not succeed in doing so. The ex-“Rosier”
      was in that profound, invincible sleep that is alarming, and the doctor,
      in surprise, went to seek assistance to help him in carrying the young man
      to Boncheval's drugstore. When they lifted him up they found an empty
      bottle under him, and when the doctor sniffed at it, he declared that it
      had contained brandy. That gave a suggestion as to what treatment he would
      require. They succeeded in rousing him.

 Isidore was drunk, drunk and degraded by a week of guzzling, drunk and so
      disgusting that a ragman would not have touched him. His beautiful white
      duck suit was a gray rag, greasy, muddy, torn, and destroyed, and he smelt
      of the gutter and of vice.

 He was washed, sermonized, shut up, and did not leave the house for four
      days. He seemed ashamed and repentant. They could not find on him either
      his purse, containing the five hundred francs, or the bankbook, or even
      his silver watch, a sacred heirloom left by his father, the fruiterer.

 On the fifth day he ventured into the Rue Dauphine, Curious glances
      followed him and he walked along with a furtive expression in his eyes and
      his head bent down. As he got outside the town towards the valley they
      lost sight of him; but two hours later he returned laughing and rolling
      against the walls. He was drunk, absolutely drunk.

 Nothing could cure him.

 Driven from home by his mother, he became a wagon driver, and drove the
      charcoal wagons for the Pougrisel firm, which is still in existence.

 His reputation as a drunkard became so well known and spread so far that
      even at Evreux they talked of Mme. Husson's “Rosier,” and the
      sots of the countryside have been given that nickname.

 A good deed is never lost.

 Dr. Marambot rubbed his hands as he finished his story. I asked:

 “Did you know the 'Rosier'?”

 “Yes. I had the honor of closing his eyes.”

 “What did he die of?”

 “An attack of delirium tremens, of course.”

 We had arrived at the old citadel, a pile of ruined walls dominated by the
      enormous tower of St. Thomas of Canterbury and the one called the
      Prisoner's Tower.

 Marambot told me the story of this prisoner, who, with the aid of a nail,
      covered the walls of his dungeon with sculptures, tracing the reflections
      of the sun as it glanced through the narrow slit of a loophole.

 I also learned that Clothaire II had given the patrimony of Gisors to his
      cousin, Saint Romain, bishop of Rouen; that Gisors ceased to be the
      capital of the whole of Vexin after the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte;
      that the town is the chief strategic centre of all that portion of France,
      and that in consequence of this advantage she was taken and retaken over
      and over again. At the command of William the Red, the eminent engineer,
      Robert de Bellesme, constructed there a powerful fortress that was
      attacked later by Louis le Gros, then by the Norman barons, was defended
      by Robert de Candos, was finally ceded to Louis le Gros by Geoffry
      Plantagenet, was retaken by the English in consequence of the treachery of
      the Knights-Templars, was contested by Philippe-Augustus and Richard the
      Lionhearted, was set on fire by Edward III of England, who could not take
      the castle, was again taken by the English in 1419, restored later to
      Charles VIII by Richard de Marbury, was taken by the Duke of Calabria
      occupied by the League, inhabited by Henry IV, etc., etc.

 And Marambot, eager and almost eloquent, continued:

 “What beggars, those English! And what sots, my boy; they are all
      'Rosiers,' those hypocrites!”

 Then, after a silence, stretching out his arm towards the tiny river that
      glistened in the meadows, he said:

 “Did you know that Henry Monnier was one of the most untiring
      fishermen on the banks of the Epte?”

 “No, I did not know it.”

 “And Bouffe, my boy, Bouffe was a painter on glass.”

 “You are joking!”

 “No, indeed. How is it you do not know these things?”