MADAME PARISSE

 I was sitting on the pier of the small port of Obernon, near the village
      of Salis, looking at Antibes, bathed in the setting sun. I had never
      before seen anything so wonderful and so beautiful.

 The small town, enclosed by its massive ramparts, built by Monsieur de
      Vauban, extended into the open sea, in the middle of the immense Gulf of
      Nice. The great waves, coming in from the ocean, broke at its feet,
      surrounding it with a wreath of foam; and beyond the ramparts the houses
      climbed up the hill, one after the other, as far as the two towers, which
      rose up into the sky, like the peaks of an ancient helmet. And these two
      towers were outlined against the milky whiteness of the Alps, that
      enormous distant wall of snow which enclosed the entire horizon.

 Between the white foam at the foot of the walls and the white snow on the
      sky-line the little city, dazzling against the bluish background of the
      nearest mountain ranges, presented to the rays of the setting sun a
      pyramid of red-roofed houses, whose facades were also white, but so
      different one from another that they seemed to be of all tints.

 And the sky above the Alps was itself of a blue that was almost white, as
      if the snow had tinted it; some silvery clouds were floating just over the
      pale summits, and on the other side of the gulf Nice, lying close to the
      water, stretched like a white thread between the sea and the mountain. Two
      great sails, driven by a strong breeze, seemed to skim over the waves. I
      looked upon all this, astounded.

 This view was one of those sweet, rare, delightful things that seem to
      permeate you and are unforgettable, like the memory of a great happiness.
      One sees, thinks, suffers, is moved and loves with the eyes. He who can
      feel with the eye experiences the same keen, exquisite and deep pleasure
      in looking at men and things as the man with the delicate and sensitive
      ear, whose soul music overwhelms.

 I turned to my companion, M. Martini, a pureblooded Southerner.

 “This is certainly one of the rarest sights which it has been
      vouchsafed to me to admire.

 “I have seen Mont Saint-Michel, that monstrous granite jewel, rise
      out of the sand at sunrise.

 “I have seen, in the Sahara, Lake Raianechergui, fifty kilometers
      long, shining under a moon as brilliant as our sun and breathing up toward
      it a white cloud, like a mist of milk.

 “I have seen, in the Lipari Islands, the weird sulphur crater of the
      Volcanello, a giant flower which smokes and burns, an enormous yellow
      flower, opening out in the midst of the sea, whose stem is a volcano.

 “But I have seen nothing more wonderful than Antibes, standing
      against the Alps in the setting sun.

 “And I know not how it is that memories of antiquity haunt me;
      verses of Homer come into my mind; this is a city of the ancient East, a
      city of the odyssey; this is Troy, although Troy was very far from the
      sea.”

 M. Martini drew the Sarty guide-book out of his pocket and read: “This
      city was originally a colony founded by the Phocians of Marseilles, about
      340 B.C. They gave it the Greek name of Antipolis, meaning counter-city,
      city opposite another, because it is in fact opposite to Nice, another
      colony from Marseilles.

 “After the Gauls were conquered, the Romans turned Antibes into a
      municipal city, its inhabitants receiving the rights of Roman citizenship.

 “We know by an epigram of Martial that at this time——”

 I interrupted him:

 “I don't care what she was. I tell you that I see down there a city
      of the Odyssey. The coast of Asia and the coast of Europe resemble each
      other in their shores, and there is no city on the other coast of the
      Mediterranean which awakens in me the memories of the heroic age as this
      one does.”

 A footstep caused me to turn my head; a woman, a large, dark woman, was
      walking along the road which skirts the sea in going to the cape.

 “That is Madame Parisse, you know,” muttered Monsieur Martini,
      dwelling on the final syllable.

 No, I did not know, but that name, mentioned carelessly, that name of the
      Trojan shepherd, confirmed me in my dream.

 However, I asked: “Who is this Madame Parisse?”

 He seemed astonished that I did not know the story.

 I assured him that I did not know it, and I looked after the woman, who
      passed by without seeing us, dreaming, walking with steady and slow step,
      as doubtless the ladies of old walked.

 She was perhaps thirty-five years old and still very beautiful, though a
      trifle stout.

 And Monsieur Martini told me the following story:

 Mademoiselle Combelombe was married, one year before the war of 1870, to
      Monsieur Parisse, a government official. She was then a handsome young
      girl, as slender and lively as she has now become stout and sad.

 Unwillingly she had accepted Monsieur Parisse, one of those little fat men
      with short legs, who trip along, with trousers that are always too large.

 After the war Antibes was garrisoned by a single battalion commanded by
      Monsieur Jean de Carmelin, a young officer decorated during the war, and
      who had just received his four stripes.

 As he found life exceedingly tedious in this fortress this stuffy
      mole-hole enclosed by its enormous double walls, he often strolled out to
      the cape, a kind of park or pine wood shaken by all the winds from the
      sea.

 There he met Madame Parisse, who also came out in the summer evenings to
      get the fresh air under the trees. How did they come to love each other?
      Who knows? They met, they looked at each other, and when out of sight they
      doubtless thought of each other. The image of the young woman with the
      brown eyes, the black hair, the pale skin, this fresh, handsome
      Southerner, who displayed her teeth in smiling, floated before the eyes of
      the officer as he continued his promenade, chewing his cigar instead of
      smoking it; and the image of the commanding officer, in his close-fitting
      coat, covered with gold lace, and his red trousers, and a little blond
      mustache, would pass before the eyes of Madame Parisse, when her husband,
      half shaven and ill-clad, short-legged and big-bellied, came home to
      supper in the evening.

 As they met so often, they perhaps smiled at the next meeting; then,
      seeing each other again and again, they felt as if they knew each other.
      He certainly bowed to her. And she, surprised, bowed in return, but very,
      very slightly, just enough not to appear impolite. But after two weeks she
      returned his salutation from a distance, even before they were side by
      side.

 He spoke to her. Of what? Doubtless of the setting sun. They admired it
      together, looking for it in each other's eyes more often than on the
      horizon. And every evening for two weeks this was the commonplace and
      persistent pretext for a few minutes' chat.

 Then they ventured to take a few steps together, talking of anything that
      came into their minds, but their eyes were already saying to each other a
      thousand more intimate things, those secret, charming things that are
      reflected in the gentle emotion of the glance, and that cause the heart to
      beat, for they are a better revelation of the soul than the spoken ward.

 And then he would take her hand, murmuring those words which the woman
      divines, without seeming to hear them.

 And it was agreed between them that they would love each other without
      evidencing it by anything sensual or brutal.

 She would have remained indefinitely at this stage of intimacy, but he
      wanted more. And every day he urged her more hotly to give in to his
      ardent desire.

 She resisted, would not hear of it, seemed determined not to give way.

 But one evening she said to him casually: “My husband has just gone
      to Marseilles. He will be away four days.”

 Jean de Carmelin threw himself at her feet, imploring her to open her door
      to him that very night at eleven o'clock. But she would not listen to him,
      and went home, appearing to be annoyed.

 The commandant was in a bad humor all the evening, and the next morning at
      dawn he went out on the ramparts in a rage, going from one exercise field
      to the other, dealing out punishment to the officers and men as one might
      fling stones into a crowd,

 On going in to breakfast he found an envelope under his napkin with these
      four words: “To-night at ten.” And he gave one hundred sous
      without any reason to the waiter.

 The day seemed endless to him. He passed part of it in curling his hair
      and perfuming himself.

 As he was sitting down to the dinner-table another envelope was handed to
      him, and in it he found the following telegram:

 “My Love: Business completed. I return this evening on the nine
   o'clock train.
                  PARISSE.”

 The commandant let loose such a vehement oath that the waiter dropped the
      soup-tureen on the floor.

 What should he do? He certainly wanted her, that very, evening at whatever
      cost; and he would have her. He would resort to any means, even to
      arresting and imprisoning the husband. Then a mad thought struck him.
      Calling for paper, he wrote the following note:

 MADAME: He will not come back this evening, I swear it to
   you,—and I shall be, you know where, at ten o'clock. Fear nothing.
   I will answer for everything, on my honor as an officer.
                       JEAN DE CARMELIN.

 And having sent off this letter, he quietly ate his dinner.

 Toward eight o'clock he sent for Captain Gribois, the second in command,
      and said, rolling between his fingers the crumpled telegram of Monsieur
      Parisse:

 “Captain, I have just received a telegram of a very singular nature,
      which it is impossible for me to communicate to you. You will immediately
      have all the gates of the city closed and guarded, so that no one, mind
      me, no one, will either enter or leave before six in the morning. You will
      also have men patrol the streets, who will compel the inhabitants to
      retire to their houses at nine o'clock. Any one found outside beyond that
      time will be conducted to his home 'manu militari'. If your men meet me
      this night they will at once go out of my way, appearing not to know me.
      You understand me?”

 “Yes, commandant.”

 “I hold you responsible for the execution of my orders, my dear
      captain.”

 “Yes, commandant.”

 “Would you like to have a glass of chartreuse?”

 “With great pleasure, commandant.”

 They clinked glasses drank down the brown liquor and Captain Gribois left
      the room.

 The train from Marseilles arrived at the station at nine o'clock sharp,
      left two passengers on the platform and went on toward Nice.

 One of them, tall and thin, was Monsieur Saribe, the oil merchant, and the
      other, short and fat, was Monsieur Parisse.

 Together they set out, with their valises, to reach the city, one
      kilometer distant.

 But on arriving at the gate of the port the guards crossed their bayonets,
      commanding them to retire.

 Frightened, surprised, cowed with astonishment, they retired to
      deliberate; then, after having taken counsel one with the other, they came
      back cautiously to parley, giving their names.

 But the soldiers evidently had strict orders, for they threatened to
      shoot; and the two scared travellers ran off, throwing away their valises,
      which impeded their flight.

 Making the tour of the ramparts, they presented themselves at the gate on
      the route to Cannes. This likewise was closed and guarded by a menacing
      sentinel. Messrs. Saribe and Parisse, like the prudent men they were,
      desisted from their efforts and went back to the station for shelter,
      since it was not safe to be near the fortifications after sundown.

 The station agent, surprised and sleepy, permitted them to stay till
      morning in the waiting-room.

 And they sat there side by side, in the dark, on the green velvet sofa,
      too scared to think of sleeping.

 It was a long and weary night for them.

 At half-past six in the morning they were informed that the gates were
      open and that people could now enter Antibes.

 They set out for the city, but failed to find their abandoned valises on
      the road.

 When they passed through the gates of the city, still somewhat anxious,
      the Commandant de Carmelin, with sly glance and mustache curled up, came
      himself to look at them and question them.

 Then he bowed to them politely, excusing himself for having caused them a
      bad night. But he had to carry out orders.

 The people of Antibes were scared to death. Some spoke of a surprise
      planned by the Italians, others of the landing of the prince imperial and
      others again believed that there was an Orleanist conspiracy. The truth
      was suspected only later, when it became known that the battalion of the
      commandant had been sent away, to a distance and that Monsieur de Carmelin
      had been severely punished.

 Monsieur Martini had finished his story. Madame Parisse returned, her
      promenade being ended. She passed gravely near me, with her eyes fixed on
      the Alps, whose summits now gleamed rosy in the last rays of the setting
      sun.

 I longed to speak to her, this poor, sad woman, who would ever be thinking
      of that night of love, now long past, and of the bold man who for the sake
      of a kiss from her had dared to put a city into a state of siege and to
      compromise his whole future.

 And to-day he had probably forgotten her, if he did not relate this
      audacious, comical and tender farce to his comrades over their cups.

 Had she seen him again? Did she still love him? And I thought: Here is an
      instance of modern love, grotesque and yet heroic. The Homer who should
      sing of this new Helen and the adventure of her Menelaus must be gifted
      with the soul of a Paul de Kock. And yet the hero of this deserted woman
      was brave, daring, handsome, strong as Achilles and more cunning than
      Ulysses.