MADEMOISELLE COCOTTE

 We were just leaving the asylum when I saw a tall, thin man in a corner of
      the court who kept on calling an imaginary dog. He was crying in a soft,
      tender voice: “Cocotte! Come here, Cocotte, my beauty!” and
      slapping his thigh as one does when calling an animal. I asked the
      physician, “Who is that man?” He answered: “Oh! he is
      not at all interesting. He is a coachman named Francois, who became insane
      after drowning his dog.”

 I insisted: “Tell me his story. The most simple and humble things
      are sometimes those which touch our hearts most deeply.”

 Here is this man's adventure, which was obtained from a friend of his, a
      groom:

 There was a family of rich bourgeois who lived in a suburb of Paris. They
      had a villa in the middle of a park, at the edge of the Seine. Their
      coachman was this Francois, a country fellow, somewhat dull, kind-hearted,
      simple and easy to deceive.

 One evening, as he was returning home, a dog began to follow him. At first
      he paid no attention to it, but the creature's obstinacy at last made him
      turn round. He looked to see if he knew this dog. No, he had never seen
      it. It was a female dog and frightfully thin. She was trotting behind him
      with a mournful and famished look, her tail between her legs, her ears
      flattened against her head and stopping and starting whenever he did.

 He tried to chase this skeleton away and cried:

 “Run along! Get out! Kss! kss!” She retreated a few steps,
      then sat down and waited. And when the coachman started to walk again she
      followed along behind him.

 He pretended to pick up some stones. The animal ran a little farther away,
      but came back again as soon as the man's back was turned.

 Then the coachman Francois took pity on the beast and called her. The dog
      approached timidly. The man patted her protruding ribs, moved by the
      beast's misery, and he cried: “Come! come here!” Immediately
      she began to wag her tail, and, feeling herself taken in, adopted, she
      began to run along ahead of her new master.

 He made her a bed on the straw in the stable, then he ran to the kitchen
      for some bread. When she had eaten all she could she curled up and went to
      sleep.

 When his employers heard of this the next day they allowed the coachman to
      keep the animal. It was a good beast, caressing and faithful, intelligent
      and gentle.

 Nevertheless Francois adored Cocotte, and he kept repeating: “That
      beast is human. She only lacks speech.”

 He had a magnificent red leather collar made for her which bore these
      words engraved on a copper plate: “Mademoiselle Cocotte, belonging
      to the coachman Francois.”

 She was remarkably prolific and four times a year would give birth to a
      batch of little animals belonging to every variety of the canine race.
      Francois would pick out one which he would leave her and then he would
      unmercifully throw the others into the river. But soon the cook joined her
      complaints to those of the gardener. She would find dogs under the stove,
      in the ice box, in the coal bin, and they would steal everything they came
      across.

 Finally the master, tired of complaints, impatiently ordered Francois to
      get rid of Cocotte. In despair the man tried to give her away. Nobody
      wanted her. Then he decided to lose her, and he gave her to a teamster,
      who was to drop her on the other side of Paris, near Joinville-le-Pont.

 Cocotte returned the same day. Some decision had to be taken. Five francs
      was given to a train conductor to take her to Havre. He was to drop her
      there.

 Three days later she returned to the stable, thin, footsore and tired out.

 The master took pity on her and let her stay. But other dogs were
      attracted as before, and one evening, when a big dinner party was on, a
      stuffed turkey was carried away by one of them right under the cook's
      nose, and she did not dare to stop him.

 This time the master completely lost his temper and said angrily to
      Francois: “If you don't throw this beast into the water before—to-morrow
      morning, I'll put you out, do you hear?”

 The man was dumbfounded, and he returned to his room to pack his trunk,
      preferring to leave the place. Then he bethought himself that he could
      find no other situation as long as he dragged this animal about with him.
      He thought of his good position, where he was well paid and well fed, and
      he decided that a dog was really not worth all that. At last he decided to
      rid himself of Cocotte at daybreak.

 He slept badly. He rose at dawn, and taking a strong rope, went to get the
      dog. She stood up slowly, shook herself, stretched and came to welcome her
      master.

 Then his courage forsook him, and he began to pet her affectionately,
      stroking her long ears, kissing her muzzle and calling her tender names.

 But a neighboring clock struck six. He could no longer hesitate. He opened
      the door, calling: “Come!” The beast wagged her tail,
      understanding that she was to be taken out.

 They reached the beach, and he chose a place where the water seemed deep.
      Then he knotted the rope round the leather collar and tied a heavy stone
      to the other end. He seized Cocotte in his arms and kissed her madly, as
      though he were taking leave of some human being. He held her to his
      breast, rocked her and called her “my dear little Cocotte, my sweet
      little Cocotte,” and she grunted with pleasure.

 Ten times he tried to throw her into the water and each time he lost
      courage.

 But suddenly he made up his mind and threw her as far from him as he
      could. At first she tried to swim, as she did when he gave her a bath, but
      her head, dragged down by the stone, kept going under, and she looked at
      her master with wild, human glances as she struggled like a drowning
      person. Then the front part of her body sank, while her hind legs waved
      wildly out of the water. Finally those also disappeared.

 Then, for five minutes, bubbles rose to the surface as though the river
      were boiling, and Francois, haggard, his heart beating, thought that he
      saw Cocotte struggling in the mud, and, with the simplicity of a peasant,
      he kept saying to himself: “What does the poor beast think of me
      now?”

 He almost lost his mind. He was ill for a month and every night he dreamed
      of his dog. He could feel her licking his hands and hear her barking. It
      was necessary to call in a physician. At last he recovered, and toward the
      2nd of June his employers took him to their estate at Biesard, near Rouen.

 There again he was near the Seine. He began to take baths. Each morning he
      would go down with the groom and they would swim across the river.

 One day, as they were disporting themselves in the water, Francois
      suddenly cried to his companion: “Look what's coming! I'm going to
      give you a chop!”

 It was an enormous, swollen corpse that was floating down with its feet
      sticking straight up in the air.

 Francois swam up to it, still joking: “Whew! it's not fresh. What a
      catch, old man! It isn't thin, either!” He kept swimming about at a
      distance from the animal that was in a state of decomposition. Then,
      suddenly, he was silent and looked at it: attentively. This time he came
      near enough to touch, it. He looked fixedly at the collar, then he
      stretched out his arm, seized the neck, swung the corpse round and drew it
      up close to him and read on the copper which had turned green and which
      still stuck to the discolored leather: “Mademoiselle Cocotte,
      belonging to the coachman Francois.”

 The dead dog had come more than a hundred miles to find its master.

 He let out a frightful shriek and began to swim for the beach with all his
      might, still howling; and as soon as he touched land he ran away wildly,
      stark naked, through the country. He was insane!