MADEMOISELLE PEARL
    

      I
    

      What a strange idea it was for me to choose Mademoiselle Pearl for queen
      that evening!
    

      Every year I celebrate Twelfth Night with my old friend Chantal. My
      father, who was his most intimate friend, used to take me round there when
      I was a child. I continued the custom, and I doubtless shall continue it
      as long as I live and as long as there is a Chantal in this world.
    

      The Chantals lead a peculiar existence; they live in Paris as though they
      were in Grasse, Evetot, or Pont-a-Mousson.
    

      They have a house with a little garden near the observatory. They live
      there as though they were in the country. Of Paris, the real Paris, they
      know nothing at all, they suspect nothing; they are so far, so far away!
      However, from time to time, they take a trip into it. Mademoiselle Chantal
      goes to lay in her provisions, as it is called in the family. This is how
      they go to purchase their provisions:
    

      Mademoiselle Pearl, who has the keys to the kitchen closet (for the linen
      closets are administered by the mistress herself), Mademoiselle Pearl
      gives warning that the supply of sugar is low, that the preserves are
      giving out, that there is not much left in the bottom of the coffee bag.
      Thus warned against famine, Mademoiselle Chantal passes everything in
      review, taking notes on a pad. Then she puts down a lot of figures and
      goes through lengthy calculations and long discussions with Mademoiselle
      Pearl. At last they manage to agree, and they decide upon the quantity of
      each thing of which they will lay in a three months' provision; sugar,
      rice, prunes, coffee, preserves, cans of peas, beans, lobster, salt or
      smoked fish, etc., etc. After which the day for the purchasing is
      determined on and they go in a cab with a railing round the top and drive
      to a large grocery store on the other side of the river in the new
      sections of the town.
    

      Madame Chantal and Mademoiselle Pearl make this trip together,
      mysteriously, and only return at dinner time, tired out, although still
      excited, and shaken up by the cab, the roof of which is covered with
      bundles and bags, like an express wagon.
    

      For the Chantals all that part of Paris situated on the other side of the
      Seine constitutes the new quarter, a section inhabited by a strange, noisy
      population, which cares little for honor, spends its days in dissipation,
      its nights in revelry, and which throws money out of the windows. From
      time to time, however, the young girls are taken to the Opera-Comique or
      the Theatre Francais, when the play is recommended by the paper which is
      read by M. Chantal.
    

      At present the young ladies are respectively nineteen and seventeen. They
      are two pretty girls, tall and fresh, very well brought up, in fact, too
      well brought up, so much so that they pass by unperceived like two pretty
      dolls. Never would the idea come to me to pay the slightest attention or
      to pay court to one of the young Chantal ladies; they are so immaculate
      that one hardly dares speak to them; one almost feels indecent when bowing
      to them.
    

      As for the father, he is a charming man, well educated, frank, cordial,
      but he likes calm and quiet above all else, and has thus contributed
      greatly to the mummifying of his family in order to live as he pleased in
      stagnant quiescence. He reads a lot, loves to talk and is readily
      affected. Lack of contact and of elbowing with the world has made his
      moral skin very tender and sensitive. The slightest thing moves him,
      excites him, and makes him suffer.
    

      The Chantals have limited connections carefully chosen in the
      neighborhood. They also exchange two or three yearly visits with relatives
      who live in the distance.
    

      As for me, I take dinner with them on the fifteenth of August and on
      Twelfth Night. That is as much one of my duties as Easter communion is for
      a Catholic.
    

      On the fifteenth of August a few friends are invited, but on Twelfth Night
      I am the only stranger.
    

      Well, this year, as every former year, I went to the Chantals' for my
      Epiphany dinner.
    

      According to my usual custom, I kissed M. Chantal, Madame Chantal and
      Mademoiselle Pearl, and I made a deep bow to the Misses Louise and
      Pauline. I was questioned about a thousand and one things, about what had
      happened on the boulevards, about politics, about how matters stood in
      Tong-King, and about our representatives in Parliament. Madame Chantal, a
      fat lady, whose ideas always gave me the impression of being carved out
      square like building stones, was accustomed to exclaiming at the end of
      every political discussion: “All that is seed which does not promise
      much for the future!” Why have I always imagined that Madame
      Chantal's ideas are square? I don't know; but everything that she says
      takes that shape in my head: a big square, with four symmetrical angles.
      There are other people whose ideas always strike me as being round and
      rolling like a hoop. As soon as they begin a sentence on any subject it
      rolls on and on, coming out in ten, twenty, fifty round ideas, large and
      small, which I see rolling along, one behind the other, to the end of the
      horizon. Other people have pointed ideas—but enough of this.
    

      We sat down as usual and finished our dinner without anything out of the
      ordinary being said. At dessert the Twelfth Night cake was brought on.
      Now, M. Chantal had been king every year. I don't know whether this was
      the result of continued chance or a family convention, but he unfailingly
      found the bean in his piece of cake, and he would proclaim Madame Chantal
      to be queen. Therefore, I was greatly surprised to find something very
      hard, which almost made me break a tooth, in a mouthful of cake. Gently I
      took this thing from my mouth and I saw that it was a little porcelain
      doll, no bigger than a bean. Surprise caused me to exclaim:
    

      “Ah!” All looked at me, and Chantal clapped his hands and
      cried: “It's Gaston! It's Gaston! Long live the king! Long live the
      king!”
    

      All took up the chorus: “Long live the king!” And I blushed to
      the tip of my ears, as one often does, without any reason at all, in
      situations which are a little foolish. I sat there looking at my plate,
      with this absurd little bit of pottery in my fingers, forcing myself to
      laugh and not knowing what to do or say, when Chantal once more cried out:
      “Now, you must choose a queen!”
    

      Then I was thunderstruck. In a second a thousand thoughts and suppositions
      flashed through my mind. Did they expect me to pick out one of the young
      Chantal ladies? Was that a trick to make me say which one I prefer? Was it
      a gentle, light, direct hint of the parents toward a possible marriage?
      The idea of marriage roams continually in houses with grown-up girls, and
      takes every shape and disguise, and employs every subterfuge. A dread of
      compromising myself took hold of me as well as an extreme timidity before
      the obstinately correct and reserved attitude of the Misses Louise and
      Pauline. To choose one of them in preference to the other seemed to me as
      difficult as choosing between two drops of water; and then the fear of
      launching myself into an affair which might, in spite of me, lead me
      gently into matrimonial ties, by means as wary and imperceptible and as
      calm as this insignificant royalty—the fear of all this haunted me.
    

      Suddenly I had an inspiration, and I held out to Mademoiselle Pearl the
      symbolical emblem. At first every one was surprised, then they doubtless
      appreciated my delicacy and discretion, for they applauded furiously.
      Everybody was crying: “Long live the queen! Long live the queen!”
    

      As for herself, poor old maid, she was so amazed that she completely lost
      control of herself; she was trembling and stammering: “No—no—oh!
      no—not me—please—not me—I beg of you——”
    

      Then for the first time in my life I looked at Mademoiselle Pearl and
      wondered what she was.
    

      I was accustomed to seeing her in this house, just as one sees old
      upholstered armchairs on which one has been sitting since childhood
      without ever noticing them. One day, with no reason at all, because a ray
      of sunshine happens to strike the seat, you suddenly think: “Why,
      that chair is very curious”; and then you discover that the wood has
      been worked by a real artist and that the material is remarkable. I had
      never taken any notice of Mademoiselle Pearl.
    

      She was a part of the Chantal family, that was all. But how? By what
      right? She was a tall, thin person who tried to remain in the background,
      but who was by no means insignificant. She was treated in a friendly
      manner, better than a housekeeper, not so well as a relative. I suddenly
      observed several shades of distinction which I had never noticed before.
      Madame Chantal said: “Pearl.” The young ladies: “Mademoiselle
      Pearl,” and Chantal only addressed her as “Mademoiselle,”
      with an air of greater respect, perhaps.
    

      I began to observe her. How old could she be? Forty? Yes, forty. She was
      not old, she made herself old. I was suddenly struck by this fact. She
      fixed her hair and dressed in a ridiculous manner, and, notwithstanding
      all that, she was not in the least ridiculous, she had such simple,
      natural gracefulness, veiled and hidden. Truly, what a strange creature!
      How was it I had never observed her before? She dressed her hair in a
      grotesque manner with little old maid curls, most absurd; but beneath this
      one could see a large, calm brow, cut by two deep lines, two wrinkles of
      long sadness, then two blue eyes, large and tender, so timid, so bashful,
      so humble, two beautiful eyes which had kept the expression of naive
      wonder of a young girl, of youthful sensations, and also of sorrow, which
      had softened without spoiling them.
    

      Her whole face was refined and discreet, a face the expression of which
      seemed to have gone out without being used up or faded by the fatigues and
      great emotions of life.
    

      What a dainty mouth! and such pretty teeth! But one would have thought
      that she did not dare smile.
    

      Suddenly I compared her to Madame Chantal! Undoubtedly Mademoiselle Pearl
      was the better of the two, a hundred times better, daintier, prouder, more
      noble. I was surprised at my observation. They were pouring out champagne.
      I held my glass up to the queen and, with a well-turned compliment, I
      drank to her health. I could see that she felt inclined to hide her head
      in her napkin. Then, as she was dipping her lips in the clear wine,
      everybody cried: “The queen drinks! the queen drinks!” She
      almost turned purple and choked. Everybody was laughing; but I could see
      that all loved her.
    

      As soon as dinner was over Chantal took me by the arm. It was time for his
      cigar, a sacred hour. When alone he would smoke it out in the street; when
      guests came to dinner he would take them to the billiard room and smoke
      while playing. That evening they had built a fire to celebrate Twelfth
      Night; my old friend took his cue, a very fine one, and chalked it with
      great care; then he said:
    

      “You break, my boy!”
    

      He called me “my boy,” although I was twenty-five, but he had
      known me as a young child.
    

      I started the game and made a few carroms. I missed some others, but as
      the thought of Mademoiselle Pearl kept returning to my mind, I suddenly
      asked:
    

      “By the way, Monsieur Chantal, is Mademoiselle Pearl a relative of
      yours?”
    

      Greatly surprised, he stopped playing and looked at me:
    

      “What! Don't you know? Haven't you heard about Mademoiselle Pearl?”
    

      “No.”
    

      “Didn't your father ever tell you?”
    

      “No.”
    

      “Well, well, that's funny! That certainly is funny! Why, it's a
      regular romance!”
    

      He paused, and then continued:
    

      “And if you only knew how peculiar it is that you should ask me that
      to-day, on Twelfth Night!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Why? Well, listen. Forty-one years ago to day, the day of the
      Epiphany, the following events occurred: We were then living at
      Roily-le-Tors, on the ramparts; but in order that you may understand, I
      must first explain the house. Roily is built on a hill, or, rather, on a
      mound which overlooks a great stretch of prairie. We had a house there
      with a beautiful hanging garden supported by the old battlemented wall; so
      that the house was in the town on the streets, while the garden overlooked
      the plain. There was a door leading from the garden to the open country,
      at the bottom of a secret stairway in the thick wall—the kind you
      read about in novels. A road passed in front of this door, which was
      provided with a big bell; for the peasants, in order to avoid the
      roundabout way, would bring their provisions up this way.
    

      “You now understand the place, don't you? Well, this year, at
      Epiphany, it had been snowing for a week. One might have thought that the
      world was coming to an end. When we went to the ramparts to look over the
      plain, this immense white, frozen country, which shone like varnish, would
      chill our very souls. One might have thought that the Lord had packed the
      world in cotton to put it away in the storeroom for old worlds. I can
      assure you that it was dreary looking.
    

      “We were a very numerous family at that time my father, my mother,
      my uncle and aunt, my two brothers and four cousins; they were pretty
      little girls; I married the youngest. Of all that crowd, there are only
      three of us left: my wife, I, and my sister-in-law, who lives in
      Marseilles. Zounds! how quickly a family like that dwindles away! I
      tremble when I think of it! I was fifteen years old then, since I am
      fifty-six now.
    

      “We were going to celebrate the Epiphany, and we were all happy,
      very happy! Everybody was in the parlor, awaiting dinner, and my oldest
      brother, Jacques, said: 'There has been a dog howling out in the plain for
      about ten minutes; the poor beast must be lost.'
    

      “He had hardly stopped talking when the garden bell began to ring.
      It had the deep sound of a church bell, which made one think of death. A
      shiver ran through everybody. My father called the servant and told him to
      go outside and look. We waited in complete silence; we were thinking of
      the snow which covered the ground. When the man returned he declared that
      he had seen nothing. The dog kept up its ceaseless howling, and always
      from the same spot.
    

      “We sat down to dinner; but we were all uneasy, especially the young
      people. Everything went well up to the roast, then the bell began to ring
      again, three times in succession, three heavy, long strokes which vibrated
      to the tips of our fingers and which stopped our conversation short. We
      sat there looking at each other, fork in the air, still listening, and
      shaken by a kind of supernatural fear.
    

      “At last my mother spoke: 'It's surprising that they should have
      waited so long to come back. Do not go alone, Baptiste; one of these
      gentlemen will accompany you.'
    

      “My Uncle Francois arose. He was a kind of Hercules, very proud of
      his strength, and feared nothing in the world. My father said to him:
      'Take a gun. There is no telling what it might be.'
    

      “But my uncle only took a cane and went out with the servant.
    

      “We others remained there trembling with fear and apprehension,
      without eating or speaking. My father tried to reassure us: 'Just wait and
      see,' he said; 'it will be some beggar or some traveller lost in the snow.
      After ringing once, seeing that the door was not immediately opened, he
      attempted again to find his way, and being unable to, he has returned to
      our door.'
    

      “Our uncle seemed to stay away an hour. At last he came back,
      furious, swearing: 'Nothing at all; it's some practical joker! There is
      nothing but that damned dog howling away at about a hundred yards from the
      walls. If I had taken a gun I would have killed him to make him keep
      quiet.'
    

      “We sat down to dinner again, but every one was excited; we felt
      that all was not over, that something was going to happen, that the bell
      would soon ring again.
    

      “It rang just as the Twelfth Night cake was being cut. All the men
      jumped up together. My Uncle, Francois, who had been drinking champagne,
      swore so furiously that he would murder it, whatever it might be, that my
      mother and my aunt threw themselves on him to prevent his going. My
      father, although very calm and a little helpless (he limped ever since he
      had broken his leg when thrown by a horse), declared, in turn, that he
      wished to find out what was the matter and that he was going. My brothers,
      aged eighteen and twenty, ran to get their guns; and as no one was paying
      any attention to me I snatched up a little rifle that was used in the
      garden and got ready to accompany the expedition.
    

      “It started out immediately. My father and uncle were walking ahead
      with Baptiste, who was carrying a lantern. My brothers, Jacques and Paul,
      followed, and I trailed on behind in spite of the prayers of my mother,
      who stood in front of the house with her sister and my cousins.
    

      “It had been snowing again for the last hour, and the trees were
      weighted down. The pines were bending under this heavy, white garment, and
      looked like white pyramids or enormous sugar cones, and through the gray
      curtains of small hurrying flakes could be seen the lighter bushes which
      stood out pale in the shadow. The snow was falling so thick that we could
      hardly see ten feet ahead of us. But the lantern threw a bright light
      around us. When we began to go down the winding stairway in the wall I
      really grew frightened. I felt as though some one were walking behind me,
      were going to grab me by the shoulders and carry me away, and I felt a
      strong desire to return; but, as I would have had to cross the garden all
      alone, I did not dare. I heard some one opening the door leading to the
      plain; my uncle began to swear again, exclaiming: 'By—-! He has gone
      again! If I can catch sight of even his shadow, I'll take care not to miss
      him, the swine!'
    

      “It was a discouraging thing to see this great expanse of plain, or,
      rather, to feel it before us, for we could not see it; we could only see a
      thick, endless veil of snow, above, below, opposite us, to the right, to
      the left, everywhere. My uncle continued:
    

      “'Listen! There is the dog howling again; I will teach him how I
      shoot. That will be something gained, anyhow.'
    

      “But my father, who was kind-hearted, went on:
    

      “'It will be much better to go on and get the poor animal, who is
      crying for hunger. The poor fellow is barking for help; he is calling like
      a man in distress. Let us go to him.'
    

      “So we started out through this mist, through this thick continuous
      fall of snow, which filled the air, which moved, floated, fell, and
      chilled the skin with a burning sensation like a sharp, rapid pain as each
      flake melted. We were sinking in up to our knees in this soft, cold mass,
      and we had to lift our feet very high in order to walk. As we advanced the
      dog's voice became clearer and stronger. My uncle cried: 'Here he is!' We
      stopped to observe him as one does when he meets an enemy at night.
    

      “I could see nothing, so I ran up to the others, and I caught sight
      of him; he was frightful and weird-looking; he was a big black shepherd's
      dog with long hair and a wolf's head, standing just within the gleam of
      light cast by our lantern on the snow. He did not move; he was silently
      watching us.
    

      “My uncle said: 'That's peculiar, he is neither advancing nor
      retreating. I feel like taking a shot at him.'
    

      “My father answered in a firm voice: 'No, we must capture him.'
    

      “Then my brother Jacques added: 'But he is not alone. There is
      something behind him.”
    

      “There was indeed something behind him, something gray, impossible
      to distinguish. We started out again cautiously. When he saw us
      approaching the dog sat down. He did not look wicked. Instead, he seemed
      pleased at having been able to attract the attention of some one.
    

      “My father went straight to him and petted him. The dog licked his
      hands. We saw that he was tied to the wheel of a little carriage, a sort
      of toy carriage entirely wrapped up in three or four woolen blankets. We
      carefully took off these coverings, and as Baptiste approached his lantern
      to the front of this little vehicle, which looked like a rolling kennel,
      we saw in it a little baby sleeping peacefully.
    

      “We were so astonished that we couldn't speak.
    

      “My father was the first to collect his wits, and as he had a warm
      heart and a broad mind, he stretched his hand over the roof of the
      carriage and said: 'Poor little waif, you shall be one of us!' And he
      ordered my brother Jacques to roll the foundling ahead of us. Thinking out
      loud, my father continued:
    

      “'Some child of love whose poor mother rang at my door on this night
      of Epiphany in memory of the Child of God.'
    

      “He once more stopped and called at the top of his lungs through the
      night to the four corners of the heavens: 'We have found it!' Then,
      putting his hand on his brother's shoulder, he murmured: 'What if you had
      shot the dog, Francois?'
    

      “My uncle did not answer, but in the darkness he crossed himself,
      for, notwithstanding his blustering manner, he was very religious.
    

      “The dog, which had been untied, was following us.
    

      “Ah! But you should have seen us when we got to the house! At first
      we had a lot of trouble in getting the carriage up through the winding
      stairway; but we succeeded and even rolled it into the vestibule.
    

      “How funny mamma was! How happy and astonished! And my four little
      cousins (the youngest was only six), they looked like four chickens around
      a nest. At last we took the child from the carriage. It was still
      sleeping. It was a girl about six weeks old. In its clothes we found ten
      thousand francs in gold, yes, my boy, ten thousand francs!—which
      papa saved for her dowry. Therefore, it was not a child of poor people,
      but, perhaps, the child of some nobleman and a little bourgeoise of the
      town—or again—we made a thousand suppositions, but we never
      found out anything-never the slightest clue. The dog himself was
      recognized by no one. He was a stranger in the country. At any rate, the
      person who rang three times at our door must have known my parents well,
      to have chosen them thus.
    

      “That is how, at the age of six weeks, Mademoiselle Pearl entered
      the Chantal household.
    

      “It was not until later that she was called Mademoiselle Pearl. She
      was at first baptized 'Marie Simonne Claire,' Claire being intended, for
      her family name.
    

      “I can assure you that our return to the diningroom was amusing,
      with this baby now awake and looking round her at these people and these
      lights with her vague blue questioning eyes.
    

      “We sat down to dinner again and the cake was cut. I was king, and
      for queen I took Mademoiselle Pearl, just as you did to-day. On that day
      she did not appreciate the honor that was being shown her.
    

      “Well, the child was adopted and brought up in the family. She grew,
      and the years flew by. She was so gentle and loving and minded so well
      that every one would have spoiled her abominably had not my mother
      prevented it.
    

      “My mother was an orderly woman with a great respect for class
      distinctions. She consented to treat little Claire as she did her own
      sons, but, nevertheless, she wished the distance which separated us to be
      well marked, and our positions well established. Therefore, as soon as the
      child could understand, she acquainted her with her story and gently, even
      tenderly, impressed on the little one's mind that, for the Chantals, she
      was an adopted daughter, taken in, but, nevertheless, a stranger. Claire
      understood the situation with peculiar intelligence and with surprising
      instinct; she knew how to take the place which was allotted her, and to
      keep it with so much tact, gracefulness and gentleness that she often
      brought tears to my father's eyes. My mother herself was often moved by
      the passionate gratitude and timid devotion of this dainty and loving
      little creature that she began calling her: 'My daughter.' At times, when
      the little one had done something kind and good, my mother would raise her
      spectacles on her forehead, a thing which always indicated emotion with
      her, and she would repeat: 'This child is a pearl, a perfect pearl!' This
      name stuck to the little Claire, who became and remained for us
      Mademoiselle Pearl.”
    

      II
    

      M. Chantal stopped. He was sitting on the edge of the billiard table, his
      feet hanging, and was playing with a ball with his left hand, while with
      his right he crumpled a rag which served to rub the chalk marks from the
      slate. A little red in the face, his voice thick, he was talking away to
      himself now, lost in his memories, gently drifting through the old scenes
      and events which awoke in his mind, just as we walk through old family
      gardens where we were brought up and where each tree, each walk, each
      hedge reminds us of some occurrence.
    

      I stood opposite him leaning against the wall, my hands resting on my idle
      cue.
    

      After a slight pause he continued:
    

      “By Jove! She was pretty at eighteen—and graceful—and
      perfect. Ah! She was so sweet—and good and true—and charming!
      She had such eyes—blue-transparent—clear—such eyes as I
      have never seen since!”
    

      He was once more silent. I asked: “Why did she never marry?”
    

      He answered, not to me, but to the word “marry” which had
      caught his ear: “Why? why? She never would—she never would!
      She had a dowry of thirty thousand francs, and she received several offers—but
      she never would! She seemed sad at that time. That was when I married my
      cousin, little Charlotte, my wife, to whom I had been engaged for six
      years.”
    

      I looked at M. Chantal, and it seemed to me that I was looking into his
      very soul, and I was suddenly witnessing one of those humble and cruel
      tragedies of honest, straightforward, blameless hearts, one of those
      secret tragedies known to no one, not even the silent and resigned
      victims. A rash curiosity suddenly impelled me to exclaim:
    

      “You should have married her, Monsieur Chantal!”
    

      He started, looked at me, and said:
    

      “I? Marry whom?”
    

      “Mademoiselle Pearl.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Because you loved her more than your cousin.”
    

      He stared at me with strange, round, bewildered eyes and stammered:
    

      “I loved her—I? How? Who told you that?”
    

      “Why, anyone can see that—and it's even on account of her that
      you delayed for so long your marriage to your cousin who had been waiting
      for you for six years.”
    

      He dropped the ball which he was holding in his left hand, and, seizing
      the chalk rag in both hands, he buried his face in it and began to sob. He
      was weeping with his eyes, nose and mouth in a heartbreaking yet
      ridiculous manner, like a sponge which one squeezes. He was coughing,
      spitting and blowing his nose in the chalk rag, wiping his eyes and
      sneezing; then the tears would again begin to flow down the wrinkles on
      his face and he would make a strange gurgling noise in his throat. I felt
      bewildered, ashamed; I wanted to run away, and I no longer knew what to
      say, do, or attempt.
    

      Suddenly Madame Chantal's voice sounded on the stairs. “Haven't you
      men almost finished smoking your cigars?”
    

      I opened the door and cried: “Yes, madame, we are coming right down.”
    

      Then I rushed to her husband, and, seizing him by the shoulders, I cried:
      “Monsieur Chantal, my friend Chantal, listen to me; your wife is
      calling; pull yourself together, we must go downstairs.”
    

      He stammered: “Yes—yes—I am coming—poor girl! I am
      coming—tell her that I am coming.”
    

      He began conscientiously to wipe his face on the cloth which, for the last
      two or three years, had been used for marking off the chalk from the
      slate; then he appeared, half white and half red, his forehead, nose,
      cheeks and chin covered with chalk, and his eyes swollen, still full of
      tears.
    

      I caught him by the hands and dragged him into his bedroom, muttering:
      “I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon, Monsieur Chantal, for having
      caused you such sorrow—but—I did not know—you—you
      understand.”
    

      He squeezed my hand, saying: “Yes—yes—there are
      difficult moments.”
    

      Then he plunged his face into a bowl of water. When he emerged from it he
      did not yet seem to me to be presentable; but I thought of a little
      stratagem. As he was growing worried, looking at himself in the mirror, I
      said to him: “All you have to do is to say that a little dust flew
      into your eye and you can cry before everybody to your heart's content.”
    

      He went downstairs rubbing his eyes with his handkerchief. All were
      worried; each one wished to look for the speck, which could not be found;
      and stories were told of similar cases where it had been necessary to call
      in a physician.
    

      I went over to Mademoiselle Pearl and watched her, tormented by an ardent
      curiosity, which was turning to positive suffering. She must indeed have
      been pretty, with her gentle, calm eyes, so large that it looked as though
      she never closed them like other mortals. Her gown was a little
      ridiculous, a real old maid's gown, which was unbecoming without appearing
      clumsy.
    

      It seemed to me as though I were looking into her soul, just as I had into
      Monsieur Chantal's; that I was looking right from one end to the other of
      this humble life, so simple and devoted. I felt an irresistible longing to
      question her, to find out whether she, too, had loved him; whether she
      also had suffered, as he had, from this long, secret, poignant grief,
      which one cannot see, know, or guess, but which breaks forth at night in
      the loneliness of the dark room. I was watching her, and I could observe
      her heart beating under her waist, and I wondered whether this sweet,
      candid face had wept on the soft pillow and she had sobbed, her whole body
      shaken by the violence of her anguish.
    

      I said to her in a low voice, like a child who is breaking a toy to see
      what is inside: “If you could have seen Monsieur Chantal crying a
      while ago it would have moved you.”
    

      She started, asking: “What? He was weeping?”
    

      “Ah, yes, he was indeed weeping!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      She seemed deeply moved. I answered:
    

      “On your account.”
    

      “On my account?”
    

      “Yes. He was telling me how much he had loved you in the days gone
      by; and what a pang it had given him to marry his cousin instead of you.”
    

      Her pale face seemed to grow a little longer; her calm eyes, which always
      remained open, suddenly closed so quickly that they seemed shut forever.
      She slipped from her chair to the floor, and slowly, gently sank down as
      would a fallen garment.
    

      I cried: “Help! help! Mademoiselle Pearl is ill.”
    

      Madame Chantal and her daughters rushed forward, and while they were
      looking for towels, water and vinegar, I grabbed my hat and ran away.
    

      I walked away with rapid strides, my heart heavy, my mind full of remorse
      and regret. And yet sometimes I felt pleased; I felt as though I had done
      a praiseworthy and necessary act. I was asking myself: “Did I do
      wrong or right?” They had that shut up in their hearts, just as some
      people carry a bullet in a closed wound. Will they not be happier now? It
      was too late for their torture to begin over again and early enough for
      them to remember it with tenderness.
    

      And perhaps some evening next spring, moved by a beam of moonlight falling
      through the branches on the grass at their feet, they will join and press
      their hands in memory of all this cruel and suppressed suffering; and,
      perhaps, also this short embrace may infuse in their veins a little of
      this thrill which they would not have known without it, and will give to
      those two dead souls, brought to life in a second, the rapid and divine
      sensation of this intoxication, of this madness which gives to lovers more
      happiness in an instant than other men can gather during a whole lifetime!