MAELZEL’S CHESS-PLAYER
    

      PERHAPS no exhibition of the kind has ever elicited so general attention
      as the Chess-Player of Maelzel. Wherever seen it has been an object of
      intense curiosity, to all persons who think. Yet the question of its modus
      operandi isstill undetermined. Nothing has been written on this topic
      which can be considered as decisive—and accordingly we find every
      where men of mechanical genius, of great general acuteness, and
      discriminative understanding, who make no scruple in pronouncing the
      Automaton a pure machine,unconnected with human agency in its
      movements, and consequently, beyond all comparison, the most astonishing
      of the inventions of mankind. And such it would undoubtedly be, were they
      right in their supposition. Assuming this hypothesis, it would be grossly
      absurd to compare with the Chess-Player, any similar thing of either
      modern or ancient days. Yet there have been many and wonderful automata.
      In Brewster’s Letters on Natural Magic, we have an account of the
      most remarkable. Among these may be mentioned, as having beyond doubt
      existed, firstly, the coach invented by M. Camus for the amusement of
      Louis XIV when a child. A table, about four feet square, was introduced,
      into the room appropriated for the exhibition. Upon this table was placed
      a carriage, six inches in length, made of wood, and drawn by two horses of
      the same material. One window being down, a lady was seen on the back
      seat. A coachman held the reins on the box, and a footman and page were in
      their places behind. M. Camus now touched a spring; whereupon the coachman
      smacked his whip, and the horses proceeded in a natural manner, along the
      edge of the table, drawing after them the carriage. Having gone as far as
      possible in this direction, a sudden turn was made to the left, and the
      vehicle was driven at right angles to its former course, and still closely
      along the edge of the table. In this way the coach proceeded until it
      arrived opposite the chair of the young prince. It then stopped, the page
      descended and opened the door, the lady alighted, and presented a petition
      to her sovereign. She then re-entered. The page put up the steps, closed
      the door, and resumed his station. The coachman whipped his horses, and
      the carriage was driven back to its original position.
    

      The magician of M. Maillardet is also worthy of notice. We copy the
      following account of it from the Lettersbefore mentioned of Dr.
      B., who derived his information principally from the Edinburgh
      Encyclopaedia.
    

      “One of the most popular pieces of mechanism which we have seen, Is
      the Magician constructed by M. Maillardet, for the purpose of answering
      certain given questions. A figure, dressed like a magician, appears seated
      at the bottom of a wall, holding a wand in one hand, and a book in the
      other A number of questions, ready prepared, are inscribed on oval
      medallions, and the spectator takes any of these he chooses and to which
      he wishes an answer, and having placed it in a drawer ready to receive it,
      the drawer shuts with a spring till the answer is returned. The magician
      then arises from his seat, bows his head, describes circles with his wand,
      and consulting the book as If in deep thought, he lifts it towards his
      face. Having thus appeared to ponder over the proposed question he raises
      his wand, and striking with it the wall above his head, two folding doors
      fly open, and display an appropriate answer to the question. The doors
      again close, the magician resumes his original position, and the drawer
      opens to return the medallion. There are twenty of these medallions, all
      containing different questions, to which the magician returns the most
      suitable and striking answers. The medallions are thin plates of brass, of
      an elliptical form, exactly resembling each other. Some of the medallions
      have a question inscribed on each side, both of which the magician
      answered in succession. If the drawer is shut without a medallion being
      put into it, the magician rises, consults his book, shakes his head, and
      resumes his seat. The folding doors remain shut, and the drawer is
      returned empty. If two medallions are put into the drawer together, an
      answer is returned only to the lower one. When the machinery is wound up,
      the movements continue about an hour, during which time about fifty
      questions may be answered. The inventor stated that the means by which the
      different medallions acted upon the machinery, so as to produce the proper
      answers to the questions which they contained, were extremely simple.”
    

      The duck of Vaucanson was still more remarkable. It was ofthe size
      of life, and so perfect an imitation of the living animal that all the
      spectators were deceived. It executed, says Brewster, all the natural
      movements and gestures, it ate and drank with avidity, performed all the
      quick motions of the head and throat which are peculiar to the duck, and
      like it muddled the water which it drank with its bill. It produced also
      the sound of quacking in the most natural manner. In the anatomical
      structure the artist exhibited the highest skill. Every bone in the real
      duck had its representative In the automaton, and its wings were
      anatomically exact. Every cavity, apophysis, and curvature was imitated,
      and each bone executed its proper movements. When corn was thrown down
      before it, the duck stretched out its neck to pick it up, swallowed, and
      digested it. {*1}
    

      But if these machines were ingenious, what shall we think of the
      calculating machine of Mr. Babbage? What shall we think of an engine of
      wood and metal which can not only compute astronomical and navigation
      tables to any given extent, but render the exactitude of its operations
      mathematically certain through its power of correcting its possible
      errors? What shall we think of a machine which can not only accomplish all
      this, but actually print off its elaborate results, when obtained, without
      the slightest intervention of the intellect of man? It will, perhaps, be
      said, in reply, that a machine such as we have described is altogether
      above comparison with the Chess-Player of Maelzel. By no means—it is
      altogether beneath it—that is to say provided we assume (what should
      never for a moment be assumed) that the Chess-Player is a pure machine,and performs its operations without any immediate human agency.
      Arithmetical or algebraical calculations are, from their very nature,
      fixed and determinate. Certain databeing given, certain results
      necessarily and inevitably follow. These results have dependence upon
      nothing, and are influenced by nothing but the dataoriginally
      given. And the question to be solved proceeds, or should proceed, to its
      final determination, by a succession of unerring steps liable to no
      change, and subject to no modification. This being the case, we can
      without difficulty conceive the possibilityof so arranging a piece
      of mechanism, that upon starting In accordance with the dataof the
      question to be solved, it should continue its movements regularly,
      progressively, and undeviatingly towards the required solution, since
      these movements, however complex, are never imagined to be otherwise than
      finite and determinate. But the case is widely different with the
      Chess-Player. With him there is no determinate progression. No one move in
      chess necessarily follows upon any one other. From no particular
      disposition of the men at one period of a game can we predicate their
      disposition at a different period. Let us place the first movein a
      game of chess, in juxta-position with the dataof an algebraical
      question, and their great difference will be immediately perceived. From
      the latter—from the data—the second step of the
      question, dependent thereupon, inevitably follows. It is modelled by the
      data.It must be thusand not otherwise. But from the first
      move in the game of chess no especial second move follows of necessity. In
      the algebraical question, as it proceeds towards solution, the certaintyof its operations remains altogether unimpaired. The second step
      having been a consequence of the data,the third step is equally a
      consequence of the second, the fourth of the third, the fifth of the
      fourth, and so on, and not possibly otherwise,to the end. But in
      proportion to the progress made in a game of chess, is the uncertaintyof each ensuing move. A few moves having been made, nostep is
      certain. Different spectators of the game would advise different moves.
      All is then dependent upon the variable judgment of the players. Now even
      granting (what should not be granted) that the movements of the Automaton
      Chess-Player were in themselves determinate, they would be necessarily
      interrupted and disarranged by the indeterminate will of his antagonist.
      There is then no analogy whatever between the operations of the
      Chess-Player, and those of the calculating machine of Mr. Babbage, and if
      we choose to call the former a pure machinewe must be prepared to
      admit that it is, beyond all comparison, the most wonderful of the
      inventions of mankind. Its original projector, however, Baron Kempelen,
      had no scruple in declaring it to be a “very ordinary piece of
      mechanism—a bagatellewhose effects appeared so marvellous
      only from the boldness of the conception, and the fortunate choice of the
      methods adopted for promoting the illusion.” But it is needless to
      dwell upon this point. It is quite certain that the operations of the
      Automaton are regulated by mind,and by nothing else. Indeed this
      matter is susceptible of a mathematical demonstration, a priori.The
      only question then is of the mannerin which human agency is
      brought to bear. Before entering upon this subject it would be as well to
      give a brief history and description of the Chess-Player for the benefit
      of such of our readers as may never have had an opportunity of witnessing
      Mr. Maelzel’s exhibition.
    

      The Automaton Chess-Player was invented in 1769, by Baron Kempelen, a
      nobleman of Presburg, in Hungary, who afterwards disposed of it, together
      with the secret of its operations, to its present possessor. {2*} Soon
      after its completion it was exhibited in Presburg, Paris, Vienna, and
      other continental cities. In 1783 and 1784, it was taken to London by Mr.
      Maelzel. Of late years it has visited the principal towns in the United
      States. Wherever seen, the most intense curiosity was excited by its
      appearance, and numerous have been the attempts, by men of all classes, to
      fathom the mystery of its evolutions. The cut on this page gives a
      tolerable representation of the figure as seen by the citizens of Richmond
      a few weeks ago. The right arm, however, should lie more at length upon
      the box, a chess-board should appear upon it, and the cushion should not
      be seen while the pipe is held. Some immaterial alterations have been made
      in the costume of the player since it came into the possession of Maelzel—the
      plume, for example, was not originally worn. {image of automaton}
    

      At the hour appointed for exhibition, a curtain is withdrawn, or folding
      doors are thrown open, and the machine rolled to within about twelve feet
      of the nearest of the spectators, between whom and it (the machine) a rope
      is stretched. A figure is seen habited as a Turk, and seated, with its
      legs crossed, at a large box apparently of maple wood, which serves it as
      a table. The exhibiter will, if requested, roll the machine to any portion
      of the room, suffer it to remain altogether on any designated spot, or
      even shift its location repeatedly during the progress of a game. The
      bottom of the box is elevated considerably above the floor by means of the
      castors or brazen rollers on which it moves, a clear view of the surface
      immediately beneath the Automaton being thus afforded to the spectators.
      The chair on which the figure sits is affixed permanently to the box. On
      the top of this latter is a chess-board, also permanently affixed. The
      right arm of the Chess-Player is extended at full length before him, at
      right angles with his body, and lying, in an apparently careless position,
      by the side of the board. The back of the hand is upwards. The board
      itself is eighteen inches square. The left arm of the figure is bent at
      the elbow, and in the left hand is a pipe. A green drapery conceals the
      back of the Turk, and falls partially over the front of both shoulders. To
      judge from the external appearance of the box, it is divided into five
      compartments—three cupboards of equal dimensions, and two drawers
      occupying that portion of the chest lying beneath the cupboards. The
      foregoing observations apply to the appearance of the Automaton upon its
      first introduction into the presence of the spectators.
    

      Maelzel now informs the company that he will disclose to their view the
      mechanism of the machine. Taking from his pocket a bunch of keys he
      unlocks with one of them, door marked ~ in the cut above, and throws the
      cupboard fully open to the inspection of all present. Its whole interior
      is apparently filled with wheels, pinions, levers, and other machinery,
      crowded very closely together, so that the eye can penetrate but a little
      distance into the mass. Leaving this door open to its full extent, he goes
      now round to the back of the box, and raising the drapery of the figure,
      opens another door situated precisely in the rear of the one first opened.
      Holding a lighted candle at this door, and shifting the position of the
      whole machine repeatedly at the same time, a bright light is thrown
      entirely through the cupboard, which is now clearly seen to be full,
      completely full, of machinery. The spectators being satisfied of this
      fact, Maelzel closes the back door, locks it, takes the key from the lock,
      lets fall the drapery of the figure, and comes round to the front. The
      door marked I, it will be remembered, is still open. The exhibiter now
      proceeds to open the drawer which lies beneath the cupboards at the bottom
      of the box—for although there are apparently two drawers, there is
      really only one—the two handles and two key holes being intended
      merely for ornament. Having opened this drawer to its full extent, a small
      cushion, and a set of chessmen, fixed in a frame work made to support them
      perpendicularly, are discovered. Leaving this drawer, as well as cupboard
      No. 1 open, Maelzel now unlocks door No. 2, and door No. 3, which are
      discovered to be folding doors, opening into one and the same compartment.
      To the right of this compartment, however, (that is to say the spectators’
      right) a small division, six inches wide, and filled with machinery, is
      partitioned off. The main compartment itself (in speaking of that portion
      of the box visible upon opening doors 2 and 3, we shall always call it the
      main compartment) is lined with dark cloth and contains no machinery
      whatever beyond two pieces of steel, quadrant-shaped, and situated one in
      each of the rear top corners of the compartment. A small protuberance
      about eight inches square, and also covered with dark cloth, lies on the
      floor of the compartment near the rear corner on the spectators’
      left hand. Leaving doors No. 2 and No. 3 open as well as the drawer, and
      door No. I, the exhibiter now goes round to the back of the main
      compartment, and, unlocking another door there, displays clearly all the
      interior of the main compartment, by introducing a candle behind it and
      within it. The whole box being thus apparently disclosed to the scrutiny
      of the company, Maelzel, still leaving the doors and drawer open, rolls
      the Automaton entirely round, and exposes the back of the Turk by lifting
      up the drapery. A door about ten inches square is thrown open in the loins
      of the figure, and a smaller one also in the left thigh. The interior of
      the figure, as seen through these apertures, appears to be crowded with
      machinery. In general, every spectator is now thoroughly satisfied of
      having beheld and completely scrutinized, at one and the same time, every
      individual portion of the Automaton, and the idea of any person being
      concealed in the interior, during so complete an exhibition of that
      interior, if ever entertained, is immediately dismissed as preposterous in
      the extreme.
    

      M. Maelzel, having rolled the machine back into its original position, now
      informs the company that the Automaton will play a game of chess with any
      one disposed to encounter him. This challenge being accepted, a small
      table is prepared for the antagonist, and placed close by the rope, but on
      the spectators’ side of it, and so situated as not to prevent the
      company from obtaining a full view of the Automaton. From a drawer in this
      table is taken a set of chess-men, and Maelzel arranges them generally,
      but not always, with his own hands, on the chess board, which consists
      merely of the usual number of squares painted upon the table. The
      antagonist having taken his seat, the exhibiter approaches the drawer of
      the box, and takes therefrom the cushion, which, after removing the pipe
      from the hand of the Automaton, he places under its left arm as a support.
      Then taking also from the drawer the Automaton’s set of chess-men,
      he arranges them upon the chessboard before the figure. He now proceeds to
      close the doors and to lock them—leaving the bunch of keys in door
      No. 1. He also closes the drawer, and, finally, winds up the machine, by
      applying a key to an aperture in the left end (the spectators’ left)
      of the box. The game now commences—the Automaton taking the first
      move. The duration of the contest is usually limited to half an hour, but
      if it be not finished at the expiration of this period, and the antagonist
      still contend that he can beat the Automaton, M. Maelzel has seldom any
      objection to continue it. Not to weary the company, is the ostensible, and
      no doubt the real object of the limitation. It Wits of course be
      understood that when a move is made at his own table, by the antagonist,
      the corresponding move is made at the box of the Automaton, by Maelzel
      himself, who then acts as the representative of the antagonist. On the
      other hand, when the Turk moves, the corresponding move is made at the
      table of the antagonist, also by M. Maelzel, who then acts as the
      representative of the Automaton. In this manner it is necessary that the
      exhibiter should often pass from one table to the other. He also
      frequently goes in rear of the figure to remove the chess-men which it has
      taken, and which it deposits, when taken, on the box to the left (to its
      own left) of the board. When the Automaton hesitates in relation to its
      move, the exhibiter is occasionally seen to place himself very near its
      right side, and to lay his hand, now and then, in a careless manner upon
      the box. He has also a peculiar shuffle with his feet, calculated to
      induce suspicion of collusion with the machine in minds which are more
      cunning than sagacious. These peculiarities are, no doubt, mere mannerisms
      of M. Maelzel, or, if he is aware of them at all, he puts them in practice
      with a view of exciting in the spectators a false idea of the pure
      mechanism in the Automaton.
    

      The Turk plays with his left hand. All the movements of the arm are at
      right angles. In this manner, the hand (which is gloved and bent in a
      natural way,) being brought directly above the piece to be moved, descends
      finally upon it, the fingers receiving it, in most cases, without
      difficulty. Occasionally, however, when the piece is not precisely in its
      proper situation, the Automaton fails in his attempt at seizing it. When
      this occurs, no second effort is made, but the arm continues its movement
      in the direction originally intended, precisely as if the piece were in
      the fingers. Having thus designated the spot whither the move should have
      been made, the arm returns to its cushion, and Maelzel performs the
      evolution which the Automaton pointed out. At every movement of the figure
      machinery is heard in motion. During the progress of the game, the figure
      now and then rolls its eyes, as if surveying the board, moves its head,
      and pronounces the word echec(check) when necessary. {*3} If a
      false move be made by his antagonist, he raps briskly on the box with the
      fingers of his right hand, shakes his head roughly, and replacing the
      piece falsely moved, in its former situation, assumes the next move
      himself. Upon beating the game, he waves his head with an air of triumph,
      looks round complacently upon the spectators, and drawing his left arm
      farther back than usual, suffers his fingers alone to rest upon the
      cushion. In general, the Turk is victorious—once or twice he has
      been beaten. The game being ended, Maelzel will again if desired, exhibit
      the mechanism of the box, in the same manner as before. The machine is
      then rolled back, and a curtain hides it from the view of the company.
    

      There have been many attempts at solving the mystery of the Automaton. The
      most general opinion in relation to it, an opinion too not unfrequently
      adopted by men who should have known better, was, as we have before said,
      that no immediate human agency was employed—in other words, that the
      machine was purely a machine and nothing else. Many, however maintained
      that the exhibiter himself regulated the movements of the figure by
      mechanical means operating through the feet of the box. Others again,
      spoke confidently of a magnet. Of the first of these opinions we shall say
      nothing at present more than we have already said. In relation to the
      second it is only necessary to repeat what we have before stated, that the
      machine is rolled about on castors, and will, at the request of a
      spectator, be moved to and fro to any portion of the room, even during the
      progress of a game. The supposition of the magnet is also untenable—for
      if a magnet were the agent, any other magnet in the pocket of a spectator
      would disarrange the entire mechanism. The exhibiter, however, will suffer
      the most powerful loadstone to remain even upon the box during the whole
      of the exhibition.
    

      The first attempt at a written explanation of the secret, at least the
      first attempt of which we ourselves have any knowledge, was made in a
      large pamphlet printed at Paris in 1785. The author’s hypothesis
      amounted to this—that a dwarf actuated the machine. This dwarf he
      supposed to conceal himself during the opening of the box by thrusting his
      legs into two hollow cylinders, which were represented to be (but which
      are not) among the machinery in the cupboard No. I, while his body was out
      of the box entirely, and covered by the drapery of the Turk. When the
      doors were shut, the dwarf was enabled to bring his body within the box—the
      noise produced by some portion of the machinery allowing him to do so
      unheard, and also to close the door by which he entered. The interior of
      the automaton being then exhibited, and no person discovered, the
      spectators, says the author of this pamphlet, are satisfied that no one is
      within any portion of the machine. This whole hypothesis was too obviously
      absurd to require comment, or refutation, and accordingly we find that it
      attracted very little attention.
    

      In 1789 a book was published at Dresden by M. I. F. Freyhere in which
      another endeavor was made to unravel the mystery. Mr. Freyhere’s
      book was a pretty large one, and copiously illustrated by colored
      engravings. His supposition was that “a well-taught boy very thin
      and tall of his age (sufficiently so that he could be concealed in a
      drawer almost immediately under the chess-board”) played the game of
      chess and effected all the evolutions of the Automaton. This idea,
      although even more silly than that of the Parisian author, met with a
      better reception, and was in some measure believed to be the true solution
      of the wonder, until the inventor put an end to the discussion by
      suffering a close examination of the top of the box.
    

      These bizarre attempts at explanation were followed by others equally
      bizarre. Of late years however, an anonymous writer, by a course of
      reasoning exceedingly unphilosophical, has contrived to blunder upon a
      plausible solution—although we cannot consider it altogether the
      true one. His Essay was first published in a Baltimore weekly paper, was
      illustrated by cuts, and was entitled “An attempt to analyze the
      Automaton Chess-Player of M. Maelzel.” This Essay we suppose to have
      been the original of the pamphlet towhich Sir David Brewster
      alludes in his letters on Natural Magic, and which he has no hesitation in
      declaring a thorough and satisfactory explanation. The resultsof
      the analysis are undoubtedly, in the main, just; but we can only account
      for Brewster’s pronouncing the Essay a thorough and satisfactory
      explanation, by supposing him to have bestowed upon it a very cursory and
      inattentive perusal. In the compendium of the Essay, made use of in the
      Letters on Natural Magic, it is quite impossible to arrive at any distinct
      conclusion in regard to the adequacy or inadequacy of the analysis, on
      account of the gross misarrangement and deficiency of the letters of
      reference employed. The same fault is to be found in the “Attempt
      &c.,” as we originally saw it. The solution consists in a series
      of minute explanations, (accompanied by wood-cuts, the whole occupying
      many pages) in which the object is to show the possibilityof so
      shifting the partitionsof the box, as to allow a human being,
      concealed in the interior, to move portions of his body from one part of
      the box to another, during the exhibition of the mechanism—thus
      eluding the scrutiny of the spectators. There can be no doubt, as we have
      before observed, and as we will presently endeavor to show, that the
      principle, or rather the result, of this solution is the true one. Some
      person is concealed in the box during the whole time of exhibiting the
      interior. We object, however, to the whole verbose description of the mannerin which the partitions are shifted, to accommodate the movements of
      the person concealed. We object to it as a mere theory assumed in the
      first place, and to which circumstances are afterwards made to adapt
      themselves. It was not, and could not have been, arrived at by any
      inductive reasoning. In whatever way the shifting is managed, it is of
      course concealed at every step from observation. To show that certain
      movements might possibly be effected in a certain way, is very far from
      showing that they are actually so effected. There may be an infinity of
      other methods by which the same results may be obtained. The probability
      of the one assumed proving the correct one is then as unity to infinity.
      But, in reality, this particular point, the shifting of the partitions, is
      of no consequence whatever. It was altogether unnecessary to devote seven
      or eight pages for the purpose of proving what no one in his senses would
      deny—viz: that the wonderful mechanical genius of Baron Kempelen
      could invent the necessary means for shutting a door or slipping aside a
      pannel, with a human agent too at his service in actual contact with the
      pannel or the door, and the whole operations carried on, as the author of
      the Essay himself shows, and as we shall attempt to show more fully
      hereafter, entirely out of reach of the observation of the spectators.
    

      In attempting ourselves an explanation of the Automaton, we will, in the
      first place, endeavor to show how its operations are effected, and
      afterwards describe, as briefly as possible, the nature of the observationsfrom which we have deduced our result.
    

      It will be necessary for a proper understanding of the subject, that we
      repeat here in a few words, the routine adopted by the exhibiter in
      disclosing the interior of the box—a routine from which he neverdeviates in any material particular. In the first place he opens the
      door No. I. Leaving this open, he goes round to the rear of the box, and
      opens a door precisely at the back of door No. I. To this back door he
      holds a lighted candle. He then closes the back door,locks it,
      and, coming round to the front, opens the drawer to its full extent. This
      done, he opens the doors No. 2 and No. 3, (the folding doors) and displays
      the interior of the main compartment. Leaving open the main compartment,
      the drawer, and the front door of cupboard No. I, he now goes to the rear
      again, and throws open the back door of the main compartment. In shutting
      up the box no particular order is observed, except that the folding doors
      are always closed before the drawer.
    

      Now, let us suppose that when the machine is first rolled into the
      presence of the spectators, a man is already within it. His body is
      situated behind the dense machinery in cupboard No. T. (the rear portion
      of which machinery is so contrived as to slip en masse,from the
      main compartment to the cupboard No. I, as occasion may require,) and his
      legs lie at full length in the main compartment. When Maelzel opens the
      door No. I, the man within is not in any danger of discovery, for the
      keenest eye cannot penetrate more than about two inches into the darkness
      within. But the case is otherwise when the back door of the cupboard No.
      I, is opened. A bright light then pervades the cupboard, and the body of
      the man would be discovered if it were there. But it is not. The putting
      the key in the lock of the back door was a signal on hearing which the
      person concealed brought his body forward to an angle as acute as possible—throwing
      it altogether, or nearly so, into the main compartment. This, however, is
      a painful position, and cannot be long maintained. Accordingly we find
      that Maelzel closes the back door.This being done, there is no
      reason why the body of the man may not resume its former situation—for
      the cupboard is again so dark as to defy scrutiny. The drawer is now
      opened, and the legs of the person within drop down behind it in the space
      it formerly occupied. {*4} There is, consequently, now no longer any part
      of the man in the main compartment—his body being behind the
      machinery in cupboard No. 1, and his legs in the space occupied by the
      drawer. The exhibiter, therefore, finds himself at liberty to display the
      main compartment. This he does—opening both its back and front doors—and
      no person Is discovered. The spectators are now satisfied that the whole
      of the box is exposed to view—and exposed too, all portions of it at
      one and the same time. But of course this is not the case. They neither
      see the space behind the drawer, nor the interior of cupboard No. 1—the
      front door of which latter the exhibiter virtually shuts in shutting its
      back door. Maelzel, having now rolled the machine around, lifted up the
      drapery of the Turk, opened the doors in his back and thigh, and shown his
      trunk to be full of machinery, brings the whole back into its original
      position, and closes the doors. The man within is now at liberty to move
      about. He gets up into the body of the Turk just so high as to bring his
      eyes above the level of the chess-board. It is very probable that he seats
      himself upon the little square block or protuberance which is seen in a
      corner of the main compartment when the doors are open. In this position
      he sees the chess-board through the bosom of the Turk which is of gauze.
      Bringing his right arm across his breast he actuates the little machinery
      necessary to guide the left arm and the fingers of the figure. This
      machinery is situated just beneath the left shoulder of the Turk, and is
      consequently easily reached by the right hand of the man concealed, if we
      suppose his right arm brought across the breast. The motions of the head
      and eyes, and of the right arm of the figure, as well as the sound echecare produced by other mechanism in the interior, and actuated at will
      by the man within. The whole of this mechanism—that is to say all
      the mechanism essential to the machine—is most probably contained
      within the little cupboard (of about six inches in breadth) partitioned
      off at the right (the spectators’ right) of the main compartment.
    

      In this analysis of the operations of the Automaton, we have purposely
      avoided any allusion to the manner in which the partitions are shifted,
      and it will now be readily comprehended that this point is a matter of no
      importance, since, by mechanism within the ability of any common
      carpenter, it might be effected in an infinity of different ways, and
      since we have shown that, however performed, it is performed out of the
      view of the spectators. Our result is founded upon the following observationstaken during frequent visits to the exhibition of Maelzel. {*5}
    

      I. The moves of the Turk are not made at regular intervals of time, but
      accommodate themselves to the moves of the antagonist—although this
      point (of regularity) so important in all kinds of mechanical contrivance,
      might have been readily brought about by limiting the time allowed for the
      moves of the antagonist. For example, if this limit were three minutes,
      the moves of the Automaton might be made at any given intervals longer
      than three minutes. The fact then of irregularity, when regularity might
      have been so easily attained, goes to prove that regularity is unimportant
      to the action of the Automaton—in other words, that the Automaton is
      not a pure machine.


      2. When the Automaton is about to move a piece, a distinct motion is
      observable just beneath the left shoulder, and which motion agitates in a
      slight degree, the drapery covering the front of the left shoulder. This
      motion invariably precedes, by about two seconds, the movement of the arm
      itself—and the arm never, in any instance, moves without this
      preparatory motion in the shoulder. Now let the antagonist move a piece,
      and let the corresponding move be made by Maelzel, as usual, upon the
      board of the Automaton. Then let the antagonist narrowly watch the
      Automaton, until he detect the preparatory motion in the shoulder.
      Immediately upon detecting this motion, and before the arm itself begins
      to move, let him withdraw his piece, as if perceiving an error in his
      manoeuvre. It will then be seen that the movement of the arm, which, in
      all other cases, immediately succeeds the motion in the shoulder, is
      withheld—is not made—although Maelzel has not yet performed,
      on the board of the Automaton, any move corresponding to the withdrawal of
      the antagonist. In this case, that the Automaton was about to move is
      evident—and that he did not move, was an effect plainly produced by
      the withdrawal of the antagonist, and without any intervention of Maelzel.
    

      This fact fully proves, 1—that the intervention of Maelzel, in
      performing the moves of the antagonist on the board of the Automaton, is
      not essential to the movements of the Automaton, 2—that its
      movements are regulated by mind—by some person who sees the
      board of the antagonist, 3—that its movements are not regulated by
      the mind of Maelzel, whose back was turned towards the antagonist at the
      withdrawal of his move.
    

      3. The Automaton does not invariably win the game. Were the machine a pure
      machine this would not be the case—it would always win. The principlebeing discovered by which a machine can be made to playa game
      of chess, an extension of the same principle would enable it to win a game—a
      farther extension would enable it to win allgames—that is,
      to beat any possible game of an antagonist. A little consideration will
      convince any one that the difficulty of making a machine beat all games,
      Is not in the least degree greater, as regards the principle of the
      operations necessary, than that of making it beat a single game. If then
      we regard the Chess-Player as a machine, we must suppose, (what is highly
      improbable,) that its inventor preferred leaving it incomplete to
      perfecting it—a supposition rendered still more absurd, when we
      reflect that the leaving it incomplete would afford an argument against
      the possibility of its being a pure machine—the very argument we now
      adduce.
    

      4. When the situation of the game is difficult or complex, we never
      perceive the Turk either shake his head or roll his eyes. It is only when
      his next move is obvious, or when the game is so circumstanced that to a
      man in the Automaton’s place there would be no necessity for
      reflection. Now these peculiar movements of the head and eyes are
      movements customary with persons engaged in meditation, and the ingenious
      Baron Kempelen would have adapted these movements (were the machine a pure
      machine) to occasions proper for their display—that is, to occasions
      of complexity. But the reverse is seen to be the case, and this reverse
      applies precisely to our supposition of a man in the interior. When
      engaged in meditation about the game he has no time to think of setting in
      motion the mechanism of the Automaton by which are moved the head and the
      eyes. When the game, however, is obvious, he has time to look about him,
      and, accordingly, we see the head shake and the eyes roll.
    

      5. When the machine is rolled round to allow the spectators an examination
      of the back of the Turk, and when his drapery is lifted up and the doors
      in the trunk and thigh thrown open, the interior of the trunk is seen to
      be crowded with machinery. In scrutinizing this machinery while the
      Automaton was in motion, that is to say while the whole machine was moving
      on the castors, it appeared to us that certain portions of the mechanism
      changed their shape and position in a degree too great to be accounted for
      by the simple laws of perspective; and subsequent examinations convinced
      us that these undue alterations were attributable to mirrors in the
      interior of the trunk. The introduction of mirrors among the machinery
      could not have been intended to influence, in any degree, the machinery
      itself. Their operation, whatever that operation should prove to be, must
      necessarily have reference to the eye of the spectator. We at once
      concluded that these mirrors were so placed to multiply to the vision some
      few pieces of machinery within the trunk so as to give it the appearance
      of being crowded with mechanism. Now the direct inference from this is
      that the machine is not a pure machine. For if it were, the inventor, so
      far from wishing its mechanism to appear complex, and using deception for
      the purpose of giving it this appearance, would have been especially
      desirous of convincing those who witnessed his exhibition, of the simplicityof the means by which results so wonderful were brought about.
    

      6. The external appearance, and, especially, the deportment of the Turk,
      are, when we consider them as imitations of life,but very
      indifferent imitations. The countenance evinces no ingenuity, and is
      surpassed, in its resemblance to the human face, by the very commonest of
      wax-works. The eyes roll unnaturally in the head, without any
      corresponding motions of the lids or brows. The arm, particularly,
      performs its operations in an exceedingly stiff, awkward, jerking, and
      rectangular manner. Now, all this is the result either of inability in
      Maelzel to do better, or of intentional neglect—accidental neglect
      being out of the question, when we consider that the whole time of the
      ingenious proprietor is occupied in the improvement of his machines. Most
      assuredly we must not refer the unlife-like appearances to inability—for
      all the rest of Maelzel’s automata are evidence of his full ability
      to copy the motions and peculiarities of life with the most wonderful
      exactitude. The rope-dancers, for example, are inimitable. When the clown
      laughs, his lips, his eyes, his eye-brows, and eyelids—indeed, all
      the features of his countenance—are imbued with their appropriate
      expressions. In both him and his companion, every gesture is so entirely
      easy, and free from the semblance of artificiality, that, were it not for
      the diminutiveness of their size, and the fact of their being passed from
      one spectator to another previous to their exhibition on the rope, it
      would be difficult to convince any assemblage of persons that these wooden
      automata were not living creatures. We cannot, therefore, doubt Mr.
      Maelzel’s ability, and we must necessarily suppose that he
      intentionally suffered his Chess Player to remain the same artificial and
      unnatural figure which Baron Kempelen (no doubt also through design)
      originally made it. What this design was it is not difficult to conceive.
      Were the Automaton life-like in its motions, the spectator would be more
      apt to attribute its operations to their true cause, (that is, to human
      agency within) than he is now, when the awkward and rectangular manoeuvres
      convey the idea of pure and unaided mechanism.
    

      7. When, a short time previous to the commencement of the game, the
      Automaton is wound up by the exhibiter as usual, an ear in any degree
      accustomed to the sounds produced in winding up a system of machinery,
      will not fail to discover, instantaneously, that the axis turned by the
      key in the box of the Chess-Player, cannot possibly be connected with
      either a weight, a spring, or any system of machinery whatever. The
      inference here is the same as in our last observation. The winding up is
      inessential to the operations of the Automaton, and is performed with the
      design of exciting in the spectators the false idea of mechanism.
    

      8. When the question is demanded explicitly of Maelzel—“Is the
      Automaton a pure machine or not?” his reply is invariably the same—“I
      will say nothing about it.” Now the notoriety of the Automaton, and
      the great curiosity it has every where excited, are owing more especially
      to the prevalent opinion that it is a pure machine, than to any other
      circumstance. Of course, then, it is the interest of the proprietor to
      represent it as a pure machine. And what more obvious, and more effectual
      method could there be of impressing the spectators with this desired idea,
      than a positive and explicit declaration to that effect? On the other
      hand, what more obvious and effectual method could there be of exciting a
      disbelief in the Automaton’s being a pure machine, than by
      withholding such explicit declaration? For, people will naturally reason
      thus,—It is Maelzel’s interest to represent this thing a pure
      machine—he refuses to do so, directly, in words, although he does
      not scruple, and is evidently anxious to do so, indirectly by actions—were
      it actually what he wishes to represent it by actions, he would gladly
      avail himself of the more direct testimony of words—the inference
      is, that a consciousness of its not being a pure machine, is the reason of
      his silence—his actions cannot implicate him in a falsehood—his
      words may.
    

      9. When, in exhibiting the interior of the box, Maelzel has thrown open
      the door No. I, and also the door immediately behind it, he holds a
      lighted candle at the back door (as mentioned above) and moves the entire
      machine to and fro with a view of convincing the company that the cupboard
      No. 1 is entirely filled with machinery. When the machine is thus moved
      about, it will be apparent to any careful observer, that whereas that
      portion of the machinery near the front door No. 1, is perfectly steady
      and unwavering, the portion farther within fluctuates, in a very slight
      degree, with the movements of the machine. This circumstance first aroused
      in us the suspicion that the more remote portion of the machinery was so
      arranged as to be easily slipped, en masse,from its position when
      occasion should require it. This occasion we have already stated to occur
      when the man concealed within brings his body into an erect position upon
      the closing of the back door.
    

      10. Sir David Brewster states the figure of the Turk to be of the size of
      life—but in fact it is far above the ordinary size. Nothing is more
      easy than to err in our notions of magnitude. The body of the Automaton is
      generally insulated, and, having no means of immediately comparing it with
      any human form, we suffer ourselves to consider it as of ordinary
      dimensions. This mistake may, however, be corrected by observing the
      Chess-Player when, as is sometimes the case, the exhibiter approaches it.
      Mr. Maelzel, to be sure, is not very tall, but upon drawing near the
      machine, his head will be found at least eighteen inches below the head of
      the Turk, although the latter, it will be remembered, is in a sitting
      position.
    

      11. The box behind which the Automaton is placed, is precisely three feet
      six inches long, two feet four inches deep, and two feet six inches high.
      These dimensions are fully sufficient for the accommodation of a man very
      much above the common size—and the main compartment alone is capable
      of holding any ordinary man in the position we have mentioned as assumed
      by the person concealed. As these are facts, which any one who doubts them
      may prove by actual calculation, we deem it unnecessary to dwell upon
      them. We will only suggest that, although the top of the box is apparently
      a board of about three inches in thickness, the spectator may satisfy
      himself by stooping and looking up at it when the main compartment is
      open, that it is in reality very thin. The height of the drawer also will
      be misconceived by those who examine it in a cursory manner. There is a
      space of about three inches between the top of the drawer as seen from the
      exterior, and the bottom of the cupboard—a space which must be
      included in the height of the drawer. These contrivances to make the room
      within the box appear less than it actually is, are referrible to a design
      on the part of the inventor, to impress the company again with a false
      idea, viz. that no human being can be accommodated within the box.
    

      12. The interior of the main compartment is lined throughout with cloth.This cloth we suppose to have a twofold object. A portion of itmay form, when tightly stretched, the only partitions which there is
      any necessity for removing during the changes of the man’s position,
      viz: the partition between the rear of the main compartment and the rear
      of the cupboard No. 1, and the partition between the main compartment, and
      the space behind the drawer when open. If we imagine this to be the case,
      the difficulty of shifting the partitions vanishes at once, if indeed any
      such difficulty could be supposed under any circumstances to exist. The
      second object of the cloth is to deaden and render indistinct all sounds
      occasioned by the movements of the person within.
    

      13. The antagonist (as we have before observed) is not suffered to play at
      the board of the Automaton, but is seated at some distance from the
      machine. The reason which, most probably, would be assigned for this
      circumstance, if the question were demanded, is, that were the antagonist
      otherwise situated, his person would intervene between the machine and the
      spectators, and preclude the latter from a distinct view. But this
      difficulty might be easily obviated, either by elevating the seats of the
      company, or by turning the end of the box towards them during the game.
      The true cause of the restriction is, perhaps, very different. Were the
      antagonist seated in contact with the box, the secret would be liable to
      discovery, by his detecting, with the aid of a quick car, the breathings
      of the man concealed.
    

      14. Although M. Maelzel, in disclosing the interior of the machine,
      sometimes slightly deviates from the routinewhich we have pointed
      out, yet reeler inany instance does he sodeviate from it
      as to interfere with our solution. For example, he has been known to open,
      first of all, the drawer—but he never opens the main compartment
      without first closing the back door of cupboard No. 1—he never opens
      the main compartment without first pulling out the drawer—he never
      shuts the drawer without first shutting the main compartment—he
      never opens the back door of cupboard No. 1 while the main compartment is
      open—and the game of chess is never commenced until the whole
      machine is closed. Now if it were observed that never, in any single
      instance,did M. Maelzel differ from the routine we have pointed out
      as necessary to our solution, it would be one of the strongest possible
      arguments in corroboration of it—but the argument becomes infinitely
      strengthened if we duly consider the circumstance that he does
      occasionallydeviate from the routine but never does sodeviate
      as to falsify the solution.
    

      15. There are six candles on the board of the Automaton during exhibition.
      The question naturally arises—“Why are so many employed, when
      a single candle, or, at farthest, two, would have been amply sufficient to
      afford the spectators a clear view of the board, in a room otherwise so
      well lit up as the exhibition room always is—when, moreover, if we
      suppose the machine a pure machine,there can be no necessity for
      so much light, or indeed any light at all, to enable itto perform
      its operations—and when, especially, only a single candle is placed
      upon the table of the antagonist?” The first and most obvious
      inference is, that so strong a light is requisite to enable the man within
      to see through the transparent material (probably fine gauze) of which the
      breast of the Turk is composed. But when we consider the arrangement of
      the candles, another reason immediately presents itself. There are six
      lights (as we have said before) in all. Three of these are on each side of
      the figure. Those most remote from the spectators are the longest—those
      in the middle are about two inches shorter—and those nearest the
      company about two inches shorter still—and the candles on one side
      differ in height from the candles respectively opposite on the other, by a
      ratio different from two inches—that is to say, the longest candle
      on one side is about three inches shorter than the longest candle on the
      other, and so on. Thus it will be seen that no two of the candles are of
      the same height, and thus also the difficulty of ascertaining the materialof the breast of the figure (against which the light is especially
      directed) is greatly augmented by the dazzling effect of the complicated
      crossings of the rays—crossings which are brought about by placing
      the centres of radiation all upon different levels.
    

      16. While the Chess-Player was in possession of Baron Kempelen, it was
      more than once observed, first, that an Italian in the suite of the Baron
      was never visible during the playing of a game at chess by the Turk, and,
      secondly, that the Italian being taken seriously ill, the exhibition was
      suspended until his recovery. This Italian professed a totalignorance
      of the game of chess, although all others of the suite played well.
      Similar observations have been made since the Automaton has been purchased
      by Maelzel. There is a man, Schlumberoer,who attends him wherever
      he goes, but who has no ostensible occupation other than that of assisting
      in the packing and unpacking of the automata. This man is about the medium
      size, and has a remarkable stoop in the shoulders. Whether he professes to
      play chess or not, we are not informed. It is quite certain, however, that
      he is never to be seen during the exhibition of the Chess-Player, although
      frequently visible just before and just after the exhibition. Moreover,
      some years ago Maelzel visited Richmond with his automata, and exhibited
      them, we believe, in the house now occupied by M. Bossieux as a Dancing
      Academy. Schlumberger was suddenly taken ill, and during his
      illness there was no exhibition of the Chess-Player. These facts are well
      known to many of our citizens. The reason assigned for the suspension of
      the Chess-Player’s performances, was notthe illness of Schlumberger.The inferences from all this we leave, without farther comment, to the
      reader.
    

      17. The Turk plays with his left arm. A circumstance so remarkable
      cannot be accidental. Brewster takes no notice of it whatever beyond a
      mere statement, we believe, that such is the fact. The early writers of
      treatises on the Automaton, seem not to have observed the matter at all,
      and have no reference to it. The author of the pamphlet alluded to by
      Brewster, mentions it, but acknowledges his inability to account for it.
      Yet it is obviously from such prominent discrepancies or incongruities as
      this that deductions are to be made (if made at all) which shall lead us
      to the truth.
    

      The circumstance of the Automaton’s playing with his left hand
      cannot have connexion with the operations of the machine, considered
      merely as such. Any mechanical arrangement which would cause the figure to
      move, in any given manner, the left arm—could, if reversed, cause it
      to move, in the same manner, the right. But these principles cannot be
      extended to the human organization, wherein there is a marked and radical
      difference in the construction, and, at all events, in the powers, of the
      right and left arms. Reflecting upon this latter fact, we naturally refer
      the incongruity noticeable in the Chess-Player to this peculiarity in the
      human organization. If so, we must imagine some reversion—for
      the Chess-Player plays precisely as a man would not.These ideas,
      once entertained, are sufficient of themselves, to suggest the notion of a
      man in the interior. A few more imperceptible steps lead us, finally, to
      the result. The Automaton plays with his left arm, because under no other
      circumstances could the man within play with his right—a desideratumof course. Let us, for example, imagine the Automaton to play with his
      right arm. To reach the machinery which moves the arm, and which we have
      before explained to lie just beneath the shoulder, it would be necessary
      for the man within either to use his right arm in an exceedingly painful
      and awkward position, (viz. brought up close to his body and tightly
      compressed between his body and the side of the Automaton,) or else to use
      his left arm brought across his breast. In neither case could he act with
      the requisite ease or precision. On the contrary, the Automaton playing,
      as it actually does, with the left arm, all difficulties vanish. The right
      arm of the man within is brought across his breast, and his right fingers
      act, without any constraint, upon the machinery in the shoulder of the
      figure.
    

      We do not believe that any reasonable objections can be urged against this
      solution of the Automaton Chess-Player.