MAGNETISM
    

      It was a men's dinner party, and they were sitting over their cigars and
      brandy and discussing magnetism. Donato's tricks and Charcot's
      experiments. Presently, the sceptical, easy-going men, who cared nothing
      for religion of any sort, began telling stories of strange occurrences,
      incredible things which, nevertheless, had really occurred, so they said,
      falling back into superstitious beliefs, clinging to these last remnants
      of the marvellous, becoming devotees of this mystery of magnetism,
      defending it in the name of science. There was only one person who smiled,
      a vigorous young fellow, a great ladies' man who was so incredulous that
      he would not even enter upon a discussion of such matters.
    

      He repeated with a sneer:
    

      “Humbug! humbug! humbug! We need not discuss Donato, who is merely a
      very smart juggler. As for M. Charcot, who is said to be a remarkable man
      of science, he produces on me the effect of those story-tellers of the
      school of Edgar Poe, who end by going mad through constantly reflecting on
      queer cases of insanity. He has authenticated some cases of unexplained
      and inexplicable nervous phenomena; he makes his way into that unknown
      region which men are exploring every day, and unable always to understand
      what he sees, he recalls, perhaps, the ecclesiastical interpretation of
      these mysteries. I should like to hear what he says himself.”
    

      The words of the unbeliever were listened to with a kind of pity, as if he
      had blasphemed in an assembly of monks.
    

      One of these gentlemen exclaimed:
    

      “And yet miracles were performed in olden times.”
    

      “I deny it,” replied the other: “Why cannot they be
      performed now?”
    

      Then, each mentioned some fact, some fantastic presentiment some instance
      of souls communicating with each other across space, or some case of the
      secret influence of one being over another. They asserted and maintained
      that these things had actually occurred, while the sceptic angrily
      repeated:
    

      “Humbug! humbug! humbug!”
    

      At last he rose, threw away his cigar, and with his hands in his pockets,
      said: “Well, I also have two stories to tell you, which I will
      afterwards explain. Here they are:
    

      “In the little village of Etretat, the men, who are all seafaring
      folk, go every year to Newfoundland to fish for cod. One night the little
      son of one of these fishermen woke up with a start, crying out that his
      father was dead. The child was quieted, and again he woke up exclaiming
      that his father was drowned. A month later the news came that his father
      had, in fact, been swept off the deck of his smack by a billow. The widow
      then remembered how her son had woke up and spoken of his father's death.
      Everyone said it was a miracle, and the affair caused a great sensation.
      The dates were compared, and it was found that the accident and the dream
      were almost coincident, whence they concluded that they had happened on
      the same night and at the same hour. And there is a mystery of magnetism.”
    

      The story-teller stopped suddenly.
    

      Thereupon, one of those who had heard him, much affected by the narrative,
      asked:
    

      “And can you explain this?”
    

      “Perfectly, monsieur. I have discovered the secret. The circumstance
      surprised me and even perplexed me very much; but you see, I do not
      believe on principle. Just as others begin by believing, I begin by
      doubting; and when I cannot understand, I continue to deny that there can
      be any telepathic communication between souls; certain that my own
      intelligence will be able to explain it. Well, I kept on inquiring into
      the matter, and by dint of questioning all the wives of the absent seamen,
      I was convinced that not a week passed without one of them, or one of
      their children dreaming and declaring when they woke up that the father
      was drowned. The horrible and continual fear of this accident makes them
      always talk about it. Now, if one of these frequent predictions coincides,
      by a very simple chance, with the death of the person referred to, people
      at once declare it to be a miracle; for they suddenly lose sight of all
      the other predictions of misfortune that have remained unfulfilled. I have
      myself known fifty cases where the persons who made the prediction forgot
      all about it a week afterwards. But, if, then one happens to die, then
      the recollection of the thing is immediately revived, and people are ready
      to believe in the intervention of God, according to some, and magnetism,
      according to others.”
    

      One of the smokers remarked:
    

      “What you say is right enough; but what about your second story?”
    

      “Oh! my second story is a very delicate matter to relate. It
      happened to myself, and so I don't place any great value on my own view of
      the matter. An interested party can never give an impartial opinion.
      However, here it is:
    

      “Among my acquaintances was a young woman on whom I had never
      bestowed a thought, whom I had never even looked at attentively, never
      taken any notice of.
    

      “I classed her among the women of no importance, though she was not
      bad-looking; she appeared, in fact, to possess eyes, a nose, a mouth, some
      sort of hair—just a colorless type of countenance. She was one of
      those beings who awaken only a chance, passing thought, but no special
      interest, no desire.
    

      “Well, one night, as I was writing some letters by my fireside
      before going to bed, I was conscious, in the midst of that train of
      sensuous visions that sometimes pass through one's brain in moments of
      idle reverie, of a kind of slight influence, passing over me, a little
      flutter of the heart, and immediately, without any cause, without any
      logical connection of thought, I saw distinctly, as if I were touching
      her, saw from head to foot, and disrobed, this young woman to whom I had
      never given more than three seconds' thought at a time. I suddenly
      discovered in her a number of qualities which I had never before observed,
      a sweet charm, a languorous fascination; she awakened in me that sort of
      restless emotion that causes one to pursue a woman. But I did not think of
      her long. I went to bed and was soon asleep. And I dreamed.
    

      “You have all had these strange dreams which make you overcome the
      impossible, which open to you double-locked doors, unexpected joys,
      tightly folded arms?
    

      “Which of us in these troubled, excising, breathless slumbers, has
      not held, clasped, embraced with rapture, the woman who occupied his
      thoughts? And have you ever noticed what superhuman delight these happy
      dreams give us? Into what mad intoxication they cast you! with what
      passionate spasms they shake you! and with what infinite, caressing,
      penetrating tenderness they fill your heart for her whom you hold clasped
      in your arms in that adorable illusion that is so like reality!
    

      “All this I felt with unforgettable violence. This woman was mine,
      so much mine that the pleasant warmth of her skin remained in my fingers,
      the odor of her skin, in my brain, the taste of her kisses, on my lips,
      the sound of her voice lingered in my ears, the touch of her clasp still
      clung to me, and the burning charm of her tenderness still gratified my
      senses long after the delight but disillusion of my awakening.
    

      “And three times that night I had the same dream.
    

      “When the day dawned she haunted me, possessed me, filled my senses
      to such an extent that I was not one second without thinking of her.
    

      “At last, not knowing what to do, I dressed myself and went to call
      on her. As I went upstairs to her apartment, I was so overcome by emotion
      that I trembled, and my heart beat rapidly.
    

      “I entered the apartment. She rose the moment she heard my name
      mentioned; and suddenly our eyes met in a peculiar fixed gaze.
    

      “I sat down. I stammered out some commonplaces which she seemed not
      to hear. I did not know what to say or do. Then, abruptly, clasping my
      arms round her, my dream was realized so suddenly that I began to doubt
      whether I was really awake. We were friends after this for two years.”
    

      “What conclusion do you draw from it?” said a voice.
    

      The story-teller seemed to hesitate.
    

      “The conclusion I draw from it—well, by Jove, the conclusion
      is that it was just a coincidence! And then—who can tell? Perhaps it
      was some glance of hers which I had not noticed and which came back that
      night to me through one of those mysterious and unconscious —recollections
      that often bring before us things ignored by our own consciousness,
      unperceived by our minds!”
    

      “Call it whatever you like,” said one of his table companions,
      when the story was finished; “but if you don't believe in magnetism
      after that, my dear boy, you are an ungrateful fellow!”