MARTINE

 It came to him one Sunday after mass. He was walking home from church
      along the by-road that led to his house when he saw ahead of him Martine,
      who was also going home.

 Her father walked beside his daughter with the important gait of a rich
      farmer. Discarding the smock, he wore a short coat of gray cloth and on
      his head a round-topped hat with wide brim.

 She, laced up in a corset which she wore only once a week, walked along
      erect, with her squeezed-in waist, her broad shoulders and prominent hips,
      swinging herself a little. She wore a hat trimmed with flowers, made by a
      milliner at Yvetot, and displayed the back of her full, round, supple
      neck, reddened by the sun and air, on which fluttered little stray locks
      of hair.

 Benoist saw only her back; but he knew well the face he loved, without,
      however, having ever noticed it more closely than he did now.

 Suddenly he said: “Nom d'un nom, she is a fine girl, all the same,
      that Martine.” He watched her as she walked, admiring her hastily,
      feeling a desire taking possession of him. He did not long to see her face
      again, no. He kept gazing at her figure, repeating to himself: “Nom
      d'un nom, she is a fine girl.”

 Martine turned to the right to enter “La Martiniere,” the farm
      of her father, Jean Martin, and she cast a glance behind her as she turned
      round. She saw Benoist, who looked to her very comical. She called out:
      “Good-morning, Benoist.” He replied: “Good-morning,
      Martine; good-morning, mait Martin,” and went on his way.

 When he reached home the soup was on the table. He sat down opposite his
      mother beside the farm hand and the hired man, while the maid servant went
      to draw some cider.

 He ate a few spoonfuls, then pushed away his plate. His mother said:

 “Don't you feel well?”

 “No. I feel as if I had some pap in my stomach and that takes away
      my appetite.”

 He watched the others eating, as he cut himself a piece of bread from time
      to time and carried it lazily to his mouth, masticating it slowly. He
      thought of Martine. “She is a fine girl, all the same.” And to
      think that he had not noticed it before, and that it came to him, just
      like that, all at once, and with such force that he could not eat.

 He did not touch the stew. His mother said:

 “Come, Benoist, try and eat a little; it is loin of mutton, it will
      do you good. When one has no appetite, they should force themselves to
      eat.”

 He swallowed a few morsels, then, pushing away his plate, said:

 “No. I can't go that, positively.”

 When they rose from table he walked round the farm, telling the farm hand
      he might go home and that he would drive up the animals as he passed by
      them.

 The country was deserted, as it was the day of rest. Here and there in a
      field of clover cows were moving along heavily, with full bellies, chewing
      their cud under a blazing sun. Unharnessed plows were standing at the end
      of a furrow; and the upturned earth ready for the seed showed broad brown
      patches of stubble of wheat and oats that had lately been harvested.

 A rather dry autumn wind blew across the plain, promising a cool evening
      after the sun had set. Benoist sat down on a ditch, placed his hat on his
      knees as if he needed to cool off his head, and said aloud in the
      stillness of the country: “If you want a fine girl, she is a fine
      girl.”

 He thought of it again at night, in his bed, and in the morning when he
      awoke.

 He was not sad, he was not discontented, he could not have told what ailed
      him. It was something that had hold of him, something fastened in his
      mind, an idea that would not leave him and that produced a sort of
      tickling sensation in his heart.

 Sometimes a big fly is shut up in a room. You hear it flying about,
      buzzing, and the noise haunts you, irritates you. Suddenly it stops; you
      forget it; but all at once it begins again, obliging you to look up. You
      cannot catch it, nor drive it away, nor kill it, nor make it keep still.
      As soon as it settles for a second, it starts off buzzing again.

 The recollection of Martine disturbed Benoist's mind like an imprisoned
      fly.

 Then he longed to see her again and walked past the Martiniere several
      times. He saw her, at last, hanging out some clothes on a line stretched
      between two apple trees.

 It was a warm day. She had on only a short skirt and her chemise, showing
      the curves of her figure as she hung up the towels. He remained there,
      concealed by the hedge, for more than an hour, even after she had left. He
      returned home more obsessed with her image than ever.

 For a month his mind was full of her, he trembled when her name was
      mentioned in his presence. He could not eat, he had night sweats that kept
      him from sleeping.

 On Sunday, at mass, he never took his eyes off her. She noticed it and
      smiled at him, flattered at his appreciation.

 One evening, he suddenly met her in the road. She stopped short when she
      saw him coming. Then he walked right up to her, choking with fear and
      emotion, but determined to speak to her. He began falteringly:

 “See here, Martine, this cannot go on like this any longer.”

 She replied as if she wanted to tease him:

 “What cannot go on any longer, Benoist?”

 “My thinking of you as many hours as there are in the day,” he
      answered.

 She put her hands on her hips.

 “I do not oblige you to do so.”

 “Yes, it is you,” he stammered; “I cannot sleep, nor
      rest, nor eat, nor anything.”

 “What do you need to cure you of all that?” she asked.

 He stood there in dismay, his arms swinging, his eyes staring, his mouth
      agape.

 She hit him a punch in the stomach and ran off.

 From that day they met each other along the roadside, in by-roads or else
      at twilight on the edge of a field, when he was going home with his horses
      and she was driving her cows home to the stable.

 He felt himself carried, cast toward her by a strong impulse of his heart
      and body. He would have liked to squeeze her, strangle her, eat her, make
      her part of himself. And he trembled with impotence, impatience, rage, to
      think she did not belong to him entirely, as if they were one being.

 People gossiped about it in the countryside. They said they were engaged.
      He had, besides, asked her if she would be his wife, and she had answered
      “Yes.”

 They, were waiting for an opportunity to talk to their parents about it.

 But, all at once, she stopped coming to meet him at the usual hour. He did
      not even see her as he wandered round the farm. He could only catch a
      glimpse of her at mass on Sunday. And one Sunday, after the sermon, the
      priest actually published the banns of marriage between Victoire-Adelaide
      Martin and Josephin-Isidore Vallin.

 Benoist felt a sensation in his hands as if the blood had been drained
      off. He had a buzzing in the ears; and could hear nothing; and presently
      he perceived that his tears were falling on his prayer book.

 For a month he stayed in his room. Then he went back to his work.

 But he was not cured, and it was always in his mind. He avoided the roads
      that led past her home, so that he might not even see the trees in the
      yard, and this obliged him to make a great circuit morning and evening.

 She was now married to Vallin, the richest farmer in the district. Benoist
      and he did not speak now, though they had been comrades from childhood.

 One evening, as Benoist was passing the town hall, he heard that she was
      enceinte. Instead of experiencing a feeling of sorrow, he experienced, on
      the contrary, a feeling of relief. It was over, now, all over. They were
      more separated by that than by her marriage. He really preferred that it
      should be so.

 Months passed, and more months. He caught sight of her, occasionally,
      going to the village with a heavier step than usual. She blushed as she
      saw him, lowered her head and quickened her pace. And he turned out of his
      way so as not to pass her and meet her glance.

 He dreaded the thought that he might one morning meet her face to face,
      and be obliged to speak to her. What could he say to her now, after all he
      had said formerly, when he held her hands as he kissed her hair beside her
      cheeks? He often thought of those meetings along the roadside. She had
      acted horridly after all her promises.

 By degrees his grief diminished, leaving only sadness behind. And one day
      he took the old road that led past the farm where she now lived. He looked
      at the roof from a distance. It was there, in there, that she lived with
      another! The apple trees were in bloom, the cocks crowed on the dung hill.
      The whole dwelling seemed empty, the farm hands had gone to the fields to
      their spring toil. He stopped near the gate and looked into the yard. The
      dog was asleep outside his kennel, three calves were walking slowly, one
      behind the other, towards the pond. A big turkey was strutting before the
      door, parading before the turkey hens like a singer at the opera.

 Benoist leaned against the gate post and was suddenly seized with a desire
      to weep. But suddenly, he heard a cry, a loud cry for help coming from the
      house. He was struck with dismay, his hands grasping the wooden bars of
      the gate, and listened attentively. Another cry, a prolonged, heartrending
      cry, reached his ears, his soul, his flesh. It was she who was crying like
      that! He darted inside, crossed the grass patch, pushed open the door, and
      saw her lying on the floor, her body drawn up, her face livid, her eyes
      haggard, in the throes of childbirth.

 He stood there, trembling and paler than she was, and stammered:

 “Here I am, here I am, Martine!”

 She replied in gasps:

 “Oh, do not leave me, do not leave me, Benoist!”

 He looked at her, not knowing what to say, what to do. She began to cry
      out again:

 “Oh, oh, it is killing me. Oh, Benoist!”

 She writhed frightfully.

 Benoist was suddenly seized with a frantic longing to help her, to quiet
      her, to remove her pain. He leaned over, lifted her up and laid her on her
      bed; and while she kept on moaning he began to take off her clothes, her
      jacket, her skirt and her petticoat. She bit her fists to keep from crying
      out. Then he did as he was accustomed to doing for cows, ewes, and mares:
      he assisted in delivering her and found in his hands a large infant who
      was moaning.

 He wiped it off and wrapped it up in a towel that was drying in front of
      the fire, and laid it on a bundle of clothes ready for ironing that was on
      the table. Then he went back to the mother.

 He took her up and placed her on the floor again, then he changed the
      bedclothes and put her back into bed. She faltered:

 “Thank you, Benoist, you have a noble heart.” And then she
      wept a little as if she felt regretful.

 He did not love her any longer, not the least bit. It was all over. Why?
      How? He could not have said. What had happened had cured him better than
      ten years of absence.

 She asked, exhausted and trembling:

 “What is it?”

 He replied calmly:

 “It is a very fine girl.”

 Then they were silent again. At the end of a few moments, the mother, in a
      weak voice, said:

 “Show her to me, Benoist.”

 He took up the little one and was showing it to her as if he were holding
      the consecrated wafer, when the door opened, and Isidore Vallin appeared.

 He did not understand at first, then all at once he guessed.

 Benoist, in consternation, stammered out:

 “I was passing, I was just passing by when I heard her crying out,
      and I came—there is your child, Vallin!”

 Then the husband, his eyes full of tears, stepped forward, took the little
      mite of humanity that he held out to him, kissed it, unable to speak from
      emotion for a few seconds; then placing the child on the bed, he held out
      both hands to Benoist, saying:

 “Your hand upon it, Benoist. From now on we understand each other.
      If you are willing, we will be a pair of friends, a pair of friends!”
      And Benoist replied: “Indeed I will, certainly, indeed I will.”