METZENGERSTEIN
    

     Pestis eram vivus—moriens tua mors ero.

                —Martin Luther


      HORROR and fatality have been stalking abroad in all ages. Why then give a
      date to this story I have to tell? Let it suffice to say, that at the
      period of which I speak, there existed, in the interior of Hungary, a
      settled although hidden belief in the doctrines of the Metempsychosis. Of
      the doctrines themselves—that is, of their falsity, or of their
      probability—I say nothing. I assert, however, that much of our
      incredulity—as La Bruy?re says of all our unhappiness—“vient
      de ne pouvoir ?tre seuls.” {*1}
    

      But there are some points in the Hungarian superstition which were fast
      verging to absurdity. They—the Hungarians—differed very
      essentially from their Eastern authorities. For example, “The
      soul,” said the former—I give the words of an acute and
      intelligent Parisian—“ne demeure qu’un seul fois dans
      un corps sensible: au reste—un cheval, un chien, un homme m?me, n’est
      que la ressemblance peu tangible de ces animaux.”
    

      The families of Berlifitzing and Metzengerstein had been at variance for
      centuries. Never before were two houses so illustrious, mutually
      embittered by hostility so deadly. The origin of this enmity seems to be
      found in the words of an ancient prophecy—“A lofty name shall
      have a fearful fall when, as the rider over his horse, the mortality of
      Metzengerstein shall triumph over the immortality of Berlifitzing.”
    

      To be sure the words themselves had little or no meaning. But more trivial
      causes have given rise—and that no long while ago—to
      consequences equally eventful. Besides, the estates, which were
      contiguous, had long exercised a rival influence in the affairs of a busy
      government. Moreover, near neighbors are seldom friends; and the
      inhabitants of the Castle Berlifitzing might look, from their lofty
      buttresses, into the very windows of the palace Metzengerstein. Least of
      all had the more than feudal magnificence, thus discovered, a tendency to
      allay the irritable feelings of the less ancient and less wealthy
      Berlifitzings. What wonder then, that the words, however silly, of that
      prediction, should have succeeded in setting and keeping at variance two
      families already predisposed to quarrel by every instigation of hereditary
      jealousy? The prophecy seemed to imply—if it implied anything—a
      final triumph on the part of the already more powerful house; and was of
      course remembered with the more bitter animosity by the weaker and less
      influential.
    

      Wilhelm, Count Berlifitzing, although loftily descended, was, at the epoch
      of this narrative, an infirm and doting old man, remarkable for nothing
      but an inordinate and inveterate personal antipathy to the family of his
      rival, and so passionate a love of horses, and of hunting, that neither
      bodily infirmity, great age, nor mental incapacity, prevented his daily
      participation in the dangers of the chase.
    

      Frederick, Baron Metzengerstein, was, on the other hand, not yet of age.
      His father, the Minister G—, died young. His mother, the Lady Mary,
      followed him quickly after. Frederick was, at that time, in his fifteenth
      year. In a city, fifteen years are no long period—a child may be
      still a child in his third lustrum: but in a wilderness—in so
      magnificent a wilderness as that old principality, fifteen years have a
      far deeper meaning.
    

      From some peculiar circumstances attending the administration of his
      father, the young Baron, at the decease of the former, entered immediately
      upon his vast possessions. Such estates were seldom held before by a
      nobleman of Hungary. His castles were without number. The chief in point
      of splendor and extent was the “Ch?teau Metzengerstein.” The
      boundary line of his dominions was never clearly defined; but his
      principal park embraced a circuit of fifty miles.
    

      Upon the succession of a proprietor so young, with a character so well
      known, to a fortune so unparalleled, little speculation was afloat in
      regard to his probable course of conduct. And, indeed, for the space of
      three days, the behavior of the heir out-heroded Herod, and fairly
      surpassed the expectations of his most enthusiastic admirers. Shameful
      debaucheries—flagrant treacheries—unheard-of atrocities—gave
      his trembling vassals quickly to understand that no servile submission on
      their part—no punctilios of conscience on his own—were
      thenceforward to prove any security against the remorseless fangs of a
      petty Caligula. On the night of the fourth day, the stables of the castle
      Berlifitzing were discovered to be on fire; and the unanimous opinion of
      the neighborhood added the crime of the incendiary to the already hideous
      list of the Baron’s misdemeanors and enormities.
    

      But during the tumult occasioned by this occurrence, the young nobleman
      himself sat apparently buried in meditation, in a vast and desolate upper
      apartment of the family palace of Metzengerstein. The rich although faded
      tapestry hangings which swung gloomily upon the walls, represented the
      shadowy and majestic forms of a thousand illustrious ancestors. Here,
      rich-ermined priests, and pontifical dignitaries, familiarly seated with
      the autocrat and the sovereign, put a veto on the wishes of a temporal
      king, or restrained with the fiat of papal supremacy the rebellious
      sceptre of the Arch-enemy. There, the dark, tall statures of the
      Princes Metzengerstein—their muscular war-coursers plunging over the
      carcasses of fallen foes—startled the steadiest nerves with their
      vigorous expression; and here, again, the voluptuous and swan-like
      figures of the dames of days gone by, floated away in the mazes of an
      unreal dance to the strains of imaginary melody.
    

      But as the Baron listened, or affected to listen, to the gradually
      increasing uproar in the stables of Berlifitzing—or perhaps pondered
      upon some more novel, some more decided act of audacity—his eyes
      became unwittingly rivetted to the figure of an enormous, and unnaturally
      colored horse, represented in the tapestry as belonging to a Saracen
      ancestor of the family of his rival. The horse itself, in the foreground
      of the design, stood motionless and statue-like—while farther back,
      its discomfited rider perished by the dagger of a Metzengerstein.
    

      On Frederick’s lip arose a fiendish expression, as he became aware
      of the direction which his glance had, without his consciousness, assumed.
      Yet he did not remove it. On the contrary, he could by no means account
      for the overwhelming anxiety which appeared falling like a pall upon his
      senses. It was with difficulty that he reconciled his dreamy and
      incoherent feelings with the certainty of being awake. The longer he gazed
      the more absorbing became the spell—the more impossible did it
      appear that he could ever withdraw his glance from the fascination of that
      tapestry. But the tumult without becoming suddenly more violent, with a
      compulsory exertion he diverted his attention to the glare of ruddy light
      thrown full by the flaming stables upon the windows of the apartment.
    

      The action, however, was but momentary, his gaze returned mechanically to
      the wall. To his extreme horror and astonishment, the head of the gigantic
      steed had, in the meantime, altered its position. The neck of the animal,
      before arched, as if in compassion, over the prostrate body of its lord,
      was now extended, at full length, in the direction of the Baron. The eyes,
      before invisible, now wore an energetic and human expression, while they
      gleamed with a fiery and unusual red; and the distended lips of the
      apparently enraged horse left in full view his gigantic and disgusting
      teeth.
    

      Stupified with terror, the young nobleman tottered to the door. As he
      threw it open, a flash of red light, streaming far into the chamber, flung
      his shadow with a clear outline against the quivering tapestry, and he
      shuddered to perceive that shadow—as he staggered awhile upon the
      threshold—assuming the exact position, and precisely filling up the
      contour, of the relentless and triumphant murderer of the Saracen
      Berlifitzing.
    

      To lighten the depression of his spirits, the Baron hurried into the open
      air. At the principal gate of the palace he encountered three equerries.
      With much difficulty, and at the imminent peril of their lives, they were
      restraining the convulsive plunges of a gigantic and fiery-colored horse.
    

      “Whose horse? Where did you get him?” demanded the youth, in a
      querulous and husky tone of voice, as he became instantly aware that the
      mysterious steed in the tapestried chamber was the very counterpart of the
      furious animal before his eyes.
    

      “He is your own property, sire,” replied one of the equerries,
      “at least he is claimed by no other owner. We caught him flying, all
      smoking and foaming with rage, from the burning stables of the Castle
      Berlifitzing. Supposing him to have belonged to the old Count’s stud
      of foreign horses, we led him back as an estray. But the grooms there
      disclaim any title to the creature; which is strange, since he bears
      evident marks of having made a narrow escape from the flames.
    

      “The letters W. V. B. are also branded very distinctly on his
      forehead,” interrupted a second equerry, “I supposed them, of
      course, to be the initials of Wilhelm Von Berlifitzing—but all at
      the castle are positive in denying any knowledge of the horse.”
    

      “Extremely singular!” said the young Baron, with a musing air,
      and apparently unconscious of the meaning of his words. “He is, as
      you say, a remarkable horse—a prodigious horse! although, as you
      very justly observe, of a suspicious and untractable character, let him be
      mine, however,” he added, after a pause, “perhaps a rider like
      Frederick of Metzengerstein, may tame even the devil from the stables of
      Berlifitzing.”
    

      “You are mistaken, my lord; the horse, as I think we mentioned, is
      not from the stables of the Count. If such had been the case, we
      know our duty better than to bring him into the presence of a noble of
      your family.”
    

      “True!” observed the Baron, dryly, and at that instant a page
      of the bedchamber came from the palace with a heightened color, and a
      precipitate step. He whispered into his master’s ear an account of
      the sudden disappearance of a small portion of the tapestry, in an
      apartment which he designated; entering, at the same time, into
      particulars of a minute and circumstantial character; but from the low
      tone of voice in which these latter were communicated, nothing escaped to
      gratify the excited curiosity of the equerries.
    

      The young Frederick, during the conference, seemed agitated by a variety
      of emotions. He soon, however, recovered his composure, and an expression
      of determined malignancy settled upon his countenance, as he gave
      peremptory orders that a certain chamber should be immediately locked up,
      and the key placed in his own possession.
    

      “Have you heard of the unhappy death of the old hunter Berlifitzing?”
      said one of his vassals to the Baron, as, after the departure of the page,
      the huge steed which that nobleman had adopted as his own, plunged and
      curvetted, with redoubled fury, down the long avenue which extended from
      the chateau to the stables of Metzengerstein.
    

      “No!” said the Baron, turning abruptly toward the speaker,
      “dead! say you?”
    

      “It is indeed true, my lord; and, to a noble of your name, will be,
      I imagine, no unwelcome intelligence.”
    

      A rapid smile shot over the countenance of the listener. “How died
      he?”
    

      “In his rash exertions to rescue a favorite portion of his hunting
      stud, he has himself perished miserably in the flames.”
    

      “I-n-d-e-e-d-!” ejaculated the Baron, as if slowly and
      deliberately impressed with the truth of some exciting idea.
    

      “Indeed;” repeated the vassal.
    

      “Shocking!” said the youth, calmly, and turned quietly into
      the chateau.
    

      From this date a marked alteration took place in the outward demeanor of
      the dissolute young Baron Frederick Von Metzengerstein. Indeed, his
      behavior disappointed every expectation, and proved little in accordance
      with the views of many a manoeuvering mamma; while his habits and manner,
      still less than formerly, offered any thing congenial with those of the
      neighboring aristocracy. He was never to be seen beyond the limits of his
      own domain, and, in this wide and social world, was utterly companionless—unless,
      indeed, that unnatural, impetuous, and fiery-colored horse, which he
      henceforward continually bestrode, had any mysterious right to the title
      of his friend.
    

      Numerous invitations on the part of the neighborhood for a long time,
      however, periodically came in. “Will the Baron honor our festivals
      with his presence?” “Will the Baron join us in a hunting of
      the boar?”—“Metzengerstein does not hunt;” “Metzengerstein
      will not attend,” were the haughty and laconic answers.
    

      These repeated insults were not to be endured by an imperious nobility.
      Such invitations became less cordial—less frequent—in time
      they ceased altogether. The widow of the unfortunate Count Berlifitzing
      was even heard to express a hope “that the Baron might be at home
      when he did not wish to be at home, since he disdained the company of his
      equals; and ride when he did not wish to ride, since he preferred the
      society of a horse.” This to be sure was a very silly explosion of
      hereditary pique; and merely proved how singularly unmeaning our sayings
      are apt to become, when we desire to be unusually energetic.
    

      The charitable, nevertheless, attributed the alteration in the conduct of
      the young nobleman to the natural sorrow of a son for the untimely loss of
      his parents—forgetting, however, his atrocious and reckless behavior
      during the short period immediately succeeding that bereavement. Some
      there were, indeed, who suggested a too haughty idea of self-consequence
      and dignity. Others again (among them may be mentioned the family
      physician) did not hesitate in speaking of morbid melancholy, and
      hereditary ill-health; while dark hints, of a more equivocal nature, were
      current among the multitude.
    

      Indeed, the Baron’s perverse attachment to his lately-acquired
      charger—an attachment which seemed to attain new strength from every
      fresh example of the animal’s ferocious and demon-like propensities—at
      length became, in the eyes of all reasonable men, a hideous and unnatural
      fervor. In the glare of noon—at the dead hour of night—in
      sickness or in health—in calm or in tempest—the young
      Metzengerstein seemed rivetted to the saddle of that colossal horse, whose
      intractable audacities so well accorded with his own spirit.
    

      There were circumstances, moreover, which coupled with late events, gave
      an unearthly and portentous character to the mania of the rider, and to
      the capabilities of the steed. The space passed over in a single leap had
      been accurately measured, and was found to exceed, by an astounding
      difference, the wildest expectations of the most imaginative. The Baron,
      besides, had no particular name for the animal, although all the
      rest in his collection were distinguished by characteristic appellations.
      His stable, too, was appointed at a distance from the rest; and with
      regard to grooming and other necessary offices, none but the owner in
      person had ventured to officiate, or even to enter the enclosure of that
      particular stall. It was also to be observed, that although the three
      grooms, who had caught the steed as he fled from the conflagration at
      Berlifitzing, had succeeded in arresting his course, by means of a
      chain-bridle and noose—yet no one of the three could with any
      certainty affirm that he had, during that dangerous struggle, or at any
      period thereafter, actually placed his hand upon the body of the beast.
      Instances of peculiar intelligence in the demeanor of a noble and
      high-spirited horse are not to be supposed capable of exciting
      unreasonable attention—especially among men who, daily trained to
      the labors of the chase, might appear well acquainted with the sagacity of
      a horse—but there were certain circumstances which intruded
      themselves per force upon the most skeptical and phlegmatic; and it is
      said there were times when the animal caused the gaping crowd who stood
      around to recoil in horror from the deep and impressive meaning of his
      terrible stamp—times when the young Metzengerstein turned pale and
      shrunk away from the rapid and searching expression of his earnest and
      human-looking eye.
    

      Among all the retinue of the Baron, however, none were found to doubt the
      ardor of that extraordinary affection which existed on the part of the
      young nobleman for the fiery qualities of his horse; at least, none but an
      insignificant and misshapen little page, whose deformities were in
      everybody’s way, and whose opinions were of the least possible
      importance. He—if his ideas are worth mentioning at all—had
      the effrontery to assert that his master never vaulted into the saddle
      without an unaccountable and almost imperceptible shudder, and that, upon
      his return from every long-continued and habitual ride, an expression of
      triumphant malignity distorted every muscle in his countenance.
    

      One tempestuous night, Metzengerstein, awaking from a heavy slumber,
      descended like a maniac from his chamber, and, mounting in hot haste,
      bounded away into the mazes of the forest. An occurrence so common
      attracted no particular attention, but his return was looked for with
      intense anxiety on the part of his domestics, when, after some hours’
      absence, the stupendous and magnificent battlements of the Chateau
      Metzengerstein, were discovered crackling and rocking to their very
      foundation, under the influence of a dense and livid mass of ungovernable
      fire.
    

      As the flames, when first seen, had already made so terrible a progress
      that all efforts to save any portion of the building were evidently
      futile, the astonished neighborhood stood idly around in silent and
      pathetic wonder. But a new and fearful object soon rivetted the attention
      of the multitude, and proved how much more intense is the excitement
      wrought in the feelings of a crowd by the contemplation of human agony,
      than that brought about by the most appalling spectacles of inanimate
      matter.
    

      Up the long avenue of aged oaks which led from the forest to the main
      entrance of the Ch?teau Metzengerstein, a steed, bearing an unbonneted and
      disordered rider, was seen leaping with an impetuosity which outstripped
      the very Demon of the Tempest.
    

      The career of the horseman was indisputably, on his own part,
      uncontrollable. The agony of his countenance, the convulsive struggle of
      his frame, gave evidence of superhuman exertion: but no sound, save a
      solitary shriek, escaped from his lacerated lips, which were bitten
      through and through in the intensity of terror. One instant, and the
      clattering of hoofs resounded sharply and shrilly above the roaring of the
      flames and the shrieking of the winds—another, and, clearing at a
      single plunge the gate-way and the moat, the steed bounded far up the
      tottering staircases of the palace, and, with its rider, disappeared amid
      the whirlwind of chaotic fire.
    

      The fury of the tempest immediately died away, and a dead calm sullenly
      succeeded. A white flame still enveloped the building like a shroud, and,
      streaming far away into the quiet atmosphere, shot forth a glare of
      preternatural light; while a cloud of smoke settled heavily over the
      battlements in the distinct colossal figure of—a horse.
    







      THE SYSTEM OF DOCTOR TARR AND PROFESSOR FETHER
    

      DURING the autumn of 18—, while on a tour through the extreme
      southern provinces of France, my route led me within a few miles of a
      certain Maison de Sante or private mad-house, about which I had heard much
      in Paris from my medical friends. As I had never visited a place of the
      kind, I thought the opportunity too good to be lost; and so proposed to my
      travelling companion (a gentleman with whom I had made casual acquaintance
      a few days before) that we should turn aside, for an hour or so, and look
      through the establishment. To this he objected—pleading haste in the
      first place, and, in the second, a very usual horror at the sight of a
      lunatic. He begged me, however, not to let any mere courtesy towards
      himself interfere with the gratification of my curiosity, and said that he
      would ride on leisurely, so that I might overtake him during the day, or,
      at all events, during the next. As he bade me good-bye, I bethought me
      that there might be some difficulty in obtaining access to the premises,
      and mentioned my fears on this point. He replied that, in fact, unless I
      had personal knowledge of the superintendent, Monsieur Maillard, or some
      credential in the way of a letter, a difficulty might be found to exist,
      as the regulations of these private mad-houses were more rigid than the
      public hospital laws. For himself, he added, he had, some years since,
      made the acquaintance of Maillard, and would so far assist me as to ride
      up to the door and introduce me; although his feelings on the subject of
      lunacy would not permit of his entering the house.
    

      I thanked him, and, turning from the main road, we entered a grass-grown
      by-path, which, in half an hour, nearly lost itself in a dense forest,
      clothing the base of a mountain. Through this dank and gloomy wood we rode
      some two miles, when the Maison de Sante came in view. It was a fantastic
      chateau, much dilapidated, and indeed scarcely tenantable through age and
      neglect. Its aspect inspired me with absolute dread, and, checking my
      horse, I half resolved to turn back. I soon, however, grew ashamed of my
      weakness, and proceeded.
    

      As we rode up to the gate-way, I perceived it slightly open, and the
      visage of a man peering through. In an instant afterward, this man came
      forth, accosted my companion by name, shook him cordially by the hand, and
      begged him to alight. It was Monsieur Maillard himself. He was a portly,
      fine-looking gentleman of the old school, with a polished manner, and a
      certain air of gravity, dignity, and authority which was very impressive.
    

      My friend, having presented me, mentioned my desire to inspect the
      establishment, and received Monsieur Maillard’s assurance that he
      would show me all attention, now took leave, and I saw him no more.
    

      When he had gone, the superintendent ushered me into a small and
      exceedingly neat parlor, containing, among other indications of refined
      taste, many books, drawings, pots of flowers, and musical instruments. A
      cheerful fire blazed upon the hearth. At a piano, singing an aria from
      Bellini, sat a young and very beautiful woman, who, at my entrance, paused
      in her song, and received me with graceful courtesy. Her voice was low,
      and her whole manner subdued. I thought, too, that I perceived the traces
      of sorrow in her countenance, which was excessively, although to my taste,
      not unpleasingly, pale. She was attired in deep mourning, and excited in
      my bosom a feeling of mingled respect, interest, and admiration.
    

      I had heard, at Paris, that the institution of Monsieur Maillard was
      managed upon what is vulgarly termed the “system of soothing”—that
      all punishments were avoided—that even confinement was seldom
      resorted to—that the patients, while secretly watched, were left
      much apparent liberty, and that most of them were permitted to roam about
      the house and grounds in the ordinary apparel of persons in right mind.
    

      Keeping these impressions in view, I was cautious in what I said before
      the young lady; for I could not be sure that she was sane; and, in fact,
      there was a certain restless brilliancy about her eyes which half led me
      to imagine she was not. I confined my remarks, therefore, to general
      topics, and to such as I thought would not be displeasing or exciting even
      to a lunatic. She replied in a perfectly rational manner to all that I
      said; and even her original observations were marked with the soundest
      good sense, but a long acquaintance with the metaphysics of mania, had
      taught me to put no faith in such evidence of sanity, and I continued to
      practise, throughout the interview, the caution with which I commenced it.
    

      Presently a smart footman in livery brought in a tray with fruit, wine,
      and other refreshments, of which I partook, the lady soon afterward
      leaving the room. As she departed I turned my eyes in an inquiring manner
      toward my host.
    

      “No,” he said, “oh, no—a member of my family—my
      niece, and a most accomplished woman.”
    

      “I beg a thousand pardons for the suspicion,” I replied,
      “but of course you will know how to excuse me. The excellent
      administration of your affairs here is well understood in Paris, and I
      thought it just possible, you know—
    

      “Yes, yes—say no more—or rather it is myself who should
      thank you for the commendable prudence you have displayed. We seldom find
      so much of forethought in young men; and, more than once, some unhappy
      contre-temps has occurred in consequence of thoughtlessness on the part of
      our visitors. While my former system was in operation, and my patients
      were permitted the privilege of roaming to and fro at will, they were
      often aroused to a dangerous frenzy by injudicious persons who called to
      inspect the house. Hence I was obliged to enforce a rigid system of
      exclusion; and none obtained access to the premises upon whose discretion
      I could not rely.”
    

      “While your former system was in operation!” I said, repeating
      his words—“do I understand you, then, to say that the ‘soothing
      system’ of which I have heard so much is no longer in force?”
    

      “It is now,” he replied, “several weeks since we have
      concluded to renounce it forever.”
    

      “Indeed! you astonish me!”
    

      “We found it, sir,” he said, with a sigh, “absolutely
      necessary to return to the old usages. The danger of the soothing system
      was, at all times, appalling; and its advantages have been much overrated.
      I believe, sir, that in this house it has been given a fair trial, if ever
      in any. We did every thing that rational humanity could suggest. I am
      sorry that you could not have paid us a visit at an earlier period, that
      you might have judged for yourself. But I presume you are conversant with
      the soothing practice—with its details.”
    

      “Not altogether. What I have heard has been at third or fourth hand.”
    

      “I may state the system, then, in general terms, as one in which the
      patients were menages-humored. We contradicted no fancies which entered
      the brains of the mad. On the contrary, we not only indulged but
      encouraged them; and many of our most permanent cures have been thus
      effected. There is no argument which so touches the feeble reason of the
      madman as the argumentum ad absurdum. We have had men, for example, who
      fancied themselves chickens. The cure was, to insist upon the thing as a
      fact—to accuse the patient of stupidity in not sufficiently
      perceiving it to be a fact—and thus to refuse him any other diet for
      a week than that which properly appertains to a chicken. In this manner a
      little corn and gravel were made to perform wonders.”
    

      “But was this species of acquiescence all?”
    

      “By no means. We put much faith in amusements of a simple kind, such
      as music, dancing, gymnastic exercises generally, cards, certain classes
      of books, and so forth. We affected to treat each individual as if for
      some ordinary physical disorder, and the word ‘lunacy’ was
      never employed. A great point was to set each lunatic to guard the actions
      of all the others. To repose confidence in the understanding or discretion
      of a madman, is to gain him body and soul. In this way we were enabled to
      dispens? with an expensive body of keepers.”
    

      “And you had no punishments of any kind?”
    

      “None.”
    

      “And you never confined your patients?”
    

      “Very rarely. Now and then, the malady of some individual growing to
      a crisis, or taking a sudden turn of fury, we conveyed him to a secret
      cell, lest his disorder should infect the rest, and there kept him until
      we could dismiss him to his friends—for with the raging maniac we
      have nothing to do. He is usually removed to the public hospitals.”
    

      “And you have now changed all this—and you think for the
      better?”
    

      “Decidedly. The system had its disadvantages, and even its dangers.
      It is now, happily, exploded throughout all the Maisons de Sante of
      France.”
    

      “I am very much surprised,” I said, “at what you tell
      me; for I made sure that, at this moment, no other method of treatment for
      mania existed in any portion of the country.”
    

      “You are young yet, my friend,” replied my host, “but
      the time will arrive when you will learn to judge for yourself of what is
      going on in the world, without trusting to the gossip of others. Believe
      nothing you hear, and only one-half that you see. Now about our Maisons de
      Sante, it is clear that some ignoramus has misled you. After dinner,
      however, when you have sufficiently recovered from the fatigue of your
      ride, I will be happy to take you over the house, and introduce to you a
      system which, in my opinion, and in that of every one who has witnessed
      its operation, is incomparably the most effectual as yet devised.”
    

      “Your own?” I inquired—“one of your own invention?”
    

      “I am proud,” he replied, “to acknowledge that it is—at
      least in some measure.”
    

      In this manner I conversed with Monsieur Maillard for an hour or two,
      during which he showed me the gardens and conservatories of the place.
    

      “I cannot let you see my patients,” he said, “just at
      present. To a sensitive mind there is always more or less of the shocking
      in such exhibitions; and I do not wish to spoil your appetite for dinner.
      We will dine. I can give you some veal a la Menehoult, with cauliflowers
      in veloute sauce—after that a glass of Clos de Vougeot—then
      your nerves will be sufficiently steadied.”
    

      At six, dinner was announced; and my host conducted me into a large salle
      a manger, where a very numerous company were assembled—twenty-five
      or thirty in all. They were, apparently, people of rank-certainly of high
      breeding—although their habiliments, I thought, were extravagantly
      rich, partaking somewhat too much of the ostentatious finery of the vielle
      cour. I noticed that at least two-thirds of these guests were ladies; and
      some of the latter were by no means accoutred in what a Parisian would
      consider good taste at the present day. Many females, for example, whose
      age could not have been less than seventy were bedecked with a profusion
      of jewelry, such as rings, bracelets, and earrings, and wore their bosoms
      and arms shamefully bare. I observed, too, that very few of the dresses
      were well made—or, at least, that very few of them fitted the
      wearers. In looking about, I discovered the interesting girl to whom
      Monsieur Maillard had presented me in the little parlor; but my surprise
      was great to see her wearing a hoop and farthingale, with high-heeled
      shoes, and a dirty cap of Brussels lace, so much too large for her that it
      gave her face a ridiculously diminutive expression. When I had first seen
      her, she was attired, most becomingly, in deep mourning. There was an air
      of oddity, in short, about the dress of the whole party, which, at first,
      caused me to recur to my original idea of the “soothing system,”
      and to fancy that Monsieur Maillard had been willing to deceive me until
      after dinner, that I might experience no uncomfortable feelings during the
      repast, at finding myself dining with lunatics; but I remembered having
      been informed, in Paris, that the southern provincialists were a
      peculiarly eccentric people, with a vast number of antiquated notions; and
      then, too, upon conversing with several members of the company, my
      apprehensions were immediately and fully dispelled.
    

      The dining-room itself, although perhaps sufficiently comfortable and of
      good dimensions, had nothing too much of elegance about it. For example,
      the floor was uncarpeted; in France, however, a carpet is frequently
      dispensed with. The windows, too, were without curtains; the shutters,
      being shut, were securely fastened with iron bars, applied diagonally,
      after the fashion of our ordinary shop-shutters. The apartment, I
      observed, formed, in itself, a wing of the chateau, and thus the windows
      were on three sides of the parallelogram, the door being at the other.
      There were no less than ten windows in all.
    

      The table was superbly set out. It was loaded with plate, and more than
      loaded with delicacies. The profusion was absolutely barbaric. There were
      meats enough to have feasted the Anakim. Never, in all my life, had I
      witnessed so lavish, so wasteful an expenditure of the good things of
      life. There seemed very little taste, however, in the arrangements; and my
      eyes, accustomed to quiet lights, were sadly offended by the prodigious
      glare of a multitude of wax candles, which, in silver candelabra, were
      deposited upon the table, and all about the room, wherever it was possible
      to find a place. There were several active servants in attendance; and,
      upon a large table, at the farther end of the apartment, were seated seven
      or eight people with fiddles, fifes, trombones, and a drum. These fellows
      annoyed me very much, at intervals, during the repast, by an infinite
      variety of noises, which were intended for music, and which appeared to
      afford much entertainment to all present, with the exception of myself.
    

      Upon the whole, I could not help thinking that there was much of the
      bizarre about every thing I saw—but then the world is made up of all
      kinds of persons, with all modes of thought, and all sorts of conventional
      customs. I had travelled, too, so much, as to be quite an adept at the nil
      admirari; so I took my seat very coolly at the right hand of my host, and,
      having an excellent appetite, did justice to the good cheer set before me.
    

      The conversation, in the meantime, was spirited and general. The ladies,
      as usual, talked a great deal. I soon found that nearly all the company
      were well educated; and my host was a world of good-humored anecdote in
      himself. He seemed quite willing to speak of his position as
      superintendent of a Maison de Sante; and, indeed, the topic of lunacy was,
      much to my surprise, a favorite one with all present. A great many amusing
      stories were told, having reference to the whims of the patients.
    

      “We had a fellow here once,” said a fat little gentleman, who
      sat at my right,—“a fellow that fancied himself a tea-pot; and
      by the way, is it not especially singular how often this particular
      crotchet has entered the brain of the lunatic? There is scarcely an insane
      asylum in France which cannot supply a human tea-pot. Our gentleman was a
      Britannia—ware tea-pot, and was careful to polish himself every
      morning with buckskin and whiting.”
    

      “And then,” said a tall man just opposite, “we had here,
      not long ago, a person who had taken it into his head that he was a donkey—which
      allegorically speaking, you will say, was quite true. He was a troublesome
      patient; and we had much ado to keep him within bounds. For a long time he
      would eat nothing but thistles; but of this idea we soon cured him by
      insisting upon his eating nothing else. Then he was perpetually kicking
      out his heels-so-so-”
    

      “Mr. De Kock! I will thank you to behave yourself!” here
      interrupted an old lady, who sat next to the speaker. “Please keep
      your feet to yourself! You have spoiled my brocade! Is it necessary, pray,
      to illustrate a remark in so practical a style? Our friend here can surely
      comprehend you without all this. Upon my word, you are nearly as great a
      donkey as the poor unfortunate imagined himself. Your acting is very
      natural, as I live.”
    

      “Mille pardons! Ma’m’selle!” replied Monsieur De
      Kock, thus addressed—“a thousand pardons! I had no intention
      of offending. Ma’m’selle Laplace—Monsieur De Kock will
      do himself the honor of taking wine with you.”
    

      Here Monsieur De Kock bowed low, kissed his hand with much ceremony, and
      took wine with Ma’m’selle Laplace.
    

      “Allow me, mon ami,” now said Monsieur Maillard, addressing
      myself, “allow me to send you a morsel of this veal a la St.
      Menhoult—you will find it particularly fine.”
    

      At this instant three sturdy waiters had just succeeded in depositing
      safely upon the table an enormous dish, or trencher, containing what I
      supposed to be the “monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen
      ademptum.” A closer scrutiny assured me, however, that it was only a
      small calf roasted whole, and set upon its knees, with an apple in its
      mouth, as is the English fashion of dressing a hare.
    

      “Thank you, no,” I replied; “to say the truth, I am not
      particularly partial to veal a la St.—what is it?—for I do not
      find that it altogether agrees with me. I will change my plate, however,
      and try some of the rabbit.”
    

      There were several side-dishes on the table, containing what appeared to
      be the ordinary French rabbit—a very delicious morceau, which I can
      recommend.
    

      “Pierre,” cried the host, “change this gentleman’s
      plate, and give him a side-piece of this rabbit au-chat.”
    

      “This what?” said I.
    

      “This rabbit au-chat.”
    

      “Why, thank you—upon second thoughts, no. I will just help
      myself to some of the ham.”
    

      There is no knowing what one eats, thought I to myself, at the tables of
      these people of the province. I will have none of their rabbit au-chat—and,
      for the matter of that, none of their cat-au-rabbit either.
    

      “And then,” said a cadaverous looking personage, near the foot
      of the table, taking up the thread of the conversation where it had been
      broken off,—“and then, among other oddities, we had a patient,
      once upon a time, who very pertinaciously maintained himself to be a
      Cordova cheese, and went about, with a knife in his hand, soliciting his
      friends to try a small slice from the middle of his leg.”
    

      “He was a great fool, beyond doubt,” interposed some one,
      “but not to be compared with a certain individual whom we all know,
      with the exception of this strange gentleman. I mean the man who took
      himself for a bottle of champagne, and always went off with a pop and a
      fizz, in this fashion.”
    

      Here the speaker, very rudely, as I thought, put his right thumb in his
      left cheek, withdrew it with a sound resembling the popping of a cork, and
      then, by a dexterous movement of the tongue upon the teeth, created a
      sharp hissing and fizzing, which lasted for several minutes, in imitation
      of the frothing of champagne. This behavior, I saw plainly, was not very
      pleasing to Monsieur Maillard; but that gentleman said nothing, and the
      conversation was resumed by a very lean little man in a big wig.
    

      “And then there was an ignoramus,” said he, “who mistook
      himself for a frog, which, by the way, he resembled in no little degree. I
      wish you could have seen him, sir,”—here the speaker addressed
      myself—“it would have done your heart good to see the natural
      airs that he put on. Sir, if that man was not a frog, I can only observe
      that it is a pity he was not. His croak thus—o-o-o-o-gh—o-o-o-o-gh!
      was the finest note in the world—B flat; and when he put his elbows
      upon the table thus—after taking a glass or two of wine—and
      distended his mouth, thus, and rolled up his eyes, thus, and winked them
      with excessive rapidity, thus, why then, sir, I take it upon myself to
      say, positively, that you would have been lost in admiration of the genius
      of the man.”
    

      “I have no doubt of it,” I said.
    

      “And then,” said somebody else, “then there was Petit
      Gaillard, who thought himself a pinch of snuff, and was truly distressed
      because he could not take himself between his own finger and thumb.”
    

      “And then there was Jules Desoulieres, who was a very singular
      genius, indeed, and went mad with the idea that he was a pumpkin. He
      persecuted the cook to make him up into pies—a thing which the cook
      indignantly refused to do. For my part, I am by no means sure that a
      pumpkin pie a la Desoulieres would not have been very capital eating
      indeed!”
    

      “You astonish me!” said I; and I looked inquisitively at
      Monsieur Maillard.
    

      “Ha! ha! ha!” said that gentleman—“he! he! he!—hi!
      hi! hi!—ho! ho! ho!—hu! hu! hu! hu!—very good indeed!
      You must not be astonished, mon ami; our friend here is a wit—a
      drole—you must not understand him to the letter.”
    

      “And then,” said some other one of the party,—“then
      there was Bouffon Le Grand—another extraordinary personage in his
      way. He grew deranged through love, and fancied himself possessed of two
      heads. One of these he maintained to be the head of Cicero; the other he
      imagined a composite one, being Demosthenes’ from the top of the
      forehead to the mouth, and Lord Brougham’s from the mouth to the
      chin. It is not impossible that he was wrong; but he would have convinced
      you of his being in the right; for he was a man of great eloquence. He had
      an absolute passion for oratory, and could not refrain from display. For
      example, he used to leap upon the dinner-table thus, and—and-”
    

      Here a friend, at the side of the speaker, put a hand upon his shoulder
      and whispered a few words in his ear, upon which he ceased talking with
      great suddenness, and sank back within his chair.
    

      “And then,” said the friend who had whispered, “there
      was Boullard, the tee-totum. I call him the tee-totum because, in fact, he
      was seized with the droll but not altogether irrational crotchet, that he
      had been converted into a tee-totum. You would have roared with laughter
      to see him spin. He would turn round upon one heel by the hour, in this
      manner—so—”
    

      Here the friend whom he had just interrupted by a whisper, performed an
      exactly similar office for himself.
    

      “But then,” cried the old lady, at the top of her voice,
      “your Monsieur Boullard was a madman, and a very silly madman at
      best; for who, allow me to ask you, ever heard of a human tee-totum? The
      thing is absurd. Madame Joyeuse was a more sensible person, as you know.
      She had a crotchet, but it was instinct with common sense, and gave
      pleasure to all who had the honor of her acquaintance. She found, upon
      mature deliberation, that, by some accident, she had been turned into a
      chicken-cock; but, as such, she behaved with propriety. She flapped her
      wings with prodigious effect—so—so—and, as for her crow,
      it was delicious!
    

      Cock-a-doodle-doo!—cock-a-doodle-doo!—cock-a-doodle-de-doo
      dooo-do-o-o-o-o-o-o!”
    

      “Madame Joyeuse, I will thank you to behave yourself!” here
      interrupted our host, very angrily. “You can either conduct yourself
      as a lady should do, or you can quit the table forthwith-take your choice.”
    

      The lady (whom I was much astonished to hear addressed as Madame Joyeuse,
      after the description of Madame Joyeuse she had just given) blushed up to
      the eyebrows, and seemed exceedingly abashed at the reproof. She hung down
      her head, and said not a syllable in reply. But another and younger lady
      resumed the theme. It was my beautiful girl of the little parlor.
    

      “Oh, Madame Joyeuse was a fool!” she exclaimed, “but
      there was really much sound sense, after all, in the opinion of Eugenie
      Salsafette. She was a very beautiful and painfully modest young lady, who
      thought the ordinary mode of habiliment indecent, and wished to dress
      herself, always, by getting outside instead of inside of her clothes. It
      is a thing very easily done, after all. You have only to do so—and
      then so—so—so—and then so—so—so—and
      then so—so—and then—
    

      “Mon dieu! Ma’m’selle Salsafette!” here cried a
      dozen voices at once. “What are you about?—forbear!—that
      is sufficient!—we see, very plainly, how it is done!—hold!
      hold!” and several persons were already leaping from their seats to
      withhold Ma’m’selle Salsafette from putting herself upon a par
      with the Medicean Venus, when the point was very effectually and suddenly
      accomplished by a series of loud screams, or yells, from some portion of
      the main body of the chateau.
    

      My nerves were very much affected, indeed, by these yells; but the rest of
      the company I really pitied. I never saw any set of reasonable people so
      thoroughly frightened in my life. They all grew as pale as so many
      corpses, and, shrinking within their seats, sat quivering and gibbering
      with terror, and listening for a repetition of the sound. It came again—louder
      and seemingly nearer—and then a third time very loud, and then a
      fourth time with a vigor evidently diminished. At this apparent dying away
      of the noise, the spirits of the company were immediately regained, and
      all was life and anecdote as before. I now ventured to inquire the cause
      of the disturbance.
    

      “A mere bagtelle,” said Monsieur Maillard. “We are used
      to these things, and care really very little about them. The lunatics,
      every now and then, get up a howl in concert; one starting another, as is
      sometimes the case with a bevy of dogs at night. It occasionally happens,
      however, that the concerto yells are succeeded by a simultaneous effort at
      breaking loose, when, of course, some little danger is to be apprehended.”
    

      “And how many have you in charge?”
    

      “At present we have not more than ten, altogether.”
    

      “Principally females, I presume?”
    

      “Oh, no—every one of them men, and stout fellows, too, I can
      tell you.”
    

      “Indeed! I have always understood that the majority of lunatics were
      of the gentler sex.”
    

      “It is generally so, but not always. Some time ago, there were about
      twenty-seven patients here; and, of that number, no less than eighteen
      were women; but, lately, matters have changed very much, as you see.”
    

      “Yes—have changed very much, as you see,” here
      interrupted the gentleman who had broken the shins of Ma’m’selle
      Laplace.
    

      “Yes—have changed very much, as you see!” chimed in the
      whole company at once.
    

      “Hold your tongues, every one of you!” said my host, in a
      great rage. Whereupon the whole company maintained a dead silence for
      nearly a minute. As for one lady, she obeyed Monsieur Maillard to the
      letter, and thrusting out her tongue, which was an excessively long one,
      held it very resignedly, with both hands, until the end of the
      entertainment.
    

      “And this gentlewoman,” said I, to Monsieur Maillard, bending
      over and addressing him in a whisper—“this good lady who has
      just spoken, and who gives us the cock-a-doodle-de-doo—she, I
      presume, is harmless—quite harmless, eh?”
    

      “Harmless!” ejaculated he, in unfeigned surprise, “why—why,
      what can you mean?”
    

      “Only slightly touched?” said I, touching my head. “I
      take it for granted that she is not particularly not dangerously affected,
      eh?”
    

      “Mon dieu! what is it you imagine? This lady, my particular old
      friend Madame Joyeuse, is as absolutely sane as myself. She has her little
      eccentricities, to be sure—but then, you know, all old women—all
      very old women—are more or less eccentric!”
    

      “To be sure,” said I,—“to be sure—and then
      the rest of these ladies and gentlemen-”
    

      “Are my friends and keepers,” interupted Monsieur Maillard,
      drawing himself up with hauteur,—“my very good friends and
      assistants.”
    

      “What! all of them?” I asked,—“the women and all?”
    

      “Assuredly,” he said,—“we could not do at all
      without the women; they are the best lunatic nurses in the world; they
      have a way of their own, you know; their bright eyes have a marvellous
      effect;—something like the fascination of the snake, you know.”
    

      “To be sure,” said I,—“to be sure! They behave a
      little odd, eh?—they are a little queer, eh?—don’t you
      think so?”
    

      “Odd!—queer!—why, do you really think so? We are not
      very prudish, to be sure, here in the South—do pretty much as we
      please—enjoy life, and all that sort of thing, you know-”
    

      “To be sure,” said I,—“to be sure.”
    

      “And then, perhaps, this Clos de Vougeot is a little heady, you know—a
      little strong—you understand, eh?”
    

      “To be sure,” said I,—“to be sure. By the bye,
      Monsieur, did I understand you to say that the system you have adopted, in
      place of the celebrated soothing system, was one of very rigorous
      severity?”
    

      “By no means. Our confinement is necessarily close; but the
      treatment—the medical treatment, I mean—is rather agreeable to
      the patients than otherwise.”
    

      “And the new system is one of your own invention?”
    

      “Not altogether. Some portions of it are referable to Professor
      Tarr, of whom you have, necessarily, heard; and, again, there are
      modifications in my plan which I am happy to acknowledge as belonging of
      right to the celebrated Fether, with whom, if I mistake not, you have the
      honor of an intimate acquaintance.”
    

      “I am quite ashamed to confess,” I replied, “that I have
      never even heard the names of either gentleman before.”
    

      “Good heavens!” ejaculated my host, drawing back his chair
      abruptly, and uplifting his hands. “I surely do not hear you aright!
      You did not intend to say, eh? that you had never heard either of the
      learned Doctor Tarr, or of the celebrated Professor Fether?”
    

      “I am forced to acknowledge my ignorance,” I replied; “but
      the truth should be held inviolate above all things. Nevertheless, I feel
      humbled to the dust, not to be acquainted with the works of these, no
      doubt, extraordinary men. I will seek out their writings forthwith, and
      peruse them with deliberate care. Monsieur Maillard, you have really—I
      must confess it—you have really—made me ashamed of myself!”
    

      And this was the fact.
    

      “Say no more, my good young friend,” he said kindly, pressing
      my hand,—“join me now in a glass of Sauterne.”
    

      We drank. The company followed our example without stint. They chatted—they
      jested—they laughed—they perpetrated a thousand absurdities—the
      fiddles shrieked—the drum row-de-dowed—the trombones bellowed
      like so many brazen bulls of Phalaris—and the whole scene, growing
      gradually worse and worse, as the wines gained the ascendancy, became at
      length a sort of pandemonium in petto. In the meantime, Monsieur Maillard
      and myself, with some bottles of Sauterne and Vougeot between us,
      continued our conversation at the top of the voice. A word spoken in an
      ordinary key stood no more chance of being heard than the voice of a fish
      from the bottom of Niagara Falls.
    

      “And, sir,” said I, screaming in his ear, “you mentioned
      something before dinner about the danger incurred in the old system of
      soothing. How is that?”
    

      “Yes,” he replied, “there was, occasionally, very great
      danger indeed. There is no accounting for the caprices of madmen; and, in
      my opinion as well as in that of Dr. Tarr and Professor Fether, it is
      never safe to permit them to run at large unattended. A lunatic may be
      ‘soothed,’ as it is called, for a time, but, in the end, he is
      very apt to become obstreperous. His cunning, too, is proverbial and
      great. If he has a project in view, he conceals his design with a
      marvellous wisdom; and the dexterity with which he counterfeits sanity,
      presents, to the metaphysician, one of the most singular problems in the
      study of mind. When a madman appears thoroughly sane, indeed, it is high
      time to put him in a straitjacket.”
    

      “But the danger, my dear sir, of which you were speaking, in your
      own experience—during your control of this house—have you had
      practical reason to think liberty hazardous in the case of a lunatic?”
    

      “Here?—in my own experience?—why, I may say, yes. For
      example:—no very long while ago, a singular circumstance occurred in
      this very house. The ‘soothing system,’ you know, was then in
      operation, and the patients were at large. They behaved remarkably
      well-especially so, any one of sense might have known that some devilish
      scheme was brewing from that particular fact, that the fellows behaved so
      remarkably well. And, sure enough, one fine morning the keepers found
      themselves pinioned hand and foot, and thrown into the cells, where they
      were attended, as if they were the lunatics, by the lunatics themselves,
      who had usurped the offices of the keepers.”
    

      “You don’t tell me so! I never heard of any thing so absurd in
      my life!”
    

      “Fact—it all came to pass by means of a stupid fellow—a
      lunatic—who, by some means, had taken it into his head that he had
      invented a better system of government than any ever heard of before—of
      lunatic government, I mean. He wished to give his invention a trial, I
      suppose, and so he persuaded the rest of the patients to join him in a
      conspiracy for the overthrow of the reigning powers.”
    

      “And he really succeeded?”
    

      “No doubt of it. The keepers and kept were soon made to exchange
      places. Not that exactly either—for the madmen had been free, but
      the keepers were shut up in cells forthwith, and treated, I am sorry to
      say, in a very cavalier manner.”
    

      “But I presume a counter-revolution was soon effected. This
      condition of things could not have long existed. The country people in the
      neighborhood-visitors coming to see the establishment—would have
      given the alarm.”
    

      “There you are out. The head rebel was too cunning for that. He
      admitted no visitors at all—with the exception, one day, of a very
      stupid-looking young gentleman of whom he had no reason to be afraid. He
      let him in to see the place—just by way of variety,—to have a
      little fun with him. As soon as he had gammoned him sufficiently, he let
      him out, and sent him about his business.”
    

      “And how long, then, did the madmen reign?”
    

      “Oh, a very long time, indeed—a month certainly—how much
      longer I can’t precisely say. In the meantime, the lunatics had a
      jolly season of it—that you may swear. They doffed their own shabby
      clothes, and made free with the family wardrobe and jewels. The cellars of
      the chateau were well stocked with wine; and these madmen are just the
      devils that know how to drink it. They lived well, I can tell you.”
    

      “And the treatment—what was the particular species of
      treatment which the leader of the rebels put into operation?”
    

      “Why, as for that, a madman is not necessarily a fool, as I have
      already observed; and it is my honest opinion that his treatment was a
      much better treatment than that which it superseded. It was a very capital
      system indeed—simple—neat—no trouble at all—in
      fact it was delicious it was.”
    

      Here my host’s observations were cut short by another series of
      yells, of the same character as those which had previously disconcerted
      us. This time, however, they seemed to proceed from persons rapidly
      approaching.
    

      “Gracious heavens!” I ejaculated—“the lunatics
      have most undoubtedly broken loose.”
    

      “I very much fear it is so,” replied Monsieur Maillard, now
      becoming excessively pale. He had scarcely finished the sentence, before
      loud shouts and imprecations were heard beneath the windows; and,
      immediately afterward, it became evident that some persons outside were
      endeavoring to gain entrance into the room. The door was beaten with what
      appeared to be a sledge-hammer, and the shutters were wrenched and shaken
      with prodigious violence.
    

      A scene of the most terrible confusion ensued. Monsieur Maillard, to my
      excessive astonishment threw himself under the side-board. I had expected
      more resolution at his hands. The members of the orchestra, who, for the
      last fifteen minutes, had been seemingly too much intoxicated to do duty,
      now sprang all at once to their feet and to their instruments, and,
      scrambling upon their table, broke out, with one accord, into, “Yankee
      Doodle,” which they performed, if not exactly in tune, at least with
      an energy superhuman, during the whole of the uproar.
    

      Meantime, upon the main dining-table, among the bottles and glasses,
      leaped the gentleman who, with such difficulty, had been restrained from
      leaping there before. As soon as he fairly settled himself, he commenced
      an oration, which, no doubt, was a very capital one, if it could only have
      been heard. At the same moment, the man with the teetotum predilection,
      set himself to spinning around the apartment, with immense energy, and
      with arms outstretched at right angles with his body; so that he had all
      the air of a tee-totum in fact, and knocked everybody down that happened
      to get in his way. And now, too, hearing an incredible popping and fizzing
      of champagne, I discovered at length, that it proceeded from the person
      who performed the bottle of that delicate drink during dinner. And then,
      again, the frog-man croaked away as if the salvation of his soul depended
      upon every note that he uttered. And, in the midst of all this, the
      continuous braying of a donkey arose over all. As for my old friend,
      Madame Joyeuse, I really could have wept for the poor lady, she appeared
      so terribly perplexed. All she did, however, was to stand up in a corner,
      by the fireplace, and sing out incessantly at the top of her voice,
      “Cock-a-doodle-de-dooooooh!”
    

      And now came the climax—the catastrophe of the drama. As no
      resistance, beyond whooping and yelling and cock-a-doodling, was offered
      to the encroachments of the party without, the ten windows were very
      speedily, and almost simultaneously, broken in. But I shall never forget
      the emotions of wonder and horror with which I gazed, when, leaping
      through these windows, and down among us pele-mele, fighting, stamping,
      scratching, and howling, there rushed a perfect army of what I took to be
      Chimpanzees, Ourang-Outangs, or big black baboons of the Cape of Good
      Hope.
    

      I received a terrible beating—after which I rolled under a sofa and
      lay still. After lying there some fifteen minutes, during which time I
      listened with all my ears to what was going on in the room, I came to same
      satisfactory denouement of this tragedy. Monsieur Maillard, it appeared,
      in giving me the account of the lunatic who had excited his fellows to
      rebellion, had been merely relating his own exploits. This gentleman had,
      indeed, some two or three years before, been the superintendent of the
      establishment, but grew crazy himself, and so became a patient. This fact
      was unknown to the travelling companion who introduced me. The keepers,
      ten in number, having been suddenly overpowered, were first well tarred,
      then—carefully feathered, and then shut up in underground cells.
      They had been so imprisoned for more than a month, during which period
      Monsieur Maillard had generously allowed them not only the tar and
      feathers (which constituted his “system”), but some bread and
      abundance of water. The latter was pumped on them daily. At length, one
      escaping through a sewer, gave freedom to all the rest.
    

      The “soothing system,” with important modifications, has been
      resumed at the chateau; yet I cannot help agreeing with Monsieur Maillard,
      that his own “treatment” was a very capital one of its kind.
      As he justly observed, it was “simple—neat—and gave no
      trouble at all—not the least.”
    

      I have only to add that, although I have searched every library in Europe
      for the works of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether, I have, up to the
      present day, utterly failed in my endeavors at procuring an edition.
    







      THE LITERARY LIFE OF  THINGUM BOB, ESQ.
    

      LATE EDITOR OF THE “GOOSETHERUMFOODLE.”
    

      By Himself
    

 


      I AM now growing in years, and—since I understand that Shakespeare
      and Mr. Emmons are deceased—it is not impossible that I may even
      die. It has occurred to me, therefore, that I may as well retire from the
      field of Letters and repose upon my laurels. But I am ambitious of
      signalizing my abdication of the literary sceptre by some important
      bequest to posterity; and, perhaps, I cannot do a better thing than just
      pen for it an account of my earlier career. My name, indeed, has been so
      long and so constantly before the public eye, that I am not only willing
      to admit the naturalness of the interest which it has everywhere excited,
      but ready to satisfy the extreme curiosity which it has inspired. In fact,
      it is no more than the duty of him who achieves greatness to leave behind
      him, in his ascent, such landmarks as may guide others to be great. I
      propose, therefore, in the present paper, (which I had some idea of
      calling “Memoranda to serve for the Literary History of America,”)
      to give a detail of those important, yet feeble and tottering first steps,
      by which, at length, I attained the high road to the pinnacle of human
      renown.
    

      Of one’s very remote ancestors it is superfluous to say much. My
      father, Thomas Bob, Esq., stood for many years at the summit of his
      profession, which was that of a merchant-barber, in the city of Smug. His
      warehouse was the resort of all the principal people of the place, and
      especially of the editorial corps—a body which inspires all about it
      with profound veneration and awe. For my own part, I regarded them as
      gods, and drank in with avidity the rich wit and wisdom which continuously
      flowed from their august mouths during the process of what is styled
      “lather.” My first moment of positive inspiration must be
      dated from that ever-memorable epoch, when the brilliant conductor of the
      “Gad-Fly,” in the intervals of the important process just
      mentioned, recited aloud, before a conclave of our apprentices, an
      inimitable poem in honor of the “Only Genuine Oil-of-Bob,” (so
      called from its talented inventor, my father,) and for which effusion the
      editor of the “Fly” was remunerated with a regal liberality by
      the firm of Thomas Bob and company, merchant-barbers.
    

      The genius of the stanzas to the “Oil-of-Bob” first breathed
      into me, I say, the divine afflatus. I resolved at once to become a
      great man and to commence by becoming a great poet. That very evening I
      fell upon my knees at the feet of my father.
    

      “Father,” I said, “pardon me!—but I have a soul
      above lather. It is my firm intention to cut the shop. I would be an
      editor—I would be a poet—I would pen stanzas to the ‘Oil-of-Bob.’
      Pardon me and aid me to be great!”
    

      “My dear Thingum,” replied my father, (I had been christened
      Thingum after a wealthy relative so surnamed,) “My dear Thingum,”
      he said, raising me from my knees by the ears—“Thingum, my
      boy, you’re a trump, and take after your father in having a soul.
      You have an immense head, too, and it must hold a great many brains. This
      I have long seen, and therefore had thoughts of making you a lawyer. The
      business, however, has grown ungenteel, and that of a politician don’t
      pay. Upon the whole you judge wisely;—the trade of editor is best:—and
      if you can be a poet at the same time,—as most of the editors are,
      by the by,—why you will kill two birds with one stone. To encourage
      you in the beginning of things, I will allow you a garret; pen, ink and
      paper; a rhyming dictionary; and a copy of the ‘Gad-Fly.’ I
      suppose you would scarcely demand any more.”
    

      “I would be an ungrateful villain if I did,” I replied with
      enthusiasm. “Your generosity is boundless. I will repay it by making
      you the father of a genius.”
    

      Thus ended my conference with the best of men, and immediately upon its
      termination, I betook myself with zeal to my poetical labors; as upon
      these, chiefly, I founded my hopes of ultimate elevation to the editorial
      chair.
    

      In my first attempts at composition I found the stanzas to “The
      Oil-of-Bob” rather a draw-back than otherwise. Their splendor more
      dazzled than enlightened me. The contemplation of their excellence tended,
      naturally, to discourage me by comparison with my own abortions; so that
      for a long time I labored in vain. At length there came into my head one
      of those exquisitely original ideas which now and then will
      permeate the brain of a man of genius. It was this:—or, rather, thus
      was it carried into execution. From the rubbish of an old book-stall, in a
      very remote corner of the town, I got together several antique and
      altogether unknown or forgotten volumes. The bookseller sold them to me
      for a song. From one of these, which purported to be a translation of one
      Dante’s “Inferno,” I copied with remarkable neatness a
      long passage about a man named Ugolino, who had a parcel of brats. From
      another which contained a good many old plays by some person whose name I
      forget, I extracted in the same manner, and with the same care, a great
      number of lines about “angels” and “ministers saying
      grace,” and “goblins damned,” and more besides of that
      sort. From a third, which was the composition of some blind man or other,
      either a Greek or a Choctaw—I cannot be at the pains of remembering
      every trifle exactly—I took about fifty verses beginning with
      “Achilles’ wrath,” and “grease,” and
      something else. From a fourth, which I recollect was also the work of a
      blind man, I selected a page or two all about “hail” and
      “holy light”; and although a blind man has no business to
      write about light, still the verses were sufficiently good in their way.
    

      Having made fair copies of these poems’ I signed every one of them
      “Oppodeldoc,” (a fine sonorous name,) and, doing each up
      nicely in a separate envelope, I despatched one to each of the four
      principal Magazines, with a request for speedy insertion and prompt pay.
      The result of this well conceived plan, however, (the success of which
      would have saved me much trouble in after life,) served to convince me
      that some editors are not to be bamboozled, and gave the coup-de-grace
      (as they say in France,) to my nascent hopes, (as they say in the city of
      the transcendentals.)
    

      The fact is, that each and every one of the Magazines in question, gave
      Mr. “Oppodeldoc” a complete using-up, in the “Monthly
      Notices to Correspondents.” The “Hum-Drum” gave him a
      dressing after this fashion:
    

      “‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he is,) has sent us a long tirade
      concerning a bedlamite whom he styles ‘Ugolino,’ who had a
      great many children that should have been all whipped and sent to bed
      without their suppers. The whole affair is exceedingly tame—not to
      say flat. ‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he is,) is entirely
      devoid of imagination—and imagination, in our humble opinion, is not
      only the soul of Poesy, but also its very heart. ‘Oppodeldoc,’
      (whoever he is,) has the audacity to demand of us, for his twattle, a
      ‘speedy insertion and prompt pay.’ We neither insert nor
      purchase any stuff of the sort. There can be no doubt, however, that he
      would meet with a ready sale for all the balderdash he can scribble, at
      the office of either the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ the ‘Lollipop,’
      or the ‘Goosetherumfoodle.’”
    

      All this, it must be acknowledged, was very severe upon “Oppodeldoc”—but
      the unkindest cut was putting the word Poesy in small caps. In those five
      pre-eminent letters what a world of bitterness is there not involved!
    

      But “Oppodeldoc” was punished with equal severity in the
      “Rowdy-Dow,” which spoke thus:
    

      “We have received a most singular and insolent communication from a
      person (whoever he is,) signing himself ‘Oppodeldoc’—thus
      desecrating the greatness of the illustrious Roman Emperor so named.
      Accompanying the letter of ‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he is,) we
      find sundry lines of most disgusting and unmeaning rant about ‘angels
      and ministers of grace’—rant such as no madman short of a Nat
      Lee, or an ‘Oppodeldoc,’ could possibly perpetrate. And for
      this trash of trash, we are modestly requested to ‘pay promptly.’
      No sir—no! We pay for nothing of that sort. Apply to the
      ‘Hum-Drum,’ the ‘Lollipop,’ or the ‘Goosetherumfoodle.’
      These periodicals will undoubtedly accept any literary offal you
      may send them—and as undoubtedly promise to pay for it.”
    

      This was bitter indeed upon poor “Oppodeldoc”; but, in this
      instance, the weight of the satire falls upon the “Humdrum,”
      the “Lollipop,” and the “Goosetherumfoodle,” who
      are pungently styled “periodicals”—in Italics,
      too—a thing that must have cut them to the heart.
    

      Scarcely less savage was the “Lollipop,” which thus
      discoursed:
    

      “Some individual, who rejoices in the appellation ‘Oppodeldoc,’
      (to what low uses are the names of the illustrious dead too often
      applied!) has enclosed us some fifty or sixty verses commencing
      after this fashion:
    




      Achilles’ wrath, to Greece the direful spring
    

      Of woes unnumbered, &c., &c., &c., &c.
    




      “‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he is,) is respectfully informed
      that there is not a printer’s devil in our office who is not in the
      daily habit of composing better lines. Those of ‘Oppodeldoc’
      will not scan. ‘Oppodeldoc’ should learn to count.
      But why he should have conceived the idea that we, (of all others,
      we!) would disgrace our pages with his ineffable nonsense, is
      utterly beyond comprehension. Why, the absurd twattle is scarcely good
      enough for the ‘Hum-Drum,’ the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ the
      ‘Goosetherumfoodle’—things that are in the practice of
      publishing ‘Mother Goose’s Melodies’ as original lyrics.
      And ‘Oppodeldoc’ (whoever he is,) has even the assurance to
      demand pay for this drivel. Does ‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever
      he is,) know—is he aware that we could not be paid to insert it?”
    

      As I perused this I felt myself growing gradually smaller and smaller, and
      when I came to the point at which the editor sneered at the poem as
      “verses” there was little more than an ounce of me left. As
      for “Oppodeldoc,” I began to experience compassion for
      the poor fellow. But the “Goosetherumfoodle” showed, if
      possible, less mercy than the “Lollipop.” It was the “Goosetherumfoodle”
      that said:
    

      “A wretched poetaster, who signs himself ‘Oppodeldoc,’
      is silly enough to fancy that we will print and pay for a
      medley of incoherent and ungrammatical bombast which he has transmitted to
      us, and which commences with the following most intelligible line:
    




      ‘Hail, Holy Light! Offspring of Heaven, first born.’
    




      “We say, ‘most intelligible’ ‘Oppodeldoc,’
      (whoever he is,) will be kind enough to tell us, perhaps, how ‘hail’
      can be ‘holy light’ We always regarded it as frozen
      rain. Will he inform us, also, how frozen rain can be, at one and the
      same time, both ‘holy light,’ (whatever that is,) and an
      ‘offspring?’—which latter term, (if we understand any
      thing about English,) is only employed, with propriety, in reference to
      small babies of about six weeks old. But it is preposterous to descant
      upon such absurdity—although ‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he
      is,) has the unparalleled effrontery to suppose that we will not only
      ‘insert’ his ignorant ravings, but (absolutely) pay for
      them!


      “Now this is fine—it is rich!—and we have half a mind to
      punish this young scribbler for his egotism, by really publishing his
      effusion, verbatim et literatim, as he has written it. We could
      inflict no punishment so severe, and we would inflict it, but for
      the boredom which we should cause our readers in so doing.
    

      “Let ‘Oppodeldoc,’ (whoever he is,) send any future composition
      of like character to the ‘Hum-Drum,’ the ‘Lollipop,’
      or the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ They will ‘insert’ it.
      They ‘insert’ every month just such stuff. Send it to
      them. WE are not to be insulted with impunity.”
    

      This made an end of me; and as for the “HumDrum,” the “Rowdy-Dow,”
      and the “Lollipop,” I never could comprehend how they survived
      it. The putting them in the smallest possible minion, (that
      was the rub—thereby insinuating their lowness—their baseness,)
      while WE stood looking down upon them in gigantic capitals!—oh it
      was too bitter!—it was wormwood—it was gall. Had I been
      either of these periodicals I would have spared no pains to have the
      “Goosetherumfoodle” prosecuted. It might have been done under
      the Act for the “Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.” As for
      “Oppodeldoc,” (whoever he was), I had by this time lost all
      patience with the fellow, and sympathized with him no longer. He was a
      fool, beyond doubt, (whoever he was,) and got not a kick more than he
      deserved.
    

      The result of my experiment with the old books, convinced me, in the first
      place, that “honesty is the best policy,” and, in the second,
      that if I could not write better than Mr. Dante, and the two blind men,
      and the rest of the old set, it would, at least, be a difficult matter to
      write worse. I took heart, therefore, and determined to prosecute the
      “entirely original,” (as they say on the covers of the
      magazines,) at whatever cost of study and pains. I again placed before my
      eyes, as a model, the brilliant stanzas on “The Oil-of-Bob” by
      the editor of the “Gad-Fly,” and resolved to construct an Ode
      on the same sublime theme, in rivalry of what had already been done.
    

      With my first verse I had no material difficulty. It ran thus: “To
      pen an Ode upon the ‘Oil-of-Bob.’”
    

      Having carefully looked out, however, all the legitimate rhymes to “Bob,”
      I found it impossible to proceed. In this dilemma I had recourse to
      paternal aid; and, after some hours of mature thought, my father and
      myself thus constructed the poem:
    




“To pen an Ode upon the “Oil-of-Bob”


      Is all sorts of a job.
    

      (Signed.) Snob.
    




      To be sure, this composition was of no very great length—but I
      “have yet to learn” as they say in the Edinburgh Review, that
      the mere extent of a literary work has any thing to do with its merit. As
      for the Quarterly cant about “sustained effort,” it is
      impossible to see the sense of it. Upon the whole, therefore, I was
      satisfied with the success of my maiden attempt, and now the only question
      regarded the disposal I should make of it. My father suggested that I
      should send it to the “Gad-Fly”—but there were two
      reasons which operated to prevent me from so doing. I dreaded the jealousy
      of the editor—and I had ascertained that he did not pay for original
      contributions. I therefore, after due deliberation, consigned the article
      to the more dignified pages of the “Lollipop,” and awaited the
      event in anxiety, but with resignation.
    

      In the very next published number I had the proud satisfaction of seeing
      my poem printed at length, as the leading article, with the following
      significant words, prefixed in italics and between brackets:
    

We call the attention of our readers to the subjoined admirable stanza
      on “The Oil of Bob.” We need say nothing of their sublimity,
      or their pathos:—it is impossible to peruse them without tears.
      Those who have been nauseated with a sad dose on the same august topic
      from the goose quill of the editor of the “Gad Fly” will do
      well to compare the two compositions.


      P. S. We are consumed with anxiety to probe the mystery which envelops the
      evident pseudonym “Snob.” May we hope for a personal
      interview?
    

      All this was scarcely more than justice, but it was, I confess, rather
      more than I had expected:—I acknowledged this, be it observed, to
      the everlasting disgrace of my country and of mankind. I lost no time,
      however, in calling upon the editor of the “Lollipop,” and had
      the good fortune to find this gentleman at home. He saluted me with an air
      of profound respect, slightly blended with a fatherly and patronizing
      admiration, wrought in him, no doubt, by my appearance of extreme youth
      and inexperience. Begging me to be seated, he entered at once upon the
      subject of my poem;—but modesty will ever forbid me to repeat the
      thousand compliments which he lavished upon me. The eulogies of Mr. Crab,
      (such was the editor’s name,) were, however, by no means fulsomely
      indiscriminate. He analyzed my composition with much freedom and great
      ability—not hesitating to point out a few trivial defects—a
      circumstance which elevated him highly in my esteem. The “Gad-Fly”
      was, of course, brought upon the tapis, and I hope never to be
      subjected to a criticism so searching, or to rebukes so withering, as were
      bestowed by Mr. Crab upon that unhappy effusion. I had been accustomed to
      regard the editor of the “Gad-Fly” as something superhuman;
      but Mr. Crab soon disabused me of that idea. He set the literary as well
      as the personal character of the Fly (so Mr. C. satirically designated the
      rival editor,) in its true light. He, the Fly, was very little better than
      he should be. He had written infamous things. He was a penny-a-liner, and
      a buffoon. He was a villain. He had composed a tragedy which set the whole
      country in a guffaw, and a farce which deluged the universe in tears.
      Besides all this, he had the impudence to pen what he meant for a lampoon
      upon himself, (Mr. Crab,) and the temerity to style him “an ass.”
      Should I at any time wish to express my opinion of Mr. Fry, the pages of
      the “Lollipop,” Mr. Crab assured me, were at my unlimited
      disposal. In the meantime, as it was very certain that I would be attacked
      in the Fly for my attempt at composing a rival poem on the “Oil-of-Bob,”
      he (Mr. Crab,) would take it upon himself to attend, pointedly, to my
      private and personal interests. If I were not made a man of at once, it
      should not be the fault of himself, (Mr. Crab.)
    

      Mr. Crab having now paused in his discourse, (the latter portion of which
      I found it impossible to comprehend,) I ventured to suggest something
      about the remuneration which I had been taught to expect for my poem, by
      an announcement on the cover of the “Lollipop,” declaring that
      it, (the “Lollipop,”) “insisted upon being permitted to
      pay exorbitant prices for all accepted contributions;—frequently
      expending more money for a single brief poem than the whole annual cost of
      the ‘HumDrum,’ the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ and the ‘Goosetherumfoodle’
      combined.”
    

      As I mentioned the word “remuneration,” Mr. Crab first opened
      his eyes, and then his mouth, to quite a remarkable extent; causing his
      personal appearance to resemble that of a highly-agitated elderly duck in
      the act of quacking;—and in this condition he remained, (ever and
      anon pressing his hands tightly to his forehead, as if in a state of
      desperate bewilderment) until I had nearly made an end of what I had to
      say.
    

      Upon my conclusion, he sank back into his seat, as if much overcome,
      letting his arms fall lifelessly by his side, but keeping his mouth still
      rigorously open, after the fashion of the duck. While I remained in
      speechless astonishment at behavior so alarming, he suddenly leaped to his
      feet and made a rush at the bell-rope; but just as he reached this, he
      appeared to have altered his intention, whatever it was, for he dived
      under a table and immediately re-appeared with a cudgel. This he was in
      the act of uplifting, (for what purpose I am at a loss to imagine,) when,
      all at once, there came a benign smile over his features, and he sank
      placidly back in his chair.
    

      “Mr. Bob,” he said, (for I had sent up my card before
      ascending myself,) “Mr. Bob, you are a young man, I presume—very?”
    

      I assented; adding that I had not yet concluded my third lustrum.
    

      “Ah!” he replied, “very good! I see how it is—say
      no more! Touching this matter of compensation, what you observe is very
      just: in fact it is excessively so. But ah—ah—the first
      contribution—the first, I say,—it is never the Magazine
      custom to pay for—you comprehend, eh? The truth is, we are usually
      the recipients in such case.” [Mr. Crab smiled blandly as he
      emphasized the word “recipients.”] “For the most part,
      we are paid for the insertion of a maiden attempt—especially
      in verse. In the second place, Mr. Bob, the Magazine rule is never to
      disburse what we term in France the argent comptant—I have no
      doubt you understand. In a quarter or two after publication of the article—or
      in a year or two—we make no objection to giving our note at nine
      months:—provided always that we can so arrange our affairs as to be
      quite certain of a ‘burst up’ in six. I really do hope,
      Mr. Bob, that you will look upon this explanation as satisfactory.”
      Here Mr. Crab concluded, and the tears stood in his eyes.
    

      Grieved to the soul at having been, however innocently, the cause of pain
      to so eminent and so sensitive a man, I hastened to apologize, and to
      reassure him, by expressing my perfect coincidence with his views, as well
      as my entire appreciation of the delicacy of his position. Having done all
      this in a neat speech, I took leave.
    

      One fine morning, very shortly afterwards, “I awoke and found myself
      famous.” The extent of my renown will be best estimated by reference
      to the editorial opinions of the day. These opinions, it will be seen,
      were embodied in critical notices of the number of the “Lollipop”
      containing my poem, and are perfectly satisfactory, conclusive and clear
      with the exception, perhaps, of the hieroglyphical marks, “Sep.
      15—1 t.” appended to each of the critiques.
    

      The “Owl,” a journal of profound sagacity, and well known for
      the deliberate gravity of its literary decisions—the “Owl,”
      I say, spoke as follows:
    

“‘The Lollipop!’ The October number of this delicious
      Magazine surpasses its predecessors, and sets competition at defiance. In
      the beauty of its typography and paper—in the number and excellence
      of its steel plates—as well as in the literary merit of its
      contributions—the ‘Lollipop’ compares with its
      slow-paced rivals as Hyperion with a Satyr. The ‘Hum-Drum,’
      the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ and the ‘Goosetherumfoodle,’
      excel, it is true, in braggadocio, but, in all other points, give us the
      ‘Lollipop!’ How this celebrated journal can sustain its
      evidently tremendous expenses, is more than we can understand. To be sure,
      it has a circulation of 100,000, and its subscription-list has increased
      one-fourth during the last month; but, on the other hand, the sums it
      disburses constantly for contributions are inconceivable. It is reported
      that Mr. Slyass received no less than thirty-seven and a half cents for
      his inimitable paper on ‘Pigs.’ With Mr. Crab, as editor, and
      with such names upon the list of contributors as Snob and Slyass, there
      can be no such word as ‘fail’ for the Lollipop.’ Go and
      subscribe. Sep. 15—1 t.”


      I must say that I was gratified with this high-toned notice from a paper
      so respectable as the “Owl.” The placing my name—that is
      to say, my nom de guerre—in priority of station to that of
      the great Slyass, was a compliment as happy as I felt it to be deserved.
    

      My attention was next arrested by these paragraphs in the “Toad”—a
      print highly distinguished for its uprightness, and independence—for
      its entire freedom from sycophancy and subservience to the givers of
      dinners:
    

“The ‘Lollipop’ for October is out in advance of all
      its contemporaries, and infinitely surpasses them, of course, in the
      splendor of its embellishments, as well as in the richness of its literary
      contents. The ‘Hum-Drum,’ the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ and the
      ‘Goosetherumfoodle’ excel, we admit, in braggadocio, but, in
      all other points, give us the ‘Lollipop. How this celebrated
      Magazine can sustain its evidently tremendous expenses, is more than we
      can understand. To be sure, it has a circulation of 200,000, and its
      subscription list has increased one-third during the last fortnight, but
      on the other hand, the sums it disburses, monthly, for contributions, are
      fearfully great. We learn that Mr. Mumblethumb received no less than fifty
      cents for his late ‘Monody in a Mud-Puddle.’


      “Among the original contributors to the present number we notice,
      (besides the eminent editor, Mr. Crab,) such men as Snob, Slyass, and
      Mumblethumb. Apart from the editorial matter, the most valuable paper,
      nevertheless, is, we think, a poetical gem by ‘Snob, on the ‘Oil-of-Bob’—but
      our readers must not suppose from the title of this incomparable bijou,
      that it bears any similitude to some balderdash on the same subject by a
      certain contemptible individual whose name is unmentionable to ears
      polite. Thepresentpoem ‘On the Oil-of-Bob,’ has
      excited universal anxiety and curiosity in respect to the owner of the
      evident pseudonym, ‘Snob’—a curiosity which, happily, we
      have it in our power to satisfy. ‘Snob’ is the nom de plume of
      Mr. Thingum Bob, of this city,—a relative of the great Mr. Thingum,
      (after whom he is named,) and otherwise connected with the most
      illustrious families of the State. His father, Thomas Bob, Esq., is an
      opulent merchant in Smug.Sep. 15—1t.”


      This generous approbation touched me to the heart—the more
      especially as it emanated from a source so avowedly—so proverbially
      pure as the “Toad.” The word “balderdash,” as
      applied to the “Oil-of-Bob” of the Fly, I considered
      singularly pungent and appropriate. The words “gem” and
      “bijou,” however, used in reference to my composition,
      struck me as being, in some degree, feeble, and seemed to me to be
      deficient in force. They were not sufficiently prononc?s, (as we
      have it in France).
    

      I had hardly finished reading the “Toad,” when a friend placed
      in my hands a copy of the “Mole,” a daily, enjoying high
      reputation for the keenness of its perception about matters in general,
      and for the open, honest, above-ground style of its editorials. The
      “Mole” spoke of the “Lollipop” as follows:
    

“We have just received the ‘Lollipop’ for October,
      and must say that never before have we perused any single number of any
      periodical which afforded us a felicity so supreme. We speak advisedly.
      The ‘Hum-Drum,’ the ‘Rowdy-Dow’ and the ‘Goosetherumfoodle’
      must look well to their laurels. These prints, no doubt, surpass every
      thing in loudness of pretension, but, in all other points, give us the
      ‘Lollipop!’ How this celebrated Magazine can sustain its
      evidently tremendous expenses, is more than we can comprehend. To be sure,
      it has a circulation of 300,000 and its subscription-list has increased
      one-half within the last week, but then the sum it disburses, monthly, for
      contributions, is astoundingly enormous. We have it upon good authority,
      that Mr. Fatquack received no less than sixty-two cents and a half for his
      late Domestic Nouvelette, the ‘Dish-Clout.’


      “The contributors to the number before us are Mr. Crab, (the eminent
      editor,) Snob, Mumblethumb, Fatquack, and others; but, after the
      inimitable compositions of the editor himself, we prefer a diamond-like
      effusion from the pen of a rising poet who writes over the signature
      ‘Snob’—a nom de guerre which we predict will one day
      extinguish the radiance of ‘Boz.’ ‘Snob,’ we
      learn, is a Mr. Thingum Bob, Esq., sole heir of a wealthy merchant of this
      city, Thomas Bob, Esq., and a near relative of the distinguished Mr.
      Thingum. The title of Mr. B.‘s admirable poem is the ‘Oil-of-Bob’—a
      somewhat unfortunate name, by-the-by, as some contemptible vagabond
      connected with the penny press has already disgusted the town with a great
      deal of drivel upon the same topic. There will be no danger, however, of
      confounding the compositions. Sep. 15-z t.”
    

      The generous approbation of so clear-sighted a journal as the “Mole”
      penetrated my soul with delight. The only objection which occurred to me
      was, that the terms “contemptible vagabond” might have been
      better written “odious and contemptible, wretch, villain
      and vagabond.” This would have sounded more gracefully, I
      think. “Diamond-like,” also, was scarcely, it will be
      admitted, of sufficient intensity to express what the “Mole”
      evidently thought of the brilliancy of the “Oil-of-Bob.”
    

      On the same afternoon in which I saw these notices in the “Owl,”
      the “Toad,” and the “Mole” I happened to meet with
      a copy of the “Daddy-Long-Legs,” a periodical proverbial for
      the extreme extent of its understanding. And it was the “Daddy-Long-Legs”
      which spoke thus:
    

“The ‘Lollipop,’! This gorgeous Magazine is already
      before the public for October. The question of preeminence is forever put
      to rest, and hereafter it will be excessively preposterous in the ‘Hum-Drum,’
      the ‘Rowdy-Dow,’ or the ‘Goosetherumfoodle,’ to
      make any farther spasmodic attempts at competition. These journals may
      excel the ‘Lollipop’ in outcry, but, in all other points, give
      us the ‘Lollipop!’ How this celebrated Magazine can sustain
      its evidently tremendous expenses, is past comprehension. To be sure it
      has a circulation of precisely half a million, and its subscription-list
      has increased seventy-five per cent, within the last couple of days; but
      then the sums it disburses, monthly, for contributions, are scarcely
      credible; we are cognizant of the fact, that Mademoiselle Cribalittle
      received no less than eighty-seven cents and a half for her late valuable
      Revolutionary Tale, entitled ‘The York-Town Katy-Did, and the
      Bunker-Hill Katy-Didn’t.’


      “The most able papers in the present number, are, of course, those
      furnished by the editor, (the eminent Mr. Crab,) but there are numerous
      magnificent contributions from such names as Snob, Mademoiselle
      Cribalittle, Slyass, Mrs. Fibalittle, Mumblethumb, Mrs. Squibalittle, and
      last, though not least, Fatquack. The world may well be challenged to
      produce so rich a galaxy of genius.
    

      “The poem over the signature ‘Snob’ is, we find,
      attracting universal commendation, and, we are constrained to say,
      deserves, if possible, even more applause than it has received. The
      ‘Oil-of-Bob’ is the title of this masterpiece of eloquence and
      art. One or two of our readers mayhave averyfaint, although
      sufficiently disgusting recollection of a poem (?) similarly entitled, the
      perpetration of a miserable penny-a-liner, mendicant, and cut-throat,
      connected in the capacity of scullion, we believe, with one of the
      indecent prints about the purlieus of the city; we beg them, for God’s
      sake, not to confound the compositions. The author of the ‘Oil-of-Bob’
      is, we hear, Thingum Bob, Esq., a gentleman of high genius, and a scholar.
      ‘Snob’ is merely anom-de-guerre. Sept. 15—1 t.”


      I could scarcely restrain my indignation while I perused the concluding
      portions of this diatribe. It was clear to me that the yea-nay manner—not
      to say the gentleness—the positive forbearance with which the
      “Daddy-Long-Legs” spoke of that pig, the editor of the “Gad-Fly”—it
      was evident to me, I say, that this gentleness of speech could proceed
      from nothing else than a partiality for the Fly—whom it was clearly
      the intention of the “Daddy-Long-Legs” to elevate into
      reputation at my expense. Any one, indeed, might perceive, with half an
      eye, that, had the real design of the “Daddy” been what it
      wished to appear, it, (the “Daddy,”) might have expressed
      itself in terms more direct, more pungent, and altogether more to the
      purpose. The words “penny-a-liner,” “mendicant,”
      “scullion,” and “cut-throat,” were epithets so
      intentionally inexpressive and equivocal, as to be worse than nothing when
      applied to the author of the very worst stanzas ever penned by one of the
      human race. We all know what is meant by “damning with faint praise,”
      and, on the other hand, who could fail seeing through the covert purpose
      of the “Daddy”—that of glorifying with feeble abuse?
    

      What the “Daddy” chose to say of the Fly, however, was no
      business of mine. What it said of myself was. After the noble
      manner in which the “Owl,” the “Toad,” the “Mole,”
      had expressed themselves in respect to my ability, it was rather too much
      to be coolly spoken of by a thing like the “Daddy-Long-Legs,”
      as merely “a gentleman of high genius and a scholar.”
      Gentleman indeed! I made up my mind at once, either to get a written
      apology from the “Daddy-Long-Legs,” or to call it out.
    

      Full of this purpose, I looked about me to find a friend whom I could
      entrust with a message to his Daddyship, and as the editor of the “Lollipop”
      had given me marked tokens of regard, I at length concluded to seek
      assistance upon the present occasion.
    

      I have never yet been able to account, in a manner satisfactory to my own
      understanding, for the very peculiar countenance and demeanor with
      which Mr. Crab listened to me, as I unfolded to him my design. He again
      went through the scene of the bell-rope and cudgel, and did not omit the
      duck. At one period I thought he really intended to quack. His fit,
      nevertheless, finally subsided as before, and he began to act and speak in
      a rational way. He declined bearing the cartel, however, and in fact,
      dissuaded me from sending it at all; but was candid enough to admit that
      the “Daddy-Long-Legs” had been disgracefully in the wrong—more
      especially in what related to the epithets “gentleman and scholar.”
    

      Towards the end of this interview with Mr. Crab, who really appeared to
      take a paternal interest in my welfare, he suggested to me that I might
      turn an honest penny, and, at the same time, advance my reputation, by
      occasionally playing Thomas Hawk for the “Lollipop.”
    

      I begged Mr. Crab to inform me who was Mr. Thomas Hawk, and how it was
      expected that I should play him.
    

      Here Mr. Crab again “made great eyes,” (as we say in Germany,)
      but at length, recovering himself from a profound attack of astonishment,
      he assured me that he employed the words “Thomas Hawk” to
      avoid the colloquialism, Tommy, which was low—but that the true idea
      was Tommy Hawk—or tomahawk—and that by “playing tomahawk”
      he referred to scalping, brow-beating and otherwise using-up the herd of
      poor-devil authors.
    

      I assured my patron that, if this was all, I was perfectly resigned to the
      task of playing Thomas Hawk. Hereupon Mr. Crab desired me to use-up the
      editor of the “Gad-Fly” forthwith, in the fiercest style
      within the scope of my ability, and as a specimen of my powers. This I
      did, upon the spot, in a review of the original “Oil-of-Bob,”
      occupying thirty-six pages of the “Lollipop.” I found playing
      Thomas Hawk, indeed, a far less onerous occupation than poetizing; for I
      went upon system altogether, and thus it was easy to do the thing
      thoroughly and well. My practice was this. I bought auction copies (cheap)
      of “Lord Brougham’s Speeches,” “Cobbett’s
      Complete Works,” the “New Slang-Syllabus,” the “Whole
      Art of Snubbing,” “Prentice’s Billingsgate,”
      (folio edition,) and “Lewis G. Clarke on Tongue.” These works
      I cut up thoroughly with a currycomb, and then, throwing the shreds into a
      sieve, sifted out carefully all that might be thought decent, (a mere
      trifle); reserving the hard phrases, which I threw into a large tin
      pepper-castor with longitudinal holes, so that an entire sentence could
      get through without material injury. The mixture was then ready for use.
      When called upon to play Thomas Hawk, I anointed a sheet of fools-cap with
      the white of a gander’s egg; then, shredding the thing to be
      reviewed as I had previously shredded the books,—only with more
      care, so as to get every word separate—I threw the latter shreds in
      with the former, screwed on the lid of the castor, gave it a shake, and so
      dusted out the mixture upon the egg’d foolscap; where it stuck. The
      effect was beautiful to behold. It was captivating. Indeed, the reviews I
      brought to pass by this simple expedient have never been approached, and
      were the wonder of the world. At first, through bashfulness—the
      result of inexperience—I was a little put out by a certain
      inconsistency—a certain air of the bizarre, (as we say in
      France,) worn by the composition as a whole. All the phrases did not fit,
      (as we say in the Anglo-Saxon). Many were quite awry. Some, even, were
      up-side-down; and there were none of them which were not, in some measure,
      injured in regard to effect, by this latter species of accident, when it
      occurred;—with the exception of Mr. Lewis Clarke’s paragraphs,
      which were so vigorous, and altogether stout, that they seemed not
      particularly disconcerted by any extreme of position, but looked equally
      happy and satisfactory, whether on their heads, or on their heels.
    

      What became of the editor of the “Gad-Fly,” after the
      publication of my criticism on his “Oil-of-Bob,” it is
      somewhat difficult to determine. The most reasonable conclusion is, that
      he wept himself to death. At all events he disappeared instantaneously
      from the face of the earth, and no man has seen even the ghost of him
      since.
    

      This matter having been properly accomplished, and the Furies appeased, I
      grew at once into high favor with Mr. Crab. He took me into his
      confidence, gave me a permanent situation as Thomas Hawk of the “Lollipop,”
      and, as for the present, he could afford me no salary, allowed me to
      profit, at discretion, by his advice.
    

      “My dear Thingum,” said he to me one day after dinner, “I
      respect your abilities and love you as a son. You shall be my heir. When I
      die I will bequeath you the ‘Lollipop.’ In the meantime I will
      make a man of you—I will—provided always that you
      follow my counsel. The first thing to do is to get rid of the old bore.”
    

      “Boar?” said I inquiringly—“pig, eh?—aper?
      (as we say in Latin)—who?—where?”
    

      “Your father,” said he.
    

      “Precisely,” I replied,—“pig.”
    

      “You have your fortune to make, Thingum,” resumed Mr. Crab,
      “and that governor of yours is a millstone about your neck. We must
      cut him at once.” [Here I took out my knife.] “We must cut
      him,” continued Mr. Crab, “decidedly and forever. He won’t
      do—he won’t. Upon second thoughts, you had better kick
      him, or cane him, or something of that kind.”
    

      “What do you say,” I suggested modestly, “to my kicking
      him in the first instance, caning him afterwards, and winding up by
      tweaking his nose?”
    

      Mr. Crab looked at me musingly for some moments, and then answered:
    

      “I think, Mr. Bob, that what you propose would answer sufficiently
      well—indeed remarkably well—that is to say, as far as it went—but
      barbers are exceedingly hard to cut, and I think, upon the whole, that,
      having performed upon Thomas Bob the operations you suggest, it would be
      advisable to blacken, with your fists, both his eyes, very carefully and
      thoroughly, to prevent his ever seeing you again in fashionable
      promenades. After doing this, I really do not perceive that you can do any
      more. However—it might be just as well to roll him once or twice in
      the gutter, and then put him in charge of the police. Any time the next
      morning you can call at the watch-house and swear an assault.”
    

      I was much affected by the kindness of feeling towards me personally,
      which was evinced in this excellent advice of Mr. Crab, and I did not fail
      to profit by it forthwith. The result was, that I got rid of the old bore,
      and began to feel a little independent and gentleman-like. The want of
      money, however, was, for a few weeks, a source of some discomfort; but at
      length, by carefully putting to use my two eyes, and observing how matters
      went just in front of my nose, I perceived how the thing was to be brought
      about. I say “thing”—be it observed—for they tell
      me the Latin for it is rem. By the way, talking of Latin, can any
      one tell me the meaning of quocunque—or what is the meaning
      of modo?


      My plan was exceedingly simple. I bought, for a song, a sixteenth of the
      “Snapping-Turtle”:—that was all. The thing was done,
      and I put money in my purse. There were some trivial arrangements
      afterwards, to be sure; but these formed no portion of the plan. They were
      a consequence—a result. For example, I bought pen, ink and paper,
      and put them into furious activity. Having thus completed a Magazine
      article, I gave it, for appellation, “Fol-Lol, by the Author of
      ‘The Oil-of-Bob,’” and enveloped it to the “Goosetherumfoodle.”
      That journal, however, having pronounced it “twattle” in the
      “Monthly Notices to Correspondents,” I reheaded the paper
      “‘Hey-Diddle-Diddle,’ by ThingumBob, Esq., Author of the
      Ode on ‘The Oil-of-Bob,’ and Editor of the ‘Snapping-Turtle.’
      “With this amendment, I re-enclosed it to the “Goosetherumfoodle,”
      and, while I awaited a reply, published daily, in the “Turtle,”
      six columns of what may be termed philosophical and analytical
      investigation of the literary merits of the “Goosetherumfoodle,”
      as well as of the personal character of the editor of the “Goosetherumfoodle.”
      At the end of a week the “Goosetherumfoodle” discovered that
      it had, by some odd mistake, “confounded a stupid article, headed
      ‘Hey-Diddle-Diddle’ and composed by some unknown ignoramus,
      with a gem of resplendent lustre similarly entitled, the work of Thingum
      Bob, Esq., the celebrated author of ‘The Oil-of-Bob.’”
      The “Goosetherumfoodle” deeply “regretted this very
      natural accident,” and promised, moreover, an insertion of the genuine
      “Hey-Diddle-Diddle” in the very next number of the Magazine.
    

      The fact is, I thought—I really thought—I
      thought at the time—I thought then—and have no reason
      for thinking otherwise now—that the “Goosetherumfoodle”
      did make a mistake. With the best intentions in the world, I never
      knew any thing that made as many singular mistakes as the “Goosetherumfoodle.”
      From that day I took a liking to the “Goosetherumfoodle,” and
      the result was I soon saw into the very depths of its literary merits, and
      did not fail to expatiate upon them, in the “Turtle,” whenever
      a fitting opportunity occurred. And it is to be regarded as a very
      peculiar coincidence—as one of those positively remarkable
      coincidences which set a man to serious thinking—that just such a
      total revolution of opinion—just such entire bouleversement,
      (as we say in French,)—just such thorough topsiturviness, (if
      I may be permitted to employ a rather forcible term of the Choctaws,) as
      happened, pro and con, between myself on the one part, and
      the “Goosetherumfoodle” on the other, did actually again
      happen, in a brief period afterwards, and with precisely similar
      circumstances, in the case of myself and the “Rowdy-Dow,” and
      in the case of myself and the “HumDrum.”
    

      Thus it was that, by a master-stroke of genius, I at length consummated my
      triumphs by “putting money in my purse,” and thus may be said
      really and fairly to have commenced that brilliant and eventful career
      which rendered me illustrious, and which now enables me to say, with
      Chateaubriand, “I have made history”—“I’ai
      fait l’histoire.”
    

      I have indeed “made history.” From the bright epoch which I
      now record, my actions—my works—are the property of mankind.
      They are familiar to the world. It is, then, needless for me to detail
      how, soaring rapidly, I fell heir to the “Lollipop”—how
      I merged this journal in the “Hum-Drum”—how again I made
      purchase of the “Rowdy-Dow,” thus combining the three
      periodicals—how, lastly, I effected a bargain for the sole remaining
      rival, and united all the literature of the country in one magnificent
      Magazine, known everywhere as the
    




      “Rowdy-Dow, Lollipop, Hum-Drum,
    

      and
    

      goosetherumfoodlb”
    




      Yes; I have made history. My fame is universal. It extends to the
      uttermost ends of the earth. You cannot take up a common newspaper in
      which you shall not see some allusion to the immortal Thingum Bob. It is
      Mr. Thingum Bob said so, and Mr. Thingum Bob wrote this, and Mr. Thingum
      Bob did that. But I am meek and expire with an humble heart. After all,
      what is it?—this indescribable something which men will persist in
      terming “genius?” I agree with Buffon—with Hogarth—it
      is but diligence after all.
    

      Look at me!—how I labored—how I toiled—how I
      wrote! Ye Gods, did I not write? I knew not the word “ease.”
      By day I adhered to my desk, and at night, a pale student, I consumed the
      midnight oil. You should have seen me—you should. I leaned to
      the right. I leaned to the left. I sat forward. I sat backward. I sat upon
      end. I sat tete baiss?e, (as they have it in the Kickapoo,) bowing
      my head close to the alabaster page. And, through all, I—wrote.
      Through joy and through sorrow, I—wrote. Through hunger and
      through thirst, I—wrote. Through good report and through ill
      report, I—wrote. Through sunshine and through moonshine, I—wrote.
      What I wrote it is unnecessary to say. The style!—that
      was the thing. I caught it from Fatquack—whizz!—fizz!——
      and I am giving you a specimen of it now.