MINUET
    

      Great misfortunes do not affect me very much, said John Bridelle, an old
      bachelor who passed for a sceptic. I have seen war at quite close
      quarters; I walked across corpses without any feeling of pity. The great
      brutal facts of nature, or of humanity, may call forth cries of horror or
      indignation, but do not cause us that tightening of the heart, that
      shudder that goes down your spine at sight of certain little heartrending
      episodes.
    

      The greatest sorrow that anyone can experience is certainly the loss of a
      child, to a mother; and the loss of his mother, to a man. It is intense,
      terrible, it rends your heart and upsets your mind; but one is healed of
      these shocks, just as large bleeding wounds become healed. Certain
      meetings, certain things half perceived, or surmised, certain secret
      sorrows, certain tricks of fate which awake in us a whole world of painful
      thoughts, which suddenly unclose to us the mysterious door of moral
      suffering, complicated, incurable; all the deeper because they appear
      benign, all the more bitter because they are intangible, all the more
      tenacious because they appear almost factitious, leave in our souls a sort
      of trail of sadness, a taste of bitterness, a feeling of disenchantment,
      from which it takes a long time to free ourselves.
    

      I have always present to my mind two or three things that others would
      surely not have noticed, but which penetrated my being like fine, sharp
      incurable stings.
    

      You might not perhaps understand the emotion that I retained from these
      hasty impressions. I will tell you one of them. She was very old, but as
      lively as a young girl. It may be that my imagination alone is responsible
      for my emotion.
    

      I am fifty. I was young then and studying law. I was rather sad, somewhat
      of a dreamer, full of a pessimistic philosophy and did not care much for
      noisy cafes, boisterous companions, or stupid girls. I rose early and one
      of my chief enjoyments was to walk alone about eight o'clock in the
      morning in the nursery garden of the Luxembourg.
    

      You people never knew that nursery garden. It was like a forgotten garden
      of the last century, as pretty as the gentle smile of an old lady. Thick
      hedges divided the narrow regular paths,—peaceful paths between two
      walls of carefully trimmed foliage. The gardener's great shears were
      pruning unceasingly these leafy partitions, and here and there one came
      across beds of flowers, lines of little trees looking like schoolboys out
      for a walk, companies of magnificent rose bushes, or regiments of fruit
      trees.
    

      An entire corner of this charming spot was in habited by bees. Their straw
      hives skillfully arranged at distances on boards had their entrances—as
      large as the opening of a thimble—turned towards the sun, and all
      along the paths one encountered these humming and gilded flies, the true
      masters of this peaceful spot, the real promenaders of these quiet paths.
    

      I came there almost every morning. I sat down on a bench and read.
      Sometimes I let my book fall on my knees, to dream, to listen to the life
      of Paris around me, and to enjoy the infinite repose of these
      old-fashioned hedges.
    

      But I soon perceived that I was not the only one to frequent this spot as
      soon as the gates were opened, and I occasionally met face to face, at a
      turn in the path, a strange little old man.
    

      He wore shoes with silver buckles, knee-breeches, a snuff-colored frock
      coat, a lace jabot, and an outlandish gray hat with wide brim and
      long-haired surface that might have come out of the ark.
    

      He was thin, very thin, angular, grimacing and smiling. His bright eyes
      were restless beneath his eyelids which blinked continuously. He always
      carried in his hand a superb cane with a gold knob, which must have been
      for him some glorious souvenir.
    

      This good man astonished me at first, then caused me the intensest
      interest. I watched him through the leafy walls, I followed him at a
      distance, stopping at a turn in the hedge so as not to be seen.
    

      And one morning when he thought he was quite alone, he began to make the
      most remarkable motions. First he would give some little springs, then
      make a bow; then, with his slim legs, he would give a lively spring in the
      air, clapping his feet as he did so, and then turn round cleverly,
      skipping and frisking about in a comical manner, smiling as if he had an
      audience, twisting his poor little puppet-like body, bowing pathetic and
      ridiculous little greetings into the empty air. He was dancing.
    

      I stood petrified with amazement, asking myself which of us was crazy, he
      or I.
    

      He stopped suddenly, advanced as actors do on the stage, then bowed and
      retreated with gracious smiles, and kissing his hand as actors do, his
      trembling hand, to the two rows of trimmed bushes.
    

      Then he continued his walk with a solemn demeanor.
    

      After that I never lost sight of him, and each morning he began anew his
      outlandish exercises.
    

      I was wildly anxious to speak to him. I decided to risk it, and one day,
      after greeting him, I said:
    

      “It is a beautiful day, monsieur.”
    

      He bowed.
    

      “Yes, sir, the weather is just as it used to be.”
    

      A week later we were friends and I knew his history. He had been a dancing
      master at the opera, in the time of Louis XV. His beautiful cane was a
      present from the Comte de Clermont. And when we spoke about dancing he
      never stopping talking.
    

      One day he said to me:
    

      “I married La Castris, monsieur. I will introduce you to her if you
      wish it, but she does not get here till later. This garden, you see, is
      our delight and our life. It is all that remains of former days. It seems
      as though we could not exist if we did not have it. It is old and
      distingue, is it not? I seem to breathe an air here that has not changed
      since I was young. My wife and I pass all our afternoons here, but I come
      in the morning because I get up early.”
    

      As soon as I had finished luncheon I returned to the Luxembourg, and
      presently perceived my friend offering his arm ceremoniously to a very old
      little lady dressed in black, to whom he introduced me. It was La Castris,
      the great dancer, beloved by princes, beloved by the king, beloved by all
      that century of gallantry that seems to have left behind it in the world
      an atmosphere of love.
    

      We sat down on a bench. It was the month of May. An odor of flowers
      floated in the neat paths; a hot sun glided its rays between the branches
      and covered us with patches of light. The black dress of La Castris seemed
      to be saturated with sunlight.
    

      The garden was empty. We heard the rattling of vehicles in the distance.
    

      “Tell me,” I said to the old dancer, “what was the
      minuet?”
    

      He gave a start.
    

      “The minuet, monsieur, is the queen of dances, and the dance of
      queens, do you understand? Since there is no longer any royalty, there is
      no longer any minuet.”
    

      And he began in a pompous manner a long dithyrambic eulogy which I could
      not understand. I wanted to have the steps, the movements, the positions,
      explained to me. He became confused, was amazed at his inability to make
      me understand, became nervous and worried.
    

      Then suddenly, turning to his old companion who had remained silent and
      serious, he said:
    

      “Elise, would you like—say—would you like, it would be
      very nice of you, would you like to show this gentleman what it was?”
    

      She turned eyes uneasily in all directions, then rose without saying a
      word and took her position opposite him.
    

      Then I witnessed an unheard-of thing.
    

      They advanced and retreated with childlike grimaces, smiling, swinging
      each other, bowing, skipping about like two automaton dolls moved by some
      old mechanical contrivance, somewhat damaged, but made by a clever workman
      according to the fashion of his time.
    

      And I looked at them, my heart filled with extraordinary emotions, my soul
      touched with an indescribable melancholy. I seemed to see before me a
      pathetic and comical apparition, the out-of-date ghost of a former
      century.
    

      They suddenly stopped. They had finished all the figures of the dance. For
      some seconds they stood opposite each other, smiling in an astonishing
      manner. Then they fell on each other's necks sobbing.
    

      I left for the provinces three days later. I never saw them again. When I
      returned to Paris, two years later, the nursery had been destroyed. What
      became of them, deprived of the dear garden of former days, with its
      mazes, its odor of the past, and the graceful windings of its hedges?
    

      Are they dead? Are they wandering among modern streets like hopeless
      exiles? Are they dancing—grotesque spectres—a fantastic minuet
      in the moonlight, amid the cypresses of a cemetery, along the pathways
      bordered by graves?
    

      Their memory haunts me, obsesses me, torments me, remains with me like a
      wound. Why? I do not know.
    

      No doubt you think that very absurd?