MISERY
    

      “To whom shall I tell my grief?”
    

      THE twilight of evening. Big flakes of wet snow are whirling lazily about
      the street lamps, which have just been lighted, and lying in a thin soft
      layer on roofs, horses’ backs, shoulders, caps. Iona Potapov, the
      sledge-driver, is all white like a ghost. He sits on the box without
      stirring, bent as double as the living body can be bent. If a regular
      snowdrift fell on him it seems as though even then he would not think it
      necessary to shake it off.... His little mare is white and motionless too.
      Her stillness, the angularity of her lines, and the stick-like
      straightness of her legs make her look like a halfpenny gingerbread horse.
      She is probably lost in thought. Anyone who has been torn away from the
      plough, from the familiar gray landscapes, and cast into this slough, full
      of monstrous lights, of unceasing uproar and hurrying people, is bound to
      think.
    

      It is a long time since Iona and his nag have budged. They came out of the
      yard before dinnertime and not a single fare yet. But now the shades of
      evening are falling on the town. The pale light of the street lamps
      changes to a vivid color, and the bustle of the street grows noisier.
    

      “Sledge to Vyborgskaya!” Iona hears. “Sledge!”
    

      Iona starts, and through his snow-plastered eyelashes sees an officer in a
      military overcoat with a hood over his head.
    

      “To Vyborgskaya,” repeats the officer. “Are you asleep?
      To Vyborgskaya!”
    

      In token of assent Iona gives a tug at the reins which sends cakes of snow
      flying from the horse’s back and shoulders. The officer gets into
      the sledge. The sledge-driver clicks to the horse, cranes his neck like a
      swan, rises in his seat, and more from habit than necessity brandishes his
      whip. The mare cranes her neck, too, crooks her stick-like legs, and
      hesitatingly sets of....
    

      “Where are you shoving, you devil?” Iona immediately hears
      shouts from the dark mass shifting to and fro before him. “Where the
      devil are you going? Keep to the r-right!”
    

      “You don’t know how to drive! Keep to the right,” says
      the officer angrily.
    

      A coachman driving a carriage swears at him; a pedestrian crossing the
      road and brushing the horse’s nose with his shoulder looks at him
      angrily and shakes the snow off his sleeve. Iona fidgets on the box as
      though he were sitting on thorns, jerks his elbows, and turns his eyes
      about like one possessed as though he did not know where he was or why he
      was there.
    

      “What rascals they all are!” says the officer jocosely.
      “They are simply doing their best to run up against you or fall
      under the horse’s feet. They must be doing it on purpose.”
    

      Iona looks as his fare and moves his lips.... Apparently he means to say
      something, but nothing comes but a sniff.
    

      “What?” inquires the officer.
    

      Iona gives a wry smile, and straining his throat, brings out huskily:
      “My son... er... my son died this week, sir.”
    

      “H’m! What did he die of?”
    

      Iona turns his whole body round to his fare, and says:
    

      “Who can tell! It must have been from fever.... He lay three days in
      the hospital and then he died.... God’s will.”
    

      “Turn round, you devil!” comes out of the darkness. “Have
      you gone cracked, you old dog? Look where you are going!”
    

      “Drive on! drive on!...” says the officer. “We shan’t
      get there till to-morrow going on like this. Hurry up!”
    

      The sledge-driver cranes his neck again, rises in his seat, and with heavy
      grace swings his whip. Several times he looks round at the officer, but
      the latter keeps his eyes shut and is apparently disinclined to listen.
      Putting his fare down at Vyborgskaya, Iona stops by a restaurant, and
      again sits huddled up on the box.... Again the wet snow paints him and his
      horse white. One hour passes, and then another....
    

      Three young men, two tall and thin, one short and hunchbacked, come up,
      railing at each other and loudly stamping on the pavement with their
      goloshes.
    

      “Cabby, to the Police Bridge!” the hunchback cries in a
      cracked voice. “The three of us,... twenty kopecks!”
    

      Iona tugs at the reins and clicks to his horse. Twenty kopecks is not a
      fair price, but he has no thoughts for that. Whether it is a rouble or
      whether it is five kopecks does not matter to him now so long as he has a
      fare.... The three young men, shoving each other and using bad language,
      go up to the sledge, and all three try to sit down at once. The question
      remains to be settled: Which are to sit down and which one is to stand?
      After a long altercation, ill-temper, and abuse, they come to the
      conclusion that the hunchback must stand because he is the shortest.
    

      “Well, drive on,” says the hunchback in his cracked voice,
      settling himself and breathing down Iona’s neck. “Cut along!
      What a cap you’ve got, my friend! You wouldn’t find a worse
      one in all Petersburg....”
    

      “He-he!... he-he!...” laughs Iona. “It’s nothing
      to boast of!”
    

      “Well, then, nothing to boast of, drive on! Are you going to drive
      like this all the way? Eh? Shall I give you one in the neck?”
    

      “My head aches,” says one of the tall ones. “At the
      Dukmasovs’ yesterday Vaska and I drank four bottles of brandy
      between us.”
    

      “I can’t make out why you talk such stuff,” says the
      other tall one angrily. “You lie like a brute.”
    

      “Strike me dead, it’s the truth!...”
    

      “It’s about as true as that a louse coughs.”
    

      “He-he!” grins Iona. “Me-er-ry gentlemen!”
    

      “Tfoo! the devil take you!” cries the hunchback indignantly.
      “Will you get on, you old plague, or won’t you? Is that the
      way to drive? Give her one with the whip. Hang it all, give it her well.”
    

      Iona feels behind his back the jolting person and quivering voice of the
      hunchback. He hears abuse addressed to him, he sees people, and the
      feeling of loneliness begins little by little to be less heavy on his
      heart. The hunchback swears at him, till he chokes over some elaborately
      whimsical string of epithets and is overpowered by his cough. His tall
      companions begin talking of a certain Nadyezhda Petrovna. Iona looks round
      at them. Waiting till there is a brief pause, he looks round once more and
      says:
    

      “This week... er... my... er... son died!”
    

      “We shall all die,...” says the hunchback with a sigh, wiping
      his lips after coughing. “Come, drive on! drive on! My friends, I
      simply cannot stand crawling like this! When will he get us there?”
    

      “Well, you give him a little encouragement... one in the neck!”
    

      “Do you hear, you old plague? I’ll make you smart. If one
      stands on ceremony with fellows like you one may as well walk. Do you
      hear, you old dragon? Or don’t you care a hang what we say?”
    

      And Iona hears rather than feels a slap on the back of his neck.
    

      “He-he!...” he laughs. “Merry gentlemen.... God give you
      health!”
    

      “Cabman, are you married?” asks one of the tall ones.
    

      “I? He he! Me-er-ry gentlemen. The only wife for me now is the damp
      earth.... He-ho-ho!.... The grave that is!... Here my son’s dead and
      I am alive.... It’s a strange thing, death has come in at the wrong
      door.... Instead of coming for me it went for my son....”
    

      And Iona turns round to tell them how his son died, but at that point the
      hunchback gives a faint sigh and announces that, thank God! they have
      arrived at last. After taking his twenty kopecks, Iona gazes for a long
      while after the revelers, who disappear into a dark entry. Again he is
      alone and again there is silence for him.... The misery which has been for
      a brief space eased comes back again and tears his heart more cruelly than
      ever. With a look of anxiety and suffering Iona’s eyes stray
      restlessly among the crowds moving to and fro on both sides of the street:
      can he not find among those thousands someone who will listen to him? But
      the crowds flit by heedless of him and his misery.... His misery is
      immense, beyond all bounds. If Iona’s heart were to burst and his
      misery to flow out, it would flood the whole world, it seems, but yet it
      is not seen. It has found a hiding-place in such an insignificant shell
      that one would not have found it with a candle by daylight....
    

      Iona sees a house-porter with a parcel and makes up his mind to address
      him.
    

      “What time will it be, friend?” he asks.
    

      “Going on for ten.... Why have you stopped here? Drive on!”
    

      Iona drives a few paces away, bends himself double, and gives himself up
      to his misery. He feels it is no good to appeal to people. But before five
      minutes have passed he draws himself up, shakes his head as though he
      feels a sharp pain, and tugs at the reins.... He can bear it no longer.
    

      “Back to the yard!” he thinks. “To the yard!”
    

      And his little mare, as though she knew his thoughts, falls to trotting.
      An hour and a half later Iona is sitting by a big dirty stove. On the
      stove, on the floor, and on the benches are people snoring. The air is
      full of smells and stuffiness. Iona looks at the sleeping figures,
      scratches himself, and regrets that he has come home so early....
    

      “I have not earned enough to pay for the oats, even,” he
      thinks. “That’s why I am so miserable. A man who knows how to
      do his work,... who has had enough to eat, and whose horse has had enough
      to eat, is always at ease....”
    

      In one of the corners a young cabman gets up, clears his throat sleepily,
      and makes for the water-bucket.
    

      “Want a drink?” Iona asks him.
    

      “Seems so.”
    

      “May it do you good.... But my son is dead, mate.... Do you hear?
      This week in the hospital.... It’s a queer business....”
    

      Iona looks to see the effect produced by his words, but he sees nothing.
      The young man has covered his head over and is already asleep. The old man
      sighs and scratches himself.... Just as the young man had been thirsty for
      water, he thirsts for speech. His son will soon have been dead a week, and
      he has not really talked to anybody yet.... He wants to talk of it
      properly, with deliberation.... He wants to tell how his son was taken
      ill, how he suffered, what he said before he died, how he died.... He
      wants to describe the funeral, and how he went to the hospital to get his
      son’s clothes. He still has his daughter Anisya in the country....
      And he wants to talk about her too.... Yes, he has plenty to talk about
      now. His listener ought to sigh and exclaim and lament.... It would be
      even better to talk to women. Though they are silly creatures, they
      blubber at the first word.
    

      “Let’s go out and have a look at the mare,” Iona thinks.
      “There is always time for sleep.... You’ll have sleep enough,
      no fear....”
    

      He puts on his coat and goes into the stables where his mare is standing.
      He thinks about oats, about hay, about the weather.... He cannot think
      about his son when he is alone.... To talk about him with someone is
      possible, but to think of him and picture him is insufferable anguish....
    

      “Are you munching?” Iona asks his mare, seeing her shining
      eyes. “There, munch away, munch away.... Since we have not earned
      enough for oats, we will eat hay.... Yes,... I have grown too old to
      drive.... My son ought to be driving, not I.... He was a real cabman....
      He ought to have lived....”
    

      Iona is silent for a while, and then he goes on:
    

      “That’s how it is, old girl.... Kuzma Ionitch is gone.... He
      said good-by to me.... He went and died for no reason.... Now, suppose you
      had a little colt, and you were own mother to that little colt. ... And
      all at once that same little colt went and died.... You’d be sorry,
      wouldn’t you?...”
    

      The little mare munches, listens, and breathes on her master’s
      hands. Iona is carried away and tells her all about it.