Sophia Pietrovna, the wife of the solicitor Loubianzev, a handsome young
      woman of about twenty-five, was walking quickly along a forest path with
      her bungalow neighbour, the barrister Ilyin. It was just after four. In
      the distance, above the path, white feathery clouds gathered; from behind
      them some bright blue pieces of cloud showed through. The clouds were
      motionless, as if caught on the tops of the tall, aged fir trees. It was
      calm and warm.
    

      In the distance the path was cut across by a low railway embankment, along
      which at this hour, for some reason or other, a sentry strode. Just behind
      the embankment a big, six-towered church with a rusty roof shone white.
    

      "I did not expect to meet you here," Sophia Pietrovna was saying, looking
      down and touching the last year's leaves with the end of her parasol. "But
      now I am glad to have met you. I want to speak to you seriously and
      finally. Ivan Mikhailovich, if you really love and respect me I implore
      you to stop pursuing me i You follow me like a shadow—there's such a
      wicked look in your eye—you make love to me—write
      extraordinary letters and ... I don't know how all this is going to end—Good
      Heavens! What can all this lead to?"
    

      Ilyin was silent. Sophia Pietrovna took a few steps and continued:
    

      "And this sudden complete change has happened in two or three weeks after
      five years of friendship. I do not know you any more, Ivan Mikhailovich."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna glanced sideways at her companion. He was staring
      intently, screwing up his eyes at the feathery clouds. The expression of
      his face was angry, capricious and distracted, like that of a man who
      suffers and at the same time must listen to nonsense.
    

      "It is annoying that you yourself can't realise it!" Madame Loubianzev
      continued, shrugging her shoulders. "Please understand that you're not
      playing a very nice game. I am married, I love and respect my husband. I
      have a daughter. Don't you really care in the slightest for all this?
      Besides, as an old friend, you know my views on family life ... on the
      sanctity of the home, generally."
    

      Ilyin gave an angry grunt and sighed:
    

      "The sanctity of the home," he murmured, "Good Lord!"
    

      "Yes, yes. I love and respect my husband and at any rate the peace of my
      family life is precious to me. I'd sooner let myself be killed than be the
      cause of Andrey's or his daughter's unhappiness. So, please, Ivan
      Mikhailovich, for goodness' sake, leave me alone. Let us be good and dear
      friends, and give up these sighings and gaspings which don't suit you.
      It's settled and done with! Not another word about it. Let us talk of
      something else!"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna again glanced sideways at Ilyin. He was looking up. He
      was pale, and angrily he bit his trembling lips. Madame Loubianzev could
      not understand why he was disturbed and angry, but his pallor moved her.
    

      "Don't be cross. Let's be friends," she said, sweetly.
    

      "Agreed! Here is my hand."
    

      Ilyin took her tiny plump hand in both his, pressed it and slowly raised
      it to his lips.
    

      "I'm not a schoolboy," he murmured. "I'm not in the least attracted by the
      idea of friendship with the woman I love."
    

      "That's enough. Stop! It is all settled and done with. We have come as far
      as the bench. Let us sit down...."
    

      A sweet sense of repose filled Sophia Pietrovna's soul. The most difficult
      and delicate thing was already said. The tormenting question was settled
      and done with. Now she could breathe easily and look straight at Ilyin.
      She looked at him, and the egotistical sense of superiority that a woman
      feels over her lover caressed her pleasantly. She liked the way this big
      strong man with a virile angry face and a huge black beard sat obediently
      at her side and hung his head. They were silent for a little while.
      "Nothing is yet settled and done with," Ilyin began. "You are reading me a
      sermon. 'I love and respect my husband ... the sanctity of the home....' I
      know all that for myself and I can tell you more. Honestly and sincerely I
      confess that I consider my conduct as criminal and immoral. What else? But
      why say what is known already? Instead of sermonizing you had far better
      tell me what I am to do."
    

      "I have already told you. Go away."
    

      "I have gone. You know quite well. I have started five times and half-way
      there I have come back again. I can show you the through tickets. I have
      kept them all safe. But I haven't the power to run away from you. I
      struggle frightfully, but what in Heaven's name is the use? If I cannot
      harden myself, if I'm weak and faint-hearted. I can't fight nature. Do you
      understand? I cannot! I run away from her and she holds me back by my
      coattails. Vile, vulgar weakness."
    

      Ilyin blushed, got up, and began walking by the bench:
    

      "How I hate and despise myself. Good Lord, I'm like a vicious boy—running
      after another man's wife, writing idiotic letters, degrading myself. Ach!"
      He clutched his head, grunted and sit down.
    

      "And now comes your lack of sincerity into the bargain," he continued with
      bitterness. "If you don't think I am playing a nice game—why are you
      here? What drew you? In my letters I only ask you for a straightforward
      answer: Yes, or No; and instead of giving it me, every day you contrive
      that we shall meet 'by chance' and you treat me to quotations from a moral
      copy-book."
    

      Madame Loubianzev reddened and got frightened. She suddenly felt the kind
      of awkwardness that a modest woman would feel at being suddenly discovered
      naked.
    

      "You seem to suspect some deceit on my side," she murmured. "I have always
      given you a straight answer; and I asked you for one to-day."
    

      "Ah, does one ask such things? If you had said to me at once 'Go away,' I
      would have gone long ago, but you never told me to. Never once have you
      been frank. Strange irresolution. My God, either you're playing with me,
      or...."
    

      Ilyin did not finish, and rested his head in his hands. Sophia Pietrovna
      recalled her behaviour all through. She remembered that she had felt all
      these days not only in deed but even in her most intimate thoughts opposed
      to Ilyin's love. But at the same moment she knew that there was a grain of
      truth in the barrister's words. And not knowing what kind of truth it was
      she could not think, no matter how much she thought about it, what to say
      to him in answer to his complaint. It was awkward being silent, so she
      said shrugging her shoulders:
    

      "So I'm to blame for that too?"
    

      "I don't blame you for your insincerity," sighed Ilyin. "It slipped out
      unconsciously. Your insincerity is natural to you, in the natural order of
      things as well. If all mankind were to agree suddenly to become serious,
      everything would go to the Devil, to ruin."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna was not in the mood for philosophy; but she was glad of
      the opportunity to change the conversation and asked:
    

      "Why indeed?"
    

      "Because only savages and animals are sincere. Since civilisation
      introduced into society the demand, for instance, for such a luxury as
      woman's virtue, sincerity has been out of place."
    

      Angrily Ilyin began to thrust his stick into the sand. Madame Loubianzev
      listened without understanding much of it; she liked the conversation.
      First of all, she was pleased that a gifted man should speak to her, an
      average woman, about intellectual things; also it gave her great pleasure
      to watch how the pale, lively, still angry, young face was working. Much
      she did not understand; but the fine courage of modern man was revealed to
      her, the courage by which he without reflection or surmise solves the
      great questions and constructs his simple conclusions.
    

      Suddenly she discovered that she was admiring him, and it frightened her.
    

      "Pardon, but I don't really understand," she hastened to say. "Why did you
      mention insincerity? I entreat you once more, be a dear, good friend and
      leave me alone. Sincerely, I ask it."
    

      "Good—I'll do my best. But hardly anything will come of it. Either
      I'll put a bullet through my brains or ... I'll start drinking in the
      stupidest possible way. Things will end badly for me. Everything has its
      limit, even a struggle with nature. Tell me now, how can one struggle with
      madness? If you've drunk wine, how can you get over the excitement? What
      can I do if your image has grown into my soul, and stands incessantly
      before my eyes, night and day, as plain as that fir tree there? Tell me
      then what thing I must do to get out of this wretched, unhappy state, when
      all my thoughts, desires, and dreams belong, not to me, but to some devil
      that has got hold of me? I love you, I love you so much that I've turned
      away from my path, given up my career and my closest friends, forgot my
      God. Never in my life have I loved so much."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, who was not expecting this turn, drew her body away from
      Ilyin, and glanced at him frightened. Tears shone in his eyes. His lips
      trembled, and a hungry, suppliant expression showed over all his face.
    

      "I love you," he murmured, bringing his own eyes near to her big,
      frightened ones. "You are so beautiful. I'm suffering now; but I swear I
      could remain so all my life, suffering and looking into your eyes, but....
      Keep silent, I implore you."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna as if taken unawares began, quickly, quickly, to think
      out words with which to stop him. "I shall go away," she decided, but no
      sooner had she moved to get up, than Ilyin was on his knees at her feet
      already. He embraced her knees, looked into her eyes and spoke
      passionately, ardently, beautifully. She did not hear his words, for her
      fear and agitation. Somehow now at this dangerous moment when her knees
      pleasantly contracted, as in a warm bath, she sought with evil intention
      to read some meaning into her sensation. She was angry because the whole
      of her instead of protesting virtue was filled with weakness, laziness,
      and emptiness, like a drunken man to whom the ocean is but knee-deep; only
      in the depths of her soul, a little remote malignant voice teased: "Why
      don't you go away? Then this is right, is it?"
    

      Seeking in herself an explanation she could not understand why she had not
      withdrawn the hand to which Ilyin's lips clung like a leech, nor why, at
      the same time as Ilyin, she looked hurriedly right and left to see that
      they were not observed.
    

      The fir-trees and the clouds stood motionless, and gazed at them severely
      like broken-down masters who see something going on, but have been bribed
      not to report to the head. The sentry on the embankment stood like a stick
      and seemed to be staring at the bench. "Let him look!" thought Sophia
      Pietrovna.
    

      "But ... But listen," she said at last with despair in her voice. "What
      will this lead to? What will happen afterwards?"
    

      "I don't know. I don't know," he began to whisper, waving these unpleasant
      questions aside.
    

      The hoarse, jarring whistle of a railway engine became audible. This cold,
      prosaic sound of the everyday world made Madame Loubianzev start.
    

      "It's time, I must go," she said, getting up quickly. "The train is
      coming. Audrey is arriving. He will want his dinner."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna turned her blazing cheeks to the embankment. First the
      engine came slowly into sight, after it the carriages. It was not a
      bungalow train, but a goods train. In a long row, one after another like
      the days of man's life, the cars drew past the white background of the
      church, and there seemed to be no end to them.
    

      But at last the train disappeared, and the end car with the guard and the
      lighted lamps disappeared into the green. Sophia Pietrovna turned sharply
      and not looking at Ilyin began to walk quickly back along the path. She
      had herself in control again. Red with shame, offended, not by Ilyin, no I
      but by the cowardice and shamelessness with which she, a good, respectable
      woman allowed a stranger to embrace her knees. She had only one thought
      now, to reach her bungalow and her family as quickly as possible. The
      barrister could hardly keep up with her. Turning from the path on to a
      little track, she glanced at him so quickly that she noticed only the sand
      on his knees, and she motioned with her hand at him to let her be.
    

      Running into the house Sophia Pietrovna stood for about five minutes
      motionless in her room, looking now at the window then at the writing
      table.... "You disgraceful woman," she scolded herself; "disgraceful!" In
      spite of herself she recollected every detail, hiding nothing, how all
      these days she had been against Ilyin's love-making, yet she was somehow
      drawn to meet him and explain; but besides this when he was lying at her
      feet she felt an extraordinary pleasure. She recalled everything, not
      sparing herself, and now, stifled with shame, she could have slapped her
      own face.
    

      "Poor Andrey," she thought, trying, as she remembered her husband, to give
      her face the tenderest possible expression—"Varya, my poor darling
      child, does not know what a mother she has. Forgive me, my dears. I love
      you very much ... very much!..."
    

      And wishing to convince herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      that corruption had not yet touched those "sanctities" of hers, of which
      she had spoken to Ilyin, Sophia Pietrovna ran into the kitchen and scolded
      the cook for not having laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She tried to
      imagine her husband's tired, hungry look, and pitying him aloud, she laid
      the table herself, a thing which she had never done before. Then she found
      her daughter Varya, lifted her up in her hands and kissed her
      passionately; the child seemed to her heavy and cold, but she would not
      own it to herself, and she began to tell her what a good, dear, splendid
      father she had.
    

      But when, soon after, Andrey. Ilyitch arrived, she barely greeted him. The
      flow of imaginary feelings had ebbed away without convincing her of
      anything; she was only exasperated and enraged by the lie. She sat at the
      window, suffered, and raged. Only in distress can people understand how
      difficult it is to master their thoughts and feelings. Sophia Pietrovna
      said afterwards a confusion was going on inside her as hard to define as
      to count a cloud of swiftly flying sparrows. Thus from the fact that she
      was delighted at her husband's arrival and pleased with the way he behaved
      at dinner, she suddenly concluded that she had begun to hate him. Andrey
      Ilyitch, languid with hunger and fatigue, while waiting for the soup, fell
      upon the sausage and ate it greedily, chewing loudly and moving his
      temples.
    

      "My God," thought Sophia Pietrovna. "I do love and respect him, but ...
      why does he chew so disgustingly."
    

      Her thoughts were no less disturbed than her feelings. Madame Loubianzev,
      like all who have no experience of the struggle with unpleasant thought,
      did her best not to think of her unhappiness, and the more zealously she
      tried, the more vivid Ilyin became to her imagination, the sand on his
      knees, the feathery clouds, the train....
    

      "Why did I—idiot—go to-day?" she teased herself. "And am I
      really a person who can't answer for herself?"
    

      Fear has big eyes. When Andrey Ilyitch had finished the last course, she
      had already resolved to tell him everything and so escape from danger.
    

      "Andrey, I want to speak to you seriously," she began after dinner, when
      her husband was taking off his coat and boots in order to have a lie down.
    

      "Well?"
    

      "Let's go away from here!"
    

      "How—where to? It's still too early to go to town."
    

      "No. Travel or something like that."
    

      "Travel," murmured the solicitor, stretching himself. "I dream of it
      myself, but where shall I get the money, and who'll look after my
      business."
    

      After a little reflection he added:
    

      "Yes, really you are bored. Go by yourself if you want to."
    

      Sophia Pietrovna agreed; but at the same time she saw that Ilyin would be
      glad of the opportunity to travel in the same train with her, in the same
      carriage....
    

      She pondered and looked at her husband, who was full fed but still
      languid. For some reason her eyes stopped on his feet, tiny, almost
      womanish, in stupid socks. On the toe of both socks little threads were
      standing out. Under the drawn blind a bumble bee was knocking against the
      window pane and buzzing. Sophia Pietrovna stared at the threads, listened
      to the bumble bee and pictured her journey.... Day and night Ilyin sits
      opposite, without taking his eyes from her, angry with his weakness and
      pale with the pain of his soul. He brands himself as a libertine, accuses
      her, tears his hair; but when the dark comes he seizes the chance when the
      passengers go to sleep or alight at a station and falls on his knees
      before her and clasps her feet, as he did by the bench....
    

      She realised that she was dreaming....
    

      "Listen. I am not going by myself," she said. "You must come, too!"
    

      "Sophochka, that's all imagination!" sighed Loubianzev. "You must be
      serious and only ask for the possible...."
    

      "You'll come when you And out!" thought Sophia Pietrovna.
    

      Having decided to go away at all costs, she began to feel free from
      danger; her thoughts fell gradually into order, she became cheerful and
      even allowed herself to think about everything. Whatever she may think or
      dream about, she is going all the same. While her husband still slept,
      little by little, evening came....
    

      She sat in the drawing-room playing the piano. Outside the window the
      evening animation, the sound of music, but chiefly the thought of her own
      cleverness in mastering her misery gave the final touch to her joy. Other
      women, her easy conscience told her, in a position like her own would
      surely not resist, they would spin round like a whirlwind; but she was
      nearly burnt up with shame, she suffered and now she had escaped from a
      danger which perhaps was nonexistent! Her virtue and resolution moved her
      so much that she even glanced at herself in the glass three times.
    

      When it was dark visitors came. The men sat down to cards in the
      dining-room, the ladies were in the drawing room and on the terrace. Ilyin
      came last, he was stem and gloomy and looked ill. He sat down on a corner
      of the sofa and did not get up for the whole evening. Usually cheerful and
      full of conversation, he was now silent, frowning, and rubbing his eyes.
      When he had to answer a question he smiled with difficulty and only with
      his upper lip, answering abruptly and spitefully. He made about five jokes
      in all, but his jokes seemed crude and insolent. It seemed to Sophia
      Pietrovna that he was on the brink of hysteria. But only now as she sat at
      the piano did she acknowledge that the unhappy man was not in the mood to
      joke, that he was sick in his soul, he could find no place for himself. It
      was for her sake he was ruining the best days of his career and his youth,
      wasting his last farthing on a bungalow, had left his mother and sisters
      uncared for, and, above all, was breaking down under the martyrdom of his
      struggle. From simple, common humanity she ought to take him seriously....
    

      All this was dear to her, even to paining her. If she were to go up to
      Ilyin now and say to him "No," there would be such strength in her voice
      that it would be hard to disobey. But she did not go up to him and she did
      not say it, did not even think it.... The petty selfishness of a young
      nature seemed never to have been revealed in her as strongly as that
      evening. She admitted that Byin was unhappy and that he sat on the sofa as
      if on hot coals. She was sorry for him, but at the same time the presence
      of the man who loved her so desperately filled her with a triumphant sense
      of her own power. She felt her youth, her beauty, her inaccessibility, and—since
      she had decided to go away—she gave herself full rein this evening.
      She coquetted, laughed continually, she sang with singular emotion, and as
      one inspired. Everything made her gay and everything seemed funny. It
      amused her to recall the incident of the bench, the sentry looking on. The
      visitors seemed funny to her, Ilyin's insolent jokes, his tie pin which
      she had never seen before. The pin was a little red snake with tiny
      diamond eyes; the snake seemed so funny that she was ready to kiss and
      kiss it.
    

      Sophia Pietrovna, nervously sang romantic songs, with a kind of
      half-intoxication, and as if jeering at another's sorrow she chose sad,
      melancholy songs that spoke of lost hopes, of the past, of old age....
      "And old age is approaching nearer and nearer," she sang. What had she to
      do with old age?
    

      "There's something wrong going on in me," she thought now and then through
      laughter and singing.
    

      At twelve o'clock the visitors departed. Ilyin was the last to go. She
      still felt warm enough about him to go with him to the lower step of the
      terrace. She had the idea of telling him that she was going away with her
      husband, just to see what effect this news would have upon him.
    

      The moon was hiding behind the clouds, but it was so bright that Sophia
      Pietrovna could see the wind playing with the tails of his overcoat and
      with the creepers on the terrace. It was also plain how pale Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper-lip, trying to smile. "Sonia, Sonichka, my
      dear little woman," he murmured, not letting her speak. "My darling, my
      pretty one."
    

      In a paroxysm of tenderness with tears in his voice, he showered her with
      endearing words each tenderer than the other, and was already speaking to
      her as if she were his wife or his mistress. Suddenly and unexpectedly to
      her, he put one arm round her and with the other hand he seized her elbow.
    

      "My dear one, my beauty," he began to whisper, kissing the nape of her
      neck; "be sincere, come to me now."
    

      She slipped out of his embrace and lifted her head to break out in
      indignation and revolt. But indignation did not come, and of all her
      praiseworthy virtue and purity, there was left only enough for her to say
      that which all average women say in similar circumstances:
    

      "You must be mad."
    

      "But really let us go," continued Ilyin. "Just now and over there by the
      bench I felt convinced that you, Sonia, were as helpless as myself. You
      too will be all the worse for it. You love me, and you are making a
      useless bargain with your conscience."
    

      Seeing that she was leaving him he seized her by her lace sleeve and ended
      quickly:
    

      "If not to-day, then to-morrow; but you will have to give in. What's the
      good of putting if off? My dear, my darling Sonia, the verdict has been
      pronounced. Why postpone the execution? Why deceive yourself?"
    

      Sophia Pietrovna broke away from him and suddenly disappeared inside the
      door. She returned to the drawing-room, shut the piano mechanically,
      stared for a long time at the cover of a music book, and sat down. She
      could neither stand nor think.... From her agitation and passion remained
      only an awful weakness mingled with laziness and tiredness. Her conscience
      whispered to her that she had behaved wickedly and foolishly to-night,
      like a madwoman; that just now she had been kissed on the terrace, and
      even now she had some strange sensation in her waist and in her elbow. Not
      a soul was in the drawing-room. Only a single candle was burning. Madame
      Loubianzev sat on a little round stool before the piano without stirring
      as if waiting for something, and as if taking advantage of her extreme
      exhaustion and the dark a heavy unconquerable desire began to possess her.
      Like a boa-constrictor, it enchained her limbs and soul. It grew every
      second and was no longer threatening, but stood clear before her in all
      its nakedness.
    

      She sat thus for half an hour, not moving, and not stopping herself from
      thinking of Ilyin. Then she got up lazily and went slowly into the
      bed-room. Andrey Ilyitch was in bed already. She sat by the window and
      gave herself to her desire. She felt no more "confusion." All her feelings
      and thoughts pressed lovingly round some clear purpose. She still had a
      mind to struggle, but instantly she waved her hand impotently, realising
      the strength and the determination of the foe. To fight him power and
      strength were necessary, but her birth, up-bringing and life had given her
      nothing on which to lean.
    

      "You're immoral, you're horrible," she tormented herself for her weakness.
      "You're a nice sort, you are!"
    

      So indignant was her insulted modesty at this weakness that she called
      herself all the bad names that she knew and she related to herself many
      insulting, degrading truths. Thus she told herself that she never was
      moral, and she had not fallen before only because there was no pretext,
      that her day-long struggle had been nothing but a game and a comedy....
    

      "Let us admit that I struggled," she thought, "but what kind of a fight
      was it? Even prostitutes struggle before they sell themselves, and still
      they do sell themselves. It's a pretty sort of fight. Like milk, turns in
      a day." She realised that it was not love that drew her from her home nor
      Ilyin's personality, but the sensations which await her.... A little
      week-end type like the rest of them.
    

      "When the young bird's mother was killed," a hoarse tenor finished
      singing.
    

      If I am going, it's time, thought Sophia Pietrovna. Her heart began to
      beat with a frightful force.
    

      "Andrey," she almost cried. "Listen. Shall we go away? Shall we? Yes?"
    

      "Yes.... I've told you already. You go alone."
    

      "But listen," she said, "if you don't come too, you may lose me. I seem to
      be in love already."
    

      "Who with?" Andrey Ilyitch asked.
    

      "It must be all the same for you, who with," Sophia Pietrovna cried out.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch got up, dangled his feet over the side of the bed, with a
      look of surprise at the dark form of his wife.
    

      "Imagination," he yawned.
    

      He could not believe her, but all the same he was frightened. After having
      thought for a while, and asked his wife some unimportant questions, he
      gave his views of the family, of infidelity.... He spoke sleepily for
      about ten minutes and then lay down again. His remarks had no success.
      There are a great many opinions in this world, and more than half of them
      belong to people who have never known misery.
    

      In spite of the late hour, the bungalow people were still moving behind
      their windows. Sophia Pietrovna put on a long coat and stood for a while,
      thinking. She still had force of mind to say to her sleepy husband:
    

      "Are you asleep? I'm going for a little walk. Would you like to come with
      me?"
    

      That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she walked out. It was breezy
      and cool. She did not feel the breeze or the darkness but walked on and
      on.... An irresistible power drove her, and it seemed to her that if she
      stopped that power would push her in the back. "You're an immoral woman,"
      she murmured mechanically. "You're horrible."
    

      She was choking for breath, burning with shame, did not feel her feet
      under her, for that which drove her along was stronger than her shame, her
      reason, her fear....
    





      Nadya Zelenina had just returned with her mother from the theatre, where
      they had been to see a performance of "Eugene Oniegin." Entering her room,
      she quickly threw off her dress, loosened her hair, and sat down hurriedly
      in her petticoat and a white blouse to write a letter in the style of
      Tatiana.
    

      "I love you,"—she wrote—"but you don't love me; no, you
      don't!"
    

      The moment she had written this, she smiled.
    

      She was only sixteen years old, and so far she had not been in love. She
      knew that Gorny, the officer, and Gronsdiev, the student, loved her; but
      now, after the theatre, she wanted to doubt their love. To be unloved and
      unhappy—how interesting. There is something beautiful, affecting,
      romantic in the fact that one loves deeply while the other is indifferent.
      Oniegin is interesting because he does not love at all, and Tatiana is
      delightful because she is very much in love; but if they loved each other
      equally and were happy, they would seem boring, instead.
    

      "Don't go on protesting that you love me," Nadya wrote on, thinking of
      Gorny, the officer, "I can't believe you. You're very clever, educated,
      serious; you have a great talent, and perhaps, a splendid future waiting,
      but I am an uninteresting poor-spirited girl, and you yourself know quite
      well that I shall only be a drag upon your life. It's true I carried you
      off your feet, and you thought you had met your ideal in me, but that was
      a mistake. Already you are asking yourself in despair, 'Why did I meet
      this girl?' Only your kindness prevents you from confessing it."
    

      Nadya pitied herself. She wept and went on.
    

      "If it were not so difficult for me to leave mother and brother I would
      put on a nun's gown and go where my eyes direct me. You would then be free
      to love another. If I were to die!"
    

      Through her tears she could not make out what she had written. Brief
      rainbows trembled on the table, on the floor and the ceiling, as though
      Nadya were looking through a prism. Impossible to write. She sank back in
      her chair and began to think of Gorny.
    

      Oh, how fascinating, how interesting men are! Nadya remembered the
      beautiful expression of Gorny's face, appealing, guilty, and tender, when
      someone discussed music with him,—the efforts he made to prevent the
      passion from sounding in his voice. Passion must be concealed in a society
      where cold reserve and indifference are the signs of good breeding. And he
      does try to conceal it, but he does not succeed, and everybody knows quite
      well that he has a passion for music. Never-ending discussions about
      music, blundering pronouncements by men who do not understand—keep
      him in incessant tension. He is scared, timid, silent. He plays superbly,
      as an ardent pianist. If he were not an officer, he would be a famous
      musician.
    

      The tears dried in her eyes. Nadya remembered how Gorny told her of his
      love at a symphony concert, and again downstairs by the cloak-room.
    

      "I am so glad you have at last made the acquaintance of the student
      Gronsdiev," she continued to write. "He is a very clever man, and you are
      sure to love him. Yesterday he was sitting with us till two o'clock in the
      morning. We were all so happy. I was sorry that you hadn't come to us. He
      said a lot of remarkable things."
    

      Nadya laid her hands on the table and lowered her head. Her hair covered
      the letter. She remembered that Gronsdiev also loved her, and that he had
      the same right to her letter as Gorny. Perhaps she had better write to
      Gronsdiev? For no cause, a happiness began to quicken in her breast. At
      first it was a little one, rolling about in her breast like a rubber ball.
      Then it grew broader and bigger, and broke forth like a wave. Nadya had
      already forgotten about Gorny and Gronsdiev. Her thoughts became confused.
      The happiness grew more and more. From her breast it ran into her arms and
      legs, and it seemed that a light fresh breeze blew over her head, stirring
      her hair. Her shoulders trembled with quiet laughter. The table and the
      lampglass trembled. Tears from her eyes splashed the letter. She was
      powerless to stop her laughter; and to convince herself that she had a
      reason for it, she hastened to remember something funny.
    

      "What a funny poodle!" she cried, feeling that she was choking with
      laughter. "What a funny poodle!"
    

      She remembered how Gronsdiev was playing with Maxim the poodle after tea
      yesterday; how he told a story afterwards of a very clever poodle who was
      chasing a crow in the yard. The crow gave him a look and said:
    

      "Oh, you swindler!"
    

      The poodle did not know he had to do with a learned crow. He was terribly
      confused, and ran away dumfounded. Afterwards he began to bark.
    

      "No, I'd better love Gronsdiev," Nadya decided and tore up the letter.
    

      She began to think of the student, of his love, of her own love, with the
      result that the thoughts in her head swam apart and she thought about
      everything, about her mother, the street, the pencil, the piano. She was
      happy thinking, and found that everything was good, magnificent. Her
      happiness told her that this was not all, that a little later it would be
      still better. Soon it will be spring, summer. They will go with mother to
      Gorbiki in the country. Gorny will come for his holidays. He will walk in
      the orchard with her, and make love to her. Gronsdiev will come too. He
      will play croquet with her and bowls. He will tell funny, wonderful
      stories. She passionately longed for the orchard, the darkness, the pure
      sky, the stars. Again her shoulders trembled with laughter and she seemed
      to awake to a smell of wormwood in the room; and a branch was tapping at
      the window.
    

      She went to her bed and sat down. She did not know what to do with her
      great happiness. It overwhelmed her. She stared at the crucifix which hung
      at the head of her bed and saying:
    

      "Dear God, dear God, dear God."