MISS YOUGHAL'S SAIS.

 When Man and Woman are agreed, what can the Kazi do? —Mahomedan
   Proverb.

 Some people say that there is no romance in India. Those people are wrong.
      Our lives hold quite as much romance as is good for us.

 Sometimes more.

 Strickland was in the Police, and people did not understand him; so they
      said he was a doubtful sort of man and passed by on the other side.
      Strickland had himself to thank for this. He held the extraordinary theory
      that a Policeman in India should try to know as much about the natives as
      the natives themselves. Now, in the whole of Upper India, there is only
      ONE man who can pass for Hindu or Mohammedan, chamar or faquir, as he
      pleases. He is feared and respected by the natives from the Ghor Kathri to
      the Jamma Musjid; and he is supposed to have the gift of invisibility and
      executive control over many Devils. But what good has this done him with
      the Government? None in the world. He has never got Simla for his charge;
      and his name is almost unknown to Englishmen.

 Strickland was foolish enough to take that man for his model; and,
      following out his absurd theory, dabbled in unsavory places no respectable
      man would think of exploring—all among the native riff-raff. He
      educated himself in this peculiar way for seven years, and people could
      not appreciate it. He was perpetually “going Fantee” among the natives,
      which, of course, no man with any sense believes in. He was initiated into
      the Sat Bhai at Allahabad once, when he was on leave; he knew the
      Lizard-Song of the Sansis, and the Halli-Hukk dance, which is a religious
      can-can of a startling kind. When a man knows who dances the Halli-Hukk,
      and how, and when, and where, he knows something to be proud of. He has
      gone deeper than the skin. But Strickland was not proud, though he had
      helped once, at Jagadhri, at the Painting of the Death Bull, which no
      Englishman must even look upon; had mastered the thieves'-patter of the
      changars; had taken a Eusufzai horse-thief alone near Attock; and had
      stood under the mimbar-board of a Border mosque and conducted service in
      the manner of a Sunni Mollah.

 His crowning achievement was spending eleven days as a faquir in the
      gardens of Baba Atal at Amritsar, and there picking up the threads of the
      great Nasiban Murder Case. But people said, justly enough: “Why on earth
      can't Strickland sit in his office and write up his diary, and recruit,
      and keep quiet, instead of showing up the incapacity of his seniors?” So
      the Nasiban Murder Case did him no good departmentally; but, after his
      first feeling of wrath, he returned to his outlandish custom of prying
      into native life. By the way, when a man once acquires a taste for this
      particular amusement, it abides with him all his days. It is the most
      fascinating thing in the world; Love not excepted. Where other men took
      ten days to the Hills, Strickland took leave for what he called shikar,
      put on the disguise that appealed to him at the time, stepped down into
      the brown crowd, and was swallowed up for a while. He was a quiet, dark
      young fellow—spare, black-eyes—and, when he was not thinking
      of something else, a very interesting companion. Strickland on Native
      Progress as he had seen it was worth hearing. Natives hated Strickland;
      but they were afraid of him. He knew too much.

 When the Youghals came into the station, Strickland—very gravely, as
      he did everything—fell in love with Miss Youghal; and she, after a
      while, fell in love with him because she could not understand him. Then
      Strickland told the parents; but Mrs. Youghal said she was not going to
      throw her daughter into the worst paid Department in the Empire, and old
      Youghal said, in so many words, that he mistrusted Strickland's ways and
      works, and would thank him not to speak or write to his daughter any more.
      “Very well,” said Strickland, for he did not wish to make his lady-love's
      life a burden. After one long talk with Miss Youghal he dropped the
      business entirely.

 The Youghals went up to Simla in April.

 In July, Strickland secured three months' leave on “urgent private
      affairs.” He locked up his house—though not a native in the
      Providence would wittingly have touched “Estreekin Sahib's” gear for the
      world—and went down to see a friend of his, an old dyer, at Tarn
      Taran.

 Here all trace of him was lost, until a sais met me on the Simla Mall with
      this extraordinary note:

 “Dear old man,

 “Please give bearer a box of cheroots—Supers, No. I, for preference.
      They are freshest at the Club. I'll repay when I reappear; but at present
      I'm out of Society.

 “Yours,

 “E. STRICKLAND.”

 I ordered two boxes, and handed them over to the sais with my love.

 That sais was Strickland, and he was in old Youghal's employ, attached to
      Miss Youghal's Arab. The poor fellow was suffering for an English smoke,
      and knew that whatever happened I should hold my tongue till the business
      was over.

 Later on, Mrs. Youghal, who was wrapped up in her servants, began talking
      at houses where she called of her paragon among saises—the man who
      was never too busy to get up in the morning and pick flowers for the
      breakfast-table, and who blacked—actually BLACKED—the hoofs of
      his horse like a London coachman! The turnout of Miss Youghal's Arab was a
      wonder and a delight. Strickland—Dulloo, I mean—found his
      reward in the pretty things that Miss Youghal said to him when she went
      out riding. Her parents were pleased to find she had forgotten all her
      foolishness for young Strickland and said she was a good girl.

 Strickland vows that the two months of his service were the most rigid
      mental discipline he has ever gone through. Quite apart from the little
      fact that the wife of one of his fellow-saises fell in love with him and
      then tried to poison him with arsenic because he would have nothing to do
      with her, he had to school himself into keeping quiet when Miss Youghal
      went out riding with some man who tried to flirt with her, and he was
      forced to trot behind carrying the blanket and hearing every word! Also,
      he had to keep his temper when he was slanged in “Benmore” porch by a
      policeman—especially once when he was abused by a Naik he had
      himself recruited from Isser Jang village—or, worse still, when a
      young subaltern called him a pig for not making way quickly enough.

 But the life had its compensations. He obtained great insight into the
      ways and thefts of saises—enough, he says, to have summarily
      convicted half the chamar population of the Punjab if he had been on
      business. He became one of the leading players at knuckle-bones, which all
      jhampanis and many saises play while they are waiting outside the
      Government House or the Gaiety Theatre of nights; he learned to smoke
      tobacco that was three-fourths cowdung; and he heard the wisdom of the
      grizzled Jemadar of the Government House saises, whose words are valuable.
      He saw many things which amused him; and he states, on honor, that no man
      can appreciate Simla properly, till he has seen it from the sais's point
      of view.

 He also says that, if he chose to write all he saw, his head would be
      broken in several places.

 Strickland's account of the agony he endured on wet nights, hearing the
      music and seeing the lights in “Benmore,” with his toes tingling for a
      waltz and his head in a horse-blanket, is rather amusing. One of these
      days, Strickland is going to write a little book on his experiences. That
      book will be worth buying; and even more, worth suppressing.

 Thus, he served faithfully as Jacob served for Rachel; and his leave was
      nearly at an end when the explosion came. He had really done his best to
      keep his temper in the hearing of the flirtations I have mentioned; but he
      broke down at last. An old and very distinguished General took Miss
      Youghal for a ride, and began that specially offensive
      “you're-only-a-little-girl” sort of flirtation—most difficult for a
      woman to turn aside deftly, and most maddening to listen to. Miss Youghal
      was shaking with fear at the things he said in the hearing of her sais.
      Dulloo—Strickland—stood it as long as he could. Then he caught
      hold of the General's bridle, and, in most fluent English, invited him to
      step off and be heaved over the cliff. Next minute Miss Youghal began
      crying; and Strickland saw that he had hopelessly given himself away, and
      everything was over.

 The General nearly had a fit, while Miss Youghal was sobbing out the story
      of the disguise and the engagement that wasn't recognized by the parents.
      Strickland was furiously angry with himself and more angry with the
      General for forcing his hand; so he said nothing, but held the horse's
      head and prepared to thrash the General as some sort of satisfaction, but
      when the General had thoroughly grasped the story, and knew who Strickland
      was, he began to puff and blow in the saddle, and nearly rolled off with
      laughing. He said Strickland deserved a V. C., if it were only for putting
      on a sais's blanket. Then he called himself names, and vowed that he
      deserved a thrashing, but he was too old to take it from Strickland. Then
      he complimented Miss Youghal on her lover.

 The scandal of the business never struck him; for he was a nice old man,
      with a weakness for flirtations. Then he laughed again, and said that old
      Youghal was a fool. Strickland let go of the cob's head, and suggested
      that the General had better help them, if that was his opinion. Strickland
      knew Youghal's weakness for men with titles and letters after their names
      and high official position.

 “It's rather like a forty-minute farce,” said the General, “but begad, I
      WILL help, if it's only to escape that tremendous thrashing I deserved. Go
      along to your home, my sais-Policeman, and change into decent kit, and
      I'll attack Mr. Youghal. Miss Youghal, may I ask you to canter home and
      wait?”.........

 About seven minutes later, there was a wild hurroosh at the Club.

 A sais, with a blanket and head-rope, was asking all the men he knew: “For
      Heaven's sake lend me decent clothes!” As the men did not recognize him,
      there were some peculiar scenes before Strickland could get a hot bath,
      with soda in it, in one room, a shirt here, a collar there, a pair of
      trousers elsewhere, and so on. He galloped off, with half the Club
      wardrobe on his back, and an utter stranger's pony under him, to the house
      of old Youghal.

 The General, arrayed in purple and fine linen, was before him.

 What the General had said Strickland never knew, but Youghal received
      Strickland with moderate civility; and Mrs. Youghal, touched by the
      devotion of the transformed Dulloo, was almost kind.

 The General beamed, and chuckled, and Miss Youghal came in, and almost
      before old Youghal knew where he was, the parental consent had been
      wrenched out and Strickland had departed with Miss Youghal to the
      Telegraph Office to wire for his kit. The final embarrassment was when an
      utter stranger attacked him on the Mall and asked for the stolen pony.

 So, in the end, Strickland and Miss Youghal were married, on the strict
      understanding that Strickland should drop his old ways, and stick to
      Departmental routine, which pays best and leads to Simla.

 Strickland was far too fond of his wife, just then, to break his word, but
      it was a sore trial to him; for the streets and the bazars, and the sounds
      in them, were full of meaning to Strickland, and these called to him to
      come back and take up his wanderings and his discoveries. Some day, I will
      tell you how he broke his promise to help a friend. That was long since,
      and he has, by this time, been nearly spoilt for what he would call
      shikar. He is forgetting the slang, and the beggar's cant, and the marks,
      and the signs, and the drift of the undercurrents, which, if a man would
      master, he must always continue to learn.

 But he fills in his Departmental returns beautifully.