MISS HARRIET
    

      There were seven of us on a drag, four women and three men; one of the
      latter sat on the box seat beside the coachman. We were ascending, at a
      snail's pace, the winding road up the steep cliff along the coast.
    

      Setting out from Etretat at break of day in order to visit the ruins of
      Tancarville, we were still half asleep, benumbed by the fresh air of the
      morning. The women especially, who were little accustomed to these early
      excursions, half opened and closed their eyes every moment, nodding their
      heads or yawning, quite insensible to the beauties of the dawn.
    

      It was autumn. On both sides of the road stretched the bare fields,
      yellowed by the stubble of wheat and oats which covered the soil like a
      beard that had been badly shaved. The moist earth seemed to steam. Larks
      were singing high up in the air, while other birds piped in the bushes.
    

      The sun rose at length in front of us, bright red on the plane of the
      horizon, and in proportion as it ascended, growing clearer from minute to
      minute, the country seemed to awake, to smile, to shake itself like a
      young girl leaving her bed in her white robe of vapor. The Comte
      d'Etraille, who was seated on the box, cried:
    

      “Look! look! a hare!” and he extended his arm toward the left,
      pointing to a patch of clover. The animal scurried along, almost hidden by
      the clover, only its large ears showing. Then it swerved across a furrow,
      stopped, started off again at full speed, changed its course, stopped
      anew, uneasy, spying out every danger, uncertain what route to take, when
      suddenly it began to run with great bounds, disappearing finally in a
      large patch of beet-root. All the men had waked up to watch the course of
      the animal.
    

      Rene Lamanoir exclaimed:
    

      “We are not at all gallant this morning,” and; regarding his
      neighbor, the little Baroness de Serennes, who struggled against sleep, he
      said to her in a low tone: “You are thinking of your husband,
      baroness. Reassure yourself; he will not return before Saturday, so you
      have still four days.”
    

      She answered with a sleepy smile:
    

      “How stupid you are!” Then, shaking off her torpor, she added:
      “Now, let somebody say something to make us laugh. You, Monsieur
      Chenal, who have the reputation of having had more love affairs than the
      Duc de Richelieu, tell us a love story in which you have played a part;
      anything you like.”
    

      Leon Chenal, an old painter, who had once been very handsome, very strong,
      very proud of his physique and very popular with women, took his long
      white beard in his hand and smiled. Then, after a few moments' reflection,
      he suddenly became serious.
    

      “Ladies, it will not be an amusing tale, for I am going to relate to
      you the saddest love affair of my life, and I sincerely hope that none of
      my friends may ever pass through a similar experience.
    

      “I was twenty-five years of age and was pillaging along the coast of
      Normandy. I call 'pillaging' wandering about, with a knapsack on one's
      back, from inn to inn, under the pretext of making studies and sketching
      landscapes. I knew nothing more enjoyable than that happy-go-lucky
      wandering life, in which one is perfectly free, without shackles of any
      kind, without care, without preoccupation, without thinking even of the
      morrow. One goes in any direction one pleases, without any guide save his
      fancy, without any counsellor save his eyes. One stops because a running
      brook attracts one, because the smell of potatoes frying tickles one's
      olfactories on passing an inn. Sometimes it is the perfume of clematis
      which decides one in his choice or the roguish glance of the servant at an
      inn. Do not despise me for my affection for these rustics. These girls
      have a soul as well as senses, not to mention firm cheeks and fresh lips;
      while their hearty and willing kisses have the flavor of wild fruit. Love
      is always love, come whence it may. A heart that beats at your approach,
      an eye that weeps when you go away are things so rare, so sweet, so
      precious that they must never be despised.
    

      “I have had rendezvous in ditches full of primroses, behind the cow
      stable and in barns among the straw, still warm from the heat of the day.
      I have recollections of coarse gray cloth covering supple peasant skin and
      regrets for simple, frank kisses, more delicate in their unaffected
      sincerity than the subtle favors of charming and distinguished women.
    

      “But what one loves most amid all these varied adventures is the
      country, the woods, the rising of the sun, the twilight, the moonlight.
      These are, for the painter, honeymoon trips with Nature. One is alone with
      her in that long and quiet association. You go to sleep in the fields,
      amid marguerites and poppies, and when you open your eyes in the full
      glare of the sunlight you descry in the distance the little village with
      its pointed clock tower which sounds the hour of noon.
    

      “You sit down by the side of a spring which gushes out at the foot
      of an oak, amid a growth of tall, slender weeds, glistening with life. You
      go down on your knees, bend forward and drink that cold, pellucid water
      which wets your mustache and nose; you drink it with a physical pleasure,
      as though you kissed the spring, lip to lip. Sometimes, when you find a
      deep hole along the course of these tiny brooks, you plunge in quite
      naked, and you feel on your skin, from head to foot, as it were, an icy
      and delicious caress, the light and gentle quivering of the stream.
    

      “You are gay on the hills, melancholy on the edge of ponds, inspired
      when the sun is setting in an ocean of blood-red clouds and casts red
      reflections or the river. And at night, under the moon, which passes
      across the vault of heaven, you think of a thousand strange things which
      would never have occurred to your mind under the brilliant light of day.
    

      “So, in wandering through the same country where we, are this year,
      I came to the little village of Benouville, on the cliff between Yport and
      Etretat. I came from Fecamp, following the coast, a high coast as straight
      as a wall, with its projecting chalk cliffs descending perpendicularly
      into the sea. I had walked since early morning on the short grass, smooth
      and yielding as a carpet, that grows on the edge of the cliff. And,
      singing lustily, I walked with long strides, looking sometimes at the slow
      circling flight of a gull with its white curved wings outlined on the blue
      sky, sometimes at the brown sails of a fishing bark on the green sea. In
      short, I had passed a happy day, a day of liberty and of freedom from
      care.
    

      “A little farmhouse where travellers were lodged was pointed out to
      me, a kind of inn, kept by a peasant woman, which stood in the centre of a
      Norman courtyard surrounded by a double row of beeches.
    

      “Leaving the coast, I reached the hamlet, which was hemmed in by
      great trees, and I presented myself at the house of Mother Lecacheur.
    

      “She was an old, wrinkled and stern peasant woman, who seemed always
      to receive customers under protest, with a kind of defiance.
    

      “It was the month of May. The spreading apple trees covered the
      court with a shower of blossoms which rained unceasingly both upon people
      and upon the grass.
    

      “I said: 'Well, Madame Lecacheur, have you a room for me?'
    

      “Astonished to find that I knew her name, she answered:
    

      “'That depends; everything is let, but all the same I can find out.”
    

      “In five minutes we had come to an agreement, and I deposited my bag
      upon the earthen floor of a rustic room, furnished with a bed, two chairs,
      a table and a washbowl. The room looked into the large, smoky kitchen,
      where the lodgers took their meals with the people of the farm and the
      landlady, who was a widow.
    

      “I washed my hands, after which I went out. The old woman was making
      a chicken fricassee for dinner in the large fireplace in which hung the
      iron pot, black with smoke.
    

      “'You have travellers, then, at the present time?' said I to her.
    

      “She answered in an offended tone of voice:
    

      “'I have a lady, an English lady, who has reached years of maturity.
      She occupies the other room.'
    

      “I obtained, by means of an extra five sous a day, the privilege of
      dining alone out in the yard when the weather was fine.
    

      “My place was set outside the door, and I was beginning to gnaw the
      lean limbs of the Normandy chicken, to drink the clear cider and to munch
      the hunk of white bread, which was four days old but excellent.
    

      “Suddenly the wooden gate which gave on the highway was opened, and
      a strange lady directed her steps toward the house. She was very thin,
      very tall, so tightly enveloped in a red Scotch plaid shawl that one might
      have supposed she had no arms, if one had not seen a long hand appear just
      above the hips, holding a white tourist umbrella. Her face was like that
      of a mummy, surrounded with curls of gray hair, which tossed about at
      every step she took and made me think, I know not why, of a pickled
      herring in curl papers. Lowering her eyes, she passed quickly in front of
      me and entered the house.
    

      “That singular apparition cheered me. She undoubtedly was my
      neighbor, the English lady of mature age of whom our hostess had spoken.
    

      “I did not see her again that day. The next day, when I had settled
      myself to commence painting at the end of that beautiful valley which you
      know and which extends as far as Etretat, I perceived, on lifting my eyes
      suddenly, something singular standing on the crest of the cliff, one might
      have said a pole decked out with flags. It was she. On seeing me, she
      suddenly disappeared. I reentered the house at midday for lunch and took
      my seat at the general table, so as to make the acquaintance of this odd
      character. But she did not respond to my polite advances, was insensible
      even to my little attentions. I poured out water for her persistently, I
      passed her the dishes with great eagerness. A slight, almost
      imperceptible, movement of the head and an English word, murmured so low
      that I did not understand it, were her only acknowledgments.
    

      “I ceased occupying myself with her, although she had disturbed my
      thoughts.
    

      “At the end of three days I knew as much about her as did Madame
      Lecacheur herself.
    

      “She was called Miss Harriet. Seeking out a secluded village in
      which to pass the summer, she had been attracted to Benouville some six
      months before and did not seem disposed to leave it. She never spoke at
      table, ate rapidly, reading all the while a small book of the Protestant
      propaganda. She gave a copy of it to everybody. The cure himself had
      received no less than four copies, conveyed by an urchin to whom she had
      paid two sous commission. She said sometimes to our hostess abruptly,
      without preparing her in the least for the declaration:
    

      “'I love the Saviour more than all. I admire him in all creation; I
      adore him in all nature; I carry him always in my heart.'
    

      “And she would immediately present the old woman with one of her
      tracts which were destined to convert the universe.
    

      “In, the village she was not liked. In fact, the schoolmaster having
      pronounced her an atheist, a kind of stigma attached to her. The cure, who
      had been consulted by Madame Lecacheur, responded:
    

      “'She is a heretic, but God does not wish the death of the sinner,
      and I believe her to be a person of pure morals.'
    

      “These words, 'atheist,' 'heretic,' words which no one can precisely
      define, threw doubts into some minds. It was asserted, however, that this
      English woman was rich and that she had passed her life in travelling
      through every country in the world because her family had cast her off.
      Why had her family cast her off? Because of her impiety, of course!
    

      “She was, in fact, one of those people of exalted principles; one of
      those opinionated puritans, of which England produces so many; one of
      those good and insupportable old maids who haunt the tables d'hote of
      every hotel in Europe, who spoil Italy, poison Switzerland, render the
      charming cities of the Mediterranean uninhabitable, carry everywhere their
      fantastic manias their manners of petrified vestals, their indescribable
      toilets and a certain odor of india-rubber which makes one believe that at
      night they are slipped into a rubber casing.
    

      “Whenever I caught sight of one of these individuals in a hotel I
      fled like the birds who see a scarecrow in a field.
    

      “This woman, however, appeared so very singular that she did not
      displease me.
    

      “Madame Lecacheur, hostile by instinct to everything that was not
      rustic, felt in her narrow soul a kind of hatred for the ecstatic
      declarations of the old maid. She had found a phrase by which to describe
      her, a term of contempt that rose to her lips, called forth by I know not
      what confused and mysterious mental ratiocination. She said: 'That woman
      is a demoniac.' This epithet, applied to that austere and sentimental
      creature, seemed to me irresistibly droll. I myself never called her
      anything now but 'the demoniac,' experiencing a singular pleasure in
      pronouncing aloud this word on perceiving her.
    

      “One day I asked Mother Lecacheur: 'Well, what is our demoniac about
      to-day?'
    

      “To which my rustic friend replied with a shocked air:
    

      “'What do you think, sir? She picked up a toad which had had its paw
      crushed and carried it to her room and has put it in her washbasin and
      bandaged it as if it were a man. If that is not profanation I should like
      to know what is!'
    

      “On another occasion, when walking along the shore she bought a
      large fish which had just been caught, simply to throw it back into the
      sea again. The sailor from whom she had bought it, although she paid him
      handsomely, now began to swear, more exasperated, indeed, than if she had
      put her hand into his pocket and taken his money. For more than a month he
      could not speak of the circumstance without becoming furious and
      denouncing it as an outrage. Oh, yes! She was indeed a demoniac, this Miss
      Harriet, and Mother Lecacheur must have had an inspiration in thus
      christening her.
    

      “The stable boy, who was called Sapeur, because he had served in
      Africa in his youth, entertained other opinions. He said with a roguish
      air: 'She is an old hag who has seen life.'
    

      “If the poor woman had but known!
    

      “The little kind-hearted Celeste did not wait upon her willingly,
      but I was never able to understand why. Probably her only reason was that
      she was a stranger, of another race; of a different tongue and of another
      religion. She was, in fact, a demoniac!
    

      “She passed her time wandering about the country, adoring and
      seeking God in nature. I found her one evening on her knees in a cluster
      of bushes. Having discovered something red through the leaves, I brushed
      aside the branches, and Miss Harriet at once rose to her feet, confused at
      having been found thus, fixing on me terrified eyes like those of an owl
      surprised in open day.
    

      “Sometimes, when I was working among the rocks, I would suddenly
      descry her on the edge of the cliff like a lighthouse signal. She would be
      gazing in rapture at the vast sea glittering in the sunlight and the
      boundless sky with its golden tints. Sometimes I would distinguish her at
      the end of the valley, walking quickly with her elastic English step, and
      I would go toward her, attracted by I know not what, simply to see her
      illuminated visage, her dried-up, ineffable features, which seemed to glow
      with inward and profound happiness.
    

      “I would often encounter her also in the corner of a field, sitting
      on the grass under the shadow of an apple tree, with her little religious
      booklet lying open on her knee while she gazed out at the distance.
    

      “I could not tear myself away from that quiet country neighborhood,
      to which I was attached by a thousand links of love for its wide and
      peaceful landscape. I was happy in this sequestered farm, far removed from
      everything, but in touch with the earth, the good, beautiful, green earth.
      And—must I avow it?—there was, besides, a little curiosity
      which retained me at the residence of Mother Lecacheur. I wished to become
      acquainted a little with this strange Miss Harriet and to know what
      transpires in the solitary souls of those wandering old English women.
    

      “We became acquainted in a rather singular manner. I had just
      finished a study which appeared to me to be worth something, and so it
      was, as it sold for ten thousand francs fifteen years later. It was as
      simple, however, as two and two make four and was not according to
      academic rules. The whole right side of my canvas represented a rock, an
      enormous rock, covered with sea-wrack, brown, yellow and red, across which
      the sun poured like a stream of oil. The light fell upon the rock as
      though it were aflame without the sun, which was at my back, being
      visible. That was all. A first bewildering study of blazing, gorgeous
      light.
    

      “On the left was the sea, not the blue sea, the slate-colored sea,
      but a sea of jade, greenish, milky and solid beneath the deep-colored sky.
    

      “I was so pleased with my work that I danced from sheer delight as I
      carried it back to the inn. I would have liked the whole world to see it
      at once. I can remember that I showed it to a cow that was browsing by the
      wayside, exclaiming as I did so: 'Look at that, my old beauty; you will
      not often see its like again.'
    

      “When I had reached the house I immediately called out to Mother
      Lecacheur, shouting with all my might:
    

      “'Hullo, there! Mrs. Landlady, come here and look at this.'
    

      “The rustic approached and looked at my work with her stupid eyes
      which distinguished nothing and could not even tell whether the picture
      represented an ox or a house.
    

      “Miss Harriet just then came home, and she passed behind me just as
      I was holding out my canvas at arm's length, exhibiting it to our
      landlady. The demoniac could not help but see it, for I took care to
      exhibit the thing in such a way that it could not escape her notice. She
      stopped abruptly and stood motionless, astonished. It was her rock which
      was depicted, the one which she climbed to dream away her time
      undisturbed.
    

      “She uttered a British 'Aoh,' which was at once so accentuated and
      so flattering that I turned round to her, smiling, and said:
    

      “'This is my latest study, mademoiselle.'
    

      “She murmured rapturously, comically and tenderly:
    

      “'Oh! monsieur, you understand nature as a living thing.'
    

      “I colored and was more touched by that compliment than if it had
      come from a queen. I was captured, conquered, vanquished. I could have
      embraced her, upon my honor.
    

      “I took my seat at table beside her as usual. For the first time she
      spoke, thinking aloud:
    

      “'Oh! I do love nature.'
    

      “I passed her some bread, some water, some wine. She now accepted
      these with a little smile of a mummy. I then began to talk about the
      scenery.
    

      “After the meal we rose from the table together and walked leisurely
      across the courtyard; then, attracted doubtless by the fiery glow which
      the setting sun cast over the surface of the sea, I opened the gate which
      led to the cliff, and we walked along side by side, as contented as two
      persons might be who have just learned to understand and penetrate each
      other's motives and feelings.
    

      “It was one of those warm, soft evenings which impart a sense of
      ease to flesh and spirit alike. All is enjoyment, everything charms. The
      balmy air, laden with the perfume of grasses and the smell of seaweed,
      soothes the olfactory sense with its wild fragrance, soothes the palate
      with its sea savor, soothes the mind with its pervading sweetness.
    

      “We were now walking along the edge of the cliff, high above the
      boundless sea which rolled its little waves below us at a distance of a
      hundred metres. And we drank in with open mouth and expanded chest that
      fresh breeze, briny from kissing the waves, that came from the ocean and
      passed across our faces.
    

      “Wrapped in her plaid shawl, with a look of inspiration as she faced
      the breeze, the English woman gazed fixedly at the great sun ball as it
      descended toward the horizon. Far off in the distance a three-master in
      full sail was outlined on the blood-red sky and a steamship, somewhat
      nearer, passed along, leaving behind it a trail of smoke on the horizon.
      The red sun globe sank slowly lower and lower and presently touched the
      water just behind the motionless vessel, which, in its dazzling
      effulgence, looked as though framed in a flame of fire. We saw it plunge,
      grow smaller and disappear, swallowed up by the ocean.
    

      “Miss Harriet gazed in rapture at the last gleams of the dying day.
      She seemed longing to embrace the sky, the sea, the whole landscape.
    

      “She murmured: 'Aoh! I love—I love' I saw a tear in her eye.
      She continued: 'I wish I were a little bird, so that I could mount up into
      the firmament.'
    

      “She remained standing as I had often before seen her, perched on
      the cliff, her face as red as her shawl. I should have liked to have
      sketched her in my album. It would have been a caricature of ecstasy.
    

      “I turned away so as not to laugh.
    

      “I then spoke to her of painting as I would have done to a fellow
      artist, using the technical terms common among the devotees of the
      profession. She listened attentively, eagerly seeking to divine the
      meaning of the terms, so as to understand my thoughts. From time to time
      she would exclaim:
    

      “'Oh! I understand, I understand. It is very interesting.'
    

      “We returned home.
    

      “The next day, on seeing me, she approached me, cordially holding
      out her hand; and we at once became firm friends.
    

      “She was a good creature who had a kind of soul on springs, which
      became enthusiastic at a bound. She lacked equilibrium like all women who
      are spinsters at the age of fifty. She seemed to be preserved in a pickle
      of innocence, but her heart still retained something very youthful and
      inflammable. She loved both nature and animals with a fervor, a love like
      old wine fermented through age, with a sensuous love that she had never
      bestowed on men.
    

      “One thing is certain, that the sight of a bitch nursing her
      puppies, a mare roaming in a meadow with a foal at its side, a bird's nest
      full of young ones, screaming, with their open mouths and their enormous
      heads, affected her perceptibly.
    

      “Poor, solitary, sad, wandering beings! I love you ever since I
      became acquainted with Miss Harriet.
    

      “I soon discovered that she had something she would like to tell me,
      but dare not, and I was amused at her timidity. When I started out in the
      morning with my knapsack on my back, she would accompany me in silence as
      far as the end of the village, evidently struggling to find words with
      which to begin a conversation. Then she would leave me abruptly and walk
      away quickly with her springy step.
    

      “One day, however, she plucked up courage:
    

      “I would like to see how you paint pictures. Are you willing? I have
      been very curious.'
    

      “And she blushed as if she had said something very audacious.
    

      “I conducted her to the bottom of the Petit-Val, where I had begun a
      large picture.
    

      “She remained standing behind me, following all my gestures with
      concentrated attention. Then, suddenly, fearing perhaps that she was
      disturbing me, she said: 'Thank you,' and walked away.
    

      “But she soon became more friendly, and accompanied me every day,
      her countenance exhibiting visible pleasure. She carried her camp stool
      under her arm, not permitting me to carry it. She would remain there for
      hours, silent and motionless, following with her eyes the point of my
      brush, in its every movement. When I obtained unexpectedly just the effect
      I wanted by a dash of color put on with the palette knife, she
      involuntarily uttered a little 'Ah!' of astonishment, of joy, of
      admiration. She had the most tender respect for my canvases, an almost
      religious respect for that human reproduction of a part of nature's work
      divine. My studies appeared to her a kind of religious pictures, and
      sometimes she spoke to me of God, with the idea of converting me.
    

      “Oh, he was a queer, good-natured being, this God of hers! He was a
      sort of village philosopher without any great resources and without great
      power, for she always figured him to herself as inconsolable over
      injustices committed under his eyes, as though he were powerless to
      prevent them.
    

      “She was, however, on excellent terms with him, affecting even to be
      the confidante of his secrets and of his troubles. She would say:
    

      “'God wills' or 'God does not will,' just like a sergeant announcing
      to a recruit: 'The colonel has commanded.'
    

      “At the bottom of her heart she deplored my ignorance of the
      intentions of the Eternal, which she endeavored to impart to me.
    

      “Almost every day I found in my pockets, in my hat when I lifted it
      from the ground, in my paintbox, in my polished shoes, standing in front
      of my door in the morning, those little pious tracts which she no doubt,
      received directly from Paradise.
    

      “I treated her as one would an old friend, with unaffected
      cordiality. But I soon perceived that she had changed somewhat in her
      manner, though, for a while, I paid little attention to it.
    

      “When I was painting, whether in my valley or in some country lane,
      I would see her suddenly appear with her rapid, springy walk. She would
      then sit down abruptly, out of breath, as though she had been running or
      were overcome by some profound emotion. Her face would be red, that
      English red which is denied to the people of all other countries; then,
      without any reason, she would turn ashy pale and seem about to faint away.
      Gradually, however, her natural color would return and she would begin to
      speak.
    

      “Then, without warning, she would break off in the middle of a
      sentence, spring up from her seat and walk away so rapidly and so
      strangely that I was at my wits' ends to discover whether I had done or
      said anything to displease or wound her.
    

      “I finally came to the conclusion that those were her normal
      manners, somewhat modified no doubt in my honor during the first days of
      our acquaintance.
    

      “When she returned to the farm, after walking for hours on the windy
      coast, her long curls often hung straight down, as if their springs had
      been broken. This had hitherto seldom given her any concern, and she would
      come to dinner without embarrassment all dishevelled by her sister, the
      breeze.
    

      “But now she would go to her room and arrange the untidy locks, and
      when I would say, with familiar gallantry, which, however, always offended
      her:
    

      “'You are as beautiful as a star to-day, Miss Harriet,' a blush
      would immediately rise to her cheeks, the blush of a young girl, of a girl
      of fifteen.
    

      “Then she would suddenly become quite reserved and cease coming to
      watch me paint. I thought, 'This is only a fit of temper; it will blow
      over.' But it did not always blow over, and when I spoke to her she would
      answer me either with affected indifference or with sullen annoyance.
    

      “She became by turns rude, impatient and nervous. I never saw her
      now except at meals, and we spoke but little. I concluded at length that I
      must have offended her in some way, and, accordingly, I said to her one
      evening:
    

      “'Miss Harriet, why is it that you do not act toward me as formerly?
      What have I done to displease you? You are causing me much pain!'
    

      “She replied in a most comical tone of anger:
    

      “'I am just the same with you as formerly. It is not true, not
      true,' and she ran upstairs and shut herself up in her room.
    

      “Occasionally she would look at me in a peculiar manner. I have
      often said to myself since then that those who are condemned to death must
      look thus when they are informed that their last day has come. In her eye
      there lurked a species of insanity, an insanity at once mystical and
      violent; and even more, a fever, an aggravated longing, impatient and
      impotent, for the unattained and unattainable.
    

      “Nay, it seemed to me there was also going on within her a struggle
      in which her heart wrestled with an unknown force that she sought to
      master, and even, perhaps, something else. But what do I know? What do I
      know?
    

      “It was indeed a singular revelation.
    

      “For some time I had commenced to work, as soon as daylight
      appeared, on a picture the subject of which was as follows:
    

      “A deep ravine, enclosed, surmounted by two thickets of trees and
      vines, extended into the distance and was lost, submerged in that milky
      vapor, in that cloud like cotton down that sometimes floats over valleys
      at daybreak. And at the extreme end of that heavy, transparent fog one
      saw, or, rather, surmised, that a couple of human beings were approaching,
      a human couple, a youth and a maiden, their arms interlaced, embracing
      each other, their heads inclined toward each other, their lips meeting.
    

      “A first ray of the sun, glistening through the branches, pierced
      that fog of the dawn, illuminated it with a rosy reflection just behind
      the rustic lovers, framing their vague shadows in a silvery background. It
      was well done; yes, indeed, well done.
    

      “I was working on the declivity which led to the Valley of Etretat.
      On this particular morning I had, by chance, the sort of floating vapor
      which I needed. Suddenly something rose up in front of me like a phantom;
      it was Miss Harriet. On seeing me she was about to flee. But I called
      after her, saying: 'Come here, come here, mademoiselle. I have a nice
      little picture for you.'
    

      “She came forward, though with seeming reluctance. I handed her my
      sketch. She said nothing, but stood for a long time, motionless, looking
      at it, and suddenly she burst into tears. She wept spasmodically, like men
      who have striven hard to restrain their tears, but who can do so no longer
      and abandon themselves to grief, though still resisting. I sprang to my
      feet, moved at the sight of a sorrow I did not comprehend, and I took her
      by the hand with an impulse of brusque affection, a true French impulse
      which acts before it reflects.
    

      “She let her hands rest in mine for a few seconds, and I felt them
      quiver as if all her nerves were being wrenched. Then she withdrew her
      hands abruptly, or, rather, snatched them away.
    

      “I recognized that tremor, for I had felt it, and I could not be
      deceived. Ah! the love tremor of a woman, whether she be fifteen or fifty
      years of age, whether she be of the people or of society, goes so straight
      to my heart that I never have any hesitation in understanding it!
    

      “Her whole frail being had trembled, vibrated, been overcome. I knew
      it. She walked away before I had time to say a word, leaving me as
      surprised as if I had witnessed a miracle and as troubled as if I had
      committed a crime.
    

      “I did not go in to breakfast. I went to take a turn on the edge of
      the cliff, feeling that I would just as lief weep as laugh, looking on the
      adventure as both comic and deplorable and my position as ridiculous,
      believing her unhappy enough to go insane.
    

      “I asked myself what I ought to do. It seemed best for me to leave
      the place, and I immediately resolved to do so.
    

      “Somewhat sad and perplexed, I wandered about until dinner time and
      entered the farmhouse just when the soup had been served up.
    

      “I sat down at the table as usual. Miss Harriet was there, eating
      away solemnly, without speaking to any one, without even lifting her eyes.
      Her manner and expression were, however, the same as usual.
    

      “I waited patiently till the meal had been finished, when, turning
      toward the landlady, I said: 'Well, Madame Lecacheur, it will not be long
      now before I shall have to take my leave of you.'
    

      “The good woman, at once surprised and troubled, replied in her
      drawling voice: 'My dear sir, what is it you say? You are going to leave
      us after I have become so accustomed to you?'
    

      “I glanced at Miss Harriet out of the corner of my eye. Her
      countenance did not change in the least. But Celeste, the little servant,
      looked up at me. She was a fat girl, of about eighteen years of age, rosy,
      fresh, as strong as a horse, and possessing the rare attribute of
      cleanliness. I had kissed her at odd times in out-of-the-way corners,
      after the manner of travellers—nothing more.
    

      “The dinner being at length over, I went to smoke my pipe under the
      apple trees, walking up and down from one end of the enclosure to the
      other. All the reflections which I had made during the day, the strange
      discovery of the morning, that passionate and grotesque attachment for me,
      the recollections which that revelation had suddenly called up,
      recollections at once charming and perplexing, perhaps also that look
      which the servant had cast on me at the announcement of my departure—all
      these things, mixed up and combined, put me now in a reckless humor, gave
      me a tickling sensation of kisses on the lips and in my veins a something
      which urged me on to commit some folly.
    

      “Night was coming on, casting its dark shadows under the trees, when
      I descried Celeste, who had gone to fasten up the poultry yard at the
      other end of the enclosure. I darted toward her, running so noiselessly
      that she heard nothing, and as she got up from closing the small trapdoor
      by which the chickens got in and out, I clasped her in my arms and rained
      on her coarse, fat face a shower of kisses. She struggled, laughing all
      the time, as she was accustomed to do in such circumstances. Why did I
      suddenly loose my grip of her? Why did I at once experience a shock? What
      was it that I heard behind me?
    

      “It was Miss Harriet, who had come upon us, who had seen us and who
      stood in front of us motionless as a spectre. Then she disappeared in the
      darkness.
    

      “I was ashamed, embarrassed, more desperate at having been thus
      surprised by her than if she had caught me committing some criminal act.
    

      “I slept badly that night. I was completely unnerved and haunted by
      sad thoughts. I seemed to hear loud weeping, but in this I was no doubt
      deceived. Moreover, I thought several times that I heard some one walking
      up and down in the house and opening the hall door.
    

      “Toward morning I was overcome by fatigue and fell asleep. I got up
      late and did not go downstairs until the late breakfast, being still in a
      bewildered state, not knowing what kind of expression to put on.
    

      “No one had seen Miss Harriet. We waited for her at table, but she
      did not appear. At length Mother Lecacheur went to her room. The English
      woman had gone out. She must have set out at break of day, as she was wont
      to do, in order to see the sun rise.
    

      “Nobody seemed surprised at this, and we began to eat in silence.
    

      “The weather was hot, very hot, one of those broiling, heavy days
      when not a leaf stirs. The table had been placed out of doors, under an
      apple tree, and from time to time Sapeur had gone to the cellar to draw a
      jug of cider, everybody was so thirsty. Celeste brought the dishes from
      the kitchen, a ragout of mutton with potatoes, a cold rabbit and a salad.
      Afterward she placed before us a dish of strawberries, the first of the
      season.
    

      “As I wished to wash and freshen these, I begged the servant to go
      and draw me a pitcher of cold water.
    

      “In about five minutes she returned, declaring that the well was
      dry. She had lowered the pitcher to the full extent of the cord and had
      touched the bottom, but on drawing the pitcher up again it was empty.
      Mother Lecacheur, anxious to examine the thing for herself, went and
      looked down the hole. She returned, announcing that one could see clearly
      something in the well, something altogether unusual. But this no doubt was
      bundles of straw, which a neighbor had thrown in out of spite.
    

      “I wished to look down the well also, hoping I might be able to
      clear up the mystery, and I perched myself close to the brink. I perceived
      indistinctly a white object. What could it be? I then conceived the idea
      of lowering a lantern at the end of a cord. When I did so the yellow flame
      danced on the layers of stone and gradually became clearer. All four of us
      were leaning over the opening, Sapeur and Celeste having now joined us.
      The lantern rested on a black-and-white indistinct mass, singular,
      incomprehensible. Sapeur exclaimed:
    

      “'It is a horse. I see the hoofs. It must have got out of the meadow
      during the night and fallen in headlong.'
    

      “But suddenly a cold shiver froze me to the marrow. I first
      recognized a foot, then a leg sticking up; the whole body and the other
      leg were completely under water.
    

      “I stammered out in a loud voice, trembling so violently that the
      lantern danced hither and thither over the slipper:
    

      “'It is a woman! Who-who-can it be? It is Miss Harriet!'
    

      “Sapeur alone did not manifest horror. He had witnessed many such
      scenes in Africa.
    

      “Mother Lecacheur and Celeste began to utter piercing screams and
      ran away.
    

      “But it was necessary to recover the corpse of the dead woman. I
      attached the young man securely by the waist to the end of the pulley rope
      and lowered him very slowly, watching him disappear in the darkness. In
      one hand he held the lantern and a rope in the other. Soon I recognized
      his voice, which seemed to come from the centre of the earth, saying:
    

      “'Stop!'
    

      “I then saw him fish something out of the water. It was the other
      leg. He then bound the two feet together and shouted anew:
    

      “'Haul up!'
    

      “I began to wind up, but I felt my arms crack, my muscles twitch,
      and I was in terror lest I should let the man fall to the bottom. When his
      head appeared at the brink I asked:
    

      “'Well?' as if I expected he had a message from the drowned woman.
    

      “We both got on the stone slab at the edge of the well and from
      opposite sides we began to haul up the body.
    

      “Mother Lecacheur and Celeste watched us from a distance, concealed
      from view behind the wall of the house. When they saw issuing from the
      hole the black slippers and white stockings of the drowned person they
      disappeared.
    

      “Sapeur seized the ankles, and we drew up the body of the poor
      woman. The head was shocking to look at, being bruised and lacerated, and
      the long gray hair, out of curl forevermore, hanging down tangled and
      disordered.
    

      “'In the name of all that is holy! how lean she is,' exclaimed
      Sapeur in a contemptuous tone.
    

      “We carried her into the room, and as the women did not put in an
      appearance I, with the assistance of the stable lad, dressed the corpse
      for burial.
    

      “I washed her disfigured face. Under the touch of my finger an eye
      was slightly opened and regarded me with that pale, cold look, that
      terrible look of a corpse which seems to come from the beyond. I braided
      as well as I could her dishevelled hair and with my clumsy hands arranged
      on her head a novel and singular coiffure. Then I took off her dripping
      wet garments, baring, not without a feeling of shame, as though I had been
      guilty of some profanation, her shoulders and her chest and her long arms,
      as slim as the twigs of a tree.
    

      “I next went to fetch some flowers, poppies, bluets, marguerites and
      fresh, sweet-smelling grass with which to strew her funeral couch.
    

      “I then had to go through the usual formalities, as I was alone to
      attend to everything. A letter found in her pocket, written at the last
      moment, requested that her body be buried in the village in which she had
      passed the last days of her life. A sad suspicion weighed on my heart. Was
      it not on my account that she wished to be laid to rest in this place?
    

      “Toward evening all the female gossips of the locality came to view
      the remains of the defunct, but I would not allow a single person to
      enter. I wanted to be alone, and I watched beside her all night.
    

      “I looked at the corpse by the flickering light of the candles, at
      this unhappy woman, unknown to us all, who had died in such a lamentable
      manner and so far away from home. Had she left no friends, no relations
      behind her? What had her infancy been? What had been her life? Whence had
      she come thither alone, a wanderer, lost like a dog driven from home? What
      secrets of sufferings and of despair were sealed up in that
      unprepossessing body, in that poor body whose outward appearance had
      driven from her all affection, all love?
    

      “How many unhappy beings there are! I felt that there weighed upon
      that human creature the eternal injustice of implacable nature! It was all
      over with her, without her ever having experienced, perhaps, that which
      sustains the greatest outcasts to wit, the hope of being loved once!
      Otherwise why should she thus have concealed herself, fled from the face
      of others? Why did she love everything so tenderly and so passionately,
      everything living that was not a man?
    

      “I recognized the fact that she believed in a God, and that she
      hoped to receive compensation from the latter for all the miseries she had
      endured. She would now disintegrate and become, in turn, a plant. She
      would blossom in the sun, the cattle would browse on her leaves, the birds
      would bear away the seeds, and through these changes she would become
      again human flesh. But that which is called the soul had been extinguished
      at the bottom of the dark well. She suffered no longer. She had given her
      life for that of others yet to come.
    

      “Hours passed away in this silent and sinister communion with the
      dead. A pale light at length announced the dawn of a new day; then a red
      ray streamed in on the bed, making a bar of light across the coverlet and
      across her hands. This was the hour she had so much loved. The awakened
      birds began to sing in the trees.
    

      “I opened the window to its fullest extent and drew back the
      curtains that the whole heavens might look in upon us, and, bending over
      the icy corpse, I took in my hands the mutilated head and slowly, without
      terror or disgust, I imprinted a kiss, a long kiss, upon those lips which
      had never before been kissed.”
    

      Leon Chenal remained silent. The women wept. We heard on the box seat the
      Count d'Atraille blowing his nose from time to time. The coachman alone
      had gone to sleep. The horses, who no longer felt the sting of the whip,
      had slackened their pace and moved along slowly. The drag, hardly
      advancing at all, seemed suddenly torpid, as if it had been freighted with
      sorrow.
    

   [Miss Harriet appeared in Le Gaulois, July 9, 1883, under the title
   of Miss Hastings. The story was later revised, enlarged; and partly
   reconstructed. This is what De Maupassant wrote to Editor Havard
   March 15, 1884, in an unedited letter, in regard to the title of the
   story that was to give its name to the volume:

   “I do not believe that Hastings is a bad name, inasmuch as it is
   known all over the world, and recalls the greatest facts in English
   history. Besides, Hastings is as much a name as Duval is with us.

   “The name Cherbuliez selected, Miss Revel, is no more like an
   English name than like a Turkish name. But here is another name as
   English as Hastings, and more euphonious; it is Miss Harriet.
   I will ask you therefore to substitute Harriet for Hastings.”

   It was in regard to this very tittle that De Maupassant had a
   disagreement with Audran and Boucheron director of the Bouffes
   Parisiens in October, 1890. They had given this title to an operetta
   about to be played at the Bouffes. It ended however, by their
   ceding to De Maupassant, and the title of the operetta was changed
   to Miss Helyett.]