MISTI

 I was very much interested at that time in a droll little woman. She was
      married, of course, as I have a horror of unmarried flirts. What enjoyment
      is there in making love to a woman who belongs to nobody and yet belongs
      to any one? And, besides, morality aside, I do not understand love as a
      trade. That disgusts me somewhat.

 The especial attraction in a married woman to a bachelor is that she gives
      him a home, a sweet, pleasant home where every one takes care of you and
      spoils you, from the husband to the servants. One finds everything
      combined there, love, friendship, even fatherly interest, bed and board,
      all, in fact, that constitutes the happiness of life, with this
      incalculable advantage, that one can change one's family from time to
      time, take up one's abode in all kinds of society in turn: in summer, in
      the country with the workman who rents you a room in his house; in winter
      with the townsfolk, or even with the nobility, if one is ambitious.

 I have another weakness; it is that I become attached to the husband as
      well as the wife. I acknowledge even that some husbands, ordinary or
      coarse as they may be, give me a feeling of disgust for their wives,
      however charming they may be. But when the husband is intellectual or
      charming I invariably become very much attached to him. I am careful if I
      quarrel with the wife not to quarrel with the husband. In this way I have
      made some of my best friends, and have also proved in many cases the
      incontestable superiority of the male over the female in the human
      species. The latter makes all sorts of trouble-scenes, reproaches, etc.;
      while the former, who has just as good a right to complain, treats you, on
      the contrary, as though you were the special Providence of his hearth.

 Well, my friend was a quaint little woman, a brunette, fanciful,
      capricious, pious, superstitious, credulous as a monk, but charming. She
      had a way of kissing one that I never saw in any one else—but that
      was not the attraction—and such a soft skin! It gave me intense
      delight merely to hold her hands. And an eye—her glance was like a
      slow caress, delicious and unending. Sometimes I would lean my head on her
      knee and we would remain motionless, she leaning over me with that subtle,
      enigmatic, disturbing smile that women have, while my eyes would be raised
      to hers, drinking sweetly and deliciously into my heart, like a form of
      intoxication, the glance of her limpid blue eyes, limpid as though they
      were full of thoughts of love, and blue as though they were a heaven of
      delights.

 Her husband, inspector of some large public works, was frequently away
      from home and left us our evenings free. Sometimes I spent them with her
      lounging on the divan with my forehead on one of her knees; while on the
      other lay an enormous black cat called “Misti,” whom she
      adored. Our fingers would meet on the cat's back and would intertwine in
      her soft silky fur. I felt its warm body against my cheek, trembling with
      its eternal purring, and occasionally a paw would reach out and place on
      my mouth, or my eyelid, five unsheathed claws which would prick my
      eyelids, and then be immediately withdrawn.

 Sometimes we would go out on what we called our escapades. They were very
      innocent, however. They consisted in taking supper at some inn in the
      suburbs, or else, after dining at her house or at mine, in making the
      round of the cheap cafes, like students out for a lark.

 We would go into the common drinking places and take our seats at the end
      of the smoky den on two rickety chairs, at an old wooden table. A cloud of
      pungent smoke, with which blended an odor of fried fish from dinner,
      filled the room. Men in smocks were talking in loud tones as they drank
      their petits verres, and the astonished waiter placed before us two cherry
      brandies.

 She, trembling, charmingly afraid, would raise her double black veil as
      far as her nose, and then take up her glass with the enjoyment that one
      feels at doing something delightfully naughty. Each cherry she swallowed
      made her feel as if she had done something wrong, each swallow of the
      burning liquor had on her the affect of a delicate and forbidden
      enjoyment.

 Then she would say to me in a low tone: “Let us go.” And we
      would leave, she walking quickly with lowered head between the drinkers
      who watched her going by with a look of displeasure. And as soon as we got
      into the street she would give a great sigh of relief, as if we had
      escaped some terrible danger.

 Sometimes she would ask me with a shudder:

 “Suppose they, should say something rude to me in those places, what
      would you do?” “Why, I would defend you, parbleu!” I
      would reply in a resolute manner. And she would squeeze my arm for
      happiness, perhaps with a vague wish that she might be insulted and
      protected, that she might see men fight on her account, even those men,
      with me!

 One evening as we sat at a table in a tavern at Montmartre, we saw an old
      woman in tattered garments come in, holding in her hand a pack of dirty
      cards. Perceiving a lady, the old woman at once approached us and offered
      to tell my friend's fortune. Emma, who in her heart believed in
      everything, was trembling with longing and anxiety, and she made a place
      beside her for the old woman.

 The latter, old, wrinkled, her eyes with red inflamed rings round them,
      and her mouth without a single tooth in it, began to deal her dirty cards
      on the table. She dealt them in piles, then gathered them up, and then
      dealt them out again, murmuring indistinguishable words. Emma, turning
      pale, listened with bated breath, gasping with anxiety and curiosity.

 The fortune-teller broke silence. She predicted vague happenings:
      happiness and children, a fair young man, a voyage, money, a lawsuit, a
      dark man, the return of some one, success, a death. The mention of this
      death attracted the younger woman's attention. “Whose death? When?
      In what manner?”

 The old woman replied: “Oh, as to that, these cards are not certain
      enough. You must come to my place to-morrow; I will tell you about it with
      coffee grounds which never make a mistake.”

 Emma turned anxiously to me:

 “Say, let us go there to-morrow. Oh, please say yes. If not, you
      cannot imagine how worried I shall be.”

 I began to laugh.

 “We will go if you wish it, dearie.”

 The old woman gave us her address. She lived on the sixth floor, in a
      wretched house behind the Buttes-Chaumont. We went there the following
      day.

 Her room, an attic containing two chairs and a bed, was filled with
      strange objects, bunches of herbs hanging from nails, skins of animals,
      flasks and phials containing liquids of various colors. On the table a
      stuffed black cat looked out of eyes of glass. He seemed like the demon of
      this sinister dwelling.

 Emma, almost fainting with emotion, sat down on a chair and exclaimed:

 “Oh, dear, look at that cat; how like it is to Misti.”

 And she explained to the old woman that she had a cat “exactly like
      that, exactly like that!”

 The old woman replied gravely:

 “If you are in love with a man, you must not keep it.”

 Emma, suddenly filled with fear, asked:

 “Why not?”

 The old woman sat down familiarly beside her and took her hand.

 “It was the undoing of my life,” she said.

 My friend wanted to hear about it. She leaned against the old woman,
      questioned her, begged her to tell. At length the woman agreed to do so.

 “I loved that cat,” she said, “as one would love a
      brother. I was young then and all alone, a seamstress. I had only him,
      Mouton. One of the tenants had given it to me. He was as intelligent as a
      child, and gentle as well, and he worshiped me, my dear lady, he worshiped
      me more than one does a fetish. All day long he would sit on my lap
      purring, and all night long on my pillow; I could feel his heart beating,
      in fact.

 “Well, I happened to make an acquaintance, a fine young man who was
      working in a white-goods house. That went on for about three months on a
      footing of mere friendship. But you know one is liable to weaken, it may
      happen to any one, and, besides, I had really begun to love him. He was so
      nice, so nice, and so good. He wanted us to live together, for economy's
      sake. I finally allowed him to come and see me one evening. I had not made
      up my mind to anything definite; oh, no! But I was pleased at the idea
      that we should spend an hour together.

 “At first he behaved very well, said nice things to me that made my
      heart go pit-a-pat. And then he kissed me, madame, kissed me as one does
      when they love. I remained motionless, my eyes closed, in a paroxysm of
      happiness. But, suddenly, I felt him start violently and he gave a scream,
      a scream that I shall never forget. I opened my eyes and saw that Mouton
      had sprung at his face and was tearing the skin with his claws as if it
      had been a linen rag. And the blood was streaming down like rain, madame.

 “I tried to take the cat away, but he held on tight, scratching all
      the time; and he bit me, he was so crazy. I finally got him and threw him
      out of the window, which was open, for it was summer.

 “When I began to bathe my poor friend's face, I noticed that his
      eyes were destroyed, both his eyes!

 “He had to go to the hospital. He died of grief at the end of a
      year. I wanted to keep him with me and provide for him, but he would not
      agree to it. One would have supposed that he hated me after the
      occurrence.

 “As for Mouton, his back was broken by the fall, The janitor picked
      up his body. I had him stuffed, for in spite of all I was fond of him. If
      he acted as he did it was because he loved me, was it not?”

 The old woman was silent and began to stroke the lifeless animal whose
      body trembled on its iron framework.

 Emma, with sorrowful heart, had forgotten about the predicted death—or,
      at least, she did not allude to it again, and she left, giving the woman
      five francs.

 As her husband was to return the following day, I did not go to the house
      for several days. When I did go I was surprised at not seeing Misti. I
      asked where he was.

 She blushed and replied:

 “I gave him away. I was uneasy.”

 I was astonished.

 “Uneasy? Uneasy? What about?”

 She gave me a long kiss and said in a low tone:

 “I was uneasy about your eyes, my dear.”

 Misti appeared in. Gil Blas of January 22, 1884, over the signature
   of “MAUFRIGNEUSE.”