[

51 ] 

‘MO-POKE!’

 ‘ Yes

, I’m from out back,’ said a dark, wiry little man,
as he dismounted from his horse at a Queensland
frontier-township hotel, in answer to a question from
one of a knot of bushmen and drovers assembled in the
verandah. ‘Out back beyond the Warburton, an’ a
nice warm time I’ve had of it, too!’

 ‘My eye!’ exclaimed the first speaker. ‘Been right
away in that new country we been hearin’ of, eh? What
like a shop is it, mate?’

 ‘Oh, the country’s right enough; lots o’ grass an
water,’ replied the newcomer, as, giving his horse to the
groom, he strode into the bar, ‘only the mopokes is so
cussed bad an’ thick in them parts that there’s no livin’ TN: apostrophe invisible for a quiet man. Roll up, lads, an’ give it a name!
It’s a long time since I felt so dry!’

 ‘What did yer mean by “mopokes,” just now, mate?’
queried an elderly, grizzled overlander, as, lighting their
pipes, the party sat down on the wide wooden bench.
‘Was it snakes?’

 ‘No, friend, it weren’t snakes. Wusser—a heap. TN: original has ' Howsomever—I reckon it’s a hour or more till supper,
so I’ll just tell you how it all happened. Gosh!’ TN: closing quote invisible he [

52 ]

exclaimed emphatically, ‘what a comfort it is to git into
a Chrischin place agin!’

 ‘Well, boys,’ commenced the stranger, ‘last April, I
’greed with ole Davies—him as owns “Tylunga,” not
far from this—to go out an’ herd cattle for him on his
new Adelaide country. Wages was good, three notes a
week—I reckoned it were worth thirty afore I left—but
as for the tucker, well, a feller never knows what he can
live on till he tries it.

 ‘Howsomever, out we goes—him an’ me an three
others; an’ in time we gets there all right, an’ musters
the cattle, which was bein’ tailed at the head station—as
they calls ’arf-a-dozen bark humpies on a waterhole.
Then we drafts ’em into four mobs, an’ each on us takes
one away out to blazes into the bush, where the old
chap shows us our runs, which was about six or seven
mile apart.

 ‘Us herders had each a little hut to himself; so you
see, mates, a feller warn’t likely to quarrel with his
neighbours.

 ‘“Now, Wilson,” sez old Davies, as he gits ready to
start, arter puttin’ the things out o’ the waggonette at my
hut—sez he, “Now, Wilson, take good care of them
cattle in your charge, an’ mind none o’ them black
rascals come sneakin’ about ’em. If you sees any,
pepper ’em well. You’ve got a gun, an’ lots of ammunition.”

 ‘You’ll obsarve, mates, that, like a good many more
of his sort, he never thinks o’ the man. It’s only the
dashed stock as troubles ’em.

 [

53 ] 

‘Howsomever, off he drives, an’ presently I catches a
horse, as it was gettin’ close to sundown, an’ roun’s up
the mob an’ puts ’em on camp, ties the dog up, lights a
fire, an’ tries to make myself at home ’s well ’s I
could.

 ‘So a week or two slips away quiet enough, an’ I was
gettin’ awful tired of the game. The cattle didn’t hardly
want any lookin’ after, an’ all I could find to do was
cuttin’ up green-hide an’ plaiting whips. I thought that
the month ’d never go by till rations—such as they was—was
due from the head station on Wild Horse Lagoon,
nigh on thirty miles away.

 ‘Up to this I’d never heard a bird singin’ out after
dark. But one night, as I was just a-fallin’ off to sleep,
mopokes begins cryin’ like anything in the scrub close to
the clear patch where the hut was. Suddently the dog
starts barkin’ like mad, an’ I gets up an’ gives him a cut
with the whip. Back I goes to the bunk, an’ lies down
a-listenin’ to them birds, an’ thinkin’ to myself as all the
mopokes in Australy had got roun’ the hut that night.
Well, I cussed an’ swore at ’em no end for kickin’ up
such a shine; an’ Towzer a-growlin’, an’ a-snappin’, an’
pullin’ at his chain all the time. In a bit, up I gets
agen, and catches hold of the ole gun, opens the door,
an’ lets her off, both barrels. It was a moonlight night,
an’ I could see the backs of a few of the cattle from
where I stood, as, scared by the row, they gets off their
camp, an’ I hears the horse-bell just over in the scrub.
No more mopokes that night. But the next, at it they
goes agen. Now one’d call, it seemed like close to the [

54 ]

chimbly, then another, right at the head o’ my stretcher—outside,
o’ course—“mopoke!” “more-pork!” “mo-po!”
till I’m blessed if I didn’t get properly on my tail,
an’ takin’ the gun, I lets Towzer off o’ the chain, and
runs out an’ bangs away, as fast as I could load her, at
the scrub, where I reckoned them blasted fowls was
a-roostin’. An’ Towzer, he tears away into the bushes,
barkin’ most furious. No more mopokin’ that night, but
Towzer he never comes back agen. Thinkin’ he’d took
arter a kangaroo-rat, I goes inside, makes up the fire,
boils a quart o’ tea, an’ waits for daylight, which I
know’d couldn’t be long.

 ‘“I never did hear yet,” I says to myself, “of a feller
bein’ harnted by a pack o’ birds; but I’m blessed if this
game don’t ’pear somethin’ like it.”

 ‘You see, mates, I never dropped to the meanin’ o’ the
racket; for though I’ve been stock-keepin’ an’ drovin’
pretty near five-an’-twenty year now, I never had no experience
afore o’ the kind o’ gutter-snipes as was disturbin’
me these last two nights.

 ‘At bird-twitter, out I goes, ’spectin’ to see Towzer
under his sheet o’ bark. I seen no Towzer; an’, what’s
more, I seen no cattle neither. They never moved off
camp afore sunrise; an’, fearin’ les’ they’d made a clean
break of it, I runs into the hut, collars my bridle, an’ off
after the mokes.

 ‘When I gets into the scrub, I hears the bell just
ahead, an’ I hears, too, a few o’ them cussed birds
a-strainin’ their throats, callin’ about, as if they hadn’t
done enough through the night.

 [

55 ] 

‘Well, I follers the bell back’ards an’ for’ards, without
seemin’ to get any nearer to the horses, till I was nigh
sick o’ stumblin’ over logs; an’ o’ swearin’ what I
wouldn’t do to ’em when I gets ’em, an’ o’ singin’ out for
Towzer.

 ‘All of a suddent, the bell sounds not ten yards away
in a patch o’ thick dogwood scrub, an’ as I makes off
full trot, I nearly falls over somethin’ soft. Lookin’
down, I sees poor ole Towzer lyin’ there with his
head caved in, and a bit o’ broken spear stickin’ in
him.

 ‘My Colonial, mates! I tumbles fast enough then,
when it were too late. Jumpin’ through the scrub to
where I last heard the bell, I runs slap up agen six ugly
black beasts o’ niggers, an’ one on ’em was just a-startin’ to
shake the dashed bell, which was hangin’ roun’ his neck.
Close to ’em lies my best horse, ole “Cossack,” dead’s a
herrin’.

 ‘I takes it all in in a flash; an’ afore you could say
“knife” I’d slung the bridle in their faces, and was
makin’ tracks for the hut at the rate o’ sixty miles a hour—leastways
it seemed so to me.

 ‘Whizz, whizz! come the spears; but the scrub was
too thick, and ne’er a one touches me. Yellin’ like ole
Nick, after me they tears, full split, but I show’s ’em
good foot for it till I comes in sight o’ the hut, a-standin’
there so quiet-like, with the chimbly smokin’ away, an’
the door wide open.

 ‘Now, mates, what should make me, insted o’ rushin’
in an’ gettin’ the gun, an’ lettin’ the darkies know what [

56 ]

o’clock it was, rip right past the hut an’ shin up a big
gum tree about twenty yards away? I can’t make out
what come over me to do sich a thing. But so it were.
An’ up I swarms to nearly the top limb as the murderin’
willians comes out on to the open. In another minute
eight or nine others tumbles out o’ the hut, where they’d
been waitin’ on chance I might git away from the fust
gang, an’ they all gathers roun’ the ole gum, a-lookin’ up,
for all the world like a lot o’ hungry dogs at a
’possum.

 ‘“Mo-poke, mo-poke!” sings out one, an’ another lot
comes runnin’ up from the back scrub, just about where
I should ha’ hit if the Lord hadn’t put it into my mind
to take the tree for it.

 ‘But this pitchin’s terrible dry work, lads,’ suddenly
broke off the narrator. ‘Come inside, an’ let’s have
another long-sleever apiece, an’ then I’ll finish the yarn.
Spite o’ them “mopokes” I’ve got a bit o’ stuff left
yet.

 ‘Well, mates,’ went on Wilson, as the party resumed
their seats, ‘the darkies throwed their spears, an’ slings
their bommerangs, but it weren’t no use, I was too high
up for ’em, and the nighest spear as come out of a
couple o’ dozen, sticks in a good six foot below my
limb. Seein’ this, one beggar gets the axe from the
wood-heap. But she were old an’ blunt like her owner,
ole Davies, an’ I soon see by the way they shapes as
it’d take ’em a couple o’ years to fall me. For a while
they niggles away at the big butt, turn an’ turn about,
then jacks the contract, gruntin’ like a lot o’ pigs.

 [

57 ] 

‘Next move were, one gets the gun out o’ the hut,
an’ I scwoushes down into a six-inch heap, till I remembers
she weren’t loaded; an’ I didn’t give ’em
credit for knowin’ how to do that.

 ‘The mopoke as got her points her most careful, with
the stock agen his belly, an’ with a grin at his mates, as
much as to reckon, “You watch me pot him,” he
shouts “Bung!” an’ as true’s I’m sittin’ here, I bursts
out larfin’ to see them black fools a-starin’ up so
hard, and wonderin’ why I didn’t fall down dead
man.

 ‘Presen’ly, ’bout half way up my tree, they spots
a good-sized pipe, an’ bringin’ a fire-stick from the hut,
up one comes like a lamplighter. I knowed the ole
gum was sound an’ green enough at the butt, but I sees
by the pipe that some of the top limbs must be holler,
an’ I didn’ fancy this last move a little bit. So, as he’s
busy straddled-out, a-blowin’ and a-puffin’ to raise the
flame, I nips down, pulls out the spear, an’ lets drive at
him ’s hard ’s I could. You never see such a thing in
your lives! It hit him just acrost the loins, an’ goes
more’n half way through him. He just gives a wriggle
or two and twists over into a fork and lies there, a
proper stiff ’un.

 ‘You bet, lads, I was proud’s a dog with a tin tail; an’
sez I, “One for poor Towzer, you pot-bellied willian!”
By gosh! didn’t they yell, an’ dance, an’ carry on when
they sees this, an’ me safe agen back in the ole
perch.

 ‘Runnin’ to the hut, they tears out the slabs in a [

58 ]

wink, piles ’em up at the butt of the ole gum, and sets
fire to ’em.

 ‘In a minute or two, I couldn’t see a stem for smoke;
but, as they was green belar, not a blaze could they get
out of ’em.

 ‘Well, I was squattin’ up there, a-peepin’ down
through the smoke for the next feller as wanted to
show off his climbin’ abilities, when I hears a noise of
horses gallopin’, an’ men shoutin’, an’ shots a-poppin’ off
like Billy-ho.

 ‘Down I comes through the smoke, an’ just clear
o’ the tree was five darkies a-lyin’ TN: punctuation invisible stretched out as would
never cry “mo-poke!” no more. Not another soul,
dead or alive, could I see. But presen’ly back canters
ole Davies, an’ says he, cool as you like, “Hello,
Wilson,” says he, “is that you? Where’s the rest o’ the
cattle? There’s eight head short yet!” Darn his ole
skin, an’ all bosses like him, as thinks more of a few
head o’ stock than a man’s life!

 ‘You see, lads, when the cattle, disturbed by poor
Towzer a-barkin’, and me a-firin’, moves quietly off afore
daybreak, one lot of nigs follers ’em up, an’ one lot stops
to ’tend on me.

 ‘Them with the cattle, after they’d gone a little way,
starts a-spearin’ ’em, an’ the mob breaks, an’ never stops
till they gets to the fust seven-mile hut, where the other
lot was; and the chap there, seein’ some with spears
stickin’ in ’em, gallops off to the head station, and out
comes ole Davies an’ all hands.

 ‘No; no more new country for me—not if I knows it! [

59 ]

I’m a-gettin’ too old now for such a little game as they
played on me out there. Is that the supper-bell a-ringin’?
Well, it’s the finest sound I’ve heard for five
’underd miles an’ more.’