MOIRON
    

      As we were still talking about Pranzini, M. Maloureau, who had been
      attorney general under the Empire, said: “Oh! I formerly knew a very
      curious affair, curious for several reasons, as you will see.
    

      “I was at that time imperial attorney in one of the provinces. I had
      to take up the case which has remained famous under the name of the Moiron
      case.
    

      “Monsieur Moiron, who was a teacher in the north of France, enjoyed
      an excellent reputation throughout the whole country. He was a person of
      intelligence, quiet, very religious, a little taciturn; he had married in
      the district of Boislinot, where he exercised his profession. He had had
      three children, who had died of consumption, one after the other. From
      this time he seemed to bestow upon the youngsters confided to his care all
      the tenderness of his heart. With his own money he bought toys for his
      best scholars and for the good boys; he gave them little dinners and
      stuffed them with delicacies, candy and cakes: Everybody loved this good
      man with his big heart, when suddenly five of his pupils died, in a
      strange manner, one after the other. It was supposed that there was an
      epidemic due to the condition of the water, resulting from drought; they
      looked for the causes without being able to discover them, the more so
      that the symptoms were so peculiar. The children seemed to be attacked by
      a feeling of lassitude; they would not eat, they complained of pains in
      their stomachs, dragged along for a short time, and died in frightful
      suffering.
    

      “A post-mortem examination was held over the last one, but nothing
      was discovered. The vitals were sent to Paris and analyzed, and they
      revealed the presence of no toxic substance.
    

      “For a year nothing new developed; then two little boys, the best
      scholars in the class, Moiron's favorites, died within four days of each
      other. An examination of the bodies was again ordered, and in both of them
      were discovered tiny fragments of crushed glass. The conclusion arrived at
      was that the two youngsters must imprudently have eaten from some
      carelessly cleaned receptacle. A glass broken over a pail of milk could
      have produced this frightful accident, and the affair would have been
      pushed no further if Moiron's servant had not been taken sick at this
      time. The physician who was called in noticed the same symptoms he had
      seen in the children. He questioned her and obtained the admission that
      she had stolen and eaten some candies that had been bought by the teacher
      for his scholars.
    

      “On an order from the court the schoolhouse was searched, and a
      closet was found which was full of toys and dainties destined for the
      children. Almost all these delicacies contained bits of crushed glass or
      pieces of broken needles!
    

      “Moiron was immediately arrested; but he seemed so astonished and
      indignant at the suspicion hanging over him that he was almost released.
      How ever, indications of his guilt kept appearing, and baffled in my mind
      my first conviction, based on his excellent reputation, on his whole life,
      on the complete absence of any motive for such a crime.
    

      “Why should this good, simple, religious man have killed little
      children, and the very children whom he seemed to love the most, whom he
      spoiled and stuffed with sweet things, for whom he spent half his salary
      in buying toys and bonbons?
    

      “One must consider him insane to believe him guilty of this act.
      Now, Moiron seemed so normal, so quiet, so rational and sensible that it
      seemed impossible to adjudge him insane.
    

      “However, the proofs kept growing! In none of the candies that were
      bought at the places where the schoolmaster secured his provisions could
      the slightest trace of anything suspicious be found.
    

      “He then insisted that an unknown enemy must have opened his
      cupboard with a false key in order to introduce the glass and the needles
      into the eatables. And he made up a whole story of an inheritance
      dependent on the death of a child, determined on and sought by some
      peasant, and promoted thus by casting suspicions on the schoolmaster. This
      brute, he claimed, did not care about the other children who were forced
      to die as well.
    

      “The story was possible. The man appeared to be so sure of himself
      and in such despair that we should undoubtedly have acquitted him,
      notwithstanding the charges against him, if two crushing discoveries had
      not been made, one after the other.
    

      “The first one was a snuffbox full of crushed glass; his own
      snuffbox, hidden in the desk where he kept his money!
    

      “He explained this new find in an acceptable manner, as the ruse of
      the real unknown criminal. But a mercer from Saint-Marlouf came to the
      presiding judge and said that a gentleman had several times come to his
      store to buy some needles; and he always asked for the thinnest needles he
      could find, and would break them to see whether they pleased him. The man
      was brought forward in the presence of a dozen or more persons, and
      immediately recognized Moiron. The inquest revealed that the schoolmaster
      had indeed gone into Saint-Marlouf on the days mentioned by the tradesman.
    

      “I will pass over the terrible testimony of children on the choice
      of dainties and the care which he took to have them eat the things in his
      presence, and to remove the slightest traces.
    

      “Public indignation demanded capital punishment, and it became more
      and more insistent, overturning all objections.
    

      “Moiron was condemned to death, and his appeal was rejected. Nothing
      was left for him but the imperial pardon. I knew through my father that
      the emperor would not grant it.
    

      “One morning, as I was working in my study, the visit of the prison
      almoner was announced. He was an old priest who knew men well and
      understood the habits of criminals. He seemed troubled, ill at ease,
      nervous. After talking for a few minutes about one thing and another, he
      arose and said suddenly: 'If Moiron is executed, monsieur, you will have
      put an innocent man to death.'
    

      “Then he left without bowing, leaving me behind with the deep
      impression made by his words. He had pronounced them in such a sincere and
      solemn manner, opening those lips, closed and sealed by the secret of
      confession, in order to save a life.
    

      “An hour later I left for Paris, and my father immediately asked
      that I be granted an audience with the emperor.
    

      “The following day I was received. His majesty was working in a
      little reception room when we were introduced. I described the whole case,
      and I was just telling about the priest's visit when a door opened behind
      the sovereign's chair and the empress, who supposed he was alone,
      appeared. His majesty, Napoleon, consulted her. As soon as she had heard
      the matter, she exclaimed: 'This man must be pardoned. He must, since he
      is innocent.'
    

      “Why did this sudden conviction of a religious woman cast a terrible
      doubt in my mind?
    

      “Until then I had ardently desired a change of sentence. And now I
      suddenly felt myself the toy, the dupe of a cunning criminal who had
      employed the priest and confession as a last means of defence.
    

      “I explained my hesitancy to their majesties. The emperor remained
      undecided, urged on one side by his natural kindness and held back on the
      other by the fear of being deceived by a criminal; but the empress, who
      was convinced that the priest had obeyed a divine inspiration, kept
      repeating: 'Never mind! It is better to spare a criminal than to kill an
      innocent man!' Her advice was taken. The death sentence was commuted to
      one of hard labor.
    

      “A few years later I heard that Moiron had again been called to the
      emperor's attention on account of his exemplary conduct in the prison at
      Toulon and was now employed as a servant by the director of the
      penitentiary.
    

      “For a long time I heard nothing more of this man. But about two
      years ago, while I was spending a summer near Lille with my cousin, De
      Larielle, I was informed one evening, just as we were sitting down to
      dinner, that a young priest wished to speak to me.
    

      “I had him shown in and he begged me to come to a dying man who
      desired absolutely to see me. This had often happened to me in my long
      career as a magistrate, and, although I had been set aside by the
      Republic, I was still often called upon in similar circumstances. I
      therefore followed the priest, who led me to a miserable little room in a
      large tenement house.
    

      “There I found a strange-looking man on a bed of straw, sitting with
      his back against the wall, in order to get his breath. He was a sort of
      skeleton, with dark, gleaming eyes.
    

      “As soon as he saw me, he murmured: 'Don't you recognize me?'
    

      “'No.'
    

      “'I am Moiron.'
    

      “I felt a shiver run through me, and I asked 'The schoolmaster?'
    

      “'Yes.'
    

      “'How do you happen to be here?'
    

      “'The story is too long. I haven't time to tell it. I was going to
      die —and that priest was brought to me—and as I knew that you
      were here I sent for you. It is to you that I wish to confess—since
      you were the one who once saved my life.'
    

      “His hands clutched the straw of his bed through the sheet and he
      continued in a hoarse, forcible and low tone: 'You see—I owe you the
      truth—I owe it to you—for it must be told to some one before I
      leave this earth.
    

      “'It is I who killed the children—all of them. I did it—for
      revenge!
    

      “'Listen. I was an honest, straightforward, pure man—adoring
      God—this good Father—this Master who teaches us to love, and
      not the false God, the executioner, the robber, the murderer who governs
      the earth. I had never done any harm; I had never committed an evil act. I
      was as good as it is possible to be, monsieur.
    

      “'I married and had children, and I loved them as no father or
      mother ever loved their children. I lived only for them. I was wild about
      them. All three of them died! Why? why? What had I done? I was rebellious,
      furious; and suddenly my eyes were opened as if I were waking up out of a
      sleep. I understood that God is bad. Why had He killed my children? I
      opened my eyes and saw that He loves to kill. He loves only that,
      monsieur. He gives life but to destroy it! God, monsieur, is a murderer!
      He needs death every day. And He makes it of every variety, in order the
      better to be amused. He has invented sickness and accidents in order to
      give Him diversion all through the months and the years; and when He grows
      tired of this, He has epidemics, the plague, cholera, diphtheria,
      smallpox, everything possible! But this does not satisfy Him; all these
      things are too similar; and so from time to time He has wars, in order to
      see two hundred thousand soldiers killed at once, crushed in blood and in
      the mud, blown apart, their arms and legs torn off, their heads smashed by
      bullets, like eggs that fall on the ground.
    

      “'But this is not all. He has made men who eat each other. And then,
      as men become better than He, He has made beasts, in order to see men hunt
      them, kill them and eat them. That is not all. He has made tiny little
      animals which live one day, flies who die by the millions in one hour,
      ants which we are continually crushing under our feet, and so many, many
      others that we cannot even imagine. And all these things are continually
      killing each other and dying. And the good Lord looks on and is amused,
      for He sees everything, the big ones as well as the little ones, those who
      are in the drops of water and those in the other firmaments. He watches
      them and is amused. Wretch!
    

       “'Then, monsieur, I began to kill children. I played a trick
on Him. He
      did not get those. It was not He, but I! And I would have killed many
      others, but you caught me. There!
    

      “'I was to be executed. I! How He would have laughed! Then I asked
      for a priest, and I lied. I confessed to him. I lied and I lived.
    

      “'Now, all is over. I can no longer escape from Him. I no longer
      fear Him, monsieur; I despise Him too much.'
    

      “This poor wretch was frightful to see as he lay there gasping,
      opening an enormous mouth in order to utter words which could scarcely be
      heard, his breath rattling, picking at his bed and moving his thin legs
      under a grimy sheet as though trying to escape.
    

      “Oh! The mere remembrance of it is frightful!
    

      “'You have nothing more to say?' I asked.
    

      “'No, monsieur.'
    

      “'Then, farewell.'
    

      “'Farewell, monsieur, till some day——'
    

      “I turned to the ashen-faced priest, whose dark outline stood out
      against the wall, and asked: 'Are you going to stay here, Monsieur
      l'Abbe?'
    

      “'Yes.'
    

      “Then the dying man sneered: 'Yes, yes, He sends His vultures to the
      corpses.'
    

      “I had had enough of this. I opened the door and ran away.”