MONSIEUR PARENT

 George's father was sitting in an iron chair, watching his little son with
      concentrated affection and attention, as little George piled up the sand
      into heaps during one of their walks. He would take up the sand with both
      hands, make a mound of it, and put a chestnut leaf on top. His father saw
      no one but him in that public park full of people.

 The sun was just disappearing behind the roofs of the Rue Saint-Lazare,
      but still shed its rays obliquely on that little, overdressed crowd. The
      chestnut trees were lighted up by its yellow rays, and the three fountains
      before the lofty porch of the church had the appearance of liquid silver.

 Monsieur Parent, accidentally looking up at the church clock, saw that he
      was five minutes late. He got up, took the child by the arm, shook his
      dress, which was covered with sand, wiped his hands, and led him in the
      direction of the Rue Blanche. He walked quickly, so as not to get in after
      his wife, and the child could not keep up with him. He took him up and
      carried him, though it made him pant when he had to walk up the steep
      street. He was a man of forty, already turning gray, and rather stout. At
      last he reached his house. An old servant who had brought him up, one of
      those trusted servants who are the tyrants of families, opened the door to
      him.

 “Has madame come in yet?” he asked anxiously.

 The servant shrugged her shoulders:

 “When have you ever known madame to come home at half-past six,
      monsieur?”

 “Very well; all the better; it will give me time to change my
      things, for I am very warm.”

 The servant looked at him with angry and contemptuous pity. “Oh, I
      can see that well enough,” she grumbled. “You are covered with
      perspiration, monsieur. I suppose you walked quickly and carried the
      child, and only to have to wait until half-past seven, perhaps, for
      madame. I have made up my mind not to have dinner ready on time. I shall
      get it for eight o'clock, and if, you have to wait, I cannot help it;
      roast meat ought not to be burnt!”

 Monsieur Parent pretended not to hear, but went into his own room, and as
      soon as he got in, locked the door, so as to be alone, quite alone. He was
      so used now to being abused and badly treated that he never thought
      himself safe except when he was locked in.

 What could he do? To get rid of Julie seemed to him such a formidable
      thing to do that he hardly ventured to think of it, but it was just as
      impossible to uphold her against his wife, and before another month the
      situation would become unbearable between the two. He remained sitting
      there, with his arms hanging down, vaguely trying to discover some means
      to set matters straight, but without success. He said to himself: “It
      is lucky that I have George; without him I should-be very miserable.”

 Just then the clock struck seven, and he started up. Seven o'clock, and he
      had not even changed his clothes. Nervous and breathless, he undressed,
      put on a clean shirt, hastily finished his toilet, as if he had been
      expected in the next room for some event of extreme importance, and went
      into the drawing-room, happy at having nothing to fear. He glanced at the
      newspaper, went and looked out of the window, and then sat down again,
      when the door opened, and the boy came in, washed, brushed, and smiling.
      Parent took him up in his arms and kissed him passionately; then he tossed
      him into the air, and held him up to the ceiling, but soon sat down again,
      as he was tired with all his exertion. Then, taking George on his knee, he
      made him ride a-cock-horse. The child laughed and clapped his hands and
      shouted with pleasure, as did his father, who laughed until his big
      stomach shook, for it amused him almost more than it did the child.

 Parent loved him with all the heart of a weak, resigned, ill-used man. He
      loved him with mad bursts of affection, with caresses and with all the
      bashful tenderness which was hidden in him, and which had never found an
      outlet, even at the early period of his married life, for his wife had
      always shown herself cold and reserved.

 Just then Julie came to the door, with a pale face and glistening eyes,
      and said in a voice which trembled with exasperation: “It is
      half-past seven, monsieur.”

 Parent gave an uneasy and resigned look at the clock and replied: “Yes,
      it certainly is half-past seven.”

 “Well, my dinner is quite ready now.”

 Seeing the storm which was coming, he tried to turn it aside. “But
      did you not tell me when I came in that it would not be ready before
      eight?”

 “Eight! what are you thinking about? You surely do not mean to let
      the child dine at eight o'clock? It would ruin his stomach. Just suppose
      that he only had his mother to look after him! She cares a great deal
      about her child. Oh, yes, we will speak about her; she is a mother! What a
      pity it is that there should be any mothers like her!”

 Parent thought it was time to cut short a threatened scene. “Julie,”
      he said, “I will not allow you to speak like that of your mistress.
      You understand me, do you not? Do not forget it in the future.”

 The old servant, who was nearly choked with surprise, turned and went out,
      slamming the door so violently after her that the lustres on the
      chandelier rattled, and for some seconds it sounded as if a number of
      little invisible bells were ringing in the drawing-room.

 Eight o'clock struck, the door opened, and Julie came in again. She had
      lost her look of exasperation, but now she put on an air of cold and
      determined resolution, which was still more formidable.

 “Monsieur,” she said, “I served your mother until the
      day of her death, and I have attended to you from your birth until now,
      and I think it may be said that I am devoted to the family.” She
      waited for a reply, and Parent stammered:

 “Why, yes, certainly, my good Julie.”

 “You know quite well,” she continued, “that I have never
      done anything for the sake of money, but always for your sake; that I have
      never deceived you nor lied to you, that you have never had to find fault
      with me—”

 “Certainly, my good Julie.”

 “Very well, then, monsieur; it cannot go on any longer like this. I
      have said nothing, and left you in your ignorance, out of respect and
      liking for you, but it is too much, and every one in the neighborhood is
      laughing at you. Everybody knows about it, and so I must tell you also,
      although I do not like to repeat it. The reason why madame comes in at any
      time she chooses is that she is doing abominable things.”

 He seemed stupefied and not to understand, and could only stammer out:

 “Hold your tongue; you know I have forbidden you——”

 But she interrupted him with irresistible resolution. “No, monsieur,
      I must tell you everything now. For a long time madame has been carrying
      on with Monsieur Limousin. I have seen them kiss scores of times behind
      the door. Ah! you may be sure that if Monsieur Limousin had been rich,
      madame would never have married Monsieur Parent. If you remember how the
      marriage was brought about, you would understand the matter from beginning
      to end.”

 Parent had risen, and stammered out, his face livid: “Hold your
      tongue —hold your tongue, or——”

 She went on, however: “No, I mean to tell you everything. She
      married you from interest, and she deceived you from the very first day.
      It was all settled between them beforehand. You need only reflect for a
      few moments to understand it, and then, as she was not satisfied with
      having married you, as she did not love you, she has made your life
      miserable, so miserable that it has almost broken my heart when I have
      seen it.”

 He walked up and down the room with hands clenched, repeating: “Hold
      your tongue—hold your tongue——” For he could find
      nothing else to say. The old servant, however, would not yield; she seemed
      resolved on everything.

 George, who had been at first astonished and then frightened at those
      angry voices, began to utter shrill screams, and remained behind his
      father, with his face puckered up and his mouth open, roaring.

 His son's screams exasperated Parent, and filled him with rage and
      courage. He rushed at Julie with both arms raised, ready to strike her,
      exclaiming: “Ah! you wretch. You will drive the child out of his
      senses.” He already had his hand on her, when she screamed in his
      face:

 “Monsieur, you may beat me if you like, me who reared you, but that
      will not prevent your wife from deceiving you, or alter the fact that your
      child is not yours——”

 He stopped suddenly, let his arms fall, and remained standing opposite to
      her, so overwhelmed that he could understand nothing more.

 “You need only to look at the child,” she added, “to
      know who is its father! He is the very image of Monsieur Limousin. You
      need only look at his eyes and forehead. Why, a blind man could not be
      mistaken in him.”

 He had taken her by the shoulders, and was now shaking her with all his
      might. “Viper, viper!” he said. “Go out the room, viper!
      Go out, or I shall kill you! Go out! Go out!”

 And with a desperate effort he threw her into the next room. She fell
      across the table, which was laid for dinner, breaking the glasses. Then,
      rising to her feet, she put the table between her master and herself.
      While he was pursuing her, in order to take hold of her again, she flung
      terrible words at him.

 “You need only go out this evening after dinner, and come in again
      immediately, and you will see! You will see whether I have been lying!
      Just try it, and you will see.” She had reached the kitchen door and
      escaped, but he ran after her, up the back stairs to her bedroom, into
      which she had locked herself, and knocking at the door, he said:

 “You will leave my house this very instant!”

 “You may be certain of that, monsieur,” was her reply. “In
      an hour's time I shall not be here any longer.”

 He then went slowly downstairs again, holding on to the banister so as not
      to fall, and went back to the drawing-room, where little George was
      sitting on the floor, crying. He fell into a chair, and looked at the
      child with dull eyes. He understood nothing, knew nothing more; he felt
      dazed, stupefied, mad, as if he had just fallen on his head, and he
      scarcely even remembered the dreadful things the servant had told him.
      Then, by degrees, his mind, like muddy water, became calmer and clearer,
      and the abominable revelations began to work in his heart.

 He was no longer thinking of George. The child was quiet now and sitting
      on the carpet; but, seeing that no notice was being taken of him, he began
      to cry. His father ran to him, took him in his arms, and covered him with
      kisses. His child remained to him, at any rate! What did the rest matter?
      He held him in his arms and pressed his lips to his light hair, and,
      relieved and composed, he whispered:

 “George—my little George—my dear little George——”
      But he suddenly remembered what Julie had said! Yes, she had said that he
      was Limousin's child. Oh! it could not be possible, surely. He could not
      believe it, could not doubt, even for a moment, that he was his own child.
      It was one of those low scandals which spring from servants' brains! And
      he repeated: “George—my dear little George.” The
      youngster was quiet again, now that his father was fondling him.

 Parent felt the warmth of the little chest penetrate through his clothes,
      and it filled him with love, courage, and happiness; that gentle warmth
      soothed him, fortified him and saved him. Then he put the small, curly
      head away from him a little, and looked at it affectionately, still
      repeating: “George! Oh, my little George!” But suddenly he
      thought:

 “Suppose he were to resemble Limousin, after all!” He looked
      at him with haggard, troubled eyes, and tried to discover whether there
      was any likeness in his forehead, in his nose, mouth, or cheeks. His
      thoughts wandered as they do when a person is going mad, and his child's
      face changed in his eyes, and assumed a strange look and improbable
      resemblances.

 The hall bell rang. Parent gave a bound as if a bullet had gone through
      him. “There she is,” he said. “What shall I do?”
      And he ran and locked himself up in his room, to have time to bathe his
      eyes. But in a few moments another ring at the bell made him jump again,
      and then he remembered that Julie had left, without the housemaid knowing
      it, and so nobody would go to open the door. What was he to do? He went
      himself, and suddenly he felt brave, resolute, ready for dissimulation and
      the struggle. The terrible blow had matured him in a few moments. He
      wished to know the truth, he desired it with the rage of a timid man, and
      with the tenacity of an easy-going man who has been exasperated.

 Nevertheless, he trembled. Does one know how much excited cowardice there
      often is in boldness? He went to the door with furtive steps, and stopped
      to listen; his heart beat furiously. Suddenly, however, the noise of the
      bell over his head startled him like an explosion. He seized the lock,
      turned the key, and opening the door, saw his wife and Limousin standing
      before him on the stairs.

 With an air of astonishment, which also betrayed a little irritation, she
      said:

 “So you open the door now? Where is Julie?”

 His throat felt tight and his breathing was labored as he tried to. reply,
      without being able to utter a word.

 “Are you dumb?” she continued. “I asked you where Julie
      is?”

 “She—she—has—gone——” he managed
      to stammer.

 His wife began to get angry. “What do you mean by gone? Where has
      she gone? Why?”

 By degrees he regained his coolness. He felt an intense hatred rise up in
      him for that insolent woman who was standing before him.

 “Yes, she has gone altogether. I sent her away.”

 “You have sent away Julie? Why, you must be mad.”

 “Yes, I sent her away because she was insolent, and because—because
      she was ill-using the child.”

 “Julie?”

 “Yes—Julie.”

 “What was she insolent about?”

 “About you.”

 “About me?”

 “Yes, because the dinner was burnt, and you did not come in.”

 “And she said——”

 “She said—offensive things about you—which I ought not—which
      I could not listen to——”

 “What did she, say?”

 “It is no good repeating them.”

 “I want to hear them.”

 “She said it was unfortunate for a man like me to be married to a
      woman like you, unpunctual, careless, disorderly, a bad mother, and a bad
      wife.”

 The young woman had gone into the anteroom, followed by Limousin, who did
      not say a word at this unexpected condition of things. She shut the door
      quickly, threw her cloak on a chair, and going straight up to her husband,
      she stammered out:

 “You say? You say? That I am——”

 Very pale and calm, he replied: “I say nothing, my dear. I am simply
      repeating what Julie said to me, as you wanted to know what it was, and I
      wish you to remark that I turned her off just on account of what she said.”

 She trembled with a violent longing to tear out his beard and scratch his
      face. In his voice and manner she felt that he was asserting his position
      as master. Although she had nothing to say by way of reply, she tried to
      assume the offensive by saying something unpleasant. “I suppose you
      have had dinner?” she asked.

 “No, I waited for you.”

 She shrugged her shoulders impatiently. “It is very stupid of you to
      wait after half-past seven,” she said. “You might have guessed
      that I was detained, that I had a good many things to do, visits and
      shopping,”

 And then, suddenly, she felt that she wanted to explain how she had spent
      her time, and told him in abrupt, haughty words that, having to buy some
      furniture in a shop a long distance off, very far off, in the Rue de
      Rennes, she had met Limousin at past seven o'clock on the Boulevard
      Saint-Germain, and that then she had gone with him to have something to
      eat in a restaurant, as she did not like to go to one by herself, although
      she was faint with hunger. That was how she had dined with Limousin, if it
      could be called dining, for they had only some soup and half a chicken, as
      they were in a great hurry to get back.

 Parent replied simply: “Well, you were quite right. I am not finding
      fault with you.”

 Then Limousin, who, had not spoken till then, and who had been half hidden
      behind Henriette, came forward and put out his hand, saying: “Are
      you very well?”

 Parent took his hand, and shaking it gently, replied: “Yes, I am
      very well.”

 But the young woman had felt a reproach in her husband's last words.
      “Finding fault! Why do you speak of finding fault? One might think
      that you meant to imply something.”

 “Not at all,” he replied, by way of excuse. “I simply
      meant that I was not at all anxious although you were late, and that I did
      not find fault with you for it.”

 She, however, took the high hand, and tried to find a pretext for a
      quarrel. “Although I was late? One might really think that it was
      one o'clock in the morning, and that I spent my nights away from home.”

 “Certainly not, my dear. I said late because I could find no other
      word. You said you should be back at half-past six, and you returned at
      half-past eight. That was surely being late. I understand it perfectly
      well. I am not at all surprised, even. But—but—I can hardly
      use any other word.”

 “But you pronounce them as if I had been out all night.”

 “Oh, no-oh, no!”

 She saw that he would yield on every point, and she was going into her own
      room, when at last she noticed that George was screaming, and then she
      asked, with some feeling: “What is the matter with the child?”

 “I told you that Julie had been rather unkind to him.”

 “What has the wretch been doing to him?”

 “Oh nothing much. She gave him a push, and he fell down.”

 She wanted to see her child, and ran into the dining room, but stopped
      short at the sight of the table covered with spilt wine, with broken
      decanters and glasses and overturned saltcellars. “Who did all that
      mischief?” she asked.

 “It was Julie, who——” But she interrupted him
      furiously:

 “That is too much, really! Julie speaks of me as if I were a
      shameless woman, beats my child, breaks my plates and dishes, turns my
      house upside down, and it appears that you think it all quite natural.”

 “Certainly not, as I have got rid of her.”

 “Really! You have got rid of her! But you ought to have given her in
      charge. In such cases, one ought to call in the Commissary of Police!”

 “But—my dear—I really could not. There was no reason. It
      would have been very difficult——”

 She shrugged her shoulders disdainfully. “There! you will never be
      anything but a poor, wretched fellow, a man without a will, without any
      firmness or energy. Ah! she must have said some nice things to you, your
      Julie, to make you turn her off like that. I should like to have been here
      for a minute, only for a minute.” Then she opened the drawing-room
      door and ran to George, took him into her arms and kissed him, and said:
      “Georgie, what is it, my darling, my pretty one, my treasure?”

 Then, suddenly turning to another idea, she said: “But the child has
      had no dinner? You have had nothing to eat, my pet?”

 “No, mamma.”

 Then she again turned furiously upon her husband. “Why, you must be
      mad, utterly mad! It is half-past eight, and George has had no dinner!”

 He excused himself as best he could, for he had nearly lost his wits
      through the overwhelming scene and the explanation, and felt crushed by
      this ruin of his life. “But, my dear, we were waiting for you, as I
      did not wish to dine without you. As you come home late every day, I
      expected you every moment.”

 She threw her bonnet, which she had kept on till then, into an easy-chair,
      and in an angry voice she said: “It is really intolerable to have to
      do with people who can understand nothing, who can divine nothing and do
      nothing by themselves. So, I suppose, if I were to come in at twelve
      o'clock at night, the child would have had nothing to eat? Just as if you
      could not have understood that, as it was after half-past seven, I was
      prevented from coming home, that I had met with some hindrance!”

 Parent trembled, for he felt that his anger was getting the upper hand,
      but Limousin interposed, and turning toward the young woman, said:

 “My dear friend, you, are altogether unjust. Parent could not guess
      that you would come here so late, as you never do so, and then, how could
      you expect him to get over the difficulty all by himself, after having
      sent away Julie?”

 But Henriette was very angry, and replied:

 “Well, at any rate, he must get over the difficulty himself, for I
      will not help him,” she replied. “Let him settle it!”
      And she went into her own room, quite forgetting that her child had not
      had anything to eat.

 Limousin immediately set to work to help his friend. He picked up the
      broken glasses which strewed the table and took them out, replaced the
      plates and knives and forks, and put the child into his high chair, while
      Parent went to look for the chambermaid to wait at table. The girl came
      in, in great astonishment, as she had heard nothing in George's room,
      where she had been working. She soon, however, brought in the soup, a
      burnt leg of mutton, and mashed potatoes.

 Parent sat by the side of the child, very much upset and distressed at all
      that had happened. He gave the boy his dinner, and endeavored to eat
      something himself, but he could only swallow with an effort, as his throat
      felt paralyzed. By degrees he was seized with an insane desire to look at
      Limousin, who was sitting opposite to him, making bread pellets, to see
      whether George was like him, but he did not venture to raise his eyes for
      some time. At last, however, he made up his mind to do so, and gave a
      quick, sharp look at the face which he knew so well, although he almost
      fancied that he had never examined it carefully. It looked so different to
      what he had imagined. From time to time he looked at Limousin, trying to
      recognize a likeness in the smallest lines of his face, in the slightest
      features, and then he looked at his son, under the pretext of feeding him.

 Two words were sounding in his ears: “His father! his father! his
      father!” They buzzed in his temples at every beat of his heart. Yes,
      that man, that tranquil man who was sitting on the other side of the
      table, was, perhaps, the father of his son, of George, of his little
      George. Parent left off eating; he could not swallow any more. A terrible
      pain, one of those attacks of pain which make men scream, roll on the
      ground, and bite the furniture, was tearing at his entrails, and he felt
      inclined to take a knife and plunge it into his stomach. He started when
      he heard the door open. His wife came in. “I am hungry,” she
      said; “are not you, Limousin?”

 He hesitated a little, and then said: “Yes, I am, upon my word.”
      She had the leg of mutton brought in again. Parent asked himself “Have
      they had dinner? Or are they late because they have had a lovers' meeting?”

 They both ate with a very good appetite. Henriette was very calm, but
      laughed and joked. Her husband watched her furtively. She had on a pink
      teagown trimmed with white lace, and her fair head, her white neck and her
      plump hands stood out from that coquettish and perfumed dress as though it
      were a sea shell edged with foam.

 What fun they must be making of him, if he had been their dupe since the
      first day! Was it possible to make a fool of a man, of a worthy man,
      because his father had left him a little money? Why could one not see into
      people's souls? How was it that nothing revealed to upright hearts the
      deceits of infamous hearts? How was it that voices had the same sound for
      adoring as for lying? Why was a false, deceptive look the same as a
      sincere one? And he watched them, waiting to catch a gesture, a word, an
      intonation. Then suddenly he thought: “I will surprise them this
      evening,” and he said:

 “My dear, as I have dismissed Julie, I will see about getting
      another girl this very day. I will go at once to procure one by to-morrow
      morning, so I may not be in until late.”

 “Very well,” she replied; “go. I shall not stir from
      here. Limousin will keep me company. We will wait for you.” Then,
      turning to the maid, she said: “You had better put George to bed,
      and then you can clear away and go up to your room.”

 Parent had got up; he was unsteady on his legs, dazed and bewildered, and
      saying, “I shall see you again later on,” he went out, holding
      on to the wall, for the floor seemed to roll like a ship. George had been
      carried out by his nurse, while Henriette and Limousin went into the
      drawing-room.

 As soon as the door was shut, he said: “You must be mad, surely, to
      torment your husband as you do?”

 She immediately turned on him: “Ah! Do you know that I think the
      habit you have got into lately, of looking upon Parent as a martyr, is
      very unpleasant?”

 Limousin threw himself into an easy-chair and crossed his legs. “I
      am not setting him up as a martyr in the least, but I think that, situated
      as we are, it is ridiculous to defy this man as you do, from morning till
      night.”

 She took a cigarette from the mantelpiece, lighted it, and replied:
      “But I do not defy him; quite the contrary. Only he irritates me by
      his stupidity, and I treat him as he deserves.”

 Limousin continued impatiently: “What you are doing is very foolish!
      I am only asking you to treat your husband gently, because we both of us
      require him to trust us. I think that you ought to see that.”

 They were close together: he, tall, dark, with long whiskers and the
      rather vulgar manners of a good-looking man who is very well satisfied
      with himself; she, small, fair, and pink, a little Parisian, born in the
      back room of a shop, half cocotte and half bourgeoise, brought up to
      entice customers to the store by her glances, and married, in consequence,
      to a simple, unsophisticated man, who saw her outside the door every
      morning when he went out and every evening when he came home.

 “But do you not understand; you great booby,” she said,
      “that I hate him just because he married me, because he bought me,
      in fact; because everything that he says and does, everything that he
      thinks, acts on my nerves? He exasperates me every moment by his
      stupidity, which you call his kindness; by his dullness, which you call
      his confidence, and then, above all, because he is my husband, instead of
      you. I feel him between us, although he does not interfere with us much.
      And then—-and then! No, it is, after all, too idiotic of him not to
      guess anything! I wish he would, at any rate, be a little jealous. There
      are moments when I feel inclined to say to him: 'Do you not see, you
      stupid creature, that Paul is my lover?'

 “It is quite incomprehensible that you cannot understand how hateful
      he is to me, how he irritates me. You always seem to like him, and you
      shake hands with him cordially. Men are very extraordinary at times.”

 “One must know how to dissimulate, my dear.”

 “It is no question of dissimulation, but of feeling. One might think
      that, when you men deceive one another, you like each other better on that
      account, while we women hate a man from the moment that we have betrayed
      him.”

 “I do not see why one should hate an excellent fellow because one is
      friendly with his wife.”

 “You do not see it? You do not see it? You all of you are wanting in
      refinement of feeling. However, that is one of those things which one
      feels and cannot express. And then, moreover, one ought not. No, you would
      not understand; it is quite useless! You men have no delicacy of feeling.”

 And smiling, with the gentle contempt of an impure woman, she put both her
      hands on his shoulders and held up her lips to him. He stooped down and
      clasped her closely in his arms, and their lips met. And as they stood in
      front of the mantel mirror, another couple exactly like them embraced
      behind the clock.

 They had heard nothing, neither the noise of the key nor the creaking of
      the door, but suddenly Henriette, with a loud cry, pushed Limousin away
      with both her arms, and they saw Parent looking at them, livid with rage,
      without his shoes on and his hat over his forehead. He looked at each, one
      after the other, with a quick glance of his eyes and without moving his
      head. He appeared beside himself. Then, without saying a word, he threw
      himself on Limousin, seized him as if he were going to strangle him, and
      flung him into the opposite corner of the room so violently that the other
      lost his balance, and, beating the air with his hand, struck his head
      violently against the wall.

 When Henriette saw that her husband was going to murder her lover, she
      threw herself on Parent, seized him by the neck, and digging her ten
      delicate, rosy fingers into his neck, she squeezed him so tightly, with
      all the vigor of a desperate woman, that the blood spurted out under her
      nails, and she bit his shoulder, as if she wished to tear it with her
      teeth. Parent, half-strangled and choking, loosened his hold on Limousin,
      in order to shake off his wife, who was hanging to his neck. Putting his
      arms round her waist, he flung her also to the other end of the
      drawing-room.

 Then, as his passion was short-lived, like that of most good-tempered men,
      and his strength was soon exhausted, he remained standing between the two,
      panting, worn out, not knowing what to do next. His brutal fury had
      expended itself in that effort, like the froth of a bottle of champagne,
      and his unwonted energy ended in a gasping for breath. As soon as he could
      speak, however, he said:

 “Go away—both of you—immediately! Go away!”

 Limousin remained motionless in his corner, against the wall, too startled
      to understand anything as yet, too frightened to move a finger; while
      Henriette, with her hands resting on a small, round table, her head bent
      forward, her hair hanging down, the bodice of her dress unfastened, waited
      like a wild animal which is about to spring. Parent continued in a
      stronger voice: “Go away immediately. Get out of the house!”

 His wife, however, seeing that he had got over his first exasperation grew
      bolder, drew herself up, took two steps toward him, and, grown almost
      insolent, she said: “Have you lost your head? What is the matter
      with you? What is the meaning of this unjustifiable violence?”

 But he turned toward her, and raising his fist to strike her, he stammered
      out: “Oh—oh—this is too much, too much! I heard
      everything! Everything—do you understand? Everything! You wretch—you
      wretch! You are two wretches! Get out of the house, both of you!
      Immediately, or I shall kill you! Leave the house!”

 She saw that it was all over, and that he knew everything; that she could
      not prove her innocence, and that she must comply. But all her impudence
      had returned to her, and her hatred for the man, which was aggravated now,
      drove her to audacity, made her feel the need of bravado, and of defying
      him, and she said in a clear voice: “Come, Limousin; as he is going
      to turn me out of doors, I will go to your lodgings with you.”

 But Limousin did not move, and Parent, in a fresh access of rage, cried
      out: “Go, will you? Go, you wretches! Or else—or else——”
      He seized a chair and whirled it over his head.

 Henriette walked quickly across the room, took her lover by the arm,
      dragged him from the wall, to which he appeared fixed, and led him toward
      the door, saying: “Do come, my friend—you see that the man is
      mad. Do come!”

 As she went out she turned round to her husband, trying to think of
      something that she could do, something that she could invent to wound him
      to the heart as she left the house, and an idea struck her, one of those
      venomous, deadly ideas in which all a woman's perfidy shows itself, and
      she said resolutely: “I am going to take my child with me.”

 Parent was stupefied, and stammered: “Your—your—child?
      You dare to talk of your child? You venture—you venture to ask for
      your child—after-after—Oh, oh, that is too much! Go, you vile
      creature! Go!”

 She went up to him again, almost smiling, almost avenged already, and
      defying him, standing close to him, and face to face, she said: “I
      want my child, and you have no right to keep him, because he is not yours—do
      you understand? He is not yours! He is Limousin's!”

 And Parent cried out in bewilderment: “You lie—you lie—worthless
      woman!”

 But she continued: “You fool! Everybody knows it except you. I tell
      you, this is his father. You need only look at him to see it.”

 Parent staggered backward, and then he suddenly turned round, took a
      candle, and rushed into the next room; returning almost immediately,
      carrying little George wrapped up in his bedclothes. The child, who had
      been suddenly awakened, was crying from fright. Parent threw him into his
      wife's arms, and then, without speaking, he pushed her roughly out toward
      the stairs, where Limousin was waiting, from motives of prudence.

 Then he shut the door again, double-locked and bolted it, but had scarcely
      got back into the drawing-room when he fell to the floor at full length.

 Parent lived alone, quite alone. During the five weeks that followed their
      separation, the feeling of surprise at his new life prevented him from
      thinking much. He had resumed his bachelor life, his habits of lounging,
      about, and took his meals at a restaurant, as he had done formerly. As he
      wished to avoid any scandal, he made his wife an allowance, which was
      arranged by their lawyers. By degrees, however, the thought of the child
      began to haunt him. Often, when he was at home alone at night, he suddenly
      thought he heard George calling out “Papa,” and his heart
      would begin to beat, and he would get up quickly and open the door, to see
      whether, by chance, the child might have returned, as dogs or pigeons do.
      Why should a child have less instinct than an animal? On finding that he
      was mistaken, he would sit down in his armchair again and think of the
      boy. He would think of him for hours and whole days. It was not only a
      moral, but still more a physical obsession, a nervous longing to kiss him,
      to hold and fondle him, to take him on his knees and dance him. He felt
      the child's little arms around his neck, his little mouth pressing a kiss
      on his beard, his soft hair tickling his cheeks, and the remembrance of
      all those childish ways made him suffer as a man might for some beloved
      woman who has left him. Twenty or a hundred times a day he asked himself
      the question whether he was or was not George's father, and almost before
      he was in bed every night he recommenced the same series of despairing
      questionings.

 He especially dreaded the darkness of the evening, the melancholy feeling
      of the twilight. Then a flood of sorrow invaded his heart, a torrent of
      despair which seemed to overwhelm him and drive him mad. He was as afraid
      of his own thoughts as men are of criminals, and he fled before them as
      one does from wild beasts. Above all things, he feared his empty, dark,
      horrible dwelling and the deserted streets, in which, here and there, a
      gas lamp flickered, where the isolated foot passenger whom one hears in
      the distance seems to be a night prowler, and makes one walk faster or
      slower, according to whether he is coming toward you or following you.

 And in spite of himself, and by instinct, Parent went in the direction of
      the broad, well-lighted, populous streets. The light and the crowd
      attracted him, occupied his mind and distracted his thoughts, and when he
      was tired of walking aimlessly about among the moving crowd, when he saw
      the foot passengers becoming more scarce and the pavements less crowded,
      the fear of solitude and silence drove him into some large cafe full of
      drinkers and of light. He went there as flies go to a candle, and he would
      sit down at one of the little round tables and ask for a “bock,”
      which he would drink slowly, feeling uneasy every time a customer got up
      to go. He would have liked to take him by the arm, hold him back, and beg
      him to stay a little longer, so much did he dread the time when the waiter
      should come up to him and say sharply: “Come, monsieur, it is
      closing time!”

 He thus got into the habit of going to the beer houses, where the
      continual elbowing of the drinkers brings you in contact with a familiar
      and silent public, where the heavy clouds of tobacco smoke lull
      disquietude, while the heavy beer dulls the mind and calms the heart. He
      almost lived there. He was scarcely up before he went there to find people
      to distract his glances and his thoughts, and soon, as he felt too lazy to
      move, he took his meals there.

 After every meal, during more than an hour, he sipped three or four small
      glasses of brandy, which stupefied him by degrees, and then his head
      drooped on his chest, he shut his eyes, and went to sleep. Then, awaking,
      he raised himself on the red velvet seat, straightened his waistcoat,
      pulled down his cuffs, and took up the newspapers again, though he had
      already seen them in the morning, and read them all through again, from
      beginning to end. Between four and five o'clock he went for a walk on the
      boulevards, to get a little fresh air, as he used to say, and then came
      back to the seat which had been reserved for him, and asked for his
      absinthe. He would talk to the regular customers whose acquaintance he had
      made. They discussed the news of the day and political events, and that
      carried him on till dinner time; and he spent the evening as he had the
      afternoon, until it was time to close. That was a terrible moment for him
      when he was obliged to go out into the dark, into his empty room full of
      dreadful recollections, of horrible thoughts, and of mental agony. He no
      longer saw any of his old friends, none of his relatives, nobody who might
      remind him of his past life. But as his apartments were a hell to him, he
      took a room in a large hotel, a good room on the ground floor, so as to
      see the passers-by. He was no longer alone in that great building. He felt
      people swarming round him, he heard voices in the adjoining rooms, and
      when his former sufferings tormented him too much at the sight of his bed,
      which was turned down, and of his solitary fireplace, he went out into the
      wide passages and walked up and down them like a sentinel, before all the
      closed doors, and looked sadly at the shoes standing in couples outside
      them, women's little boots by the side of men's thick ones, and he thought
      that, no doubt, all these people were happy, and were sleeping in their
      warm beds. Five years passed thus; five miserable years. But one day, when
      he was taking his usual walk between the Madeleine and the Rue Drouot, he
      suddenly saw a lady whose bearing struck him. A tall gentleman and a child
      were with her, and all three were walking in front of him. He asked
      himself where he had seen them before, when suddenly he recognized a
      movement of her hand; it was his wife, his wife with Limousin and his
      child, his little George.

 His heart beat as if it would suffocate him, but he did not stop, for he
      wished to see them, and he followed them. They looked like a family of the
      better middle class. Henriette was leaning on Paul's arm, and speaking to
      him in a low voice, and looking at him sideways occasionally. Parent got a
      side view of her and recognized her pretty features, the movements of her
      lips, her smile, and her coaxing glances. But the child chiefly took up
      his attention. How tall and strong he was! Parent could not see his face,
      but only his long, fair curls. That tall boy with bare legs, who was
      walking by his mother's side like a little man, was George. He saw them
      suddenly, all three, as they stopped in front of a shop. Limousin had
      grown very gray, had aged and was thinner; his wife, on the contrary, was
      as young looking as ever, and had grown stouter. George he would not have
      recognized, he was so different from what he had been formerly.

 They went on again and Parent followed them. He walked on quickly, passed
      them, and then turned round, so as to meet them face to face. As he passed
      the child he felt a mad longing to take him into his arms and run off with
      him, and he knocked against him as if by accident. The boy turned round
      and looked at the clumsy man angrily, and Parent hurried away, shocked,
      hurt, and pursued by that look. He went off like a thief, seized with a
      horrible fear lest he should have been seen and recognized by his wife and
      her lover. He went to his cafe without stopping, and fell breathless into
      his chair. That evening he drank three absinthes. For four months he felt
      the pain of that meeting in his heart. Every night he saw the three again,
      happy and tranquil, father, mother, and child walking on the boulevard
      before going in to dinner, and that new vision effaced the old one. It was
      another matter, another hallucination now, and also a fresh pain. Little
      George, his little George, the child he had so much loved and so often
      kissed, disappeared in the far distance, and he saw a new one, like a
      brother of the first, a little boy with bare legs, who did not know him!
      He suffered terribly at that thought. The child's love was dead; there was
      no bond between them; the child would not have held out his arms when he
      saw him. He had even looked at him angrily.

 Then, by degrees he grew calmer, his mental torture diminished, the image
      that had appeared to his eyes and which haunted his nights became more
      indistinct and less frequent. He began once more to live nearly like
      everybody else, like all those idle people who drink beer off
      marble-topped tables and wear out their clothes on the threadbare velvet
      of the couches.

 He grew old amid the smoke from pipes, lost his hair under the gas lights,
      looked upon his weekly bath, on his fortnightly visit to the barber's to
      have his hair cut, and on the purchase of a new coat or hat as an event.
      When he got to his cafe in a new hat he would look at himself in the glass
      for a long time before sitting down, and take it off and put it on again
      several times, and at last ask his friend, the lady at the bar, who was
      watching him with interest, whether she thought it suited him.

 Two or three times a year he went to the theatre, and in the summer he
      sometimes spent his evenings at one of the open-air concerts in the Champs
      Elysees. And so the years followed each other slow, monotonous, and short,
      because they were quite uneventful.

 He very rarely now thought of the dreadful drama which had wrecked his
      life; for twenty years had passed since that terrible evening. But the
      life he had led since then had worn him out. The landlord of his cafe
      would often say to him: “You ought to pull yourself together a
      little, Monsieur Parent; you should get some fresh air and go into the
      country. I assure you that you have changed very much within the last few
      months.” And when his customer had gone out be used to say to the
      barmaid: “That poor Monsieur Parent is booked for another world; it
      is bad never to get out of Paris. Advise him to go out of town for a day
      occasionally; he has confidence in you. Summer will soon be here; that
      will put him straight.”

 And she, full of pity and kindness for such a regular customer, said to
      Parent every day: “Come, monsieur, make up your mind to get a little
      fresh air. It is so charming in the country when the weather is fine. Oh,
      if I could, I would spend my life there!”

 By degrees he was seized with a vague desire to go just once and see
      whether it was really as pleasant there as she said, outside the walls of
      the great city. One morning he said to her:

 “Do you know where one can get a good luncheon in the neighborhood
      of Paris?”

 “Go to the Terrace at Saint-Germain; it is delightful there!”

 He had been there formerly, just when he became engaged. He made up his
      mind to go there again, and he chose a Sunday, for no special reason, but
      merely because people generally do go out on Sundays, even when they have
      nothing to do all the week; and so one Sunday morning he went to
      Saint-Germain. He felt low-spirited and vexed at having yielded to that
      new longing, and at having broken through his usual habits. He was
      thirsty; he would have liked to get out at every station and sit down in
      the cafe which he saw outside and drink a “bock” or two, and
      then take the first train back to Paris. The journey seemed very long to
      him. He could remain sitting for whole days, as long as he had the same
      motionless objects before his eyes, but he found it very trying and
      fatiguing to remain sitting while he was being whirled along, and to see
      the whole country fly by, while he himself was motionless.

 However, he found the Seine interesting every time he crossed it. Under
      the bridge at Chatou he saw some small boats going at great speed under
      the vigorous strokes of the bare-armed oarsmen, and he thought: “There
      are some fellows who are certainly enjoying themselves!” The train
      entered the tunnel just before you get to the station at Saint-Germain,
      and presently stopped at the platform. Parent got out, and walked slowly,
      for he already felt tired, toward the Terrace, with his hands behind his
      back, and when he got to the iron balustrade, stopped to look at the
      distant horizon. The immense plain spread out before him vast as the sea,
      green and studded with large villages, almost as populous as towns. The
      sun bathed the whole landscape in its full, warm light. The Seine wound
      like an endless serpent through the plain, flowed round the villages and
      along the slopes. Parent inhaled the warm breeze, which seemed to make his
      heart young again, to enliven his spirits, and to vivify his blood, and
      said to himself:

 “Why, it is delightful here.”

 Then he went on a few steps, and stopped again to look about him. The
      utter misery of his existence seemed to be brought into full relief by the
      intense light which inundated the landscape. He saw his twenty years of
      cafe life—dull, monotonous, heartbreaking. He might have traveled as
      others did, have gone among foreigners, to unknown countries beyond the
      sea, have interested himself somewhat in everything which other men are
      passionately devoted to, in arts and science; he might have enjoyed life
      in a thousand forms, that mysterious life which is either charming or
      painful, constantly changing, always inexplicable and strange. Now,
      however, it was too late. He would go on drinking “bock” after
      “bock” until he died, without any family, without friends,
      without hope, without any curiosity about anything, and he was seized with
      a feeling of misery and a wish to run away, to hide himself in Paris, in
      his cafe and his lethargy! All the thoughts, all the dreams, all the
      desires which are dormant in the slough of stagnating hearts had
      reawakened, brought to life by those rays of sunlight on the plain.

 Parent felt that if he were to remain there any longer he should lose his
      reason, and he made haste to get to the Pavilion Henri IV for lunch, to
      try and forget his troubles under—the influence of wine and alcohol,
      and at any rate to have some one to speak to.

 He took a small table in one of the arbors, from which one can see all the
      surrounding country, ordered his lunch, and asked to be served at once.
      Then some more people arrived and sat down at tables near him. He felt
      more comfortable; he was no longer alone. Three persons were eating
      luncheon near him. He looked at them two or three times without seeing
      them clearly, as one looks at total strangers. Suddenly a woman's voice
      sent a shiver through him which seemed to penetrate to his very marrow.
      “George,” it said, “will you carve the chicken?”

 And another voice replied: “Yes, mamma.”

 Parent looked up, and he understood; he guessed immediately who those
      people were! He should certainly not have known them again. His wife had
      grown quite white and very stout, an elderly, serious, respectable lady,
      and she held her head forward as she ate for fear of spotting her dress,
      although she had a table napkin tucked under her chin. George had become a
      man. He had a slight beard, that uneven and almost colorless beard which
      adorns the cheeks of youths. He wore a high hat, a white waistcoat, and a
      monocle, because it looked swell, no doubt. Parent looked at him in
      astonishment. Was that George, his son? No, he did not know that young
      man; there could be nothing in common between them. Limousin had his back
      to him, and was eating; with his shoulders rather bent.

 All three of them seemed happy and satisfied; they came and took luncheon
      in the country at well-known restaurants. They had had a calm and pleasant
      existence, a family existence in a warm and comfortable house, filled with
      all those trifles which make life agreeable, with affection, with all
      those tender words which people exchange continually when they love each
      other. They had lived thus, thanks to him, Parent, on his money, after
      having deceived him, robbed him, ruined him! They had condemned him, the
      innocent, simple-minded, jovial man, to all the miseries of solitude, to
      that abominable life which he had led, between the pavement and a
      bar-room, to every mental torture and every physical misery! They had made
      him a useless, aimless being, a waif in the world, a poor old man without
      any pleasures, any prospects, expecting nothing from anybody or anything.
      For him, the world was empty, because he loved nothing in the world. He
      might go among other nations, or go about the streets, go into all the
      houses in Paris, open every room, but he would not find inside any door
      the beloved face, the face of wife or child which smiles when it sees you.
      This idea worked upon him more than any other, the idea of a door which
      one opens, to see and to embrace somebody behind it.

 And that was the fault of those three wretches! The fault of that
      worthless woman, of that infamous friend, and of that tall, light-haired
      lad who put on insolent airs. Now he felt as angry with the child as he
      did with the other two. Was he not Limousin's son? Would Limousin have
      kept him and loved him otherwise? Would not Limousin very quickly have got
      rid of the mother and of the child if he had not felt sure that it was
      his, positively his? Does anybody bring up other people's children? And
      now they were there, quite close to him, those three who had made him
      suffer so much.

 Parent looked at them, irritated and excited at the recollection of all
      his sufferings and of his despair, and was especially exasperated at their
      placid and satisfied looks. He felt inclined to kill them, to throw his
      siphon of Seltzer water at them, to split open Limousin's head as he every
      moment bent it over his plate, raising it again immediately.

 He would have his revenge now, on the spot, as he had them under his hand.
      But how? He tried to think of some means, he pictured such dreadful things
      as one reads of in the newspapers occasionally, but could not hit on
      anything practical. And he went on drinking to excite himself, to give
      himself courage not to allow such an opportunity to escape him, as he
      might never have another.

 Suddenly an idea struck him, a terrible idea; and he left off drinking to
      mature it. He smiled as he murmured: “I have them, I have them! We
      will see; we will see!”

 They finished their luncheon slowly, conversing with perfect unconcern.
      Parent could not hear what they were saying, but he saw their quiet
      gestures. His wife's face especially exasperated him. She had assumed a
      haughty air, the air of a comfortable, devout woman, of an unapproachable,
      devout woman, sheathed in principles, iron-clad in virtue. They paid their
      bill and got up from table. Parent then noticed Limousin. He might have
      been taken for a retired diplomat, for he looked a man of great
      importance, with his soft white whiskers, the tips of which touched his
      coat collar.

 They walked away. Parent rose and followed them. First they went up and
      down the terrace, and calmly admired the landscape, and then they went
      into the forest. Parent followed them at a distance, hiding himself so as
      not to excite their suspicion too soon.

 Parent came up to them by degrees, breathing hard with emotion and
      fatigue, for he was unused to walking now. He soon came up to them, but
      was seized with fear, an inexplicable fear, and he passed them, so as to
      turn round and meet them face to face. He walked on, his heart beating,
      feeling that they were just behind him now, and he said to himself:
      “Come, now is the time. Courage! courage! Now is the moment!”

 He turned round. They were all three sitting on the grass, at the foot of
      a huge tree, and were still chatting. He made up his mind, and walked back
      rapidly; stopping in front of them in the middle of the road, he said
      abruptly, in a voice broken by emotion:

 “It is I! Here I am! I suppose you did not expect me?”

 They all three stared at this man, who seemed to be insane. He continued:

 “One would suppose that you did not know me again. Just look at me!
      I am Parent, Henri Parent. You thought it was all over, and that you would
      never see me again. Ah! but here I am once more, you see, and now we will
      have an explanation.”

 Henriette, terrified, hid her face in her hands, murmuring: “Oh!
      Good heavens!”

 Seeing this stranger, who seemed to be threatening his mother, George
      sprang up, ready to seize him by the collar. Limousin, thunderstruck,
      looked in horror at this apparition, who, after gasping for breath,
      continued:

 “So now we will have an explanation; the proper moment has come! Ah!
      you deceived me, you condemned me to the life of a convict, and you
      thought that I should never catch you!”

 The young man took him by the shoulders and pushed him back.

 “Are you mad?” he asked. “What do you want? Go on your
      way immediately, or I shall give you a thrashing!”

 “What do I want?” replied Parent. “I want to tell you
      who these people are.”

 George, however, was in a rage, and shook him; and was even going to
      strike him.

 “Let me go,” said Parent. “I am your father. There, see
      whether they recognize me now, the wretches!”

 The young man, thunderstruck, unclenched his fists and turned toward his
      mother. Parent, as soon as he was released, approached her.

 “Well,” he said, “tell him yourself who I am! Tell him
      that my name is Henri Parent, that I am his father because his name is
      George Parent, because you are my wife, because you are all three living
      on my money, on the allowance of ten thousand francs which I have made you
      since I drove you out of my house. Will you tell him also why I drove you
      out? Because I surprised you with this beggar, this wretch, your lover!
      Tell him what I was, an honorable man, whom you married for money, and
      whom you deceived from the very first day. Tell him who you are, and who I
      am——”

 He stammered and gasped for breath in his rage. The woman exclaimed in a
      heartrending voice:

 “Paul, Paul, stop him; make him be quiet! Do not let him say this
      before my son!”

 Limousin had also risen to his feet. He said in a very low voice: “Hold
      your tongue! Hold your tongue! Do you understand what you are doing?”

 “I quite know what I am doing,” resumed Parent, “and
      that is not all. There is one thing that I will know, something that has
      tormented me for twenty years.” Then, turning to George, who was
      leaning against a tree in consternation, he said:

 “Listen to me. When she left my house she thought it was not enough
      to have deceived me, but she also wanted to drive me to despair. You were
      my only consolation, and she took you with her, swearing that I was not
      your father, but, that he was your father. Was she lying? I do not know. I
      have been asking myself the question for the last twenty years.” He
      went close up to her, tragic and terrible, and, pulling away her hands,
      with which she had covered her face, he continued:

 “Well, now! I call upon you to tell me which of us two is the father
      of this young man; he or I, your husband or your lover. Come! Come! tell
      us.”

 Limousin rushed at him. Parent pushed him back, and, sneering in his fury,
      he said: “Ah! you are brave now! You are braver than you were that
      day when you ran downstairs because you thought I was going to murder you.
      Very well! If she will not reply, tell me yourself. You ought to know as
      well as she. Tell me, are you this young fellow's father? Come! Come! Tell
      me!”

 He turned to his wife again. “If you will not tell me, at any rate
      tell your son. He is a man, now, and he has the right to know who his
      father is. I do not know, and I never did know, never, never! I cannot
      tell you, my boy.”

 He seemed to be losing his senses; his voice grew shrill and he worked his
      arms about as if he had an epileptic 'fit.

 “Come! . . . Give me an answer. She does not know . . . I will make
      a bet that she does not know . . . No . . . she does not know, by Jove!
      Ha! ha! ha! Nobody knows . . . nobody . . . How can one know such things?

 “You will not know either, my boy, you will not know any more than I
      do . . . never. . . . Look here . . . Ask her you will find that she does
      not know . . . I do not know either . . . nor does he, nor do you, nobody
      knows. You can choose . . . You can choose . . . yes, you can choose him
      or me. . . Choose.

 “Good evening . . . It is all over. If she makes up her mind to tell
      you, you will come and let me know, will you not? I am living at the Hotel
      des Continents . . . I should be glad to know . . . Good evening . . . I
      hope you will enjoy yourselves very much . . .”

 And he went away gesticulating, talking to himself under the tall trees,
      in the quiet, the cool air, which was full of the fragrance of growing
      plants. He did not turn round to look at them, but went straight on,
      walking under the stimulus of his rage, under a storm of passion, with
      that one fixed idea in his mind. All at once he found himself outside the
      station. A train was about to start and he got in. During the journey his
      anger calmed down, he regained his senses and returned to Paris,
      astonished at his own boldness, full of aches and pains as if he had
      broken some bones. Nevertheless, he went to have a “bock” at
      his brewery.

 When she saw him come in, Mademoiselle Zoe asked in surprise: “What!
      back already? are you tired?”

 “Yes—yes, I am tired . . . very tired . . . You know, when one
      is not used to going out. . . I've had enough of it. I shall not go into
      the country again. It would have been better to have stayed here. For the
      future, I shall not stir out.”

 She could not persuade him to tell her about his little excursion, much as
      she wished to.

 For the first time in his life he got thoroughly drunk that night, and had
      to be carried home.