MOONLIGHT
    

      Madame Julie Roubere was expecting her elder sister, Madame Henriette
      Letore, who had just returned from a trip to Switzerland.
    

      The Letore household had left nearly five weeks before. Madame Henriette
      had allowed her husband to return alone to their estate in Calvados, where
      some business required his attention, and had come to spend a few days in
      Paris with her sister. Night came on. In the quiet parlor Madame Roubere
      was reading in the twilight in an absent-minded way, raising her, eyes
      whenever she heard a sound.
    

      At last, she heard a ring at the door, and her sister appeared, wrapped in
      a travelling cloak. And without any formal greeting, they clasped each
      other in an affectionate embrace, only desisting for a moment to give each
      other another hug. Then they talked about their health, about their
      respective families, and a thousand other things, gossiping, jerking out
      hurried, broken sentences as they followed each other about, while Madame
      Henriette was removing her hat and veil.
    

      It was now quite dark. Madame Roubere rang for a lamp, and as soon as it
      was brought in, she scanned her sister's face, and was on the point of
      embracing her once more. But she held back, scared and astonished at the
      other's appearance.
    

      On her temples Madame Letore had two large locks of white hair. All the
      rest of her hair was of a glossy, raven-black hue; but there alone, at
      each side of her head, ran, as it were, two silvery streams which were
      immediately lost in the black mass surrounding them. She was,
      nevertheless, only twenty-four years old, and this change had come on
      suddenly since her departure for Switzerland.
    

      Without moving, Madame Roubere gazed at her in amazement, tears rising to
      her eyes, as she thought that some mysterious and terrible calamity must
      have befallen her sister. She asked:
    

      “What is the matter with you, Henriette?”
    

      Smiling with a sad face, the smile of one who is heartsick, the other
      replied:
    

      “Why, nothing, I assure you. Were you noticing my white hair?”
    

      But Madame Roubere impetuously seized her by the shoulders, and with a
      searching glance at her, repeated:
    

      “What is the matter with you? Tell me what is the matter with you.
      And if you tell me a falsehood, I'll soon find it out.”
    

      They remained face to face, and Madame Henriette, who looked as if she
      were about to faint, had two pearly tears in the corners of her drooping
      eyes.
    

      Her sister continued:
    

      “What has happened to you? What is the matter with you? Answer me!”
    

      Then, in a subdued voice, the other murmured:
    

      “I have—I have a lover.”
    

      And, hiding her forehead on the shoulder of her younger sister, she
      sobbed.
    

      Then, when she had grown a little calmer, when the heaving of her breast
      had subsided, she commenced to unbosom herself, as if to cast forth this
      secret from herself, to empty this sorrow of hers into a sympathetic
      heart.
    

      Thereupon, holding each other's hands tightly clasped, the two women went
      over to a sofa in a dark corner of the room, into which they sank, and the
      younger sister, passing her arm over the elder one's neck, and drawing her
      close to her heart, listened.
    

      “Oh! I know that there was no excuse for me; I do not understand
      myself, and since that day I feel as if I were mad. Be careful, my child,
      about yourself—be careful! If you only knew how weak we are, how
      quickly we yield, and fall. It takes so little, so little, so little, a
      moment of tenderness, one of those sudden fits of melancholy which come
      over you, one of those longings to open your arms, to love, to cherish
      something, which we all have at certain moments.
    

      “You know my husband, and you know how fond I am of him; but he is
      mature and sensible, and cannot even comprehend the tender vibrations of a
      woman's heart. He is always the same, always good, always smiling, always
      kind, always perfect. Oh! how I sometimes have wished that he would clasp
      me roughly in his arms, that he would embrace me with those slow, sweet
      kisses which make two beings intermingle, which are like mute confidences!
      How I have wished that he were foolish, even weak, so that he should have
      need of me, of my caresses, of my tears!
    

      “This all seems very silly; but we women are made like that. How can
      we help it?
    

      “And yet the thought of deceiving him never entered my mind. Now it
      has happened, without love, without reason, without anything, simply
      because the moon shone one night on the Lake of Lucerne.
    

      “During the month when we were travelling together, my husband, with
      his calm indifference, paralyzed my enthusiasm, extinguished my poetic
      ardor. When we were descending the mountain paths at sunrise, when as the
      four horses galloped along with the diligence, we saw, in the transparent
      morning haze, valleys, woods, streams, and villages, I clasped my hands
      with delight, and said to him: 'How beautiful it is, dear! Give me a kiss!
      Kiss me now!' He only answered, with a smile of chilling kindliness:
      'There is no reason why we should kiss each other because you like the
      landscape.'
    

      “And his words froze me to the heart. It seems to me that when
      people love each other, they ought to feel more moved by love than ever,
      in the presence of beautiful scenes.
    

      “In fact, I was brimming over with poetry which he kept me from
      expressing. I was almost like a boiler filled with steam and hermetically
      sealed.
    

      “One evening (we had for four days been staying in a hotel at
      Fluelen) Robert, having one of his sick headaches, went to bed immediately
      after dinner, and I went to take a walk all alone along the edge of the
      lake.
    

      “It was a night such as one reads of in fairy tales. The full moon
      showed itself in the middle of the sky; the tall mountains, with their
      snowy crests, seemed to wear silver crowns; the waters of the lake
      glittered with tiny shining ripples. The air was mild, with that kind of
      penetrating warmth which enervates us till we are ready to faint, to be
      deeply affected without any apparent cause. But how sensitive, how
      vibrating the heart is at such moments! how quickly it beats, and how
      intense is its emotion!
    

      “I sat down on the grass, and gazed at that vast, melancholy, and
      fascinating lake, and a strange feeling arose in me; I was seized with an
      insatiable need of love, a revolt against the gloomy dullness of my life.
      What! would it never be my fate to wander, arm in arm, with a man I loved,
      along a moon-kissed bank like this? Was I never to feel on my lips those
      kisses so deep, delicious, and intoxicating which lovers exchange on
      nights that seem to have been made by God for tenderness? Was I never to
      know ardent, feverish love in the moonlit shadows of a summer's night?
    

      “And I burst out weeping like a crazy woman. I heard something
      stirring behind me. A man stood there, gazing at me. When I turned my head
      round, he recognized me, and, advancing, said:
    

      “'You are weeping, madame?'
    

      “It was a young barrister who was travelling with his mother, and
      whom we had often met. His eyes had frequently followed me.
    

      “I was so confused that I did not know what answer to give or what
      to think of the situation. I told him I felt ill.
    

      “He walked on by my side in a natural and respectful manner, and
      began talking to me about what we had seen during our trip. All that I had
      felt he translated into words; everything that made me thrill he
      understood perfectly, better than I did myself. And all of a sudden he
      repeated some verses of Alfred de Musset. I felt myself choking, seized
      with indescribable emotion. It seemed to me that the mountains themselves,
      the lake, the moonlight, were singing to me about things ineffably sweet.
    

      “And it happened, I don't know how, I don't know why, in a sort of
      hallucination.
    

      “As for him, I did not see him again till the morning of his
      departure.
    

      “He gave me his card!”
    

      And, sinking into her sister's arms, Madame Letore broke into groans
      —almost into shrieks.
    

      Then, Madame Roubere, with a self-contained and serious air, said very
      gently:
    

      “You see, sister, very often it is not a man that we love, but love
      itself. And your real lover that night was the moonlight.”