MOTHER SAUVAGE

 Fifteen years had passed since I was at Virelogne. I returned there in the
      autumn to shoot with my friend Serval, who had at last rebuilt his
      chateau, which the Prussians had destroyed.

 I loved that district. It is one of those delightful spots which have a
      sensuous charm for the eyes. You love it with a physical love. We, whom
      the country enchants, keep tender memories of certain springs, certain
      woods, certain pools, certain hills seen very often which have stirred us
      like joyful events. Sometimes our thoughts turn back to a corner in a
      forest, or the end of a bank, or an orchard filled with flowers, seen but
      a single time on some bright day, yet remaining in our hearts like the
      image of certain women met in the street on a spring morning in their
      light, gauzy dresses, leaving in soul and body an unsatisfied desire which
      is not to be forgotten, a feeling that you have just passed by happiness.

 At Virelogne I loved the whole countryside, dotted with little woods and
      crossed by brooks which sparkled in the sun and looked like veins carrying
      blood to the earth. You fished in them for crawfish, trout and eels.
      Divine happiness! You could bathe in places and you often found snipe
      among the high grass which grew along the borders of these small water
      courses.

 I was stepping along light as a goat, watching my two dogs running ahead
      of me, Serval, a hundred metres to my right, was beating a field of
      lucerne. I turned round by the thicket which forms the boundary of the
      wood of Sandres and I saw a cottage in ruins.

 Suddenly I remembered it as I had seen it the last time, in 1869, neat,
      covered with vines, with chickens before the door. What is sadder than a
      dead house, with its skeleton standing bare and sinister?

 I also recalled that inside its doors, after a very tiring day, the good
      woman had given me a glass of wine to drink and that Serval had told me
      the history of its people. The father, an old poacher, had been killed by
      the gendarmes. The son, whom I had once seen, was a tall, dry fellow who
      also passed for a fierce slayer of game. People called them “Les
      Sauvage.”

 Was that a name or a nickname?

 I called to Serval. He came up with his long strides like a crane.

 I asked him:

 “What's become of those people?”

 This was his story:

 When war was declared the son Sauvage, who was then thirty-three years
      old, enlisted, leaving his mother alone in the house. People did not pity
      the old woman very much because she had money; they knew it.

 She remained entirely alone in that isolated dwelling, so far from the
      village, on the edge of the wood. She was not afraid, however, being of
      the same strain as the men folk—a hardy old woman, tall and thin,
      who seldom laughed and with whom one never jested. The women of the fields
      laugh but little in any case, that is men's business. But they themselves
      have sad and narrowed hearts, leading a melancholy, gloomy life. The
      peasants imbibe a little noisy merriment at the tavern, but their
      helpmates always have grave, stern countenances. The muscles of their
      faces have never learned the motions of laughter.

 Mother Sauvage continued her ordinary existence in her cottage, which was
      soon covered by the snows. She came to the village once a week to get
      bread and a little meat. Then she returned to her house. As there was talk
      of wolves, she went out with a gun upon her shoulder—her son's gun,
      rusty and with the butt worn by the rubbing of the hand—and she was
      a strange sight, the tall “Sauvage,” a little bent, going with
      slow strides over the snow, the muzzle of the piece extending beyond the
      black headdress, which confined her head and imprisoned her white hair,
      which no one had ever seen.

 One day a Prussian force arrived. It was billeted upon the inhabitants,
      according to the property and resources of each. Four were allotted to the
      old woman, who was known to be rich.

 They were four great fellows with fair complexion, blond beards and blue
      eyes, who had not grown thin in spite of the fatigue which they had
      endured already and who also, though in a conquered country, had remained
      kind and gentle. Alone with this aged woman, they showed themselves full
      of consideration, sparing her, as much as they could, all expense and
      fatigue. They could be seen, all four of them, making their toilet at the
      well in their shirt-sleeves in the gray dawn, splashing with great swishes
      of water their pink-white northern skin, while La Mere Sauvage went and
      came, preparing their soup. They would be seen cleaning the kitchen,
      rubbing the tiles, splitting wood, peeling potatoes, doing up all the
      housework like four good sons around their mother.

 But the old woman thought always of her own son, so tall and thin, with
      his hooked nose and his brown eyes and his heavy mustache which made a
      roll of black hair upon his lip. She asked every day of each of the
      soldiers who were installed beside her hearth: “Do you know where
      the French marching regiment, No. 23, was sent? My boy is in it.”

 They invariably answered, “No, we don't know, don't know a thing at
      all.” And, understanding her pain and her uneasiness—they who
      had mothers, too, there at home—they rendered her a thousand little
      services. She loved them well, moreover, her four enemies, since the
      peasantry have no patriotic hatred; that belongs to the upper class alone.
      The humble, those who pay the most because they are poor and because every
      new burden crushes them down; those who are killed in masses, who make the
      true cannon's prey because they are so many; those, in fine, who suffer
      most cruelly the atrocious miseries of war because they are the feeblest
      and offer least resistance—they hardly understand at all those
      bellicose ardors, that excitable sense of honor or those pretended
      political combinations which in six months exhaust two nations, the
      conqueror with the conquered.

 They said in the district, in speaking of the Germans of La Mere Sauvage:

 “There are four who have found a soft place.”

 Now, one morning, when the old woman was alone in the house, she observed,
      far off on the plain, a man coming toward her dwelling. Soon she
      recognized him; it was the postman to distribute the letters. He gave her
      a folded paper and she drew out of her case the spectacles which she used
      for sewing. Then she read:

 MADAME SAUVAGE: This letter is to tell you sad news. Your boy
   Victor was killed yesterday by a shell which almost cut him in two.
   I was near by, as we stood next each other in the company, and he
   told me about you and asked me to let you know on the same day if
   anything happened to him.

   I took his watch, which was in his pocket, to bring it back to you
   when the war is done.
                    CESAIRE RIVOT,

   Soldier of the 2d class, March. Reg. No. 23.

 The letter was dated three weeks back.

 She did not cry at all. She remained motionless, so overcome and stupefied
      that she did not even suffer as yet. She thought: “There's Victor
      killed now.” Then little by little the tears came to her eyes and
      the sorrow filled her heart. Her thoughts came, one by one, dreadful,
      torturing. She would never kiss him again, her child, her big boy, never
      again! The gendarmes had killed the father, the Prussians had killed the
      son. He had been cut in two by a cannon-ball. She seemed to see the thing,
      the horrible thing: the head falling, the eyes open, while he chewed the
      corner of his big mustache as he always did in moments of anger.

 What had they done with his body afterward? If they had only let her have
      her boy back as they had brought back her husband—with the bullet in
      the middle of the forehead!

 But she heard a noise of voices. It was the Prussians returning from the
      village. She hid her letter very quickly in her pocket, and she received
      them quietly, with her ordinary face, having had time to wipe her eyes.

 They were laughing, all four, delighted, for they brought with them a fine
      rabbit—stolen, doubtless—and they made signs to the old woman
      that there was to be something good to east.

 She set herself to work at once to prepare breakfast, but when it came to
      killing the rabbit, her heart failed her. And yet it was not the first.
      One of the soldiers struck it down with a blow of his fist behind the
      ears.

 The beast once dead, she skinned the red body, but the sight of the blood
      which she was touching, and which covered her hands, and which she felt
      cooling and coagulating, made her tremble from head to foot, and she kept
      seeing her big boy cut in two, bloody, like this still palpitating animal.

 She sat down at table with the Prussians, but she could not eat, not even
      a mouthful. They devoured the rabbit without bothering themselves about
      her. She looked at them sideways, without speaking, her face so impassive
      that they perceived nothing.

 All of a sudden she said: “I don't even know your names, and here's
      a whole month that we've been together.” They understood, not
      without difficulty, what she wanted, and told their names.

 That was not sufficient; she had them written for her on a paper, with the
      addresses of their families, and, resting her spectacles on her great
      nose, she contemplated that strange handwriting, then folded the sheet and
      put it in her pocket, on top of the letter which told her of the death of
      her son.

 When the meal was ended she said to the men:

 “I am going to work for you.”

 And she began to carry up hay into the loft where they slept.

 They were astonished at her taking all this trouble; she explained to them
      that thus they would not be so cold; and they helped her. They heaped the
      stacks of hay as high as the straw roof, and in that manner they made a
      sort of great chamber with four walls of fodder, warm and perfumed, where
      they should sleep splendidly.

 At dinner one of them was worried to see that La Mere Sauvage still ate
      nothing. She told him that she had pains in her stomach. Then she kindled
      a good fire to warm herself, and the four Germans ascended to their
      lodging-place by the ladder which served them every night for this
      purpose.

 As soon as they closed the trapdoor the old woman removed the ladder, then
      opened the outside door noiselessly and went back to look for more bundles
      of straw, with which she filled her kitchen. She went barefoot in the
      snow, so softly that no sound was heard. From time to time she listened to
      the sonorous and unequal snoring of the four soldiers who were fast
      asleep.

 When she judged her preparations to be sufficient, she threw one of the
      bundles into the fireplace, and when it was alight she scattered it over
      all the others. Then she went outside again and looked.

 In a few seconds the whole interior of the cottage was illumined with a
      brilliant light and became a frightful brasier, a gigantic fiery furnace,
      whose glare streamed out of the narrow window and threw a glittering beam
      upon the snow.

 Then a great cry issued from the top of the house; it was a clamor of men
      shouting heartrending calls of anguish and of terror. Finally the trapdoor
      having given way, a whirlwind of fire shot up into the loft, pierced the
      straw roof, rose to the sky like the immense flame of a torch, and all the
      cottage flared.

 Nothing more was heard therein but the crackling of the fire, the cracking
      of the walls, the falling of the rafters. Suddenly the roof fell in and
      the burning carcass of the dwelling hurled a great plume of sparks into
      the air, amid a cloud of smoke.

 The country, all white, lit up by the fire, shone like a cloth of silver
      tinted with red.

 A bell, far off, began to toll.

 The old “Sauvage” stood before her ruined dwelling, armed with
      her gun, her son's gun, for fear one of those men might escape.

 When she saw that it was ended, she threw her weapon into the brasier. A
      loud report followed.

 People were coming, the peasants, the Prussians.

 They found the woman seated on the trunk of a tree, calm and satisfied.

 A German officer, but speaking French like a son of France, demanded:

 “Where are your soldiers?”

 She reached her bony arm toward the red heap of fire which was almost out
      and answered with a strong voice:

 “There!”

 They crowded round her. The Prussian asked:

 “How did it take fire?”

 “It was I who set it on fire.”

 They did not believe her, they thought that the sudden disaster had made
      her crazy. While all pressed round and listened, she told the story from
      beginning to end, from the arrival of the letter to the last shriek of the
      men who were burned with her house, and never omitted a detail.

 When she had finished, she drew two pieces of paper from her pocket, and,
      in order to distinguish them by the last gleams of the fire, she again
      adjusted her spectacles. Then she said, showing one:

 “That, that is the death of Victor.” Showing the other, she
      added, indicating the red ruins with a bend of the head: “Here are
      their names, so that you can write home.” She quietly held a sheet
      of paper out to the officer, who held her by the shoulders, and she
      continued:

 “You must write how it happened, and you must say to their mothers
      that it was I who did that, Victoire Simon, la Sauvage! Do not forget.”

 The officer shouted some orders in German. They seized her, they threw her
      against the walls of her house, still hot. Then twelve men drew quickly up
      before her, at twenty paces. She did not move. She had understood; she
      waited.

 An order rang out, followed instantly by a long report. A belated shot
      went off by itself, after the others.

 The old woman did not fall. She sank as though they had cut off her legs.

 The Prussian officer approached. She was almost cut in two, and in her
      withered hand she held her letter bathed with blood.

 My friend Serval added:

 “It was by way of reprisal that the Germans destroyed the chateau of
      the district, which belonged to me.”

 I thought of the mothers of those four fine fellows burned in that house
      and of the horrible heroism of that other mother shot against the wall.

 And I picked up a little stone, still blackened by the flames.