MOTI GUJ—MUTINEER

 ONCE upon a time there was a coffee-planter in India who wished to clear
      some forest land for coffee-planting. When he had cut down all the trees
      and burned the underwood, the stumps still remained. Dynamite is expensive
      and slow fire slow. The happy medium for stump-clearing is the lord of all
      beasts, who is the elephant. He will either push the stump out of the
      ground with his tusks, if he has any, or drag it out with ropes. The
      planter, therefore, hired elephants by ones and twos and threes, and fell
      to work. The very best of all the elephants belonged to the very worst of
      all the drivers or mahouts; and this superior beast's name was Moti Guj.
      He was the absolute property of his mahout, which would never have been
      the case under native rule; for Moti Guj was a creature to be desired by
      kings, and his name, being translated, meant the Pearl Elephant. Because
      the British government was in the land, Deesa, the mahout, enjoyed his
      property undisturbed. He was dissipated. When he had made much money
      through the strength of his elephant, he would get extremely drunk and
      give Moti Guj a beating with a tent-peg over the tender nails of the
      forefeet. Moti Guj never trampled the life out of Deesa on these
      occasions, for he knew that after the beating was over, Deesa would
      embrace his trunk and weep and call him his love and his life and the
      liver of his soul, and give him some liquor. Moti Guj was very fond of
      liquor—arrack for choice, though he would drink palm-tree toddy if
      nothing better offered. Then Deesa would go to sleep between Moti Guj's
      forefeet, and as Deesa generally chose the middle of the public road, and
      as Moti Guj mounted guard over him, and would not permit horse, foot, or
      cart to pass by, traffic was congested till Deesa saw fit to wake up.

 There was no sleeping in the daytime on the planter's clearing: the wages
      were too high to risk. Deesa sat on Moti Guj's neck and gave him orders,
      while Moti Guj rooted up the stumps—for he owned a magnificent pair
      of tusks; or pulled at the end of a rope—for he had a magnificent
      pair of shoulders—while Deesa kicked him behind the ears and said he
      was the king of elephants. At evening time Moti Guj would wash down his
      three hundred pounds' weight of green food with a quart of arrack, and
      Deesa would take a share, and sing songs between Moti Guj's legs till it
      was time to go to bed. Once a week Deesa led Moti Guj down to the river,
      and Moti Gui lay on his side luxuriously in the shallows, while Deesa went
      over him with a coir swab and a brick. Moti Guj never mistook the pounding
      blow of the latter for the smack of the former that warned him to get up
      and turn over on the other side. Then Deesa would look at his feet and
      examine his eyes, and turn up the fringes of his mighty ears in case of
      sores or budding ophthalmia. After inspection the two would come up with a
      song from the sea, Moti Guj, all black and shining, waving a torn tree
      branch twelve feet long in his trunk, and Deesa knotting up his own long
      wet hair.

 It was a peaceful, well-paid life till Deesa felt the return of the desire
      to drink deep. He wished for an orgy. The little draughts that led nowhere
      were taking the manhood out of him.

 He went to the planter, and “My mother's dead,” said he, weeping.

 “She died on the last plantation two months ago, and she died once before
      that when you were working for me last year,” said the planter, who knew
      something of the ways of nativedom.

 “Then it's my aunt, and she was just the same as a mother to me,” said
      Deesa, weeping more than ever. “She has left eighteen small children
      entirely without bread, and it is I who must fill their little stomachs,”
       said Deesa, beating his head on the floor.

 “Who brought the news?” said the planter.

 “The post,” said Deesa.

 “There hasn't been a post here for the past week. Get back to your
      lines!”,

 “A devastating sickness has fallen on my village, and all my wives are
      dying,” yelled Deesa, really in tears this time.

 “Call Chihun, who comes from Deesa's village,” said the planter. “Chihun,
      has this man got a wife?”

 “He?” said Chihun. “No. Not a woman of our village would look at him.
      They'd sooner marry the elephant!”

 Chihun snorted. Deesa wept and bellowed.

 “You will get into a difficulty in a minute,” said the planter. “Go back
      to your work!”

 “Now I will speak Heaven's truth,” gulped Deesa, with an inspiration. “I
      haven't been drunk for two months. I desire to depart in order to get
      properly drunk afar off and distant from this heavenly plantation. Thus I
      shall cause no trouble.”

 A flickering smile crossed the planter's face. “Deesa,” said he, “you've
      spoken the truth, and I'd give you leave on the spot if anything could be
      done with Moti Guj while you're away. You know that he will only obey your
      orders.”

 “May the light of the heavens live forty thousand years. I shall be absent
      but ten little days. After that, upon my faith and honor and soul, I
      return. As to the inconsiderable interval, have I the gracious permission
      of the heaven-born to call up Moti Guj?”

 Permission was granted, and in answer of Deesa's shrill yell, the mighty
      tusker swung out of the shade of a clump of trees where he had been
      squirting dust over himself till his master should return.

 “Light of my heart, protector of the drunken, mountain of might, give
      ear!” said Deesa, standing in front of him.

 Moti Guj gave ear, and saluted with his trunk. “I am going away,” said
      Deesa.

 Moti Guj's eyes twinkled. He liked jaunts as well as his master. One could
      snatch all manner of nice things from the roadside then.

 “But you, you fussy old pig, must stay behind and work.”

 The twinkle died out as Moti Guj tried to look delighted. He hated
      stump-hauling on the plantation. It hurt his teeth.

 “I shall be gone for ten days, oh, delectable one! Hold up your near
      forefoot and I'll impress the fact upon it, warty toad of a dried
      mud-puddle.” Deesa took a tent-peg and banged Moti Guj ten times on the
      nails. Moti Guj grunted and shuffled from foot to foot.

 “Ten days,” said Deesa, “you will work and haul and root the trees as
      Chihun here shall order you. Take up Chihun and set him on your neck!”
       Moti Guj curled the tip of his trunk, Chihun put his foot there, and was
      swung on to the neck. Deesa handed Chihun the heavy ankus—the iron
      elephant goad.

 Chihun thumped Moti Guj's bald head as a paver thumps a curbstone.

 Moti Guj trumpeted.

 “Be still, hog of the backwoods! Chihun's your mahout for ten days. And
      now bid me goodbye, beast after mine own heart. Oh, my lord, my king!
      Jewel of all created elephants, lily of the herd, preserve your honored
      health; be virtuous. Adieu!”

 Moti Guj lapped his trunk round Deesa and swung him into the air twice.
      That was his way of bidding him goodbye.

 “He'll work now,” said Deesa to the planter. “Have I leave to go?”

 The planter nodded, and Deesa dived into the woods. Moti Guj went back to
      haul stumps.

 Chihun was very kind to him, but he felt unhappy and forlorn for all that.
      Chihun gave him a ball of spices, and tickled him under the chin, and
      Chihun's little baby cooed to him after work was over, and Chihun's wife
      called him a darling; but Moti Guj was a bachelor by instinct, as Deesa
      was. He did not understand the domestic emotions. He wanted the light of
      his universe back again—the drink and the drunken slumber, the
      savage beatings and the savage caresses.

 None the less he worked well, and the planter wondered. Deesa had wandered
      along the roads till he met a marriage procession of his own caste, and,
      drinking, dancing, and tippling, had drifted with it past all knowledge of
      the lapse of time.

 The morning of the eleventh day dawned, and there returned no Deesa, Moti
      Guj was loosed from his ropes for the daily stint. He swung clear, looked
      round, shrugged his shoulders, and began to walk away, as one having
      business elsewhere.

 “Hi! ho! Come back you!” shouted Chihun. “Come back and put me on your
      neck, misborn mountain! Return, splendor of the hillsides! Adornment of
      all India, heave to, or I'll bang every toe off your forefoot!”

 Moti Guj gurgled gently, but did not obey. Chihun ran after him with a
      rope and caught him up. Moti Guj put his ears forward, and Chihun knew
      what that meant, though he tried to carry it off with high words.

 “None of your nonsense with me,” said he. “To your pickets, devil-son!”

 “Hrrump!” said Moti Guj, and that was all—that and the forebent
      ears.

 Moti Guj put his hands in his pockets, chewed a branch for a toothpick,
      and strolled about the clearing, making fun of the other elephants who had
      just set to work.

 Chihun reported the state of affairs to the planter, who came out with a
      dog-whip and cracked it furiously. Moti Guj paid the white man the
      compliment of charging him nearly a quarter of a mile across the clearing
      and “Hrrumphing” him into his veranda. Then he stood outside the house,
      chuckling to himself and shaking all over with the fun of it, as an
      elephant will.

 “We'll thrash him,” said the planter. “He shall have the finest thrashing
      ever elephant received. Give Kala Nag and Nazim twelve foot of chain
      apiece, and tell them to lay on twenty.”

 Kala Nag—which means Black Snake—and Nazim were two of the
      biggest elephants in the lines, and one of their duties was to administer
      the graver punishment, since no man can beat an elephant properly.

 They took the whipping-chains and rattled them in their trunks as they
      sidled up to Moti Guj, meaning to hustle him between them. Moti Guj had
      never, in all his life of thirty-nine years, been whipped, and he did not
      intend to begin a new experience. So he waited, waving his head from right
      to left, and measuring the precise spot in Kala Nag's fat side where a
      blunt tusk could sink deepest. Kala Nag had no tusks; the chain was the
      badge of his authority; but for all that, he swung wide of Moti Guj at the
      last minute, and tried to appear as if he had brought the chain out for
      amusement. Nazim turned round and went home early. He did not feel
      fighting fit that morning, and so Moti Guj was left standing alone with
      his ears cocked.

 That decided the planter to argue no more, and Moti Guj rolled back to his
      amateur inspection of the clearing. An elephant who will not work and is
      not tied up is about as manageable as an eighty-one-ton gun loose in a
      heavy seaway. He slapped old friends on the back and asked them if the
      stumps were coming away easily; he talked nonsense concerning labor and
      the inalienable rights of elephants to a long 'nooning'; and, wandering to
      and fro, he thoroughly demoralized the garden till sundown, when he
      returned to his picket for food.

 “If you won't work, you sha'n't eat,” said Chihun, angrily. “You're a wild
      elephant, and no educated animal at all. Go back to your jungle.”

 Chihun's little brown baby was rolling on the floor of the hut, and
      stretching out its fat arms to the huge shadow in the doorway. Moti Guj
      knew well that it was the dearest thing on earth to Chihun. He swung out
      his trunk with a fascinating crook at the end, and the brown baby threw
      itself, shouting, upon it. Moti Guj made fast and pulled up till the brown
      baby was crowing in the air twelve feet above his father's head.

 “Great Lord!” said Chihun. “Flour cakes of the best, twelve in number, two
      feet across and soaked in rum, shall be yours on the instant, and two
      hundred pounds weight of fresh-cut young sugar-cane therewith. Deign only
      to put down safely that insignificant brat who is my heart and my life to
      me!”

 Moti Guj tucked the brown baby comfortably between his forefeet, that
      could have knocked into toothpicks all Chihun's hut, and waited for his
      food. He ate it, and the brown baby crawled away. Moti Guj dozed and
      thought of Deesa. One of many mysteries connected with the elephant is
      that his huge body needs less sleep than anything else that lives. Four or
      five hours in the night suffice—two just before midnight, lying down
      on one side; two just after one o'clock, lying down on the other. The rest
      of the silent hours are filled with eating and fidgeting, and long
      grumbling soliloquies.

 At midnight, therefore, Moti Guj strode out of his pickets, for a thought
      had come to him that Deesa might be lying drunk somewhere in the dark
      forest with none to look after him. So all that night he chased through
      the undergrowth, blowing and trumpeting and shaking his ears. He went down
      to the river and blared across the shallows where Deesa used to wash him,
      but there was no answer. He could not find Deesa, but he disturbed all the
      other elephants in the lines, and nearly frightened to death some gypsies
      in the woods.

 At dawn Deesa returned to the plantation. He had been very drunk in deed,
      and he expected to get into trouble for outstaying his leave. He drew a
      long breath when he saw that the bungalow and the plantation were still
      uninjured, for he knew something of Moti Guj's temper, and reported
      himself with many lies and salaams. Moti Guj had gone to his pickets for
      breakfast. The night exercise had made him hungry.

 “Call up your beast,” said the planter; and Deesa shouted in the
      mysterious elephant language that some mahouts believe came from China at
      the birth of the world, when elephants and not men were masters. Moti Guj
      heard and came. Elephants do not gallop They move from places at varying
      rates of speed. If an elephant wished to catch an express train he could
      not gallop, but he could catch the train. So Moti Guj was at the planter's
      door almost before Chihun noticed that he had left his pickets. He fell
      into Deesa's arms trumpeting with joy, and the man and beast wept and
      slobbered over each other, and handled each other from head to heel to see
      that no harm had befallen.

 “Now we will get to work,” said Deesa. “Lift me up, my son and my joy!”

 Moti Guj swung him up, and the two went to the coffee-clearing to look for
      difficult stumps.

 The planter was too astonished to be very angry.