MY OLD MAN



 MY OLD MAN

 I guess looking at it now my old man was cut out
for a fat guy, one of those regular little roly fat guys
you see around, but he sure never got that way,
except a little toward the last, and then it wasn’t
his fault, he was riding over the jumps only and he
could afford to carry plenty of weight then. I remember
the way he’d pull on a rubber shirt over a couple
of jerseys and a big sweat shirt over that and get
me to run with him in the forenoon in the hot sun.
He’d have maybe taken a trial trip with one of
Razzo’s skins early in the morning after just getting
in from Torino at four o’clock in the morning and
beating it out to the stables in a cab and then with
the dew all over everything and the sun just starting
to get going I’d help him pull off his boots and he’d
get into a pair of sneakers and all these sweaters and
we’d start out.

“Come on kid” he’d say, stepping up and down
on his toes in front of the jock’s dressing room,
“let’s get moving”.

Then we’d start off jogging around the infield
once maybe with him ahead running nice and then
turn out the gate and along one of those roads with
all the trees along both sides of them that run out
from San Siro. I’d go ahead of him when we hit the
road and I could run pretty stout and I’d look around
and he’d be jogging easy just behind me and after
a little while I’d look around again and he’d begun to
sweat. Sweating heavy and he’d just be dogging it
along with his eyes on my back, but when he’d catch
me looking at him he’d grin and say, “Sweating
plenty?” When my old man grinned nobody could
help but grin too. We’d keep right on running out
toward the mountains and then my old man would
yell “Hey Joe!” and I’d look back and he’d be
sitting under a tree with a towel he’d had around
his waist wrapped around his neck.

I’d come back and sit down beside him and he’d
pull a rope out of his pocket and start skipping rope
out in the sun with the sweat pouring off his face
and him skipping rope out in the white dust with the
rope going cloppetty cloppety clop clop clop and
the sun hotter and him working harder up and down
a patch of the road. Say it was a treat to see my old
man skip rope too. He could whirr it fast or lop it
slow and fancy. Say you ought to have seen wops
look at us sometimes when they’d come by going
into town walking along with big white steers hauling
the cart. They sure looked as though they thought
the old man was nuts. He’d start the rope whirring
till they’d stop dead still and watch him, then give
the steers a cluck and a poke with the goad and get
going again.

When I’d sit watching him working out in the
hot sun I sure felt fond of him. He sure was fun and
he done his work so hard and he’d finish up with a
regular whirring that’d drive the sweat out on his
face like water and then sling the rope at the tree
and come over and sit down with me and lean back
against the tree with the towel and a sweater
wrapped around his neck.

“Sure is hell keeping it down, Joe” he’d say
and lean back and shut his eyes and breath long and
deep, “it aint like when you’re a kid”. Then he’d
get up before he started to cool and we’d jog along
back to the stables. That’s the way it was keeping
down to weight. He was worried all the time. Most
jocks can just about ride off all they want to. A jock
loses about a kilo every time he rides, but my old
man was sort of dried out and he couldn’t keep
down his kilos without all that running.

I remember once at San Siro, Regoli, a little wop
that was riding for Buzoni came out across the paddock
going to the bar for something cool and flicking
his boots with his whip, after he’d just weighed
in and my old man had just weighed in too and came
out with the saddle under his arm looking red faced
and tired and too big for his silks and he stood there
looking at young Regoli standing up to the outdoors
bar cool and kid looking and I says, “What’s the
matter Dad?” cause I thought maybe Regoli had
bumped him or something and he just looked at
Regoli and said, “Oh to hell with it” and went on
to the dressing room.

Well it would have been all right maybe if we’d
stayed in Milan and ridden at Milan and Torino cause
if there ever were any easy courses its those two.
“Pianola, Joe”. My old man said when he dismounted
in the winning stall after what the wops
thought was a hell of a steeplechase. I asked him
once, “This course rides its-self. It’s the pace you’re
going at that makes riding the jumps dangerous Joe.
We aint going any pace here, and they aint any really
bad jumps either. But it’s the pace always—not
the jumps that makes the trouble”.

San Siro was the swellest course I’d ever seen but
the old man said it was a dog’s life. Going back and
forth between Mirafiore and San Siro and riding just
about every day in the week with a train ride every
other night.

I was nuts about the horses too. There’s something
about it when they come out and go up the track
to the post. Sort of dancy and tight looking with the
jock keeping a tight hold on them and maybe easing
off a little and letting them run a little going up.
Then once they were at the barrier it got me worse
than anything. Especially at San Siro with that big
green infield and the mountains way off and the fat
wop starter with his big whip and the jocks fiddling
them around and then the barrier snapping up and
that bell going off and them all getting off in a bunch
and then commencing to string out. You know the
way a bunch of skins gets off. If you’re up in the
stand with a pair of glasses all you see is them
plunging off and then that bell goes off and it seems
like it rings for a thousand years and then they come
sweeping round the turn. There wasn’t ever anything
like it for me.

But my old man said one day in the dressing room
when he was getting into his street clothes, “None
of these things are horses Joe. They’d kill that bunch
of skates for their hides and hoofs up at Paris”.
That was the day he’d won the Premio Commercio
with Lantorna shooting her out of the field the last
hundred meters like pulling a cork out of a bottle.

It was right after the Premio Commercio that we
pulled out and left Italy. My old man and Holbrook
and a fat wop in a straw hat that kept wiping his
face with a handkerchief were having an argument
at a table in the Galleria. They were all talking
French and the two of them were after my old man
about something. Finally he didn’t say anything
any more but just sat there and looked at Holbrook
and the two of them kept after him, first one talking
and then the other and the fat wop always butting
in on Holbrook.

“You go out and buy me a Sportsman, will you
Joe?” my old man said and handed me a couple
of soldi without looking away from Holbrook.

So I went out of the Galleria and walked over to
in front of the Scala and bought a paper and came
back and stood a little way away because I didn’t
want to butt in and my old man was sitting back
in his chair looking down at his coffee and fooling
with a spoon and Holbrook and the big wop were
standing and the big wop was wiping his face and
shaking his head. And I came up and my old man
acted just as though the two of them weren’t standing
there and said, “Want an ice Joe?” Holbrook
looked down at my old man and said slow and careful,
“You son of a bitch” and he and the fat wop
went out through the tables.

My old man sat there and sort of smiled at me but
his face was white and he looked sick as hell and I
was scared and felt sick inside because I knew something
had happened and I didn’t see how anybody
could call my old man a son of a bitch and get away
with it. My old man opened up the Sportsman and
studied the handicaps for a while and then he said,
“You got to take a lot of things in this world Joe”.
And three days later we left Milan for good on the
Turin train for Paris after an auction sale out in
front of Turner’s stables of everything we couldn’t
get into a trunk and a suit case.

We got into Paris early in the morning in a long
dirty station the old man told me was the Gare de
Lyon. Paris was an awful big town after Milan.
Seems like in Milan everybody is going somewhere
and all the trams run somewhere and there aint any
sort of a mixup, but Paris is all balled up and they
never do straighten it out. I got to like it though,
part of it anyway, and say it’s got the best race
courses in the world. Seems as though that were the
thing that keeps it all going and about the only thing
you can figure on is that every day the buses will
be going out to whatever track they’re running at
going right out through everything to the track.
I never really got to know Paris well because I just
came in about once or twice a week with the old
man from Maisons and he always sat at the Cafe de
la Paix on the Opera side with the rest of the gang
from Maisons and I guess that’s one of the busiest
parts of the town. But say it is funny that a big town
like Paris wouldn’t have a Galleria isn’t it?

Well, we went out to live at Maisons-Lafitte, where
just about everybody lives except the gang at Chantilly,
with a Mrs. Meyers that runs a boarding house.
Maisons is about the swellest place to live I’ve ever
seen in all my life. The town aint so much, but there’s
a lake and a swell forest that we used to go off
bumming in all day, a couple of us kids, and my
old man made me a sling shot and we got a lot of
things with it but the best one was a magpie. Young
Dick Atkinson shot a rabbit with it one day and we
put it under a tree and were all sitting around and
Dick had some cigarettes and all of a sudden the rabbit
jumped up and beat it into the brush and we
chased it but we couldn’t find it. Gee we had fun
at Maisons. Mrs. Meyers used to give me lunch in the
morning and I’d be gone all day. I learned to talk
French quick. It’s an easy language.

As soon as we got to Maisons my old man wrote
to Milan for his license and he was pretty worried
till it came. He used to sit around the Cafe de Paris
in Maisons with the gang there, there were lots of
guys he’d known when he rode up at Paris before
the war lived at Maisons, and there’s a lot of time
to sit around because the work around a racing
stable for the jocks that is, is all cleaned up by nine
o’clock in the morning. They take the first batch
of skins out to gallop them at 5.30 in the morning and
they work the second lot at 8 o’clock. That means
getting up early all right and going to bed early too.
If a jock’s riding for somebody too he can’t go boozing
around because the trainer always has an eye on
him if he’s a kid and if he aint a kid he’s always got
an eye on himself. So mostly if a jock aint working
he sits around the Café de Paris with the gang and
they can all sit around about two or three hours in
front of some drink like a vermouth and seltz and
they talk and tell stories and shoot pool and it’s
sort of like a club or the Galleria in Milan. Only it
aint really like the Galleria because there everybody
is going by all the time and there’s everybody around
at the tables.

Well my old man got his license all right. They
sent it through to him without a word and he rode
a couple of times. Amiens, up country and that sort
of thing, but he didn’t seem to get any engagement.
Everybody liked him and whenever I’d come in to
the Café in the forenoon I’d find somebody drinking
with him because my old man wasn’t tight like most
of these jockey’s that have got the first dollar they
made riding at the World’s Fair in St. Louis in
Nineteen ought four. That’s what my old man would
say when he’d kid George Burns. But it seemed like
everybody steered clear of giving my old man any
mounts.

We went out to wherever they were running every
day with the car from Maisons and that was the most
fun of all. I was glad when the horses came back
from Deauville and the summer. Even though it
meant no more bumming in the woods, cause then
we’d ride to Enghien or Tremblay or St. Cloud and
watch them from the trainers’ and jockeys’ stand.
I sure learned about racing from going out with that
gang and the fun of it was going every day.

I remember once out at St. Cloud. It was a big
two hundred thousand franc race with seven entries
and Kzar a big favourite. I went around to the
paddock to see the horses with my old man and you
never saw such horses. This Kzar is a great big
yellow horse that looks like just nothing but run.
I never saw such a horse. He was being led around the
paddock with his head down and when he went by
me I felt all hollow inside he was so beautiful. There
never was such a wonderful, lean, running built
horse. And he went around the paddock putting his
feet just so and quiet and careful and moving easy
like he knew just what he had to do and not jerking
and standing up on his legs and getting wild eyed
like you see these selling platers with a shot of dope
in them. The crowd was so thick I couldn’t see him
again except just his legs going by and some yellow
and my old man started out through the crowd and
I followed him over to the jock’s dressing room back
in the trees and there was a big crowd around there
too but the man at the door in a derby nodded to
my old man and we got in and everybody was sitting
around and getting dressed and pulling shirts over
their heads and pulling boots on and it all smelled
hot and sweaty and linimenty and outside was the
crowd looking in.

The old man went over and sat down beside
George Gardner that was getting into his pants and
said, “What’s the dope George?” just in an ordinary
tone of voice cause there aint any use him
feeling around because George either can tell him
or he can’t tell him.

“He won’t win” George says very low, leaning
over and buttoning the bottoms of his pants.

“Who will” my old man says leaning over close
so nobody can hear.

“Kircubbin” George says, “And if he does, save
me a couple of tickets”.

My old man says something in a regular voice to
George and George says, “Don’t ever bet on anything
I tell you” kidding like and we beat it out
and through all the crowd that was looking in over
to the 100 franc mutuel machine. But I knew something
big was up because George is Kzar’s jockey.
On the way he gets one of the yellow odds sheets
with the starting prices on and Kzar is only paying
5 for 10, Cefisidote is next at 3 to I and fifth down
the list this Kircubbin at 8 to 1. My old man bets
five thousand on Kircubbin to win and puts on a
thousand to place and we went around back of the
grandstand to go up the stairs and get a place to
watch the race.

We were jammed in tight and first a man in a long
coat with a grey tall hat and a whip folded up in his
hand came out and then one after another the horses,
with the jocks up and a stable boy holding the bridle
on each side and walking along, followed the old guy.
That big yellow horse Kzar came first. He didn’t
look so big when you first looked at him until you
saw the length of his legs and the whole way he’s
built and the way he moves. Gosh I never saw such
a horse. George Gardner was riding him and they
moved along slow, back of the old guy in the gray tall
hat that walked along like he was the ring master
in a circus. Back of Kzar, moving along smooth and
yellow in the sun, was a good looking black with a
nice head with Tommy Archibald riding him and
after the black was a string of five more horses all
moving along slow in a procession past the grandstand
and the pesage. My old man said the black
was Kircubbin and I took a good look at him and he
was a nice looking horse all right but nothing like
Kzar.

Everybody cheered Kzar when he went by and
he sure was one swell looking horse. The procession
of them went around on the other side past the
pelouse and then back up to the near end of the
course and the circus master had the stable boys
turn them loose one after another so they could
gallop by the stands on their way up to the post and
let everybody have a good look at them. They
weren’t at the post hardly any time at all when the
gong started and you could see them way off across
the infield all in a bunch starting on the first swing
like a lot of little toy horses. I was watching them
through the glasses and Kzar was running well
back with one of the bays making the pace. They
swept down and around and came pounding past
and Kzar was way back when they passed us and
this Kircubbin horse in front and going smooth.
Gee it’s awful when they go by you and then you
have to watch them go farther away and get smaller
and smaller and then all bunched up on the turns
and then come around towards into the stretch and
you feel like swearing and goddaming worse and
worse. Finally they made the last turn and came
into the straightaway with this Kircubbin horse
way out in front. Everybody was looking funny and
saying “Kzar” in sort of a sick way and they
pounding nearer down the stretch, and then something
came out of the pack right into my glasses
like a horse-headed yellow streak and everybody
began to yell “Kzar” as though they were crazy.
Kzar came on faster than I’d ever seen anything
in my life and pulled up on Kircubbin that was going
fast as any black horse could go with the jock
flogging hell out of him with the gad and they were
right dead neck and neck for a second but Kzar
seemed going about twice as fast with those great
jumps and that head out—but it was while they
were neck and neck that they passed the winning
post and when the numbers went up in the slots the
first one was 2 and that meant Kircubbin had won.

I felt all trembly and funny inside, and then we
were all jammed in with the people going down
stairs to stand in front of the board where they’d
post what Kircubbin paid. Honest watching the
race I’d forgot how much my old man had bet on
Kircubbin. I’d wanted Kzar to win so damned bad.
But now it was all over it was swell to know we had
the winner.

“Wasn’t it a swell race Dad?” I said to him.

He looked at me sort of funny with his derby on
the back of his head, “George Gardner’s a swell
jockey all right”, he said, “It sure took a great
jock to keep that Kzar horse from winning”.

Of course I knew it was funny all the time. But
my old man saying that right out like that sure took
the kick all out of it for me and I didn’t get the real
kick back again ever, even when they posted the
numbers up on the board and the bell rang to pay
off and we saw that Kircubbin paid 67.50 for 10. All
around people were saying “Poor Kzar. Poor Kzar!”
And I thought, I wish I were a jockey and could
have rode him instead of that son of a bitch. And
that was funny, thinking of George Gardner as a son
of a bitch because I’d always liked him and besides
he’d given us the winner, but I guess that’s what he
is all right.

My old man had a big lot of money after that race
and he took to coming into Paris oftener. If they
raced at Tremblay he’d have them drop him in town
on their way back to Maisons and he and I’d sit out
in front of the Café de la Paix and watch the people
go by. It’s funny sitting there. There’s streams of
people going by and all sorts of guys come up and
want to sell you things and I loved to sit there with
my old man. That was when we’d have the most fun.
Guys would come by selling funny rabbits that
jumped if you squeezed a bulb and they’d come up to
us and my old man would kid with them. He could
talk French just like English and all those kind of
guys knew him cause you can always tell a jockey—and
then we always sat at the same table and they
got used to seeing us there. There were guys selling
matrimonial papers and girls selling rubber eggs
that when you squeezed them a rooster came out
of them and one old wormy looking guy that went
by with post cards of Paris showing them to everybody,
and of course nobody ever bought any and
then he would come back and show the under side
of the pack and they would all be smutty post cards
and lots of people would dig down and buy them.

Gee I remember the funny people that used to go
by. Girls around supper time looking for somebody
to take them out to eat and they’d speak to my old
man and he’d make some joke at them in French
and they’d pat me on the head and go on.
Once there was an American woman sitting
with her kid daughter at the next table to
us and they were both eating ices and I kept
looking at the girl and she was awfully good
looking and I smiled at her and she smiled at me
but that was all that ever came of it because I looked
for her mother and her every day and I made up
ways that I was going to speak to her and I wondered
if I got to know her if her mother would let me
take her out to Auteuil or Tremblay but I never
saw either of them again. Anyway I guess it wouldn’t
have been any good anyway because looking back
on it I remember the way I thought out would be
best to speak to her was to say, “Pardon me, but
perhaps I can give you a winner at Enghien today?”
and after all maybe she would have thought I was
a tout instead of really trying to give her a winner.

We’d sit at the Café de la Paix, my old man and
me, and we had a big drag with the waiter because
my old man drank whisky and it cost five francs
and that meant a good tip when the saucers were
counted up. My old man was drinking more than I’d
ever seen him, but he wasn’t riding at all now and
besides he said that whiskey kept his weight down.
But I noticed he was putting it on all right just the
same. He’d busted away from his old gang out at
Maisons and seemed to like just sitting around on
the boulevard with me. But he was dropping money
every day at the track. He’d feel sort of doleful after
the last race, if he’d lost on the day, until we’d get
to our table and he’d have his first whiskey and then
he’d be fine.

He’d be reading the Paris-Sport and he’d look
over at me and say, “Where’s your girl Joe?” to
kid me on account I had told him about the girl that
day at the next table. And I’d get red but I liked
being kidded about her. It gave me a good feeling.
“Keep your eye peeled for her Joe.” he’d say,
“She’ll be back.”

He’d ask me questions about things and some of
the things I’d say he’d laugh. And then he’d get
started talking about things. About riding down in
Egypt, or at St. Moritz on the ice before my mother
died, and about during the war when they had regular
races down in the south of France without any
purses, or betting or crowd or anything just to keep
the breed up. Regular races with the jocks riding
hell out of the horses. Gee I could listen to my old
man talk by the hour, especially when he’d had a
couple or so of drinks. He’d tell me about when he
was a boy in Kentucky and going coon hunting and
the old days in the states before everything went on
the bum there. And he’d say, “Joe, when we’ve got
a decent stake, you’re going back there to the
States and go to school.”

“What’ve I got to go back there to go to school
for when everything’s on the bum there?” I’d ask
him.

“That’s different.” he’d say and get the waiter
over and pay the pile of saucers and we’d get a taxi
to the Gare St. Lazare and get on the train out to
Maisons.

One day at Auteuil after a selling steeplechase my
old man bought in the winner for 30.000 francs. He
had to bid a little to get him but the stable let the
horse go finally and my old man had his permit and
his colors in a week. Gee I felt proud when my old
man was an owner. He fixed it up for stable space with
Charles Drake and cut out coming in to Paris and
started his running and sweating out again and him
and I were the whole stable gang. Our horse’s name
was Gillford, he was Irish bred and a nice sweet
jumper. My old man figured that training him and
riding him himself he was a good investment. I was
proud of everything and I thought Gillford was as
good a horse as Kzar. He was a good solid jumper a
bay, with plenty of speed on the flat if you asked him
for it and he was a nice looking horse too.

Gee I was fond of him. The first time he started
with my old man up he finished third in a 2.500 meter
hurdle race and when my old man got off him, all
sweating and happy in the place stall and went in
to weigh I felt as proud of him as though it was the
first race he’d ever placed in. You see when a guy
aint been riding for a long time you can’t make
yourself really believe that he has ever rode. The whole
thing was different now cause down in Milan even big
races never seemed to make any difference to my
old man, if he won he wasn’t ever excited or anything,
and now it was so I couldn’t hardly sleep the night
before a race and I knew my old man was excited
too even if he didn’t show it. Riding for yourself
makes an awful difference.

Second time Gillford and my old man started was
a rainy Sunday at Auteuil in the Prix du Marat, a
4.500 meter steeplechase. As soon as he’d gone out I
beat it up in the stand with the new glasses my old
man had bought for me to watch them. They started
way over at the far end of the course and there
was some trouble at the barrier. Something with
goggle blinders on was making a great fuss and
rearing around and busted the barrier once but I
could see my old man in our black jacket with a
white cross and a black cap sitting up on Gillford
and patting him with his hand. Then they were off
in a jump and out of sight behind the trees and the
gong going for dear life and the pari mutuel wickets
rattling down. Gosh I was so excited I was afraid to
look at them but I fixed the glasses on the place
where they would come out back of the trees and
then out they came with the old black jacket going
third and they all sailing over the jump like birds.
Then they went out of sight again and then they
came pounding out and down the hill and all going
nice and sweet and easy and taking the fence smooth
in a bunch and moving away from us all solid.
Looked as though you could walk across on their
backs they were all so bunched and going so smooth,
Then they bellied over the big double Bullfinch and
something came down. I couldn’t see who it was
but in a minute the horse was up an galloping free
and the field, all bunched still, sweeping around the
long left turn into the straightaway. They jumped the
stone wall and came jammed down the stretch toward
the big water jump right in front of the stands. I
saw them coming and hollered at my old man as he
went by and he was leading by about a length and
riding way out over and light as a monkey and they
were racing for the water jump. They took off over
the big hedge of the water jump in a pack and then
there was a crash and two horses pulled sideways
out off it and kept on going and three others were
piled up. I couldn’t see my old man anywhere. One
horse knee-ed himself up and the jock had hold of the
bridle and mounted and went slamming on after
the place money. The other horse was up and away
by himself, jerking his head and galloping with the
bridle rein hanging and the jock staggered over to
one side of the track against the fence. Then Gillford
rolled over to one side off my old man and got up
and started to run on three legs with his off hoof
dangling and there was my old man lying there on
the grass flat out with his face up and blood all over
the side of his head. I ran down the stand and bumped
into a jam of people and got to the rail and a cop
grabbed me and held me and two big stretcher
bearers were going out after my old man and around
on the other side of the course I saw three horses,
strung way out, coming out of the trees and taking
the jump.

My old man was dead when they brought him in
and while a doctor was listening to his heart with a
thing plugged in his ears I heard a shot up the track
that meant they’d killed Gillford. I lay down beside
my old man when they carried the stretcher into the
hospital room and hung onto the stretcher and cried
and cried and he looked so white and gone and so
awfully dead and I couldn’t help feeling that if my
old man was dead maybe they didn’t need to have
shot Gillford. His hoof might have got well. I don’t
know. I loved my old man so much.

Then a couple of guys came in and one of them patted
me on the back and then went over and looked at
my old man and then pulled a sheet off the cot and
and spread it over him; and the other was telephoning
in French for them to send the ambulance to take
him out to Maisons. And I couldn’t stop crying,
crying and choking, sort of, and George Gardner
came in and sat down beside me on the floor and put
his arm around me and says, “Come on Joe old boy.
Get up and we’ll go out and wait for the ambulance.”

George and I went out to the gate and I was
trying to stop bawling and George wiped off my face
with his handkerchief and we were standing back a
little ways while the crowd was going out of the gate
and a couple of guys stopped near us while we were
waiting for the crowd to get through the gate and one
of them was counting a bunch of mutuel tickets and
he said, “Well Butler got his all right.”

The other guy said, “I don’t give a good goddam
if he did, the crook. He had it coming to him on the
stuff he’s pulled.”

“I’ll say he had,” said the other guy and tore
the bunch of tickets in two.

And George Gardner looked at me to see if I’d
heard and I had all right and he said, “Don’t you
listen to what those bums said Joe. Your old man
was one swell guy.”

But I don’t know. Seems like when they get started
they dont leave a guy nothing.

  TEN POEMS