MY UNCLE JULES
    

      A white-haired old man begged us for alms. My companion, Joseph Davranche,
      gave him five francs. Noticing my surprised look, he said:
    

      “That poor unfortunate reminds me of a story which I shall tell you,
      the memory of which continually pursues me. Here it is:
    

      “My family, which came originally from Havre, was not rich. We just
      managed to make both ends meet. My father worked hard, came home late from
      the office, and earned very little. I had two sisters.
    

      “My mother suffered a good deal from our reduced circumstances, and
      she often had harsh words for her husband, veiled and sly reproaches. The
      poor man then made a gesture which used to distress me. He would pass his
      open hand over his forehead, as if to wipe away perspiration which did not
      exist, and he would answer nothing. I felt his helpless suffering. We
      economized on everything, and never would accept an invitation to dinner,
      so as not to have to return the courtesy. All our provisions were bought
      at bargain sales. My sisters made their own gowns, and long discussions
      would arise on the price of a piece of braid worth fifteen centimes a
      yard. Our meals usually consisted of soup and beef, prepared with every
      kind of sauce.
    

      “They say it is wholesome and nourishing, but I should have
      preferred a change.
    

      “I used to go through terrible scenes on account of lost buttons and
      torn trousers.
    

      “Every Sunday, dressed in our best, we would take our walk along the
      breakwater. My father, in a frock coat, high hat and kid gloves, would
      offer his arm to my mother, decked out and beribboned like a ship on a
      holiday. My sisters, who were always ready first, would await the signal
      for leaving; but at the last minute some one always found a spot on my
      father's frock coat, and it had to be wiped away quickly with a rag
      moistened with benzine.
    

      “My father, in his shirt sleeves, his silk hat on his head, would
      await the completion of the operation, while my mother, putting on her
      spectacles, and taking off her gloves in order not to spoil them, would
      make haste.
    

      “Then we set out ceremoniously. My sisters marched on ahead, arm in
      arm. They were of marriageable age and had to be displayed. I walked on
      the left of my mother and my father on her right. I remember the pompous
      air of my poor parents in these Sunday walks, their stern expression,
      their stiff walk. They moved slowly, with a serious expression, their
      bodies straight, their legs stiff, as if something of extreme importance
      depended upon their appearance.
    

      “Every Sunday, when the big steamers were returning from unknown and
      distant countries, my father would invariably utter the same words:
    

      “'What a surprise it would be if Jules were on that one! Eh?'
    

      “My Uncle Jules, my father's brother, was the only hope of the
      family, after being its only fear. I had heard about him since childhood,
      and it seemed to me that I should recognize him immediately, knowing as
      much about him as I did. I knew every detail of his life up to the day of
      his departure for America, although this period of his life was spoken of
      only in hushed tones.
    

      “It seems that he had led a bad life, that is to say, he had
      squandered a little money, which action, in a poor family, is one of the
      greatest crimes. With rich people a man who amuses himself only sows his
      wild oats. He is what is generally called a sport. But among needy
      families a boy who forces his parents to break into the capital becomes a
      good-for-nothing, a rascal, a scamp. And this distinction is just,
      although the action be the same, for consequences alone determine the
      seriousness of the act.
    

      “Well, Uncle Jules had visibly diminished the inheritance on which
      my father had counted, after he had swallowed his own to the last penny.
      Then, according to the custom of the times, he had been shipped off to
      America on a freighter going from Havre to New York.
    

      “Once there, my uncle began to sell something or other, and he soon
      wrote that he was making a little money and that he soon hoped to be able
      to indemnify my father for the harm he had done him. This letter caused a
      profound emotion in the family. Jules, who up to that time had not been
      worth his salt, suddenly became a good man, a kind-hearted fellow, true
      and honest like all the Davranches.
    

      “One of the captains told us that he had rented a large shop and was
      doing an important business.
    

      “Two years later a second letter came, saying: 'My dear Philippe, I
      am writing to tell you not to worry about my health, which is excellent.
      Business is good. I leave to-morrow for a long trip to South America. I
      may be away for several years without sending you any news. If I shouldn't
      write, don't worry. When my fortune is made I shall return to Havre. I
      hope that it will not be too long and that we shall all live happily
      together . . . .'
    

      “This letter became the gospel of the family. It was read on the
      slightest provocation, and it was shown to everybody.
    

      “For ten years nothing was heard from Uncle Jules; but as time went
      on my father's hope grew, and my mother, also, often said:
    

      “'When that good Jules is here, our position will be different.
      There is one who knew how to get along!'
    

      “And every Sunday, while watching the big steamers approaching from
      the horizon, pouring out a stream of smoke, my father would repeat his
      eternal question:
    

      “'What a surprise it would be if Jules were on that one! Eh?'
    

      “We almost expected to see him waving his handkerchief and crying:
    

      “'Hey! Philippe!'
    

      “Thousands of schemes had been planned on the strength of this
      expected return; we were even to buy a little house with my uncle's money—a
      little place in the country near Ingouville. In fact, I wouldn't swear
      that my father had not already begun negotiations.
    

      “The elder of my sisters was then twenty-eight, the other
      twenty-six. They were not yet married, and that was a great grief to every
      one.
    

      “At last a suitor presented himself for the younger one. He was a
      clerk, not rich, but honorable. I have always been morally certain that
      Uncle Jules' letter, which was shown him one evening, had swept away the
      young man's hesitation and definitely decided him.
    

      “He was accepted eagerly, and it was decided that after the wedding
      the whole family should take a trip to Jersey.
    

      “Jersey is the ideal trip for poor people. It is not far; one
      crosses a strip of sea in a steamer and lands on foreign soil, as this
      little island belongs to England. Thus, a Frenchman, with a two hours'
      sail, can observe a neighboring people at home and study their customs.
    

      “This trip to Jersey completely absorbed our ideas, was our sole
      anticipation, the constant thought of our minds.
    

      “At last we left. I see it as plainly as if it had happened
      yesterday. The boat was getting up steam against the quay at Granville; my
      father, bewildered, was superintending the loading of our three pieces of
      baggage; my mother, nervous, had taken the arm of my unmarried sister, who
      seemed lost since the departure of the other one, like the last chicken of
      a brood; behind us came the bride and groom, who always stayed behind, a
      thing that often made me turn round.
    

      “The whistle sounded. We got on board, and the vessel, leaving the
      breakwater, forged ahead through a sea as flat as a marble table. We
      watched the coast disappear in the distance, happy and proud, like all who
      do not travel much.
    

      “My father was swelling out his chest in the breeze, beneath his
      frock coat, which had that morning been very carefully cleaned; and he
      spread around him that odor of benzine which always made me recognize
      Sunday. Suddenly he noticed two elegantly dressed ladies to whom two
      gentlemen were offering oysters. An old, ragged sailor was opening them
      with his knife and passing them to the gentlemen, who would then offer
      them to the ladies. They ate them in a dainty manner, holding the shell on
      a fine handkerchief and advancing their mouths a little in order not to
      spot their dresses. Then they would drink the liquid with a rapid little
      motion and throw the shell overboard.
    

      “My father was probably pleased with this delicate manner of eating
      oysters on a moving ship. He considered it good form, refined, and, going
      up to my mother and sisters, he asked:
    

      “'Would you like me to offer you some oysters?'
    

      “My mother hesitated on account of the expense, but my two sisters
      immediately accepted. My mother said in a provoked manner:
    

      “'I am afraid that they will hurt my stomach. Offer the children
      some, but not too much, it would make them sick.' Then, turning toward me,
      she added:
    

      “'As for Joseph, he doesn't need any. Boys shouldn't be spoiled.'
    

      “However, I remained beside my mother, finding this discrimination
      unjust. I watched my father as he pompously conducted my two sisters and
      his son-in-law toward the ragged old sailor.
    

      “The two ladies had just left, and my father showed my sisters how
      to eat them without spilling the liquor. He even tried to give them an
      example, and seized an oyster. He attempted to imitate the ladies, and
      immediately spilled all the liquid over his coat. I heard my mother
      mutter:
    

      “'He would do far better to keep quiet.'
    

      “But, suddenly, my father appeared to be worried; he retreated a few
      steps, stared at his family gathered around the old shell opener, and
      quickly came toward us. He seemed very pale, with a peculiar look. In a
      low voice he said to my mother:
    

      “'It's extraordinary how that man opening the oysters looks like
      Jules.'
    

      “Astonished, my mother asked:
    

      “'What Jules?'
    

      “My father continued:
    

      “'Why, my brother. If I did not know that he was well off in
      America, I should think it was he.'
    

      “Bewildered, my mother stammered:
    

      “'You are crazy! As long as you know that it is not he, why do you
      say such foolish things?'
    

      “But my father insisted:
    

      “'Go on over and see, Clarisse! I would rather have you see with
      your own eyes.'
    

      “She arose and walked to her daughters. I, too, was watching the
      man. He was old, dirty, wrinkled, and did not lift his eyes from his work.
    

      “My mother returned. I noticed that she was trembling. She exclaimed
      quickly:
    

      “'I believe that it is he. Why don't you ask the captain? But be
      very careful that we don't have this rogue on our hands again!'
    

      “My father walked away, but I followed him. I felt strangely moved.
    

      “The captain, a tall, thin man, with blond whiskers, was walking
      along the bridge with an important air as if he were commanding the Indian
      mail steamer.
    

      “My father addressed him ceremoniously, and questioned him about his
      profession, adding many compliments:
    

      “'What might be the importance of Jersey? What did it produce? What
      was the population? The customs? The nature of the soil?' etc., etc.
    

      “'You have there an old shell opener who seems quite interesting. Do
      you know anything about him?'
    

      “The captain, whom this conversation began to weary, answered dryly:
    

      “'He is some old French tramp whom I found last year in America, and
      I brought him back. It seems that he has some relatives in Havre, but that
      he doesn't wish to return to them because he owes them money. His name is
      Jules—Jules Darmanche or Darvanche or something like that. It seems
      that he was once rich over there, but you can see what's left of him now.'
    

      “My father turned ashy pale and muttered, his throat contracted, his
      eyes haggard.
    

      “'Ah! ah! very well, very well. I'm not in the least surprised.
      Thank you very much, captain.'
    

      “He went away, and the astonished sailor watched him disappear. He
      returned to my mother so upset that she said to him:
    

      “'Sit down; some one will notice that something is the matter.'
    

      “He sank down on a bench and stammered:
    

      “'It's he! It's he!'
    

      “Then he asked:
    

      “'What are we going to do?'
    

      “She answered quickly:
    

      “'We must get the children out of the way. Since Joseph knows
      everything, he can go and get them. We must take good care that our
      son-in-law doesn't find out.'
    

      “My father seemed absolutely bewildered. He murmured:
    

      “'What a catastrophe!'
    

      “Suddenly growing furious, my mother exclaimed:
    

      “'I always thought that that thief never would do anything, and that
      he would drop down on us again! As if one could expect anything from a
      Davranche!'
    

      “My father passed his hand over his forehead, as he always did when
      his wife reproached him. She added:
    

      “'Give Joseph some money so that he can pay for the oysters. All
      that it needed to cap the climax would be to be recognized by that beggar.
      That would be very pleasant! Let's get down to the other end of the boat,
      and take care that that man doesn't come near us!'
    

      “They gave me five francs and walked away.
    

      “Astonished, my sisters were awaiting their father. I said that
      mamma had felt a sudden attack of sea-sickness, and I asked the shell
      opener:
    

      “'How much do we owe you, monsieur?'
    

      “I felt like laughing: he was my uncle! He answered:
    

      “'Two francs fifty.'
    

      “I held out my five francs and he returned the change. I looked at
      his hand; it was a poor, wrinkled, sailor's hand, and I looked at his
      face, an unhappy old face. I said to myself:
    

      “'That is my uncle, the brother of my father, my uncle!'
    

      “I gave him a ten-cent tip. He thanked me:
    

      “'God bless you, my young sir!'
    

      “He spoke like a poor man receiving alms. I couldn't help thinking
      that he must have begged over there! My sisters looked at me, surprised at
      my generosity. When I returned the two francs to my father, my mother
      asked me in surprise:
    

      “'Was there three francs' worth? That is impossible.'
    

      “I answered in a firm voice
    

      “'I gave ten cents as a tip.'
    

      “My mother started, and, staring at me, she exclaimed:
    

      “'You must be crazy! Give ten cents to that man, to that vagabond—'
    

      “She stopped at a look from my father, who was pointing at his
      son-in-law. Then everybody was silent.
    

      “Before us, on the distant horizon, a purple shadow seemed to rise
      out of the sea. It was Jersey.
    

      “As we approached the breakwater a violent desire seized me once
      more to see my Uncle Jules, to be near him, to say to him something
      consoling, something tender. But as no one was eating any more oysters, he
      had disappeared, having probably gone below to the dirty hold which was
      the home of the poor wretch.”