MY WIFE
    

      It had been a stag dinner. These men still came together once in a while
      without their wives as they had done when they were bachelors. They would
      eat for a long time, drink for a long time; they would talk of everything,
      stir up those old and joyful memories which bring a smile to the lip and a
      tremor to the heart. One of them was saying: “Georges, do you
      remember our excursion to Saint-Germain with those two little girls from
      Montmartre?”
    

      “I should say I do!”
    

      And a little detail here or there would be remembered, and all these
      things brought joy to the hearts.
    

      The conversation turned on marriage, and each one said with a sincere air:
      “Oh, if it were to do over again!” Georges Duportin added:
      “It's strange how easily one falls into it. You have fully decided
      never to marry; and then, in the springtime, you go to the country; the
      weather is warm; the summer is beautiful; the fields are full of flowers;
      you meet a young girl at some friend's house—crash! all is over. You
      return married!”
    

      Pierre Letoile exclaimed: “Correct! that is exactly my case, only
      there were some peculiar incidents—”
    

      His friend interrupted him: “As for you, you have no cause to
      complain. You have the most charming wife in the world, pretty, amiable,
      perfect! You are undoubtedly the happiest one of us all.”
    

      The other one continued: “It's not my fault.”
    

      “How so?”
    

      “It is true that I have a perfect wife, but I certainly married her
      much against my will.”
    

      “Nonsense!”
    

      “Yes—this is the adventure. I was thirty-five, and I had no
      more idea of marrying than I had of hanging myself. Young girls seemed to
      me to be inane, and I loved pleasure.
    

      “During the month of May I was invited to the wedding of my cousin,
      Simon d'Erabel, in Normandy. It was a regular Normandy wedding. We sat
      down at the table at five o'clock in the evening and at eleven o'clock we
      were still eating. I had been paired off, for the occasion, with a
      Mademoiselle Dumoulin, daughter of a retired colonel, a young, blond,
      soldierly person, well formed, frank and talkative. She took complete
      possession of me for the whole day, dragged me into the park, made me
      dance willy-nilly, bored me to death. I said to myself: 'That's all very
      well for to-day, but tomorrow I'll get out. That's all there is to it!'
    

      “Toward eleven o'clock at night the women retired to their rooms;
      the men stayed, smoking while they drank or drinking while they smoked,
      whichever you will.
    

      “Through the open window we could see the country folks dancing.
      Farmers and peasant girls were jumping about in a circle yelling at the
      top of their lungs a dance air which was feebly accompanied by two violins
      and a clarinet. The wild song of the peasants often completely drowned the
      sound of the instruments, and the weak music, interrupted by the
      unrestrained voices, seemed to come to us in little fragments of scattered
      notes. Two enormous casks, surrounded by flaming torches, contained drinks
      for the crowd. Two men were kept busy rinsing the glasses or bowls in a
      bucket and immediately holding them under the spigots, from which flowed
      the red stream of wine or the golden stream of pure cider; and the parched
      dancers, the old ones quietly, the girls panting, came up, stretched out
      their arms and grasped some receptacle, threw back their heads and poured
      down their throats the drink which they preferred. On a table were bread,
      butter, cheese and sausages. Each one would step up from time to time and
      swallow a mouthful, and under the starlit sky this healthy and violent
      exercise was a pleasing sight, and made one also feel like drinking from
      these enormous casks and eating the crisp bread and butter with a raw
      onion.
    

      “A mad desire seized me to take part in this merrymaking, and I left
      my companions. I must admit that I was probably a little tipsy, but I was
      soon entirely so.
    

      “I grabbed the hand of a big, panting peasant woman and I jumped her
      about until I was out of breath.
    

      “Then I drank some wine and reached for another girl. In order to
      refresh myself afterward, I swallowed a bowlful of cider, and I began to
      bounce around as if possessed.
    

      “I was very light on my feet. The boys, delighted, were watching me
      and trying to imitate me; the girls all wished to dance with me, and
      jumped about heavily with the grace of cows.
    

      “After each dance I drank a glass of wine or a glass of cider, and
      toward two o'clock in the morning I was so drunk that I could hardly stand
      up.
    

      “I realized my condition and tried to reach my room. Everybody was
      asleep and the house was silent and dark.
    

      “I had no matches and everybody was in bed. As soon as I reached the
      vestibule I began to, feel dizzy. I had a lot of trouble to find the
      banister. At last, by accident, my hand came in contact with it, and I sat
      down on the first step of the stairs in order to try to gather my
      scattered wits.
    

      “My room was on the second floor; it was the third door to the left.
      Fortunately I had not forgotten that. Armed with this knowledge, I arose,
      not without difficulty, and I began to ascend, step by step. In my hands I
      firmly gripped the iron railing in order not to fall, and took great pains
      to make no noise.
    

      “Only three or four times did my foot miss the steps, and I went
      down on my knees; but thanks to the energy of my arms and the strength of
      my will, I avoided falling completely.
    

      “At last I reached the second floor and I set out in my journey
      along the hall, feeling my way by the walls. I felt one door; I counted:
      'One'; but a sudden dizziness made me lose my hold on the wall, make a
      strange turn and fall up against the other wall. I wished to turn in a
      straight line: The crossing was long and full of hardships. At last I
      reached the shore, and, prudently, I began to travel along again until I
      met another door. In order to be sure to make no mistake, I again counted
      out loud: 'Two.' I started out on my walk again. At last I found the third
      door. I said: 'Three, that's my room,' and I turned the knob. The door
      opened. Notwithstanding my befuddled state, I thought: 'Since the door
      opens, this must be home.' After softly closing the door, I stepped out in
      the darkness. I bumped against something soft: my easy-chair. I
      immediately stretched myself out on it.
    

      “In my condition it would not have been wise to look for my bureau,
      my candles, my matches. It would have taken me at least two hours. It
      would probably have taken me that long also to undress; and even then I
      might not have succeeded. I gave it up.
    

      “I only took my shoes off; I unbuttoned my waistcoat, which was
      choking me, I loosened my trousers and went to sleep.
    

      “This undoubtedly lasted for a long time. I was suddenly awakened by
      a deep voice which was saying: 'What, you lazy girl, still in bed? It's
      ten o'clock!'
    

      “A woman's voice answered: 'Already! I was so tired yesterday.'
    

      “In bewilderment I wondered what this dialogue meant. Where was I?
      What had I done? My mind was wandering, still surrounded by a heavy fog.
      The first voice continued: 'I'm going to raise your curtains.'
    

      “I heard steps approaching me. Completely at a loss what to do, I
      sat up. Then a hand was placed on my head. I started. The voice asked:
      'Who is there?' I took good care not to answer. A furious grasp seized me.
      I in turn seized him, and a terrific struggle ensued. We were rolling
      around, knocking over the furniture and crashing against the walls. A
      woman's voice was shrieking: 'Help! help!'
    

      “Servants, neighbors, frightened women crowded around us. The blinds
      were open and the shades drawn. I was struggling with Colonel Dumoulin.
    

      “I had slept beside his daughter's bed!
    

      “When we were separated, I escaped to my room, dumbfounded. I locked
      myself in and sat down with my feet on a chair, for my shoes had been left
      in the young girl's room.
    

      “I heard a great noise through the whole house, doors being opened
      and closed, whisperings and rapid steps.
    

      “After half an hour some one knocked on my door. I cried: 'Who is
      there?' It was my uncle, the bridegroom's father. I opened the door:
    

      “He was pale and furious, and he treated me harshly: 'You have
      behaved like a scoundrel in my house, do you hear?' Then he added more
      gently 'But, you young fool, why the devil did you let yourself get caught
      at ten o'clock in the morning? You go to sleep like a log in that room,
      instead of leaving immediately—immediately after.'
    

      “I exclaimed: 'But, uncle, I assure you that nothing occurred. I was
      drunk and got into the wrong room.'
    

      “He shrugged his shoulders! 'Don't talk nonsense.' I raised my hand,
      exclaiming: 'I swear to you on my honor.' My uncle continued: 'Yes, that's
      all right. It's your duty to say that.'
    

      “I in turn grew angry and told him the whole unfortunate occurrence.
      He looked at me with a bewildered expression, not knowing what to believe.
      Then he went out to confer with the colonel.
    

      “I heard that a kind of jury of the mothers had been formed, to
      which were submitted the different phases of the situation.
    

      “He came back an hour later, sat down with the dignity of a judge
      and began: 'No matter what may be the situation, I can see only one way
      out of it for you; it is to marry Mademoiselle Dumoulin.'
    

      “I bounded out of the chair, crying: 'Never! never!'
    

      “Gravely he asked: 'Well, what do you expect to do?'
    

      “I answered simply: 'Why—leave as soon as my shoes are
      returned to me.'
    

      “My uncle continued: 'Please do not jest. The colonel has decided to
      blow your brains out as soon as he sees you. And you may be sure that he
      does not threaten idly. I spoke of a duel and he answered: “No, I
      tell you that I will blow his brains out.”'
    

      “'Let us now examine the question from another point of view. Either
      you have misbehaved yourself—and then so much the worse for you, my
      boy; one should not go near a young girl—or else, being drunk, as
      you say, you made a mistake in the room. In this case, it's even worse for
      you. You shouldn't get yourself into such foolish situations. Whatever you
      may say, the poor girl's reputation is lost, for a drunkard's excuses are
      never believed. The only real victim in the matter is the girl. Think it
      over.'
    

      “He went away, while I cried after him: 'Say what you will, I'll not
      marry her!'
    

      “I stayed alone for another hour. Then my aunt came. She was crying.
      She used every argument. No one believed my story. They could not imagine
      that this young girl could have forgotten to lock her door in a house full
      of company. The colonel had struck her. She had been crying the whole
      morning. It was a terrible and unforgettable scandal. And my good aunt
      added: 'Ask for her hand, anyhow. We may, perhaps, find some way out of it
      when we are drawing up the papers.'
    

      “This prospect relieved me. And I agreed to write my proposal. An
      hour later I left for Paris. The following day I was informed that I had
      been accepted.
    

      “Then, in three weeks, before I had been able to find any excuse,
      the banns were published, the announcement sent out, the contract signed,
      and one Monday morning I found myself in a church, beside a weeping young
      girl, after telling the magistrate that I consented to take her as my
      companion—for better, for worse.
    

      “I had not seen her since my adventure, and I glanced at her out of
      the corner of my eye with a certain malevolent surprise. However, she was
      not ugly—far from it. I said to myself: 'There is some one who won't
      laugh every day.'
    

      “She did not look at me once until, the evening, and she did not say
      a single word.
    

      “Toward the middle of the night I entered the bridal chamber with
      the full intention of letting her know my resolutions, for I was now
      master. I found her sitting in an armchair, fully dressed, pale and with
      red eyes. As soon as I entered she rose and came slowly toward me saying:
      'Monsieur, I am ready to do whatever you may command. I will kill myself
      if you so desire'
    

      “The colonel's daughter was as pretty as she could be in this heroic
      role. I kissed her; it was my privilege.
    

      “I soon saw that I had not got a bad bargain. I have now been
      married five years. I do not regret it in the least.”
    

      Pierre Letoile was silent. His companions were laughing. One of them said:
      “Marriage is indeed a lottery; you must never choose your numbers.
      The haphazard ones are the best.”
    

      Another added by way of conclusion: “Yes, but do not forget that the
      god of drunkards chose for Pierre.”