( A study of Serb infantry in battle, 1914 )

 There

is no moon. In black darkness a long file of men stumbles up a
stony gully. Precipitous rock-walls keep them to the bed of a vanished
stream, where they trip in succession over the same loose boulders.
Their curses are hushed instantly by voices not less authoritative
because they bark in whispers. Wrapped in long sheepskin coats the
figures pass like ghosts of an antique time, whose grimness is
accentuated by the incongruity of modern rifles with fixed bayonets
that glint under the myriad stars. Presently the head of the file halts
in what seems a black pit, the edge of which cuts sharply against
the star-powdered bluish darkness of the sky. Those behind arrive
continuously, collect in the hollow, are formed into ranks by sergeants
who bully sotto voce like angry conspirators. The company commander
is crawling on hands and knees up the wall of the hollow, which is not
so precipitous as it appears in the darkness.

 The captain peers cautiously over the crest. He sees only blackness
which rises all around him from an abyss that reflects no ray in its
profundity, and blots out the stars high in the sky with irregular cones and shapeless masses of inky night. From those mountains a
wind blows chilly on his face. He fixes his gaze upon a point in the
blackness far across the gulf. The point is decided upon after careful
reference to a phosphorescent compass in his hand. He stares at this
blank darkness until it almost seems that he must be staring against
closed lids.

 Suddenly in the gloom at which he strains his eyes, he perceives a
pin-point of light. It flickers for an instant and then projects itself
in a ray of intense brilliance widening from the point of origin, right
across the gulf. It falls in a great oval of blinding whiteness upon
the hill-side to his right. Its hard white glare is painful in its
brutality. Everything outside the ray is swallowed in a blackness where
even the stars are lost. The white oval on the hill-side moves slowly.
It brings into vivid relief a long line of loosely piled stones behind
which lie, in many attitudes, the motionless bodies of men. Some,
which have fallen across the heap of stones, throw grotesque shadows,
intensely black. The white oval stays its slow progress, vignettes
them from the night. In the centre of the picture one of these figures
stirs, raises itself upon one elbow and rubs its eyes stupidly like a
man wakened from sleep by the sudden glare.

 Instantly a group of sharp reports, multiplied by rapidly reiterated
echoes, breaks from the distant blackness. The figure sinks quickly, a
dark hole visible in the ghastly whiteness of its face. The oval begins
to move again, assuring the men who lurk far back in the night that
this uncompleted shelter-trench is held only by the dead.

  Suddenly the light is cut off. The stars reappear in a sky that seems
strangely pallid. The mountain masses silhouette themselves more
definitely than before against their tenebrous background, the outlines
of the high summits, where some snow still lies, picked out in a grey
that has just the faintest tinge of yellow. From the black gulf below
eddies of mist boil up like steam from a mighty cauldron, veiling the
shrinking stars. A wall of fog rolls along the hill-side, blots out the
mountains and the sky.

 The captain turns instantly and calls down an order in a carefully
restrained voice. The company in the hollow springs up and over the
crest with the agility of born mountaineers. They follow their captain
at a quick pace into the bank of fog. Behind them is a murmur of
voices. The other companies of the battalion are coming up, deploying
rapidly into line when they reach the crest. The first company has
halted for a moment to allow time for their arrival. Seconds are
precious. At any moment the cloud may roll away, expose them to the
glare of hostile searchlights and a storm of bullets. In two long lines
the battalion moves briskly down the hill, leaving the unfinished
shelter-trench upon its right. Behind, another battalion is coming up
in support.

 Some way down the slope the infantry breaks out of the mist. They open
their files and slacken pace, dodging nimbly from one to another of the
boulders which glimmer in the twilight. Overhead the searchlights move
uneasily in long pale bands against the paling sky and fall upon the
fog-belt in white circles as upon a magic-lantern screen. The infantry
is not yet discovered. It works stealthily but quickly forward, aiming
at a lower ridge that rises before them. They seem alone in the narrow
mountain-valley that begins to reveal itself in the dawn, but their
officers know that to right and left of them other battalions are
likewise creeping forward. They reach the ridge, halt and lie down upon
its slope, wisps and wreaths of mist blowing over them.

 The searchlights are extinguished—when, it is hard to say. The sky
is now a translucent ultramarine where no stars are left, and against
which the mountain peaks stand out in vivid orange. White fog patches
wander over the dark lower faces of the hills. The infantry creeps
cautiously up to the summit of its ridge and, like one man, peeps
over. In front of them is a mountain-wall that goes back at an angle,
leaving a great gap. Another ridge, parallel to their own, starts from
the mountain-side and drops away to the left. Its foot is lost in a
sea of fog. Between them and that ridge the ground drops into a ravine
and then mounts in a smooth glacis to the further crest. A little
below its summit the loose boulders, which are everywhere sown over
the ground, are disposed in a long regular grey line. The officers of
the battalion give the range to that line—750 yards. The infantrymen
snuggle down behind boulders and inequalities on the crest and adjust
their sights. There is a general loosening of sheepskin coats, a tinkle
of cartridge-clips laid in readiness, and then the line lies still,
waiting, its bayoneted rifles slid back out of view.

 Far back the infantry brigade commander is lying upon his stomach upon
the height to the left of the wrecked shelter-trench. The fog-belt has
moved off. He has a clear view from ridge to ridge. Suddenly he takes
his field-glasses from his eyes and picks up a telephone receiver at
the end of a long line trailing over the ground. He speaks a few words
into it, replies shortly to mysterious enquiries that emanate from
the far distance, suggests a number of metres in thousands. Almost
immediately the shriek of a shell passes overhead and the report of a
cannon-shot comes echoing along the valley, arrives in a succession of
distinct shocks to the ear. Ere the echoes have died away another shell
screams past, followed by its series of reverberations. The infantry
brigadier is watching the distant ridge through his binoculars. The
line of boulders is faintly visible. The first shell bursts above it
and beyond; the second bursts short. The bracket is too wide. The
brigadier speaks again through the telephone. Another shell wakes weird
noises from the mountains as an accompaniment to its own shriek. It
bursts just in front of the line of boulders above it. Through his
glasses the brigadier sees the splash of shrapnel bullets upon the
rocks like twinkles in quick whiffs of dust. He speaks two brief words
into the telephone. A flight of shells rushes overhead like a covey
of screaming spirits and with an enormous roll of thunder arrives the
roar of a battery in rapid action. Its reverberations roll and clash
endlessly, surging from side to side of the valley in confused waves of
violent sound. The long line of boulders is suddenly whelmed in a cloud
of dust that renews itself as fast as it drifts into the air. From
one end of that cloud spurt tiny points of flame, and shriek crosses
shriek in the air above, whilst a series of sharp crashes mingles
with the continuous roar. Quick puffs of white smoke appear in groups
against the blue sky. In the unfinished shelter-trench spurts of dust
leap up around the bodies of the dead men who lie behind the boulders.
A battery of guns has been pushed up into the infantry line over there
on the hostile ridge and, unobservant of the menace close at hand, is
spending its fury upon the trench that it wrecked overnight.

 The firing line upon the intervening ridge lies quiet in its
concealment. Its officers have no wish to provoke a rafale from a
battery protected by tall stone sangars. Intently they watch the sheets
of dust that spurt up high over the line of boulders like the beat of a
rough sea against a breakwater. They mark where the long thin tongues
of flame shoot out ceaselessly in reply, spitting at a distant target
far behind them. They communicate these observations to the battalion
commander who is smoking a cigarette in an attitude of ease a little
way down the slope. A man close to him commences a series of quick,
jerky gesticulations with a pair of flags held stiffly at arm's length.
No flags wave in reply, but, far back, the brigadier at the telephone
speaks. A great shell rushes overhead with the roar of an express
train. A moment later the officers upon the ridge see a sudden eruption
of flame and rocks in the centre of the line of boulders. They send
another message down to the signaller. Another shell hurtles through
the air, another explosion shoots upward, this time nearer to the
spitting guns. Where the fumes drift off, great holes, in which there
is a scurry of tiny figures, are visible in the shelter trench. Wide
grins open on the faces of the Serbian firing-line as they draw their
rifles close to them and finger the triggers. They understand fully
the value of artillery support. Again and again the volcanic eruptions
spout into the air with an appalling detonation that breaks heavily
into the rolling echoes which fill the valley. Two of them leap up
suddenly from the very midst of the dust-cloud where the battery is at
work. There is a fountain of flying rocks dark in the centre of the
flame, and in the colossal roar of the explosion a brief, acute note of
human agony comes like a high-pitched discord mingled with a thunderous
bass. A moment later the line of guns is revealed, naked to attack. A
few men are seen darting with short movements about them. Three out of
the six eject a tongue of flame at short intervals. While they fire,
a pale gleam flickers along the Serbian ridge as the bayoneted rifles
are thrust forward, and with a long dry crackle a sheet of bullets
leaps out at the wrecked battery. The sun rises over a shoulder of the
mountains and a band of golden light spreads downwards, illuminates the
flying clouds of dust in which figures can just be seen frantically
endeavouring to turn the guns in the new direction. They are picked
off one by one with deadly aim. Above the trench the shrapnel bursts
incessantly, a new shower starting ere its predecessor has reached
earth.

 Along the Serbian ridge the sheepskin-clad figures lie in snug
safety and pull trigger with chuckles of satisfaction. There is no
excitement, only a keen savouring of primeval emotions that can now be
given rein. About them dance quick spurts of dust and bright splashes
of nickel appear upon the rocks. An irregular rifle fire is coming from
the hostile ridge. One or two shells burst overhead and then the guns
fall silent, are forgotten. The company on the right starts suddenly to
its feet, dashes over the crest and down the slope. The rifle fire from
the other ridge changes in character, welcomes them with rapid, violent
claps. A couple of machine-guns strike into the din with a continued
rapid and resonant hammering, nerve-racking in its persistency. Men in
the running line throw up their arms or pitch forward here and there,
but the company is lost to sight almost immediately on the rock-strewn
hill-side. The men dart forward from boulder to boulder. Behind them on
their left other companies are descending in quick succession towards
the ravine.

 At the other side of the ridge, in rear, the second line of the
battalion is coming up in support, and behind them the other battalions
of the brigade are streaming forward, unhindered as yet by artillery
fire. It is a brief respite, however. In a moment or two a distant,
unseen battery has got their range, flings shell after shell to burst
over their heads and fall in a spreading cone of bullets. The brigade
advances with quick onward dashes by battalions that spring up, race a
hundred yards and disappear for a breathing space among the boulders.
Gradually they draw into the shelter of the intervening ridge, and
battalion after battalion tops it and moves down to the aid of those
in front. A strong firing-line remains on the crest, keeps up a steady
stream of bullets against the long grey line still whelmed in dust by
an unceasing hail of shrapnel. The brigadier ensconces himself in a
rock shelter at the end of this firing-line, the telephone receiver
still ready to his hand.

 The first line of the attack has now reached the ravine. The men
seize hold of tiny shrubs that grow out at overhanging angles and
swing themselves down, scrambling over loose stones and sliding sand.
A hail of bullets is beating upon them from the trench above and
from a line of supports that has come into action higher still. The
machine-guns hammer with an appalling energy that knows not fatigue.
Where their aim is directed the sand spouts up as though struck by
an air-blast from a hose. In that ravine the first line is more than
decimated. Men stumble and fall upon their own bayonets. Corpses,
hanging limply, weigh down the shrubs. With fierce shouts the survivors
scramble onward. The second line has caught them up, is mingled with
them. The battle-madness seethes in every head; each bullet that
strikes harmlessly upon the earth is a shock of stimulation to already
hyper-excited nerves. They lose their identity, lose the instinct
of self-preservation in the flood of an older instinct which blinds
them to all but the hazards of the ground, and sweeps them forward
like demented animals frantic to assuage a thirst that consumes
their tissues. A savage cry breaks automatically from every throat;
the blood-congested brains, that permit the action of the muscles,
unconscious of it. They reach the bottom of the ravine, not very deep,
and clamber up in the comparative security of the other side.

 At the foot of the smooth slope which reaches to the dust-whelmed
boulder-line, their officers halt them by orders, entreaties. The men
lie down and open a rapid, irregular fire against the trench. More men
arrive behind them, frenzied with excitement. They attempt to rush
upward, are pulled back by officers, or are struck down quickly in the
rain of bullets from the trench. The rifle-fire up there comes now in
one long rolling crackle through the cloud of dust that flurries in
answer to the continuous crashing of the shrapnel. The fire of the
attack increases in sporadic bursts.

 On the ridge behind, the brigadier speaks a few brief words into the
telephone. A minute later the shrapnel ceases to burst over the trench.

 In the disordered crowd of men that lies at the foot of the slope is
a commotion that defies the efforts of the officers. In vain do they,
knowing what is about to occur, endeavour to form a regular line of
attack up the ravine, as, from those who are still swarming down the
other side, arises one hoarse, savage cry that dominates the crash
of rifle-volleys. It is the battle-cry of a primitive people that
spontaneously clutches its primitive weapon in this awakening of its
oldest instincts, this plunge into the on-old chaos where man thirsts
for the blood of man. "Na Nos! Na Nos!" comes the cry from a thousand
throats, reiterated endlessly by frenzied men whose faces are deathly
white or inflamed with blood. "Na Nos! Na Nos!" from parched mouths,
from dry, cracked lips the shout issues, overpowering the orders of
the officers. The bloodshot eyes that protrude with wild hatred at
the trench no longer see those officers. It is a savage horde merely,
in which the modern military hierarchy is lost, obliterated by an
intensely individual lust to slay as their ancestors slew. "Na Nos! Na
Nos!" "With the knife! With the knife!" What matters it that the knife
is at the end of a rifle? It is still a knife, the primordial weapon.
With an angry roar, the mass, no longer to be restrained, rushes madly
up the slope.

 With an answering crash the rifle-fire from the trench leaps to a
climax. The men up there are firing for their lives. In the horde upon
the slope is an appalling massacre. Heedless of it, blind to it, the
mass surges upward, happily forgetful of the cartridges in their own
rifles, mindful only of the blade that gleams at the muzzle. They see a
line of faces, white behind countless spurts of flame. With one fierce
roar they hurl themselves upon them. Men in grey-blue spring up and
dash away or turn and run at them bayonet to bayonet. The attacking
line howls in the joy of butchery—" Na Nos! "

    The

hot sun of a morning in early summer beat down upon the narrow
street of a little North Italian town. Down the long, confined vista
of colonnaded shopfronts, hung with striped awnings of warm hue,
the air quivered above the cobbles, troubled the view of an arched,
square-turreted gateway which barred the street. The sky above was
a long strip of intense azure. Sharp to the left, near at hand, was
the roughly-paved piazza, white-fronted Venetian-shuttered houses
looking out to the large round basin, the weather-worn Triton, of
the fountain where the pigeons, flashing in the sun, circled down to
drink. A group of girls, bare-armed, black-haired, skirts turned up
over vividly-coloured petticoats, water-jars underneath the gush from
the Triton's mouth, or poised already upon the graceful head, stood
laughing and chattering about the fountain. Their gaze was unanimously
turned towards the large building, the words Palazzo Municipale over
its arcaded front, which occupied one side of the square. Carved on
that front, beneath the clock, defaced but not entirely obliterated,
might yet be made out the double-eagle of Austria—a memento of a
tyranny that had fled before a passionate patriotism, to entrench
itself, not far distant, high on the crag and glacier of the eagles'
haunts, ready to swoop. But not to that did the merry, whispering girls
dart their flirtatious glances. The two grey-uniformed Bersagliere
sentries, strutting up and down before the building, superb under the
drooping cocks' feathers of their grey-covered tilted hats, were for
once immune. A handsome young officer, black-moustached, dark-eyed, who
stood, one foot upon the running-board of a car that hummed ready to
start, in conversation with another officer, was the point of interest.
Both officers, clad in the grey field-service uniform, wore upon
their arm the brassard which indicated that they were of the Staff.
The officer on the point of departure wore the badges of captain; he
who was giving him his final instructions was a tenente colonello (lieutenant-colonel).

 "You quite understand what the General wants, don't you, Ricci?" he
said, using the familiar " tu ," universal between Italian officers.
"As soon as possible after the position is captured, a report on its
possibilities for field artillery if we can advance to the covering
ridge. The General thinks it will command the valley road up from the
railway. You will see. Don't get buried under an avalanche!"

 "Very good, colonel. I quite understand." He saluted—a quick movement
of the hand horizontally below the peak of the kpi, palm downwards, as
though shading the sight, in the Italian fashion—and jumped into the
car. He pushed to one side a heavy fur coat, settled himself. A moment
later the car was humming out of the square, spinning down the long
colonnaded street.

  In front of him loomed the heavy medival gateway, square above its
arch. Its ordinarily forbidding gloomy aspect was lost in a generous
decoration of green boughs, a trophy of Italian flags, red, white and
green, above a white-crossed shield, a great inscription—"Per la pi
grande Italia!" The battle-cry of Italy's greatest modern poet—the
cry that had rung beseeching, dominating, inspiring, through dithyramb
after dithyramb of the wonderful passionate orations by which he had
wakened the glowing soul of the people into flame, was blazoned here
as everywhere in Italy. Under that gateway thousands of Italy's sons
had marched to conflict with the Tedeschi , to the redemption of their
brethren; thousands more would march. And those to come would shout
as those who had gone had shouted: " Per la pi grande Italia! Evviva
Italia! " The captain, glancing up at it ere the car shot under the
dark arch, carried the inscription marked upon his brain through the
obscurity. Familiar enough, he reperceived its meaning with a thrill.
What mattered the little individual life he was hurrying to risk? " Per
la pi grande Italia! "

 The car sped along a road on the left side of a pleasant valley. In
front, immediately claiming the eye, a range of Alpine peaks, dark
rock-scars breaking their dazzling whiteness, exquisitely delicate and
fine-drawn as perceived through the warm atmosphere, towered in lofty
austerity into the rich unvarying blue of the sky. The road, thick with
dust, climbed to wards them in long loops and bold curves. Close upon
its left, dark woodland descended, masking ever and anon the distant
prospect behind a shoulder of the hills. To the right, across the green
valley where the cattle stood hock-deep in flowers, village after
village—yellow-ochre and burnt-red, its slant-roofed campanile high
above the flat houses—clustered itself upon an eminence or nestled
low down to the valley stream. Viewing the scene of quiet bucolic
prosperity it was difficult to imagine that among the silent peaks in
the background lurked the terrors of war; men embattled for mutual
destruction.

 Along the road creaked and squealed clumsy country-carts drawn by oxen
with patient heads bowed to the yoke. They hoofed the dust with the
unhurried motion of centuries of tradition in their toil, careless
of the goad of the barefooted contadina crying them to hasten, to
turn aside to allow passage for impatiently hooting motor-lorries.
In strange contrast of locomotion, column after column of lumbering
mechanical transport rushed down from the mountains in a smother of
dust and petrol-fumes. Column after column proceeding upward was
overtaken and passed by the captain's car. Ever in front towered the
range of glittering peaks, in unshakable, eternal calm. Yet from
somewhere among their solitudes came a distant, faint roar that was not
the roar of nature's thunder.

 The road had climbed high. The valley was narrower. The orchards
sloping to its stream were white with fruit-blossoms. The air was
rarefied but still hot under the direct rays of the sun. The dark woods of oak gave place to darker woods of pine. The road swept round
in sharp curves on low-parapeted stone bridges above a rushing torrent.
Bare green slopes, strewn with grey boulders, opened between the woods.
The car overtook a long marching column of Alpini crunching the dust
under heavily nailed boots, pack high upon the shoulders, alpenstock
as well as rifle, sweating profusely yet pressing upwards with quick
step, the eagle's feather in their soft hats still jaunty. It was the
rear battalion of a brigade whose units were successively overtaken and
passed.

 The road swung to the right round the head of the valley which here
commenced in a sheer drop. As the car followed it there was a sudden
spurt of flame, a drifting tawny smoke, in the dark depths to the
right. A tremendous, shattering detonation that re-echoed endlessly
down the valley ceased at last, leaving audible the eerie moaning of
a great shell speeding upwards over the mountains, already far away.
Another such flash and detonation followed the first. Looking over the
side of the car, the captain perceived, deep down, the long barrel
of a monster gun nosing upwards, men tiny about it. A second gun was
depressed, a crane-slung shell hovering near its breech. Once more
there was a crash—a series of distracted conflicting echoes that
shattered the Alpine silence as thick glass is starred and fractured.
In the sky above the valley an eagle beat the air with heavy, violent
wings, startled into a vertical climb, and then glided swiftly with
outstretched pinions downwards to its crag.

  The road still ascended, left the valley, climbed tortuously a rocky
spur, thinly grassed. The car took the gradient slowly, noisily, on
second speed. In front, struggling on the brow of the spur, a column
of "caterpillar" tractors drawing the component parts of a battery
of heavy howitzers distributed on trucks rattled and detonated like
machine-guns in full action. The battery personnel, harnessed to
long ropes, hauled and strained at the leading piece in an effort to
facilitate the passage of the steep crest. Before the war the boldest
artilleryman would have scouted the possibility of such heavy ordnance
at this height among the mountains. But the battery was only entering
upon the area of its severest toil.

 On the crest of the spur the road turned to the left, climbed at an
easier angle. The view, hitherto much masked by closely overhanging
slopes, opened out. To right and left the gaze plunged into blue
depths, fell on miniature woods and thin white strips that were roads.
Far away on either hand the mountain ranges lifted themselves, superb,
into the blue sky. But directly in front the higher peaks were not
seen. A sheer wall of dark rock barred the view as effectually as it
seemed to bar further progress.

 At the foot of the precipice was a stationary column of motor-lorries,
tiny by comparison with the towering mountain. The road went straight
up to it. The captain in the car bestirred himself, picked up his
heavy fur coat. Far away and high above was a prolonged rumbling roar
that seemed to re-echo from invisible walls in the upper atmosphere.
In voluntarily the captain raised his eyes. The blue sky was untroubled.

 Upon the face of the rock—which leaned back less precipitously than
had appeared—swarmed hundreds of grey-uniformed engineers. They were
laying a pathway of heavy timber, erecting huge sheers, arranging a
complicated tackle of thick rope and large pulleys. Back along the road
the first of the heavy pieces for which this hoisting apparatus was in
preparation lumbered already into sight.

 This tackle was not the only feature on the precipice. A little further
along, at the centre of the line of lorries, a light cantilever steel
standard was connected by drooping wire ropes to the summit. Suspended
from those ropes by a running-gear of pulleys a little car was gliding
steadily upwards, another coming down. It was the Teleferica —the
famous wire-rope railway, that, many times multiplied, made modern war
possible at these high altitudes.

 Ammunition in boxes was being unloaded from the lorries, stacked on the
roadside near the Teleferica . The downward-gliding car was seized
by a group of waiting men, steadied, stopped, quickly loaded with the
boxes.

 The staff-captain's motor drew up. He descended, walked towards the Teleferica , exchanged a salute with the dapper little ammunition
officer superintending the work.

 " Buon' giorno, signor capitano ," said the little lieutenant. "Are you
going up to see the attack?"

 The captain nodded.

 "Ah! Some people have all the luck! I never see anything. My battery
never has any casualties—and here am I left supernumerary. I might as
well be mountaineering for my pleasure!" He drew a lugubrious grimace
of comic, half-sincere self-pity.

 The captain struggled into his heavy fur coat, apparently superfluous
here in the fierce heat which glowed from the rock in the noonday sun.

 "A glass of wine before you ascend, capitano !" said the lieutenant.
"Come, I will take no denial!"

 He led the way to a little wooden shack close under the lee of the
precipice. Within, the walls were decorated with a number of scathingly
satirical drawings of the Tedeschi ; some extremely clever studies
of the mountains in their different aspects of light—sunset and
dawn, moonlight. The host, perceiving the captain's glance, made a
deprecatory gesture.

 "What I am reduced to, signor capitano ! And I might be blowing the
Austrians out of their eyries!" He was typical of that new Italy which,
while it cannot cease to be artistic, holds all of small account that
is not war against the Austrian. He filled the glasses, raised his own,
half turned to a portrait of Gabriele d'Annunzio that shared with the
King the honours of the wall. " Per la pi grande Italia! "

 " Per la pi grande Italia! " Both officers drank the toast. "To-morrow
morning she will be a little greater if the fates are kind," added the
captain.

 A few minutes later he was lying full-length in a narrow low-sided
cage, suspended from a pulley on a thick wire-rope, and being hauled
up, with much creaking and strident protest of the pulley-wheel and vicious jerking of the loose rope, to the summit of the cliff.

 There he was again in a scene of activity. Broad-shouldered porters
in frayed and much-worn Territorial uniforms were bearing away the
ammunition boxes that had arrived at the summit, carrying them towards
the next station of the Teleferica . The captain followed in their
track.

 The wire-rope railway ran in short sections from station to station.
The gaps between the sections—stretches of comparatively level
ground—were filled by the sturdy Alpine porters or, in the case of
longer distances, by pack-mules. It was the line of communications
to the sector of the front immediately ahead—a front that for the
most part of 450 miles is thrust out amid the eternal snows of lofty
mountains, along the edges of deep chasms, upon the knife-ridges of artes , across the Arctic desolation of glacier and neve . Over it
was transported food and ammunition, light guns, clothing, equipment,
all the necessaries for an army in action. By it descended the wounded
and the sick, the unwanted stores.

 Over section after section the staff-captain passed, ascending higher
and ever higher towards his goal. About him rose the great peaks, their
robes of snow dazzling white under the sun, splendidly superior to
the ragged army of stunted pines that sought to climb them, last lost
sentinels straggling half submerged in the snow. Up sheer rock-faces
whence birds of prey darted frightened from their nests, over deep
chasms where he looked down to a dark profundity of pines and rushing
streams, over great empty fields of snow far away beneath him on
which zigzagged long lines of tiny black figures insignificant in the
immensity, bearing burdens, upward and ever upward to the regions where
snow and ice reign in eternal winter, the Teleferica bore him. And
ever between the stations there were throngs of busy men, more and more
thickly clad at each successive height, who marched under heavy loads.

 Always there was a thunder rolling among the mountains. From apparently
inaccessible crags dark against the blue, from bare snow ridges, from
bleak white wastes where there seemed nothing to detain the eye,
spurted little darts of flame, drifted faint smoke. Detonations came
in sharp direct cracks, fantastically re-echoed; in a long rumbling
angry mutter from the more distant guns. From steep mountain-sides,
avalanches, loosened by the concussions, rushed downwards in a white
smoke of flying snow, their thunders rivalling the persistent artillery.

 The staff-captain dallied not. The bombardment which was to prepare
the way for the attack had already commenced. He hurried over the
intervening spaces between the wire-rope stations, ascended higher and
ever higher in the little dangling cages.

 It was afternoon when he reached the limit of the Teleferica —a
little snow-covered hut on a desolate ledge. Here, sheeted down from
the weather, stacks of supplies awaited further transportation. It was
the depot of the quartermaster of the battalion holding the sector. An
Alpino soldier, thickly clad, was in waiting to act as guide.

  The staff-captain borrowed an alpenstock from the quartermaster and
set out. In front of him stretched a great smooth slope of snow that
ascended until, high above him, it cut—in sharp contrast—across the
blue of the sky. Its whiteness was blinding—the captain fitted on a
pair of darkened spectacles. Far across it, dark dots strung like beads
on an invisible thread, a company of soldiers was marching in a long
single file zigzagged over the snow, climbing to the crest. Nearer at
hand to the right, vivid spurts of yellow flame shot out from mounds of
snow aligned at a little distance from each other. The detonations of
the battery came crisply to the ear, predominant over the rumble and
roll and confused echoes of the general bombardment.

 As the captain followed his guide up the vast empty slope he heard a
long plaintive whining in the air, descending a scale of tones. It
had not ceased when over to his right a great fountain of snow leaped
skywards from the field—subsided leaving a smother of dirty smoke.
The whine finished in an ugly rush, a muffled detonation. Another and
another followed, in each case the visible effects of the shell's
explosion preceding the noise of its arrival. The Austrian batteries
were replying.

 The echoing thunder of the bombardment continued all through the
dreary fatiguing climb up the slope of snow. The higher peaks began to
throw long blue shadows across its whiteness, their argent heads to be
suffused with gold.

 The ridge to which they climbed was not, after all, the summit. There
was another, yet higher, whence splintered crags serrated the sky.
They reached it, stood among rocky pinnacles.

 " Attenzione, signor capitano! " said the guide. "It is dangerous to
linger!"

 Followed by the captain he swung himself round a jut of rock, dropped
into a trench excavated deeply in the snow. As they dropped a couple of
ugly " phutts! " just above their heads explained the warning.

 The Alpino grinned.

 "Tirolese!" he said. "We could have gone round by a safer way, signor
capitano , but their snipers do not often hit if one is quick."

 The deep trench, in cold blue shadow through the gilded surface of the
snow, descended the ridge at a gentle angle to the summit. It emerged
into another trench that ran roughly parallel to the ridge. This was
filled with soldiers who, well below the high parapet, larked with
one another, threw snowballs, wrestled and laughed. They were keeping
themselves warm during their enforced wait. Every one of them was
garbed in a thick white outer coat, with a hood. This was the main
trench; these were the men who presently were going to attack.

 On steps cut in the parapet stood sentries, peering towards the enemy.
The captain ceded to an impulse of curiosity, interrupted his hurried
progress towards the battalion advanced headquarters, mounted to the
side of one of these sentries, looked out.

 About him was a sea of mountains, their lower flanks in cold blue
light, their snow-covered peaks orange against the azure sky.
Immediately in front of him were the nearly submerged stakes, the
snow-thickened upper wires, of wide entanglements. Beyond them
stretched the confused, humped and fractured white surface of a high
glacier. On the other side of it was again a snow ridge, and in front
of that ridge could be discerned a belt of wire entanglements—the
enemy's. In the midst of that entanglement, and all up the snow to
the ridge, leaped fountain after fountain of white snow, momentarily
brilliant against the sky, falling back into a persistent cloud of dark
smoke. The noise of the explosions overwhelmed the roar of the guns
behind. The preparatory bombardment was in full swing.

 Warfare in the high Alps, with their difficult communications, is
necessarily carried on by comparatively small bodies of men. The
vast masses of the Western and Eastern fronts could not possibly be
maintained among the crags and glaciers of the Italian frontier.
Operations by single battalions have all the importance of a divisional
attack elsewhere. In this case one battalion had been allotted the task
of storming and retaining the enemy's position.

 In the little low timber hut sunk beneath the snow-level which was
the battalion headquarters, the captain found the colonel commanding
the regiment in conference with the local commander and the company
leaders. The atmosphere of the cramped interior was thick with
the exhalations of the half-dozen men, warm with the heat of a
petrol-stove. Capitano Ricci saluted the colonel, was received affably.
A pair of keen eyes under level brows appraised him, smiled upon him.
For his benefit the colonel recapitulated.

 "The plan is briefly this. The artillery is cutting the wire and
shelling the trenches immediately in front of us. The Austrians of
course will assume that we are going to attack there. They will keep
strong reserves at hand in the vicinity—as strong as they can, for
we know that there is no very large force opposite. The artillery
is making it difficult to bring up the reserves from the rear. All
their communications are under fire. Now, we hope that the enemy will
concentrate on the damaged trench in front of us. The attack is being
made by four companies. One company will advance at 9 p.m., using
every precaution not to be seen, and will cross the glacier at an
angle to its right. It will fall upon the enemy's trench here"—he
indicated a spot on the left of the enemy's position as marked on a
plan spread over the table. "It should effect a surprise as the enemy
will be far from expecting an attack on a part of the line which has
not been bombarded at all. Directly that attack gets into the trench
it will turn to the left and continue to press on as hard as possible.
If it is progressing well it will send up a green rocket. If it is in
difficulties it will send up a red rocket. The second company will
advance to within about a hundred metres of the trench that has been
bombarded. There it will halt. If matters go as I expect them to, the
company on the right will send up a green rocket. Then the Austrians,
realising that they have made a mistake, will rush up their men from
the damaged sector and put up a resistance. The green light will
be followed by a red one which will automatically indicate that the
enemy's reserves are engaged. Whenever that red light goes up ,
whether preceded by a green one or not, the second company will rush
the trench in front of it. I hope that it will find it thinly held.
The third company will advance, with every precaution, at 9.30 p.m.
in support of the second company. The fourth company I will retain as
general reserve under my command. The men will be served with hot cocoa
at 8.30 p.m. Is that quite clear, gentlemen?"

 There was a general murmur of assent. The staff-captain requested
permission to advance with the second company, the one that was
attacking straight ahead. He received it.

 The conference was at an end. Officers went out to give final
instructions to their subalterns, came in again, beating powdered snow
from their huge fur coats. One and all looked like Polar explorers.

 Presently orderlies entered, put a steaming hot meal upon the
table. Crowded closely together in the confined space, the officers
ate—talking and laughing in high confidence, though in all was the
tension which precedes the moment of action. Occasionally during the
meal they heard the dull thud of an Austrian shell's arrival. They sat
over coffee and smoked.

 At last the colonel looked at his watch, stood up.

 "It is time to go to your companies, gentlemen. I rely upon all of you
as upon myself. I have promised the general that the trench shall be
taken—and held. Per la pi grande Italia! And good luck to all of
you!"

 Some time later the staff-captain found himself by the side of the
company commander in the deep trench hewn through the snow. It was
night and in the faint reflected radiance of the white walls he could
just dimly discern the figures of a long line of men, all garbed
in white like himself. Only when their heads moved did they detach
themselves from their surroundings. Overhead, above the crisp line of
the parapet, the sky was a black background for an immense multitude of
strangely brilliant stars. A wind raised little whirls of powdered snow
upon the lip of the parapet, blew down into the trench in chill gusts
that penetrated the clothing. Not a sound broke the intense silence.
It seemed almost that one could hear the crackle of the sparkling
vivid stars. The artillery bombardment had long since ceased. There
was nothing to suggest that a death-dealing enemy was hidden only
eight hundred metres away across the glacier. No sound came from the
company that had already advanced. Along the trench was a murmur of
conversation, stifled laughter. The company commander stood gazing at
the luminous dial of his watch.

 9.15! He turned his head, gave a command in a low voice.

 " Avanti! "

 It was repeated in a low murmur to right and left.

 In an instant the company commander, the staff-captain at his side,
had sprung up on to the parapet. A bitter wind smote upon them from
the darkness, chilling to the bone. The commander glanced back, saw
his men like a line of ghosts faint in the dim light, already over
the parapet. Then the company commenced to thread its way through the
openings previously cut in their own wire.

 Stealthily, with the utmost precautions to avoid any unnecessary sound,
the company stole across the uneven, heaped and riven snow and ice of
the glacier. Under that black night of stars it stretched away white
to a near indistinctness. The black masses of the mountains occulting
the stars near the horizon were too indefinite to indicate direction.
Compass in hand, the commander counted his paces over the snow, his
only means of judging distance. For greater accuracy the staff-captain
counted also. They spoke not a word. From the obscurity came the
whispers of the men as they preserved a rough alignment.

 Sliding, stumbling over the inequalities of the frozen surface, they
pressed onwards. Somewhere over to their right, higher on the glacier
in front of them, the other company was advancing also. There was
neither sound nor sign of it. In that dim desolation the staff-captain
might with difficulty see his immediate companions. The remainder of
the company was swallowed up, was noiseless. It seemed that they were
stumbling on alone—on and on, an interminable distance—a few lost
figures struggling through an Arctic night.

 Suddenly from the blackness straight ahead a beam of intensely white
light shot out horizontal with the ground, sweeping it. At its first
birth-splutter they flung themselves upon the snow, lay motionless.
The searchlight—a wall of milky radiance to one side of them,
suffusing the snow with a pale reflection—then, as it shone full on
them, a lane of intolerable light from a blindingly violent source,
casting long pitch-black shadows from every hump and hummock of the
ice—swept questingly over the glacier, rested doubtfully here and
there for a moment, passed on again. The Austrians were on the alert.
Cautiously, still repeating to himself the number of paces they had
marched when they dropped, the staff-captain glimpsed to right and left
of him, looking for the company. The nearer figures he saw, immobile,
their white humped backs looking like inequalities of the snow. Those
more distant were utterly indistinguishable. The searchlight ceased
abruptly. The world was annihilated in a profound blackness where the
stars reigned alone.

 The two officers rose to their feet, marched onward, resumed their
count of the paces. To right and left of them rose ghostly figures,
stumbling forward. On and on they went, bruising themselves on sudden
obstacles in the black night, the dim uniform whiteness of the snow a
bewilderment to the vision. Far away in the mountains of the Austrian
position a livid flash leaped to the sky. The reverberation of a
gun's discharge rolled heavily and ominously to their ears, the long
hurrying whine of a shell approached them. There was an instant of
suspense. Were they after all discovered? The shell passed overhead to
burst far behind, inaudible. The trench in front was invisible in the darkness—not a flare, not a rifle-spurt marked its position.

 "Seven hundred!" Both officers murmured the number at the same moment.

 " Alt! " The whispered order was passed to right and left. The line of
ghostly figures sank down, was merged in the ice and snow under the
twinkling stars. " Baionett' cann! " There was a faint rustling, a just
audible click and clink of bayonets being fixed. Then again silence.
The company might have ceased to exist.

 The company commander and the staff-captain gazed earnestly to their
right front, towards the point where the other company should be
attacking. At any moment now! Their comrades had a quarter of an hour's
start, had a rather longer, more difficult stretch to traverse. But
they should have reached their objective. At this moment stealthy
white-clad figures should be crawling among the stakes of the
entanglements, snipping at the wire. The two officers stared in the
fateful direction—in suspense for the up-flung flare, the shouts and
stabs of flame. They stared at complete obscurity.

 The searchlight on the trench in front leaped out again to the night,
its origin startlingly close. This time as it swept over them, it
illumined the short heads of the stakes of the wire entanglement that
cast black shadows on the snow which all but submerged them. They were
very near. In the intense light the white craters of the shell-holes
produced by the afternoon's bombardment, hung with broken wire from
supports all askew, gleamed like craters of the moon seen in uncanny
proximity. Once more the light swept the glacier, searched doubtfully
and was extinguished.

 A sudden shot, off to the right front—a swift succession of loud
reports—woke wild echoes from unseen cliffs. High up on the glacier,
to the left of the Austrian position, flare after flare was flung into
the sky, eerily illuminant, plucking strange rock-forms into grotesque
relief. There was a fierce shout that rolled in repeated reverberation,
a wild tumult of voices in a crisis of human lives, confused shots,
isolated and in irregular volleys, the dull thudding explosions of
bombs. The first company was attacking.

 The two officers lying in the snow gazed with fixed intensity towards
the distant fight whose tumult swelled louder and louder with every
moment. The wild flares continued to soar into the night, but as yet
no rocket—neither red nor green—had leaped up to tell them of its
fortunes. The searchlight in front shot out again, swept quickly
from side to side. It illumined only the apparently empty, tumbled
desolation of the glacier. But it continued to blaze out into the
night. Both officers cursed it under their breath. From the trenches
they had left, far behind, rifle-shots rang out, the rapid hammering
of a machine-gun. The reserve company was indulging in a little tricky
target-practice at the searchlight. It was successful. The beam of
light vanished.

 At the same moment a little spark of trailing fire went rushing
skywards from the tumult of the flank attack. It was watched with
suspended breath—green or red? The rocket burst into an effulgence of uncanny green light. The cheer which came from under it was like a
ghostly utterance of the cheer repressed on the lips of the men lying
prone and motionless on the glacier. The colonel's forecast was sound.

 But now the uproar on the flank increased to a wild intensity.
Incessant were the sharp detonations of the rifles, the dull thuds of
the bombs, mingling with a clamour of voices, shrieks and yells. No
more flares went up from the point of conflict, but from all along the
trench they soared into the air, symptomatic of the nervousness of
the unseen defenders. Machine-guns began to rap out their streams of
bullets in blind hazard across the glacier.

 The staff-captain pressed himself close to the snow, overhead cracked
the rapid bullets of the Austrian machine-guns. The wind that blew
over the glacier, ruffling the loose surface snow on to his face, was
intensely cold. He felt himself a heavy leaden thing, frozen stiff.
Over to his right front the savage noises of the contest, weird and
awe-inspiring on this summit of the world that seemed so uncannily near
to the flashing stars, swelled hideously cacophonous. Livid bursts of
flame flickered and were reflected redly on snow surfaces, on black
jagged spires of rock. All along the trench the blindingly white flares
leaped upward, another soaring as its predecessor circled down in a
parabola that illumined the unearthly confusion of the glacier surface.
He seemed a mortal for ever severed from his fellow-men, set down in
a world that was primitive Arctic chaos, a paralysed spectator of a
contest of fierce mountain spirits fighting over spectral issues,
remote from the interests of humanity. A part of his mind harked back
to the warm summer, the green fields, the somnolent little town of
the valley he had left that morning, and it seemed that those things
belonged to another existence. Yet all the time he gazed fixedly to the
point whence the next rocket should shoot up. He awaited it as he would
await the breaking of a spell.

 At last! The trailing spark of fire shot upwards, burst into hanging
globes of red light, the snow rosy beneath them. On the instant the
company was erect, rushing forward. Leaping, soaring flares from the
trench revealed them—white moving figures casting black shadows on the
white glacier. Spurts of livid flame, loud quick detonations darted
from the white ridge in front. " Avanti! Avanti! Italia! Italia! "
shouted the commander. " Italia! Italia! Savoia! " came the fierce
antistrophe from the rushing men flinging aside their alpenstocks,
brandishing their bayoneted rifles.

 They were fighting their way through the deep loose snow, the wreck
of the wire entanglements. The staff-captain floundered in a white
shell-crater pitilessly illumined by an overhanging flare. The loose
ends of the barbed wire tore at his clothes, clutched round his legs
like tentacles that would hold him for death to strike. In front the
spurts of flame sprang from a wall of darkness above the white, high
up. Near him was the company commander, extricating himself from the
shell-hole, the last of the wire safely passed. He had a sense of
tensely struggling figures all around him. He, too, got clear of the
wire. He saw the company commander throw up his hands, roll sideways
over the snow, still shouting " Avanti! Avanti! Italia! "

 He passed him, took up the cry: " Avanti! Avanti! Italia! La pi grande
Italia! " leading the company that yelled behind him like a pack of
mountain wolves. He topped the snow parapet, saw a fierce face glaring
up at him in a strange light, a rifle-barrel levelled. His revolver
seemed to go off of itself, a sharp autonomous detonation. The face
opened a black mouth, sank out of vision.

 He sprang into the trench, shouting like a madman. Behind him came
the Italians, tumbling down in fierce onslaught. One of them struck
him violently on the back as he slid down, knocked him face forward
into the snow. As he went he heard a sudden heavy crash, saw a flare
of lurid light. A bomb! He picked himself up, only half realising his
escape, fired at once into a dark body that wrestled with a white-clad
soldier. There was a confusion of blows, of shots, of ear-splitting
detonations—shouts, cries, shrieks. At one moment he was in close
contact with a panting man, warm breath upon his face, eyes flashing
momentarily in the reflection of a rifle-shot, looking into his—the
next the man was gone, there was space about him. The confusion
cleared—there were bodies underfoot—white-clad men about him shouting
unintelligibly. Further along the trench another flare went up.

 The staff-captain turned to his right along the trench.

  " Avanti! Avanti! A destra! Italia! Italia! "

 Behind him followed a rush of fiercely yelling soldiery.

 " Italia! Italia! "

 They were held up by a traverse of snow-covered rock. A shower of bombs
came over it. From a communication trench a mass of dark figures rushed
at them, shouting with guttural voices. There was bitter conflict—an
ebb and flow in the surge of men.

 Then another fierce shout: " Italia! Italia! Savoia! " It was the third
company flinging itself in the trench to support the attack.

 In the midst of the tumult could be distinguished the scream of Italian
shells passing overhead to burst dully on the Austrian avenues of
approach.

 Suddenly the angry dominant note of the babel of voices changed.
Accents of supplication rang out amid the jarring reports: " Kamerad!
Kamerad! "

 The staff-captain made his way along the deep dark gully in the snow
where motionless figures stood with arms stretched up above their
heads, rifles at their feet. Ghostly white figures who had retained
their weapons joked at them in rough patois . He met the commander
of the company which had attacked upon the flank. The trench was
completely captured.

 There followed a period of fierce toil in the trench. Under the
twinkling stars in the black sky, men delved at the snow of the
parados, cutting fire-steps, building it up into a breastwork. Behind
them little parties of prisoners, stretcher-bearers and slightly
wounded men, stumbled across the broken surface of the glacier. The
toiling men gave no thought to them as they laboured to prepare for
the storm which would surely burst.

 It came. An ugly hissing rush heralded the first Austrian shell.
It exploded with re-echoing violence and a great fount of up-flung
snow right on the newly-strengthened breastwork. Another and another
followed in a methodical bombardment directed by calmly judicial
gunners ensconced in little huts far back in the mountains. Amid the
nerve-harrying rush of ever new arrivals, constant explosions, the men
toiled frenziedly. Reserves of ammunition were brought up. Machine-guns
were put in position. Telephone wires were laid. The fourth company
took up a post on the glacier whence it could rush into the trench in a
counter-attack if needed.

 Suddenly the bombardment ceased. The Alpini crouched behind the
parapet, fingering their rifles with gloved hands, peered out into the
indistinctness of the snow.

 There was a rush of dimly-seen figures from the obscurity, a blaze of
fire from the trench. Near the staff-captain the colonel sat speaking
into the mouth-piece of a telephone. Rush after rush of hurrying shells
passed overhead. Out there on the slope where an Austrian battalion was
surging to the attack, shrapnel after shrapnel lit fierce sudden flares
in the dark sky. There was again a tumult of voices, a re-echoing chaos
of men at strife. It persisted, swelled, died down.

 The silence of an Alpine night rested once more over the battleground,
was broken only by the roar of a distant avalanche.

  In the twilight of approaching morn an officer made his tour of the
outposts on what had been Austria.

 " Chi va l? " rang the sharp challenge of a white-garbed sentry almost
indistinguishable against the snow.

 " Italia! " came the proud response.

 The first rays of the sun gilded the surrounding summits in the glory
of a new dawn.

 FOOTNOTES:

  [2]

"For Greater Italy!"—the theme of d'Annunzio's discourses
in the doubtful days preceding Italy's intervention.