In

the long luxuriously furnished saloon car of the special train an
officer clad in the field-service uniform of a South-Eastern Power
sat in conversation with a colonel of the German General Staff. The
deference shown to him made it immediately obvious that he was a
distinguished personage representing a neutral whose friendliness was
important. His dark, clever eyes rested thoughtfully upon the groups
of officers with whom the car was overcrowded. All round was a buzz of
talk, of suppressed excitement. The air was thick with cigar smoke.

 " Ja, Excellenz ," said the German colonel, podgy little fingers
drumming the table between them. "The secret is out. You have rightly
guessed our objective." His eyes were those of a rather clumsy and not
too scrupulous diplomat. His smile was deliberate flattery. "Allow
me to congratulate you upon your good fortune. You will see the
machinery of our Kriegswirtschaftlichkeit ," he throated the word
impressively, "at the moment when it works at its highest power to
shape for Germany her final victory."

 The distinguished neutral smiled also, perfectly courteous. He spoke
with a faint Austrian accent.

  "I can understand your desire for the final," he underlined the word
ever so lightly, "victory, Herr Oberst."

 The German stared at him, suspicious of the nimbler brain.

 "Who would not desire it, Excellenz? This awful slaughter," he waved a
deprecating hand. "It is terrible that our adversaries do not recognise
they are already beaten."

 The neutral nodded.

 "Bar-le-Duc and the Upper Marne, I suppose—Paris!"

 The German colonel's eyes went dead.

 "Excellenz, I believe the supreme command reserves to itself the honour
of enlightening you on its plans."

 The conversation languished. The train rolled on, heavily comfortable.
The staff officers talked earnestly among themselves, the word
"Majestt" oft repeated. Orderlies, garbed as soldiers but obviously
royal Kammerdiener , stole noiselessly in and out of the car, went
frequently into the car beyond. On those occasions the distinguished
neutral had a glimpse of a world-familiar figure, upturned moustaches
on a tired face, a uniform of grey hung with many decorations.

 The train rolled into a station, stopped. The blare of a military
band started on the precise instant of its arrival. The platform was
thronged with officers, bright with the red of the General Staff.

 The distinguished neutral took little interest in the ceremony outside.
He busied himself with collecting the small articles of his kit.
Through the large windows he glimpsed the salutes of the rigidly-erect
officers. Above the noise of the band he heard the repeated " Hoch!
Hoch! Hoch! " of soldiers who cheered as they drilled, exactly
synchronous.

 He stepped on to the platform, followed by the Colonel appointed to be
his conductor. "Majestt" had already departed. Officers were thronging
to the exit, laughing and talking, much excited, revealing, despite
the grey and red of the staff uniform, the essential childishness of
the crowd-mind. " Nach Verdun! " said one of them, very close to the
distinguished neutral, nudging another in the ribs. " Nach Verdun! "
He repeated the just given watchword of victory as a schoolboy repeats
the latest smart expression. The officers around him laughed. The crowd
buzzed with high spirits.

 Outside the station the roadway was choked with waiting motor-cars,
lined with soldiers readjusting their helmets after tumultuous
" Hochs! " Some cars—those containing the highest personages—had
already departed. One after the other those remaining were filled,
swerved out and sped away. The distinguished neutral and his companion
found a vehicle reserved for them. The colonel led him to it with an
air that suggested: "See how the smallest details are thought out!"
They, too, sped away through the walls of infantry.

 Behind the soldiers were a few listless French inhabitants; from the
windows of that French town hung German flags, but no French faces
looked out. The shops were open but their owners stood not at the
doors. The neutral noted these things. The complete apathy of the
population was in contrast to stories his companion had related in
the train. In many of the side-streets long convoys of ammunition
and ration wagons were halted to allow them passage. On one of those
foremost wagons was scrawled in big chalk letters: "Nach Verdun!"

 " Nach Verdun! " that was the Leitmotiv underlying all the intense
military activity that filled the town and, as they shot out beyond
the houses, the countryside also. Every road was choked with columns
of marching infantry, with endless trains of wagons, of limbers, of
ambulances. Even cavalry was in evidence, riding with tall lances
and saddle-hung rifles on wretched-looking horses. " Nach Verdun! "
The German colonel, though he warily gave no information, could talk
of nothing else. Under that grey February sky pulsed and boomed the
distant detonations of artillery. The neutral listened to it with a
professional ear, was puzzled. It was persistent enough, but it was
certainly not the prolonged roar of a preparatory bombardment.

 The car swung into the drive of a park. A tunnel of winter-stripped
trees, brown above, green streaking the bark, and then a large chteau
drew itself across the vista. Thither the other cars had preceded
them. They stood now ranked in a mass. There was a throng of officers
round the great doors, the buzz awakened by the recent passage of the
All-Highest. The neutral was shown to his room, the German colonel
volubly regretting that exigencies of space forced him to share it.

  Some hours later the neutral was ushered into a vast, lofty apartment
whose tapestried walls were almost completely rehung with the huge
maps pinned upon them. On easels stood other maps, strange diagrams in
curves and slants of red, green and black ink. On a large table was
a horizontal relief model of hills and woods, a river with tributary
streams, a splash of red in the valley, thin lines of red converging
upon it, passing through, opening out again. On all these maps, on the
splash of red in the relief model, the name "Verdun" was repeated again
and again.

 All these things the neutral officer noticed with the corner of his
eye—the large writing-tables behind which sat officers of high rank,
other officers grouped in a corner. His direct gaze was held by the
figure he saluted. Spare, of medium height, in the grey field-service
uniform of a general, gold cord looping across his right breast, a star
upon the left above the Iron Cross, gilt epaulettes, gilt leaves upon
the red gorgets of his collar, the would-be conqueror of the world
stood stiffly erect, graciously acknowledged his salute. The brushed-up
moustache was still dark, though the short hair on the head was grey,
almost white. The face was deeply furrowed with endless anxieties,
but the blue eyes—pouched though were their under lids—gleamed with
excitement. He spoke in a jerky but distinct manner that betrayed a
temperament of long ill-controlled impulses.

 " Guten Abend, Herr General! Welcome to Germany's greatest hour! You
shall see our sun mount triumphantly to its zenith, breaking through
the dark clouds of foes who cluster over against us in vain!" The tone
was that of a rhetoric practised until it has become a habit. The right
hand gesticulated with quick motions, the left arm was conspicuously
still. "General!" he turned to one of the officers sitting at the
tables, "be so good as to explain everything to our friend here."

 It was to be clearly understood that the All-Highest was flatteringly
gracious.

 The neutral officer bowed, expressed his thanks courteously, ventured a
request: "That I may be allowed to admire your War-Machine in all its
work, Majestt—go where I will."

 "By all means, General. We have nothing to hide. You will find much
to interest you, much to relate to our well-wishers in your country.
General! see that a pass is given to our friend that will give him the
fullest freedom." The All-Highest answered the neutral's salute in a
manner that terminated the conversation.

 Seated at the huge, carved writing-table with the officer to whom he
had been addressed, the neutral found himself looking at a pair of keen
grey eyes that peered through pince-nez under bushy white eyebrows. The
German spread out maps, indicated positions. He drew notice to the fact
that all roads squeezed through a bottle-neck over the river at Verdun,
spread out in a fan on the east bank to a long line of positions that
climbed from the river over the Heights of the Meuse and fell into the
plain of the Woevre across which they bent southward.

  " Die Sache ist usserst einfach! " he said with the air of a
man explaining a chess-problem. "The French have three divisions of
Territorials in front of us to hold the entire sector. That force is
not strong enough to defend it and certainly too weak to have kept the
trench-systems in good repair. In fact we know that they have been
allowed to fall into ruin. We have fifteen divisions in front
line, fifteen divisions in reserve. We do not intend to fling those
divisions away. No. Step by step our artillery will blast a passage
for them—see, here are our artillery positions," he showed concentric
lines one within the other on the map, round the doomed sector. "It
is the greatest artillery concentration the world has ever seen. Even
our concentration on the Donajetz last year is surpassed. We shall
obliterate the positions in front of us—other batteries will drench
the only avenues of supplies with shells, they must all go through the
town—our infantry will merely march into the devastated position, wait
for the clearance of the next step. I may tell you that the French
have only one small branch railway line which is safe from our fire.
We have built fourteen new lines, besides those already existing. In
the great problem of supply we have an overwhelming superiority. We
believe we have the advantage of surprise. Certainly the French have no
concentration within easy reach. In four days we shall be in Verdun.
The Western Front will have been broken."

 "In four days?" The neutral officer looked at the map as a
chess-player looks at the board. "And—if I might ask the
question—supposing you do not take Verdun in four days? There is said
to be an enormous Allied force somewhere in France."

 "We have yet another day," said the German a little wearily, as though
resenting the effort to explain the unnecessary. "We have five clear
days before any reinforcements can be brought up against us—all the
chances have been calculated, you see. If we are not in Verdun by
the evening of the fifth day—well, the battle will continue. But, I
repeat, we shall be in Verdun within four days. The thing is certain!"

 "Of course it is, General," said another voice above their heads. Both
officers looked up, rose to their feet. "In four days we shall be in
Verdun. In a fortnight—Paris!"

 The speaker was a youngish man, with a long nose in a long face,
somewhat bald upon the brow, a clipped moustache above a long thin
mouth. There was something in his manner which suggested not too
reputable finance doubled with Monte Carlo and the coulisses .
He repeated, smacking his hand familiarly upon the back of the
distinguished neutral: "In a fortnight—Paris!" He named the famous
city with a smack of the lips.

 "Undoubtedly, Highness," said the German general, his professional
manner replaced by the obsequiousness of the courtier. "The army led by
Your Highness cannot fail to conquer."

 "Verdun—Paris! This time it will not fail, General." He walked across
the room, smacking a riding-switch on his tall, patent-leather hussar
boots, and chanting: " Nach Verdun! Nach Verdun—Paris! "   The morning of the 21st February, 1916, opened damp and bleak. Over
the heavy clay fields of the Woevre plain the mist hung persistently,
enclosing all vision in a few hundred yards. Through the obscurity the
poplars lining the roads loomed up like ghosts, dripping moisture from
each bare twig. In the copses and the larger stretch of woodland known
as the Fort de Spincourt the conglobulated mist fell like rain. From
either of the high knolls known as the Twins of Ornes, just south-west
of the Fort de Spincourt, the wooded slopes of the Heights of the
Meuse—Merbebois and the Bois de Wavrille—rose dark and indefinite,
discernible only when a little puff of the raw east wind, coming up the
valley of the Orne, broke a rift in the fog.

 The neutral and the German Oberst who was his inseparable companion
stood on the more southerly of the twin heights. About them was a group
of artillery officers. In their immediate front was the deep dug-out,
sod-roofed, where telephonists sat and waited. It was an artillery
observation post. The light was yet dim though the wet fog was white.
It had been quite dark when the two spectators had made their way over
roads deep in mud to this position of vantage.

  The journey had been long, for their car had had to squeeze, lurching
and slithering, past endless columns of infantry plodding over the
atrocious roads. In the darkness those thousands of men had been
scarcely more visible than phantoms who sang continuously as they
marched, chorusing to the tune set by picked singers at the head of
each company. Those who were merely the chorus broke off frequently
to shout witticisms at the labouring motor-car. In high spirits, they
wagered that they would be the first, after all, to arrive in Verdun.

 On the hill-top of the Twin of Ornes, where the officers clustered, was
tense expectation. The fog did not lift. Only at rare intervals was
there a faint glimpse of the wooded heights towards which all gazed
with thrilling foreknowledge. As yet all was a quiet broken only by
an occasional isolated detonation that rolled heavily down the Orne
valley. It echoed in a dull repercussion from the mist-filled woods
upon the great scarp that was the far-flung rampart of the doomed
city. An officer looked at his watch. The example was infectious. The
seconds, the minutes passed slowly. It was like waiting for the curtain
to go up. The watches marked 8.13 (German time)—8.14—8.15!

 There was one simultaneous vast roar that leaped from an arc stretching
from far in the north-west and passing round behind them to the
south. It did not cease. Minute after minute it continued, unabated,
prolonged. In the first sudden shock it appeared one colossal bellow
of sound, evenly maintained. But as the ear became accustomed to it,
instinctively analysed it, it was possible to distinguish spasms of
even fiercer sound than the general welter: the ponderous concussion of
especially heavy ordnance; the frenzied hammering of the quickfiring
field-guns. The sense of hearing was overwrought, but the view changed
not. The mist still hung over the landscape, was a curtain before the
straining eye. Only down below them to the right a howitzer battery,
adventurously pushed forward, rent the fog with stabs of orange-red
flame.

 It seemed, in the overpowering blast of the German guns, that the
French artillery was making no general reply. From time to time a shell
came whining over towards them, finished in an ugly rush and a crash
somewhere upon the knoll. They scarcely noticed these occasional djinns
of death, so ineffective were they by contrast to the whirlwind of
destruction that swept the other way. The habituated ear could now pick
out the rumbling tramcar-like progress of the heavy shells overhead,
the fierce rushing drone of the missiles from lighter guns, mingling
interwoven with the uninterrupted sheet of sound.

 What was happening over there among the dank, wooded hills? Nothing
could be seen, but the experienced imagination sketched, conscious that
it fell below the reality, fearful havoc distant in the fog. Trees
suddenly blasted, toppling; parapets leaping into the air—horrors
among the spout of earth that had been a sheltered dug-out; trenches
whose walls fell in; men who cowered, fear-paralysed, in a shambles;
overhead a ceaseless cracking that rained down death; shock upon shock;
chaos—such flitted through the minds of those who strained their eyes
at the fog. An artillery observation officer turned to the neutral.

 "Five hours of this, Excellenz," he said with a smile, "and then, the
first step to Verdun!"

 The Oberst expatiated on the wonderful German system for supplying all
these batteries indefinitely at this intensity of fire. "Who can resist
us?" was the implied corollary to his dissertation. The neutral was
duly impressed, his dark clever eyes serious.

 The bombardment continued, became monotonous. The fog thinned somewhat
but permitted no clear vision. The batteries were firing by the map,
according to a prearranged programme. The Oberst suggested to his
distinguished guest that further stay was useless.

 "I would like to see your guns at work, Herr Oberst," said the
neutral, and the colonel saw himself forced to put aside his hopes of
returning to Corps Headquarters for Mittagessen . He speculated on the
Divisional Messes in their vicinity as he replied:

 "By all means, Excellenz."

 They scrambled down the rough path of the knoll, through a thin growth
of birch, passed into the denser mist below.

 They found themselves suddenly among long ranks of resting infantry
squatting and lying in close proximity to their piled arms. The
feld-grau uniforms merged, were lost in the fog, but there was an
indefinable suggestion of the presence of many thousands. The Oberst
and his guest might walk where they would, the shadowy grey forms
still loomed up out of the mist. All were cheerful and confident. The
officers in little groups smiling as they conversed, bent over a map.
The men grinning. They were waiting for the guns to level the path for
their "promenade."

 At last the ranks of infantry ceased. They came upon a field battery
that was firing furiously. The guns were in the open, their upturned
caissons—lid upright to form a shield, exposing the pigeon-holed bases
of the cartridges—close against the left wheel. Grouped behind each
were the busy gunners, in rapid movement of arms and torso, crouching,
labouring with swift concentrated intensity as they passed the long,
gleaming projectile from hand to hand, thrust it into the breech,
closed and fired. Behind them was a heap of brass cartridge-cases, the
flat compartmented baskets that had held three rounds. The watching
officers, helmeted, in long closely-buttoned coats, stood behind their
sections. The battery hurled out its stream of death in absolute
immunity. No enemy shell came to seek it. The fog veiled its target.

 Beyond that battery was another, in the open like the first, almost
wheel to wheel with it. And beyond that, another and yet others, an
endless chain of them, all scorning concealment, all firing as fast as
sweating, straining men could load and pull the lever. From behind came
the prolonged, heavy, linked detonations of yet other batteries of more
weighty metal. Overhead the rumble and rush of hurrying shells was as
the sound of heavy traffic.

  The neutral and his guide turned eastwards towards the zone of the
great howitzers. Once more they were entangled in waiting masses
of grey-clad infantry. The mist had thinned, permitted quite long
vistas. Everywhere there was infantry, battalion upon battalion,
regiment on regiment, brigade after brigade. The time had passed—by
the neutral, at least, almost unnoticed, so much was there for his
brain to register—it was now almost noon. The infantry was standing
to its ranks, forming into column of route, marching forward with
songs and shouts, their spiked helmets decorated with sprigs of fir.
" Vorwrts! " came the sharp, barking commands of the officers. " Nach
Verdun! " shouted the excited men, drunk with the prospect of superbly
easy victory.

 And ever the indefatigable batteries hammered and crashed, spewing
forth death in volumes that the men they served might live. From behind
every hedge, every hillock; in long lines across the open—so many that
they could afford to neglect the enemy's reply; their tongues of flame
shot out, flickered indefinitely repeated into the distance. Their
infinitely reiterated detonations smote splittingly upon the ear, were
gathered into one overpowering roar.

 The dark mass of the Fort de Spincourt was riven by red flame that
lit and was gone momentarily in every part of its recesses. As the two
officers approached it, they saw a faint film of smoke hanging over
the tree-tops, saw the quick flashes gleaming through the undergrowth
of the verge. They entered its obscurity. The air choked one with
the fumes of burnt explosive, beat against the face in gusts with the disturbance of the multiplied discharges. The wood was a nest of
howitzer batteries. On platforms of concrete and timber the monsters
squatted, bowed their head to receive yet another shell, raised it
again with slow, determined movement, the great round jaws gaping
upward to the sky, belched with a sudden eructation of vivid flame,
a tremendous shock of which the stunning noise was only part. The
spectator behind the gun, looking upward, saw a black object speeding
high into the air, rapidly diminishing, the while a rain of twigs
pattered down upon his face. As the barrel was lowered again, the
breech opened, slow curling tongues of flame licked round the muzzle.
Behind each weapon were great stacks of shells. Hurrying men, two at a
time, a tray supported on two short poles between them, carried more
food to the iron monster, fed its fuming breech for yet another roar.

 Further within the wood were still greater monsters, so huge that
their aliment was trundled to them on light rails, swung into their
maw by overhanging cranes. The earth shook, the trees rocked, with the
vehemence of their discharge.

 "Frau Bertha has a most persuasive voice, nicht wahr ?" said the
Oberst to his guest. The neutral agreed as courteously as was possible
in this chaos of bludgeoning noise. His dark eyes rested a little
contemptuously on the dapper, somewhat podgy colonel whose soul,
even in this crisis of nations, was still essentially the soul of a
commercial traveller. The order to Krupp's was not yet given.

 It was one o'clock—noon to the anxious French general far over
there in the terrible distance. As suddenly as it had commenced, the
vast bombardment ceased. There was an uncanny silence. All knew its
significance. The German infantry was advancing to the assault. With
what resistance would it be met? Every ear was at strain—machine-guns?
There was no sound. Suddenly the bombardment opened again, as violent
as before. The German guns were putting a screen of death behind the
doomed positions, barring off all help. Far away huge shells were
crashing down from a curve that was four miles high at its zenith,
making an inferno of a once quiet cathedral town, wrecking the bridges
across a flooded river, blocking every avenue of supply to the
defenders agonising on the plateau.

 That night in the Army Headquarters was a night of jubilation. Courtier
soldiers—who none the less laboured into the small hours at the
intricate calculations and orders that would improve the victory on
the morrow—glanced at a youngish, very exalted personage and murmured
platitudes about the pardonable intoxication of success. An even
more exalted personage strode from general to general in the great
tapestried, map-hung apartment and gave instructions that were received
as the inspiration of genius and then merged, lost sight of, nullified
in the mass of orders that emanated from those fiercely toiling brains.

 The distinguished guest sat at the table with the keen-eyed,
white-browed general, had everything patiently explained to him.

 "All has gone exactly according to schedule," said the German. "The
first line positions are ours. There has been a counter-attack in the
Bois de Caures, but we have stemmed it. Elsewhere there has been no
serious opposition. The first day has been a brilliant success. We
have pierced the line where we intended to pierce it. If the French
maintain their flank positions their disaster is certain. The battle
will be developed to-morrow. We shall drive right through to the
Ornes-Louvemont road. The French defence is dead, was annihilated by
our bombardment. To-morrow disintegration will set in and our progress
will be rapid. On the third day we shall take Fort Douaumont—the key
to Verdun."

 "And on the fourth day?" queried the neutral, his dark eyes gazing at
the map in front of him.

 "We shall be in Verdun!" said the German.

 " Verdun! Verdun! Nach Verdun—Paris! " chanted an unsteady voice
across the room, finished in a suspicious resemblance to a hiccup.
There was a moment of tense, awkward silence in the great apartment,
and then a buzz of low voices earnestly discussing technicalities.

  Day followed day, surcharged with fateful issues. Men who flung
themselves down, utterly wearied, to snatch a brief sleep, woke
from it with an oppression of the breast, a tremor of the nerves.
Their fiercely excited brains begrudged an instant's unconsciousness
where every minute was a vehicle of destiny, once ahead never to be
overtaken. Strenuously, night and day, laboured the Staffs in the Army Headquarters, in the Corps, Divisions, Artillery Groups—desperately,
for after the second day they were behind their time-table. On that
second day the French defence they had fondly thought annihilated woke
to sternly resisting life. There had been terrific fighting on the
whole front from Brabant to Ornes. Once more a frightful bombardment
had opened with the dawn. Once more the German infantry had advanced
in masses. They found the trenches in front of them weakly held, had
occupied them. But en route a storm of shells had rained down on the
swarming columns, had strewn the ground with dead and dying. Further
advance was barred by sheets of rifle-fire, torrents of machine-gun
bullets. There were ugly rumours as to losses. The day's objective had
not been reached. Counter-attacks had flung the grey infantry out of
positions already conquered.

 During the black night of the 22nd-23rd, while the gun-teams of the
German batteries strained and stumbled forward over a shell-torn ground
to new positions, the French left flank had fallen back from Brabant.
The German guns hurled an avalanche of projectiles blindly upon the
new lines of defence, more or less at hazard since no longer did they
have them accurately marked upon the map. Once more the grey masses
swept forward, once more the hail of shells beat them down. The end
of that day saw the centre pushed in with wild confusion, but the
French resistance still alive, determined to perish rather than break.
Once more the objective had not been attained. Douaumont was not even
menaced. The time-table was hopelessly out. That night the French fell
back on both flanks, withdrew from Ornes.

 The fourth day dawned—the appointed day for final victory—and still
the struggle continued, fiercer than ever. Slowly, slowly, the German
infantry pressed forward, leaving behind them a sea of helpless
bodies—a grey carpet as perceived from a distance. The artillery fire
swelled and mounted in paroxysms of incredible violence, the German
guns hammering in savage persistence, the French batteries lurking
for their target, overwhelming it in a deluge. On and on pressed the
grey infantry, thrust dangerously as night fell straight at the heart,
towards Fort Douaumont. A fierce conflict—body to body, rifles that
flashed in the face of the victim, bayonets perforce shortened for
the thrust, griping fingers clutching at the throat as men wrestled
and swayed—raved and roared in an indescribable tumult upon the
Ornes-Louvemont road. The defenders had made a supreme rally. The
Germans fought like men who grasp at victory, maddened that it is
withheld. The French fought like heroes, desperately outnumbered,
who know their duty is to die. When night fell the defence was still
intact, but the French had withdrawn to their last line, covering
Douaumont.

 "We have still one more day," said the German general to the
distinguished neutral that night in the great map-hung apartment. "We
allowed that margin of time. To-morrow will see our greatest effort,
Douaumont in our hands, Verdun untenable." The dark eyes of the neutral
read a certain nervous ness in the German's face, despite the confident
tone.

 "It has proved rather more difficult than you expected?"

 "The French field-guns have been terrible—terrible," replied the
German. "Without them——" He waved an expressive hand. "But to-morrow
we shall deliver the coup de grce . We have not boasted idly,
Excellenz." His eyes looked searchingly through their pince-nez on the
calmly interested face of the neutral. "When Germany threatens she
performs."

 On the morning of the 25th the German guns roared over white fields
of snow, through veils of the softly falling flakes that fluttered
inexhaustibly from the leaden sky. Their thunder swelled louder and
ever louder as the batteries which had changed position, consequently
upon the French withdrawal during the night, got to work, searching
for their target, more or less accurately finding it despite the
difficulty of observation. Not a minute was to be lost. The anxious
German staff knew that the reinforcements of their foes must be
hurrying—hurrying. Some perhaps had already arrived. If night fell
without definite victory, the morrow would surely see fresh masses
against them, reinvigorating the defence. Victory to-day—complete
victory—Douaumont captured, the pursuit pressed into the streets of
Verdun—meant victory indeed. Mighty therefore was the effort. By noon
every German battery was firing at its maximum. Under the leaden sky,
over the white ground, in the still cold of a bitter frost, their
thunder swelled and crashed, roaring in a never-ending frenzy. Eighteen
German divisions were massed to break down all opposition. Already they
had attacked—again and again. Again and again, the rapid detonations
of the French guns had leaped into the din, smiting desperately,
frantically, to stay them. Over there, in the mist-hung gullies of the
plateau, on its bare open spaces between the woods, the snow had ceased
to be white—save where it fell freshly upon the huddled bodies of the
fallen.

 In the afternoon the weather cleared somewhat. More distant views
were possible. On the higher of the Twins of Ornes, the knolls just
south-west of the Fort de Spincourt, stood the figure who more than
any other individual would have to dare the answer for all the agony
rolled out there before him, for all the agony that no eye could
measure, spread over continents, crying to strange stars. Spiked
helmet on his head, long grey cavalry-cloak wrapped about him, his
field-glasses held to his eyes by the right hand only, he gazed upon
the now distant conflict. At his side stood a younger figure, his face
masked also by binoculars. Behind them was a group of dignitaries,
generals of high position, the distinguished neutral and the Oberst who
never quitted him. All gazed to the wooded scarp of the Heights of the
Meuse, their glasses pointing south-south-west.

 The great masses of woodland rose dark from the snow of the plain a
long stretch of undulating, climbing tree-tops. Beyond them the bare
bulk of the plateau humped itself yet higher, dirty grey against the
sky. It rose to a culminating knoll—Douaumont! All that bare plateau
was whelmed in a drifting reek, but the highest point was like a
volcano in eruption. Great founts of smoke shot up from it incessantly,
spread in the air in heavy plumes that overhung. It was the objective
of the 3rd Corps (Brandenburgers), attacking under the eye of the
Kaiser so particularly their chief. Their orders were that Douaumont
was to be taken at all costs. On the Twin of Ornes operators from Army
Headquarters had taken over the telephone dug-out. Behind them the line
was clear to Berlin—waiting—waiting for the triumphant announcement
that should thrill the world.

 Somewhat impatiently the neutral scanned the lofty distances where the
great drama was being enacted. Innumerable puffs of bursting shells
indicated the conflict but gave no hint of its varying fortunes.
The professional instinct was strong within him, the report to his
Government an ideal to which it strove. To perfect that report he
must see the fight at closer quarters, must describe the effects of
the French fire as a complement to the already written minute on the
German batteries. His keen eye picked out a position of vantage on the
Heights. Then he waited for an opportunity, alert for the moment when
the eye of majesty should rest itself from the distant view, should
fall upon him. The opportunity occurred. The glance of the All-Highest
swept over him, preoccupied. The neutral stepped forward, saluted,
indicated the far-off point.

 " Ich bitte um Erlaubnis, Majestt ," he said.

  A frowning glance rested upon him for an instant, intolerant of aught
save the mighty contest whose issue was the fate of nations.

 " Gestattet ," was the curt, indifferent reply.

 The German Oberst, standing behind the neutral, changed colour. He had
no option but to accompany this damnable foreigner in his mad adventure
into unnecessary danger. He, too, saluted "Majestt," followed the
neutral to the spot where a number of orderlies stood at the heads of
saddled horses. They had been sent forward in case the dignitaries
should require them.

 In a few moments the two officers, followed by mounted attendants, were
slithering down the snowy side of the knoll, were cantering across the
valley towards Ornes.

 High above them towered the dark Bois de la Chaume as they threaded
the dbris-covered street of the wrecked village. It was packed with
Brandenburger infantry waiting to advance. They followed the road
southward, at the foot of the hills, towards Bezonvaux. Everywhere the
infantry stood thick, waiting. The cannonade mounted to a frightful
intensity, appalling even the ears now habituated to it, bewildering
the senses, troubling the sight. French shells came whining, screaming,
rushing, to burst with loud crashes in the woodland rising on their
right hand, on the road and the fields through which it passed. Domes
of dark smoke leaped upward from the earth, preceding the stunning,
metallic detonation. White shrapnel puffs clustered thickly above the
trees. Bezonvaux was a ruin. They turned off from it to the right,
up a rough track that climbed into the woods. The snow on the track
had been trampled into a dirty slush. All about them lay bodies, grey
and blue; weapons pell-mell as they had fallen from a suddenly opened
grasp. Their horses shuddered, whinnied, jerked nervous ears, moved
disconcertingly sideways from red stains soaking deep into the snow.

 Just under the edge of the plateau the neutral stopped, dismounted,
threw his reins to an orderly. The Oberst followed his example. His
face was blotchy white, he trembled in every limb.

 "We shall see nothing, Excellenz—absolutely nothing," he asseverated
appealingly.

 "We can at least try," replied his guest. "Something is happening over
there."

 Above them, some distance ahead, was a tremendous uproar, a chaos of
violent thudding slams, splitting crashes, a faint troublous murmur of
human voices. Behind them, up the rough track, a column of infantry
was advancing, overtaking them. They ascended with a steady progress,
splashing through the slush; officers waving swords, shouting; rank
upon rank of tense faces that had lost their humanity in the tremulous
brute; glazed staring eyes under the spiked helmets; singing, singing
like drugged, doomed gladiators marching to the arena. They passed
upward.

 The neutral, to whom his conductor had nervelessly surrendered the
initiative, led the way. They left their horses behind them, struck off
at a tangent to the right, through the woods, climbing always. They
emerged upon the plateau, in a clearing. Across the open space, from
a whelm of smoke and noise in the distance, groups of grey men were
running swiftly towards them, shouting inarticulately. Along the edge
of the woods was a line of pickets. Their weapons rose to the shoulder.
Sternly, every fugitive but those wounded was driven again into the
fight. Those who hesitated, screaming under the menace of the rifle,
dropped shot.

 The neutral hurried along the verge of the wood, scanning every tall
tree carefully, expectantly. "Ah!" He had found what he sought.
Against the green bark of a lofty beech dangled a rope ladder. It was
an abandoned French artillery observation post. He scrambled up the
ladder, followed by the trembling, shivering Oberst. High up among the
topmost branches was a little platform.

 The neutral settled himself, adjusted his binoculars, pushed aside
the twigs. He looked out over an undulating terrain, dark with woods
that ceased raggedly in deep indentations short of a bare hog's back
that gathered itself into a hump. That bare ground was smothered in a
turmoil of smoke that fumed to the grey sky, far to right and left.
But through it, in chance rifts, his glasses revealed a dark mass
upon the highest point. A reek of white smoke drifted away from it as
from burning buildings, mingling with the darker clouds of incessant
explosions. He had a glimpse of a rounded cupola. It was Douaumont!

 The snow on the open space between the fort and the woods was grey. It
was moving with crawling life like the festering of a stagnant pool.
Over it burst occasional puffs of shrapnel.

 "Ah!" The cry was involuntary from both the watching men. From the
woods emerged masses of running tiny grey figures, running, running
towards the fort. The open space was covered with them. A moment of
tense expectation when the heart seemed to stop—and then, as by a
terrible magic, great fountains of dark smoke and darker objects leaped
up among those running figures, countless explosions. A canopy of
vicious little shrapnel bursts in thousands spread itself over them.
Under it men sprawled in great patches, seemed to be fighting the air
ere they tumbled and fell. A horrid screaming came faint through the
uproar. More masses rushed out, were beaten down. There was a running
to and fro of men bewildered—a headlong flight.

 The storm of fire did not cease. It rolled over the plateau towards the
woods, remorselessly following the fugitives. Louder and louder, nearer
and nearer, the crashes, the fountains, the puffs—the great mingled
reek of the inferno—rolled towards the two men in the observation post.

 The Oberst clutched the neutral's arm.

 "Excellenz!" he shouted stammeringly. "We must go. I insist. I have
superior authority—written authority—my discretion—I insist!" he
almost screamed. His hand groped for a scrap of paper which he waved.
"Arrest!" he cried like a maniac. "Arrest if you do not come!"

  The storm of French shells was a very near menace. The neutral
acquiesced with a shrug of his shoulders. Nimbly they descended the
ladder.

 On the ground they found themselves among a swarm of slightly wounded,
terror-stricken men. One of them, a tall, bearded Brandenburger, his
clothes torn to rags, was shrieking and laughing in a manner horrible
to hear. His comrades drew away from him as he clutched at them. He was
insane.

 "Only I am left!" he cried. "Only I! They are all dead—dead—out
there. They were meant to be dead. They were dead men before we
attacked—all dead men running on—I could see it in their faces—only
I was alive! And now they are still crawling—crawling—dead men!"
His tone emphasised the horror of his words, struck a chill. A sentry
lowered his rifle, irresolutely.

 The maniac turned, waved a hand to the westward. The sun, on the point
of setting, showed itself in a rift of the threatening snow clouds,
sank, a great ball of glowing fire, over the rim of the plateau. Its
last rays were lurid on the face of the madman, as he stood, arm
outstretched, his eyes flaming, his tangled beard falling upon his
rags, like some antique prophet of the wilderness.

 "Woe! woe!" he shrieked. " Nach Verdun! Nach
Verdun—Verdunkelung! " He finished in a scream of maniac
laughter, glorying in the crazy assonance of the words. " Nach
Verdun—Verdunkelung! "

  The neutral and the Oberst hurried through the woods to their horses.

 A rapid ride with the German always in front, and once more they
ascended the Twin of Ornes. As they arrived at the summit they found
themselves among wildly cheering men. " Douaumont! Douaumont is
taken! " Far away to the south-south-west, rocket after rocket shot up
into the darkening sky. Already the great news had gone—electrical—to
Berlin.

 The crowd of dignitaries descended the steep path in the gloom to where
the motor-cars were ranked in waiting. Along the road passed streams of
wounded who could walk, phantoms half-distinguished in the dim light.
Joyous were the voices of the War-Lords. One, a familiar tone, chanted:
" Nach Verdun! Nach Verdun—Paris! "  Out of the darkness came a screamed reply, a burst of insane laughter.

 " Nach Verdun—Verdunkelung! Nach Verdun—Verdunkelung! "

 It was the voice of the crazed Brandenburger. There was a scuffle, the
sound of a man hurried away, resisting.

 All through that dark journey as the car bumped and lurched over the
atrocious roads, the words beat in a refrain through the mind of the
neutral. " Nach Verdun—Verdunkelung! " He wondered. Eclipse? Was it
the sun of Germany that set on the French position? The Oberst was
loquaciously cheerful.

 That night, in the great map-hung apartment, the War-Lords received
the news that their further advance was barred.

 Next morning a furious counter-attack surrounded a handful of defenders
in the fort for which they had paid so much. The French reinforcements
had arrived.

 FOOTNOTES:

  [11]

War economy.

  [12]

"The thing is absolutely simple!"

  [13]

Vide Mr. John Buchan's History of the War , Vol. XIII.

  [14]

"Nach" means "to, towards," and also "after."—"To
Verdun! After Verdun—Paris!"

  [15]

"I beg permission, Your Majesty."

  [16]

"Granted."

  [17]

"To Verdun! After Verdun—Eclipse."

  [18]

"To Verdun! After Verdun—Paris!"

    (AN IDYLL BETWEEN THE TRENCHES, 1914)

  ( Note.

—This story is founded upon an actual occurrence
narrated by Paul Grabein, "Im Auto durch Feindesland," Berlin, 1916.)

 The

sun set while a regiment of Zouaves was marching across the
plateau. The after-glow yet illumined the sky when its leading files
turned obliquely off to the right along a rough track that presently
dropped abruptly into a deep ravine, sculped by one of the streamlet
tributaries of the Oise. Bare for a little way below the lip, save
for some scattered juniper bushes stiffly perpendicular from the
close-cropped slope, the sides of the ravine were dark with a dense
growth of tree and thorn. The road plunged into it.

 Down and down went the road in a gloomy tunnel of arching boughs that
scarce left an interstice for the twilight sky. It reached the floor of
the little valley, followed it to the right in a more gentle descent.
On its left a brook fell swiftly through a plantation of silver birch
in a channel that brimmed to the long, rank, water-flattened grass and
anon plashed over boulders in a miniature cascade. Save for the steady
tramp of the marching troops and the occasional squawk of a frightened
jay, there was no sound in the valley.

  Mounted upon a magnificent black horse, the colonel rode at the head of
the column. Seen in profile, his face was remarkable—virile, powerful,
and intellectual. When it turned to full face it fascinated. Not the
steel-grey eyes looked for under those level brows, but a pair of full
brown orbs, romantic as those of an Arab, met the gaze. He raised his
hand as the column approached a pair of high ornamental iron gates, set
in a frame of lofty arched stone and surmounted by a carved escutcheon,
on the left side of the road. "Halt!"

 Behind him there was a clatter of accoutrements as the long column
broke its ranks, settled itself in seated groups, with piled arms, by
the roadside. In front, the advance-guard, receiving the order from
the connecting files, halted also. The colonel walked his horse to the
gates. The padlocked chain that had held them closed hung broken from
one of the wrought-iron scrolls. The gates had evidently been forced.
He pressed his horse's flank against one of them, slipped through the
opening, and set off at a trot down a long avenue of ancient poplars.
His capitaine-adjutant, cantering up from the leading company, followed
the wave of his hand.

 Beyond the clearing of lawn and Cupid-crowned fountain into which he
emerged, lay a long white stone mansion, picturesque but not remarkable
in its seventeenth-century architecture. Every window was shuttered.
Throwing the reins to his companion, he dismounted and, with the stiff
gait from long hours in the saddle, ascended the broad curving steps to
the main entrance.

  Only at his second summons on the loud, harshly clanging bell was there
any answering sign of life. One of the great doors opened slightly
until checked by a chain, and a woman's voice asked: "Who is it?"

 "French officers, madame. Is the patronne at home?"

 "I cannot see you," said the voice, evading the question.

 The colonel placed himself so as to be visible through the narrow
aperture. "Attendez!" said the voice. The door closed again.

 A minute or two of waiting in the chill, misty air and once more the
door opened, this time fully. "Entrez, monsieur!" said the voice.

 He found himself in a large lofty hall, dimly illumined by the candle
held by a little bent old woman. "Par ici, monsieur!" she said.

 She led him through salon after salon. In the flickering light he could
only just discern that they were richly furnished. At last she stopped
and tapped at a closed door.

 He was admitted into an apartment of costly and tasteful comfort, lit
with warm soft radiance from a shaded pedestal lamp. Pine logs were
burning on the hearth of a high stone fireplace. To one side stood a
grand piano. A great dog, stretched before the hearth, growled surlily.
These were salient details he was scarcely conscious of noting. His
eyes were held by the woman who rose from an arm-chair by the fire.

 Tall, gowned simply in a long robe of soft pale green, the lamplight
shimmered on the waved masses of her auburn hair as she moved. Not
vulgarly beautiful—the mouth was large, though well-cut—an oval
ivory-white face looked into his. No longer very young—she was at
least thirty—her instantly felt charm came accentuated by a hint of
incomplete maturity. Those quiet eyes could still look at life with a
questioning scrutiny, receptive of the new experience. They met his
now and a personality leaped into them, communed with him ere yet a
word had been uttered. Outwardly, only, they were still strangers. He
noticed that she wore no jewellery as he bowed courteously, fez in hand.

 "Madame, I am the colonel of the —th Regiment of Zouaves. A necessity,
that must be disagreeable to you, forces me to ask your hospitality for
my officers and men."

 "For to-night only?" Her voice was singularly deep and rich.

 "Perhaps for several, madame."

 "You are many?"

 "Eleven hundred men and twenty officers."

 "A strong battalion!"

 "Three battalions, madame," he corrected gently.

 The expression of the eyes, which had never left his, changed slightly.
The wordless, languageless message they were exchanging with his own
was interrupted. "Ah," she said in a voice of sympathy. "You come from
the battle? From the Marne?"

 "Yes, madame. We were on the Ourcq. Since then, on the Aisne."

 Her face lit up.

  "But certainly! Who would refuse anything to the brave men who have
saved France! You will excuse the coolness of your reception, Monsieur
le colonel? We have had other guests—less welcome." The colonel
thought of the broken chain on the gate. "Marie!" This to the old woman
who stood by the door, shading the candle in her hand, incongruous
in this luxurious apartment. "Place the large dining-room at the
disposition of messieurs les officiers . The kitchen also." She turned
again to the colonel. "I can offer only ten bedrooms to your officers,
Monsieur le colonel, but doubtless they can arrange themselves. The
stables are large, there are three barns and a disused mill, and there
is a loft at the top of the house. I hope you will find room for all
your men. There is plenty of straw in the barns. They may use it
freely. Please consider the house entirely at your disposition." And
all this time the eyes were talking wordlessly. And his, although he
knew it not, were replying.

 "You are too kind, madame!"

 "It is a happy privilege, Monsieur le colonel!"

 His business was finished, yet he felt curiously unwilling to go, much
though awaited him to do. His apology seemed addressed as much to his
own hidden inner self as to her.

 "Mille remerciments, madame! You will excuse me if I withdraw? My men
are very tired. Once more, a thousand thanks, madame——?"

 She answered his unuttered question, a smile lighting up eyes and face.

 "—La comtesse de Beaupr et Lysboise."

 He bowed.

  "Le colonel Victor de Montvrault."

 She held out a slender hand. Involuntarily, almost, he touched it with
his lips as he took it in his own. She did not stir. He did not see her
face.

 "Au revoir, madame, et tous mes remerciments!"

 "Au revoir, monsieur," she answered in her rich, deep voice.

 He felt her eyes upon him as he turned to follow Marie, candle in hand,
once more through the series of dark apartments.

 A little later and the chteau and its precincts were thronged with the
soldiers of the three war-worn battalions as they installed themselves
for the night. From the great yard between the stables and the barns
came the glow of cooking fires.

 But not for all was the hour of rest arrived. In a little room of the
chteau the colonel, with his three chefs de bataillon of whom one
only was a major, was poring over a large-scale map and indicating the
positions for the lines of sentries, outposts and grand'gardes . Up
the opposite side of the ravine to that which they had ascended, well
in advance across the high open ground, and down the valley road he
posted them. On the three battalion commanders the greatest vigilance
was enjoined. Ahead of them there should be French cavalry, but those
were the days of flux and reflux in the meeting tides of war, and all
things were possible.

 Later still, the colonel sat at the head of the long lamp-lit table
in the great dining-room. From the walls dim portraits in lustreless
frames looked down upon the backs of the loudly chattering Frenchmen in the exotic, Oriental uniforms. There was little or no talk of the
bitter, terrible but finally victorious days through which they—it
seemed to each of them miraculously—had lived. Animated discussion
of the future was the rule—a future confidently regarded through the
glow of the so recently victorious past. Bold strategic plans were
elaborated, illustrated with cruet and table-knives. There was much
talk of envelopment, of a rapid dash on Le Cateau, Valenciennes and
Mons that should hurl the Boche, deprived of his communications, into
the tangled thicket of the Ardennes, if indeed he escaped at all. The
colonel took no part in these arguments. He sat silently sipping the
wine which a generous hostess had caused to be placed in ample quantity
upon the table. His large brown eyes were soft, the muscles of his face
relaxed. It is possible that he thought of something quite other than
war.

 One of the soldier orderlies flitting behind the chairs touched him on
the shoulder.

 "Pardon, mon colonel, but the domestic wishes to speak to you."

 He turned in his chair to see the ancient Marie at the door.

 "Madame presents her compliments, m'sieu le colonel, and would be
honoured if you would take your coffee with her."

 The colonel rose in his chair.

 "Bonsoir et bonne nuit, messieurs!"

 "Bonsoir, mon colonel," was reiterated from the score of upturned
faces. "Bonne nuit."

 In her cosy warm salon the chtelaine sat by the fire, a glow softly
playing over her features. At her side, on a little table, a silver
coffee-service steamed. As the colonel entered she looked up to greet
him with a smile, indicating the corresponding arm-chair on the other
side of the hearth. The large dog at her feet raised his head, wagged
his tail in friendly welcome.

 In a few moments they were conversing with the ease of those who
have known each other for long years. Wartime, and particularly the
kaleidoscopic wartime of those early days, is a great ripener of
acquaintance. None might venture to forecast the circumstances of the
morrow, to predict continued life for self or other. The actual moment
must be snatched. The colonel with his quiet assured poise, his alert
intelligence; the countess, polished grande dame and yet something
more, a being of exquisite intuitions, would have set, naturally, to
partners whatever the circumstances of their meeting. Each of the pair
offered interest to the other. He, soldierly, his massive intellectual
head on the broad shoulders, the glowing soft eyes so strangely set
in the cold face, the Oriental Zouave uniform emphasising their hint
of romance, claimed the eye not less than her slender figure, gowned
with the refinement of a consummate civilisation, her supple yet strong
carriage of the auburn glory that crowned the pale oval face, the
flowing, delicate curve from rounded chin to the gently mobile breast.
Her eloquent eyes were long-lashed, downcast towards the fire. He was
asking the reason of her stay here in the danger zone. She turned them
upon him.

  "This is my own house—my family's house—the chteau of Lysboise.
Since my husband's death three years ago I have always inhabited it for
a great part of the year. I have always loved it. I was a child in this
dark ravine, among the birches of the water-meadows. My own life—that
I have never shared with anyone—is here. I am of the country. All the
peasant people know me, love me. And when the war came I felt that I
must be among them, that I could not leave my house, my own dear house,
alone, unprotected against anything that might happen. So I hurried
here at a time when everybody was hurrying the other way. But the
servants had gone. Only old Marie remained, and she and I have lived
here all these black weeks, only Roland," she patted the dog's head
smilingly, "to watch over us. We have had many visits from the German
cavalry, but no violence. They saw, perhaps, that I was not afraid. Now
the people are beginning to creep back to their homes."

 He nodded his head sympathetically, described how the peasants of the
Aisne valley crept back to their farms, continued their field-tasks
close behind the trenches, apparently indifferent to the shrapnel and
the marmites .

 "Yes," she murmured, gazing thoughtfully into the fire, "amidst so
much death the flame of life burns ever higher, will not, must not be
extinguished."

 There was a little pause, during which the colonel sipped his coffee.
Lightly, with the smile of a prima ballerina pirouetting away from
a serious posture into which she would have you believe she fell
unwittingly, the countess commenced to talk of Paris of the days before
the war. With a young enthusiasm she spoke of her morning rides in the
Bois, of restaurants and dinner-parties—mentioning a name here and
there that might lead to the discovery of a mutual acquaintance, of
concerts and the play. The colonel listened, speaking little, seeing
her—though she did not so much as hint at them—circled by a crowd of
admirers.

 "And madame," she said innocently, "does she inhabit Paris?"

 "Madame——?" He was obviously at a loss.

 "You are not married, then?"

 "No, madame."

 "But," she persisted gently, "you have doubtless friends in Paris? A
man such as you——" she stopped, smiling. "I am indiscreet."

 "Madame," he replied in a quiet voice, "I have been in Africa for more
than twenty years. The Paris I knew exists no more."

 She turned her gaze full on him. The freshness of the man appeared
suddenly to her. An involuntary little blush suffused her face. She
covered it by a slight withdrawal from the fire.

 "Tell me about Africa," she commanded.

 He spoke at first depreciatingly of the country, the grave of so many
of France's best, so remote from all that to a Frenchman makes life
worth while. Then as he warmed to his description she saw that he loved
that parched land of immense distances where the pitiless sun consumes
the human soul or heats it to an intense unworldly fervour. He told of
interminable marches over the glowing sands, of forgotten skirmishes
where a wound was worse than death, of fierce razzias, of lonely
outpost nights in the desert underneath a miracle of stars, where under
the naked presence of the infinite one watched, finger on trigger, for
the gleam of a creeping burnous. She found herself seeking to detect a
deliberate elimination of the feminine in his reminiscences. With sure
instinct she felt there was a woman somewhere in the background. How
far back?

 "You have suffered much," she said, her deep rich voice all sympathy.

 "Who has not suffered who lives?" he replied.

 There was again a pause, where the breathing of the couched dog was the
only sound.

 "Will you not play something?" he asked, suddenly, looking at the
piano. "My opportunities have been few——"

 She rose, went to the piano, and seated herself without a word. She
played, not with the brilliance of the showy amateur nor with the hard
precision of the professional, but as though the notes on which her
light fingers fell re-echoed an intimate music of the soul. Through
the grave breath-restrained emotion of a Chopin Nocturne she led him,
then, with an enigmatic inconsequence, into the flitting, dainty,
Harlequin and Columbine passion of a Chaminade that left a question
poised, smilingly. A moment's interval, and with a deep contralto voice
she commenced to sing a chanson of old France, that followed, simply,
exquisite quiet notes, compact of love and the tragedy of love,
poignantly eloquent in their unadorned statement of the theme. He went
across to the piano, stood over her. She felt his presence very close.
A thrill passed into her voice, magical. She finished and stood up with
a sudden movement. His glowing eyes were full with tears.

 "Bonsoir, monsieur," she said abruptly, stretching out her hand. The
voice was not her own.

 He took her hand in his, held it tightly. His breath came in deep
halations from a heaving chest.

 "Madame," he said in a low intense voice, "you are divine!"

 She strove to release her hand.

 " Voyons! " she said plaintively, almost tearfully, averting her face.
"We met only to-day."

 "And to-morrow?—Who knows?"

 "No! no! no!" she cried and tore away her hand from his. "Bonsoir,
monsieur!" She ran across the room like a startled fawn, bowed herself
against the stone fireplace, her face hidden. He saw her shoulders
heave.

 He followed her, stood irresolute. She turned on him suddenly.

 "Oh, isn't there enough suffering in the world," she cried,
"without——?"

 "Without love?" He advanced with outstretched arms, laid his hands
upon her shoulders. She stiffened, fending him off. "Without love? If
to love is to suffer," he said in a voice deeply harmonious, "to love
is also to live. And I have waited so long to live! Have waited for
you, my twin soul! We met only to-day? What if we have only to-day to
live——?"

 She leaned back, away from him, yet held in his grasp.

 "Oh, no, no, no! I mustn't listen!" Her bosom filled. Her eyes closed.
She crumpled suddenly in his arms.

  The next morning, mounted upon a fine-bred chestnut mare, a zealous
Zouave at the bridle, she waited in the great courtyard behind the
chteau. She had offered her knowledge of the locality to the colonel
and gladly he had accepted it. He came towards her now on his noble
black horse, bending down in grave talk with the chef de bataillon
walking by his stirrup. She acknowledged his salutation, and a moment
later they were riding out of the great gate together.

 The ravine of Lysboise lifted its towering further wall of dark
undergrowth immediately behind the chteau. A narrow path, frequently
stepped, zigzagging through the hanger in steep gradients, made the
ascent of the sheer acclivity possible. Side by side they walked their
horses up, bending often in the saddle to escape the low overhanging
branches. They rode in silence, each in their own thoughts. She glanced
sideways at her companion. It was the face of a soldier, not of a
lover. Obviously he pondered some problem. She sighed. This undisturbed
solitude, the screen of thick woodland arching over them, on the
two pacing animals that nosed each other amicably, awoke primitive
instincts in her. But she kept silence, made no movement.

 At last, as though summoned by her thought, he turned his head towards
her.

 "You have received bad news, mon ami?" she asked.

 "Orders that throw a heavy responsibility upon me," he answered.

 Again they relapsed into silence. The ascent continued. Only a few
yards short of the summit did the undergrowth cease.

 For a dozen paces the path ran over bare close-cropped grass, then,
sunk in a rough cutting, surmounted the crest.

 A little beyond, on the open down, the grand'garde—a weak company of
Zouaves—was digging energetically at shelter-trenches. The colonel
spoke with the officer, rode on.

 "Would you please take me to the highest point, chre amie?" he asked.
The countess bowed her head, without a word. A touch of the spur, and
he followed her at an easy, touch-controlled canter, his horse eager to
get abreast the mare. At last she reined up, met his eyes with a smile.

 They stood upon a knoll in the downs, wide-spaced horizon all round.
Far to the south and east were the dark masses of the Fort de Laigue.
From beyond them came a heavy distant roll of artillery. The colonel
listened, searching the panorama with narrowed eyes. At his request
she pointed out localities and the direction of localities. He turned
to look backward, saw the lips of the ravine widening out to the
south-east until the slopes fell into another valley. His face hardened.

 "Let us go back, chre amie," he said. "As quickly as possible."

 At a swift, swinging gallop—the skirts of her amazon fluttering in the
wind—they hastened back to the grand'garde. The officer came up. The
colonel took out his note-book.

 "Have you any spades or farm implements, madame?" he asked.

 He nodded to her affirmation, writing the while in his note-book. He
tore out the page, folded it, gave it to the officer. "To be delivered
to the Commandant Legros at the Chteau. Without delay."

 Then he turned his horse and, followed by his companion, rode slowly
along the lip of the ravine. She searched his features, anxiously.

 He stopped in a depression of the down, out of sight of the
grand'garde. He turned to her, and her heart fluttered at the
tenderness of his face.

 "Pauline," he said gravely, laying his hand upon her arm, "you must not
stay here. Listen! The regiment on our left extends to the head of the
ravine. The orders I received this morning left me to choose on which
side of the ravine I should place my trenches. We advance no further.
We are only a screen, but the screen must be maintained, must not be
risked. I am obliged to choose the other side of the ravine. We shall
almost certainly be attacked. I do not know when—nothing is known.
But you would be in danger. You must leave this afternoon, go right
back—to Amiens, Paris."

  She checked an impulse to quick speech, smiled at him.

 "Mon ami, I was almost unjust to you——"

 "You will go?"

 She shook her head.

 "No, cher ami, I remain with you."

 "But if we are attacked and have to retire to the other side of the
ravine? You cannot remain in the trenches."

 "No. I should remain in my house until you advance again." She turned
an appealing, coquettish glance upon him. "Should I be something to
fight for?" She checked his protestations. "No, cher ami, I know all
your arguments. They are useless. What did you say last night?—What if
we have only to-day to live?" Her voice sank, her eyes dropped. "Cher
ami, I want not a moment that your duty claims,—but those others,
those precious little instants, can you not accept me in them? So
little time is ours, cher !"

 The horses had drawn close together. He put his right arm round her
waist. She leaned back, face upturned. Their eyes met in a long deep
look. Their mouths approached, were one. The flame of life burned high
in them. Their horses' ears quivered to a louder roar of the distant
guns.

 Slowly they rode home together, by an easier, more roundabout path she
showed him.

 All that day those of the regiment not required for outposts laboured
hard at the new entrenchments on the high, western edge of the
ravine—a long, long line of delving men. Ranges were marked out; reserves of ammunition, food and water carried up. The energising
source of all this activity, the colonel, laboured also, without haste
and without rest. His brain worked quickly, coolly, definite in its
decisions. She, his companion, unobtrusively at hand when required
for information or material of defence, vanished unnoticed when her
presence might become importunate. She quenched her personality,
transfused, she felt, her life-force into him as he worked, an
emotionless intellect. With his chefs-de-bataillon he elaborated plans
of defence; nothing was left to chance; nothing could be misunderstood.
Personally he supervised, corrected, the siting of the trenches, the
emplacements of the mitrailleuses. In the afternoon he rode over to the
colonel of the adjoining regiment, concerted arrangements. From the
gnral de brigade he obtained the promise of a battery in support on
the morrow.

 But he was uneasy. Patrols sent out had failed to get into touch with
the covering cavalry. The distant artillery roll was nearer. There
had been one inexplicable burst of fire some miles away to the right.
As night fell he ordered the new trenches to be manned with the bulk
of his force, leaving outposts and grand'garde on the plateau above
the ravine and down the valley. One company only he retained near the
chteau.

 That evening he sat again in the salon of his hostess. All was quiet.
The dog snored in front of the hearth. At his request the countess
seated herself at the piano, played dreamily with bowed head. The soft
harmonies that awoke under her fingers seemed only to make the silence
musical.

 Suddenly a shot re-echoed loud along the valley; another and another
followed. There was a burst of rapid, irregular fire, indefinitely
prolonged. The colonel rushed to a window, flung it open, listened. The
outposts down the valley were being driven in.

 His companion had risen, stood by the piano with tense features. There
was a loud hurried knock on the door. She ran to open it. A Zouave
entered, breathing heavily from swift exertion. Saluting, he handed a
message to the colonel. It was from the commander of the grand'garde on
the edge of the ravine above. He reported that his advanced posts were
in contact with the enemy, were retiring. For one moment the colonel
stood by the window, listening to the rapid clatter of the rifles,
deciding which was the heavier attack.

 He wrote an order to the officer above. The messenger disappeared. The
countess was holding out his fez and his revolver. One wild embrace and
he sprang out of the room, dashed through the adjoining salons, out
into the night.

 In the courtyard he found the reserve company assembled, awaiting his
orders. He gave them, quickly, succinctly. The company fell into fours,
doubled out of the courtyard into the darkness to form a screen across
the valley behind which the men above could seek safety. From the
widening ravine the rifle fire swelled in intensity, was a continuous
loud re-echoing clatter. Above, sharp definite reports rang out,
were rapidly multiplied. It was the grand'garde— feu  volont .
He glanced to the other wall of the ravine and smiled in a grim
satisfaction. His orders were being obeyed. The long line of trenches
he knew to be there lay in silence and darkness.

 Above him there was one fierce paroxysm of fire and then the reports
diminished, sprang from lower levels. He saw quick flashes of light
among the trees. Wounded men limped and hobbled past him in the
darkness. The outpost was retiring into the valley. A bullet cracked
close to him. He turned, suddenly conscious of companionship. The
countess was standing at his side, her pale dress luminous in the
night. The dog growled angrily in front of her.

 "Pauline!" His voice was almost a shriek of alarm for her. "Pauline!
For the love of God, come with me—now—there is yet time! I cannot
leave you!"

 She grasped his hand, as a friend would.

 "No, cher —I stay—as a pledge for your victorious return!"

 The last men of the outpost were running past them. Overhead the
bullets cracked viciously, phutting against the walls.

 "I implore you! There may be heavy fighting!"

 "No, mon ami. I stay." Her voice was quite decided. "I have cellars."
She pressed his hand, then, with a quick movement, flung herself into
his arms, was one with him for a brief second. He unloosed her embrace.

 "Go, then," he said, his voice trembling. "Quickly. God be with you!"

  "And with you, my beloved! Take the dog with you—he will tell me where
you are." She bent down to the animal, whispered to him, pointed to the
colonel. Heavy volleys crashed out of the trees above. She sprang back
into the house.

 The dog at his heels, the colonel raced after the last of his men. They
turned to spit livid spurts of flame at the dark wall of the ravine. In
a few moments they were clambering up a steep path through the wood on
the other side.

 Half an hour later the Germans felt the long line of trenches on the
lip of the ravine, attacked, and were heavily repulsed.

  At dawn the colonel reconnoitred the situation from his position on the
height. In front of him the enemy, abandoning the valley in which lay
so many of his dead, had entrenched himself along the opposite edge of
the ravine. Vicious little bursts of rifle fire at scattered parties or
individuals who hazarded themselves for a moment out of cover betokened
the vigilance of both sides, and on both sides the many spadefuls of
earth tossed in the air showed that the work of strengthening the
positions was proceeding feverishly. So far no artillery had entered
into the fray, but at any moment the first shell from one party or the
other might come whining across the gulf. To the right of the Zouaves
another battalion had established contact, was maintaining itself. To
the left, at the head of the ravine, where they joined with the next
regiment, a fierce fight was proceeding—attack and counter-attack
which finally left the positions unchanged. Far to right and left the
crackle of rifle fire swelled and continued. Mingled with it came the
rapid detonations of field-guns, their reports ever nearer. The battle
was developing all along the line. The colonel received positive orders
to maintain himself at all costs, to risk nothing. Upon the maintenance
of this thin screen depended the safety of two armies, forming and in
motion, perhaps the fate of France.

 Through his glasses the colonel gazed into the depths of the ravine,
where the white stone chteau glinted through the dark, thickly
surrounding trees. A wisp of smoke ascended from one of the chimneys
and he had to be content with that assurance that all was well. A
patrol sent out in the first light had failed to reach it. All access
to the chteau was commanded by spurs from the other side of the
ravine. But apparently it was unoccupied by the enemy. He thought
suddenly of the dog, wondered what had happened to it. In the stress
of the night attack he had lost sight of it, forgotten it. Even as he
searched his memory it came bounding along the trench towards him,
nosed against his leg. There was something fastened to its collar, a
letter.

 As he read it, all the passion of his ascetic, sun-parched years,
awakened by the exquisite charm of that slender pale woman lonely
there below him, surged up in him, overmastering, obliterating all
else. The eloquent eyes under the auburn hair were vivid to him, spoke
to his deepest soul. Her letter was a prose lyric of passion wherein
all emotions—longing, tenderness, anxiety, surrender, pride in her lover, even a flash of the doubt born of swiftly-given love—contended.
It was revelatory of her inmost self as her speech had never been.
She, it seemed, had also waited—waited. Some of the phrases in
it—"The burning sacrament of your kiss"—"linked in an instant for
eternity"—branded themselves upon his brain. In a whirl of cerebral
excitement he tore out a page from his note-book, dashed off a letter
not less ardent, not less than hers the ecstasy of a soul that lives at
last in the consuming fire of love.

 He attached it to the dog's collar, pointed away. The animal sprang
over the low parapet, disappeared in the undergrowth below.

 An artillery officer came up, reported himself as the observer of the
newly arrived battery. He evinced much professional interest in the
chteau, seemed eager to make it the target for his guns. The colonel
explained the situation.

 All through the multitudinous tasks and responsibilities of the day his
soul yearned out to the lonely woman below. To have risked his life in
an endeavour to see her would have been more than a joy, it would have
been the satisfaction of a need of his being—but his life was pledged
to France. To him his duty was a religion with which his love did not
conflict, nay both, upon the summit of his life, blended and were one.
Yet tempted, he found himself speculating upon the possibility of
creeping down at nightfall.

 But night saw the intense glare of three German searchlights shoot out
of the darkness. A storm of shrapnel burst fiercely over the trenches
of the Zouaves. A wild attack of shadowy forms surging up out of the
undergrowth beat against the parapet, ebbed back in an inferno of
noise from the long line of countless stabs of flame, was hurled into
the ravine under the reiterated crashes, the sudden livid flares of
shrapnel from the battery behind.

 Down below, at the highest window of the chteau, the countess stood
looking out into the night, her lover's letter pressed close against
her bosom. High above her flickered and spurted the endless rifle
flashes from his trenches, paling the stars above the dark hill. The
noise of the conflict, the shouts and cries amid the re-echoing din,
was a tribute to his power. She gloried in it, exulted when the attack
subsided, withdrew in a clamour of voices past the chteau to the hill
behind.

 Descending, she wrote yet another letter to him—a proud pan of love
triumphant. Then suddenly she flung herself, face downward, arms
outstretched, across the table in a passion of irrepressible tears.
She lay thus a long time, until the heaving of her body ceased and she
slept, her cheek upon the letter.

 The morning was yet young when she despatched the dog once more upon
his mission to her lover. Save for an occasional shot, the opposing
trenches were quiet. Stretcher parties were at work in the valley.
Waited upon by the ancient Marie—eloquent in her protestations of
terror during the night—she breakfasted, counting the minutes until
the return of her messenger. Roland arrived, pleased with himself, as his energetic tail testified. Once more with swelling breast and
radiant face she read her lover's letter, passionate as the first. In a
postscript, it begged her to give no information that might imperil her.

 During the day the battle woke again between the trenches at the head
of the ravine, continued in fierce spasms hour after hour. In the
afternoon she wrote another letter, despatched it and received an
answer. She was strangely, exaltedly happy. He was holding firm.
No one came to the chteau. At night she again posted herself at the
window to watch the flashes from his trenches.

 The third day dawned. She wrote, assuring him of her safety—of much
else. The reply duly arrived. A false peace brooded over the little
valley. Ceding to an impulse, she went out, tried to get a clearer view
of his position, to see—she would not admit to herself her absurd
hope. Then, regretting her imprudence, she returned hurriedly.

 The grey of afternoon already filled the valley when a loud, imperative
knocking upon the great door re-echoed through the house. The countess
stood as if turned to stone; her heart seemed to stop. So soon! The
threat to her exalted, impassioned life of the past days paralysed her.
She could with difficulty cry to Marie to admit.

 A German officer entered, a group of soldiers behind him. He saluted
with stiff ceremony.

 "Madame, I regret you must leave this house at once!" His French was
painfully correct.

 She faced him, tense.

 "And if I refuse?"

  "Then, madame, you leave me no alternative but to arrest you as a
suspect."

 She cried an inarticulate protest. The dog, hitherto standing by her
side as though straining at a leash, sprang forward with an angry growl.

 The German regarded the menace coolly, without moving a muscle.

 "Schnes Tier!" he murmured. Then, turning to his men, he ordered:
"Secure it, one of you!"

 Thunderously growling, with a puzzled look at his mistress standing
like a statue, the dog suffered a cord to be slipped through its
collar. The blood surged into the countess's face.

 "Monsieur——!" The sense of outrage choked her.

 "Madame," he interrupted calmly, "I need scarcely remind you that time
presses. You will not, I am sure, constrain us to violence."

 She met his eyes, was confronted with inexorable necessity. Her hands
twitched.

 "You will at least allow me a little time to collect a few clothes and
valuables?"

 "A little time, madame."

 She ran from the room, hearing as a last sound the dog choking as it
struggled on the leash. In the hall was Marie, haggard, her old body
shaking with excitement. She clutched at her mistress's arm.

 "Madame! what is happening?" She lapsed into patois under the stress.

 The countess replied also, without noticing it, in the language of her
childhood.

 "I am arrested. They are letting me fetch some clothes."

  The servant suppressed a cry. "Madame!" The old hands trembled upon
her. "The colonel!—a note to him—he will come—give it to me!"

 "But Marie——" They looked deep down into each other's soul. With a
sudden movement of decision the countess ran into an adjoining room,
scribbled " They are taking me. P. " on a piece of paper, thrust it
into the old woman's hand. "You are sure, Marie?" she asked wildly,
seeking condonation for herself.

 "Chre dame!" was the brief, eloquent reply. The old woman disappeared.

 The countess ran upstairs to her bedroom, the one word
"Delay!—delay!—delay!—delay!" beating in her brain.

 Down in the salon the officer gave a few curt commands to his men,
ordered the dog to be taken into the yard. Left alone, he strolled
round the room examining the pictures, the bibelots, opening the
drawers of the secretaire. The minutes passed. The house was in deep
silence. He began to get impatient, to wonder if some trick——. But he
was sure of the vigilance of his men. A quarter of an hour had elapsed
when he heard a sharp little burst of fire from the German trenches
above. It was not answered. The valley resumed its unwonted quiet.
Exasperated at the delay he began to pace up and down the room, looked
at his watch, gave his prisoner yet another five minutes.

 Suddenly his eye was caught by a little piece of folded paper on the
floor under the piano. He picked it up, opened it. It was a letter that
had evidently fallen from the countess's dress when she ran from the
room. He read it through, a gleam in his eyes. "So! meine Grfin!" he
murmured, and smiled.

 The colonel's passionate outpouring awoke no sympathetic thrill of
romance in his breast. The tip of a pink tongue protruding under
his fair moustache, his clever blue eyes alight, he turned it over,
pondering the signature. From many indications he deduced that the
writer was in the trenches on the other side of the ravine, was of
commanding rank. Even as he considered it there was a knock at the door.

 "Herein!" A German soldier entered and saluted. He brought a message
from the trenches above. It explained the little burst of fire, warned
him. The officer stood for a moment in thought, then his face lit up
with a malicious pleasure. The clever blue eyes saw a sequence of
events—the messenger from the countess, whose sudden scramble over the
opposing parapet had drawn the German fire, imploring rescue of the
distressed; a French commander, intoxicated with love for a beautiful
woman, catching fire at the news, issuing wild orders, seeing only his
mistress in imminent danger; a reckless avalanche of French soldiery
sweeping down the sides of the ravine in a blind quixotic chivalry. He
saw——"Famos!" he ejaculated, and laughed softly to himself. He wrote
out an answering message, a long one, and handed it to the orderly.

 When the countess returned to the room, garbed for departure, she found
him seated at the piano, playing gently with a sentimental touch. He
rose at her entrance, performed a polite bow.

  "Madame, you appear to have a very interesting house," he said in his
stiff French; "would you do me the honour of escorting me over it?"

 The countess stared at him, dumbfounded. Were her prayers miraculously
answered? Delay!—delay!—delay!

 "If you wish, monsieur," she answered in a calm, controlled voice.
Following the twin thought in her brain, her eyes searched the carpet.

 He noticed the glance, drew the letter from his pocket.

 "I think you dropped this, madame," he said, handing it to her.

 She took it from him. Had he read it? The blonde face that met her
questioning gaze was impassive under its smiling courtesy.

 For an instant they confronted each other. With a cynical sense of
superiority, pleasant to himself, he read her delight at his unexpected
request, carefully though she tried to disguise it, read her quickly
banished doubt that he had penetrated her scheme, was counter-plotting.
He could almost phrase her thankful prayer to God—begging for a
continuance of the miracle—that the barbarian had thus delivered
himself into the strong hands of her lover. He would surely come! Both
as they stood thus silent were calculating the necessary minutes—but
his calculation was a double one. With the politest of bows, he opened
the door for her.

 Together they went through salon after salon, candlelit since he
refused to have the shutters opened. In contrast with his previous
manner, he displayed not the least haste. Leisurely he lingered over
each piece, discussed it, appraised it with real connoisseurship
as though he were merely a cultured guest. She loitered willingly,
her brain on fire, every sense at strain. The precious moments were
accumulating. She found new treasures for his admiration, racked her
memory for rare objects that might hold him yet a little longer. He
handled them, was enthusiastic, with calm audacity regretted this
terrible war which imperilled so many beautiful things. Not once did
he depart from his attitude of studied politeness. And while he spoke
she was listening—listening—for the sudden shout, the quick close
detonations, which should announce her deliverance.

 At any moment now! She glanced for the barbarian's weapon, her heart
praying for his safety. Out there beyond the shuttered windows he was
coming in might at the head of his men. She seemed to see him—running
towards her, past the Cupid-crowned fountain. She exulted in the crass
absence of suspicion in the hatefully calm enemy at her side.

 Out there in the twilight the precincts of the chteau were being
lined with grey-clad soldiers, settling themselves in hidden firing
positions. The officer saw them, with experienced second-sight. He
smiled, blandly. His prisoner loitered, desperately prolonging his
happy preoccupation.

 When they returned to the salon it was to find another German officer
waiting. Unseen by her, they exchanged a significant look.

 There was a sharp, hissing, ugly rush in the air and a loud crash in
the courtyard.

   By a fortunate chance the colonel was near when the panting Marie
scrambled over the parapet to the accompaniment of a dozen rifle
bullets. On the point of collapse, the old woman sank into his arms,
stammered confused unintelligible words, gave him the scrap of paper.
Consigning her to the care of an orderly, he read the message, then
raised his head, his fingers crushing the paper. He stood motionless,
in intense thought. Slowly his eyes turned, fell upon the old woman
shaking more with fright from the narrowly escaped bullets than from
her exertions. Then his gaze lifted, fixed itself with frowning
concentration upon the clay wall of the trench. He saw only with an
inner vision. Around him no one spoke. His jaw set hard.

 He raised himself upon the fire-step, gazed over the parapet through
his glasses. The opposing lip of the ravine, bare of undergrowth
a few yards from the top, lay silent, seemingly deserted. He
called up an officer, handed him his glasses, indicated a point,
ordered an unceasing watch upon it. Then he sent orderlies for his
chefs-de-bataillon and the artillery observation officer in all haste.

 They came. The battalion commanders received definite instructions and
departed. The artillery officer remained with him. The ancient Marie
sat upon the fire-step of the trench, trembling but recovering. She
watched the saviour of her mistress with fascinated eyes.

 The trench began to fill with soldiers. They crouched in their firing
positions, their heads kept carefully below the parapet. Here and
there little groups were busy about the machine-guns, fitted the long
comb-like strips of cartridges, huddled ready to hoist the weapon into
action. The watching officer called, without moving his head.

 "Infantry are slipping into the ravine, mon colonel!"

 The colonel, stern, impassive, ordered him to report when the movement
ceased.

 The long trench filled with crouching riflemen lay in a hush of intense
expectancy. There was scarce a movement save the quick, involuntary
jerks of nerves at strain. The old woman's eyes began to wander,
puzzled, seeking comprehension. The wild rush forward she had imagined,
would it never come? She waited, breathless, for the inspiring command
of the colonel that should wake the tumultuous Hurrah! The watching
officer reported:

 "Movement has ceased, mon colonel. About two hundred men."

 The colonel drew his watch from his pocket, glanced at the dial. Beyond
that he made no movement. The old woman's eyes were fixed upon him.
Suddenly she noticed that he wore neither sword nor revolver. In a
flash she understood. She sprang up like a madwoman, crying at the top
of her voice.

 "Soldiers! To the rescue! The Boches are taking away my mistress!
Now! Save her! Your colonel—her lover—abandons her! Abandons her! Cowards! Cowards! Do you want an old woman to show you the way?"

 She leaped in a frenzy upon the fire-step, tearing aside the soldiers
to make way for her with cat-like hands. There was a stir along the
trench. The soldiers knew her, knew her mistress, their generous
hostess. There was a murmur. The colonel stood like a statue carved in
stone. His face was that of an ascetic at the supreme moment. In his
eyes was the glow of a mystic who beholds a vision.

 He turned to the old woman.

 "Be quiet!" he commanded. His eyes rather than his voice quelled her.
She sank in a passion of hysterical weeping to the floor of the trench.
He glanced at his watch again, replaced it, waited. Age-long minutes
passed. He turned to the artillery officer.

 "Now!" he said. "But be careful! As near to the chteau as possible
without touching it."

 The officer shouted an order to the waiting telephonist. Overhead there
was the rush of a shell, from far behind the sharp crack of a gun.
Leisurely—one—two—three—four—the battery fired. The observation
officer looked over the parapet. The colonel mounted by his side,
watched also.

 One—two—three—four—the battery fired again, repeated itself once
more. Down there among the trees was a faint drifting smoke.

 The colonel counted the minutes as the well-placed shells dropped
around the chteau of his dreams. He saw, where none other saw, the
sudden alarm below; the prisoner hurriedly evacuated from her home,
dragged scrambling up through the dark trees into safety on the other
side. One—two—three—four. She should be out of harm's way.

  He turned his face to the trench, shouted an order. As he turned his
gaze again swiftly towards the enemy he had a glimpse of something
upon the bare lip of the ravine—something white, quickly moving. He
had miscalculated! In a sudden agony, he shrieked rather than shouted
a countermanding order. Too late! His voice was drowned in one long
smashing detonation of a thousand rifles in an irregular volley
from the trench. From the battery behind came the rapid, multiplied
hammer-slams of the guns firing at their maximum speed.

 He had a ghostly vision of an anguished woman's face, denying love.

 The ravine was lashed by a tornado of shell and bullets. Caught in its
depths, unseen yet precisely imagined from above, men were clambering
in an agony of desperation to escape from the death that crashed
unceasingly overhead and hailed about them. The white shrapnel puffs
were countless against the dark background of the trees.

 For a quarter of an hour the fierce fire continued, was answered in
bitter anger from the opposing trenches. Then on both sides it died
away. The dead in the valley lay in quiet.

 The colonel, his face rigid, turned to walk along the trench. Suddenly
a dog trailing a cord leaped over the parapet, dashed at him in a
frenzy of joy. Then, perceiving the old woman, it jumped at her, nosed
around her with vigorously wagging tail.

 The old woman shrieked. The colonel looked. There was blood upon the
dog's coat. The old woman drew herself up, held the colonel's eyes.
" Mur derer! " she cried with the intensity of a curse, and fainted.

 The colonel strode on.

  On a bitter day in December, three months later, the colonel returned
from his morning tour of the trenches for which he was responsible.
They were trenches in another landscape, far from those whose memory
lay like a sear across his soul. At the entrance to the sandbagged,
wrecked farmhouse which served him as a home the soldier- courrier was in the act of extracting letters from his wallet. The colonel took
the bundle destined for him. At the sight of the topmost envelope he
stopped as though he had seen a ghost. With trembling fingers he tore
it open, read:

 "My hero! I understood! I understood! Oh, didn't you know I
understood? How grand you are—more than a man! All these weary months
of imprisonment, trial, release and travel, I have been hungering to
tell you this. Home once more, France is more than ever France to me
since you ennobled me in sacrifice. Beloved!—--"

 The colonel hurried into his quarters to read the letter in solitude.
None might see his face.