NAMGAY DOOLA

 ONCE upon a time there was a king who lived on the road to Thibet, very
      many miles in the Himalaya Mountains. His kingdom was 11,000 feet above
      the sea, and exactly four miles square, but most of the miles stood on
      end, owing to the nature of the country. His revenues were rather less
      than 400 pounds yearly, and they were expended on the maintenance of one
      elephant and a standing army of five men. He was tributary to the Indian
      government, who allowed him certain sums for keeping a section of the
      Himalaya-Thibet road in repair. He further increased his revenues by
      selling timber to the railway companies, for he would cut the great deodar
      trees in his own forest and they fell thundering into the Sutlej River and
      were swept down to the Plains, 300 miles away, and became railway ties.
      Now and again this king, whose name does not matter, would mount a
      ring-streaked horse and ride scores of miles to Simlatown to confer with
      the lieutenant-governor on matters of state, or assure the viceroy that
      his sword was at the service of the queen-empress. Then the viceroy would
      cause a ruffle of drums to be sounded and the ring-streaked horse and the
      cavalry of the state—two men in tatters—and the herald who
      bore the Silver Stick before the king would trot back to their own place,
      which was between the tail of a heaven-climbing glacier and a dark birch
      forest.

 Now, from such a king, always remembering that he possessed one veritable
      elephant and could count his descent for 1,200 years, I expected, when it
      was my fate to wander through his dominions, no more than mere license to
      live.

 The night had closed in rain, and rolling clouds blotted out the lights of
      the villages in the valley. Forty miles away, untouched by cloud or storm,
      the white shoulder of Dongo Pa—the Mountain of the Council of the
      Gods—upheld the evening star. The monkeys sung sorrowfully to each
      other as they hunted for dry roots in the fern-draped trees, and the last
      puff of the day-wind brought from the unseen villages the scent of damp
      wood smoke, hot cakes, dripping undergrowth, and rotting pine-cones. That
      smell is the true smell of the Himalayas, and if it once gets into the
      blood of a man he will, at the last, forgetting everything else, return to
      the Hills to die. The clouds closed and the smell went away, and there
      remained nothing in all the world except chilling white mists and the boom
      of the Sutlej River.

 A fat-tailed sheep, who did not want to die, bleated lamentably at my
      tent-door. He was scuffling with the prime minister and the
      director-general of public education, and he was a royal gift to me and my
      camp servants. I expressed my thanks suitably and inquired if I might have
      audience of the king. The prime minister readjusted his turban—it
      had fallen off in the struggle—and assured me that the king would be
      very pleased to see me. Therefore I dispatched two bottles as a foretaste,
      and when the sheep had entered upon another incarnation, climbed up to the
      king's palace through the wet. He had sent his army to escort me, but it
      stayed to talk with my cook. Soldiers are very much alike all the world
      over.

 The palace was a four-roomed, white-washed mud-and-timber house, the
      finest in all the Hills for a day's journey. The king was dressed in a
      purple velvet jacket, white muslin trousers, and a saffron-yellow turban
      of price. He gave me audience in a little carpeted room opening off the
      palace courtyard, which was occupied by the elephant of state. The great
      beast was sheeted and anchored from trunk to tail, and the curve of his
      back stood out against the sky line.

 The prime minister and the director-general of public instruction were
      present to introduce me; but all the court had been dismissed lest the two
      bottles aforesaid should corrupt their morals. The king cast a wreath of
      heavy, scented flowers round my neck as I bowed, and inquired how my
      honored presence had the felicity to be. I said that through seeing his
      auspicious countenance the mists of the night had turned into sunshine,
      and that by reason of his beneficent sheep his good deeds would be
      remembered by the gods. He said that since I had set my magnificent foot
      in his kingdom the crops would probably yield seventy per cent more than
      the average. I said that the fame of the king had reached to the four
      corners of the earth, and that the nations gnashed their teeth when they
      heard daily of the glory of his realm and the wisdom of his moon-like
      prime minister and lotus-eyed director-general of public education.

 Then we sat down on clean white cushions, and I was at the king's right
      hand. Three minutes later he was telling me that the condition of the
      maize crop was something disgraceful, and that the railway companies would
      not pay him enough for his timber. The talk shifted to and fro with the
      bottles. We discussed very many quaint things, and the king became
      confidential on the subject of government generally. Most of all he dwelt
      on the shortcomings of one of his subjects, who, from what I could gather,
      had been paralyzing the executive.

 “In the old days,” said the king, “I could have ordered the elephant
      yonder to trample him to death. Now I must e'en send him seventy miles
      across the hills to be tried, and his keep for that time would be upon the
      state. And the elephant eats everything.”

 “What be the man's crimes, Rajah Sahib?” said I.

 “Firstly, he is an 'outlander,' and no man of mine own people. Secondly,
      since of my favor I gave him land upon his coming, he refuses to pay
      revenue. Am I not the lord of the earth, above and below—entitled by
      right and custom to one-eighth of the crop? Yet this devil, establishing
      himself, refuses to pay a single tax... and he brings a poisonous spawn of
      babes.”

 “Cast him into jail,” I said.

 “Sahib,” the king answered, shifting a little on the cushions, “once and
      only once in these forty years sickness came upon me so that I was not
      able to go abroad. In that hour I made a vow to my God that I would never
      again cut man or woman from the light of the sun and the air of God, for I
      perceived the nature of the punishment. How can I break my vow? Were it
      only the lopping off of a hand or a foot, I should not delay. But even
      that is impossible now that the English have rule. One or another of my
      people”—he looked obliquely at the director-general of public
      education—“would at once write a letter to the viceroy, and perhaps
      I should be deprived of that ruffle of drums.”

 He unscrewed the mouthpiece of his silver water-pipe, fitted a plain amber
      one, and passed the pipe to me. “Not content with refusing revenue,” he
      continued, “this outlander refuses also to beegar” (this is the corvee or
      forced labor on the roads), “and stirs my people up to the like treason.
      Yet he is, if so he wills, an expert log-snatcher. There is none better or
      bolder among my people to clear a block of the river when the logs stick
      fast.”

 “But he worships strange gods,” said the prime minister, deferentially.

 “For that I have no concern,” said the king, who was as tolerant as Akbar
      in matters of belief. “To each man his own god, and the fire or Mother
      Earth for us all at the last. It is the rebellion that offends me.”

 “The king has an army,” I suggested. “Has not the king burned the man's
      house, and left him naked to the night dews?”

 “Nay. A hut is a hut, and it holds the life of a man. But once I sent my
      army against him when his excuses became wearisome. Of their heads he
      brake three across the top with a stick. The other two men ran away. Also
      the guns would not shoot.”

 I had seen the equipment of the infantry. One-third of it was an old
      muzzle-loading fowling-piece with ragged rust holes where the nipples
      should have been; one-third a wirebound matchlock with a worm-eaten stock,
      and one-third a four-bore flint duck-gun, without a flint.

 “But it is to be remembered,” said the king, reaching out for the bottle,
      “that he is a very expert log-snatcher and a man of a merry face. What
      shall I do to him, sahib?”

 This was interesting. The timid hill-folk would as soon have refused taxes
      to their king as offerings to their gods. The rebel must be a man of
      character.

 “If it be the king's permission,” I said, “I will not strike my tents till
      the third day, and I will see this man. The mercy of the king is godlike,
      and rebellion is like unto the sin of witchcraft. Moreover, both the
      bottles, and another, be empty.”

 “You have my leave to go,” said the king.

 Next morning the crier went through the stare proclaiming that there was a
      log-jam on the river and that it behooved all loyal subjects to clear it.
      The people poured down from their villages to the moist, warm valley of
      poppy fields, and the king and I went with them.

 Hundreds of dressed deodar logs had caught on a snag of rock, and the
      river was bringing down more logs every minute to complete the blockade.
      The water snarled and wrenched and worried at the timber, while the
      population of the state prodded at the nearest logs with poles, in the
      hope of easing the pressure. Then there went up a shout of “Namgay Doola!
      Namgay Doola!” and a large, red-haired villager hurried up, stripping off
      his clothes as he ran.

 “That he is. That is the rebel!” said the king. “Now will the dam be
      cleared.”

 “But why has he red hair?” I asked, since red hair among hill-folk is as
      uncommon as blue or green.

 “He is an outlander,” said the king. “Well done! Oh, well done!”

 Namgay Doola had scrambled on the jam and was clawing out the butt of a
      log with a rude sort of a boat-hook. It slid forward slowly, as an
      alligator moves, and three or four others followed it. The green water
      spouted through the gaps. Then the villagers howled and shouted and leaped
      among the logs, pulling and pushing the obstinate timber, and the red head
      of Namgay Doola was chief among them all. The logs swayed and chafed and
      groaned as fresh consignments from up-stream battered the now weakening
      dam. It gave way at last in a smother of foam, racing butts, bobbing black
      heads, and a confusion indescribable, as the river tossed everything
      before it. I saw the red head go down with the last remnants of the jam
      and disappear between the great grinding tree trunks. It rose close to the
      hank, and blowing like a grampus, Namgay Doola wiped the water out of his
      eyes and made obeisance to the king.

 I had time to observe the man closely. The virulent redness of his shock
      head and beard was most startling, and in the thicket of hair twinkled
      above high cheek-bones two very merry blue eyes. He was indeed an
      outlander, but yet a Thibetan in language, habit and attire. He spoke the
      Lepcha dialect with an indescribable softening of the gutturals. It was
      not so much a lisp as an accent.

 “Whence comest thou?” I asked, wondering.

 “From Thibet.” He pointed across the hills and grinned. That grin went
      straight to my heart. Mechanically I held out my hand and Namgay Doola
      took it. No pure Thibetan would have understood the meaning of the
      gesture. He went away to look for his clothes, and as he climbed back to
      his village, I heard a joyous yell that seemed unaccountably familiar. It
      was the whooping of Namgay Doola.

 “You see now,” said the king, “why I would not kill him. He is a bold man
      among my logs, but,” and he shook his head like a schoolmaster, “I know
      that before long there will be complaints of him in the court. Let us
      return to the palace and do justice.”

 It was that king's custom to judge his subjects every day between eleven
      and three o'clock. I heard him do justice equitably on weighty matters of
      trespass, slander, and a little wife-stealing. Then his brow clouded and
      he summoned me.

 “Again it is Namgay Doola,” he said, despairingly. “Not content with
      refusing revenue on his own part, he has bound half his village by an oath
      to the like treason. Never before has such a thing befallen me! Nor are my
      taxes heavy.”

 A rabbit-faced villager, with a blush-rose stuck behind his ear, advanced
      trembling. He had been in Namgay Doola's conspiracy, but had told
      everything and hoped for the king's favor.

 “Oh, king!” said I, “if it be the king's will, let this matter stand over
      till the morning. Only the gods can do right in a hurry, and it may be
      that yonder villager has lied.”

 “Nay, for I know the nature of Namgay Doola; but since a guest asks, let
      the matter remain. Wilt thou, for my sake, speak harshly to this
      red-headed outlander? He may listen to thee.”

 I made an attempt that very evening, but for the life of me I could not
      keep my countenance. Namgay Doola grinned so persuasively and began to
      tell me about a big brown bear in a poppy field by the river. Would I care
      to shoot that bear? I spoke austerely on the sin of detected conspiracy
      and the certainty of punishment. Namgay Doola's face clouded for a moment.
      Shortly afterward he withdrew from my tent, and I heard him singing softly
      among the pines. The words were unintelligible to me, but the tune, like
      his liquid, insinuating speech, seemed the ghost of something strangely
      familiar.

 “Dir hane mard-i-yemen dir To weeree ala gee,” crooned Namgay Doola again
      and again, and I racked my brain for that lost tune. It was not till after
      dinner that I discovered some one had cut a square foot of velvet from the
      centre of my best camera-cloth. This made me so angry that I wandered down
      the valley in the hope of meeting the big brown bear. I could hear him
      grunting like a discontented pig in the poppy field as I waited shoulder
      deep in the dew-dripping Indian corn to catch him after his meal. The moon
      was at full and drew out the scent of the tasseled crop. Then I heard the
      anguished bellow of a Himalayan cow—one of the little black crummies
      no bigger than Newfoundland dogs. Two shadows that looked like a bear and
      her cub hurried past me. I was in the act of firing when I saw that each
      bore a brilliant red head. The lesser animal was trailing something
      rope-like that left a dark track on the path. They were within six feet of
      me, and the shadow of the moonlight lay velvet-black on their faces.
      Velvet-black was exactly the word, for by all the powers of moonlight they
      were masked in the velvet of my camera-cloth. I marveled, and went to bed.

 Next morning the kingdom was in an uproar. Namgay Doola, men said, had
      gone forth in the night and with a sharp knife had cut off the tail of a
      cow belonging to the rabbit-faced villager who had betrayed him. It was
      sacrilege unspeakable against the holy cow. The state desired his blood,
      but he had retreated into his hut, barricaded the doors and windows with
      big stones, and defied the world.

 The king and I and the populace approached the hut cautiously. There was
      no hope of capturing our man without loss of life, for from a hole in the
      wall projected the muzzle of an extremely well-cared-for gun—the
      only gun in the state that could shoot. Namgay Doola had narrowly missed a
      villager just before we came up.

 The standing army stood.

 It could do no more, for when it advanced pieces of sharp shale flew from
      the windows. To these were added from time to time showers of scalding
      water. We saw red beads bobbing up and down within. The family of Namgay
      Doola were aiding their sire. Blood-curdling yells of defiance were the
      only answer to our prayers.

 “Never,” said the king, puffing, “has such a thing befallen my state. Next
      year I will certainly buy a little cannon.” He looked at me imploringly.

 “Is there any priest in the kingdom to whom he will listen?” said I, for a
      light was beginning to break upon me.

 “He worships his own god,” said the prime minister. “We can but starve him
      out.”

 “Let the white man approach,” said Namgay Doola from within. “All others I
      will kill. Send me the white man.”

 The door was thrown open and I entered the smoky interior of a Thibetan
      hut crammed with children. And every child had flaming red hair. A
      freshgathered cow's tail lay on the floor, and by its side two pieces of
      black velvet—my black velvet—rudely hacked into the semblance
      of masks.

 “And what is this shame, Namgay Doola?” I asked.

 He grinned more charmingly than ever. “There is no shame,” said he. “I did
      but cut off the tail of that man's cow. He betrayed me. I was minded to
      shoot him, sahib, but not to death. Indeed, not to death; only in the
      legs.”

 “And why at all, since it is the custom to pay revenue to the king? Why at
      all?”

 “By the god of my father, I cannot tell,” said Namgay Doola.

 “And who was thy father?”

 “The same that had this gun.” He showed me his weapon, a Tower musket,
      bearing date 1832 and the stamp of the Honorable East India Company.

 “And thy father's name?” said I.

 He obeyed, and I understood whence the puzzling accent in his speech came.
      “Thimla Dhula!” said he, excitedly. “To this hour I worship his god.”

 “May I see that god?”

 “In a little while—at twilight time.”

 “Rememberest thou aught of thy father's speech?”

 “It is long ago. But there was one word which he said often. Thus,
      ''Shun!' Then I and my brethren stood upon our feet, our hands to our
      sides, thus.”

 “Even so. And what was thy mother?”

 “A woman of the Hills. We be Lepchas of Darjiling, but me they call an
      outlander because my hair is as thou seest.”

 The Thibetan woman, his wife, touched him on the arm gently. The long
      parley outside the fort had lasted far into the day. It was now close upon
      twilight—the hour of the Angelus. Very solemnly the red-headed brats
      rose from the floor and formed a semicircle. Namgay Doola laid his gun
      aside, lighted a little oil-lamp, and set it before a recess in the wall.
      Pulling back a wisp of dirty cloth, he revealed a worn brass crucifix
      leaning against the helmet badge of a long-forgotten East India Company's
      regiment. “Thus did my father,” he said, crossing himself clumsily. The
      wife and children followed suit. Then, all together, they struck up the
      wailing cham that I heard on the hillside:

 “Dir bane mard-i-yemen dir To weeree ala gee.”

 I was puzzled no longer. Again and again they sung, as if their hearts
      would break, their version of the chorus of “The Wearing of the Green”:

 “They're hanging men and women, too,
     For the wearing of the green,”

 A diabolical inspiration came to me. One of the brats, a boy about eight
      years old—could he have been in the fields last night?—was
      watching me as he sung. I pulled out a rupee, held the coin between finger
      and thumb, and looked—only looked—at the gun leaning against
      the wall. A grin of brilliant and perfect comprehension overspread his
      porringer-like face. Never for an instant stopping the song, he held out
      his hand for the money, and then slid the gun to my hand. I might have
      shot Namgay Doola dead as he chanted, but I was satisfied. The inevitable
      blood-instinct held true. Namgay Doola drew the curtain across the recess.
      Angelus was over.

 “Thus my father sung. There was much more, but I have forgotten, and I do
      not know the purport of even these words, but it may be that the god will
      understand. I am not of this people, and I will not pay revenue.”

 “And why?”

 Again that soul-compelling grin. “What occupation would be to me between
      crop and crop? It is better than scaring bears. But these people do not
      understand.”

 He picked the masks off the floor and looked in my face as simply as a
      child.

 “By what road didst thou attain knowledge to make those deviltries?” I
      said, pointing.

 “I cannot tell. I am but a Lepcha of Darjiling, and yet the stuff”—

 “Which thou hast stolen,” said I.

 “Nay, surely. Did I steal? I desired it so. The stuff—the stuff.
      What else should I have done with the stuff?” He twisted the velvet
      between his fingers.

 “But the sin of maiming the cow—consider that.”

 “Oh, sahib, the man betrayed me; the heifer's tail waved in the moonlight,
      and I had my knife. What else should I have done? The tail came off ere I
      was aware. Sahib, thou knowest more than I.”

 “That is true,” said I. “Stay within the door. I go to speak to the king.”
       The population of the state were ranged on the hillside. I went forth and
      spoke.

 “O king,” said I, “touching this man, there be two courses open to thy
      wisdom. Thou canst either hang him from a tree—him and his brood—till
      there remains no hair that is red within thy land.”

 “Nay,” said the king. “Why should I hurt the little children?”

 They had poured out of the hut and were making plump obeisances to
      everybody. Namgay Doola waited at the door with his gun across his arm.

 “Or thou canst, discarding their impiety of the cow-maiming, raise him to
      honor in thy army. He comes of a race that will not pay revenue. A red
      flame is in his blood which comes out at the top of his head in that
      glowing hair. Make him chief of thy army. Give him honor as may befall and
      full allowance of work, but look to it, oh, king, that neither he nor his
      hold a foot of earth from thee henceforward. Feed him with words and
      favor, and also liquor from certain bottles that thou knowest of, and he
      will be a bulwark of defense. But deny him even a tuftlet of grass for his
      own. This is the nature that God has given him. Moreover, he has brethren”—

 The state groaned unanimously.

 “But if his brethren come they will surely fight with each other till they
      die; or else the one will always give information concerning the other.
      Shall he be of thy army, oh, king? Choose!”

 The king bowed his head, and I said:

 “Come forth, Namgay Doola, and command the king's army. Thy name shall no
      more be Namgay in the mouths of men, but Patsay Doola, for, as thou hast
      truly said, I know.”

 Then Namgay Doola, never christened Patsay Doola, son of Timlay Doola—which
      is Tim Doolan—clasped the king's feet, cuffed the standing army, and
      hurried in an agony of contrition from temple to temple making offerings
      for the sin of the cattle—maiming.

 And the king was so pleased with my perspicacity that he offered to sell
      me a village for 20 pounds sterling. But I buy no village in the Himalayas
      so long as one red head flares between the tail of the heaven-climbing
      glacier and the dark birch forest.

 I know that breed.