NEIGHBOURS

  P

YOTR MIHALITCH
      IVASHIN was very much out of humour: his sister, a young girl, had gone
      away to live with Vlassitch, a married man. To shake off the despondency
      and depression which pursued him at home and in the fields, he called to
      his aid his sense of justice, his genuine and noble ideas—he had
      always defended free-love! —but this was of no avail, and he always
      came back to the same conclusion as their foolish old nurse, that his
      sister had acted wrongly and that Vlassitch had abducted his sister. And
      that was distressing.

 His mother did not leave her room all day long; the old nurse kept sighing
      and speaking in whispers; his aunt had been on the point of taking her
      departure every day, and her trunks were continually being brought down to
      the hall and carried up again to her room. In the house, in the yard, and
      in the garden it was as still as though there were some one dead in the
      house. His aunt, the servants, and even the peasants, so it seemed to
      Pyotr Mihalitch, looked at him enigmatically and with perplexity, as
      though they wanted to say “Your sister has been seduced; why are you
      doing nothing?” And he reproached himself for inactivity, though he
      did not know precisely what action he ought to have taken.

 So passed six days. On the seventh—it was Sunday afternoon—a
      messenger on horseback brought a letter. The address was in a familiar
      feminine handwriting: “Her Excy. Anna Nikolaevna Ivashin.”
      Pyotr Mihalitch fancied that there was something defiant, provocative, in
      the handwriting and in the abbreviation “Excy.” And advanced
      ideas in women are obstinate, ruthless, cruel.

 “She’d rather die than make any concession to her unhappy
      mother, or beg her forgiveness,” thought Pyotr Mihalitch, as he went
      to his mother with the letter.

 His mother was lying on her bed, dressed. Seeing her son, she rose
      impulsively, and straightening her grey hair, which had fallen from under
      her cap, asked quickly:

 “What is it? What is it?”

 “This has come . . .” said her son, giving her the letter.

 Zina’s name, and even the pronoun “she” was not uttered
      in the house. Zina was spoken of impersonally: “this has come,”
      “Gone away,” and so on. . . . The mother recognised her
      daughter’s handwriting, and her face grew ugly and unpleasant, and
      her grey hair escaped again from her cap.

 “No!” she said, with a motion of her hands, as though the
      letter scorched her fingers. “No, no, never! Nothing would induce
      me!”

 The mother broke into hysterical sobs of grief and shame; she evidently
      longed to read the letter, but her pride prevented her. Pyotr Mihalitch
      realised that he ought to open the letter himself and read it aloud, but
      he was overcome by anger such as he had never felt before; he ran out into
      the yard and shouted to the messenger:

 “Say there will be no answer! There will be no answer! Tell them
      that, you beast!”

 And he tore up the letter; then tears came into his eyes, and feeling that
      he was cruel, miserable, and to blame, he went out into the fields.

 He was only twenty-seven, but he was already stout. He dressed like an old
      man in loose, roomy clothes, and suffered from asthma. He already seemed
      to be developing the characteristics of an elderly country bachelor. He
      never fell in love, never thought of marriage, and loved no one but his
      mother, his sister, his old nurse, and the gardener, Vassilitch. He was
      fond of good fare, of his nap after dinner, and of talking about politics
      and exalted subjects. He had in his day taken his degree at the
      university, but he now looked upon his studies as though in them he had
      discharged a duty incumbent upon young men between the ages of eighteen
      and twenty-five; at any rate, the ideas which now strayed every day
      through his mind had nothing in common with the university or the subjects
      he had studied there.

 In the fields it was hot and still, as though rain were coming. It was
      steaming in the wood, and there was a heavy fragrant scent from the pines
      and rotting leaves. Pyotr Mihalitch stopped several times and wiped his
      wet brow. He looked at his winter corn and his spring oats, walked round
      the clover-field, and twice drove away a partridge with its chicks which
      had strayed in from the wood. And all the while he was thinking that this
      insufferable state of things could not go on for ever, and that he must
      end it one way or another. End it stupidly, madly, but he must end it.

 “But how? What can I do?” he asked himself, and looked
      imploringly at the sky and at the trees, as though begging for their help.

 But the sky and the trees were mute. His noble ideas were no help, and his
      common sense whispered that the agonising question could have no solution
      but a stupid one, and that to-day’s scene with the messenger was not
      the last one of its kind. It was terrible to think what was in store for
      him!

 As he returned home the sun was setting. By now it seemed to him that the
      problem was incapable of solution. He could not accept the accomplished
      fact, and he could not refuse to accept it, and there was no intermediate
      course. When, taking off his hat and fanning himself with his
      handkerchief, he was walking along the road, and had only another mile and
      a half to go before he would reach home, he heard bells behind him. It was
      a very choice and successful combination of bells, which gave a clear
      crystal note. No one had such bells on his horses but the police captain,
      Medovsky, formerly an officer in the hussars, a man in broken-down health,
      who had been a great rake and spendthrift, and was a distant relation of
      Pyotr Mihalitch. He was like one of the family at the Ivashins’ and
      had a tender, fatherly affection for Zina, as well as a great admiration
      for her.

 “I was coming to see you,” he said, overtaking Pyotr
      Mihalitch. “Get in; I’ll give you a lift.”

 He was smiling and looked cheerful. Evidently he did not yet know that
      Zina had gone to live with Vlassitch; perhaps he had been told of it
      already, but did not believe it. Pyotr Mihalitch felt in a difficult
      position.

 “You are very welcome,” he muttered, blushing till the tears
      came into his eyes, and not knowing how to lie or what to say. “I am
      delighted,” he went on, trying to smile, “but . . . Zina is
      away and mother is ill.”

 “How annoying!” said the police captain, looking pensively at
      Pyotr Mihalitch. “And I was meaning to spend the evening with you.
      Where has Zinaida Mihalovna gone?”

 “To the Sinitskys’, and I believe she meant to go from there
      to the monastery. I don’t quite know.”

 The police captain talked a little longer and then turned back. Pyotr
      Mihalitch walked home, and thought with horror what the police captain’s
      feelings would be when he learned the truth. And Pyotr Mihalitch imagined
      his feelings, and actually experiencing them himself, went into the house.

 “Lord help us,” he thought, “Lord help us!”

 At evening tea the only one at the table was his aunt. As usual, her face
      wore the expression that seemed to say that though she was a weak,
      defenceless woman, she would allow no one to insult her. Pyotr Mihalitch
      sat down at the other end of the table (he did not like his aunt) and
      began drinking tea in silence.

 “Your mother has had no dinner again to-day,” said his aunt.
      “You ought to do something about it, Petrusha. Starving oneself is
      no help in sorrow.”

 It struck Pyotr Mihalitch as absurd that his aunt should meddle in other
      people’s business and should make her departure depend on Zina’s
      having gone away. He was tempted to say something rude to her, but
      restrained himself. And as he restrained himself he felt the time had come
      for action, and that he could not bear it any longer. Either he must act
      at once or fall on the ground, and scream and bang his head upon the
      floor. He pictured Vlassitch and Zina, both of them progressive and
      self-satisfied, kissing each other somewhere under a maple tree, and all
      the anger and bitterness that had been accumulating in him for the last
      seven days fastened upon Vlassitch.

 “One has seduced and abducted my sister,” he thought, “another
      will come and murder my mother, a third will set fire to the house and
      sack the place. . . . And all this under the mask of friendship, lofty
      ideas, unhappiness!”

 “No, it shall not be!” Pyotr Mihalitch cried suddenly, and he
      brought his fist down on the table.

 He jumped up and ran out of the dining-room. In the stable the steward’s
      horse was standing ready saddled. He got on it and galloped off to
      Vlassitch.

 There was a perfect tempest within him. He felt a longing to do something
      extraordinary, startling, even if he had to repent of it all his life
      afterwards. Should he call Vlassitch a blackguard, slap him in the face,
      and then challenge him to a duel? But Vlassitch was not one of those men
      who do fight duels; being called a blackguard and slapped in the face
      would only make him more unhappy, and would make him shrink into himself
      more than ever. These unhappy, defenceless people are the most
      insufferable, the most tiresome creatures in the world. They can do
      anything with impunity. When the luckless man responds to well-deserved
      reproach by looking at you with eyes full of deep and guilty feeling, and
      with a sickly smile bends his head submissively, even justice itself could
      not lift its hand against him.

 “No matter. I’ll horsewhip him before her eyes and tell him
      what I think of him,” Pyotr Mihalitch decided.

 He was riding through his wood and waste land, and he imagined Zina would
      try to justify her conduct by talking about the rights of women and
      individual freedom, and about there being no difference between legal
      marriage and free union. Like a woman, she would argue about what she did
      not understand. And very likely at the end she would ask, “How do
      you come in? What right have you to interfere?”

 “No, I have no right,” muttered Pyotr Mihalitch. “But so
      much the better. . . . The harsher I am, the less right I have to
      interfere, the better.”

 It was sultry. Clouds of gnats hung over the ground and in the waste
      places the peewits called plaintively. Everything betokened rain, but he
      could not see a cloud in the sky. Pyotr Mihalitch crossed the boundary of
      his estate and galloped over a smooth, level field. He often went along
      this road and knew every bush, every hollow in it. What now in the far
      distance looked in the dusk like a dark cliff was a red church; he could
      picture it all down to the smallest detail, even the plaster on the gate
      and the calves that were always grazing in the church enclosure.
      Three-quarters of a mile to the right of the church there was a copse like
      a dark blur—it was Count Koltonovitch’s. And beyond the church
      Vlassitch’s estate began.

 From behind the church and the count’s copse a huge black
      storm-cloud was rising, and there were ashes of white lightning.

 “Here it is!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch. “Lord help us,
      Lord help us!”

 The horse was soon tired after its quick gallop, and Pyotr Mihalitch was
      tired too. The storm-cloud looked at him angrily and seemed to advise him
      to go home. He felt a little scared.

 “I will prove to them they are wrong,” he tried to reassure
      himself. “They will say that it is free-love, individual freedom;
      but freedom means self-control and not subjection to passion. It’s
      not liberty but license!”

 He reached the count’s big pond; it looked dark blue and frowning
      under the cloud, and a smell of damp and slime rose from it. Near the dam,
      two willows, one old and one young, drooped tenderly towards one another.
      Pyotr Mihalitch and Vlassitch had been walking near this very spot only a
      fortnight before, humming a students’ song:

 “‘Youth is wasted, life is nought, when the heart is cold and
      loveless.’”

 A wretched song!

 It was thundering as Pyotr Mihalitch rode through the copse, and the trees
      were bending and rustling in the wind. He had to make haste. It was only
      three-quarters of a mile through a meadow from the copse to Vlassitch’s
      house. Here there were old birch-trees on each side of the road. They had
      the same melancholy and unhappy air as their owner Vlassitch, and looked
      as tall and lanky as he. Big drops of rain pattered on the birches and on
      the grass; the wind had suddenly dropped, and there was a smell of wet
      earth and poplars. Before him he saw Vlassitch’s fence with a row of
      yellow acacias, which were tall and lanky too; where the fence was broken
      he could see the neglected orchard.

 Pyotr Mihalitch was not thinking now of the horsewhip or of a slap in the
      face, and did not know what he would do at Vlassitch’s. He felt
      nervous. He felt frightened on his own account and on his sister’s,
      and was terrified at the thought of seeing her. How would she behave with
      her brother? What would they both talk about? And had he not better go
      back before it was too late? As he made these reflections, he galloped up
      the avenue of lime-trees to the house, rode round the big clumps of
      lilacs, and suddenly saw Vlassitch.

 Vlassitch, wearing a cotton shirt, and top-boots, bending forward, with no
      hat on in the rain, was coming from the corner of the house to the front
      door. He was followed by a workman with a hammer and a box of nails. They
      must have been mending a shutter which had been banging in the wind.
      Seeing Pyotr Mihalitch, Vlassitch stopped.

 “It’s you!” he said, smiling. “That’s nice.”

 “Yes, I’ve come, as you see,” said Pyotr Mihalitch,
      brushing the rain off himself with both hands.

 “Well, that’s capital! I’m very glad,” said
      Vlassitch, but he did not hold out his hand: evidently he did not venture,
      but waited for Pyotr Mihalitch to hold out his. “It will do the oats
      good,” he said, looking at the sky.

 “Yes.”

 They went into the house in silence. To the right of the hall was a door
      leading to another hall and then to the drawing-room, and on the left was
      a little room which in winter was used by the steward. Pyotr Mihalitch and
      Vlassitch went into this little room.

 “Where were you caught in the rain?”

 “Not far off, quite close to the house.”

 Pyotr Mihalitch sat down on the bed. He was glad of the noise of the rain
      and the darkness of the room. It was better: it made it less dreadful, and
      there was no need to see his companion’s face. There was no anger in
      his heart now, nothing but fear and vexation with himself. He felt he had
      made a bad beginning, and that nothing would come of this visit.

 Both were silent for some time and affected to be listening to the rain.

 “Thank you, Petrusha,” Vlassitch began, clearing his throat.
      “I am very grateful to you for coming. It’s generous and noble
      of you. I understand it, and, believe me, I appreciate it. Believe me.”

 He looked out of the window and went on, standing in the middle of the
      room:

 “Everything happened so secretly, as though we were concealing it
      all from you. The feeling that you might be wounded and angry has been a
      blot on our happiness all these days. But let me justify myself. We kept
      it secret not because we did not trust you. To begin with, it all happened
      suddenly, by a kind of inspiration; there was no time to discuss it.
      Besides, it’s such a private, delicate matter, and it was awkward to
      bring a third person in, even some one as intimate as you. Above all, in
      all this we reckoned on your generosity. You are a very noble and generous
      person. I am infinitely grateful to you. If you ever need my life, come
      and take it.”

 Vlassitch talked in a quiet, hollow bass, always on the same droning note;
      he was evidently agitated. Pyotr Mihalitch felt it was his turn to speak,
      and that to listen and keep silent would really mean playing the part of a
      generous and noble simpleton, and that had not been his idea in coming. He
      got up quickly and said, breathlessly in an undertone:

 “Listen, Grigory. You know I liked you and could have desired no
      better husband for my sister; but what has happened is awful! It’s
      terrible to think of it!”

 “Why is it terrible?” asked Vlassitch, with a quiver in his
      voice. “It would be terrible if we had done wrong, but that isn’t
      so.”

 “Listen, Grigory. You know I have no prejudices; but, excuse my
      frankness, to my mind you have both acted selfishly. Of course, I shan’t
      say so to my sister—it will distress her; but you ought to know:
      mother is miserable beyond all description.”

 “Yes, that’s sad,” sighed Vlassitch. “We foresaw
      that, Petrusha, but what could we have done? Because one’s actions
      hurt other people, it doesn’t prove that they are wrong. What’s
      to be done! Every important step one takes is bound to distress somebody.
      If you went to fight for freedom, that would distress your mother, too.
      What’s to be done! Any one who puts the peace of his family before
      everything has to renounce the life of ideas completely.”

 There was a vivid flash of lightning at the window, and the lightning
      seemed to change the course of Vlassitch’s thoughts. He sat down
      beside Pyotr Mihalitch and began saying what was utterly beside the point.

 “I have such a reverence for your sister, Petrusha,” he said.
      “When I used to come and see you, I felt as though I were going to a
      holy shrine, and I really did worship Zina. Now my reverence for her grows
      every day. For me she is something higher than a wife—yes, higher!”
      Vlassitch waved his hands. “She is my holy of holies. Since she is
      living with me, I enter my house as though it were a temple. She is an
      extraordinary, rare, most noble woman!”

 “Well, he’s off now!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch; he
      disliked the word “woman.”

 “Why shouldn’t you be married properly?” he asked.
      “How much does your wife want for a divorce?”

 “Seventy-five thousand.”

 “It’s rather a lot. But if we were to negotiate with her?”

 “She won’t take a farthing less. She is an awful woman,
      brother,” sighed Vlassitch. “I’ve never talked to you
      about her before—it was unpleasant to think of her; but now that the
      subject has come up, I’ll tell you about her. I married her on the
      impulse of the moment—a fine, honourable impulse. An officer in
      command of a battalion of our regiment—if you care to hear the
      details—had an affair with a girl of eighteen; that is, to put it
      plainly, he seduced her, lived with her for two months, and abandoned her.
      She was in an awful position, brother. She was ashamed to go home to her
      parents; besides, they wouldn’t have received her. Her lover had
      abandoned her; there was nothing left for her but to go to the barracks
      and sell herself. The other officers in the regiment were indignant. They
      were by no means saints themselves, but the baseness of it was so
      striking. Besides, no one in the regiment could endure the man. And to
      spite him, you understand, the indignant lieutenants and ensigns began
      getting up a subscription for the unfortunate girl. And when we subalterns
      met together and began to subscribe five or ten roubles each, I had a
      sudden inspiration. I felt it was an opportunity to do something fine. I
      hastened to the girl and warmly expressed my sympathy. And while I was on
      my way to her, and while I was talking to her, I loved her fervently as a
      woman insulted and injured. Yes. . . . Well, a week later I made her an
      offer. The colonel and my comrades thought my marriage out of keeping with
      the dignity of an officer. That roused me more than ever. I wrote a long
      letter, do you know, in which I proved that my action ought to be
      inscribed in the annals of the regiment in letters of gold, and so on. I
      sent the letter to my colonel and copies to my comrades. Well, I was
      excited, and, of course, I could not avoid being rude. I was asked to
      leave the regiment. I have a rough copy of it put away somewhere; I’ll
      give it to you to read sometime. It was written with great feeling. You
      will see what lofty and noble sentiments I was experiencing. I resigned my
      commission and came here with my wife. My father had left a few debts, I
      had no money, and from the first day my wife began making acquaintances,
      dressing herself smartly, and playing cards, and I was obliged to mortgage
      the estate. She led a bad life, you understand, and you are the only one
      of the neighbours who hasn’t been her lover. After two years I gave
      her all I had to set me free and she went off to town. Yes. . . . And now
      I pay her twelve hundred roubles a year. She is an awful woman! There is a
      fly, brother, which lays an egg in the back of a spider so that the spider
      can’t shake it off: the grub fastens upon the spider and drinks its
      heart’s blood. That was how this woman fastened upon me and sucks
      the blood of my heart. She hates and despises me for being so stupid; that
      is, for marrying a woman like her. My chivalry seems to her despicable.
      ‘A wise man cast me off,’ she says, ‘and a fool picked
      me up.’ To her thinking no one but a pitiful idiot could have
      behaved as I did. And that is insufferably bitter to me, brother.
      Altogether, I may say in parenthesis, fate has been hard upon me, very
      hard.”

 Pyotr Mihalitch listened to Vlassitch and wondered in perplexity what it
      was in this man that had so charmed his sister. He was not young—he
      was forty-one—lean and lanky, narrow-chested, with a long nose, and
      grey hairs in his beard. He talked in a droning voice, had a sickly smile,
      and waved his hands awkwardly as he talked. He had neither health, nor
      pleasant, manly manners, nor savoir-faire , nor gaiety, and in all
      his exterior there was something colourless and indefinite. He dressed
      without taste, his surroundings were depressing, he did not care for
      poetry or painting because “they have no answer to give to the
      questions of the day” —that is, he did not understand them;
      music did not touch him. He was a poor farmer.

 His estate was in a wretched condition and was mortgaged; he was paying
      twelve percent on the second mortgage and owed ten thousand on personal
      securities as well. When the time came to pay the interest on the mortgage
      or to send money to his wife, he asked every one to lend him money with as
      much agitation as though his house were on fire, and, at the same time
      losing his head, he would sell the whole of his winter store of fuel for
      five roubles and a stack of straw for three roubles, and then have his
      garden fence or old cucumber-frames chopped up to heat his stoves. His
      meadows were ruined by pigs, the peasants’ cattle strayed in the
      undergrowth in his woods, and every year the old trees were fewer and
      fewer: beehives and rusty pails lay about in his garden and
      kitchen-garden. He had neither talents nor abilities, nor even ordinary
      capacity for living like other people. In practical life he was a weak,
      naïve man, easy to deceive and to cheat, and the peasants with good reason
      called him “simple.”

 He was a Liberal, and in the district was regarded as a “Red,”
      but even his progressiveness was a bore. There was no originality nor
      moving power about his independent views: he was revolted, indignant, and
      delighted always on the same note; it was always spiritless and
      ineffective. Even in moments of strong enthusiasm he never raised his head
      or stood upright. But the most tiresome thing of all was that he managed
      to express even his best and finest ideas so that they seemed in him
      commonplace and out of date. It reminded one of something old one had read
      long ago, when slowly and with an air of profundity he would begin
      discoursing of his noble, lofty moments, of his best years; or when he
      went into raptures over the younger generation, which has always been, and
      still is, in advance of society; or abused Russians for donning their
      dressing-gowns at thirty and forgetting the principles of their alma
      mater . If you stayed the night with him, he would put Pissarev or
      Darwin on your bedroom table; if you said you had read it, he would go and
      bring Dobrolubov.

 In the district this was called free-thinking, and many people looked upon
      this free-thinking as an innocent and harmless eccentricity; it made him
      profoundly unhappy, however. It was for him the maggot of which he had
      just been speaking; it had fastened upon him and was sucking his
      life-blood. In his past there had been the strange marriage in the style
      of Dostoevsky; long letters and copies written in a bad, unintelligible
      hand-writing, but with great feeling, endless misunderstandings,
      explanations, disappointments, then debts, a second mortgage, the
      allowance to his wife, the monthly borrowing of money—and all this
      for no benefit to any one, either himself or others. And in the present,
      as in the past, he was still in a nervous flurry, on the lookout for
      heroic actions, and poking his nose into other people’s affairs; as
      before, at every favourable opportunity there were long letters and
      copies, wearisome, stereotyped conversations about the village community,
      or the revival of handicrafts or the establishment of cheese factories—conversations
      as like one another as though he had prepared them, not in his living
      brain, but by some mechanical process. And finally this scandal with Zina
      of which one could not see the end!

 And meanwhile Zina was young—she was only twenty-two—good-looking,
      elegant, gay; she was fond of laughing, chatter, argument, a passionate
      musician; she had good taste in dress, in furniture, in books, and in her
      own home she would not have put up with a room like this, smelling of
      boots and cheap vodka. She, too, had advanced ideas, but in her
      free-thinking one felt the overflow of energy, the vanity of a young,
      strong, spirited girl, passionately eager to be better and more original
      than others. . . . How had it happened that she had fallen in love with
      Vlassitch?

 “He is a Quixote, an obstinate fanatic, a maniac,” thought
      Pyotr Mihalitch, “and she is as soft, yielding, and weak in
      character as I am. . . . She and I give in easily, without resistance. She
      loves him; but, then, I, too, love him in spite of everything.”

 Pyotr Mihalitch considered Vlassitch a good, straightforward man, but
      narrow and one-sided. In his perturbations and his sufferings, and in fact
      in his whole life, he saw no lofty aims, remote or immediate; he saw
      nothing but boredom and incapacity for life. His self-sacrifice and all
      that Vlassitch himself called heroic actions or noble impulses seemed to
      him a useless waste of force, unnecessary blank shots which consumed a
      great deal of powder. And Vlassitch’s fanatical belief in the
      extraordinary loftiness and faultlessness of his own way of thinking
      struck him as naïve and even morbid; and the fact that Vlassitch all his
      life had contrived to mix the trivial with the exalted, that he had made a
      stupid marriage and looked upon it as an act of heroism, and then had
      affairs with other women and regarded that as a triumph of some idea or
      other was simply incomprehensible.

 Nevertheless, Pyotr Mihalitch was fond of Vlassitch; he was conscious of a
      sort of power in him, and for some reason he had never had the heart to
      contradict him.

 Vlassitch sat down quite close to him for a talk in the dark, to the
      accompaniment of the rain, and he had cleared his throat as a prelude to
      beginning on something lengthy, such as the history of his marriage. But
      it was intolerable for Pyotr Mihalitch to listen to him; he was tormented
      by the thought that he would see his sister directly.

 “Yes, you’ve had bad luck,” he said gently; “but,
      excuse me, we’ve been wandering from the point. That’s not
      what we are talking about.”

 “Yes, yes, quite so. Well, let us come back to the point,”
      said Vlassitch, and he stood up. “I tell you, Petrusha, our
      conscience is clear. We are not married, but there is no need for me to
      prove to you that our marriage is perfectly legitimate. You are as free in
      your ideas as I am, and, happily, there can be no disagreement between us
      on that point. As for our future, that ought not to alarm you. I’ll
      work in the sweat of my brow, I’ll work day and night— in
      fact, I will strain every nerve to make Zina happy. Her life will be a
      splendid one! You may ask, am I able to do it. I am, brother! When a man
      devotes every minute to one thought, it’s not difficult for him to
      attain his object. But let us go to Zina; it will be a joy to her to see
      you.”

 Pyotr Mihalitch’s heart began to beat. He got up and followed
      Vlassitch into the hall, and from there into the drawing-room. There was
      nothing in the huge gloomy room but a piano and a long row of old chairs
      ornamented with bronze, on which no one ever sat. There was a candle
      alight on the piano. From the drawing-room they went in silence into the
      dining-room. This room, too, was large and comfortless; in the middle of
      the room there was a round table with two leaves with six thick legs, and
      only one candle. A clock in a large mahogany case like an ikon stand
      pointed to half-past two.

 Vlassitch opened the door into the next room and said:

 “Zina, here is Petrusha come to see us!”

 At once there was the sound of hurried footsteps and Zina came into the
      dining-room. She was tall, plump, and very pale, and, just as when he had
      seen her for the last time at home, she was wearing a black skirt and a
      red blouse, with a large buckle on her belt. She flung one arm round her
      brother and kissed him on the temple.

 “What a storm!” she said. “Grigory went off somewhere
      and I was left quite alone in the house.”

 She was not embarrassed, and looked at her brother as frankly and candidly
      as at home; looking at her, Pyotr Mihalitch, too, lost his embarrassment.

 “But you are not afraid of storms,” he said, sitting down at
      the table.

 “No,” she said, “but here the rooms are so big, the
      house is so old, and when there is thunder it all rattles like a cupboard
      full of crockery. It’s a charming house altogether,” she went
      on, sitting down opposite her brother. “There’s some pleasant
      memory in every room. In my room, only fancy, Grigory’s grandfather
      shot himself.”

 “In August we shall have the money to do up the lodge in the garden,”
      said Vlassitch.

 “For some reason when it thunders I think of that grandfather,”
      Zina went on. “And in this dining-room somebody was flogged to
      death.”

 “That’s an actual fact,” said Vlassitch, and he looked
      with wide-open eyes at Pyotr Mihalitch. “Sometime in the forties
      this place was let to a Frenchman called Olivier. The portrait of his
      daughter is lying in an attic now—a very pretty girl. This Olivier,
      so my father told me, despised Russians for their ignorance and treated
      them with cruel derision. Thus, for instance, he insisted on the priest
      walking without his hat for half a mile round his house, and on the church
      bells being rung when the Olivier family drove through the village. The
      serfs and altogether the humble of this world, of course, he treated with
      even less ceremony. Once there came along this road one of the
      simple-hearted sons of wandering Russia, somewhat after the style of Gogol’s
      divinity student, Homa Brut. He asked for a night’s lodging, pleased
      the bailiffs, and was given a job at the office of the estate. There are
      many variations of the story. Some say the divinity student stirred up the
      peasants, others that Olivier’ s daughter fell in love with him. I
      don’t know which is true, only one fine evening Olivier called him
      in here and cross-examined him, then ordered him to be beaten. Do you
      know, he sat here at this table drinking claret while the stable-boys beat
      the man. He must have tried to wring something out of him. Towards morning
      the divinity student died of the torture and his body was hidden. They say
      it was thrown into Koltovitch’s pond. There was an inquiry, but the
      Frenchman paid some thousands to some one in authority and went away to
      Alsace. His lease was up just then, and so the matter ended.”

 “What scoundrels!” said Zina, shuddering.

 “My father remembered Olivier and his daughter well. He used to say
      she was remarkably beautiful and eccentric. I imagine the divinity student
      had done both—stirred up the peasants and won the daughter’s
      heart. Perhaps he wasn’t a divinity student at all, but some one
      travelling incognito.”

 Zina grew thoughtful; the story of the divinity student and the beautiful
      French girl had evidently carried her imagination far away. It seemed to
      Pyotr Mihalitch that she had not changed in the least during the last
      week, except that she was a little paler. She looked calm and just as
      usual, as though she had come with her brother to visit Vlassitch. But
      Pyotr Mihalitch felt that some change had taken place in himself. Before,
      when she was living at home, he could have spoken to her about anything,
      and now he did not feel equal to asking her the simple question, “How
      do you like being here?” The question seemed awkward and
      unnecessary. Probably the same change had taken place in her. She was in
      no haste to turn the conversation to her mother, to her home, to her
      relations with Vlassitch; she did not defend herself, she did not say that
      free unions are better than marriages in the church; she was not agitated,
      and calmly brooded over the story of Olivier. . . . And why had they
      suddenly begun talking of Olivier?

 “You are both of you wet with the rain,” said Zina, and she
      smiled joyfully; she was touched by this point of resemblance between her
      brother and Vlassitch.

 And Pyotr Mihalitch felt all the bitterness and horror of his position. He
      thought of his deserted home, the closed piano, and Zina’s bright
      little room into which no one went now; he thought there were no prints of
      little feet on the garden-paths, and that before tea no one went off,
      laughing gaily, to bathe. What he had clung to more and more from his
      childhood upwards, what he had loved thinking about when he used to sit in
      the stuffy class-room or the lecture theatre—brightness, purity, and
      joy, everything that filled the house with life and light, had gone never
      to return, had vanished, and was mixed up with a coarse, clumsy story of
      some battalion officer, a chivalrous lieutenant, a depraved woman and a
      grandfather who had shot himself. . . . And to begin to talk about his
      mother or to think that the past could ever return would mean not
      understanding what was clear.

 Pyotr Mihalitch’s eyes filled with tears and his hand began to
      tremble as it lay on the table. Zina guessed what he was thinking about,
      and her eyes, too, glistened and looked red.

 “Grigory, come here,” she said to Vlassitch.

 They walked away to the window and began talking of something in a
      whisper. From the way that Vlassitch stooped down to her and the way she
      looked at him, Pyotr Mihalitch realised again that everything was
      irreparably over, and that it was no use to talk of anything. Zina went
      out of the room.

 “Well, brother!” Vlassitch began, after a brief silence,
      rubbing his hands and smiling. “I called our life happiness just
      now, but that was, so to speak, poetical license. In reality, there has
      not been a sense of happiness so far. Zina has been thinking all the time
      of you, of her mother, and has been worrying; looking at her, I, too, felt
      worried. Hers is a bold, free nature, but, you know, it’s difficult
      when you’re not used to it, and she is young, too. The servants call
      her ‘Miss’; it seems a trifle, but it upsets her. There it is,
      brother.”

 Zina brought in a plateful of strawberries. She was followed by a little
      maidservant, looking crushed and humble, who set a jug of milk on the
      table and made a very low bow: she had something about her that was in
      keeping with the old furniture, something petrified and dreary.

 The sound of the rain had ceased. Pyotr Mihalitch ate strawberries while
      Vlassitch and Zina looked at him in silence. The moment of the inevitable
      but useless conversation was approaching, and all three felt the burden of
      it. Pyotr Mihalitch’s eyes filled with tears again; he pushed away
      his plate and said that he must be going home, or it would be getting
      late, and perhaps it would rain again. The time had come when common
      decency required Zina to speak of those at home and of her new life.

 “How are things at home?” she asked rapidly, and her pale face
      quivered. “How is mother?”

 “You know mother . . .” said Pyotr Mihalitch, not looking at
      her.

 “Petrusha, you’ve thought a great deal about what has
      happened,” she said, taking hold of her brother’s sleeve, and
      he knew how hard it was for her to speak. “You’ve thought a
      great deal: tell me, can we reckon on mother’s accepting Grigory . .
      . and the whole position, one day?”

 She stood close to her brother, face to face with him, and he was
      astonished that she was so beautiful, and that he seemed not to have
      noticed it before. And it seemed to him utterly absurd that his sister, so
      like his mother, pampered, elegant, should be living with Vlassitch and in
      Vlassitch’s house, with the petrified servant, and the table with
      six legs—in the house where a man had been flogged to death, and
      that she was not going home with him, but was staying here to sleep.

 “You know mother,” he said, not answering her question.
      “I think you ought to have . . . to do something, to ask her
      forgiveness or something. . . .”

 “But to ask her forgiveness would mean pretending we had done wrong.
      I’m ready to tell a lie to comfort mother, but it won’t lead
      anywhere. I know mother. Well, what will be, must be!” said Zina,
      growing more cheerful now that the most unpleasant had been said. “We’ll
      wait for five years, ten years, and be patient, and then God’s will
      be done.”

 She took her brother’s arm, and when she walked through the dark
      hall she squeezed close to him. They went out on the steps. Pyotr
      Mihalitch said good-bye, got on his horse, and set off at a walk; Zina and
      Vlassitch walked a little way with him. It was still and warm, with a
      delicious smell of hay; stars were twinkling brightly between the clouds.
      Vlassitch’s old garden, which had seen so many gloomy stories in its
      time, lay slumbering in the darkness, and for some reason it was mournful
      riding through it.

 “Zina and I to-day after dinner spent some really exalted moments,”
      said Vlassitch. “I read aloud to her an excellent article on the
      question of emigration. You must read it, brother! You really must. It’s
      remarkable for its lofty tone. I could not resist writing a letter to the
      editor to be forwarded to the author. I wrote only a single line: ‘I
      thank you and warmly press your noble hand.’”

 Pyotr Mihalitch was tempted to say, “Don’t meddle in what does
      not concern you,” but he held his tongue.

 Vlassitch walked by his right stirrup and Zina by the left; both seemed to
      have forgotten that they had to go home. It was damp, and they had almost
      reached Koltovitch’s copse. Pyotr Mihalitch felt that they were
      expecting something from him, though they hardly knew what it was, and he
      felt unbearably sorry for them. Now as they walked by the horse with
      submissive faces, lost in thought, he had a deep conviction that they were
      unhappy, and could not be happy, and their love seemed to him a
      melancholy, irreparable mistake. Pity and the sense that he could do
      nothing to help them reduced him to that state of spiritual softening when
      he was ready to make any sacrifice to get rid of the painful feeling of
      sympathy.

 “I’ll come over sometimes for a night,” he said.

 But it sounded as though he were making a concession, and did not satisfy
      him. When they stopped near Koltovitch’s copse to say good-bye, he
      bent down to Zina, touched her shoulder, and said:

 “You are right, Zina! You have done well.” To avoid saying
      more and bursting into tears, he lashed his horse and galloped into the
      wood. As he rode into the darkness, he looked round and saw Vlassitch and
      Zina walking home along the road—he taking long strides, while she
      walked with a hurried, jerky step beside him—talking eagerly about
      something.

 “I am an old woman!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch. “I went to
      solve the question and I have only made it more complicated—there it
      is!”

 He was heavy at heart. When he got out of the copse he rode at a walk and
      then stopped his horse near the pond. He wanted to sit and think without
      moving. The moon was rising and was reflected in a streak of red on the
      other side of the pond. There were low rumbles of thunder in the distance.
      Pyotr Mihalitch looked steadily at the water and imagined his sister’s
      despair, her martyr-like pallor, the tearless eyes with which she would
      conceal her humiliation from others. He imagined her with child, imagined
      the death of their mother, her funeral, Zina’s horror. . . . The
      proud, superstitious old woman would be sure to die of grief. Terrible
      pictures of the future rose before him on the background of smooth, dark
      water, and among pale feminine figures he saw himself, a weak, cowardly
      man with a guilty face.

 A hundred paces off on the right bank of the pond, something dark was
      standing motionless: was it a man or a tall post? Pyotr Mihalitch thought
      of the divinity student who had been killed and thrown into the pond.

 “Olivier behaved inhumanly, but one way or another he did settle the
      question, while I have settled nothing and have only made it worse,”
      he thought, gazing at the dark figure that looked like a ghost. “He
      said and did what he thought right while I say and do what I don’t
      think right; and I don’t know really what I do think. . . .”

 He rode up to the dark figure: it was an old rotten post, the relic of
      some shed.

 From Koltovitch’s copse and garden there came a strong fragrant
      scent of lilies of the valley and honey-laden flowers. Pyotr Mihalitch
      rode along the bank of the pond and looked mournfully into the water. And
      thinking about his life, he came to the conclusion he had never said or
      acted upon what he really thought, and other people had repaid him in the
      same way. And so the whole of life seemed to him as dark as this water in
      which the night sky was reflected and water-weeds grew in a tangle. And it
      seemed to him that nothing could ever set it right.

  









  





   

 AT HOME

 I

  T

HE Don railway. A
      quiet, cheerless station, white and solitary in the steppe, with its walls
      baking in the sun, without a speck of shade, and, it seems, without a
      human being. The train goes on after leaving one here; the sound of it is
      scarcely audible and dies away at last. Outside the station it is a
      desert, and there are no horses but one’s own. One gets into the
      carriage—which is so pleasant after the train—and is borne
      along the road through the steppe, and by degrees there are unfolded
      before one views such as one does not see near Moscow—immense,
      endless, fascinating in their monotony. The steppe, the steppe, and
      nothing more; in the distance an ancient barrow or a windmill; ox-waggons
      laden with coal trail by. . . . Solitary birds fly low over the plain, and
      a drowsy feeling comes with the monotonous beat of their wings. It is hot.
      Another hour or so passes, and still the steppe, the steppe, and still in
      the distance the barrow. The driver tells you something, some long
      unnecessary tale, pointing into the distance with his whip. And
      tranquillity takes possession of the soul; one is loth to think of the
      past. . . .

 A carriage with three horses had been sent to fetch Vera Ivanovna Kardin.
      The driver put in her luggage and set the harness to rights.

 “Everything just as it always has been,” said Vera, looking
      about her. “I was a little girl when I was here last, ten years ago.
      I remember old Boris came to fetch me then. Is he still living, I wonder?”

 The driver made no reply, but, like a Little Russian, looked at her
      angrily and clambered on to the box.

 It was a twenty-mile drive from the station, and Vera, too, abandoned
      herself to the charm of the steppe, forgot the past, and thought only of
      the wide expanse, of the freedom. Healthy, clever, beautiful, and young—she
      was only three-and-twenty—she had hitherto lacked nothing in her
      life but just this space and freedom.

 The steppe, the steppe. . . . The horses trotted, the sun rose higher and
      higher; and it seemed to Vera that never in her childhood had the steppe
      been so rich, so luxuriant in June; the wild flowers were green, yellow,
      lilac, white, and a fragrance rose from them and from the warmed earth;
      and there were strange blue birds along the roadside. . . . Vera had long
      got out of the habit of praying, but now, struggling with drowsiness, she
      murmured:

 “Lord, grant that I may be happy here.”

 And there was peace and sweetness in her soul, and she felt as though she
      would have been glad to drive like that all her life, looking at the
      steppe.

 Suddenly there was a deep ravine overgrown with oak saplings and
      alder-trees; there was a moist feeling in the air—there must have
      been a spring at the bottom. On the near side, on the very edge of the
      ravine, a covey of partridges rose noisily. Vera remembered that in old
      days they used to go for evening walks to this ravine; so it must be near
      home! And now she could actually see the poplars, the barn, black smoke
      rising on one side—they were burning old straw. And there was Auntie
      Dasha coming to meet her and waving her handkerchief; grandfather was on
      the terrace. Oh dear, how happy she was!

 “My darling, my darling!” cried her aunt, shrieking as though
      she were in hysterics. “Our real mistress has come! You must
      understand you are our mistress, you are our queen! Here everything is
      yours! My darling, my beauty, I am not your aunt, but your willing slave!”

 Vera had no relations but her aunt and her grandfather; her mother had
      long been dead; her father, an engineer, had died three months before at
      Kazan, on his way from Siberia. Her grandfather had a big grey beard. He
      was stout, red-faced, and asthmatic, and walked leaning on a cane and
      sticking his stomach out. Her aunt, a lady of forty-two, drawn in tightly
      at the waist and fashionably dressed with sleeves high on the shoulder,
      evidently tried to look young and was still anxious to be charming; she
      walked with tiny steps with a wriggle of her spine.

 “Will you love us?” she said, embracing Vera, “You are
      not proud?”

 At her grandfather’s wish there was a thanksgiving service, then
      they spent a long while over dinner—and Vera’s new life began.
      She was given the best room. All the rugs in the house had been put in it,
      and a great many flowers; and when at night she lay down in her snug,
      wide, very soft bed and covered herself with a silk quilt that smelt of
      old clothes long stored away, she laughed with pleasure. Auntie Dasha came
      in for a minute to wish her good-night.

 “Here you are home again, thank God,” she said, sitting down
      on the bed. “As you see, we get along very well and have everything
      we want. There’s only one thing: your grandfather is in a poor way!
      A terribly poor way! He is short of breath and he has begun to lose his
      memory. And you remember how strong, how vigorous, he used to be! There
      was no doing anything with him. . . . In old days, if the servants didn’t
      please him or anything else went wrong, he would jump up at once and
      shout: ‘Twenty-five strokes! The birch!’ But now he has grown
      milder and you never hear him. And besides, times are changed, my
      precious; one mayn’t beat them nowadays. Of course, they oughtn’t
      to be beaten, but they need looking after.”

 “And are they beaten now, auntie?” asked Vera.

 “The steward beats them sometimes, but I never do, bless their
      hearts! And your grandfather sometimes lifts his stick from old habit, but
      he never beats them.”

 Auntie Dasha yawned and crossed herself over her mouth and her right ear.

 “It’s not dull here?” Vera inquired.

 “What shall I say? There are no landowners living here now, but
      there have been works built near, darling, and there are lots of
      engineers, doctors, and mine managers. Of course, we have theatricals and
      concerts, but we play cards more than anything. They come to us, too. Dr.
      Neshtchapov from the works comes to see us—such a handsome,
      interesting man! He fell in love with your photograph. I made up my mind:
      he is Verotchka’s destiny, I thought. He’s young, handsome, he
      has means—a good match, in fact. And of course you’re a match
      for any one. You’re of good family. The place is mortgaged, it’s
      true, but it’s in good order and not neglected; there is my share in
      it, but it will all come to you; I am your willing slave. And my brother,
      your father, left you fifteen thousand roubles. . . . But I see you can’t
      keep your eyes open. Sleep, my child.”

 Next day Vera spent a long time walking round the house. The garden, which
      was old and unattractive, lying inconveniently upon the slope, had no
      paths, and was utterly neglected; probably the care of it was regarded as
      an unnecessary item in the management. There were numbers of grass-snakes.
      Hoopoes flew about under the trees calling “Oo-too-toot!” as
      though they were trying to remind her of something. At the bottom of the
      hill there was a river overgrown with tall reeds, and half a mile beyond
      the river was the village. From the garden Vera went out into the fields;
      looking into the distance, thinking of her new life in her own home, she
      kept trying to grasp what was in store for her. The space, the lovely
      peace of the steppe, told her that happiness was near at hand, and perhaps
      was here already; thousands of people, in fact, would have said: “What
      happiness to be young, healthy, well-educated, to be living on one’s
      own estate!” And at the same time the endless plain, all alike,
      without one living soul, frightened her, and at moments it was clear to
      her that its peaceful green vastness would swallow up her life and reduce
      it to nothingness. She was very young, elegant, fond of life; she had
      finished her studies at an aristocratic boarding-school, had learnt three
      languages, had read a great deal, had travelled with her father—and
      could all this have been meant to lead to nothing but settling down in a
      remote country-house in the steppe, and wandering day after day from the
      garden into the fields and from the fields into the garden to while away
      the time, and then sitting at home listening to her grandfather’s
      breathing? But what could she do? Where could she go? She could find no
      answer, and as she was returning home she doubted whether she would be
      happy here, and thought that driving from the station was far more
      interesting than living here.

 Dr. Neshtchapov drove over from the works. He was a doctor, but three
      years previously he had taken a share in the works, and had become one of
      the partners; and now he no longer looked upon medicine as his chief
      vocation, though he still practised. In appearance he was a pale, dark man
      in a white waistcoat, with a good figure; but to guess what there was in
      his heart and his brain was difficult. He kissed Auntie Dasha’s hand
      on greeting her, and was continually leaping up to set a chair or give his
      seat to some one. He was very silent and grave all the while, and, when he
      did speak, it was for some reason impossible to hear and understand his
      first sentence, though he spoke correctly and not in a low voice.

 “You play the piano?” he asked Vera, and immediately leapt up,
      as she had dropped her handkerchief.

 He stayed from midday to midnight without speaking, and Vera found him
      very unattractive. She thought that a white waistcoat in the country was
      bad form, and his elaborate politeness, his manners, and his pale, serious
      face with dark eyebrows, were mawkish; and it seemed to her that he was
      perpetually silent, probably because he was stupid. When he had gone her
      aunt said enthusiastically:

 “Well? Isn’t he charming?”

 II

 Auntie Dasha looked after the estate. Tightly laced, with jingling
      bracelets on her wrists, she went into the kitchen, the granary, the
      cattle-yard, tripping along with tiny steps, wriggling her spine; and
      whenever she talked to the steward or to the peasants, she used, for some
      reason, to put on a pince-nez. Vera’s grandfather always sat in the
      same place, playing patience or dozing. He ate a very great deal at dinner
      and supper; they gave him the dinner cooked to-day and what was left from
      yesterday, and cold pie left from Sunday, and salt meat from the servants’
      dinner, and he ate it all greedily. And every dinner left on Vera such an
      impression, that when she saw afterwards a flock of sheep driven by, or
      flour being brought from the mill, she thought, “Grandfather will
      eat that.” For the most part he was silent, absorbed in eating or in
      patience; but it sometimes happened at dinner that at the sight of Vera he
      would be touched and say tenderly:

 “My only grandchild! Verotchka!”

 And tears would glisten in his eyes. Or his face would turn suddenly
      crimson, his neck would swell, he would look with fury at the servants,
      and ask, tapping with his stick:

 “Why haven’t you brought the horse-radish?”

 In winter he led a perfectly inactive existence; in summer he sometimes
      drove out into the fields to look at the oats and the hay; and when he
      came back he would flourish his stick and declare that everything was
      neglected now that he was not there to look after it.

 “Your grandfather is out of humour,” Auntie Dasha would
      whisper. “But it’s nothing now to what it used to be in the
      old days: ‘Twenty-five strokes! The birch!’”

 Her aunt complained that every one had grown lazy, that no one did
      anything, and that the estate yielded no profit. Indeed, there was no
      systematic farming; they ploughed and sowed a little simply from habit,
      and in reality did nothing and lived in idleness. Meanwhile there was a
      running to and fro, reckoning and worrying all day long; the bustle in the
      house began at five o’clock in the morning; there were continual
      sounds of “Bring it,” “Fetch it,” “Make
      haste,” and by the evening the servants were utterly exhausted.
      Auntie Dasha changed her cooks and her housemaids every week; sometimes
      she discharged them for immorality; sometimes they went of their own
      accord, complaining that they were worked to death. None of the village
      people would come to the house as servants; Auntie Dasha had to hire them
      from a distance. There was only one girl from the village living in the
      house, Alyona, and she stayed because her whole family—old people
      and children—were living upon her wages. This Alyona, a pale, rather
      stupid little thing, spent the whole day turning out the rooms, waiting at
      table, heating the stoves, sewing, washing; but it always seemed as though
      she were only pottering about, treading heavily with her boots, and were
      nothing but a hindrance in the house. In her terror that she might be
      dismissed and sent home, she often dropped and broke the crockery, and
      they stopped the value of it out of her wages, and then her mother and
      grandmother would come and bow down at Auntie Dasha’s feet.

 Once a week or sometimes oftener visitors would arrive. Her aunt would
      come to Vera and say:

 “You should sit a little with the visitors, or else they’ll
      think that you are stuck up.”

 Vera would go in to the visitors and play vint with them for hours
      together, or play the piano for the visitors to dance; her aunt, in high
      spirits and breathless from dancing, would come up and whisper to her:

 “Be nice to Marya Nikiforovna.”

 On the sixth of December, St. Nikolay’s Day, a large party of about
      thirty arrived all at once; they played vint until late at night,
      and many of them stayed the night. In the morning they sat down to cards
      again, then they had dinner, and when Vera went to her room after dinner
      to rest from conversation and tobacco smoke, there were visitors there
      too, and she almost wept in despair. And when they began to get ready to
      go in the evening, she was so pleased they were going at last, that she
      said:

 “Do stay a little longer.”

 She felt exhausted by the visitors and constrained by their presence; yet
      every day, as soon as it began to grow dark, something drew her out of the
      house, and she went out to pay visits either at the works or at some
      neighbours’, and then there were cards, dancing, forfeits, suppers.
      . . .The young people in the works or in the mines sometimes sang Little
      Russian songs, and sang them very well. It made one sad to hear them sing.
      Or they all gathered together in one room and talked in the dusk of the
      mines, of the treasures that had once been buried in the steppes, of Saur’s
      Grave. . . . Later on, as they talked, a shout of “Help!”
      sometimes reached them. It was a drunken man going home, or some one was
      being robbed by the pit near by. Or the wind howled in the chimneys, the
      shutters banged; then, soon afterwards, they would hear the uneasy church
      bell, as the snow-storm began.

 At all the evening parties, picnics, and dinners, Auntie Dasha was
      invariably the most interesting woman and the doctor the most interesting
      man. There was very little reading either at the works or at the
      country-houses; they played only marches and polkas; and the young people
      always argued hotly about things they did not understand, and the effect
      was crude. The discussions were loud and heated, but, strange to say, Vera
      had nowhere else met people so indifferent and careless as these. They
      seemed to have no fatherland, no religion, no public interests. When they
      talked of literature or debated some abstract question, it could be seen
      from Dr. Neshtchapov’s face that the question had no interest for
      him whatever, and that for long, long years he had read nothing and cared
      to read nothing. Serious and expressionless, like a badly painted
      portrait, for ever in his white waistcoat, he was silent and
      incomprehensible as before; but the ladies, young and old, thought him
      interesting and were enthusiastic over his manners. They envied Vera, who
      appeared to attract him very much. And Vera always came away from the
      visits with a feeling of vexation, vowing inwardly to remain at home; but
      the day passed, the evening came, and she hurried off to the works again,
      and it was like that almost all the winter.

 She ordered books and magazines, and used to read them in her room. And
      she read at night, lying in bed. When the clock in the corridor struck two
      or three, and her temples were beginning to ache from reading, she sat up
      in bed and thought, “What am I to do? Where am I to go?”
      Accursed, importunate question, to which there were a number of ready-made
      answers, and in reality no answer at all.

 Oh, how noble, how holy, how picturesque it must be to serve the people,
      to alleviate their sufferings, to enlighten them! But she, Vera, did not
      know the people. And how could she go to them? They were strange and
      uninteresting to her; she could not endure the stuffy smell of the huts,
      the pot-house oaths, the unwashed children, the women’s talk of
      illnesses. To walk over the snow-drifts, to feel cold, then to sit in a
      stifling hut, to teach children she disliked—no, she would rather
      die! And to teach the peasants’ children while Auntie Dasha made
      money out of the pot-houses and fined the peasants—it was too great
      a farce! What a lot of talk there was of schools, of village libraries, of
      universal education; but if all these engineers, these mine-owners and
      ladies of her acquaintance, had not been hypocrites, and really had
      believed that enlightenment was necessary, they would not have paid the
      schoolmasters fifteen roubles a month as they did now, and would not have
      let them go hungry. And the schools and the talk about ignorance—it
      was all only to stifle the voice of conscience because they were ashamed
      to own fifteen or thirty thousand acres and to be indifferent to the
      peasants’ lot. Here the ladies said about Dr. Neshtchapov that he
      was a kind man and had built a school at the works. Yes, he had built a
      school out of the old bricks at the works for some eight hundred roubles,
      and they sang the prayer for “long life” to him when the
      building was opened, but there was no chance of his giving up his shares,
      and it certainly never entered his head that the peasants were human
      beings like himself, and that they, too, needed university teaching, and
      not merely lessons in these wretched schools.

 And Vera felt full of anger against herself and every one else. She took
      up a book again and tried to read it, but soon afterwards sat down and
      thought again. To become a doctor? But to do that one must pass an
      examination in Latin; besides, she had an invincible repugnance to corpses
      and disease. It would be nice to become a mechanic, a judge, a commander
      of a steamer, a scientist; to do something into which she could put all
      her powers, physical and spiritual, and to be tired out and sleep soundly
      at night; to give up her life to something that would make her an
      interesting person, able to attract interesting people, to love, to have a
      real family of her own. . . . But what was she to do? How was she to
      begin?

 One Sunday in Lent her aunt came into her room early in the morning to
      fetch her umbrella. Vera was sitting up in bed clasping her head in her
      hands, thinking.

 “You ought to go to church, darling,” said her aunt, “or
      people will think you are not a believer.”

 Vera made no answer.

 “I see you are dull, poor child,” said Auntie Dasha, sinking
      on her knees by the bedside; she adored Vera. “Tell me the truth,
      are you bored?”

 “Dreadfully.”

 “My beauty, my queen, I am your willing slave, I wish you nothing
      but good and happiness. . . . Tell me, why don’t you want to marry
      Nestchapov? What more do you want, my child? You must forgive me, darling;
      you can’t pick and choose like this, we are not princes . . . . Time
      is passing, you are not seventeen. . . . And I don’t understand it!
      He loves you, idolises you!”

 “Oh, mercy!” said Vera with vexation. “How can I tell?
      He sits dumb and never says a word.”

 “He’s shy, darling. . . . He’s afraid you’ll
      refuse him!”

 And when her aunt had gone away, Vera remained standing in the middle of
      her room uncertain whether to dress or to go back to bed. The bed was
      hateful; if one looked out of the window there were the bare trees, the
      grey snow, the hateful jackdaws, the pigs that her grandfather would eat.
      . . .

 “Yes, after all, perhaps I’d better get married!” she
      thought.

 III

 For two days Auntie Dasha went about with a tear-stained and heavily
      powdered face, and at dinner she kept sighing and looking towards the
      ikon. And it was impossible to make out what was the matter with her. But
      at last she made up her mind, went in to Vera, and said in a casual way:

 “The fact is, child, we have to pay interest on the bank loan, and
      the tenant hasn’t paid his rent. Will you let me pay it out of the
      fifteen thousand your papa left you?”

 All day afterwards Auntie Dasha spent in making cherry jam in the garden.
      Alyona, with her cheeks flushed with the heat, ran to and from the garden
      to the house and back again to the cellar.

 When Auntie Dasha was making jam with a very serious face as though she
      were performing a religious rite, and her short sleeves displayed her
      strong, little, despotic hands and arms, and when the servants ran about
      incessantly, bustling about the jam which they would never taste, there
      was always a feeling of martyrdom in the air. . . .

 The garden smelt of hot cherries. The sun had set, the charcoal stove had
      been carried away, but the pleasant, sweetish smell still lingered in the
      air. Vera sat on a bench in the garden and watched a new labourer, a young
      soldier, not of the neighbourhood, who was, by her express orders, making
      new paths. He was cutting the turf with a spade and heaping it up on a
      barrow.

 “Where were you serving?” Vera asked him.

 “At Berdyansk.”

 “And where are you going now? Home?”

 “No,” answered the labourer. “I have no home.”

 “But where were you born and brought up?”

 “In the province of Oryol. Till I went into the army I lived with my
      mother, in my step-father’s house; my mother was the head of the
      house, and people looked up to her, and while she lived I was cared for.
      But while I was in the army I got a letter telling me my mother was dead.
      . . . And now I don’t seem to care to go home. It’s not my own
      father, so it’s not like my own home.”

 “Then your father is dead?”

 “I don’t know. I am illegitimate.”

 At that moment Auntie Dasha appeared at the window and said:

 “ Il ne faut pas parler aux gens . . . . Go into the kitchen,
      my good man. You can tell your story there,” she said to the
      soldier.

 And then came as yesterday and every day supper, reading, a sleepless
      night, and endless thinking about the same thing. At three o’clock
      the sun rose; Alyona was already busy in the corridor, and Vera was not
      asleep yet and was trying to read. She heard the creak of the barrow: it
      was the new labourer at work in the garden. . . . Vera sat at the open
      window with a book, dozed, and watched the soldier making the paths for
      her, and that interested her. The paths were as even and level as a
      leather strap, and it was pleasant to imagine what they would be like when
      they were strewn with yellow sand.

 She could see her aunt come out of the house soon after five o’clock,
      in a pink wrapper and curl-papers. She stood on the steps for three
      minutes without speaking, and then said to the soldier:

 “Take your passport and go in peace. I can’t have any one
      illegitimate in my house.”

 An oppressive, angry feeling sank like a stone on Vera’s heart. She
      was indignant with her aunt, she hated her; she was so sick of her aunt
      that her heart was full of misery and loathing. But what was she to do? To
      stop her mouth? To be rude to her? But what would be the use? Suppose she
      struggled with her, got rid of her, made her harmless, prevented her
      grandfather from flourishing his stick— what would be the use of it?
      It would be like killing one mouse or one snake in the boundless steppe.
      The vast expanse, the long winters, the monotony and dreariness of life,
      instil a sense of helplessness; the position seems hopeless, and one wants
      to do nothing—everything is useless.

 Alyona came in, and bowing low to Vera, began carrying out the arm-chairs
      to beat the dust out of them.

 “You have chosen a time to clean up,” said Vera with
      annoyance. “Go away.”

 Alyona was overwhelmed, and in her terror could not understand what was
      wanted of her. She began hurriedly tidying up the dressing-table.

 “Go out of the room, I tell you,” Vera shouted, turning cold;
      she had never had such an oppressive feeling before. “Go away!”

 Alyona uttered a sort of moan, like a bird, and dropped Vera’s gold
      watch on the carpet.

 “Go away!” Vera shrieked in a voice not her own, leaping up
      and trembling all over. “Send her away; she worries me to death!”
      she went on, walking rapidly after Alyona down the passage, stamping her
      feet. “Go away! Birch her! Beat her!” Then suddenly she came
      to herself, and just as she was, unwashed, uncombed, in her dressing-gown
      and slippers, she rushed out of the house. She ran to the familiar ravine
      and hid herself there among the sloe-trees, so that she might see no one
      and be seen by no one. Lying there motionless on the grass, she did not
      weep, she was not horror-stricken, but gazing at the sky open-eyed, she
      reflected coldly and clearly that something had happened which she could
      never forget and for which she could never forgive herself all her life.

 “No, I can’t go on like this,” she thought. “It’s
      time to take myself in hand, or there’ll be no end to it. . . . I
      can’t go on like this. . . .”

 At midday Dr. Neshtchapov drove by the ravine on his way to the house. She
      saw him and made up her mind that she would begin a new life, and that she
      would make herself begin it, and this decision calmed her. And following
      with her eyes the doctor’s well-built figure, she said, as though
      trying to soften the crudity of her decision:

 “He’s a nice man. . . . We shall get through life somehow.”

 She returned home. While she was dressing, Auntie Dasha came into the
      room, and said:

 “Alyona upset you, darling; I’ve sent her home to the village.
      Her mother’s given her a good beating and has come here, crying.”

 “Auntie,” said Vera quickly, “I’m going to marry
      Dr. Neshtchapov. Only talk to him yourself . . . I can’t.”

 And again she went out into the fields. And wandering aimlessly about, she
      made up her mind that when she was married she would look after the house,
      doctor the peasants, teach in the school, that she would do all the things
      that other women of her circle did. And this perpetual dissatisfaction
      with herself and every one else, this series of crude mistakes which stand
      up like a mountain before one whenever one looks back upon one’s
      past, she would accept as her real life to which she was fated, and she
      would expect nothing better. . . . Of course there was nothing better!
      Beautiful nature, dreams, music, told one story, but reality another.
      Evidently truth and happiness existed somewhere outside real life. . . .
      One must give up one’s own life and merge oneself into this
      luxuriant steppe, boundless and indifferent as eternity, with its flowers,
      its ancient barrows, and its distant horizon, and then it would be well
      with one. . . .

 A month later Vera was living at the works.