Notes

 {*1} Whaling vessels are usually fitted with iron oil-tanks—why the Grampus was not I have never been able to ascertain.

 {*2} The case of the brig Polly , of Boston, is one so much in
      point, and her fate, in many respects, so remarkably similar to our own,
      that I cannot forbear alluding to it here. This vessel, of one hundred and
      thirty tons burden, sailed from Boston, with a cargo of lumber and
      provisions, for Santa Croix, on the twelfth of December, 1811, under the
      command of Captain Casneau. There were eight souls on board besides the
      captain—the mate, four seamen, and the cook, together with a Mr.
      Hunt, and a negro girl belonging to him. On the fifteenth, having cleared
      the shoal of Georges, she sprung a leak in a gale of wind from the
      southeast, and was finally capsized; but, the masts going by the board,
      she afterward righted. They remained in this situation, without fire, and
      with very little provision, for the period of one hundred and ninety-one
      days (from December the fifteenth to June the twentieth), when Captain
      Casneau and Samuel Badger, the only survivors, were taken off the wreck by
      the Fame, of Hull, Captain Featherstone, bound home from Rio Janeiro. When
      picked up, they were in latitude 28 degrees N., longitude 13 degrees W.,
      having drifted above two thousand miles! On the ninth of July the Fame
      fell in with the brig Dromero, Captain Perkins, who landed the two
      sufferers in Kennebeck. The narrative from which we gather these details
      ends in the following words:

 “It is natural to inquire how they could float such a vast distance,
      upon the most frequented part of the Atlantic, and not be discovered all
      this time. They were passed by more than a dozen sail, one of which came
      so nigh them that they could distinctly see the people on deck and on the
      rigging looking at them; but, to the inexpressible disappointment of the
      starving and freezing men, they stifled the dictates of compassion,
      hoisted sail, and cruelly abandoned them to their fate.”

 {*3} Among the vessels which at various times have professed to meet with
      the Auroras may be mentioned the ship San Miguel, in 1769; the ship
      Aurora, in 1774; the brig Pearl, in 1779; and the ship Dolores, in 1790.
      They all agree in giving the mean latitude fifty-three degrees south.

 {*4} The terms morning and evening, which I have made use of to avoid
      confusion in my narrative, as far as possible, must not, of course, be
      taken in their ordinary sense. For a long time past we had had no night at
      all, the daylight being continual. The dates throughout are according to
      nautical time, and the bearing must be understood as per compass. I would
      also remark, in this place, that I cannot, in the first portion of what is
      here written, pretend to strict accuracy in respect to dates, or latitudes
      and longitudes, having kept no regular journal until after the period of
      which this first portion treats. In many instances I have relied
      altogether upon memory.

 {*5} This day was rendered remarkable by our observing in the south
      several huge wreaths of the grayish vapour I have spoken of.

 {*6} The marl was also black; indeed, we noticed no light colored
      substances of any kind upon the island.

 {*7}For obvious reasons I cannot pretend to strict accuracy in these
      dates. They are given principally with a view to perspicity of narrative,
      and as set down in my pencil memorandum.