[

71 ] 

‘NUMBER ONE NORTH RAINBOW.’

 ‘ Another

duffer!’

 ‘Rank as ever was bottomed!’

 ‘Seventy-five feet hard delving, and not a colour!’

 The speakers were myself, the teller of this story, and
my mate, Harry Treloar.

 We were sitting on a heap of earth and stones representing
a month’s fruitless, dreary labour. The last
remark was Harry’s.

 ‘That makes, I think,’ continued he, ‘as nearly as I
can guess, about a dozen of the same species. And
people have the cheek to call this a poor man’s diggings!’

 ‘The prospectors are on good gold,’ I hazard.

 ‘So are the publicans,’ retorts he, ‘and the speculators,
and the storekeepers, and, apparently, everybody but the
poor men—ourselves, to wit. This place is evidently for
capitalists. We’re nearly “dead-brokers,” as they say
out here. Let’s harness up Eclipse and go over to old
Yamnibar. We may make a rise there. It’s undignified, I
allow, scratching amongst the leavings of other men and
other years; dangerous, also, but that’s nothing. And
many a good man has had to do the same before us.’

 No life can equal that of a digger’s if he be ‘on gold,’ [

72 ]

even moderately so; if not, none so weary and heart-breaking TN: hyphen retained .

 It’s all very well to talk, as some street-bred novelists
do, of ‘hope following every stroke of the pick, making
the heaviest toil as nought,’ and all that kind of thing;
but when one has been pick-stroking for months without
seeing a colour; when one’s boots are sticking together
by suasion of string or greenhide; when every meal is
eaten on grudged credit; when one works late and early,
wet and dry, and all in vain, then hope becomes of that
description which maketh the heart sick, very sick,
indeed. Treloar was, in general, a regular Mark Tapley
and Micawber rolled into one. But for once, fate, so
adverse, had proved too much for even his serenely
hopeful temper.

 He was an Anglo-Indian. Now he is Assistant Commissioner
at Bhurtpore, also a C.S.I.; and, when he
reads this, will recollect and perhaps sigh for the days
when he possessed a liver and an appetite, and was
penniless.

 Our turnout was rather a curious one. The season
was dry, and, feed being scarce, Treloar had concluded
that, at such a time, a bullock would be better able to
eke out a living than a horse. Therefore, a working
bullock drew our tilted cart about the country.

 ‘You see, my boy,’ said Treloar, when deciding on the
purchase, ‘an ox is a beggar that always seems to have
something to chew. Turn a horse out where there’s no
grass, and he’ll probably go to the deuce before morning.
But your ox, now, after a good look around, seeing he’s [

73 ]

struck a barren patch, ’ll draw on his reserves, bring up
something from somewhere, and start chewing away like
one o’clock. That comforts his owner. I vote for the
ox. He may be slow, but he generally appears to have
enough in his stomach to keep his jaws going; and, in a
dry time, that is a distinct advantage.’

 So Eclipse was bought, I merely stipulating that
Treloar should always drive.

 I have an idea, that, after a while, as the old ‘worker’
sauntered along, regarding the perspiring Harry, and his
exhortations and exclamations, often in Hindustani, with
a mild stare of surprise, as he slowly stooped for a dry
tussock, or reached aloft for an overhanging branch, the
latter somewhat repented him of his experiment. But
he never said so. And, to do him justice, Eclipse was
not a bad ‘ox’; and, when he could get nothing better,
justified Harry’s expectations by seeming able to chew
stones. But his motto was decidedly festina lente .

 Yamnibar, ‘Old Yamnibar,’ at last. Behind us, on
the far inland river, we had left a busy scene of activity.
Hurrying crowds of men, the whirr of a thousand windlasses,
the swish of countless cradles, and the ceaseless
pounding by night and by day of the battery stamps.
And now what a contrast!

 A wide, trackless valley, covered with grave-like
mounds, on which grass grew rankly; with ruined buildings
and rotting machinery, and, here and there, pools of
stagnant water, whilst the only thing save the sweep
of the wind that reached our ears was a distant rhythmical
moaning, coming very sadly in that desolate place—the [

74 ]

sounding of the sea on the rock-bound coast not far
away.

 The only signs of life, as Eclipse, pausing now and
again, and taking a ruminative survey of the valley, drew
us by degrees down the sloping hills, were the buglings
of a squad of native companions flying heavily towards
the setting sun.

 ‘What a dismal hole!’ I muttered, as the ‘ox,’ spying
some green rushes, bolted at top speed—about a mile an
hour—towards them.

 ‘Let’s try and find a golden one,’ laughed my mercurial
friend. ‘Here we have a whole gold-field to ourselves.
Just think of it! “Lords of the fowl and the brute”—Eclipse
and Kálee and the bralgas. Take the old chap
out of the gharri , and we’ll pitch our camp.’

 I ought to have spoken of Kálee long ago. Indeed,
when one comes to think of it, I ought to have called
this story after her. But man is an ungrateful animal—worse
than most dogs. Not that the great deerhound
with the faithful eyes, who might have stepped out
of one of Landseer’s pictures, was forgotten—far from it.
But for her we should possibly now, both of us, be
bundles of dry bones, with all sorts of underground
small deer making merry amongst them.

 She ought, according to her merits, to hold pride of
place here. But she was quiet and unobtrusive as she
was faithful and affectionate, whereas Eclipse was nothing
of the kind, only a noisy blusterer, thinking of no
one but himself. Therefore, as happens so often with
us, has he stolen a march on a failing memory for prior [

75 ]

recognition. But the ‘ox’ is grass, and Kálee still lives
in the great Eastern Empire, and has two servants to
wait upon her. O Dea certe!  ‘Behold!’ said Treloar, as we lay and smoked in the
moonlight, after supper, in front of our tent, which
we had pitched between the door-posts of what had
evidently been a building of some size, but of which
they were the sole remains. ‘Behold, my friend, the
end of it all! But a few years are passed, and where,
now, are the busy thousands that toiled and strove and
jostled each other, below there, in earth’s bowels, in the
fierce race for gold? Look at it now! Think of the
great waves of human hopes and disappointments and
joys that have rolled to and fro across this miserable
patch of earth! Think of the brave hearts that came
hot with the excitement of the quest, and departed
broken with the emptiness of it. Also, of those others,
who never departed, but lie at rest beneath that yellow
clay. Just a little while, in the new-born one, is centred
alike the glow of success and the cold chill of failure;
all the might of swift fierce endeavour, every passion,
good and bad, that convulses our wretched souls. And
then, after a brief season, its pristine form defaced and
scarred, comes the rotting solitude of the tomb! Why
’tis, in some sort, the story of our corporal life and
death!

    ‘“Over the Mountains of the Moon,

 

Down the Vale of Shadow,

 

Ride, boldly ride,” the shade replied,

 

“For there lies El Dorado.”







 [

76 ] 

Behold, my friend, the Valley of the Shadow that has
passed, wherein many a bold soul has gone down to
Hades, “unhouselled, disappointed, unaneled.” Do
their ghosts wander yet, I ask?’

 ‘O, bother!’ I mutter sleepily. ‘I’m tired. Let’s
turn in.’

 Fortunately such outbursts were rare. But when the
fit came on, I knew too well the uselessness of attempting
to stop it.

 Awakened towards the small hours by the roarings of
Eclipse, triumphantly apprising the world at large that
his belly was full, I found the lantern still burning, and
could see Treloar’s eye ‘in a fine phrenzy rolling,’ as he
scribbled rapidly. Years afterwards I read in the Bombay Pioneer

‘How the Night Falls on Yamnibar,’
and thought it passable.

 It was anything but pleasant work, this groping about
old workings. It was also very dangerous. Many were
the close shaves we had of being buried, sometimes
alive, at others flattened out.

 The soil, for the first twenty or thirty feet, was of a
loose, friable description. Thence to the bottom, averaging
eighty feet, was ‘standing ground,’ i.e. , needed no
timbering. But, in many cases, the slabbing from the
upper parts had rotted away and fallen down, followed
by big masses of earth, which blocked up the entrance
to the drives where our work lay.

 Then after, with great trouble, clearing the bottom,
generally yellow pipeclay, and exploring the dark,
cramped passages for pillars, we had, before beginning [

77 ]

to displace these, to support the roof by artificial ones.
Timber had at the time of the rush been plentiful; as a
consequence pillars were scarce. Also, the field, having
in its prime been a wonderfully rich one, it had been
repeatedly fossicked over. This made them scarcer
still.

 Often after a heavy job of clearing out and heaving-up
mullock, water, and slabs, all the time in imminent peril
of a ‘fall’ from some part of the shaft, would we discover,
on exploring the drives, that they were simply
groves of props—not a natural support left standing.

 Such a network of holes and burrows as the place
was! I can compare it to nothing but a Brobdingnagian TN: original reads "Brobnignagian" rabbit-warren.

 The flat had been undermined, claim breaking into
claim, until the wonder was that the whole top crust
didn’t cave in. In some places this had happened, and
one looked down into a dismal chaos of soil, rotten
timber, and surface water.

 As I have remarked, it was risky work this hunting
for the few solitary grains amongst the rotten treasure-husks
left by others, especially without a local knowledge
of the past, which would have been so invaluable to us.
But there came to be, nevertheless, a sort of dreary
fascination in it.

 We had heard that, on this same field, years after its
total abandonment, a two hundred ounce nugget had
been found by a solitary fossicker in a pillar left in an
old claim.

 Very often, I believe, did the picture of that big lump [

78 ]

rise before us as we crawled and twisted and wriggled
about like a pair of great subterranean yellow eels, not
knowing the moment a few odd tons of earth might fall
and bury us.

 One day an incident rather out of the common befell.
Lowering Treloar cautiously down an old shaft to, as
usual, make a preliminary survey, I presently heard a
splash and a cry of ‘Heave-up!’ Up he came, a regular
Laocoon, in the close embraces of a thumping, lively
carpet snake, whose frogging ground he had intruded upon.

 He had, by luck, got a firm grip of the reptile round
the neck, and was not bitten. He was, however, badly
scared.

 Doubtfully he listened as, while releasing him from the
coils, I assured him that the thing was perfectly harmless.

 Was I quite certain on this point? he wished to know.
Of course I was; and I quoted all the authorities I could
think of.

 Then, before despatching it, would I let it bite me?
As an ardent ophiologist, he took the utmost interest in
such a fact, and would like to become as confident as
myself of it.

 But I pointed out earnestly that this was simply trifling,
and that we had no time to spare. Practical demonstration
is a very capital thing in many cases. But ver
non semper viret , and our friend of the curiously-patterned
skin might not be always

innocuous.

 We took three ounces out of a pillar in Snake Shaft. TN: punctuation invisible That night, on returning to our camp, we found an old
man there. He was the first person we had seen for a [

79 ]

month; and so were inclined to be cordial. There was
nothing particularly remarkable about the new-comer,
except that he had a habit of tightly shutting one eye as
he looked at you.

 I have called him old because his hair was grey; but
he was still a very powerful man, and likely to prove a
tough one at close quarters.

 ‘Come and have some supper, mate,’ said Treloar.

 ‘Call me Brummy, an’ keep yer dorg orf,’ replied the
other, as he poured out a pannikin of tea. ‘I don’t fancy
a big beast like yon a-breathin’ inter the back o’ a feller’s
neck.’

 And, indeed, Kálee’s attentions were marked. She
sniffed around and around the new-comer, bristled all her
hair up, and carried on a monologue which sounded
unpleasant.

 ‘No,’ he resumed in answer to a question, as Treloar
sent Kálee to her kennel. ‘I was never on this here field
before. Down about the Lachlan’s my towri TN: aboriginal word, no lang code available . Everybody
theer knows Brummy. I’m goin’ to do a bit of
fossickin’ now I got this far. Ain’t a-thinkin’ o’ interferin’
wi’ you. Surfiss is my dart—roun’ about the old tailin’s
and puddlers. Down below’s too risky in a rotten shop
like this. I leaves that game to the young ’uns. An’’
(with a sly grin) ‘old Brum does as well as the best on
’em in the long run.’

 Soon after this he went away and pitched a ragged fly
further along the flat.

 Next day, as we were having a smoke and a spell after
rigging two new windlass standards, he came up to us, [

80 ]

and in a furtive sort of manner, began to try and discover
the position of those claims which we had already
prospected. Having no motive for concealment, we told
him as well as we could, also pointing out most of them
from where we sat.

 He appeared quite pleased as we finished, and marched
off with his old tin dish banging and rattling against the
pick on his shoulder.

 ‘That old man,’ remarked Harry presently, ‘is a
dangerous old man. Moreover, he is a liar.’

 ‘How do you know that?’ I asked.

 ‘The first,’ he replied, ‘I feel—as Kálee did. Now for
the second count in the indictment. Did you not hear
him tell us that this was his first visit to Yamnibar?
Well, when he asked so carelessly if we had tried the big
shaft over yonder—the one where you can see the remains
of a horse-whim—and you said that we had not, a
momentary gleam of satisfaction passed across his face.
We’ll try that hole to-morrow morning. Luckily, our
new standards are finished.’

 ‘Pooh!’ I said. ‘My dear fellow, your legal training
has made you too suspicious. The poor old beggar may
have an idea of prospecting that very shaft himself.’

 ‘He probably has,’ replied Treloar quietly. ‘Only
don’t forget that he doesn’t like underground work.’

 However, my companion had his own way, which,
except in such matters as that of the snake-test, he
generally did; and next morning saw us fixing our
windlass at the summit of the big heap of mullock which
towered above its fellows.

 [

81 ] 

We seldom got anything in such claims. They had
mostly been worked by rich companies, and every ounce
of wash-dirt removed.

 It was pretty late by the time we had removed sufficient
of the débris from the bottom of the shaft—too late to do
more that night.

 As we walked over to our camp, we caught a glimpse
of ‘Brummy’ following us.

 ‘He’s been watching,’ said Treloar.

 ‘Nonsense!’ I replied impatiently. ‘You’re becoming
a monomaniac.’

 That evening our neighbour came over to our fire; and
in consequence Kálee , in low threatening communion
with herself, had to be put upon the chain.

 ‘Goin’ to try the big un?’ he asked presently.

 ‘Yes,’ said Harry; ‘there may be something there.
One can never tell.’

 ‘Not much danger!’ he blurted out. ‘The coves as
worked Number One North Rainbow weren’t the chaps
to leave much behind ’em. Leastways’—he quickly
added, seeing his mistake, ‘so I’ve heerd say.’

 Treloar gave me a look which meant ‘How now?’ but
neither of us took further notice.

 ‘I’ve heard tell, too,’ he continued, ‘as that claim’s
häänted.’

 ‘Oh!’ said Treloar airily, and as if in constant
association with them, ‘we don’t mind ghosts. It’s the
living, not the dead, that force us betimes to keep a
sharp look-out.’

 ‘Well, mates,’ retorted Brummy, rather sulkily, ‘I [

82 ]

ain’t quite cunnin’ enuff yet to chew tacks, but I ain’t
not altogether a born hidjiot; an’ if anybody was to offer
me a thousand poun’ to go down that ’ere shaft, where
you got your win’less rigged, an’ up them drives, I
wouldn’t do it.’

 ‘I was down it to-day,’ I remarked, ‘and didn’t notice
anything out of the common.’

 ‘Mebbe not, mebbe not—yet,’ said he. ‘But the
yarns I’ve listened to—on the Lachlan, over yander—consarning
that ’ere Rainbow claim ’d make your ’air
stick up stiff.’

 During the night, feeling restless and unable to sleep,
I got up and went outside. The weather was very hot,
and, for some time, I sat and listened to the faint wash
of the sea, longing for a plunge in its cool depths.
Suddenly, in the great expanse of gloom, my eyes
caught the glimmer of a light. As nearly as I could
guess, it was moving slowly towards the shaft we were to
descend in the morning.

 ‘There goes your aged friend,’ said a voice at my
shoulder, which made me start with the unexpectedness
of it.

 ‘Too hot and close to sleep,’ explained Treloar.
‘Come out for a breath of air.’

 ‘Let’s shepherd the old chap, and see what his little
game is. Bring the lantern. Needn’t show a light.
We know the way well enough. I expect he’s after
ghosts.’

 As, breathless, we arrived at our windlass, Treloar
gave a grunt of disappointment on seeing that [

83 ]

everything was exactly as we had left it—rope coiled neatly
round the barrel, green-hide bucket hanging over the
mouth.

 ‘It must have been a Jack-o’-lantern,’ said he; ‘or
perhaps the old sinner’s gone down some other shaft.
Yes, by Jingo! look there!’ he exclaimed, pointing to
where, a couple of hundred of yards distant, a flash of
light was visible for a moment. ‘He’s gone down the
Snake Shaft! Those ladders are as rotten as pears;
and he’ll break his wicked old neck if he isn’t careful.
I wish him joy of all he’ll find there, even if he gets to
the bottom safely. What came we out for to see? Let’s
make back.’

 It was my turn down next morning, and when I got
to the end of the hundred and odd feet of the häänted
shaft, I lit my candle, and, at random, entered one of
the four roomy drives that had been put in so many
long years ago.

 So extensively had it been quarried, that I was only
obliged to stoop slightly. Not a trace of earthen pillar
here. A valuable property this, and a clean-swept one.
Travelling warily along, I suddenly stumbled over a
ridge of mullock, into what was evidently another drive
altogether.

 My course, so far, had been downwards. The new
tunnel sloped slightly upwards.

 Evidently both claims had been driving for a ‘gutter.’
One of them had got to the end of its tether before
reaching it. The surface limits of ‘golden holes’ are
pretty strictly defined; but roguery, as well as miscalculation, [

84 ]

has been known to produce curious effects in adjoining
claims. Not that, just then, I bothered myself
with any such speculations. I was on the look-out for a
lump of that rich water-worn conglomerate which had
made Yamnibar, in the days of its youth, the talk of the
world. Sitting down to rest a minute, the candlelight
fell brightly on the shining steel of a pick.

 I had noticed how freshly the earth smelled, and
wondered thereat. The pick was fresh too. One could
swear that it had not left its owner’s grip five minutes.
Without a doubt it had been used to remove the thin
curtain of earth between the rival drives.

 Looking more closely, fresh knee and footprints were
plentiful.

 What the deuce did it mean?

 Crawling along the new drive, which was much
smaller than the Rainbow’s, I at length emerged into
a shaft that struck me as familiar.

 The ‘Snake,’ or I was a Dutchman!

 I knew it by the ladders, for one thing; for another,
by a piece of timber at the entrance to the opposite
drive—the one in which we had made our three-ounce
rise.

 I tried the rungs of the rude ladders. Not half so
rotten as we had taken them to be. Also covered with
fresh earth left by recent boots.

 Only fifty feet to the top, and up I went safely enough.
Treloar was sitting smoking, with his back towards me
as I approached.

 I startled him finely when I spoke.

 [

85 ] 

‘This is the hole the old man wants,’ he remarked,
after hearing my story. ‘He knew he couldn’t very well
get down our rope and climb up it again. But he knew
that one of the ‘Snake’ drives ran nearly into one of
these. I suspect he must once have been employed in
one or other of the claims. Either that, or he’s been
fossicking here before. You know we’ve come across
plenty of traces of such. Cunning old dodger! But
what can

he be after? I tell you what. We’ll both go
down and try another of the drives. We’ll leave Kálee on top to watch. I’ll bet you she’ll sing out pretty
soon.’

 I said nothing, for I was beginning to have doubts
respecting ‘Brummy’s’ veracity.

 This time I lowered Treloar first. Then, whilst
he held the rope taut, I slipped comfortably down.

 We chose the opposite drive to the one I had explored,
and moved in, Treloar leading.

 ‘Hello!’ said he presently, ‘someone’s been here
before us. See, there’s been a good-sized pillar taken
out. Why, here’s some of the dirt left yet! And—good
God!’ he suddenly exclaimed, ‘what’s this?’

 Pushing up alongside him, and holding my candle
forward, I saw, lying at full length, a human skeleton.
And yet it was not a complete skeleton. Here and
there, rags and tatters of flesh, dry and hard as leather,
stuck to the frame. A pair of heavy boots, with the ankle
bones protruding, lay detached, and remnants of clothing
were still visible. But the head was what fixed our
gaze, the first horror of the thing over. The fore part [

86 ]

of the skull had been smashed completely in. Near by
lay a small driving-pick, thickly encrusted as with
rust.

 ‘Neither rats, nor mice, nor snakes did that,’ whispered
Treloar, pointing to the awful fracture.

 ‘Surely,’ I replied, with a shiver, ‘this can’t be the
thing old Brummy’s searching for. No wonder he
insisted on the place being haunted.’

 ‘Not that poor valueless shell,’ answered my friend,
who was now kneeling, ‘but this! and this! and this!’
holding up, as he spoke, three fine nuggets, whose dull
gleam had caught his eye in the heap of loose drift on
which the skeleton partially lay.

 ‘Never!’ I exclaimed. ‘He never would have had
the pluck to face back again if that

is some of his
work.’

 ‘If it is,’ said Treloar, quickly springing to his
feet, thereby bumping the roof with his head, ‘we
shall soon hear of it. Back, man! Back for your life!
Hark! By G—d! there’s Kálee now. Good dog, hold
him!’ as if it were possible for her to hear at that
depth.

 Pushing and scrambling along, we got to the entrance
of the drive, where the muffled sounds resolved themselves
in a furious hullaballoo of barks and curses.
Then, as we paused for a moment, swish, swish, down
came the windlass rope, falling all of a heap. Just as
we were on the point of pushing out, what feeble light
there was at the bottom changed into total darkness,
and, with a terrific smash, a heavy mass fell at our feet. [

87 ]

Then silence, broken only by low groans and hoarse
fierce growls.

 With trembling hands we relit our candles, and saw
more distinctly.

 .
Squatted on his breast, the great hound watched him
narrowly—so narrowly that her lolling red tongue nearly
touched the face of the prostrate man. Blood oozed
slowly from his mouth and ears.

 With reluctance the dog obeyed her master’s call, and,
apparently uninjured, crouched in a corner, panting
loudly, while we examined Brummy.

 ‘ Habet! ’ said Treloar, as we turned him over. ‘Back’s
broken! See here’ (producing a loaded revolver from a
hip-pocket), ‘the old man meant business. It’s only
guessing, mind. But he probably thought we should
attempt to escape up the Snake Shaft, and would have
shot us off the ladders like magpies. Well done,
Goddess Kálee . You’ve proved yourself worthy of your
name for once, anyhow.’

 With a good deal of trouble we got the rope through
the drive into the Snake Shaft and on to our windlass
again. It had been cut clean off with a tomahawk.
We hove the man and the dog up. We let the other
thing alone for a while. But the one we had thought
dead was still alive, with a little life. As the cool air
blew on his face he opened his eyes. It was all he
could do. Black, beady eyes, once sharp and piercing,
now fast dulling with the death-film. And he lay there
and watched me, staring fixedly. It was a bright [

88 ]

sunshiny day, the birds were singing cheerily about us, and
the wash of the sea was very faint. From the expression
on his face I thought he was listening to it. Presently
Treloar returned from the camp with some brandy, and
poured a spoonful between the clenched teeth.

 The spirit revived him a little, and he spoke. He said,—

 ‘Curse you!’

 More brandy, and he spoke again.

 ‘Is he there yet?’

 ‘He’s there yet,’ answered Treloar. ‘How long ago
was it?’

 ‘Ten year.’

 ‘What did you kill him for?’

 More brandy; and then, as his eyes brightened, he
laughed, actually laughed up at us, saying, in a strong voice,—

 ‘Why, you fool, for the big lump, o’ coorse! A
’underd an’ eighty ounces! Too big to share, I reckon.
I’d a-smashed a dozen men for it in them days, let alone
a poor softy like Jim.’

 ‘There must be thirty or forty ounces down there,’ I
remarked. ‘Why didn’t you take that too?’

 ‘Never you mind,’ he said. ‘I come back for it now.
And if it hadn’t been for that theer infernal dorg I’d ha’
had it.’

 ‘And how about us?’ asked Treloar, as, obeying the
look in his eyes, he gave him another drink.

  [

88a ] 

[Illustration:

Upon the rope coils lay “Brummy,” quite still. ( ) ]



 The dying man smiled significantly, but said nothing.
There was a long pause, during which Brummy shut his [

89 ]

eyes, and breathed stertorously, whilst Kálee , drawing
herself noiselessly along on her belly, came closer, and
looked into his face, but with no anger in her gaze
now.

 ‘There’s one thing I can’t understand,’ said Treloar,
in a low voice, ‘and that is how he contrived to get up
this shaft again with the gold.’

 Quietly as he spoke, Brummy heard him, and muttered—

 ‘Would ye like to know?’

 ‘No, no!’ exclaimed Treloar earnestly. ‘We have
wasted far too much precious time already in vain talk.
Can we do anything to make your mind easier? You
know you can’t last much longer. In God’s name try
and prepare yourself to meet Him.’

 Very slowly came the reply, in short gasps,—

 ‘I’m easy enough. If I could choke the pair o’ ye by
winkin’ I’d do it. I’m gittin’ cold a’ready. But I’m
cursin’ ye to mysen all the time. If I kin git back I’ll
häänt ye.’

 Another long silence, and then he murmured,—

 ‘Take that dorg away, Jim, or I’ll put the pick into
yer! There, you got it now, ole man! Ah, would yer?’

 Then the flickering light in the eyes failed altogether,
and, I take it, a very defiant, murderous old soul went
forth to meet its Maker.

 Kálee , smelling at the body, sat upon her haunches
and wailed loudly and dismally after the manner of her
kind, answered from the flat by Eclipse, marvelling at
the disturbance of his friend, with sonorous bellowings.

 [

90 ] 

This was the requiem of him as he passed to join the
other shades of Yamnibar. Slain by a dog and the cunning
of his own hand.

 As for the gold that ‘Jim’ had lain by so quietly, and
watched so patiently through the years, we never got any
of it.

 The three nuggets figured in the police-court inquiry,
with other things, under the title of ‘Exhibit A.’

 That was the last glimpse we had of them.

 Departmental red tape enwrapped them so closely that
no amount of solicitation could render them visible again—to
us.

 Easier would it be to draw leviathan from the waters
with a bit of twine and a crooked pin than to draw
‘treasure trove’ from the coffers of a treasury—colonial
or otherwise.

 To this day they are possibly accumulating dust,
pigeon-holed with the depositions in the case. But
I doubt it, I doubt it.