OLD MONGILET
    

      In the office old Mongilet was considered a type. He was a good old
      employee, who had never been outside Paris but once in his life.
    

      It was the end of July, and each of us, every Sunday, went to roll in the
      grass, or soak in the water in the country near by. Asnieres, Argenteuil,
      Chatou, Borgival, Maisons, Poissy, had their habitues and their ardent
      admirers. We argued about the merits and advantages of all these places,
      celebrated and delightful to all Parsian employees.
    

      Daddy Mongilet declared:
    

      “You are like a lot of sheep! It must be pretty, this country you
      talk of!”
    

      “Well, how about you, Mongilet? Don't you ever go on an excursion?”
    

      “Yes, indeed. I go in an omnibus. When I have had a good luncheon,
      without any hurry, at the wine shop down there, I look up my route with a
      plan of Paris, and the time table of the lines and connections. And then I
      climb up on the box, open my umbrella and off we go. Oh, I see lots of
      things, more than you, I bet! I change my surroundings. It is as though I
      were taking a journey across the world, the people are so different in one
      street and another. I know my Paris better than anyone. And then, there is
      nothing more amusing than the entresols. You would not believe what one
      sees in there at a glance. One guesses at domestic scenes simply at sight
      of the face of a man who is roaring; one is amused on passing by a
      barber's shop, to see the barber leave his customer whose face is covered
      with lather to look out in the street. One exchanges heartfelt glances
      with the milliners just for fun, as one has no time to alight. Ah, how
      many things one sees!
    

      “It is the drama, the real, the true, the drama of nature, seen as
      the horses trot by. Heavens! I would not give my excursions in the omnibus
      for all your stupid excursions in the woods.”
    

      “Come and try it, Mongilet, come to the country once just to see.”
    

      “I was there once,” he replied, “twenty years ago, and
      you will never catch me there again.”
    

      “Tell us about it, Mongilet.”
    

      “If you wish to hear it. This is how it was:
    

      “You knew Boivin, the old editorial clerk, whom we called Boileau?”
    

      “Yes, perfectly.”
    

      “He was my office chum. The rascal had a house at Colombes and
      always invited me to spend Sunday with him. He would say:
    

      “'Come along, Maculotte [he called me Maculotte for fun]. You will
      see what a nice excursion we will take.'
    

      “I let myself be entrapped like an animal, and set out, one morning
      by the 8 o'clock train. I arrived at a kind of town, a country town where
      there is nothing to see, and I at length found my way to an old wooden
      door with an iron bell, at the end of an alley between two walls.
    

      “I rang, and waited a long time, and at last the door was opened.
      What was it that opened it? I could not tell at the first glance. A woman
      or an ape? The creature was old, ugly, covered with old clothes that
      looked dirty and wicked. It had chicken's feathers in its hair and looked
      as though it would devour me.
    

      “'What do you want?' she said.
    

      “'Mr. Boivin.'
    

      “'What do you want of him, of Mr. Boivin?'
    

      “I felt ill at ease on being questioned by this fury. I stammered:
      'Why-he expects me.'
    

      “'Ah, it is you who have come to luncheon?'
    

      “'Yes,' I stammered, trembling.
    

      “Then, turning toward the house, she cried in an angry tone:
    

      “'Boivin, here is your man!'
    

      “It was my friend's wife. Little Boivin appeared immediately on the
      threshold of a sort of barrack of plaster covered with zinc, that looked
      like a foot stove. He wore white duck trousers covered with stains and a
      dirty Panama hat.
    

      “After shaking my hands warmly, he took me into what he called his
      garden. It was at the end of another alleyway enclosed by high walls and
      was a little square the size of a pocket handkerchief, surrounded by
      houses that were so high that the sun, could reach it only two or three
      hours in the day. Pansies, pinks, wallflowers and a few rose bushes were
      languishing in this well without air, and hot as an oven from the
      refraction of heat from the roofs.
    

      “'I have no trees,' said Boivin, 'but the neighbors' walls take
      their place. I have as much shade as in a wood.'
    

      “Then he took hold of a button of my coat and said in a low tone:
    

      “'You can do me a service. You saw the wife. She is not agreeable,
      eh? To-day, as I had invited you, she gave me clean clothes; but if I spot
      them all is lost. I counted on you to water my plants.'
    

      “I agreed. I took off my coat, rolled up my sleeves, and began to
      work the handle of a kind of pump that wheezed, puffed and rattled like a
      consumptive as it emitted a thread of water like a Wallace drinking
      fountain. It took me ten minutes to water it and I was in a bath of
      perspiration. Boivin directed me:
    

      “'Here—this plant—a little more; enough—now this
      one.'
    

      “The watering pot leaked and my feet got more water than the
      flowers. The bottoms of my trousers were soaking and covered with mud. And
      twenty times running I kept it up, soaking my feet afresh each time, and
      perspiring anew as I worked the handle of the pump. And when I was tired
      out and wanted to stop, Boivin, in a tone of entreaty, said as he put his
      hand on my arm:
    

      “Just one more watering pot full—just one, and that will be
      all.'
    

      “To thank me he gave me a rose, a big rose, but hardly had it
      touched my button-hole than it fell to pieces, leaving only a hard little
      green knot as a decoration. I was surprised, but said nothing.
    

      “Mme. Boivin's voice was heard in the distance:
    

      “'Are you ever coming? When you know that luncheon is ready!'
    

      “We went toward the foot stove. If the garden was in the shade, the
      house, on the other hand, was in the blazing sun, and the sweating room in
      the Turkish bath is not as hot as was my friend's dining room.
    

      “Three plates at the side of which were some half-washed forks, were
      placed on a table of yellow wood in the middle of which stood an
      earthenware dish containing boiled beef and potatoes. We began to eat.
    

      “A large water bottle full of water lightly colored with wine
      attracted my attention. Boivin, embarrassed, said to his wife:
    

      “'See here, my dear, just on a special occasion, are you not going
      to give us some plain wine?'
    

      “She looked at him furiously.
    

      “'So that you may both get tipsy, is that it, and stay here gabbing
      all day? A fig for your special occasion!'
    

      “He said no more. After the stew she brought in another dish of
      potatoes cooked with bacon. When this dish was finished, still in silence,
      she announced:
    

      “'That is all! Now get out!'
    

      “Boivin looked at her in astonishment.
    

      “'But the pigeon—the pigeon you plucked this morning?'
    

      “She put her hands on her hips:
    

      “'Perhaps you have not had enough? Because you bring people here is
      no reason why we should devour all that there is in the house. What is
      there for me to eat this evening?'
    

      “We rose. Solvin whispered
    

      “'Wait for me a second, and we will skip.'
    

      “He went into the kitchen where his wife had gone, and I overheard
      him say:
    

      “'Give me twenty sous, my dear.'
    

      “'What do you want with twenty sons?'
    

      “'Why, one does not know what may happen. It is always better to
      have some money.'
    

      “She yelled so that I should hear:
    

      “'No, I will not give it to you! As the man has had luncheon here,
      the least he can do is to pay your expenses for the day.'
    

      “Boivin came back to fetch me. As I wished to be polite I bowed to
      the mistress of the house, stammering:
    

      “'Madame—many thanks—kind welcome.'
    

      “'That's all right,' she replied. 'But do not bring him back drunk,
      for you will have to answer to me, you know!'
    

      “We set out. We had to cross a perfectly bare plain under the
      burning sun. I attempted to gather a flower along the road and gave a cry
      of pain. It had hurt my hand frightfully. They call these plants nettles.
      And, everywhere, there was a smell of manure, enough to turn your stomach.
    

      “Boivin said, 'Have a little patience and we will reach the river
      bank.'
    

      “We reached the river. Here there was an odor of mud and dirty
      water, and the sun blazed down on the water so that it burned my eyes. I
      begged Boivin to go under cover somewhere. He took me into a kind of
      shanty filled with men, a river boatmen's tavern.
    

      “He said:
    

      “'This does not look very grand, but it is very comfortable.'
    

      “I was hungry. I ordered an omelet. But to and behold, at the second
      glass of wine, that beggar, Boivin, lost his head, and I understand why
      his wife gave him water diluted.
    

      “He got up, declaimed, wanted to show his strength, interfered in a
      quarrel between two drunken men who were fighting, and, but for the
      landlord, who came to the rescue, we should both have been killed.
    

      “I dragged him away, holding him up until we reached the first bush
      where I deposited him. I lay down beside him and, it seems, I fell asleep.
      We must certainly have slept a long time, for it was dark when I awoke.
      Boivin was snoring at my side. I shook him; he rose but he was still
      drunk, though a little less so.
    

      “We set out through the darkness across the plain. Boivin said he
      knew the way. He made me turn to the left, then to the right, then to the
      left. We could see neither sky nor earth, and found ourselves lost in the
      midst of a kind of forest of wooden stakes, that came as high as our
      noses. It was a vineyard and these were the supports. There was not a
      single light on the horizon. We wandered about in this vineyard for about
      an hour or two, hesitating, reaching out our arms without finding any
      limit, for we kept retracing our steps.
    

      “At length Boivin fell against a stake that tore his cheek and he
      remained in a sitting posture on the ground, uttering with all his might
      long and resounding hallos, while I screamed 'Help! Help!' as loud as I
      could, lighting candle-matches to show the way to our rescuers, and also
      to keep up my courage.
    

      “At last a belated peasant heard us and put us on our right road. I
      took Boivin to his home, but as I was leaving him on the threshold of his
      garden, the door opened suddenly and his wife appeared, a candle in her
      hand. She frightened me horribly.
    

      “As soon as she saw her husband, whom she must have been waiting for
      since dark, she screamed, as she darted toward me:
    

      “'Ah, scoundrel, I knew you would bring him back drunk!'
    

      “My, how I made my escape, running all the way to the station, and
      as I thought the fury was pursuing me I shut myself in an inner room as
      the train was not due for half an hour.
    

      “That is why I never married, and why I never go out of Paris.”