ON THE RIVER

 I rented a little country house last summer on the banks of the Seine,
      several leagues from Paris, and went out there to sleep every evening.
      After a few days I made the acquaintance of one of my neighbors, a man
      between thirty and forty, who certainly was the most curious specimen I
      ever met. He was an old boating man, and crazy about boating. He was
      always beside the water, on the water, or in the water. He must have been
      born in a boat, and he will certainly die in a boat at the last.

 One evening as we were walking along the banks of the Seine I asked him to
      tell me some stories about his life on the water. The good man at once
      became animated, his whole expression changed, he became eloquent, almost
      poetical. There was in his heart one great passion, an absorbing,
      irresistible passion-the river.

 Ah, he said to me, how many memories I have, connected with that river
      that you see flowing beside us! You people who live in streets know
      nothing about the river. But listen to a fisherman as he mentions the
      word. To him it is a mysterious thing, profound, unknown, a land of
      mirages and phantasmagoria, where one sees by night things that do not
      exist, hears sounds that one does not recognize, trembles without knowing
      why, as in passing through a cemetery—and it is, in fact, the most
      sinister of cemeteries, one in which one has no tomb.

 The land seems limited to the river boatman, and on dark nights, when
      there is no moon, the river seems limitless. A sailor has not the same
      feeling for the sea. It is often remorseless and cruel, it is true; but it
      shrieks, it roars, it is honest, the great sea; while the river is silent
      and perfidious. It does not speak, it flows along without a sound; and
      this eternal motion of flowing water is more terrible to me than the high
      waves of the ocean.

 Dreamers maintain that the sea hides in its bosom vast tracts of blue
      where those who are drowned roam among the big fishes, amid strange
      forests and crystal grottoes. The river has only black depths where one
      rots in the slime. It is beautiful, however, when it sparkles in the light
      of the rising sun and gently laps its banks covered with whispering reeds.

 The poet says, speaking of the ocean,

 “O waves, what mournful tragedies ye know
   —Deep waves, the dread of kneeling mothers' hearts!
   Ye tell them to each other as ye roll
   On flowing tide, and this it is that gives
   The sad despairing tones unto your voice
   As on ye roll at eve by mounting tide.”

 Well, I think that the stories whispered by the slender reeds, with their
      little soft voices, must be more sinister than the lugubrious tragedies
      told by the roaring of the waves.

 But as you have asked for some of my recollections, I will tell you of a
      singular adventure that happened to me ten years ago.

 I was living, as I am now, in Mother Lafon's house, and one of my closest
      friends, Louis Bernet who has now given up boating, his low shoes and his
      bare neck, to go into the Supreme Court, was living in the village of C.,
      two leagues further down the river. We dined together every day, sometimes
      at his house, sometimes at mine.

 One evening as I was coming home along and was pretty tired, rowing with
      difficulty my big boat, a twelve-footer, which I always took out at night,
      I stopped a few moments to draw breath near the reed-covered point yonder,
      about two hundred metres from the railway bridge.

 It was a magnificent night, the moon shone brightly, the river gleamed,
      the air was calm and soft. This peacefulness tempted me. I thought to
      myself that it would be pleasant to smoke a pipe in this spot. I took up
      my anchor and cast it into the river.

 The boat floated downstream with the current, to the end of the chain, and
      then stopped, and I seated myself in the stern on my sheepskin and made
      myself as comfortable as possible. There was not a sound to be heard,
      except that I occasionally thought I could perceive an almost
      imperceptible lapping of the water against the bank, and I noticed taller
      groups of reeds which assumed strange shapes and seemed, at times, to
      move.

 The river was perfectly calm, but I felt myself affected by the unusual
      silence that surrounded me. All the creatures, frogs and toads, those
      nocturnal singers of the marsh, were silent.

 Suddenly a frog croaked to my right, and close beside me. I shuddered. It
      ceased, and I heard nothing more, and resolved to smoke, to soothe my
      mind. But, although I was a noted colorer of pipes, I could not smoke; at
      the second draw I was nauseated, and gave up trying. I began to sing. The
      sound of my voice was distressing to me. So I lay still, but presently the
      slight motion of the boat disturbed me. It seemed to me as if she were
      making huge lurches, from bank to bank of the river, touching each bank
      alternately. Then I felt as though an invisible force, or being, were
      drawing her to the surface of the water and lifting her out, to let her
      fall again. I was tossed about as in a tempest. I heard noises around me.
      I sprang to my feet with a single bound. The water was glistening, all was
      calm.

 I saw that my nerves were somewhat shaky, and I resolved to leave the
      spot. I pulled the anchor chain, the boat began to move; then I felt a
      resistance. I pulled harder, the anchor did not come up; it had caught on
      something at the bottom of the river and I could not raise it. I began
      pulling again, but all in vain. Then, with my oars, I turned the boat with
      its head up stream to change the position of the anchor. It was no use, it
      was still caught. I flew into a rage and shook the chain furiously.
      Nothing budged. I sat down, disheartened, and began to reflect on my
      situation. I could not dream of breaking this chain, or detaching it from
      the boat, for it was massive and was riveted at the bows to a piece of
      wood as thick as my arm. However, as the weather was so fine I thought
      that it probably would not be long before some fisherman came to my aid.
      My ill-luck had quieted me. I sat down and was able, at length, to smoke
      my pipe. I had a bottle of rum; I drank two or three glasses, and was able
      to laugh at the situation. It was very warm; so that, if need be, I could
      sleep out under the stars without any great harm.

 All at once there was a little knock at the side of the boat. I gave a
      start, and a cold sweat broke out all over me. The noise was, doubtless,
      caused by some piece of wood borne along by the current, but that was
      enough, and I again became a prey to a strange nervous agitation. I seized
      the chain and tensed my muscles in a desperate effort. The anchor held
      firm. I sat down again, exhausted.

 The river had slowly become enveloped in a thick white fog which lay close
      to the water, so that when I stood up I could see neither the river, nor
      my feet, nor my boat; but could perceive only the tops of the reeds, and
      farther off in the distance the plain, lying white in the moonlight, with
      big black patches rising up from it towards the sky, which were formed by
      groups of Italian poplars. I was as if buried to the waist in a cloud of
      cotton of singular whiteness, and all sorts of strange fancies came into
      my mind. I thought that someone was trying to climb into my boat which I
      could no longer distinguish, and that the river, hidden by the thick fog,
      was full of strange creatures which were swimming all around me. I felt
      horribly uncomfortable, my forehead felt as if it had a tight band round
      it, my heart beat so that it almost suffocated me, and, almost beside
      myself, I thought of swimming away from the place. But then, again, the
      very idea made me tremble with fear. I saw myself, lost, going by
      guesswork in this heavy fog, struggling about amid the grasses and reeds
      which I could not escape, my breath rattling with fear, neither seeing the
      bank, nor finding my boat; and it seemed as if I would feel myself dragged
      down by the feet to the bottom of these black waters.

 In fact, as I should have had to ascend the stream at least five hundred
      metres before finding a spot free from grasses and rushes where I could
      land, there were nine chances to one that I could not find my way in the
      fog and that I should drown, no matter how well I could swim.

 I tried to reason with myself. My will made me resolve not to be afraid,
      but there was something in me besides my will, and that other thing was
      afraid. I asked myself what there was to be afraid of. My brave “ego”
      ridiculed my coward “ego,” and never did I realize, as on that
      day, the existence in us of two rival personalities, one desiring a thing,
      the other resisting, and each winning the day in turn.

 This stupid, inexplicable fear increased, and became terror. I remained
      motionless, my eyes staring, my ears on the stretch with expectation. Of
      what? I did not know, but it must be something terrible. I believe if it
      had occurred to a fish to jump out of the water, as often happens, nothing
      more would have been required to make me fall over, stiff and unconscious.

 However, by a violent effort I succeeded in becoming almost rational
      again. I took up my bottle of rum and took several pulls. Then an idea
      came to me, and I began to shout with all my might towards all the points
      of the compass in succession. When my throat was absolutely paralyzed I
      listened. A dog was howling, at a great distance.

 I drank some more rum and stretched myself out at the bottom of the boat.
      I remained there about an hour, perhaps two, not sleeping, my eyes wide
      open, with nightmares all about me. I did not dare to rise, and yet I
      intensely longed to do so. I delayed it from moment to moment. I said to
      myself: “Come, get up!” and I was afraid to move. At last I
      raised myself with infinite caution as though my life depended on the
      slightest sound that I might make; and looked over the edge of the boat. I
      was dazzled by the most marvellous, the most astonishing sight that it is
      possible to see. It was one of those phantasmagoria of fairyland, one of
      those sights described by travellers on their return from distant lands,
      whom we listen to without believing.

 The fog which, two hours before, had floated on the water, had gradually
      cleared off and massed on the banks, leaving the river absolutely clear;
      while it formed on either bank an uninterrupted wall six or seven metres
      high, which shone in the moonlight with the dazzling brilliance of snow.
      One saw nothing but the river gleaming with light between these two white
      mountains; and high above my head sailed the great full moon, in the midst
      of a bluish, milky sky.

 All the creatures in the water were awake. The frogs croaked furiously,
      while every few moments I heard, first to the right and then to the left,
      the abrupt, monotonous and mournful metallic note of the bullfrogs.
      Strange to say, I was no longer afraid. I was in the midst of such an
      unusual landscape that the most remarkable things would not have
      astonished me.

 How long this lasted I do not know, for I ended by falling asleep. When I
      opened my eyes the moon had gone down and the sky was full of clouds. The
      water lapped mournfully, the wind was blowing, it was pitch dark. I drank
      the rest of the rum, then listened, while I trembled, to the rustling of
      the reeds and the foreboding sound of the river. I tried to see, but could
      not distinguish my boat, nor even my hands, which I held up close to my
      eyes.

 Little by little, however, the blackness became less intense. All at once
      I thought I noticed a shadow gliding past, quite near me. I shouted, a
      voice replied; it was a fisherman. I called him; he came near and I told
      him of my ill-luck. He rowed his boat alongside of mine and, together, we
      pulled at the anchor chain. The anchor did not move. Day came, gloomy
      gray, rainy and cold, one of those days that bring one sorrows and
      misfortunes. I saw another boat. We hailed it. The man on board of her
      joined his efforts to ours, and gradually the anchor yielded. It rose, but
      slowly, slowly, loaded down by a considerable weight. At length we
      perceived a black mass and we drew it on board. It was the corpse of an
      old women with a big stone round her neck.