ON THE STRENGTH OF A LIKENESS.

 If your mirror be broken, look into still water; but have a care
   that you do not fall in.
                  —Hindu Proverb.

 Next to a requited attachment, one of the most convenient things that a
      young man can carry about with him at the beginning of his career, is an
      unrequited attachment. It makes him feel important and business-like, and
      blase, and cynical; and whenever he has a touch of liver, or suffers from
      want of exercise, he can mourn over his lost love, and be very happy in a
      tender, twilight fashion.

 Hannasyde's affair of the heart had been a Godsend to him. It was four
      years old, and the girl had long since given up thinking of it.

 She had married and had many cares of her own. In the beginning, she had
      told Hannasyde that, “while she could never be anything more than a sister
      to him, she would always take the deepest interest in his welfare.” This
      startlingly new and original remark gave Hannasyde something to think over
      for two years; and his own vanity filled in the other twenty-four months.
      Hannasyde was quite different from Phil Garron, but, none the less, had
      several points in common with that far too lucky man.

 He kept his unrequited attachment by him as men keep a well-smoked pipe—for
      comfort's sake, and because it had grown dear in the using. It brought him
      happily through the Simla season. Hannasyde was not lovely. There was a
      crudity in his manners, and a roughness in the way in which he helped a
      lady on to her horse, that did not attract the other sex to him. Even if
      he had cast about for their favor, which he did not. He kept his wounded
      heart all to himself for a while.

 Then trouble came to him. All who go to Simla, know the slope from the
      Telegraph to the Public Works Office. Hannasyde was loafing up the hill,
      one September morning between calling hours, when a 'rickshaw came down in
      a hurry, and in the 'rickshaw sat the living, breathing image of the girl
      who had made him so happily unhappy.

 Hannasyde leaned against the railing and gasped. He wanted to run downhill
      after the 'rickshaw, but that was impossible; so he went forward with most
      of his blood in his temples. It was impossible, for many reasons, that the
      woman in the 'rickshaw could be the girl he had known. She was, he
      discovered later, the wife of a man from Dindigul, or Coimbatore, or some
      out-of-the-way place, and she had come up to Simla early in the season for
      the good of her health.

 She was going back to Dindigul, or wherever it was, at the end of the
      season; and in all likelihood would never return to Simla again, her
      proper Hill-station being Ootacamund. That night, Hannasyde, raw and
      savage from the raking up of all old feelings, took counsel with himself
      for one measured hour. What he decided upon was this; and you must decide
      for yourself how much genuine affection for the old love, and how much a
      very natural inclination to go abroad and enjoy himself, affected the
      decision. Mrs. Landys-Haggert would never in all human likelihood cross
      his path again. So whatever he did didn't much matter. She was
      marvellously like the girl who “took a deep interest” and the rest of the
      formula. All things considered, it would be pleasant to make the
      acquaintance of Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and for a little time—only a
      very little time—to make believe that he was with Alice Chisane
      again. Every one is more or less mad on one point. Hannasyde's particular
      monomania was his old love, Alice Chisane.

 He made it his business to get introduced to Mrs. Haggert, and the
      introduction prospered. He also made it his business to see as much as he
      could of that lady. When a man is in earnest as to interviews, the
      facilities which Simla offers are startling. There are garden-parties, and
      tennis-parties, and picnics, and luncheons at Annandale, and
      rifle-matches, and dinners and balls; besides rides and walks, which are
      matters of private arrangement.

 Hannasyde had started with the intention of seeing a likeness, and he
      ended by doing much more. He wanted to be deceived, he meant to be
      deceived, and he deceived himself very thoroughly. Not only were the face
      and figure, the face and figure of Alice Chisane, but the voice and lower
      tones were exactly the same, and so were the turns of speech; and the
      little mannerisms, that every woman has, of gait and gesticulation, were
      absolutely and identically the same. The turn of the head was the same;
      the tired look in the eyes at the end of a long walk was the same; the
      sloop and wrench over the saddle to hold in a pulling horse was the same;
      and once, most marvellous of all, Mrs. Landys-Haggert singing to herself
      in the next room, while Hannasyde was waiting to take her for a ride,
      hummed, note for note, with a throaty quiver of the voice in the second
      line:—“Poor Wandering One!” exactly as Alice Chisane had hummed it
      for Hannasyde in the dusk of an English drawing-room. In the actual woman
      herself—in the soul of her—there was not the least likeness;
      she and Alice Chisane being cast in different moulds. But all that
      Hannasyde wanted to know and see and think about, was this maddening and
      perplexing likeness of face and voice and manner. He was bent on making a
      fool of himself that way; and he was in no sort disappointed.

 Open and obvious devotion from any sort of man is always pleasant to any
      sort of woman; but Mrs. Landys-Haggert, being a woman of the world, could
      make nothing of Hannasyde's admiration.

 He would take any amount of trouble—he was a selfish man habitually—to
      meet and forestall, if possible, her wishes.

 Anything she told him to do was law; and he was, there could be no
      doubting it, fond of her company so long as she talked to him, and kept on
      talking about trivialities. But when she launched into expression of her
      personal views and her wrongs, those small social differences that make
      the spice of Simla life, Hannasyde was neither pleased nor interested. He
      didn't want to know anything about Mrs. Landys-Haggert, or her experiences
      in the past—she had travelled nearly all over the world, and could
      talk cleverly—he wanted the likeness of Alice Chisane before his
      eyes and her voice in his ears.

 Anything outside that, reminding him of another personality jarred, and he
      showed that it did.

 Under the new Post Office, one evening, Mrs. Landys-Haggert turned on him,
      and spoke her mind shortly and without warning. “Mr. Hannasyde,” said she,
      “will you be good enough to explain why you have appointed yourself my
      special cavalier servente? I don't understand it. But I am perfectly
      certain, somehow or other, that you don't care the least little bit in the
      world for ME.” This seems to support, by the way, the theory that no man
      can act or tell lies to a woman without being found out. Hannasyde was
      taken off his guard. His defence never was a strong one, because he was
      always thinking of himself, and he blurted out, before he knew what he was
      saying, this inexpedient answer:—“No more I do.”

 The queerness of the situation and the reply, made Mrs. Haggert laugh.
      Then it all came out; and at the end of Hannasyde's lucid explanation,
      Mrs. Haggert said, with the least little touch of scorn in her voice:—“So
      I'm to act as the lay-figure for you to hang the rags of your tattered
      affections on, am I?”

 Hannasyde didn't see what answer was required, and he devoted himself
      generally and vaguely to the praise of Alice Chisane, which was
      unsatisfactory. Now it is to be thoroughly made clear that Mrs. Haggert
      had not the shadow of a ghost of an interest in Hannasyde.

 Only—only no woman likes being made love through instead of to—specially
      on behalf of a musty divinity of four years' standing.

 Hannasyde did not see that he had made any very particular exhibition of
      himself. He was glad to find a sympathetic soul in the arid wastes of
      Simla.

 When the season ended, Hannasyde went down to his own place and Mrs.
      Haggert to hers. “It was like making love to a ghost,” said Hannasyde to
      himself, “and it doesn't matter; and now I'll get to my work.” But he
      found himself thinking steadily of the Haggert-Chisane ghost; and he could
      not be certain whether it was Haggert or Chisane that made up the greater
      part of the pretty phantom..........

 He got understanding a month later.

 A peculiar point of this peculiar country is the way in which a heartless
      Government transfers men from one end of the Empire to the other. You can
      never be sure of getting rid of a friend or an enemy till he or she dies.
      There was a case once—but that's another story.

 Haggert's Department ordered him up from Dindigul to the Frontier at two
      days' notice, and he went through, losing money at every step, from
      Dindigul to his station. He dropped Mrs. Haggert at Lucknow, to stay with
      some friends there, to take part in a big ball at the Chutter Munzil, and
      to come on when he had made the new home a little comfortable. Lucknow was
      Hannasyde's station, and Mrs. Haggert stayed a week there. Hannasyde went
      to meet her. And the train came in, he discovered which he had been
      thinking of for the past month. The unwisdom of his conduct also struck
      him. The Lucknow week, with two dances, and an unlimited quantity of rides
      together, clinched matters; and Hannasyde found himself pacing this circle
      of thought:—He adored Alice Chisane—at least he HAD adored
      her. AND he admired Mrs. Landys-Haggert because she was like Alice
      Chisane. BUT Mrs. Landys-Haggert was not in the least like Alice Chisane,
      being a thousand times more adorable. NOW Alice Chisane was “the bride of
      another,” and so was Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and a good and honest wife too.
      THEREFORE, he, Hannasyde, was.... here he called himself several hard
      names, and wished that he had been wise in the beginning.

 Whether Mrs. Landys-Haggert saw what was going on in his mind, she alone
      knows. He seemed to take an unqualified interest in everything connected
      with herself, as distinguished from the Alice-Chisane likeness, and he
      said one or two things which, if Alice Chisane had been still betrothed to
      him, could scarcely have been excused, even on the grounds of the
      likeness. But Mrs. Haggert turned the remarks aside, and spent a long time
      in making Hannasyde see what a comfort and a pleasure she had been to him
      because of her strange resemblance to his old love. Hannasyde groaned in
      his saddle and said, “Yes, indeed,” and busied himself with preparations
      for her departure to the Frontier, feeling very small and miserable.

 The last day of her stay at Lucknow came, and Hannasyde saw her off at the
      Railway Station. She was very grateful for his kindness and the trouble he
      had taken, and smiled pleasantly and sympathetically as one who knew the
      Alice-Chisane reason of that kindness. And Hannasyde abused the coolies
      with the luggage, and hustled the people on the platform, and prayed that
      the roof might fall in and slay him.

 As the train went out slowly, Mrs. Landys-Haggert leaned out of the window
      to say goodbye:—“On second thoughts au revoir, Mr. Hannasyde. I go
      Home in the Spring, and perhaps I may meet you in Town.”

 Hannasyde shook hands, and said very earnestly and adoringly:—“I
      hope to Heaven I shall never see your face again!”

 And Mrs. Haggert understood.