[

146 ] 

ON THE GRAND STAND.

 A Pioneer Sketch.

 There

was a lot of men from up-country staying at the
Kamilaroi. One could easily tell them by their bronzed
hands and faces, and creased or brand-new clothes, from
the city members of the well-known Pastoralists’ Club.

 ‘Hello,’ suddenly exclaimed a fine-looking man, whose
thick moustache lay snow-white against the deep tan of
his cheek, ‘here’s Boorookoorora in the market! H’m,
one hundred and sixty thousand sheep (so they’ve got
the jumbucks on it at last).... Capital homestead ...
stone-built house ... splendid garden and orchard.
How things must have changed out there since Wal
Neville and Jimmy Carstairs and myself took that country
up, and lived for months at a time on damper, bullock
and pigweed in a bark humpy. Stone house and orchard!
Well, well,’ he concluded, laying down the newspaper
with a sigh, ‘I hope they haven’t disturbed the boys.
I left them there sleeping quietly enough side by side
over five-and-twenty years ago.’

 ‘Shouldn’t have gone home and stayed away so long, [

147 ]

Standish,’ here remarked a friend. ’You’re out of touch
altogether with our side now. That’s the worst of being
rich. D’rectly a fellow gets a pot of money left him, off
he must go “home.” But here’s Hatton.—Hatton, let
me introduce Mr Hugh Standish to you. He’s interested
in your place. First man to take it up; early pioneer,
and all that sort of thing.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Mr Hatton presently, ‘I was the first to
put sheep on Boorookoorora, and they do well. Yes,
the two graves are untouched at the old homestead still.
Carstairs and Neville! I’ve heard the story, or a version
of it. Poor fellows! I had their graves freshly fenced
in a couple of years ago. And so you were the third
partner. Will you tell us the story of your escape? I
should much like to hear it at first hand.’

 ‘Do you know the Grand Stand?’ asked Standish,
without replying directly.

 The other shook his head.

 ‘What is it?’ he asked.

 ‘Why, the big rock, close to the Black Waterhole, on
your own run,’ replied Standish.

 ‘Oh,’ said his new acquaintance, ‘you mean Mount
Lookout. That’s just at the bottom of the orchard now.
You see, we’ve shifted the head station from where you
and Warner and Adams and the rest had it.’

 ‘Well, well,’ replied the other, ‘Grand Stand, or
Mount Lookout, or whatever you like to call it, I had a
very rough time on its top.’

 ‘Ah,’ remarked the owner of Boorookoorora, ‘I’ve
had the top levelled and an anemometer erected on it; [

148 ]

also a flight of steps cut. In fact, it is a sort of observatory
on a small scale.’

 ‘The devil it is!’ exclaimed Standish. ‘Well, if
you’ll listen, I’ll tell you what I observed once from its
top.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘There were three of us. We were all young and
healthy, and each had a little money. Foregathering
(the first time was in this very room), we determined to
become partners, and take up country. We would go
out in person—far out, beyond even, as poor Neville
put it, the “furthest paling of civilisation.”

 ‘There we would acquire a territory, expressible not
in poor, miserable acres, but in square miles—thousands
of ’em.

 ‘There we would breed sheep and cattle, increasing
yearly in multitude, so that the sands upon the sea-shore TN: OED hyphenates shouldn’t be a circumstance to them. We would
plant in that far country our own vines and our own fig-trees,
and sit under their shade in the good days to
come—we and our children, and our children’s children
after us—in that wide and pleasant heritage of our founding.
Alas, the glamour of youth and confidence, and
health and strength over a bottle or two of good wine!
Five-and-twenty years ago, gentlemen, in this same old
room!

 ‘So we went. And the days grew into weeks, and
the weeks into months, as we rode, searching hither and
thither, to the right hand or to the left, but always with
our faces to the falling sun. Over stony ridges and over [

149 ]

rolling downs; over deserts of cruel spinifex and barren
sand; through great scrubs, thick and gloomy; along
rivers, tortuous and muddy. At times drenched with
rain, at others suffering from heat and hunger and thirst,
but ever westward. At length, after many disappointments,
emerging from a broad stretch of sterile country
and ascending a range of low hills, our eyes beheld
something resembling the Canaan of our dreams. Track
of horse or beast we had not seen for weeks; therefore
we knew that the land was, if we so willed it, ours.

 ‘For a long time we gazed over the timber-clumped,
wide expanse, emerald-swarded after some recent fire,
and through which ran a creek whose waterholes shone
like polished steel under the mid-day sun.

 ‘“Here we rest?” said one; and another,—“The
Plains of Hope lie before us!”

 ‘So we rested from our wanderings; and one, journeying
backwards, secured the country, defining its boundaries,
not by marked trees, but by parallels of latitude.

 ‘Shortly a homestead arose, rude but sufficient. Mob
after mob of cattle came up from stations to the south
and east, and Boorookoorora became itself a station.

 ‘We got the name from a black fellow. We understood
him to signify that the word meant “ No place
beyond .” This pleased us, for we were, so far, proud of
being the “farthest out”—the Ultima Thule of settlement.
We may have been altogether mistaken, for the
fellow was wild as a hawk, and, at the first chance, gave
us the slip. But I’m glad, all the same, that the old
name still holds.

 [

150 ] 

‘Of the blacks we had seen very little. They appeared
to decline all communication with us. Now and again
the stockmen would bring one in; but he came evidently
under strong protest, and refused both food and gifts of
any description. However, we cared nothing for that, so
long as our cattle remained unmolested. They were
doing splendidly; and we soon began to talk about
sending a mob to the southern markets, with which, in
those days, there was little or no communication. We
intended to pioneer that trade. There was plenty of
room as yet. Our nearest neighbour was a hundred
miles away; the nearest township, five hundred. One
Sunday morning I went for a ride, leaving Walter and
Jimmy alone. The two white stockmen and a couple of
black boys, who made up the head station staff, were
away on a round of the out-stations.

 ‘I had intended to be back for the dinner, which I
had left the pair busily preparing. Unfortunately, when
about five miles from the homestead on my return, my
horse put his foot in a hole, stumbled badly, and directly
afterwards went dead lame.

 ‘The day was a roaster for a tramp; but there seemed
no help for it. So, planting the saddle and bridle, also,
in a most unlucky moment, my heavy Enfield rifle, I set
out through the long, dry grass, which reached at times
over my head, and made walking hard and disagreeable
work.

 ‘As often as I paused to rest and wipe my dripping
face did I curse our remissness in not having “burnt
off” before this, and vow to soon have a right royal [

151 ]

blaze amongst the thick reed-like grass-stalks that hampered
my progress towards shade and dinner.

 ‘I had got about two miles along, and was just
thinking of having a good drink at the Black
Waterhole, which I knew to be close to me, when I
suddenly came upon the dead body of a fine young
heifer.

 ‘A couple of broken spears stuck out of the carcase—so
freshly killed that even the crows had not yet found it.
It was, indeed, still warm. By the tracks I could see
that the niggers were in force. They had evidently run
the beast up from the water, and slain it merely for sport,
as it was untouched. My first impulse was to return for
the rifle. Second thoughts determined me to make for
home as quickly as possible.

 ‘I had kept my shoulder-belt, to which was attached a
heavy metal powder-flask. Thinking that I should travel
lighter without these things, I started to unbuckle, when
a tomahawk hurtled past one side of my head, whilst a
spear went sailing by the other. The grass was full
of blacks coming at me sideways—that is, between me
and the station.

 ‘Turning, I ran for the water, the whole pack, now in
full cry, after me.

 ‘Close to the banks of the Black Waterhole stood a
tall rock we had named (I don’t know why, for it was as
much like one as this tumbler is) the Grand Stand. I
daresay it must have been quite one hundred and fifty
feet high, if not more—’

 ‘One hundred and seventy-five six,’ put in Mr Hatton, [

152 ]

who, in common with, by this time, a small crowd, was
listening interestedly.

 ‘Thanks. You’ve evidently had more leisure than we
could manage. Anyhow, it was sheer on three sides,
only accessible, in one part, on the fourth.’ (‘Just where
I had the stairway cut,’ murmured Mr Hatton. But no
one took any notice).

 ‘Many a time I had climbed it to look for cattle
across the plains on which it formed such a landmark.
If I could do so now, very quickly, there might still be a
chance.

 ‘I could tell by the sound of the spears that I was
gaining. They didn’t come slipping quietly past, but
whizzed and sung angrily, a sure sign that the throwing
sticks were being used; at least I found it so. It was
wonderful how they missed me. If the grass had been
burnt I was a dead man fifty times over. Presently, I
struck a cattle pad, and, at the same moment, caught
sight of the Grand Stand. Now they saw what I was after,
and put on a spurt, yelling harder than ever. As they
arrived at the foot of the rock I was half-way up the narrow,
almost perpendicular, track, going like a goat, whilst
spears, tomahawks and nullahs hit all around me. One
spear grazed my leg, sticking in the breeches, and a stone
tomahawk knocked my hat off. I afterwards made use
of that spear. It was hot work while it lasted, which,
luckily, wasn’t long. The top of the Grand Stand
measured about twenty feet each way, and sloped gently
inwards, saucer-shape, to a depth of four. There had
been rain lately, and a good pool of water was collected [

153 ]

in the basin, which was strewn with stones and big
boulders, remains of a former top, which had broken off
and lay around the base. Being in a hurry, I hadn’t
time to pull myself up, so tumbled headlong into the
water. However, the bath refreshed me much, and,
everything below having all at once become silent as the
grave, I peeped over.

 ‘Well it was I did so!

 ‘Four big fellows were climbing up, one behind the
other.

 ‘Lifting a stone, just as much as I could manage, I
rolled it to the edge, and, forgetting to sing out “Stand
from under,” let go.

 ‘It caught the first fellow fair on the chest, and the lot
went down like skittles.

 ‘Three picked themselves up and limped off howling.
The fourth man—he who led—lay quite still, and had
to be dragged away. I did not care about expending
my ammunition or I could have scattered them also.

 ‘It was terribly hot up there under the sun, but,
ripping out the lining of my coat, I covered my head
with it. If there had been no water, though, I should
have been done—roasted alive.

 ‘Now I had a spell, and took a good look at the
niggers.

 ‘They were a wild lot—five-and-twenty of ’em—naked
as the day they were born, tall and wiry, with
woolly hair and long, black beards. One side of their
faces was painted white, t’other red, ribs and legs to
match. Half-a-dozen of ’em had some shining stone [

154 ]

like a lump of crystal either around their necks or
tied upon their foreheads. These I took to be
chiefs.

 ‘I had never seen any niggers quite like these, and,
consequently, was rather impressed, not to say scared.
They squatted under a shady tree, the only one for
miles around, evidently holding a council of war, whilst
I crouched and watched them, and slowly baked on top
of my rock.

 ‘Suddenly, all springing to their feet, they ran backwards,
then, wheeling together, threw their spears.
But the height beat ’em. There was a strong breeze
blowing, too, hot as from a furnace, right against them.
Quite plainly that game wouldn’t answer, so they squatted
again and started another consultation.

 ‘Meanwhile the day grew hotter. The rock was
actually blistering my skin through the light clothes I
wore.

 ‘Bathing my head and face brought relief.

 ‘Being quite a new chum with respect to blacks and
their ways, I half expected that, now, seeing they
couldn’t get me down, they would raise the siege and be
off.

 ‘Nothing, it appeared, could be further from their intentions.
The confab over, some lit a fire on a small, clear
space close to the water, whilst others went off towards the
dead heifer, shortly returning with great lumps of meat,
which they roasted and devoured.

 ‘After this, they all got up, and coming quite close,
one went a little apart from the rest and pointed at my [

155 ]

head, which was all he could see, with outstretched
arm.

 ‘Then his fellows formed a circle and danced and
yelled, patting their bellies, and going through the
motions of eating and drinking. Presently the gaunt,
black semaphore was altered, pointing towards the sun.
The dancing and shouting ceased, and, sitting down, the
party began to display symptoms of the utmost distress.

 ‘Once more the arm shifted, this time towards the
water, whereupon the whole crowd stiffened themselves
out as if dead.

 ‘Another dance round and a song, and the semaphore
put himself in position again and pointed in the direction
of the homestead.

 ‘Instantly all but two sneaked off into the tall grass.
The pair left behind lay down beside each other, feigning
sleep. Suddenly, with terrific yells, the rest sprung
upon them and went very realistically through the motions
of beating the sleepers’ brains out and thrusting spears
into their bodies.

 ‘The first portion of the pantomime I took to mean
that they were determined to stay and see how long I
could withstand the combined effects of heat, hunger,
and want of water.

 ‘The second was only too intelligible, and for the
first time made me feel a sharp pang of anxiety for
those at home, totally unwarned, and off their
guard.

 ‘How, as I watched the brutes, did I wish and long [

156 ]

for that rifle, hidden away back there, or—best of all—that
newly-imported breech-loader hanging over my
stretcher at the station.

 ‘It was getting late in the afternoon. The rock was
casting a long shadow, and my dripping body beginning
to feel a little cooler as the sun lowered. Slight
though the scratch upon my leg was, it smarted terribly.
I was also very hungry, and altogether in anything but
a happy frame of mind.

 ‘Foreseeing a night of it, I carried and rolled big
stones to the edge, placing them so that at a touch they
would go crashing down.

 ‘Darkness fell at last, and with it came the moon,
nearly at her full.

 ‘Lying along the incline, I watched the niggers, and
tried to work out some plan of giving them the
slip.

 ‘Gorged to repletion, they were stretched about their
fire: but two upright black forms, motionless as if cut
from marble, watched steadfastly the pathway, on which
the moonbeams fell full of light.

 ‘Although I had promised to return for dinner, I had
no expectation, on account of my failure, that the others
would come and look for me. We were all nothing
if not irregular in our habits. Of the blacks we had
almost ceased to think, so little had we seen of them.
Indeed, though generally going armed, we carried rifles
more for the purpose of shooting an odd bull or so
than from any other motive. The place, you should
remember, had been formed now over a couple of [

157 ]

years, during all which time nothing suspicious had
occurred.

 ‘The two at home would merely think that I had
extended my ride as far as one of the out-stations,
and feel no surprise if I did not turn up till the next
day.

 ‘As for them, I knew not what to think. That the
blacks were nearly all inveterate liars I was aware; but
this sudden, strange raid, together with their expressive
pantomimes and determined attitude towards myself,
made me fear the worst.

 ‘If there had been no moon I should certainly have
made an effort to get away. But it was as bright as
day—so bright that I fancied I could at times see the
glitter in the eyes of the sentinels.

 ‘I must have been cat-napping, for I awoke with a
start to the sound of an awful chorus of yells.

 ‘The moon was low, but still gave enough light to
enable me to make out that more niggers had
arrived.

 ‘After what appeared to be an enthusiastic greeting
of the new-comers, the whole mob—about fifty—came up
and began to dance at the foot of the rock. Presently,
to my horror, I caught sight of objects that I recognised
only too well.

 ‘One fellow had on a broad-brimmed straw hat belonging
to Carstairs; another flourished a hunting-knife
of my own; yet another waved a gaily-striped rug that
I had last seen covering poor Neville’s stretcher.

 ‘Evidently the station had been sacked.

 [

158 ] 

‘Neither hearing nor seeing anything, they perhaps
imagined me asleep, and, just as the dawn was breaking
redly, some of them began to ascend.

 ‘A leaping, rattling, boulder, however, soon undeceived
and sent them to the right-about.

 ‘Knowing that another day would probably see the
end, they were in no particular hurry now.

 ‘The sun rose hot and angry-looking. By its better
light I made out a whole heap of our traps under the
tree, jumbled up anyhow.

 ‘But, lest I should, by any means, fail to comprehend
what had happened, they had recourse once more to
dumb show.

 ‘A nigger came forward and arranged three spears,
tripod fashion. To their apex he hung a nullah-nullah.
All the weapons were red with blood. Then, pointing
alternately to the homestead, myself, and the heap of
plunder, he made a long speech, beginning quietly
enough, but working himself into such a rage at the
finish that his big black beard was speckled with
foam.

 ‘Of course, I didn’t understand a word. There was
little need that I should—everything was plain
enough.

 ‘But worse was to come!

 ‘Seeing that I made no sign, and thinking, perhaps,
that I was difficult to convince, the orator went off to the
pile of stuff, and, in a minute, returned with some object
in a net, which, amidst triumphant yells, he fastened to
the trophy already erected.

 [

159 ] 

‘For a moment I couldn’t make it out at all. Then,
as the sun shone fuller on the thing, I saw that it was
Neville’s head.

 ‘All gashed and disfigured though it was, I recognised
it by the long golden beard which the poor old chap had
been so proud of.

 ‘The sight turned me quite faint and sick. Then I got
vicious. Slipping to the water, of which there was now
very little left, to get one good, long, last drink, my eyes
fell upon the powder-flask lying where I had thrown it off.

 ‘ TN: opening quote invisible It was one of the old-fashioned kind, of solid copper,
very large, and holding nearly a couple of pounds. It
was quite full.

 ‘“Well,” I said to myself, taking the flask up as the
idea struck me, “you’ve cornered me and killed my
mates, but I’ll be hanged if I don’t try and scorch some
of you before giving in.”

 ‘Now, sitting down, I tore a strip off my handkerchief,
and, with moistened gunpowder, made a rough sort of
fuse. Then unscrewing the measuring cylinder, and
taking out the spring-valve, I inserted the fuse deeply
into the powder, brought the twisted end well up,
and replaced the long cylinder. Then, binding the
flask firmly about five feet from the head of the spear
that had come up with me, I shouted to the niggers,
who were busily overhauling their booty.

 ‘They stared with surprise, and I waved my coat and
beckoned to them to come nearer.

 ‘Chattering like anything, a couple of ’em advanced
a few steps very doubtfully.

 [

160 ] 

‘Stooping down and striking a match I fired the fuse,
which caught at once and began to burn quietly away
inside the cylinder.

 ‘At this moment I hove the spear well out towards
them. To my delight it stuck fairly upright in the
ground almost at their feet, the shock, so far as I could
see, shifting nothing.

 ‘Starting back, they gazed inquisitively at the shining
polished object it had brought with it.

 ‘For a minute or two they hesitated, and I despaired.
But, seeing the rest moving up, curiosity or cupidity
prevailed, and one running to it, seized the spear and
made off back to the mob.

 ‘At once he was surrounded with an eager, excited,
jabbering crowd, each man with his chin over his
neighbour’s shoulder.

 ‘The seconds went by like ages. I had reckoned the
fuse would last, perhaps, seven or eight minutes. They
had untied the flask, and it was being passed from hand
to hand.

 ‘Still no sound!

 ‘With a deep sigh of regret I gave the affair up as a
failure—had even turned away—when an explosion like
that of an eighteen pounder made me jump.

 ‘From out of a cloud of dense white smoke came
shrieks and screams of agony. I could dimly see
bodies—some quite still, and others rolling over and
over.

 ‘By God! gentlemen,’ exclaimed the speaker, interrupting
himself emphatically, and with a cruel gleam [

161 ]

in his eyes, ‘although afterwards I shot the wretches
down in dozens, and always with joy in my heart, yet
never with such a complete sense of satisfaction and
pleasure as I felt at that moment.

 ‘As I looked a sharp blaze curled up, spreading
broadly, and almost instantly, into a curtain of flame
and smoke.

 ‘The grass was on fire!

 ‘Never a thought had I given to that. For miles and
miles the country was covered with herbage, tall, and
dry as tinder.

 ‘The top of the Grand Stand was about the only safe
place now, bar the water, in all that neighbourhood.
For a long time I couldn’t see a foot for smoke; but,
as with the fire, it rolled away before the wind. I
looked towards the Black Waterhole, thinking, of course,
that the niggers would have taken to it. To my surprise
not one was to be seen. There was the blackened
ground, smoking yet, bare, and affording not the slightest
cover.

 ‘The erstwhile shady and graceful tree was a gnarled
and withered skeleton.

 ‘Underneath it, as the haze cleared, I made out four
motionless bodies, blacker than the burnt black ashes
on which they lay.

 ‘I waited a bit longer before coming down. But at
last, pretty certain that the niggers had cleared out, or
better still, been caught in the fire, I crept down the
pathway, stiff, sore, and hungry, but with that feeling of
vengeful joy in my heart trebly intensified as I passed [

162 ]

by the poor, scorched, singed head lying on the
ground.

 ‘Poking about the heap of blankets, clothing, etc., still
smouldering, I dropped across a tin of preserved meat—a
four pounder.

 ‘This was luck, if you like. Taking it to the water I
finished it to the last scrap, and made the most appreciated
meal of a life.

 ‘I hadn’t gone near the bodies. They were charred,
and I was certain they were dead.

 ‘But, as I finished eating, to my astonishment one
fellow got up and staggered straight for me. Snatching
up a heavy stick, which happened to be handy, I stood
ready to receive him.

 ‘As he came nearer his face frightened me.

 ‘It wasn’t a face at all, properly speaking; nor, for
the matter of that, a head even. It was simply a mass
of grass-ashes and blood—every scrap of hair had been
burnt off. From his open mouth protruded a blackened
tongue. I dropped my stick, for I saw he was stone-blind—in
fact, he was eyeless altogether.

 ‘Groping along, in a minute or two he felt the water
at his feet, when, instead of splashing into it, as you’d
naturally think a fellow in such an awful predicament
would do, he gave a sort of screech, very bad to hear,
and made out again at a great pace, tripped over a
stone, and fell headlong.

 ‘When I got up to him he was as dead as Julius
Cæsar, and a great lump of jagged copper was sticking
out of the back of his skull.

 [

163 ] 

‘Presently I started off towards the homestead, but
hadn’t got more than half-way before I met our two
white stockmen—the black boys had cleared on the
back track.

 ‘The buildings, such as they were, and all our things
were gone. But we didn’t trouble much about that
just then.

 ‘Taking Neville’s head to him, we buried him and
Carstairs, who had been literally chopped to pieces, and
then, getting the outside men together, we followed the
niggers.

 ‘They had made for a patch of red ground six miles
away. There we found ’em—fifty of ’em; and there we
left ’em. How they must have travelled to have beaten
the fire! Must have been touch and go, for some of
’em were pretty badly scorched.

 ‘Well, gentlemen, that’s the story of the Grand Stand,
and the first settling of Boorookoorora. “Stone house
and garden, and splendid orchard,” eh? Well, well, I
suppose it’s only natural. Yet it sounds curiously to
me. No; I won’t invest. Shouldn’t care about going
back to live there now. That’s the dinner gong, isn’t TN: apostrophe invisible it? Good old Kamilaroi! Come along.’