III 

 

ONCE THERE WAS A KING

 " Once

upon a time there was a king."

 When we were children there was no need to know
who the king in the fairy story was. It didn't matter
whether he was called Shiladitya or Shaliban,
whether he lived at Kashi or Kanauj. The thing
that made a seven-year-old boy's heart go thump,
thump with delight was this one truth, this
reality of all realities: "Once there was a king."

 But the readers of this modern age are far more
exact and exacting. When they hear such an opening
to a story, they are at once critical and .
They apply the searchlight of science to its legendary
haze and ask: "Which king?"

 The story-tellers have become more precise in
their turn. They are no longer content with the old
indefinite, "There was a king," but assume instead
a look of profound learning and begin: "Once
there was a king named Ajatasatru."

 The modern reader's curiosity, however, is not so easily satisfied. He at the author through his
scientific spectacles and asks again: "Which Ajatasatru?"

 When we were young, we understood all sweet
things; and we could detect the sweets of a fairy story
by an unerring science of our own. We never cared
for such useless things as knowledge. We only
cared for truth. And our little
hearts knew well where the Crystal Palace of Truth
lay and how to reach it. But to-day we are expected
to write pages of facts, while the truth is simply
this:

 "There was a king."

 I remember vividly that evening in Calcutta when
the fairy story began. The rain and the storm had
been incessant. The whole of the city was flooded.
The water was knee-deep in our lane. I had a
straining hope, which was almost a certainty, that
my tutor would be prevented from coming that
evening. I sat on the stool in the far corner of the
verandah looking down the lane, with a heart beating
faster and faster. Every minute I kept my eye
on the rain, and when it began to diminish I prayed
with all my might: "Please, God, send some more
rain till half-past seven is over." For I was quite
ready to believe that there was no other need for rain
except to protect one helpless boy one evening in one corner of Calcutta from the deadly clutches of his
tutor.

 If not in answer to my prayer, at any rate according
to some grosser law of nature, the rain did not
give up.

 But, alas, nor did my teacher!

 Exactly to the minute, in the bend of the lane,
I saw his approaching . The great bubble
of hope burst in my breast, and my heart collapsed.
Truly, if there is a punishment to fit the crime after
death, then my tutor will be born again as me, and
I shall be born as my tutor.

 As soon as I saw his umbrella I ran as hard as I
could to my mother's room. My mother and my
grandmother were sitting opposite one another playing
cards by the light of a lamp. I ran into the
room, and flung myself on the bed beside my mother,
and said:

 "Mother, the tutor has come, and I have such a
bad headache; couldn't I have no lessons to-day?"

 I hope no child of immature age will be allowed
to read this story, and I sincerely trust it will not be
used in text-books or primers for junior classes.
For what I did was dreadfully bad, and I received no
punishment whatever. On the contrary, my wickedness
was crowned with success.

 My mother said to me: "All right," and turning to the servant added: "Tell the tutor that he can
go back home."

 It was perfectly plain that she didn't think my
illness very serious, as she went on with her game
as before and took no further notice. And I also,
burying my head in the pillow, laughed to my heart's
content. We perfectly understood one another, my
mother and I.

 But every one must know how hard it is for a boy
of seven years old to keep up the illusion of illness
for a long time. After about a minute I got hold
of Grandmother and said: "Grannie, do tell me
a story."

 I had to ask this many times. Grannie and
Mother went on playing cards and took no notice.
At last Mother said to me: "Child, don't bother.
Wait till we've finished our game." But I persisted:
"Grannie, do tell me a story." I told
Mother she could finish her game to-morrow, but she
must let Grannie tell me a story there and then.

 At last Mother threw down the cards and said:
"You had better do what he wants. I can't manage
him." Perhaps she had it in her mind that she
would have no tiresome tutor on the morrow, while
I should be obliged to be back at those stupid lessons.

 As soon as ever Mother had given way, I rushed at Grannie. I got hold of her hand, and, dancing
with delight, dragged her inside my mosquito curtain
on to the bed. I clutched hold of the bolster with
both hands in my excitement, and jumped up and
down with joy, and when I had got a little quieter
said: "Now, Grannie, let's have the story!"

 Grannie went on: "And the king had a queen."

 That was good to begin with. He had only one!

 It is usual for kings in fairy stories to be in queens. And whenever we hear that there
are two queens our hearts begin to sink. One is sure
to be unhappy. But in Grannie's story that danger
was past. He had only one queen.

 We next hear that the king had not got any son.
At the age of seven I didn't think there was any
need to bother if a man had no son. He might
only have been in the way.

 Nor are we greatly excited when we hear that the
king has gone away into the forest to practise austerities
in order to get a son. There was only one
thing that would have made me go into the forest,
and that was to get away from my tutor!

 But the king left behind with his queen a small girl,
who grew up into a beautiful princess.

 Twelve years pass away, and the king goes on
practising austerities, and never thinks all this while
of his beautiful daughter. The princess has reached the full bloom of her youth. The age of marriage
has passed, but the king does not return. And the
queen pines away with grief and cries: "Is my
golden daughter destined to die unmarried? Ah
me, what a fate is mine!"

 Then the queen sent men to the king to entreat
him earnestly to come back for a single night and
take one meal in the palace. And the king consented.

 The queen cooked with her own hand, and with
the greatest care, sixty-four dishes. She made a
seat for him of sandal-wood and arranged the food
in plates of gold and cups of silver. The princess
stood behind with the peacock-tail fan in her hand.
The king, after twelve years' absence, came into the
house, and the princess waved the fan, lighting up all
the room with her beauty. The king looked in his
daughter's face and forgot to take his food.

 At last he asked his queen: "Pray, who is this
girl whose beauty shines as the gold image of the
goddess? Whose daughter is she?"

 The queen beat her forehead and cried: "Ah,
how evil is my fate! Do you not know your own
daughter?"

 The king was struck with amazement. He said
at last: "My tiny daughter has grown to be a
woman."  "What else?" the queen said with a sigh. "Do
you not know that twelve years have passed by?"

 "But why did you not give her in marriage?"
asked the king.

 "You were away," the queen said. "And how
could I find her a suitable husband?"

 The king became vehement with excitement.
"The first man I see to-morrow," he said, "when I
come out of the palace shall marry her."

 The princess went on waving her fan of peacock
feathers, and the king finished his meal.

 The next morning, as the king came out of his
palace, he saw the son of a Brahman gathering sticks
in the forest outside the palace gates. His age was
about seven or eight.

 The King said: "I will marry my daughter to
him."

 Who can interfere with a king's command? At
once the boy was called, and the marriage garlands
were exchanged between him and the princess.

 At this point I came up close to my wise Grannie
and asked her eagerly: "When then?"

 In the bottom of my heart there was a devout wish
to substitute myself for that fortunate wood-gatherer
of seven years old. The night was resonant with
the patter of rain. The earthen lamp by my bedside
was burning low. My grandmother's voice droned on as she told the story. And all these things
served to create in a corner of my credulous heart
the belief that I had been gathering sticks in the dawn
of some indefinite time in the kingdom of some unknown
king, and in a moment garlands had been
exchanged between me and the princess, beautiful as
the Goddess of Grace. She had a gold band on her
hair and gold earrings in her ears. She had a necklace
and bracelets of gold, and a golden waist-chain
round her waist, and a pair of golden anklets tinkled
above her feet.

 If my grandmother were an author, how many she would have to offer for this little
story! First of all, every one would ask why the
king remained twelve years in the forest? Secondly,
why should the king's daughter remain unmarried all
that while? This would be regarded as absurd.

 Even if she could have got so far without a quarrel,
still there would have been a great hue and cry
about the marriage itself. First, it never happened.
Secondly, how could there be a marriage between a
princess of the Warrior Caste and a boy of the
priestly Brahman Caste? Her readers would have
imagined at once that the writer was preaching
against our social customs in an underhand way.
And they would write letters to the papers.

 So I pray with all my heart that my grandmother may be born a grandmother again, and not through
some cursed fate take birth as her luckless grandson.

 With a throb of joy and delight, I asked Grannie:
"What then?"

 Grannie went on: Then the princess took her
little husband away in great distress, and built a large
palace with seven wings, and began to cherish her
husband with great care.

 I jumped up and down in my bed and clutched
at the bolster more tightly than ever and said:
"What then?"

 Grannie continued: The little boy went to school
and learnt many lessons from his teachers, and as he
grew up his class-fellows began to ask him: "Who
is that beautiful lady living with you in the palace
with the seven wings?"

 The Brahman's son was eager to know who she
was. He could only remember how one day he had
been gathering sticks and a great disturbance arose.
But all that was so long ago that he had no clear
recollection.

 Four or five years passed in this way. His companions
always asked him: "Who is that beautiful
lady in the palace with the seven wings?" And
the Brahman's son would come back from school and
sadly tell the princess: "My school companions always
ask me who is that beautiful lady in the palace with the seven wings, and I can give them no reply.
Tell me, oh, tell me, who you are!"

 The princess said: "Let it pass to-day. I will
tell you some other day." And every day the Brahman's
son would ask: "Who are you?" and the
princess would reply: "Let it pass to-day. I will
tell you some other day." In this manner four or
five more years passed away.

 At last the Brahman's son became very impatient
and said: "If you do not tell me to-day who you
are, O beautiful lady, I will leave this palace with
the seven wings." Then the princess said: "I will
certainly tell you to-morrow."

 Next day the Brahman's son, as soon as he came
home from school, said: "Now, tell me who you
are." The princess said: "To-night I will tell you
after supper, when you are in bed."

 The Brahman's son said: "Very well"; and he
began to count the hours in expectation of the night.
And the princess, on her side, spread white flowers
over the golden bed, and lighted a gold lamp with
fragrant oil, and adorned her hair, and dressed herself
in a beautiful robe of blue, and began to count
the hours in expectation of the night.

 That evening when her husband, the Brahman's
son, had finished his meal, too excited almost to eat,
and had gone to the golden bed in the bedchamber strewn with flowers, he said to himself: "To-night
I shall surely know who this beautiful lady is in the
palace with the seven wings."

 The princess took for her food that which was left
over by her husband, and slowly entered the bedchamber.
She had to answer that night the question,
who was the beautiful lady that lived in the palace
with the seven wings. And as she went up to the
bed to tell him she found a serpent had crept out of
the flowers and had bitten the Brahman's son. Her
boy-husband was lying on the bed of flowers, with
face pale in death.

 My heart suddenly ceased to throb, and I asked
with choking voice: "What then?"

 Grannie said: "Then ..."

 But what is the use of going on any further with
the story? It would only lead on to what was more
and more impossible. The boy of seven did not
know that, if there were some "What then?" after
death, no grandmother of a grandmother could tell
us all about it.

 But the child's faith never admits defeat, and
it would snatch at the mantle of death itself to turn
him back. It would be outrageous for him to think
that such a story of one teacherless evening could so
suddenly come to a stop. Therefore the grandmother
had to call back her story from the ever-shut chamber of the great End, but she does it so simply:
it is merely by floating the dead body on a banana
stem on the river, and having some read
by a . But in that rainy night and in the
dim light of a lamp death loses all its horror in the
mind of the boy, and seems nothing more than a deep
slumber of a single night. When the story ends the
tired eyelids are weighed down with sleep. Thus it
is that we send the little body of the child floating
on the back of sleep over the still water of time, and
then in the morning read a few verses of incantation
to restore him to the world of life and light.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . This word is taken directly from the French
language. It is connected with the Latin "supremus."

 . Many English words are made up from the supposed
sound or motion to be represented. Compare to
splash , to plump , to quack , to throb , to swish .

 . From the Latin word "spicere," to look.
Compare auspicious , respect , inspect , aspect.  . This word comes from the Greek "sophistes,"
meaning a sophist, that is to say, one who
makes a pretence of being wise. Unsophisticated means
one who makes no pretence to be learned.

 . This word has come into English from the
Italian language. "Umbra" in Latin means "shade"
and Ombrella in Italian means "little shade."

 . From the Latin root "vag," meaning to
wander. The word means "wandering outside" and
so "going beyond bounds." Compare vagrant , vagabond , vague.   . From the Latin "planus," meaning plain.
Compare explanatory , explain , plain , plane.  . From the Latin "cantare," to chant, something
chanted over a person.

 . From the Greek "magus," an astrologer.
Compare magic , the Magi , magical.     THE CHILD'S RETURN