ONLY A SUBALTERN
    

     ... Not only to enforce by command but to encourage by
     example the energetic discharge of duty and the steady
     endurance of the difficulties and privations inseparable
     from Military Service. —Bengal Army Regulations.


      THEY made Bobby Wick pass an examination at Sandhurst. He was a gentleman
      before he was gazetted, so, when the Empress announced that
      “Gentleman-Cadet Robert Hanna Wick” was posted as Second Lieutenant to the
      Tyneside Tail Twisters at Kram Bokhar, he became an officer and a
      gentleman, which is an enviable thing; and there was joy in the house of
      Wick where Mamma Wick and all the little Wicks fell upon their knees and
      offered incense to Bobby by virtue of his achievements.
    

      Papa Wick had been a Commissioner in his day, holding authority over three
      millions of men in the Chota-Buldana Division, building great works for
      the good of the land, and doing his best to make two blades of grass grow
      where there was but one before. Of course, nobody knew anything about this
      in the little English village where he was just “old Mr. Wick” and had
      forgotten that he was a Companion of the Order of the Star of India.
    

      He patted Bobby on the shoulder and said: “Well done, my boy!”
     

      There followed, while the uniform was being prepared, an interval of pure
      delight, during which Bobby took brevet-rank as a “man” at the
      women-swamped tennis-parties and tea-fights of the village, and, I dare
      say, had his joining-time been extended, would have fallen in love with
      several girls at once. Little country villages at Home are very full of
      nice girls, because all the young men come out to India to make their
      fortunes.
    

      “India,” said Papa Wick, “is the place. I've had thirty years of it and,
      begad, I'd like to go back again. When you join the Tail Twisters you'll
      be among friends, if every one hasn't forgotten Wick of Chota-Buldana, and
      a lot of people will be kind to you for our sakes. The mother will tell
      you more about outfit than I can, but remember this. Stick to your
      Regiment, Bobby—stick to your Regiment. You'll see men all round you
      going into the Staff Corps, and doing every possible sort of duty but
      regimental, and you may be tempted to follow suit. Now so long as you keep
      within your allowance, and I haven't stinted you there, stick to the Line,
      the whole Line and nothing but the Line. Be careful how you back another
      young fool's bill, and if you fall in love with a woman twenty years older
      than yourself, don't tell me about it, that's all.”
     

      With these counsels, and many others equally valuable, did Papa Wick
      fortify Bobby ere that last awful night at Portsmouth when the Officers'
      Quarters held more inmates than were provided for by the Regulations, and
      the liberty-men of the ships fell foul of the drafts for India, and the
      battle raged from the Dockyard Gates even to the slums of Longport, while
      the drabs of Fratton came down and scratched the faces of the Queen's
      Officers.
    

      Bobby Wick, with an ugly bruise on his freckled nose, a sick and shaky
      detachment to manoeuvre inship and the comfort of fifty scornful females
      to attend to, had no time to feel homesick till the Malabar reached
      mid-Channel, when he doubled his emotions with a little guard-visiting and
      a great many other matters.
    

      The Tail Twisters were a most particular Regiment. Those who knew them
      least said that they were eaten up with “side.” But their reserve and
      their internal arrangements generally were merely protective diplomacy.
      Some five years before, the Colonel commanding had looked into the
      fourteen fearless eyes of seven plump and juicy subalterns who had all
      applied to enter the Staff Corps, and had asked them why the three stars
      should he, a colonel of the Line, command a dashed nursery for
      double-dashed bottle-suckers who put on condemned tin spurs and rode
      qualified mokes at the hiatused heads of forsaken Black Regiments. He was
      a rude man and a terrible. Wherefore the remnant took measures [with the
      half-butt as an engine of public opinion] till the rumor went abroad that
      young men who used the Tail Twisters as a crutch to the Staff Corps, had
      many and varied trials to endure. However a regiment had just as much
      right to its own secrets as a woman.
    

      When Bobby came up from Deolali and took his place among the Tail
      Twisters, it was gently But firmly borne in upon him that the Regiment was
      his father and his mother and his indissolubly wedded wife, and that there
      was no crime under the canopy of heaven blacker than that of bringing
      shame on the Regiment, which was the best-shooting, best-drilled,
      best-set-up, bravest, most illustrious, and in all respects most desirable
      Regiment within the compass of the Seven Seas. He was taught the legends
      of the Mess Plate from the great grinning Golden Gods that had come out of
      the Summer Palace in Pekin to the silver-mounted markhor-horn snuff-mull
      presented by the last C. 0. [he who spake to the seven subalterns]. And
      every one of those legends told him of battles fought at long odds,
      without fear as without support; of hospitality catholic as an Arab's; of
      friendships deep as the sea and steady as the fighting-line; of honor won
      by hard roads for honor's sake; and of instant and unquestioning devotion
      to the Regiment—the Regiment that claims the lives of all and lives
      forever.
    

      More than once, too, he came officially into contact with the Regimental
      colors, which looked like the lining of a bricklayer's hat on the end of a
      chewed stick. Bobby did not kneel and worship them, because British
      subalterns are not constructed in that manner. Indeed, he condemned them
      for their weight at the very moment that they were filling with awe and
      other more noble sentiments.
    

      But best of all was the occasion when he moved with the Tail Twisters, in
      review order at the breaking of a November day. Allowing for duty-men and
      sick, the Regiment was one thousand and eighty strong, and Bobby belonged
      to them; for was he not a Subaltern of the Line the whole Line and nothing
      but the Line—as the tramp of two thousand one hundred and sixty
      sturdy ammunition boots attested. He would not have changed places with
      Deighton of the Horse Battery, whirling by in a pillar of cloud to a
      chorus of “Strong right! Strong left!” or Hogan-Yale of the White Hussars,
      leading his squadron for all it was worth, with the price of horseshoes
      thrown in; or “Tick” Boileau, trying to live up to his fierce blue and
      gold turban while the wasps of the Bengal Cavalry stretched to a gallop in
      the wake of the long, lollopping Walers of the White Hussars.
    

      They fought through the clear cool day, and Bobby felt a little thrill run
      down his spine when he heard the tinkle-tinkle-tinkle of the empty
      cartridge-cases hopping from the breech-blocks after the roar of the
      volleys; for he knew that he should live to hear that sound in action. The
      review ended in a glorious chase across the plain—batteries
      thundering after cavalry to the huge disgust of the White Hussars, and the
      Tyneside Tail Twisters hunting a Sikh Regiment, till the lean lathy Singhs
      panted with exhaustion. Bobby was dusty and dripping long before noon, but
      his enthusiasm was merely focused—not diminished.
    

      He returned to sit at the feet of Revere, his “skipper,” that is to say,
      the Captain of his Company, and to be instructed in the dark art and
      mystery of managing men, which is a very large part of the Profession of
      Arms.
    

      “If you haven't a taste that way,” said Revere, between his puffs of his
      cheroot, “you'll never be able to get the hang of it, but remember Bobby,
      'tisn't the best drill, though drill is nearly everything, that hauls a
      Regiment through Hell and out on the other side. It's the man who knows
      how to handle men—goat-men, swine-men, dog-men, and so on.”
     

      “Dormer, for instance,” said Bobby. “I think he comes under the head of
      fool-men. He mopes like a sick owl.”
     

      “That's where you make your mistake, my son. Dormer isn't a fool yet, but
      he's a dashed dirty soldier, and his room corporal makes fun of his socks
      before kit-inspection. Dormer, being two-thirds pure brute, goes into a
      corner and growls.”
     

      “How do you know?” said Bobby, admiringly.
    

      “Because a Company commander has to know these things—because, if he
      does not know, he may have crime—ay, murder—brewing under his
      very nose and yet not see that it's there. Dormer is being badgered out of
      his mind—big as he is—and he hasn't intellect enough to resent
      it. He's taken to quiet boozing and, Bobby, when the butt of a room goes
      on the drink, or takes to moping by himself, measures are necessary to
      pull him out of himself.”
     

      “What measures? 'Man can't run round coddling his men forever.”
     

      “No. The men would precious soon show him that he was not wanted. You've
      got to”—Here the Color-sergeant entered with some papers; Bobby
      reflected for a while as Revere looked through the Company forms.
    

      “Does Dormer do anything, Sergeant?” Bobby asked, with the air of one
      continuing an interrupted conversation.
    

      “No, sir. Does 'is dooty like a hortomato,” said the Sergeant, who
      delighted in long words. “A dirty soldier, and 'e's under full stoppages
      for new kit. It's covered with scales, sir.”
     

      “Scales? What scales?”
     

      “Fish-scales, sir. 'E's always pokin' in the mud by the river an'
      a-cleanin' them muchly-fish with 'is thumbs.” Revere was still absorbed in
      the Company papers, and the Sergeant, who was sternly fond of Bobby,
      continued,—“'E generally goes down there when 'e's got 'is skinful,
      beggin' your pardon, sir, an' they do say that the more lush in-he-briated
      'e is, the more fish 'e catches. They call 'im the Looney Fish-monger in
      the Comp'ny, sir.”
     

      Revere signed the last paper and the Sergeant retreated.
    

      “It's a filthy amusement,” sighed Bobby to himself. Then aloud to Revere:
      “Are you really worried about Dormer?”
     

      “A little. You see he's never mad enough to send to a hospital, or drunk
      enough to run in, but at any minute he may flare up, brooding and sulking
      as he does. He resents any interest being shown in him, and the only time
      I took him out shooting he all but shot me by accident.”
     

      “I fish,” said Bobby, with a wry face. “I hire a country-boat and go down
      the river from Thursday to Sunday, and the amiable Dormer goes with me—if
      you can spare us both.”
     

      “You blazing young fool!” said Revere, but his heart was full of much more
      pleasant words.
    

      Bobby, the Captain of a dhoni, with Private Dormer for mate, dropped down
      the river on Thursday morning—the Private at the bow, the Subaltern
      at the helm. The Private glared uneasily at the Subaltern, who respected
      the reserve of the Private.
    

      After six hours, Dormer paced to the stern, saluted, and said—“Beg
      y'pardon, sir, but was you ever on the Durh'm Canal?”
     

      “No,” said Bobby Wick. “Come and have some tiffin.”
     

      They ate in silence. As the evening fell, Private Dormer broke forth,
      speaking to himself—“Hi was on the Durh'm Canal, jes' such a night,
      come next week twelve month, a-trailin' of my toes in the water.” He
      smoked and said no more till bedtime.
    

      The witchery of the dawn turned the grey river-reaches to purple, gold,
      and opal; and it was as though the lumbering dhoni crept across the
      splendors of a new heaven.
    

      Private Dormer popped his head out of his blanket and gazed at the glory
      below and around.
    

      “Well—damn-my-eyes!” said Private Dormer, in an awed whisper. “This
      'ere is like a bloomin' gallantry-show!” For the rest of the day he was
      dumb, but achieved an ensanguined filthiness through the cleaning of big
      fish.
    

      The boat returned on Saturday evening. Dormer had been struggling with
      speech since noon. As the lines and luggage were being disembarked, he
      found tongue.
    

      “Beg y'pardon—sir,” he said, “but would you—would you min'
      shakin' 'ands with me, sir?”
     

      “Of course not,” said Bobby, and he shook accordingly. Dormer returned to
      barracks and Bobby to mess.
    

      “He wanted a little quiet and some fishing, I think,” said Bobby. “My
      aunt, but he's a filthy sort of animal! Have you ever seen him clean
      'them, muchly-fish with 'is thumbs'?”
     

      “Anyhow,” said Revere, three weeks later, “he's doing his best to keep his
      things clean.”
     

      When the spring died, Bobby joined in the general scramble for Hill leave,
      and to his surprise and delight secured three months.
    

      “As good a boy as I want,” said Revere, the admiring skipper.
    

      “The best of the batch,” said the Adjutant to the Colonel. “Keep back that
      young skrim-shanker Porkiss, sir, and let Revere make him sit up.”
     

      So Bobby departed joyously to Simla Pahar with a tin box of gorgeous
      raiment.
    

      “Son of Wick—old Wick of Chota-Buldana? Ask him to dinner, dear,”
       said the aged men.
    

      “What a nice boy!” said the matrons and the maids.
    

      “First-class place, Simla. Oh, ri-ipping!” said Bobby Wick, and ordered
      new white cord breeches on the strength of it.
    

      “We're in a bad way,” wrote Revere to Bobby at the end of two months.
      “Since you left, the Regiment has taken to fever and is fairly rotten with
      it—two hundred in hospital, about a hundred in cells—drinking
      to keep off fever—and the Companies on parade fifteen file strong at
      the outside. There's rather more sickness in the out-villages than I care
      for, but then I'm so blistered with prickly-heat that I'm ready to hang
      myself. What's the yarn about your mashing a Miss Haverley up there? Not
      serious, I hope? You're over-young to hang millstones round your neck, and
      the Colonel will turf you out of that in double-quick time if you attempt
      it.”
     

      It was not the Colonel that brought Bobby out of Simla, but a much more to
      be respected Commandant. The sick ness in the out-villages spread, the
      Bazar was put out of bounds, and then came the news that the Tail Twisters
      must go into camp. The message flashed to the Hill stations.—“Cholera—Leave
      stopped—Officers recalled.” Alas, for the white gloves in the neatly
      soldered boxes, the rides and the dances and picnics that were to he, the
      loves half spoken, and the debts unpaid! Without demur and without
      question, fast as tongue could fly or pony gallop, back to their Regiments
      and their Batteries, as though they were hastening to their weddings, fled
      the subalterns.
    

      Bobby received his orders on returning from a dance at Viceregal Lodge
      where he had—but only the Haverley girl knows what Bobby had said or
      how many waltzes he had claimed for the next ball. Six in the morning saw
      Bobby at the Tonga Office in the drenching rain, the whirl of the last
      waltz still in his ears, and an intoxication due neither to wine nor
      waltzing in his brain.
    

      “Good man!” shouted Deighton of the Horse Battery, through the mists.
      “Whar you raise dat tonga? I'm coming with you. Ow! But I've had a head
      and a half. I didn't sit out all night. They say the Battery's awful bad,”
       and he hummed dolorously—Leave the what at the what's-its-name,
      Leave the flock without shelter, Leave the corpse uninterred, Leave the
      bride at the altar!
    

      “My faith! It'll be more bally corpse than bride, though, this journey.
      Jump in, Bobby. Get on, Coachman!”
     

      On the Umballa platform waited a detachment of officers discussing the
      latest news from the stricken cantonment, and it was here that Bobby
      learned the real condition of the Tail Twisters.
    

      “They went into camp,” said an elderly Major recalled from the
      whist-tables at Mussoorie to a sickly Native Regiment, “they went into
      camp with two hundred and ten sick in carts. Two hundred and ten fever
      cases only, and the balance looking like so many ghosts with sore eyes. A
      Madras Regiment could have walked through 'em.”
     

      “But they were as fit as be-damned when I left them!” said Bobby.
    

      “Then you'd better make them as fit as be-damned when you rejoin,” said
      the Major, brutally.
    

      Bobby pressed his forehead against the rain-splashed windowpane as the
      train lumbered across the sodden Doab, and prayed for the health of the
      Tyneside Tail Twisters. Naini Tal had sent down her contingent with all
      speed; the lathering ponies of the Dalhousie Road staggered into
      Pathankot, taxed to the full stretch of their strength; while from cloudy
      Darjiling the Calcutta Mail whirled up the last straggler of the little
      army that was to fight a fight, in which was neither medal nor honor for
      the winning, against an enemy none other than “the sickness that
      destroyeth in the noonday.”
     

      And as each man reported himself, he said: “This is a bad business,” and
      went about his own forthwith, for every Regiment and Battery in the
      cantonment was under canvas, the sickness bearing them company.
    

      Bobby fought his way through the rain to the Tail Twisters' temporary
      mess, and Revere could have fallen on the boy's neck for the joy of seeing
      that ugly, wholesome phiz once more.
    

      “Keep 'em amused and interested,” said Revere. “They went on the drink,
      poor fools, after the first two cases, and there was no improvement. Oh,
      it's good to have you back, Bobby! Porkiss is a—never mind.”
     

      Deighton came over from the Artillery camp to attend a dreary mess dinner,
      and contributed to the general gloom by nearly weeping over the condition
      of his beloved Battery. Porkiss so far forgot himself as to insinuate that
      the presence of the officers could do no earthly good, and that the best
      thing would be to send the entire Regiment into hospital and “let the
      doctors look after them.” Porkiss was demoralized with fear, nor was his
      peace of mind restored when Revere said coldly: “Oh! The sooner you go out
      the better, if that's your way of thinking. Any public school could send
      us fifty good men in your place, but it takes time, time, Porkiss, and
      money, and a certain amount of trouble, to make a Regiment. 'S'pose you're
      the person we go into camp for, eh?”
     

      Whereupon Porkiss was overtaken with a great and chilly fear which a
      drenching in the rain did not allay, and, two days later, quitted this
      world for another where, men do fondly hope, allowances are made for the
      weaknesses of the flesh. The Regimental Sergeant-Major looked wearily
      across the Sergeants' Mess tent when the news was announced.
    

      “There goes the worst of them,” he said. “It'll take the best, and then,
      please God, it'll stop.” The Sergeants were silent till one said: “It
      couldn't be him!” and all knew of whom Travis was thinking.
    

      Bobby Wick stormed through the tents of his Company, rallying, rebuking
      mildly, as is consistent with the Regulations, chaffing the faint-hearted:
      haling the sound into the watery sunlight when there was a break in the
      weather, and bidding them be of good cheer for their trouble was nearly at
      an end; scuttling on his dun pony round the outskirts of the camp and
      heading back men who, with the innate perversity of British soldier's,
      were always wandering into infected villages, or drinking deeply from
      rain-flooded marshes; comforting the panic-stricken with rude speech, and
      more than once tending the dying who had no friends—the men without
      “townies”; organizing, with banjos and burned cork, Sing-songs which
      should allow the talent of the Regiment full play; and generally, as he
      explained, “playing the giddy garden-goat all round.”
     

      “You're worth half a dozen of us, Bobby,” said Revere in a moment of
      enthusiasm. “How the devil do you keep it up?”
     

      Bobby made no answer, but had Revere looked into the breast-pocket of his
      coat he might have seen there a sheaf of badly-written letters which
      perhaps accounted for the power that possessed the boy. A letter came to
      Bobby every other day. The spelling was not above reproach, but the
      sentiments must have been most satisfactory, for on receipt Bobby's eyes
      softened marvelously, and he was wont to fall into a tender abstraction
      for a while ere, shaking his cropped head, he charged into his work.
    

      By what power he drew after him the hearts of the roughest, and the Tail
      Twisters counted in their ranks some rough diamonds indeed, was a mystery
      to both skipper and C. O., who learned from the regimental chaplain that
      Bobby was considerably more in request in the hospital tents than the
      Reverend John Emery.
    

      “The men seem fond of you. Are you in the hospitals much?” said the
      Colonel, who did his daily round and ordered the men to get well with a
      hardness that did not cover his bitter grief.
    

      “A little, sir,” said Bobby.
    

      “Shouldn't go there too often if I were you. They say it's not contagious,
      but there's no use in running unnecessary risks. We can't afford to have
      you down, y'know.”
     

      Six days later, it was with the utmost difficulty that the post-runner
      plashed his way out to the camp with mailbags, for the rain was falling in
      torrents. Bobby received a letter, bore it off to his tent, and, the
      programme for the next week's Sing-song being satisfactorily disposed of,
      sat down to answer it. For an hour the unhandy pen toiled over the paper,
      and where sentiment rose to more than normal tide-level Bobby Wick stuck
      out his tongue and breathed heavily. He was not used to letter-writing.
    

      “Beg y'pardon, sir,” said a voice at the tent door; “but Dormer's 'orrid
      bad, sir, an' they've taken him orf, sir.
    

      “Damn Private Dormer and you too!” said Bobby Wick running the blotter
      over the half-finished letter. “Tell him I'll come in the morning.”
     

      “'E's awful bad, sir,” said the voice, hesitatingly. There was an
      undecided squelching of heavy boots.
    

      “Well?” said Bobby, impatiently.
    

      “Excusin' 'imself before an' for takin' the liberty, 'e says it would be a
      comfort for to assist 'im, sir, if”—
    

      “Tattoo lao! Get my pony! Here, come in out of the rain till I'm ready.
      What blasted nuisances you are! That's brandy. Drink some; you want it.
      Hang on to my stirrup and tell me if I go mo fast.”
     

      Strengthened by a four-finger “nip” which he swallowed without a wink, the
      Hospital Orderly kept up with the slipping, mud-stained, and very
      disgusted pony as it shambled to the hospital tent.
    

      Private Dormer was certainly “'orrid bad.” He had all but reached the
      stage of collapse and was not pleasant to look upon.
    

      “What's this, Dormer?” said Bobby, bending over the man. “You're not going
      out this time. You've got to come fishin' with me once or twice more yet.”
     

      The blue lips parted and in the ghost of a whisper said,—“Beg
      y'pardon, sir, disturbin' of you now, but would you min' 'oldin' my 'and,
      sir?”
     

      Bobby sat on the side of the bed, and the icy cold hand closed on his own
      like a vice, forcing a lady's ring which was on the little finger deep
      into the flesh. Bobby set his lips and waited, the water dripping from the
      hem of his trousers. An hour passed and the grasp of the hand did not
      relax, nor did the expression on the drawn face change. Bobby with
      infinite craft lit himself a cheroot with the left hand—his right
      arm was numbed to the elbow—and resigned himself to a night of pain.
    

      Dawn showed a very white-faced Subaltern sitting on the side of a sick
      man's cot, and a Doctor in the doorway using language unfit for
      publication.
    

      “Have you been here all night, you young ass?” said the Doctor.
    

      “There or thereabouts,” said Bobby, ruefully. “He's frozen on to me.”
     

      Dormer's mouth shut with a click. He turned his head and sighed. The
      clinging band opened, and Bobby's arm fell useless at his side.
    

      “He'll do,” said the Doctor, quietly. “It must have been a toss-up all
      through the night. 'Think you're to be congratulated on this case.”
     

      “Oh, bosh!” said Bobby. “I thought the man had gone out long ago—only—only
      I didn't care to take my hand away. Rub my arm down, there's a good chap.
      What a grip the brute has! I'm chilled to the marrow!” He passed out of
      the tent shivering.
    

      Private Dormer was allowed to celebrate his repulse of Death by strong
      waters. Four days later, he sat on the side of his cot and said to the
      patients mildly: “I'd 'a' liken to 'a' spoken to 'im—so I should.”
     

      But at that time Bobby was reading yet another letter—he had the
      most persistent correspondent of any man in camp—and was even then
      about to write that the sickness had abated, and in another week at the
      outside would be gone. He did not intend to say that the chill of a sick
      man's hand seemed to have struck into the heart whose capacities for
      affection he dwelt on at such length. He did intend to enclose the
      illustrated programme of the forthcoming Sing-song whereof he was not a
      little proud. He also intended to write on many other matters which do not
      concern us, and doubtless would have done so but for the slight feverish
      headache which made him dull and unresponsive at mess.
    

      “You are overdoing it, Bobby,” said his skipper. “'Might give the rest of
      us credit of doing a little work. You go on as if you were the whole Mess
      rolled into one. Take it easy.”
     

      “I will,” said Bobby. “I'm feeling done up, somehow.” Revere looked at him
      anxiously and said nothing.
    

      There was a flickering of lanterns about the camp that night, and a rumor
      that brought men out of their cots to the tent doors, a paddling of the
      naked feet of doolie-bearers and the rush of a galloping horse.
    

      “Wot's up?” asked twenty tents; and through twenty tents ran the answer—“Wick,
      'e's down.”
     

      They brought the news to Revere and he groaned. “Any one but Bobby and I
      shouldn't have cared! The Sergeant-Major was right.”
     

      “Not going out this journey,” gasped Bobby, as he was lifted from the
      doolie. “Not going out this journey.” Then with an air of supreme
      conviction—“I can't, you see.”
     

      “Not if I can do anything!” said the Surgeon-Major, who had hastened over
      from the mess where he had been dining.
    

      He and the Regimental Surgeon fought together with Death for the life of
      Bobby Wick. Their work was interrupted by a hairy apparition in a
      blue-grey dressing-gown who stared in horror at the bed and cried—“Oh,
      my Gawd. It can't be 'im!” until an indignant Hospital Orderly whisked him
      away.
    

      If care of man and desire to live could have done aught, Bobby would have
      been saved. As it was, he made a fight of three days, and the
      Surgeon-Major's brow uncreased. “We'll save him yet,” he said; and the
      Surgeon, who, though he ranked with the Captain, had a very youthful
      heart, went out upon the word and pranced joyously in the mud.
    

      “Not going out this journey,” whispered Bobby Wick, gallantly, at the end
      of the third day.
    

      “Bravo!” said the Surgeon-Major. “That's the way to look at it, Bobby.”
     

      As evening fell a grey shade gathered round Bobby's mouth, and he turned
      his face to the tent wall wearily. The Surgeon-Major frowned.
    

      “I'm awfully tired,” said Bobby, very faintly. “What's the use of
      bothering me with medicine? I-don't-want-it. Let me alone.”
     

      The desire for life had departed, and Bobby was content to drift away on
      the easy tide of Death.
    

      “It's no good,” said the Surgeon-Major. “He doesn't want to live. He's
      meeting it, poor child.” And he blew his nose.
    

      Half a mile away, the regimental band was playing the overture to the
      Sing-song, for the men had been told that Bobby was out of danger. The
      clash of the brass and the wail of the horns reached Bobby's ears.
    

    Is there a single joy or pain,
    That I should never kno-ow?
    You do not love me, 'tis in vain,
    Bid me goodbye and go!


      An expression of hopeless irritation crossed the boy's face, and he tried
      to shake his head.
    

      The Surgeon-Major bent down—“What is it? Bobby?”—
    

      “Not that waltz,” muttered Bobby. “That's our own—our very ownest
      own. Mummy dear.”
     

      With this he sank into the stupor that gave place to death early next
      morning.
    

      Revere, his eyes red at the rims and his nose very white, went into
      Bobby's tent to write a letter to Papa Wick which should bow the white
      head of the ex-Commissioner of Chota-Buldana in the keenest sorrow of his
      life. Bobby's little store of papers lay in confusion on the table, and
      among them a half-finished letter. The last sentence ran: “So you see,
      darling, there is really no fear, because as long as I know you care for
      me and I care for you, nothing can touch me.”
     

      Revere stayed in the tent for an hour. When he came out, his eyes were
      redder than ever.
    


      Private Conklin sat on a turned-down bucket, and listened to a not
      unfamiliar tune. Private Conklin was a convalescent and should have been
      tenderly treated.
    

      “Ho!” said Private Conklin. “There's another bloomin' orf'cer dead.”
     

      The bucket shot from under him, and his eyes filled with a smithyful of
      sparks. A tall man in a blue-grey bedgown was regarding him with deep
      disfavor.
    

      “You ought to take shame for yourself, Conky! Orf'cer?—bloomin'
      orf'cer? I'll learn you to misname the likes of 'im. Hangel! Bloomin'
      Hangel! That's wot 'e is!”
     

      And the Hospital Orderly was so satisfied with the justice of the
      punishment that he did not even order Private Dormer back to his cot.