OUR LETTERS

 Eight hours of railway travel induce sleep for some persons and insomnia
      for others; with me, any journey prevents my sleeping on the following
      night.

 At about five o'clock I arrived at the estate of Abelle, which belongs to
      my friends, the Murets d'Artus, to spend three weeks there. It is a pretty
      house, built by one of their grandfathers in the style of the latter half
      of the last century. Therefore it has that intimate character of dwellings
      that have always been inhabited, furnished and enlivened by the same
      people. Nothing changes; nothing alters the soul of the dwelling, from
      which the furniture has never been taken out, the tapestries never
      unnailed, thus becoming worn out, faded, discolored, on the same walls.
      None of the old furniture leaves the place; only from time to time it is
      moved a little to make room for a new piece, which enters there like a
      new-born infant in the midst of brothers and sisters.

 The house is on a hill in the center of a park which slopes down to the
      river, where there is a little stone bridge. Beyond the water the fields
      stretch out in the distance, and here one can see the cows wandering
      around, pasturing on the moist grass; their eyes seem full of the dew,
      mist and freshness of the pasture. I love this dwelling, just as one loves
      a thing which one ardently desires to possess. I return here every autumn
      with infinite delight; I leave with regret.

 After I had dined with this friendly family, by whom I was received like a
      relative, I asked my friend, Paul Muret: “Which room did you give me
      this year?”

 “Aunt Rose's room.”

 An hour later, followed by her three children, two little girls and a boy,
      Madame Muret d'Artus installed me in Aunt Rose's room, where I had not yet
      slept.

 When I was alone I examined the walls, the furniture, the general aspect
      of the room, in order to attune my mind to it. I knew it but little, as I
      had entered it only once or twice, and I looked indifferently at a pastel
      portrait of Aunt Rose, who gave her name to the room.

 This old Aunt Rose, with her curls, looking at me from behind the glass,
      made very little impression on my mind. She looked to me like a woman of
      former days, with principles and precepts as strong on the maxims of
      morality as on cooking recipes, one of these old aunts who are the bugbear
      of gaiety and the stern and wrinkled angel of provincial families.

 I never had heard her spoken of; I knew nothing of her life or of her
      death. Did she belong to this century or to the preceding one? Had she
      left this earth after a calm or a stormy existence? Had she given up to
      heaven the pure soul of an old maid, the calm soul of a spouse, the tender
      one of a mother, or one moved by love? What difference did it make? The
      name alone, “Aunt Rose,” seemed ridiculous, common, ugly.

 I picked up a candle and looked at her severe face, hanging far up in an
      old gilt frame. Then, as I found it insignificant, disagreeable, even
      unsympathetic, I began to examine the furniture. It dated from the period
      of Louis XVI, the Revolution and the Directorate. Not a chair, not a
      curtain had entered this room since then, and it gave out the subtle odor
      of memories, which is the combined odor of wood, cloth, chairs, hangings,
      peculiar to places wherein have lived hearts that have loved and suffered.

 I retired but did not sleep. After I had tossed about for an hour or two,
      I decided to get up and write some letters.

 I opened a little mahogany desk with brass trimmings, which was placed
      between the two windows, in hope of finding some ink and paper; but all I
      found was a quill-pen, very much worn, and chewed at the end. I was about
      to close this piece of furniture, when a shining spot attracted my
      attention it looked like the yellow head of a nail. I scratched it with my
      finger, and it seemed to move. I seized it between two finger-nails, and
      pulled as hard as I could. It came toward me gently. It was a long gold
      pin which had been slipped into a hole in the wood and remained hidden
      there.

 Why? I immediately thought that it must have served to work some spring
      which hid a secret, and I looked. It took a long time. After about two
      hours of investigation, I discovered another hole opposite the first one,
      but at the bottom of a groove. Into this I stuck my pin: a little shelf
      sprang toward my face, and I saw two packages of yellow letters, tied with
      a blue ribbon.

 I read them. Here are two of them:

 So you wish me to return to you your letters, my dearest friend.
   Here they are, but it pains me to obey. Of what are you afraid?
   That I might lose them? But they are under lock and key. Do you
   fear that they might be stolen? I guard against that, for they are
   my dearest treasure.

   Yes, it pains me deeply. I wondered whether, perhaps you might not
   be feeling some regret! Not regret at having loved me, for I know
   that you still do, but the regret of having expressed on white paper
   this living love in hours when your heart did not confide in me, but
   in the pen that you held in your hand. When we love, we have need
   of confession, need of talking or writing, and we either talk or
   write. Words fly away, those sweet words made of music, air and
   tenderness, warm and light, which escape as soon as they are
   uttered, which remain in the memory alone, but which one can neither
   see, touch nor kiss, as one can with the words written by your hand.

   Your letters? Yes, I am returning them to you! But with what
   sorrow!

   Undoubtedly, you must have had an after thought of delicate shame at
   expressions that are ineffaceable. In your sensitive and timid soul
   you must have regretted having written to a man that you loved him.
   You remembered sentences that called up recollections, and you said
   to yourself: “I will make ashes of those words.”

   Be satisfied, be calm. Here are your letters. I love you.

 MY FRIEND:

   No, you have not understood me, you have not guessed. I do not
   regret, and I never shall, that I told you of my affection.

   I will always write to you, but you must return my letters to me as
   soon as you have read them.

   I shall shock you, my friend, when I tell you the reason for this
   demand. It is not poetic, as you imagined, but practical. I am
   afraid, not of you, but of some mischance. I am guilty. I do not
   wish my fault to affect others than myself.

   Understand me well. You and I may both die. You might fall off
   your horse, since you ride every day; you might die from a sudden
   attack, from a duel, from heart disease, from a carriage accident,
   in a thousand ways. For, if there is only one death, there are more
   ways of its reaching us than there are days or us to live.

   Then your sisters, your brother, or your sister-in-law might find my
   letters! Do you think that they love me? I doubt it. And then,
   even if they adored me, is it possible for two women and one man to
   know a secret—such a secret!—and not to tell of it?

   I seem to be saying very disagreeable things, speaking first of your
   death, and then suspecting the discreetness of your relatives.

   But don't all of us die sooner or later? And it is almost certain
   that one of us will precede the other under the ground. We must
   therefore foresee all dangers, even that one.

   As for me, I will keep your letters beside mine, in the secret of my
   little desk. I will show them to you there, sleeping side by side
   in their silken hiding place, full of our love, like lovers in a
   tomb.

   You will say to me: “But if you should die first, my dear, your
   husband will find these letters.”

   Oh! I fear nothing. First of all, he does not know the secret of my
   desk, and then he will not look for it. And even if he finds it
   after my death, I fear nothing.

   Did you ever stop to think of all the love letters that have been
   found after death? I have been thinking of this for a long time,
   and that is the reason I decided to ask you for my letters.

   Think that never, do you understand, never, does a woman burn, tear
   or destroy the letters in which it is told her that she is loved.
   That is our whole life, our whole hope, expectation and dream.
   These little papers which bear our name in caressing terms are
   relics which we adore; they are chapels in which we are the saints.
   Our love letters are our titles to beauty, grace, seduction, the
   intimate vanity of our womanhood; they are the treasures of our
   heart. No, a woman does not destroy these secret and delicious
   archives of her life.

   But, like everybody else, we die, and then—then these letters
   are found! Who finds them? The husband. Then what does he do?
   Nothing. He burns them.

   Oh, I have thought a great deal about that! Just think that every
   day women are dying who have been loved; every day the traces and
   proofs of their fault fall into the hands of their husbands, and
   that there is never a scandal, never a duel.

   Think, my dear, of what a man's heart is. He avenges himself on a
   living woman; he fights with the man who has dishonored her, kills
   him while she lives, because, well, why? I do not know exactly why.
   But, if, after her death, he finds similar proofs, he burns them and
   no one is the wiser, and he continues to shake hands with the friend
   of the dead woman, and feels quite at ease that these letters should
   not have fallen into strange hands, and that they are destroyed.

   Oh, how many men I know among my friends who must have burned such
   proofs, and who pretend to know nothing, and yet who would have
   fought madly had they found them when she was still alive! But she
   is dead. Honor has changed. The tomb is the boundary of conjugal
   sinning.

   Therefore, I can safely keep our letters, which, in your hands,
   would be a menace to both of us. Do you dare to say that I am not
   right?

   I love you and kiss you.

 I raised my eyes to the portrait of Aunt Rose, and as I looked at her
      severe, wrinkled face, I thought of all those women's souls which we do
      not know, and which we suppose to be so different from what they really
      are, whose inborn and ingenuous craftiness we never can penetrate, their
      quiet duplicity; and a verse of De Vigny returned to my memory:

 “Always this comrade whose heart is uncertain.”