OUT OF SEASON



 OUT OF SEASON

 On the four lira he had earned by spading the
hotel garden he got quite drunk. He saw the young
gentleman coming down the path and spoke to him
mysteriously. The young gentleman said he had not
eaten yet but would be ready to go as soon as lunch
was finished. Forty minutes or an hour.

At the cantina near the bridge they trusted him
for three more grappas because he was so confident
and mysterious about his job for the afternoon. It
was a windy day with the sun coming out from behind
clouds and then going under in sprinkles of rain.
A wonderful day for trout fishing.

The young gentleman came out of the hotel and
asked him about the rods. Should his wife come
behind with the rods? Yes, said Peduzzi, let her
follow us. The young gentleman went back into the
hotel and spoke to his wife. He and Peduzzi started
down the road. The young gentleman had a musette
over his shoulder. Peduzzi saw the wife, who looked
as young as the young gentleman and was wearing
mountain boots and a blue beret, start out to follow
them down the road carrying the fishing rods unjointed
one in each hand. Peduzzi didn’t like her to
be way back there. Signorina, he called, winking at
the young gentleman, come up here and walk with
us. Signora come up here. Let us all walk together.
Peduzzi wanted them all three to walk down the
street of Cortina together.

The wife stayed behind, following rather sullenly.
Signorina, Peduzzi called tenderly, come up here
with us. The young gentleman looked back and
shouted something. The wife stopped lagging behind,
and walked up.

Everyone they met walking through the main
street of the town Peduzzi greeted elaborately. Buon’ di Arturo ! Tipping his hat. The bank clerk
stared at him from the door of the Fascist café.
Groups of three and four people standing in front
of the shops stared at the three. The workmen in
their stone-powdered jackets working on the foundations
of the new hotel looked up as they passed.
Nobody spoke or gave any sign to them except the
town beggar, lean and old with a spittle thickened
beard, who lifted his hat as they passed.

Peduzzi stopped in front of a store with the window
full of bottles and brought his empty grappa bottle
from an inside pocket of his old military coat.
A little to drink, some marsala for the Signora, something,
something to drink. He gestured with the
bottle. It was a wonderful day. Marsala, you like
marsala, Signorina? A little marsala?

The wife stood sullenly. You’ll have to play up to
this, she said. I can’t understand a word he says.
He’s drunk isn’t he?

The young gentleman appeared not to hear
Peduzzi. He was thinking what in hell makes him
say Marsala. That’s what Max Beerbohm drinks.

 Geld , Peduzzi said finally, taking hold of the
young gentleman’s sleeve. Lire . He smiled reluctant
to press the subject but needing to bring the young
gentleman into action.

The young gentleman took out his pocket book and
gave him a ten lire note. Peduzzi went up the steps
to the door of the Speciality of Domestic and Foreign
Wines shop. It was locked.

It is closed until two, someone passing in the street
said scornfully. Peduzzi came down the steps. He
felt hurt. Never mind, he said, we can get it at the
Concordia.

They walked down the road to the Concordia
three abreast. On the porch of the Concordia where
the rusty bobsleds were stacked the young gentleman
said, Was wollen sie ? Peduzzi handed him the ten
lira note folded over and over. Nothing, he said,
Anything. He was embarrassed. Marsala maybe.
I don’t know. Marsala?

The door of the Concordia shut on the young
gentleman and the wife. Three marsalas, said the
y. g. to the girl behind the pastry counter. Two you
mean? she asked. No, he said, one for a vecchio . Oh,
she said, a vecchio , and laughed getting down the
bottle. She poured out the three muddy looking
drinks into three glasses. The wife was sitting at a
table under the line of newspapers on sticks. The
y. g. put one of the marsalas in front of her. You
might as well drink it, he said. Maybe it’ll make
you feel better. She sat and looked at the glass. The
y. g. went outside the door with a glass for Peduzzi
but could not see him.

I don’t know where he is, he said coming back into
the pastry room carrying the glass.

He wanted a quart of it, said the wife.

How much is a quarter litre, the y. g. asked the
girl.

Of the bianco? One lira.

No, of the marsala. Put these two in too, he said
giving her his own glass and the one poured for
Peduzzi. She filled the quarter litre wine measure
with a funnel. A bottle to carry it, said the y. g.

She went to hunt for a bottle. It all amused her.

I’m sorry you feel so rotten Tiny, he said, I’m sorry
I talked the way I did at lunch. We were both getting
at the same thing from different angles.

It doesn’t make any difference, she said. None of
it makes any difference.

Are you too cold, he asked. I wish you’d worn
another sweater.

I’ve got on three sweaters.

The girl came in with a very slim brown bottle and
poured the marsala into it. The y. g. paid five lira
more. They went out of the door. The girl was
amused. Peduzzi was walking up and down at the
other end out of the wind and holding the rods.

Come on, he said, I will carry the rods. What
difference does it make if anybody sees them. No
one will trouble us. No one will make any trouble
for me in Cortina. I know them at the municipio .
I have been a soldier. Everybody in this town likes
me. I sell frogs. What if it is forbidden to fish? Not
a thing. Nothing. No trouble. Big trout I tell you. Lots
of them.

They were walking down the hill toward the river.
The town was in back of them. The sun had gone
under and it was sprinkling rain. There, said Peduzzi,
pointing to a girl in the doorway of a house they
passed. My daughter.

His doctor, the wife said, has he got to show us
his doctor?

He said his daughter, said the y. g.

The girl went into the house as Peduzzi pointed.

They walked down the hill across the fields and
then turned to follow the river bank. Peduzzi talked
rapidly with much winking and knowingness. As
they walked three abreast the wife caught his breath
across the wind. Once he nudged her in the ribs.
Part of the time he talked in D’Ampezzo dialect
and sometimes in Tyroler German dialect. He could
not make out which the young gentleman and his
wife understood the best so he was being bi-lingual.
But as the young gentleman said Ja Ja Peduzzi
decided to talk altogether in Tyroler. The young
gentleman and the wife understood nothing.

Everybody in the town saw us going through with
these rods. We’re probably being followed by the
game police now. I wish we weren’t in on this damn
thing. This damned old fool is so drunk too.

Of course you haven’t got the guts to just go back,
said the wife. Of course you have to go on.

Why don’t you go back? Go on back Tiny.

I’m going to stay with you. If you go to jail we
might as well both go.

They turned sharp down the bank and Peduzzi
stood his coat blowing in the wind gesturing at the
river. It was brown and muddy. Off on the right there
was a dump heap.

Say it to me in Italian, said the young gentleman

 Un’ mezz’ ora. Piu d’ un’ mezz’ ora .

He says it’s at least a half an hour more. Go on
back Tiny. You’re cold in this wind anyway. It’s
a rotten day and we aren’t going to have any fun
anyway.

All right, she said, and climbed up the grassy bank.

Peduzzi was down at the river and did not notice
her till she was almost out of sight over the crest.
Frau! he shouted. Frau! Fraulein! You’re not
going? She went on over the crest of the hill.

She’s gone! said Peduzzi. It shocked him.

He took off the rubber bands that held the rod
segments together and commenced to joint up one
of the rods.

But you said it was half an hour further.

Oh yes. It is good half an hour down. It is good
here too.

Really?

Of course. It is good here and good there too.

The y. g. sat down on the bank and jointed up a
rod, put on the reel and threaded the line through
the guides. He felt uncomfortable and afraid that
any minute a gamekeeper or a posse of citizens
would come over the bank from the town. He could
see the houses of the town and the campanile
over the edge of the hill. He opened his leader box.
Peduzzi leaned over and dug his flat hard thumb
and forefinger in and tangled the moistened leaders.

Have you some lead?

No.

You must have some lead. Peduzzi was excited.
You must have piombo. Piombo. A little piombo .
Just here. Just above the hook or your bait will float
on the water. You must have it. Just a little piombo .

Have you got some?

No. He looked through all his pockets desperately.
Sifting through the cloth dirt in the linings of his
inside military pockets. I haven’t any. We must have piombo .

We can’t fish then, said the y. g. and unjointed
the rod, reeling the line back through the guides.
We’ll get some piombo and fish tomorrow.

But listen caro, you must have piombo . The line
will lie flat on the water. Peduzzi’s day was going
to pieces before his eyes. You must have piombo .
A little is enough. Your stuff is all clean and new
but you have no lead. I would have brought some.
You said you had everything.

The y. g. looked at the stream discoloured by the
melting snow. I know, he said, we’ll get some piombo and fish tomorrow.

At what hour in the morning? Tell me that.

At seven.

The sun came out. It was warm and pleasant. The
young gentleman felt relieved. He was no longer
breaking the law. Sitting on the bank he took the
bottle of marsala out of his pocket and passed it to
Peduzzi. Peduzzi passed it back. The y. g. took a
drink of it and passed it to Peduzzi again. Peduzzi
passed it back again. Drink, he said, drink. It’s your
marsala. After another short drink the y. g. handed
the bottle over. Peduzzi had been watching it closely.
He took the bottle very hurriedly and tipped it up.
The grey hairs in the folds of his neck oscillated as
he drank his eyes fixed on the end of the narrow
brown bottle. He drank it all. The sun shone while
he drank. It was wonderful. This was a great day
after all. A wonderful day.

 Senta caro ! In the morning at seven. He had
called the young gentleman caro several times and
nothing had happened. It was good marsala. His
eyes glistened. Days like this stretched out ahead.
It would begin again at seven in the morning.

They started to walk up the hill toward the town.
The y. g. went on ahead. He was quite a way up the
hill. Peduzzi called to him.

Listen caro can you let me take five lira for a
favour?

For today? asked the young gentleman frowning.

No, not today. Give it to me today for tomorrow.
I will provide everything for tomorrow. Pane, salami,
formaggio, good stuff for all of us. You and I and the
signora. Bait for fishing, minnows, not worms only.
Perhaps I can get some marsala. All for five lira.
Five lira for a favour.

The young gentleman looked through his pocket
book and took out a two lira note and two ones.

Thank you caro . Thank you, said Peduzzi in the
tone of one member of the Carleton Club accepting
the Morning Post from another. This was living. He
was through with the hotel garden, breaking up
frozen manure with a dung fork. Life was opening
out.

Until seven o’clock then caro, he said, slapping
the y. g. on the back. Promptly at seven.

I may not be going, said the young gentleman
putting his purse back in his pocket.

What, said Peduzzi. I will have minnows Signor. Salami, everything. You and I and the Signora. The
three of us.

I may not be going, said the y. g., very probably
not. I will leave word with the padrone at the hotel
office.