This happened not so very long ago in the Moscow Circuit Court. The
      jurymen, left in court for the night, before going to bed, began a
      conversation about overwhelming sensations. It was occasioned by someone's
      recollection of a witness who became a stammerer and turned grey, owing,
      as he said, to one dreadful moment. The jurymen decided before going to
      bed that each one of them should dig into his memories and tell a story.
      Life is short; but still there is not a single man who can boast that he
      had not had some dreadful moments in his past.

 One juryman related how he was nearly drowned. A second told how one night
      he poisoned his own child, in a place where there was neither doctor nor
      chemist, by giving the child white copperas in mistake for soda. The child
      did not die, but the father nearly went mad. A third, not an old man, but
      sickly, described his two attempts to commit suicide. Once he shot
      himself; the second time he threw himself in front of a train.

 The fourth, a short, stout man, smartly dressed, told the following story:

 "I was no more than twenty-two or twenty-three years old, when I fell head
      over heels in love with my present wife and proposed to her. Now, I would
      gladly give myself a thrashing for that early marriage; but then—well,
      I don't know what would have happened to me if Natasha had refused. My
      love was most ardent, the kind described in novels as mad, passionate, and
      so on. My happiness choked me, and I did not know how to escape from it. I
      bored my father, my friends, the servants by continually telling them how
      desperately I was in love. Happy people are quite the most tiresome and
      boring. I used to be awfully exasperating. Even now I'm ashamed.

 "At the time I had a newly-called barrister among my friends. The
      barrister is now known all over Russia, but then he was only at the
      beginning of his popularity, and he was not rich or famous enough to have
      the right not to recognise a friend when he met him or not to raise his
      hat. I used to go and see him once or twice a week.

 "When I came, we used both to stretch ourselves upon the sofas and begin
      to philosophise.

 "Once I lay on the sofa, harping on the theme that there is no more
      ungrateful profession than a barrister's. I tried to show that after the
      witnesses have been heard the Court can easily dispense with the Crown
      Prosecutor and the barrister, because they are equally unnecessary and
      only hindrances. If an adult juryman, sound in spirit and mind, is
      convinced that this ceiling is white, or that Ivanov is guilty, no
      Demosthenes has the power to fight and overcome his conviction. Who can
      convince me that my moustache is carroty when I know it is black? When I
      listen to an orator I may perhaps get sentimental and even shed a tear,
      but my rooted convictions, for the most part based on the obvious and on
      facts, will not be changed an atom. My friend the barrister contended that
      I was still young and silly and was talking childish nonsense. In his
      opinion an obvious fact when illumined by conscientious experts became
      still more obvious. That was his first point. His second was that a talent
      is a force, an elemental power, a hurricane, that is able to turn even
      stones to dust, not to speak of such trifles as the convictions of
      householders and small shopkeepers. It is as hard for human frailty to
      struggle against a talent as it is to look at the sun without being
      blinded or to stop the wind. By the power of the word one single mortal
      converts thousands of convinced savages to Christianity. Ulysses was the
      most convinced person in the world, but he was all submission before the
      Syrens, and so on. All history is made up of such instances. In life we
      meet them at every turn. And so it ought to be; otherwise a clever person
      of talent would not be preferred before the stupid and untalented.

 "I persisted and continued to argue that a conviction is stronger than any
      talent, though, speaking frankly, I myself could not define what exactly
      is a conviction and what is a talent. Probably I talked only for the sake
      of talking.

 "'Take even your own case' ... said the barrister. 'You are convinced that
      your fiancée is an angel and that there's not a man in all the town
      happier than you. I tell you, ten or twenty minutes would be quite enough
      for me to make you sit down at this very table and write to break off the
      engagement.'

 "I began to laugh.

 "'Don't laugh. I'm talking seriously,' said my friend. 'If I only had the
      desire, in twenty minutes you would be happy in the thought that you have
      been saved from marriage. My talent is not great, but neither are you
      strong?'

 "'Well, try, please,' I said.

 "'No, why should I? I only said it in passing. You're a good boy. It would
      be a pity to expose you to such an experiment. Besides, I'm not in the
      mood, to-day.'

 "We sat down to supper. The wine and thoughts of Natasha and my love
      utterly filled me with a sense of youth and happiness. My happiness was so
      infinitely great that the green-eyed barrister opposite me seemed so
      unhappy, so little, so grey!"

 "'But do try,' I pressed him. 'I beg you.'

 "The barrister shook his head and knit his brows. Evidently I had begun to
      bore him.

 "'I know,' he said, 'that when the experiment is over you will thank me
      and call me saviour, but one must think of your sweetheart too. She loves
      you, and your refusal would make her suffer. But what a beauty she is 'I
      envy you.'

 "The barrister sighed, swallowed some wine, and began to speak of what a
      wonderful creature my Natasha was. He had an uncommon gift for
      description. He could pour out a whole heap of words about a woman's
      eyelashes or her little finger. I listened to him with delight.

 "'I've seen many women in my life-time;' he said, 'but I give you my word
      of honour, I tell you as a friend, your Natasha Andreevna is a gem, a rare
      girl! Of course, there are defects, even a good many, I grant you, but
      still she is charming.'

 "And the barrister began to speak of the defects of my sweetheart. Now I
      quite understand it was a general conversation about women, one about
      their weak points in general; but it appeared to me then as though he was
      speaking only of Natasha. He went into raptures about her snub-nose, her
      excited voice, her shrill laugh, her affectation—indeed, about
      everything I particularly disliked in her. All this was in his opinion
      infinitely amiable, gracious and feminine. Imperceptibly he changed from
      enthusiasm first to paternal edification, then to a light, sneering
      tone.... There was no Chairman of the Bench with us to stop the barrister
      riding the high horse. I hadn't a chance of opening my mouth—and
      what could I have said? My friend said nothing new, his truths were long
      familiar. The poison was not at all in what he said, but altogether in the
      devilish form in which he said it. A form of Satan's own invention! As I
      listened to him I was convinced that one and the same word had a thousand
      meanings and nuances according to the way it is pronounced and the turn
      given to the sentence. I certainly cannot reproduce the tone or the form.
      I can only say that as I listened to my friend and paced from corner to
      corner of my room, I was revolted, exasperated, contemptuous according as
      he felt. I even believed him when, with tears in his eyes, he declared to
      me that I was a great man, deserving a better fate, and destined in the
      future to accomplish some remarkable exploit, from which I might be
      prevented by my marriage.

 "'My dear friend,' he exclaimed, firmly grasping my hand, 'I implore you,
      I command you: stop before it is too late. Stop! God save you from this
      strange and terrible mistake! My friend, don't ruin your youth.'

 "Believe me or not as you will, but finally I sat down at the table and
      wrote to my sweetheart breaking off the engagement. I wrote and rejoiced
      that there was still time to repair my mistake. When the envelope was
      sealed I hurried into the street to put it in a pillar box. The barrister
      came with me.

 "'Splendid! Superb!' he praised me when my letter to Natasha disappeared
      into the darkness of the pillar-box. 'I congratulate you with all my
      heart. I'm delighted for your sake.'

 "After we had gone about ten steps together, the barrister continued:

 "'Of course, marriage has its bright side too. I, for instance, belong to
      the kind of men for whom marriage and family life are everything.'

 "He was already describing his life: all the ugliness of a lonely bachelor
      existence appeared before me.

 "He spoke with enthusiasm of his future wife, of the pleasures of an
      ordinary family life, and his transports were so beautiful and sincere
      that I was in absolute despair by the time we reached his door.

 "'What are you doing with me, you damnable man?' I said panting. 'You've
      ruined me! Why did you make me write that cursed letter? I love her! I
      love her!'

 "And I swore that I was in love. I was terrified of my action. It already
      seemed wild and absurd to me. Gentlemen, it is quite impossible to imagine
      a more overwhelming sensation than mine at that moment! If a kind man had
      happened to slip a revolver into my hand I would have put a bullet through
      my head gladly.

 "'Well, that's enough, enough!' the advocate said, patting my shoulder and
      beginning to laugh. 'Stop crying! The letter won't reach your sweetheart.
      It was I, not you, wrote the address on the envelope, and I muddled it up
      so that they won't be able to make anything of it at the post-office. But
      let this be a lesson to you. Don't discuss things you don't understand.'"

 "Now, gentlemen, next, please."

 The fifth juryman had settled himself comfortably and already opened his
      mouth to begin his story, when we heard the dock striking from Spaisky
      Church-tower.

 "Twelve...." one of the jurymen counted. "To which class, gentlemen, would
      you assign the sensations which our prisoner at the bar is now feeling?
      The murderer passes the night here in a prisoner's cell, either lying or
      sitting, certainly without sleeping and all through the sleepless night
      listens to the striking of the hours. What does he think of? What dreams
      visit him?"

 And all the jurymen suddenly forgot about overwhelming sensations. The
      experience of their friend, who once wrote the letter to his Natasha,
      seemed unimportant, and not even amusing. Nobody told any more stories;
      but they began to go to bed quietly, in silence.

   

 It is a great bore for an educated person not to know foreign languages.
      Vorotov felt it strongly, when on leaving the university after he had got
      his degree he occupied himself with a little scientific research.

 "It's awful!" he used to say, losing his breath (for although only
      twenty-six he was stout, heavy, and short of breath). "It's awful. Without
      knowing languages I'm like a bird without wings. I'll simply have to chuck
      the work."

 So he decided, come what might, to conquer his natural laziness and to
      study French and German, and he began to look out for a teacher.

 One winter afternoon, as Vorotov sat working in his study, the servant
      announced a lady to see him.

 "Show her in," said Vorotov.

 And a young lady, exquisitely dressed in the latest fashion, entered the
      study. She introduced herself as Alice Ossipovna Enquette, a teacher of
      French, and said that a friend of Vorotov's had sent her to him.

 "Very glad! Sit down!" said Vorotov, losing his breath, and clutching at
      the collar of his night shirt. (He always worked in a night shirt in order
      to breathe more easily.) "You were sent to me by Peter Sergueyevich?
      Yes.... Yes ... I asked him.... Very glad!"

 While he discussed the matter with Mademoiselle Enquette he glanced at her
      shyly, with curiosity. She was a genuine Frenchwoman, very elegant, and
      still quite young. From her pale and languid face, from her short, curly
      hair and unnaturally small waist, you would not think her more than
      eighteen, but looking at her broad, well-developed shoulders, her charming
      back and severe eyes, Vorotov decided that she was certainly not less than
      twenty-three, perhaps even twenty-five; but then again it seemed to him
      that she was only eighteen. Her face had the cold, business-like
      expression of one who had come to discuss a business matter. Never once
      did she smile or frown, and only once a look of perplexity flashed into
      her eyes, when she discovered that she was not asked to teach children but
      a grown up, stout young man.

 "So, Alice Ossipovna," Vorotov said to her, "you will give me a lesson
      daily from seven to eight o'clock in the evening. With regard to your wish
      to receive a rouble a lesson, I have no objection at all. A rouble—well,
      let it be a rouble...."

 And he went on asking her if she wanted tea or coffee, if the weather was
      fine, and, smiling good naturedly, stroking the tablecloth with the palm
      of his hand, he asked her kindly who she was, where she had completed her
      education, and how she earned her living.

 In a cold, business-like tone Alice Ossipovna answered that she had
      completed her education at a private school, and had then qualified as a
      domestic teacher, that her father had died recently of scarlet fever, her
      mother was alive and made artificial flowers, that she, Mademoiselle
      Enquette, gave private lessons at a pension in the morning, and from one
      o'clock right until the evening she taught in respectable private houses.

 She went, leaving a slight and almost imperceptible perfume of a woman's
      dress behind her. Vorotov did not work for a long time afterwards but sat
      at the table stroking the green cloth and thinking.

 "It's very pleasant to see girls earning their own living," he thought.
      "On the other hand it is very unpleasant to realise that poverty does not
      spare even such elegant and pretty girls as Alice Ossipovna; she, too,
      must struggle for her existence. Rotten luck!..."

 Having never seen virtuous Frenchwomen he also thought that this
      exquisitely dressed Alice Ossipovna, with her well-developed shoulders and
      unnaturally small waist was in all probability, engaged in something else
      besides teaching.

 Next evening when the clock pointed to five minutes to seven, Alice
      Ossipovna arrived, rosy from the cold; she opened Margot (an elementary
      text-book) and began without any preamble:

 "The French grammar has twenty-six letters. The first is called A, the
      second B...."

 "Pardon," interrupted Vorotov, smiling, "I must warn you, Mademoiselle,
      that you will have to change your methods somewhat in my case. The fact is
      that I know Russian, Latin and Greek very well. I have studied comparative
      philology, and it seems to me that we may leave out Margot and begin
      straight off to read some author." And he explained to the Frenchwoman how
      grown-up people study languages.

 "A friend of mine," said he, "who wished to know modern languages put a
      French, German and Latin gospel in front of him and then minutely analysed
      one word after another. The result—he achieved his purpose in less
      than a year. Let us take some author and start reading."

 The Frenchwoman gave him a puzzled look. It was evident that Vorotov's
      proposal appeared to her naive and absurd. If he had not been grown up she
      would certainly have got angry and stormed at him, but as he was a very
      stout, adult man at whom she could not storm, she only shrugged her
      shoulders half-perceptibly and said:

 "Just as you please."

 Vorotov ransacked his bookshelves and produced a ragged French book.

 "Will this do?" he asked.

 "It's all the same."

 "In that case let us begin. Let us start from the title, Mémoires ."

 "Reminiscences...." translated Mademoiselle Enquette.

 "Reminiscences...." repeated Vorotov.

 Smiling good naturedly and breathing heavily, he passed a quarter of an
      hour over the word mémoires and the same with the word de. This tired Alice Ossipovna out. She answered his questions carelessly, got
      confused and evidently neither understood her pupil nor tried to. Vorotov
      asked her questions, and at the same time glanced furtively at her fair
      hair, thinking:

 "The hair is not naturally curly. She waves it. Marvellous! She works from
      morning till night and yet she finds time to wave her hair."

 At eight o'clock sharp she got up, gave him a dry, cold "Au revoir,
      Monsieur," and left the study. After her lingered the same sweet, subtle,
      agitating perfume. The pupil again did nothing for a long time, but sat by
      the table and thought.

 During the following days he became convinced that his teacher was a
      charming girl serious and punctual, but very uneducated and incapable of
      teaching grown up people; so he decided he would not waste his time, but
      part with her and engage someone else. When she came for the seventh
      lesson he took an envelope containing seven roubles out of his pocket.
      Holding it in his hands and blushing furiously, he began:

 "I am sorry, Alice Ossipovna, but I must tell you.... I am placed in an
      awkward position...."

 The Frenchwoman glanced at the envelope and guessed what was the matter.
      For the first time during the lessons a shiver passed over her face and
      the cold, business-like expression disappeared. She reddened faintly, and
      casting her eyes down, began to play absently with her thin gold chain.
      And Vorotov, noticing her confusion, understood how precious this rouble
      was to her, how hard it would be for her to lose this money.

 "I must tell you," he murmured, getting still more confused. His heart
      gave a thump. Quickly he put the envelope back into his pocket and
      continued:

 "Excuse me. I ... I will leave you for ten minutes...."

 And as though he did not want to dismiss her at all, but had only asked
      permission to retire for a moment he went into another room and sat there
      for ten minutes. Then he returned, more confused than ever; he thought
      that his leaving her like that would be explained by her in a certain way
      and this made him awkward.

 The lessons began again.

 Vorotov wanted them no more. Knowing that they would lead to nothing he
      gave the Frenchwoman a free hand; he did not question or interrupt her any
      more. She translated at her own sweet will, ten pages a lesson, but he did
      not listen. He breathed heavily and for want of occupation gazed now and
      then at her curly little head, her neck, her soft white hands, and inhaled
      the perfume of her dress.

 He caught himself thinking about her as he ought not and it shamed him, or
      admiring her, and then he felt aggrieved and angry because she behaved so
      coldly towards him, in such a businesslike way, never smiling and as if
      afraid that he might suddenly touch her. All the while he thought: How
      could he inspire her with confidence in him, how could he get to know her
      better, to help her, to make her realise how badly she taught, poor little
      soul?

 Once Alice Ossipovna came to the lesson in a dainty pink dress, a little décolleté , and such a sweet scent came from her that you might have
      thought she was wrapped in a cloud, that you had only to blow on her for
      her to fly away or dissolve like smoke. She apologised, saying she could
      only stay for half an hour, because she had to go straight from the lesson
      to a ball.

 He gazed at her neck, at her bare shoulders and he thought he understood
      why Frenchwomen were known to be light-minded and easily won; he was
      drowned in this cloud of scent, beauty, and nudity, and she, quite unaware
      of his thoughts and probably not in the least interested in them, read
      over the pages quickly and translated full steam ahead:

 "He walked over the street and met the gentleman of his friend and said:
      where do you rush? seeing your face so pale it makes me pain."

 The Mémoires had been finished long ago; Alice was now translating
      another book. Once she came to the lesson an hour earlier, apologising
      because she had to go to the Little Theatre at seven o'clock. When the
      lesson was over Vorotov dressed and he too went to the theatre. It seemed
      to him only for the sake of rest and distraction, and he did not even
      think of Alice. He would not admit that a serious man, preparing for a
      scientific career, a stay-at-home, should brush aside his book and rush to
      the theatre for the sake of meeting an unintellectual, stupid girl whom he
      hardly knew.

 But somehow, dining the intervals his heart beat, and, without noticing
      it, he ran about the foyer and the corridors like a boy, looking
      impatiently for someone. Every time the interval was over he was tired,
      but when he discovered the familiar pink dress and the lovely shoulders
      veiled with tulle his heart jumped as if from a presentiment of happiness,
      he smiled joyfully, and for the first time in his life he felt jealous.

 Alice was with two ugly students and an officer. She was laughing, talking
      loudly and evidently flirting. Vorotov had never seen her like that.
      Apparently she was happy, contented, natural, warm. Why? What was the
      reason? Perhaps because these people were dear to her and belonged to the
      same class as she. Vorotov felt the huge abyss between him and that class.
      He bowed to his teacher, but she nodded coldly and quietly passed by. It
      was plain she did not want her cavaliers to know that she had pupils and
      gave lessons because she was poor.

 After the meeting at the theatre Vorotov knew that he was in love. During
      lessons that followed he devoured his elegant teacher with his eyes, and
      no longer struggling, he gave full rein to his pure and impure thoughts.
      Alice's face was always cold. Exactly at eight o'clock every evening she
      said calmly, "Au revoir, Monsieur," and he felt that she was indifferent
      to him and would remain indifferent, that—his position was hopeless.

 Sometimes in the middle of a lesson he would begin dreaming, hoping,
      building plans; he composed an amorous declaration, remembering that
      Frenchwomen were frivolous and complaisant, but he had only to give his
      teacher one glance for his thoughts to be blown out like a candle, when
      you carry it on to the verandah of a bungalow and the wind is blowing.
      Once, overcome, forgetting everything, in a frenzy, he could stand it no
      longer. He barred her way when she came from the study into the hall after
      the lesson and, losing his breath and stammering, began to declare his
      love:

 "You are dear to me!... I love you. Please let me speak!"

 Alice grew pale: probably she was afraid that after this declaration she
      would not be able to come to him any more and receive a rouble a lesson.
      She looked at him with terrified eyes and began in a loud whisper:

 "Ah, it's impossible! Do not speak, I beg you! Impossible!"

 Afterwards Vorotov did not sleep all night; he tortured himself with
      shame, abused himself, thinking feverishly. He thought that his
      declaration had offended the girl and that she would not come any more. He
      made up his mind to find out where she lived from the Address Bureau and
      to write her an apology. But Alice came without the letter. For a moment
      she felt awkward, and then opened the book and began to translate quickly,
      in an animated voice, as always:

 "'Oh, young gentleman, do not rend these flowers in my garden which I want
      to give to my sick daughter.'"

 She still goes. Four books have been translated by now but Vorotov knows
      nothing beyond the word mémoires, and when he is asked about his
      scientific research work he waves his hand, leaves the question
      unanswered, and begins to talk about the weather.