PANIC FEARS
    

DURING all the
      years I have been living in this world I have only three times been
      terrified.
    

      The first real terror, which made my hair stand on end and made shivers
      run all over me, was caused by a trivial but strange phenomenon. It
      happened that, having nothing to do one July evening, I drove to the
      station for the newspapers. It was a still, warm, almost sultry evening,
      like all those monotonous evenings in July which, when once they have set
      in, go on for a week, a fortnight, or sometimes longer, in regular
      unbroken succession, and are suddenly cut short by a violent thunderstorm
      and a lavish downpour of rain that refreshes everything for a long time.
    

      The sun had set some time before, and an unbroken gray dusk lay all over
      the land. The mawkishly sweet scents of the grass and flowers were heavy
      in the motionless, stagnant air.
    

      I was driving in a rough trolley. Behind my back the gardener’s son
      Pashka, a boy of eight years old, whom I had taken with me to look after
      the horse in case of necessity, was gently snoring, with his head on a
      sack of oats. Our way lay along a narrow by-road, straight as a ruler,
      which lay hid like a great snake in the tall thick rye. There was a pale
      light from the afterglow of sunset; a streak of light cut its way through
      a narrow, uncouth-looking cloud, which seemed sometimes like a boat and
      sometimes like a man wrapped in a quilt....
    

      I had driven a mile and a half, or two miles, when against the pale
      background of the evening glow there came into sight one after another
      some graceful tall poplars; a river glimmered beyond them, and a gorgeous
      picture suddenly, as though by magic, lay stretched before me. I had to
      stop the horse, for our straight road broke off abruptly and ran down a
      steep incline overgrown with bushes. We were standing on the hillside and
      beneath us at the bottom lay a huge hole full of twilight, of fantastic
      shapes, and of space. At the bottom of this hole, in a wide plain guarded
      by the poplars and caressed by the gleaming river, nestled a village. It
      was now sleeping.... Its huts, its church with the belfry, its trees,
      stood out against the gray twilight and were reflected darkly in the
      smooth surface of the river.
    

      I waked Pashka for fear he should fall out and began cautiously going
      down.
    

      “Have we got to Lukovo?” asked Pashka, lifting his head
      lazily.
    

      “Yes. Hold the reins!...”
    

      I led the horse down the hill and looked at the village. At the first
      glance one strange circumstance caught my attention: at the very top of
      the belfry, in the tiny window between the cupola and the bells, a light
      was twinkling. This light was like that of a smoldering lamp, at one
      moment dying down, at another flickering up. What could it come from?
    

      Its source was beyond my comprehension. It could not be burning at the
      window, for there were neither ikons nor lamps in the top turret of the
      belfry; there was nothing there, as I knew, but beams, dust, and spiders’
      webs. It was hard to climb up into that turret, for the passage to it from
      the belfry was closely blocked up.
    

      It was more likely than anything else to be the reflection of some outside
      light, but though I strained my eyes to the utmost, I could not see one
      other speck of light in the vast expanse that lay before me. There was no
      moon. The pale and, by now, quite dim streak of the afterglow could not
      have been reflected, for the window looked not to the west, but to the
      east. These and other similar considerations were straying through my mind
      all the while that I was going down the slope with the horse. At the
      bottom I sat down by the roadside and looked again at the light. As before
      it was glimmering and flaring up.
    

      “Strange,” I thought, lost in conjecture. “Very strange.”
    

      And little by little I was overcome by an unpleasant feeling. At first I
      thought that this was vexation at not being able to explain a simple
      phenomenon; but afterwards, when I suddenly turned away from the light in
      horror and caught hold of Pashka with one hand, it became clear that I was
      overcome with terror....
    

      I was seized with a feeling of loneliness, misery, and horror, as though I
      had been flung down against my will into this great hole full of shadows,
      where I was standing all alone with the belfry looking at me with its red
      eye.
    

      “Pashka!” I cried, closing my eyes in horror.
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Pashka, what’s that gleaming on the belfry?”
    

      Pashka looked over my shoulder at the belfry and gave a yawn.
    

      “Who can tell?”
    

      This brief conversation with the boy reassured me for a little, but not
      for long. Pashka, seeing my uneasiness, fastened his big eyes upon the
      light, looked at me again, then again at the light....
    

      “I am frightened,” he whispered.
    

      At this point, beside myself with terror, I clutched the boy with one
      hand, huddled up to him, and gave the horse a violent lash.
    

      “It’s stupid!” I said to myself. “That phenomenon
      is only terrible because I don’t understand it; everything we don’t
      understand is mysterious.”
    

      I tried to persuade myself, but at the same time I did not leave off
      lashing the horse. When we reached the posting station I purposely stayed
      for a full hour chatting with the overseer, and read through two or three
      newspapers, but the feeling of uneasiness did not leave me. On the way
      back the light was not to be seen, but on the other hand the silhouettes
      of the huts, of the poplars, and of the hill up which I had to drive,
      seemed to me as though animated. And why the light was there I don’t
      know to this day.
    

      The second terror I experienced was excited by a circumstance no less
      trivial.... I was returning from a romantic interview. It was one o’clock
      at night, the time when nature is buried in the soundest, sweetest sleep
      before the dawn. That time nature was not sleeping, and one could not call
      the night a still one. Corncrakes, quails, nightingales, and woodcocks
      were calling, crickets and grasshoppers were chirruping. There was a light
      mist over the grass, and clouds were scurrying straight ahead across the
      sky near the moon. Nature was awake, as though afraid of missing the best
      moments of her life.
    

      I walked along a narrow path at the very edge of a railway embankment. The
      moonlight glided over the lines which were already covered with dew. Great
      shadows from the clouds kept flitting over the embankment. Far ahead, a
      dim green light was glimmering peacefully.
    

      “So everything is well,” I thought, looking at them.
    

      I had a quiet, peaceful, comfortable feeling in my heart. I was returning
      from a tryst, I had no need to hurry; I was not sleepy, and I was
      conscious of youth and health in every sigh, every step I took, rousing a
      dull echo in the monotonous hum of the night. I don’t know what I
      was feeling then, but I remember I was happy, very happy.
    

      I had gone not more than three-quarters of a mile when I suddenly heard
      behind me a monotonous sound, a rumbling, rather like the roar of a great
      stream. It grew louder and louder every second, and sounded nearer and
      nearer. I looked round; a hundred paces from me was the dark copse from
      which I had only just come; there the embankment turned to the right in a
      graceful curve and vanished among the trees. I stood still in perplexity
      and waited. A huge black body appeared at once at the turn, noisily darted
      towards me, and with the swiftness of a bird flew past me along the rails.
      Less than half a minute passed and the blur had vanished, the rumble
      melted away into the noise of the night.
    

      It was an ordinary goods truck. There was nothing peculiar about it in
      itself, but its appearance without an engine and in the night puzzled me.
      Where could it have come from and what force sent it flying so rapidly
      along the rails? Where did it come from and where was it flying to?
    

      If I had been superstitious I should have made up my mind it was a party
      of demons and witches journeying to a devils’ sabbath, and should
      have gone on my way; but as it was, the phenomenon was absolutely
      inexplicable to me. I did not believe my eyes, and was entangled in
      conjectures like a fly in a spider’s web....
    

      I suddenly realized that I was utterly alone on the whole vast plain; that
      the night, which by now seemed inhospitable, was peeping into my face and
      dogging my footsteps; all the sounds, the cries of the birds, the
      whisperings of the trees, seemed sinister, and existing simply to alarm my
      imagination. I dashed on like a madman, and without realizing what I was
      doing I ran, trying to run faster and faster. And at once I heard
      something to which I had paid no attention before: that is, the plaintive
      whining of the telegraph wires.
    

      “This is beyond everything,” I said, trying to shame myself.
      “It’s cowardice! it’s silly!”
    

      But cowardice was stronger than common sense. I only slackened my pace
      when I reached the green light, where I saw a dark signal-box, and near it
      on the embankment the figure of a man, probably the signalman.
    

      “Did you see it?” I asked breathlessly.
    

      “See whom? What?”
    

      “Why, a truck ran by.”
    

      “I saw it,...” the peasant said reluctantly. “It broke
      away from the goods train. There is an incline at the ninetieth mile...;
      the train is dragged uphill. The coupling on the last truck gave way, so
      it broke off and ran back.... There is no catching it now!...”
    

      The strange phenomenon was explained and its fantastic character vanished.
      My panic was over and I was able to go on my way.
    

      My third fright came upon me as I was going home from stand shooting in
      early spring. It was in the dusk of evening. The forest road was covered
      with pools from a recent shower of rain, and the earth squelched under one’s
      feet. The crimson glow of sunset flooded the whole forest, coloring the
      white stems of the birches and the young leaves. I was exhausted and could
      hardly move.
    

      Four or five miles from home, walking along the forest road, I suddenly
      met a big black dog of the water spaniel breed. As he ran by, the dog
      looked intently at me, straight in my face, and ran on.
    

      “A nice dog!” I thought. “Whose is it?”
    

      I looked round. The dog was standing ten paces off with his eyes fixed on
      me. For a minute we scanned each other in silence, then the dog, probably
      flattered by my attention, came slowly up to me and wagged his tail.
    

      I walked on, the dog following me.
    

      “Whose dog can it be?” I kept asking myself. “Where does
      he come from?”
    

      I knew all the country gentry for twenty or thirty miles round, and knew
      all their dogs. Not one of them had a spaniel like that. How did he come
      to be in the depths of the forest, on a track used for nothing but carting
      timber? He could hardly have dropped behind someone passing through, for
      there was nowhere for the gentry to drive to along that road.
    

      I sat down on a stump to rest, and began scrutinizing my companion. He,
      too, sat down, raised his head, and fastened upon me an intent stare. He
      gazed at me without bHlinking. I don’t know whether it was the
      influence of the stillness, the shadows and sounds of the forest, or
      perhaps a result of exhaustion, but I suddenly felt uneasy under the
      steady gaze of his ordinary doggy eyes. I thought of Faust and his
      bulldog, and of the fact that nervous people sometimes when exhausted have
      hallucinations. That was enough to make me get up hurriedly and hurriedly
      walk on. The dog followed me.
    

      “Go away!” I shouted.
    

      The dog probably liked my voice, for he gave a gleeful jump and ran about
      in front of me.
    

      “Go away!” I shouted again.
    

      The dog looked round, stared at me intently, and wagged his tail
      good-humoredly. Evidently my threatening tone amused him. I ought to have
      patted him, but I could not get Faust’s dog out of my head, and the
      feeling of panic grew more and more acute... Darkness was coming on, which
      completed my confusion, and every time the dog ran up to me and hit me
      with his tail, like a coward I shut my eyes. The same thing happened as
      with the light in the belfry and the truck on the railway: I could not
      stand it and rushed away.
    

      At home I found a visitor, an old friend, who, after greeting me, began to
      complain that as he was driving to me he had lost his way in the forest,
      and a splendid valuable dog of his had dropped behind.
    







      THE BET
    

IT WAS a dark
      autumn night. The old banker was walking up and down his study and
      remembering how, fifteen years before, he had given a party one autumn
      evening. There had been many clever men there, and there had been
      interesting conversations. Among other things they had talked of capital
      punishment. The majority of the guests, among whom were many journalists
      and intellectual men, disapproved of the death penalty. They considered
      that form of punishment out of date, immoral, and unsuitable for Christian
      States. In the opinion of some of them the death penalty ought to be
      replaced everywhere by imprisonment for life.
    

      “I don’t agree with you,” said their host the banker.
      “I have not tried either the death penalty or imprisonment for life,
      but if one may judge a priori, the death penalty is more moral and
      more humane than imprisonment for life. Capital punishment kills a man at
      once, but lifelong imprisonment kills him slowly. Which executioner is the
      more humane, he who kills you in a few minutes or he who drags the life
      out of you in the course of many years?”
    

      “Both are equally immoral,” observed one of the guests,
      “for they both have the same object—to take away life. The
      State is not God. It has not the right to take away what it cannot restore
      when it wants to.”
    

      Among the guests was a young lawyer, a young man of five-and-twenty. When
      he was asked his opinion, he said:
    

      “The death sentence and the life sentence are equally immoral, but
      if I had to choose between the death penalty and imprisonment for life, I
      would certainly choose the second. To live anyhow is better than not at
      all.”
    

      A lively discussion arose. The banker, who was younger and more nervous in
      those days, was suddenly carried away by excitement; he struck the table
      with his fist and shouted at the young man:
    

      “It’s not true! I’ll bet you two millions you wouldn’t
      stay in solitary confinement for five years.”
    

      “If you mean that in earnest,” said the young man, “I’ll
      take the bet, but I would stay not five but fifteen years.”
    

      “Fifteen? Done!” cried the banker. “Gentlemen, I stake
      two millions!”
    

      “Agreed! You stake your millions and I stake my freedom!” said
      the young man.
    

      And this wild, senseless bet was carried out! The banker, spoilt and
      frivolous, with millions beyond his reckoning, was delighted at the bet.
      At supper he made fun of the young man, and said:
    

      “Think better of it, young man, while there is still time. To me two
      millions are a trifle, but you are losing three or four of the best years
      of your life. I say three or four, because you won’t stay longer.
      Don’t forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary confinement is
      a great deal harder to bear than compulsory. The thought that you have the
      right to step out in liberty at any moment will poison your whole
      existence in prison. I am sorry for you.”
    

      And now the banker, walking to and fro, remembered all this, and asked
      himself: “What was the object of that bet? What is the good of that
      man’s losing fifteen years of his life and my throwing away two
      millions? Can it prove that the death penalty is better or worse than
      imprisonment for life? No, no. It was all nonsensical and meaningless. On
      my part it was the caprice of a pampered man, and on his part simple greed
      for money....”
    

      Then he remembered what followed that evening. It was decided that the
      young man should spend the years of his captivity under the strictest
      supervision in one of the lodges in the banker’s garden. It was
      agreed that for fifteen years he should not be free to cross the threshold
      of the lodge, to see human beings, to hear the human voice, or to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was allowed to have a musical instrument and
      books, and was allowed to write letters, to drink wine, and to smoke. By
      the terms of the agreement, the only relations he could have with the
      outer world were by a little window made purposely for that object. He
      might have anything he wanted—books, music, wine, and so on—in
      any quantity he desired by writing an order, but could only receive them
      through the window. The agreement provided for every detail and every
      trifle that would make his imprisonment strictly solitary, and bound the
      young man to stay there exactly fifteen years, beginning from
      twelve o’clock of November 14, 1870, and ending at twelve o’clock
      of November 14, 1885. The slightest attempt on his part to break the
      conditions, if only two minutes before the end, released the banker from
      the obligation to pay him two millions.
    

      For the first year of his confinement, as far as one could judge from his
      brief notes, the prisoner suffered severely from loneliness and
      depression. The sounds of the piano could be heard continually day and
      night from his lodge. He refused wine and tobacco. Wine, he wrote, excites
      the desires, and desires are the worst foes of the prisoner; and besides,
      nothing could be more dreary than drinking good wine and seeing no one.
      And tobacco spoilt the air of his room. In the first year the books he
      sent for were principally of a light character; novels with a complicated
      love plot, sensational and fantastic stories, and so on.
    

      In the second year the piano was silent in the lodge, and the prisoner
      asked only for the classics. In the fifth year music was audible again,
      and the prisoner asked for wine. Those who watched him through the window
      said that all that year he spent doing nothing but eating and drinking and
      lying on his bed, frequently yawning and angrily talking to himself. He
      did not read books. Sometimes at night he would sit down to write; he
      would spend hours writing, and in the morning tear up all that he had
      written. More than once he could be heard crying.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year the prisoner began zealously studying
      languages, philosophy, and history. He threw himself eagerly into these
      studies—so much so that the banker had enough to do to get him the
      books he ordered. In the course of four years some six hundred volumes
      were procured at his request. It was during this period that the banker
      received the following letter from his prisoner:
    

      “My dear Jailer, I write you these lines in six languages. Show them
      to people who know the languages. Let them read them. If they find not one
      mistake I implore you to fire a shot in the garden. That shot will show me
      that my efforts have not been thrown away. The geniuses of all ages and of
      all lands speak different languages, but the same flame burns in them all.
      Oh, if you only knew what unearthly happiness my soul feels now from being
      able to understand them!” The prisoner’s desire was fulfilled.
      The banker ordered two shots to be fired in the garden.
    

      Then after the tenth year, the prisoner sat immovably at the table and
      read nothing but the Gospel. It seemed strange to the banker that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred learned volumes should waste
      nearly a year over one thin book easy of comprehension. Theology and
      histories of religion followed the Gospels.
    

      In the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an immense
      quantity of books quite indiscriminately. At one time he was busy with the
      natural sciences, then he would ask for Byron or Shakespeare. There were
      notes in which he demanded at the same time books on chemistry, and a
      manual of medicine, and a novel, and some treatise on philosophy or
      theology. His reading suggested a man swimming in the sea among the
      wreckage of his ship, and trying to save his life by greedily clutching
      first at one spar and then at another.
    

      II
    

      The old banker remembered all this, and thought:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock he will regain his freedom. By
      our agreement I ought to pay him two millions. If I do pay him, it is all
      over with me: I shall be utterly ruined.”
    

      Fifteen years before, his millions had been beyond his reckoning; now he
      was afraid to ask himself which were greater, his debts or his assets.
      Desperate gambling on the Stock Exchange, wild speculation and the
      excitability which he could not get over even in advancing years, had by
      degrees led to the decline of his fortune and the proud, fearless,
      self-confident millionaire had become a banker of middling rank, trembling
      at every rise and fall in his investments. “Cursed bet!”
      muttered the old man, clutching his head in despair. “Why didn’t
      the man die? He is only forty now. He will take my last penny from me, he
      will marry, will enjoy life, will gamble on the Exchange; while I shall
      look at him with envy like a beggar, and hear from him every day the same
      sentence: ‘I am indebted to you for the happiness of my life, let me
      help you!’ No, it is too much! The one means of being saved from
      bankruptcy and disgrace is the death of that man!”
    

      It struck three o’clock, the banker listened; everyone was asleep in
      the house and nothing could be heard outside but the rustling of the
      chilled trees. Trying to make no noise, he took from a fireproof safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house.
    

      It was dark and cold in the garden. Rain was falling. A damp cutting wind
      was racing about the garden, howling and giving the trees no rest. The
      banker strained his eyes, but could see neither the earth nor the white
      statues, nor the lodge, nor the trees. Going to the spot where the lodge
      stood, he twice called the watchman. No answer followed. Evidently the
      watchman had sought shelter from the weather, and was now asleep somewhere
      either in the kitchen or in the greenhouse.
    

      “If I had the pluck to carry out my intention,” thought the
      old man, “suspicion would fall first upon the watchman.”
    

      He felt in the darkness for the steps and the door, and went into the
      entry of the lodge. Then he groped his way into a little passage and
      lighted a match. There was not a soul there. There was a bedstead with no
      bedding on it, and in the corner there was a dark cast-iron stove. The
      seals on the door leading to the prisoner’s rooms were intact.
    

      When the match went out the old man, trembling with emotion, peeped
      through the little window. A candle was burning dimly in the prisoner’s
      room. He was sitting at the table. Nothing could be seen but his back, the
      hair on his head, and his hands. Open books were lying on the table, on
      the two easy-chairs, and on the carpet near the table.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner did not once stir. Fifteen years’
      imprisonment had taught him to sit still. The banker tapped at the window
      with his finger, and the prisoner made no movement whatever in response.
      Then the banker cautiously broke the seals off the door and put the key in
      the keyhole. The rusty lock gave a grating sound and the door creaked. The
      banker expected to hear at once footsteps and a cry of astonishment, but
      three minutes passed and it was as quiet as ever in the room. He made up
      his mind to go in.
    

      At the table a man unlike ordinary people was sitting motionless. He was a
      skeleton with the skin drawn tight over his bones, with long curls like a
      woman’s and a shaggy beard. His face was yellow with an earthy tint
      in it, his cheeks were hollow, his back long and narrow, and the hand on
      which his shaggy head was propped was so thin and delicate that it was
      dreadful to look at it. His hair was already streaked with silver, and
      seeing his emaciated, aged-looking face, no one would have believed that
      he was only forty. He was asleep.... In front of his bowed head there lay
      on the table a sheet of paper on which there was something written in fine
      handwriting.
    

      “Poor creature!” thought the banker, “he is asleep and
      most likely dreaming of the millions. And I have only to take this
      half-dead man, throw him on the bed, stifle him a little with the pillow,
      and the most conscientious expert would find no sign of a violent death.
      But let us first read what he has written here....”
    

      The banker took the page from the table and read as follows:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock I regain my freedom and the right
      to associate with other men, but before I leave this room and see the
      sunshine, I think it necessary to say a few words to you. With a clear
      conscience I tell you, as before God, who beholds me, that I despise
      freedom and life and health, and all that in your books is called the good
      things of the world.
    

      “For fifteen years I have been intently studying earthly life. It is
      true I have not seen the earth nor men, but in your books I have drunk
      fragrant wine, I have sung songs, I have hunted stags and wild boars in
      the forests, have loved women.... Beauties as ethereal as clouds, created
      by the magic of your poets and geniuses, have visited me at night, and
      have whispered in my ears wonderful tales that have set my brain in a
      whirl. In your books I have climbed to the peaks of Elburz and Mont Blanc,
      and from there I have seen the sun rise and have watched it at evening
      flood the sky, the ocean, and the mountain-tops with gold and crimson. I
      have watched from there the lightning flashing over my head and cleaving
      the storm-clouds. I have seen green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, towns.
      I have heard the singing of the sirens, and the strains of the shepherds’
      pipes; I have touched the wings of comely devils who flew down to converse
      with me of God.... In your books I have flung myself into the bottomless
      pit, performed miracles, slain, burned towns, preached new religions,
      conquered whole kingdoms....
    

      “Your books have given me wisdom. All that the unresting thought of
      man has created in the ages is compressed into a small compass in my
      brain. I know that I am wiser than all of you.
    

      “And I despise your books, I despise wisdom and the blessings of
      this world. It is all worthless, fleeting, illusory, and deceptive, like a
      mirage. You may be proud, wise, and fine, but death will wipe you off the
      face of the earth as though you were no more than mice burrowing under the
      floor, and your posterity, your history, your immortal geniuses will burn
      or freeze together with the earthly globe.
    

      “You have lost your reason and taken the wrong path. You have taken
      lies for truth, and hideousness for beauty. You would marvel if, owing to
      strange events of some sorts, frogs and lizards suddenly grew on apple and
      orange trees instead of fruit, or if roses began to smell like a sweating
      horse; so I marvel at you who exchange heaven for earth. I don’t
      want to understand you.
    

      “To prove to you in action how I despise all that you live by, I
      renounce the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise and which
      now I despise. To deprive myself of the right to the money I shall go out
      from here five hours before the time fixed, and so break the compact....”
    

      When the banker had read this he laid the page on the table, kissed the
      strange man on the head, and went out of the lodge, weeping. At no other
      time, even when he had lost heavily on the Stock Exchange, had he felt so
      great a contempt for himself. When he got home he lay on his bed, but his
      tears and emotion kept him for hours from sleeping.
    

      Next morning the watchmen ran in with pale faces, and told him they had
      seen the man who lived in the lodge climb out of the window into the
      garden, go to the gate, and disappear. The banker went at once with the
      servants to the lodge and made sure of the flight of his prisoner. To
      avoid arousing unnecessary talk, he took from the table the writing in
      which the millions were renounced, and when he got home locked it up in
      the fireproof safe.