Hauptmann von Waldhofer

, Batteriechef of the —th Battery
Fussartillerie, stood, helmeted and with buttoned coat, hastily sipping
a cup of steaming hot coffee in his dug-out. The electric light, fed
from the power-station at Cambrai, miles back, illumined a cosy little
apartment. Portraits of the Kaiser and Hindenburg looked stiffly from
the matchboard walls in the incongruous company of a medley of coloured
pages from Simplicissimus , Jugend , and, quaintly enough, the Vie
Parisienne . One side was fully occupied by an enormous large-scale
map of the Somme area, divided into numbered squares, heavily scored
with blue pencil here and there, across which ran a great curve of red
lines massed in intricate pattern—the enemy trenches, and radiating
pin-supported coloured threads from a point slightly E.S.E. of Flers
fan wise far across the opposing line. The battery-made bed, wiremesh
stretched over a wooden frame, sloping slightly from the head downwards
towards the foot, on which lay blankets in the disarray of recent use,
bulked largely in the apartment. But there was still room for a little
table, on which books and writing material were neatly arranged, and
two comfortable plush-covered armchairs, besides the camp washstand
in which the water yet steamed. A carpet, mudstained but thick and
soft to the tread, covered the floor. In the corner remote from the
bed was a stove whose long pipe bent at right angles below the roof
and followed it until it ascended the steep stairway at the entrance.
The deliberate comfort of the dug-out indicated long residence and
the expectation of an indefinite stay. Only the pick and shovel in
readiness by the door gave a hint of possible cataclysm.

 An orderly stood stiffly at attention while his master finished his
coffee. The captain put down the cup.

 "What time is it?" he asked sharply.

 "A quarter to seven, Herr Hauptmann."

 "What sort of morning?"

 "Clear, Herr Hauptmann, but very cold."

 "Any aeroplanes?"

 "None over the battery, Herr Hauptmann."

 The captain gave a final glance at himself in the French wall-mirror
which hung over the table, touched lightly with his finger-tips the
black and white ribbon of the Iron Cross upon his breast, as though
flickering away a speck of dust, and turned to go. As he went the
hanging calendar caught his eye. He tore off the top leaf. The date
revealed was September 15th, 1916.

 He climbed, with the heavy step of an oldish man, the narrow steep
thirty-tread stairway, and emerged into the blue sky of a clear dawn.
Around him was bare rolling downlike country. About half a mile directly in front of him the village of Flers huddled itself among thin
trees, its skeletal roofs silhouetted against the blue. Between him
and it, but close at hand in a slight depression of the ground, the
four 105 mm. guns of his battery stood spaced and silent under veils
of a gauzelike material tufted with green and brown that blended well
with the terrain. Inconspicuous even to a side view, thus covered they
were invisible from above. Near them were stacks of ammunition also
shrouded. Save for a sentry the guns were deserted. The personnel of
the battery was lined up in two queues, where the smoke of a couple of
field kitchens betokened breakfast.

 The battery dug-outs were excavated in the breast of a slight swelling
of the downs, their exits looking N.W., on the flank of the gun
positions. The battery commander stood for a moment surveying his
little community banded for the service of the four veiled idols lying
unhuman and aloof from the domestic needs of men. Then, following
his morning habit, he turned and climbed the little rise of ground.
On his accustomed view-point he stopped and gazed westward. Before
him, clear in the cold early light, the undulating downs gathered
themselves into a long, fairly regular ridge, some two miles distant
at the summit. A maze of communication and support trenches, just
visible, criss-crossed their white lines in the chalk of the hither
slope. On the skyline of the ridge directly west a large clump of bare,
shell-sharpened tree-stumps broke its emptiness. It was the Bois de
Foureaux. Further south a similar group of stumps spiked up into the
sky—the Bois de Delville. That clean-swept landscape mounting to
the desolate skyline was the great dominant fact in his existence. Ever
concrete in his mind, it claimed his first waking vision even as the
weather horizon claims the first heed of the sailor, or Vesuvius the
morning glance of the Neapolitan. This morning it lay cloudless—save
for the towering smoke of an occasional shell-burst in the vicinity
of the Bois de Foureaux—and strangely quiet. The whole wide stretch
would have seemed untenanted by man had it not been for the occasional
primrose twinkle of a field-gun's flash. The reports of such guns came
in isolated slams at varying intervals. To his right an English shell
hurried with a long-drawn whine to burst heavily in Flers. Far back
several enemy aeroplanes, tiny specks in the cold blue sky yellowing
to the dawn, were dodging like midges among a smother of little brown
shell puffs. From overhead came the drone of a German machine. But, by
contrast with the frequent uproar which welled out of this region to
translate itself into long thick smoke along the ridge, the scene was
curiously clear and silent.

 Satisfied with his scrutiny, the Captain turned and descended again
to the battery position. He passed along the line of dug-outs in
the flank of the rise until he reached one whose entrance bore the
notice "Fernsprecher und Befehls Unterstand" neatly painted on a
board. The Oberfeldwebel standing at the doorway sprang to a precise,
heel-clicking salute. The officer acknowledged it curtly and dived into
the dug-out.

 Here yellow electric light replaced the cool grey dawn and tobacco
smoke floated in long wreaths about the bulb. A young lieutenant,
seated at the telephone instrument on the table, took the pipe out of
his mouth and rose smartly as his superior entered.

 "Good morning, Eberstein," said the captain. "Anything fresh?"

 "Nothing, Herr Hauptmann," replied the lieutenant respectfully.

 "Nothing of this rumoured attack?"

 "Nothing."

 The captain seated himself heavily at the table and the lieutenant was
at liberty to resume his chair.

 "And that frightful bombardment all last night, Eberstein, what do you
make of it?" he asked as he lit himself a cigarette.

 The mouth under the fair moustache of the young lieutenant twisted into
a contemptuous smile.

 "Bah! the Englanders want to make us nervous or to persuade themselves
that their wonderful 'great push' is not played out."

 The captain blew out a long puff of smoke and nodded his head in
dubious thought.

 "And you think it is?"

 Von Waldhofer, a man of somewhat deliberate mental processes, was never
unwilling to discuss general topics with his subordinate. Eberstein's
cheering, if crude, optimism was a welcome stimulus to him.

 "Of course it is," said the lieutenant. "Since the first rush they have
been practically fought to a standstill. Here it is two and a half
months since the offensive began and where are they? Now in one week on
the Donajetz we——"

 "Yes, I know, Eberstein," his superior interrupted him. "You did
wonders. But it is the Somme and not the Donajetz that interests us
now." He removed his helmet and passed his hand wearily over a high
semi-bald brow. "I wish I could be as certain as you. These Englanders
do not know when they are beaten——" He stopped, then broke out
again with the over-emphasis of a man wearied with long brooding over
a problem. "The colonel was so positive last night! And he had just
come from the General Staff. At dawn, he said, we might expect it. I
can't make it out. All night that frightful bombardment, obviously
preparation. Then this quiet! I feel something is coming." He shook his
head. "We are much too near in this position."

 "If they come, so much the better!" cried Eberstein. "We will
annihilate them. But I do not for a moment believe——"

 He was stopped by a heavy distant roar that commenced with the
suddenness of a thunderclap and continued in one never-ending roll.

 "There we are!" exclaimed von Waldhofer. He looked at his watch. It
marked 7 o'clock precisely.  A moment later the telephone bell rang in an excavated offshoot of the
main dug-out. The orderly on duty there answered the call. "Message
from the observation officer!" he announced in a loud voice. Eberstein
picked up the receiver lying on the table in front of him.

 "Yes?"

 "Intense artillery fire all calibres upon entire sector. Whole front
being heavily bombarded. Infantry attack expected momentarily."

 Eberstein repeated the message, and ere he had finished the battery
commander had sprung to the door of the dug-out, shouting his orders.
He heard them megaphoned on by the sergeant-major above. Out there in
the first rays of the sun the four squat idols had shaken aside their
veils, lay surrounded by tensely waiting acolytes. The moment for their
dread speech was at hand.

 In the electric-lit dug-out the two officers sat silently listening
to the distant storm. It rolled in one unnerving continuous thunder.
Not their duty was it to reply. They were detailed for barrage upon a
particular sector. But near at hand the heavy detonations of guns told
off for counter-battery work followed one another ever more quickly.
Near at hand, too, came the long whine and crash of the English
counter-battery shells hurled in reply.

 Again the bell rang and again the telephone orderly called out. "Speak
to battalion commander, please!"

  This time von Waldhofer picked up the receiver himself.

 " Ja, ja! We are all ready!" he said. "Yes. It is coming this time.
No. No further message. Oh, yes, we are in communication. No? Have
you heard anything definite? No. I wonder if there's any truth in it?
Good-bye." He put down the receiver and turned to Eberstein, stopping
for a moment to listen to the roll of the hostile bombardment.

 "That old story again! You remember we heard it before the first of
July? Some wonderful invention the Englanders are supposed to have for
annihilating us all. I wonder if there's anything in it?"

 The lieutenant laughed mockingly.

 "The Englanders invent anything? Not they! Besides, I don't believe
in the possibility of any new invention that can revolutionise war.
Just think! Here have all the nations of the world been fighting for
two years, and what new inventions have we seen? None! There have been
perfections and the rediscovery of old methods—that's all. What is the
Zeppelin but a perfected Montgolfier? It is neither the first nor the
only dirigible even! Poison gas and liquid fire—what are they but the
stinkpots and Greek fire of the middle ages, rediscovered and brought
up to date? There is nothing, can be nothing really new!"

  Von Waldhofer shook his head.

 "You are very positive in all your ideas, Eberstein. I don't know. The
English do get hold of new things sometimes—it is true that generally
they leave it to us to make use of them. But these rumours are so
persistent! They are vague, I admit. Yet where there is so much smoke
there is generally a fire. We are very close here. Just listen to that
bombardment!"

 For a moment or two both officers sat silent again, listening to the
roll of awful menace. Then von Waldhofer shouted an order to the
telephonist.

 "Get through to the observation officer!"

 Almost immediately the orderly called out:

 "Speaking, Herr Hauptmann!"

 Von Waldhofer picked up the receiver.

 "What is happening?"

 "The bombardment is continuing," came the reply. "Much damage is being
done to the trenches. Some sectors are almost obliterated. My wire has
already been cut twice."

 "No infantry attack?"

 "Not yet. This is evidently preparatory."

 "Keep me informed," said von Waldhofer, and put down the receiver. He
turned to Eberstein. "Well, we shall soon see."

 "There will be nothing," replied the lieutenant with his contemptuous
laugh. "I should like to bet on it. If there were a patent way of
breaking down trench lines, it would not be the Englanders who invented
it. It would be we Germans!—--"

 "Hush!" said von Waldhofer. "Listen!"

  The roll of the hostile artillery ceased as though controlled by a
single volition, remained silent for a few seconds and then, with one
thunder-surge of sound, recommenced.

 "The barrage has lifted!" cried von Waldhofer. He raised his voice to
be heard by the Oberfeldwebel who waited megaphone in hand, his legs
visible halfway down the dug-out steps. "All ready, sergeant-major?"

 "All ready, Herr Hauptmann," replied the tranquil voice of the N.C.O.

 The telephone bell rang again in the dug-out.

 "Message from observation officer!" proclaimed the orderly.

 Von Waldhofer snatched up the instrument.

 "Yes?"

 " Barrage! "

 "Fire!" shouted von Waldhofer to the Oberfeldwebel.

 Eberstein looked at his watch. The hour was 7.20.

 As though the commanding officer had pressed an electric firing-button,
the four heavy crashes of his guns followed, merging into each other,
renewed in a never-ending chain of detonations as fast as the crews
could load, relay and fire. A constant stream of 4.2" shells was
rushing from the battery to fall in a narrow area at the predetermined
range. But loud as were the violent concussions of the guns close at
hand, they were but one element in the chaos of frenzied sound that had
leaped from the whole countryside at the moment of their first report. Every German battery was firing at its maximum intensity. On the
background of the dull continuance of the English guns danced the rapid
reports of the quick-firers at full pressure of urgency, and surged
ponderously the gruff double-roar of the howitzers, and the sharper,
louder crash of the heavies, blended without a moment's interval into
one unceasing peal. The rifle-fire from the trenches was inaudible,
swallowed up.

 Von Waldhofer sat with one telephone receiver pressed to his ear.
Eberstein picked up the other. They heard the observation officer's
voice, faintly.

 "What?" shouted von Waldhofer into the instrument.

 "Something is coming—something strange—I cannot see well,
there is so much smoke—something—slow and crawling—a
machine—firing—more— schreckliche ——!" The voice ceased abruptly.

 Von Waldhofer and his lieutenant looked at one another.

 "The wire has gone!" cried Eberstein. He had to shout to be heard in
the din.

 "Let us hope it is only that," replied his chief. Both strove
deliberately to ignore the fear in the forefront of their minds. Von
Waldhofer shouted loudly into the telephone: "Kurt! Kurt! Are you
there?"

 There was no answer.

 Outside the dug-out the battery was still firing furiously, would
continue to do so until it received fresh orders. The general uproar
had abated not at all, had if anything intensified. Into the welter of sound came a familiar, heart-stopping, hissing rush followed by a loud
crash. Another and another and another swooped down on the heels of
the first. An English 60 pr. battery was searching for their position.
But the two officers, fascinated by the mysterious distant menace that
was crawling into their world, did not hear and gave no thought to
the shells. Once more von Waldhofer shouted into the telephone "Kurt!
Kurt!" Still there came no answer. The eyes of the two men met.

 "What can it be?" demanded Eberstein impatiently. "Is he dreaming?"

 "Perhaps the wire has been cut close here," said his chief, resolute
like a good soldier to allow no disturbing speculations in this battle
crisis. He shouted an order to the Oberfeldwebel.

 The telephone bell rang sharply.

 "Order from the battalion commander," announced the telephonist.

 Von Waldhofer was already listening.

 "Yes?"

 " Feindliche Panzerkraftwagen bersteigen die Schtzengrben Punkt
C 32 d 4.1. Sofort Feuer dagegen mit aller Kraft erffnen! " ("Enemy
armoured motor-cars are crossing the trenches at point C 32 d 4.1. Open
heaviest possible fire upon them immediately!")

 The battery commander sprang to a little table, outspread with a
large-scale map upon which lay protractor and dividers. A second or
two of hasty calculation and he shouted his orders to the Oberfeldwebel.

 "Cease fire! All guns 20 degrees more right! With percussion! Left half
at 3150 metres! Right half at 3100 metres! Forty rounds battery fire!"

 He heard them repeated in stentorian tones through the Oberfeldwebel's
megaphone. The rapid detonations of the guns ceased. There was a pause,
a few seconds only. Then the voice of the sergeant-major announced.

 "All ready!"

 "Fire!"

 Again the fury of the guns burst forth.

 " Panzerkraftwagen! " said Eberstein. "But surely armoured cars cannot
cross wire entanglements and trenches! There is a mistake somewhere."

 "There is no mistake that something has gone wrong and that we are
without observation," returned von Waldhofer irritably, indisposed to
abstract argument just then. The orderly had once more failed to elicit
any response from the observation officer. "Take a couple of men and
a new instrument, follow the wire along as far as possible, get into
a good position for observing, and open up communication with the
battery. No, wait a moment!" The telephone bell was ringing again.

 "Message from battalion commander," said the orderly.

 "Yes?" von Waldhofer spoke into the instrument. "I am firing on them
now. No. I am without observation. Five minutes ago. Really? What are they? Not ordinary cars? Something quite new? Herr Gott, this is
serious! Yes. Yes. I quite understand. I am not to retreat while I
have ammunition. Good. You may rely on us. We shall stand to the last
man. Fr Gott und Kaiser! Lebewohl! " He put down the receiver and
stood for a moment in deep thought, his hand pressed to his high bald
brow. Then he shook himself alert. He turned to Eberstein. "Hurry!" he
said irritably. "Everything is at stake!" The lieutenant sprang up the
stairway and vanished.

 Von Waldhofer put on his helmet and gave a last order to the
telephonist before he followed his subaltern.

 "Ring up Captain Pforzheim. Tell him to send up every available round
as quickly as possible. Urgently required!"

 Then he also ran up the narrow stairway into the bright morning light.

 "Two telephonists, all necessary instruments, with me into flank
observing station at once!" he shouted to the sergeant-major.

 He went swiftly towards the battery. The last gun had just finished
its allotted ten rounds. They lay now in their wide-spaced row, smoke
upcurling from their muzzles. Their attendant crews stood, coatless,
mopping the sweat on their brows. Far and near the thunderous uproar
of the battle swelled; it seemed louder than ever now that he had
come from the dug-out into the open air. The English batteries had
lengthened their range. As he walked he glanced at Flers. It was
whelmed in fumes. Explosion upon explosion leaped up among the huddled
houses in the trees, fragments, timbers, earth-clods momentarily poised
upon a dome of dark smoke. White shrapnel puffs sprang incessantly into
existence above the roofs. He heard the hissing rush of an approaching
shell without faltering in his pace, so preoccupied was he with the
urgency of the moment. He saw the quick upspout of smoke; the heavy
metallic crash came to his ears. He noted only that it was well behind
the battery. His eyes were fixed on the officer with the guns.

 "Oberleutnant Schwarz!" he called, stopping suddenly some twenty yards
from the battery.

 The long-coated, helmeted lieutenant stiffened as though galvanised,
walked smartly up to him, saluted, and waited rigidly for his orders.
Oberleutnant Schwarz, a young freckled-face fellow, set the pattern
for discipline in that battery. The commander noted the punctilious
attitude without his wonted inward smile. The occasion had found the
man.

 "Schwarz, communication with the forward officer is interrupted.
Eberstein has gone to re-establish it if possible. I am going into
the flank observing station. Orders will come from there. Put the
Einjhriger into the telephone dug-out. The situation is critical.
Something has gone wrong. A new kind of armoured car has broken through
the trench-line. They must be stopped at all costs. The orders from the
battalion commander are formal. The battery will not retire while it
has ammunition. I have ordered up every available round. The battery
will maintain its position, whatever happens , while it has a man and
a shell. Is that clear?"

 Oberleutnant Schwarz saluted in precise parade-ground fashion.

 "Quite, Herr Hauptmann," he replied unemotionally.

 "If I become a casualty the command devolves upon you," continued von
Waldhofer. "Remember these armoured cars are your target, wherever
they can be fired on. Use direct laying if you get the opportunity." A
flight of shells burst in a succession of heavy crashes on the swelling
ground to his right. He glanced at them. "Keep a couple of groundmen
going over the wire to the flank observing station. Here, two of you!"
he shouted suddenly to some mounted N.C.O.'s who at that moment trotted
up to the battery with a string of ammunition limbers. Upon his sign
one of them dismounted. The captain swung himself into the vacated
saddle. Oberleutnant Schwarz saluted once more. Accompanied by the
other N.C.O. the battery commander set off at a hard gallop, up the
rising ground into the welter of dark smoke from the just-burst shells.

 The flank observing station was a splinter-proof dug-out on a little
knoll some 500 yards away to the left flank of the battery. It had
been constructed in prevision of the unexpected. Von Waldhofer spurred
towards it now at the top pace of his horse. Despite many shell-bursts,
on the ground and in the air, he reached it safely. Leaping to earth,
he threw the reins to his follower and sent both horses back. Then he
dived into the dug-out.

  Both telephonists were there awaiting him. The large-scale map was
pinned out on a board, instruments upon it. The range-finder stood by
the observation-slit. One of the orderlies was testing the telephone
communication to the battery. Von Waldhofer pulled his glasses out of
their case, pressed himself against the observation-slit and looked out.

 Directly in front of him the bare ground with many minor undulations
rose steadily to the shattered silhouette of the Bois de Foureaux on
the skyline. But no longer was the view clear as when he last had gazed
on it. Over all lay a haze which the early morning sun was powerless to
penetrate. In the foreground and wide to right and left in the middle
distance spurted and twinkled the primrose flashes of the guns, more
rapidly multiplied than any eye could count. On the ridge the smoke
lay thick, bellying in dark masses over the tree-stumps of the wood,
poised on the horizon in tall, heavy-headed columns like elm trees in
full foliage. In the air long bands of white shrapnel smoke reached out
and clung to each other in a lazy drift, while among them the large
dead-black bursts of heavy high-explosive shrapnel appeared suddenly,
darted a head from the round nucleus and then unfolded themselves
slowly and snakily earthward. Between him and the ridge the whole wide
amphitheatre was being thickly sown with English shells. Near and far
the smoke-columns shot incessantly into the air. Over the road from
Flers to the Bois de Delville, which crossed his view at right angles,
the white shrapnel puffs clustered in ever-renewed groups. Over all,
English aeroplanes in scores flitted to and fro, daringly low yet
apparently unchallenged. No longer did this arena appear untenanted. In
every part there was movement and confusion of Lilliputian figures. Far
away three tiny ammunition wagons raced towards a battery. Closer at
hand, grey-clad infantry dashed in sections along the shell-swept road
from Flers. They tugged low bomb-carts on long hand-ropes. He knew,
subconsciously, that they were going to reinforce the great trench-line
that stretched east and west from Martinpuich to Lesbœufs. Further
afield other bands of grey midgets, scarcely visible, were rushing
forward. Everywhere from the rim of battle-pressure grey figures were
filtering in ragged streams down towards the lower ground. A long way
off, on that rim, his glasses revealed a nodal point of confusion. He
focussed on it. There were tiny grey figures grouped, in quick movement
to and fro. Little smoke-dots were all round them. Then the confusion
cleared. He saw darker figures, running forward, the twinkle of sun on
a distant bayonet. For a moment he held them under view anxiously. Then
with an impatient movement he swept his glasses round. Not there was
the target that he sought.

 Suddenly he arrested his sweep. To his left, much closer to him than
he had been looking, a field battery topped a little rise, retiring at
full gallop among a welter of shell-smoke. It passed down below his
vision. His glasses remained steadily focussed on the rise over which
it had come, fascinated by the abnormality, expectant of the cause.

  It appeared. Slightly to the right of the course of the retreating
battery, something emerged over the crest—something slow, ponderous,
shapeless—drawing itself up. The silhouette of a gun projecting from
its flank barred the sky. Swiftly he replaced his glasses by the
range-finder. As he twisted the thumbscrews that brought the inverted
vision into juxtaposition with the normal, he saw a group of grey
soldiers surround the monster, hurl little puffs of smoke at it. He saw
the gun slue, spit, saw soldiers who waved white rags tripping over
those already fallen. The double visions met, he read the range. The
thing drew itself up, turned slightly, creeping on its belly, snout
in the air, like an uncouth saurian from the prehistoric slime. It
was moving more quickly than he at first realised. In another instant
he had taken the angle to the aiming post, plotted another, and was
shouting orders to the telephonist.

 "All guns 283 degrees left! Right half-section No. 1 gun 980 metres,
No. 2 gun 960 metres! With percussion! one round! Fire!"

 Through the range-finder he saw the burst of the two shells at the same
moment that the detonations of the guns came to his ears. One fell
full in the midst of the group of grey soldiery, whelmed them in black
smoke. The other burst beyond. The thing paused not nor hurried. At an
even pace it drew its low bulk along, dipped now for the descent.

 "Right half-section 970 metres! Left half-section 960 metres! With
percussion! Twenty rounds battery fire! Fire!"

 Spout upon spout of black smoke heralded the rapid explosions of
the guns. The monster was blotted out. Feeling like one engaged in a
struggle with a creature born not in our time and space, of another
world, von Waldhofer prayed for a direct hit. The smoke cleared. He
looked for what should be its ripped and stationary bulk. It was not
there. Only the grey bodies of the dead lay under the drifting fumes.
The thing had passed onward, dipped into the hollow, out of sight.

 He was suddenly aware that the enemy shell-fire, always heavy, had
increased in intensity. The smoke-spouts shot up more numerously,
grouped themselves more densely. Gradually they extended to new areas,
abandoned those already covered. He realised in a flash that the
monster was moving behind its special barrage, aeroplane directed from
above. He shouted fresh orders, altering the range. Blindly he hurled
his shells into the hollow behind the screen of smoke.

 If only he had direct observation! He shouted to the telephonist.

 "Ask if communication has been made with Leutnant Eberstein?"

 The reply came: "Nothing has been heard of Leutnant Eberstein. Six men
have just been killed in the battery."

 Von Waldhofer's exclamation expressed annoyance rather than grief
at the loss of his subordinate. He turned again to look through the
observation slit. There was a blinding crash——

 When he came to, he found himself gazing at the blue sky. The deep
breath he drew half-choked him with the fumes of burnt explosive.
Shaking in every limb he struggled to his feet. Before him lay his two
orderlies, dead. The dug-out was wrecked and roofless. The telephone
instrument was strewn in fragments on the floor. He himself was
unwounded.

 He listened, with a sudden anxiety, for the detonations of his guns.
The general uproar had diminished not at all, but the familiar crashes
were wanting in the din. How long had he lain there? A wild fear seized
him. Scrambling out of the ruined dug-out he ran breathlessly towards
the battery.

 The enemy fire was as intense as ever. The air was filled with the
whine and scream of arriving shells and the heavy crashes of their
explosion. From somewhere behind came the rattle of rifles and
machine-guns and the dull thud of bombs. Grey-clad men in swarms
were running across the open ground athwart his path. He heard them
shouting, saw officers gesticulating, realised as in a dream that they
were running from the battle. But their fear touched him not. He was
enveloped in concern for his beloved battery.

 He arrived on the lip of the depression where it lay. In a surge of joy
he saw the four guns lying in the familiar places, saw them strangely
naked, their protective veils ripped and hurled aside, saw barely
sufficient crews standing at their posts, saw the position gashed with
shell-holes and littered with prone grey bodies, shattered limbers and
dead horses. Even as he looked a salvo of shrapnel burst with deafening
cracks above them, and white fleecy clouds floated over the battery.
On the near flank, in the position of command, stood Oberleutnant
Schwarz, rigid and precise as on the parade-ground.

 Von Waldhofer ran down the slope towards him.

 "Schwarz! Schwarz!" he called.

 The Oberleutnant advanced to meet him, and, looking calmly at his chief
as though his smoke-blackened face and torn clothing were in no way out
of the normal, saluted with perfect gravity.

 "What has been happening?"

 "We have been under heavy fire, Herr Hauptmann. All the wires are
cut in many places. The telephone dug-out has been blown in. We are
absolutely without communications. The battery has fired whenever there
was a chance of a target. Your orders have been obeyed. The battery has
stood its ground. We have only three rounds per gun left. I am waiting
now for an opportunity to fire."

 Listening to the cool report of his subordinate, von Waldhofer
recovered his soldierly poise.

 "Excellent. You have done well, Schwarz. And the casualties?"

 "I regret are heavy." He waved a gloved hand towards the bare dozen
standing by the guns. "All that are left."

 There was the loud, hissing, nerve-paralysing rush of a shell at
arrival. Simultaneously with the shattering crash that leaped from
the fountain of black smoke, Oberleutnant Schwarz put his hand to his
breast, performed a sharp half-turn and fell—dead.

 The reverberation yet rang when a second rush and crash followed
the first. A third and fourth shook the air almost too quickly for
distinction. The battery commander's brain worked with the timeless
speed of a great crisis or a dream. In an incomputable fraction of a
second he saw the heavy barrage which preceded the slowly crawling
monster, was conscious of an aeroplane overhead, saw his opportunity
and his plan. He ran towards the guns, shouting: "Lie down! Lie down!"
The crews obeyed. Standing among the strewn corpses the guns seemed
manned only by the dead. He flung himself prone on the flank of the
battery.

 Shell after shell swooped and burst on the stretch of ground in
front of him. Fed by the constantly spouting black geysers, an
ever-thickening dark mist drifted across, blotted out the distance.
Through it he saw the freshly thrown edges, brown and white, of
unfamiliar shell-craters pocking the undulating ground. The worn,
smooth greensward that he had known was being churned into loose clay
and chalk, mingled haphazard in their fall from the fierce upward
gush. The reiterated crash upon crash of near explosions all but
obliterated the far-flung din of the general battle, but through them
he caught waves of an appalling uproar welling out of Flers. Slowly,
riving, crashing, upspouting its black fountains of smoke and earth,
the barrage marched onward, passing across the battery front. Now?
Through the mist he saw the directing aeroplane sweep down in front of
him, absurdly low, rattling its machine-gun. A group of grey figures
sprang up beneath it, both arms high above the head, tumbling among
the shell-holes as they ran. A temptation flitted across his mind. One
round gun-fire and that aeroplane was blown to fragments. His lips
tightened. He did not move. The battery seemed abandoned by all its
dead.

 Age-long seconds passed as he watched, peering through the thinning
mist. Save for one little group of hasty, self-obliterating men, his
immediate front was a deserted waste of churned earth, sloping gently
upwards away from him. Once, over the low near skyline seen from his
prone position, he thought he saw the spurt of a bomb. But he could
not be sure. And a bomb did not necessarily betoken the presence of
the—Thing. Yes! What was that?

 Something was lifting itself, slowly and with jerks, beyond that near
skyline. Ponderously, with the efforts of a limbless living thing, it
drew its bulk up, seemed to stop—nosing the air with its blind snout.
Now? Not yet! He had only one chance—certainty. The monster moved on
again, downward now, lurching and wallowing among the shell-holes like
a ship in a heavy sea. He saw the gun swinging in the side-turret as
it rolled, the bright-splashed colouring of its flank. It was passing
diagonally across his front. It must climb to escape. Now!  He sprang to his feet, shouting with all his lungs.

 "To the guns!" The crews leaped up, resuscitated. "Point blank! At the
devil! With percussion! All guns! Fire!"

 But quick as he and his men had been, the monster was quicker. At
his first movement, with a mighty jerk it had slued itself nose-on
to the battery. Ere a hand could clutch a firing lever, a storm of
small violently exploding shells burst right in among the guns, a
hail of whip-cracking machine-gun bullets smote on men and metal. Von
Waldhofer looked towards the monster lurching heavily towards him,
keyed to a frenzy of suspense. To his horror he heard—not four—but
one detonation. The Thing dipped. He saw the shell burst— over ! He
glanced towards the guns in speechless agony. The last gunner was in
the act of falling lifeless across the trail.

 High-nosed, seeming to smell its enemies rather than see them, like
an uncouth blind monster of the rudimentary past, the Thing crept on,
its speed as surprising as a reptile's. Viciously, with unallayed
suspicions, it spat its missiles at the dead battery. Von Waldhofer
stood alone, erect, praying that one might strike him.

 Suddenly its fire ceased. He heard the loud clatter of its machinery as
it approached, saw the rolling bands on which it moved. He felt that it
was coming to mark its triumph over his beloved guns, felt its disdain
for him their helpless master. An insane hatred for it gushed up in
him, swept away his conscious self. He whipped out his pistol, ran like
a madman towards it. He fired again and again, desperately seeking the
eye, the brain, like a hunter at bay with a crocodile. But eyeless,
featureless, the great snout slanted upwards above him, impenetrable
steel plates, on which his bullets flattened.

 Blindly the Thing rolled on, ponderous, invulnerable. It bulked huge
above him. He heard a shriek. It was his own.

  In the bright sunshine of a September morning the strange new monsters
crawled over that bare countryside racked with noise and tortured with
the leaping, eddying smoke of countless explosions. Behind them crowds
of khaki-clad men, hatted with inverted bowls like Samurai, followed
cheering and laughing like boys behind a circus-car. They waved
newspaper posters, obtained Heaven knows whence, that proclaimed in fat
bold type: "Great British Victory!"

 FOOTNOTES:

  [3]

6.45 German Summer Time, 5.45 English Summer Time, 4.45
Greenwich Time. The Summer Time was used in all the Armies.

  [4]

The well-known 42" gun.

  [5]

Known to the British Army as High Wood and Devil's Wood
respectively.

  [6]

Telephone and Command Dug-out.

  [7]

6 a.m. English summer time.

  [8]

German Heavy Artillery is organised in "Bataillons" of
four batteries.

  [9]

The Germans had apparently heard rumours of the coming of
the "Tanks." It was asserted in the Army on the 16th September, that a
motor-cyclist carrying a definite warning had been killed by one of our
shells in the early morning of the 15th, on his way from H.Q. to the
front line.

  [10]

Panzerkraftwagen, lit. "armoured power wagons," was and
is the official German designation of the "Tanks." The word is also
applied to armoured cars.