PAULA IN ITALY

 On his way down-stairs Prospero came
upon the padrona di casa .

 She stood at the door of the first floor,
which he had supposed untenanted, the windows
on the street being always dark. She
looked pleased, anxious, and full of business.

 "Just step in for a moment, signorino,"
she said, "and tell me what it seems to
you."

 The young man followed her. The windows
of the apartment were wide open—most
likely to let in the heat, for to lean
forth beyond the chill boundary of the
stone walls was like dipping into a warm
bath. The long, old, neatly darned lace
curtains waved gently in the April air.
The stone floors had been sprinkled; a pleasant freshness arose from them. Everything
had an air of having just been gone
over with a damp dust-cloth; everything
that could be furbished shone to the utmost
of its capacity.

 The little woman led Prospero into the
large sala , from which, through several open
doors, one got glimpses of other airy chambers.
The great height of the ceiling—increased
to illusion by the cunning of the
fresco, which professed to open into the sky
itself, and show a flight of rosy cupids tumbling
among the clouds—had the effect of
dwarfing the furniture, even the gigantic
vases under their shining bells. The seats
were placed about in social groups; in the
embrasure of the balcony window stood a
small table supporting a coral-colored coffee
service, lately placed between two low chairs,
with a view to spreading about suggestions
of cosiness—the joys of intimate life.

 "I see that you are expecting a tenant,"
said Prospero.

 "So it is indeed; a great lady—a foreigner,"
replied the padrona , under her breath. "Just see, signorino, what you
make of this name." While she felt in her
pocket she went on: "It is Dottor Segati
sends her to me. Oh, he has sent me
families before when there was a patient
among them; and this apartment has always
given satisfaction; that I can say with my
hand upon my conscience. There—can you
read it? I can tell the letters, but I can't
make the sound. One ought to have another
tongue on purpose for these foreign
names."

 Prospero studied a second, then pronounced,
clearly, "Grfin Paula von Schattenort."

 " Grfin means Countess," said the landlady.
"The doctor told me that she is a
Countess; but whether Danish or Swedish
or Hollandish I don't remember. For me
all those countries are the same. Schattenort,
you call it? What would that be in
Italian?"

 Prospero laughed. "It stays as it is, dear
lady. Is this Countess young, do you know?"
he went on, looking again at the name on the paper he still held. "Is she coming here
for her health?"

 "I don't know anything beyond the fact
that the doctor engages the rooms for her,
and I can rely upon him. Oh, he has sent
me families before, you know, who have always
been perfectly satisfied with me, and I
with them. You can see yourself that the
quarters are such that even a Countess
might find herself well in them—"

 "Yes, truly," replied Prospero, agreeably.
"She would be hard to please if she were
not content. Well, if you allow me now, I
go. Have you perhaps a commission of any
sort for me? I shall do myself a pleasure in
serving you."

 "Too good—much too good. If you
would just say the name over—"

 "Von Schattenort."

 "What it is to have a memory! What
a thing is education! Not but that also I
can make myself understood in the French
tongue. Schattenort—Schattenort. I should
not like to scomparire , you will understand, at
the very first meeting. But if I forget, I will simply say Signora Contessa . Only one likes
to be able to tell friends whom one has got
in the house."

 Prospero, late already, was hurrying down
the stairs, his music under his arm; at the
foot he was forced to stop. He took off his
hat, and leaned against the wall to let the
ladies pass.

 The gray-haired gentleman talking unpractised
French he knew to be Dottor
Segati. He fixed upon Paula von Schattenort
without a second's hesitation; of the
two ladies, only the one in the hat and
feather could, in his conception of possibility,
be she. He was half-conscious as she
passed him on her upward way of a faint
pang of disappointment. The name had
suggested to his imagination something tall
and frail, delicate yet imposing, exceedingly,
luminously blond, with eyes of a corn-flower
blue. The magic of the name was defeated.

 He bethought him how late he would be,
and without turning his head for a second
look, or giving another thought to the arrivals,
slipped past the two maids, who stood in the doorway talking in a language unknown
to him, while the Countess's man
handed them bundles from the carriages
drawn up to the door.

 Paula, on entering the apartment, let her
little gloved hands drop at her sides, and
looking around with wide, quick eyes, gave
a long sigh of pleasure.

 "Here I can breathe—here I can breathe
indeed!" she said to her companion, in their
Northern tongue; then turning to the doctor,
she assured him in French that she found it
charming, as she had found everything in
Italy—that she thanked him for his goodness.
The doctor and the landlady both
watched her with a half smile and slightly
raised eyebrows as she walked quickly
through the rooms, exclaiming at every
window with delight at sight of the fawn-colored,
warm-looking river flowing below
and flashing back the sunshine, and the low
hills clothed in their early green.

 Her companion followed her with an unusual
solemn dignity of manner, intended
to counterbalance Paula's unaccustomed vi vacity,
and give the people of the house, if
possible, an adequate impression of the two
as a whole.

 "Oh, look—look, Cousin Veronika!" exclaimed
the younger woman from the balcony,
over the parapet of which she had
been leaning venturously far—"look at that
dear old bridge; it is the Jeweller's Bridge;
I recognize it. N'est-ce pas, cher docteur? Oh, what a sky! But have you any patients
at all in this city, doctor? Is it possible to
be ill here? Do persons die? Of what? I
will never believe it!"

 "My dear lady," said the gray doctor, his
kindly face lighting as if with the reflection
of her childish excitement, "will you be advised
by me? Will you sit down on this
commodious divan and rest a little, while
you take what the signora has brought for
you—this little glass of our white vin santo ?
It will do you good. You must be tired,
very tired."

 "Oh no! no, doctor! It is like magic. I
do not understand it. I feel like another. I
shall not be tired here, ever. You must come and see me every day indeed, but not
as a doctor—as my good, good friend. Tell
me, is it still standing, the house where
Dante lived? Have you a book—I mean,
could you advise me a book—in which there
is everything of the story about him and
Beatrice? It must be sweet to think of
when one is in their city."

 "I will do myself the pleasure of sending
you the Vita Nova ," he said; then, solicitously,
"but accommodate yourself, my dearest
lady, and drink this—"

 " Vita Nova? Does that mean new life?
New life!" she said, as if to herself, suddenly
half stretching her arms up in the air and
smiling in indeterminate happiness at the
ceiling, whereon the shining river cast a restless,
quivering brightness. "Yes, send it
me; I want to read it. I will drink this to
please you, signor, but not that I am tired.
Here is to New Life!"

 She touched her glass to the doctor's
and Veronika's, and emptied it at an eager
draught. Veronika watched her in surprised
displeasure, sipping her own wine staidly and decorously. It warmed her very heart to
see Paula merry, only she thought it unbecoming
to behave in the presence of strangers
as if one were a person of no importance.

 Her good-humor returned as soon as the
doctor and the padrona had excused themselves.
When they were alone she seized
Paula unceremoniously by the wrists and
forced her back into an arm-chair; then lifted
her feet, and with much decision placed
them upon a footstool. "Now you don't
stir," she said, shaking her finger in Paula's
face.

 "But, cousin, it is so different," pleaded
Paula. "I feel no more as I do at home,
than this mild, heavenly air is like our
joyless atmosphere. Are your eyes open,
Cousin Veronika? Do you perceive the
things about you—or is it all a dream of my
own? It seemed to me as we drove from
the station that we had arrived in an enchanted
place."

 "It's just a city," murmured Veronika.

 "Those sombre palaces we passed, how
they make the spring-time in the sky above them more lightsome, more warm! And
those flowers banked up for sale against
that black stone wall, could you see what
they were? They seemed to me all new
sorts—marvellous. Have you noticed how
happy every one looks in Italy, even the
beggars sitting in the sun? And what beautiful
faces one sees—"

 She stopped and mused, gazing ahead in
silence for a few moments; then went on
aloud: "Yes—beautiful faces, like pictures.
Did you see the young man whom we met
on the stairs? Not? Veronika, for what
have you eyes? The light just there was a
little dim, but I saw him perfectly. I passed
him slowly on purpose—he leaned against
the wall to let us go by him. He had wavy
hair, longer than is usual, falling over his
forehead, and soft brown eyes like an animal's.
I am sure one sees such eyes only in
Italy, half asleep, yet deeply intelligent, that
when you look in them you think a thousand
things—"

 "You certainly took in a great deal at a
glance," said Veronika.

  "Oh, I could tell you much else," laughed
Paula; "beside that he wore a pink in
his button-hole and carried a roll of music."

 "Veronika," she said, after a pause, jumping
up from her chair and walking about excitedly
as before, "we must be very happy
here. We must begin at once. Think how
much time we have lost—all our years up
to this day. Now we must really enjoy
ourselves, live—love!" she added, recklessly,
with light in her eyes.

 Veronika, kneeling over an open satchel,
paused in her task to look over her spectacles
with a vaguely shocked air, as if
something immoral had been said.

 "This seems like the opening chapter in a
lovely story-book that becomes more interesting
with every page," said Paula, dropping
on her knees and crushing her cheek to
Veronika's gray hair, with an expansiveness
that took this lady aback. "I have the happiest
presentiments! Ah, Veronika, there
was once a woman who said that happiness
is to be young, beloved, and in Italy!"

 "Unless you keep quiet and rest," said Veronika, "you will be ill, and that is as far
as you will get—"

 Paula stared a second in wonder at Veronika's
impatience; then she reflected that her
cousin was old and could not understand.
"Poor Veronika!" she thought, with a sympathetic
shake of the head, " she can never
have but Italy!"

 Like a good child, she went back to her
chair, but before settling down in it she
pushed it to the balcony window; then she
sat with her eyes fixed upon San Miniato.

 Dr. Segati came the next day, early. He
found Paula pale and infinitely tired, but
wearing a contented face. She sat in the
balcony window, closed to-day, with a cushion
behind her shoulders; flowers stood in
the water near her—a delight to the eyes,
wonderful wind-flowers, white and pink, purple,
scarlet, pale violet. She rose to meet
the doctor, and gave him the childish smile
that had won his heart to her the day before.

 She pointed to the book she held. "It
came last night. I thank you. I am trying to read it, you see. But I do not know
enough. I can make only just a little sense
here and there, where it resembles French.
Oh, I like it all the same—very much. The
title is beautiful— Vita Nova !"

 "Tell her she must not read, doctor," said
Veronika. "It is bad for her. She has been
tiring herself over the book."

 The doctor listened politely, an intelligent
eye fixed on Veronika's, and made no objection
to what she said. She had always
after that half an idea that he understood her.

 "I had the cook sent in," said Paula, with
a brightening face. "The native cook whom
the padrona was so good as to engage for
me. I asked her about some passages. She
could read them easily—how I envied her!—but
she could not make them clear to me,
though she seemed to do her best."

 The doctor laughed amusedly, and took a
seat beside her. "What an eager little lady!
Certainly that is the way to learn. But why
this hurry? The great object first is to become
robust. Oh, this air will do it! I have
no fear. And how did you sleep?"

  Paula blushed as if caught in fault. "I
don't know why it should be I lay awake so
much. My old doctor at home (I bless him
for his inspiration of sending me here!) has
written you about me, I suppose. I dare
say you know I cough sometimes in the
night. Doctor," she asked, abruptly, "who
lives above us?"

 He looked interrogatively at the ceiling,
and shook his head.

 "Oh, I am so sorry you do not happen
to know. It is a great musician, and I feel
much gratitude towards him. I was becoming
nervous with lying awake—I was on
the point of calling my poor cousin—when
some one began playing on the piano in
the room above me. Sweetly, very sweetly.
I could hear it just distinctly enough. It
was a joy. I lay awake, but it soothed me
more than sleep."

 "I seem to remember that there is a
music-master living in the house," said the
doctor. "I will beg the padrona to speak to
him. He should not play in the night."

 "Not at all," exclaimed Paula, with a warmth he could not expect. "Please, I
want him to play. I shall be grieved if you
say anything to prevent him. It does not
keep me awake. If I were sleepy I could not
hear it."

 The doctor prolonged his visit far into the
forenoon. At the first movement he made
to go, Paula said, pleadingly: "Oh, not yet.
I entertain myself so willingly with you!"
And he stayed.

 He was interested, in the woman as well
as in the case. She was different from his
other aristocratic patients. She was of a
type new to him; without appearing to, he
studied her face as she spoke, and from it,
and from frequent allusions she dropped, he
built up a theory of her past.

 He divined that she was older than she
looked. It was, he resolved, the childlike
glance and smile, the voice as of shyness
overcome, her artlessness, her continually
outcropping ignorance of the world, her
immature mind perhaps, that gave the impression
of youthfulness one at first received
from her. If one looked well, she had even already a sad little beginning of
faded appearance. Her face was a trifle
broad, and the high cheek-bones were commencing
slightly to accuse themselves, as
they say in French. The charm of her
countenance, to such as felt it, lay in her
eyes: they were unsophisticated, hopeful,
interested, idealizing eyes. Vanity, it must
be pityingly related, had taught her nothing.
Her blond hair, dull and fine and soft—a
large treasure that would have made the
boast of many another woman—was drawn
away rigorously from her forehead, braided,
and wound compactly against the back of
her head, like a school-girl's.

 He noticed with amused wonder how unpretending—nay,
provincial, homely, for persons
of rank and fortune—was the mise of
the two women. Fashion by them was misconstrued,
or else despised. He did not incline
to the latter interpretation of their
plainness; he rather laid to a touching innocence
of the mode's dictates Mamsell
Veronika's pelerine and the black lace tabs
on the sides of her head; the antiquated cut of Paula's deep violet gown, the little black
silk mitts that covered her pale pretty hands
to the point where her rings began. These
were numerous rather than rich, and gave
the impression of being heirlooms—things
worn for a memory: brilliants mounted in
darkening silver, enamels, carnelians; one
showed a pale gleam of human hair.

 Paula had never spoken so much about
herself to any one as she did to the doctor.
Her loquacity was an effect of her unreasoning
instinct that in this new place everything
was good to her, every influence favorable.
She let herself go in a way that would have
seemed out of her nature at home.

 All she had ever read in the long, melancholy
winter evenings at Schattenort, of poetry
or romance, came back to her mind in
essence, drawn to the surface by an inexplicable
magic. Her conversation in this
mental excitement teemed with allusions
and modest flowers of speech that almost
surprised herself, and gave her a strange delight.
She felt as she were some one she had
some time read of.

  "Oh, we will make you well, quite well,
soon," said the doctor, cheerily, on taking
his leave. "But you must promise to be
very good, very prudent."

 He gave his directions with a light air, but
as he turned from the door a shadow settled
upon his kindly old face.

 In his breast-pocket lay folded the letter
his colleague, Paula's former doctor, had
written him. The consciousness of what
was said in it gave rise in his heart to a tender,
grateful thought of his own children—grown-up
daughters, fair and healthy, happily
established in life.

 Paula had hoped to go for a drive that
day, but a light rain fell, and she could only
watch the turbid stream outside through
the glistening window-pane. She sat with
her forehead leaning against it, her book in
her lap. Now and then she opened this and
let her eyes wander over the lines, without
trying to understand, just for a pleasure she
found in its being Italian too.

 She had prevailed upon Veronika to go
out for a walk, so that she might amuse her with an account of what there was to
see.

 Towards evening the clouds broke. She
saw the red reflection of the sunset on the
river. Tempted, she opened the balcony
door; a smell of damp stone came gratefully
to her nostrils. She slipped out and leaned
over the cool balusters, and looked up and
down the empty gleaming street. The hills
were as if washed with wine; the air was
sparkling. She heard a footstep; she hoped
it might be Veronika's. She looked. But
it was not a woman. She recognized the
young man who had been on the stairs
when she arrived. He did not look up.
She leaned over to see him disappear in the portone below. Then, swiftly, she came in-doors
and stopped in the middle of the floor.
She listened intently. In a few moments she
thought to hear, faintly, faintly, footsteps in
the room above. She clasped her hands silently,
saying to herself with unaccountable
excitement: "I knew it already. I knew it
well."

 Late in the night again she heard music. She had been listening for it a long time.
Night to her was often tediously long. Often
she spent many hours staring at the square
of paler darkness, star-bestrewn, the window
made. At a certain pitch of nervousness,
soon reached when the city had become quiet
and the stillness of the bedroom was full of
mysterious sounds, she always thought of a
dear sister she had lost, rehearsing old sad
scenes vivid in her brain as if they had been
lived through but yesterday. Her own physical
discomfort increased as she thought of
that other girl's long-drawn-out suffering. It
seemed to her that already she could not
breathe; her body was damp with sweat of
fear. "It is all useless!" she groaned, tossing
wretchedly. "I too—I too am going
that way!" Then she prayed diligently, and
looked out up at the stars with a return of
tranquillity, hoping steadfastly in a beautiful
world beyond them.

 But on the night in question she lay
patiently and happily watchful. And late
in the night again she heard music. No
very definite melody was played; it was as if skilful hands were dreamily straying over
the keys, unravelling a little tangled skein
of musical impression, thinking aloud. The
tune wandered and flitted like a butterfly
over a summer garden. Paula's thought
climbed upward and entered the musician's
chamber. She saw him clearly, leaning back,
looking upward, swaying slightly. She took
joy in the symmetry of his dark Italian face.
She pictured him intensely, and held her
breath gazing. Then she tried to build up
his surroundings; she adorned his room poetically.

 Satisfied at last, her imagination folded
its wings and dropped back into its nest.
She merely listened, and let herself be comforted;
accepted passively what dreams the
music imposed. It was as if she and another
were walking in a moonless starry
night along a quiet village road; and the
dewy flowers in the stilly little gardens
skirting the way were giving forth perfume
in the warm dark. Then it was as if another
and she were in a boat with drooping
sail, becalmed, drifting slowly. The moon was behind a great cloud wonderfully
silvered on the ravelled edges; the sea at
the horizon was a streak of pure light. The
other had laid her on velvet cushions and
covered her with a cloak, was playing and
singing softly to her. They hoped the wind
would not rise. Drifting—drifting. And she
slept.

 In the gayest mood next day she showed
the doctor a little package of letters to different
persons in the city, but said that
she was not ready yet to let these distinguished
ones know of her arrival; she must
first attend to various important things. He
derived from her words that she wished to
make her establishment more elegant, and
became gruff and severe when she asked
him to procure for her the address of the
most fashionable mantua—maker. She almost
cried when he forbade the expense of
any precious energy on worldly vanities, but
was half consoled by his promise soon to
make her well enough to employ a master
in the art of playing the guitar.

 He prescribed a daily drive in the sun niest
hour. Paula came back from her first
excursion with flushed cheeks. Veronika
grumbled: "I will tell the doctor, and he
will forbid your going out at all. It is not
to kneel in damp churches will help you.
You might as well take up your abode in
the cellar."

 "Don't scold me," said Paula, gently. "I
had to thank God."

 Towards sunset she seated herself on the
balcony wrapped in fleecy white, and looked
down the street towards the Jeweller's
Bridge. She saw Prospero come. But he
did not look up. That night again she
heard him play.

 Many times she sat on the balcony and
saw Prospero coming. Sometimes he looked
up, but oftener he passed into the house
unaware of a Countess gazing after him
from above.

 Some nights he did not play; those were
restless, disappointed nights for her.

 Once or twice she met him on the stairs as
she was going to her carriage; he glanced at
her with an unimpressed eye, then looked elsewhere, standing against the wall, hat in
hand.

 Occasionally she saw him in the street,
but he seemed never to see her. A vague
heartache grew out of those occasions.

 The Italian spring deepened in warmth
and color; the air had a fragrance, some
days, as of lilacs; other days, more penetrating,
as of hyacinths. The little hills in
the midst of which Florence lies took on
dewy morning hues of the opal, changing
evening tints of the dark dove's neck. The
pure noon light made the statues in the
King's Garden, where Paula walked sometimes,
look dazzlingly white against the
sombre walls of clipped laurel. The open
country now was full of blossoming fruit
trees; Paula often begged Veronika to
alight from the carriage and gather for
her the flowers she saw shining in the
grass—primroses and violets, tulips, narcissi,
fleurs-de-lis. She brought home immense
nosegays, which she spent long minutes
breathing; this perfume of Italy went
to her brain.

  At sunset once a red flower lay by chance
on the rail of the balcony, just where a
movement of her arm would brush it off; it
would drop in the street. A bold thought
crossed her mind. But that evening Prospero
did not come at the usual hour. She
sat outside, trembling slightly as the dusk
closed around her and the dew fell; then
Veronika, with shrill cries of surprise and
blame, came to fetch her in. She felt guilty
and ashamed, and did not protest. She
spent the evening on the divan, with her
face to the wall, crying softly with a vast
invincible melancholy, a sense of forlornness
and failure, giving no explanation of her
humor.

 She was kept in-doors for many days after
that. Only she insisted upon being folded
in a fur and seated on the balcony at a certain
hour every afternoon. The beggar-woman
stationed at the street corner with
a basket on her knees got used to seeing
the sick forestiera appear, who always threw
her a bit of silver, and gave her a faint little
smile.

  Veronika suffered from Paula's silence and
depression. She went about with two deep
lines constantly between her updrawn brows.
Her heart misgave her; her inability to communicate
with the doctor and those around
her became a gnawing despair. She formed
a habit, which never left her after, of talking
audibly to herself. She gave up the effort to
hold cheerful conversation with Paula, and
simply tried to preserve in her presence an
unconcerned attitude. She secretly yearned
to be at home. She felt an unappeasable
animosity towards this Italy, that had seemed
to do her Paula so much good, only to
make her worse. She began to hate everything
Italian.

 Paula herself sat by the window watching
the hills opposite with an absent face. Now
and then she rose to take a few desultory
steps about the large room, touching the
things, passing her hand over the flowers,
making the guitar-strings give forth a murmur
as she brushed them; she went back to
her chair and closed her eyes, tired out.

 Once a friend was walking at Prospero's side. They were talking. As they approached,
the friend looked up, and evidently
asked a question of Prospero, who
looked up too: she thought his lips framed
her name. Her heart leaped; she drew
back, faint, and felt foolish at feeling such
pleasure. She waited more eagerly than
usual that night to hear him; it seemed
the music must have a special message for
her. Silence—utter, atrocious. The night
seemed unending.

 The doctor wondered next day what spring
had broken within her. She showed so little
interest in anything; she was fretful as he
had never seen her before. He scarcely
knew how to conduct himself to avoid irritating
her. At a loss, he picked up the little
tome of Vita Nova , that always lay on the table
at her side, and inquired of her progress in it.

 "Oh, put it away!" she said, tears springing
to her eyes. "Put it away! I cannot
suffer it. That title exasperates me; it
works upon my nerves. Doctor, doctor, I
shall never be well again!" and she poured
forth a long complaint.

   "PAULA HERSELF SAT BY THE WINDOW"



 He feigned to make light of her fears; he
comforted her. Casting about in his mind
for things to say that should divert, interest
her in her gray mood, he found this, which
brought the sudden color to her face:

 "Did you not once ask me who lived in
the apartment above? I know now. I will
not take the credit of having applied myself
to discover just on that hint of curiosity from
you; I confess hearing it by chance. Your
neighbor is the young maestro Prospero
C——, celebrated in his way. He has
written an opera, to be produced for the first
time precisely to-night. Those who know
promise great things for it—"

 She had leaned forward, listening thirstily.
The doctor could congratulate himself.

 When Veronika went to the door with
him, he turned upon her suddenly, and asked,
almost violently: "Why did you wait so
long? Why did you not bring her to this
climate before?"

 She looked at him in a puzzled way, and
in her turn said something he could not understand.

 He appeared for a moment as if he meant
to shake her, but shrugged his shoulders and
brusquely left.

 Some who were present at the first night
of "Parisina" remember well how when the
curtain dropped on the first act and they
looked about to discover whom they should
salute, their attention was arrested by the
strange apparition in one of the second-tier
boxes. There, in a crimson velvet chair, sat
very upright an unknown lady in a gown
such as no one nowadays wears—a gown of
cloth of gold, that might have figured at a
court ball perhaps a century earlier. An
ermine-lined mantle half covered her arms
and neck, dainty thin and white as wax, and
half extinguished the gleam of her heavy
jewels. A wreath of roses was twined in
her pale hair, that might have made one
laugh in its dmod pretentiousness but that
one divined the lady to be a foreigner from
some Northern country, where perhaps it is
still customary to adorn the hair with a garland.
She held her fan like a sceptre, her fingers
stiffly closed on the pearl sticks. A mass of roses lay in her lap. She turned a
colorless face upon the stage; her eyes were
wide and glassy, and fixed as a somnambulist's.

 On the opposite side of the box, less clearly
defined against the darkness, sat an elderly,
soberly clad lady, whose face expressed a
degree of uneasiness, misery, and fear almost
pitiful—if not comical—to behold. She
made no pretence of interest in the stage or
the gleaming galleries, but watched her golden-haired
companion with an unswerving,
frightened eye.

 No one knew who these were, though
many took pains to discover.

 Through the second act the lady in gold
listened breathlessly, as if life itself were suspended.
It seemed to her that the soul left
her body, and went floating up, up, on the
strains of the music. She was praying, praying
with all her strength, for the success of
this work, that the people might feel just
as she felt how it was beautiful!

 When a crash of applause came and a call
for the composer, it seemed but an answer to
her prayer. She rose to her feet, radiant.

  Prospero C—— came to the foot-lights
below, looking a slight thing, the acclaimed
great man, in his close black evening dress,
and bowed his thanks. Then, as the applause
continued, he lingered a moment,
and let his eye pass along the friendly
faces in the boxes, a grateful emotion expressed
in his smile.

 The lady in gold leaned over the velvet
parapet, breathing short, tremulously smiling,
her flowers in her hands. His eye
passed her unrecognizing. She wanted to
shout: "It is I, Paula! Nothing could
keep me away!" The clamor subsided.
Panting, she leaned back in the shade.

 The third act ended in triumph. Again
the composer was called. Paula laughed
and cried at the same time, clapping her
little hands like mad, forgetting herself.

 Then, when it was all over and she sat in
the dark carriage rolling homeward, she felt
a chill seizing upon her very heart; she began
to shiver. But her physical condition scarcely
interested her; a sense of the sad things of
life weighed heavily upon her: the vanity of earthly hopes, the evanescence of happy
things, the inequality in the measure of pain
and pleasure to God's children, the fugitiveness
of illusions, the foolishness of dreams.
She thought of the beggar sitting at the corner
in sun and rain through years: she felt
disgust for a world where such things could
be. She said, "It is a good thing to have
done with it. It is a deliverance. I will
not give it one regret; no, not one." She
felt suddenly that she did not love Italy: it
had betrayed her. "It is you, you who are
to blame," she said, full of helpless resentment,
shaking a pale small hand vaguely
from the window out at the balmy moonlit
world; "you, soft air! you, flower smell!
you, velvety firmament with the many-colored
stars! I was a simple soul: my common
life was enough for me; you sowed in
my unguarded heart all the seeds of vain
dreams, and fostered them. And they bear
no fruit; they wither on their shallow roots—they
are weeds!—But I will not curse you,
for God made you lovely."

 She closed her eyes; her thoughts turned to remote Schattenort; she wished she were
there again, in the dull, quiet, big, cold, familiar
country house where she had been
born and bred. A mist of bitter longing
rose in her eyes. The moon was shining
clamorously, obtrusively; it cast a green
light, a light almost warm, on the pale
pavement. She hated its fervent beauty.
"Would God I were home!" she sighed.

 Veronika, mistaking her meaning, said,
"You are almost there."

 Paula suffered Veronika and her maid to
put her to bed. She seemed not to notice
them. She was thinking—far away. Out of
habit she listened a moment for the piano
above. But all was silent. "He is happy,"
she said to herself; "he has gone with his
friends. Or perhaps he is up there living it
all over again." And her imagination, touched
anew with the old obstinate insanity, took
the road up to his never-seen chamber, bent
over him, and rejoiced with him. "Oh, if I
could—" she said; "if I could! But he will
never know how a dying noble lady used to
listen to his playing in the dead of night, and loved him, and left him her blessing—"

 Veronika had no sleep that night. Before
day the doctor was summoned. He remained
several hours. At going he drew Veronika
aside, and by signs succeeded at last in
procuring from her the package of letters the
Countess had once shown him. He looked
at the superscriptions, and took from among
them one "To the Abb S——."

 That evening he brought with him a white-haired
old man in priestly garb, whom Veronika
was relieved to hear address her in
her native tongue.

 Presently, with muffled footsteps and a
frightened, solemn mien, she led him into
the Countess's bedroom, dimly lighted by
shaded candles, and left them long alone
together.

 Prospero, returning home that night, opened
the window wide and stood a moment
looking out at the stars, at peace with life,
every desire for the moment hushed, satisfied.
Then he lighted the candles on the
piano, and the faint yellow illumination brought out a hint of color in the objects
around. It showed an ordinary, rather bare
room; he lived in it very little. The littering
music and the piano formed its chief
adornment.

 He sat down, but for a moment did not
touch the keys. He removed the flower
from his coat and smelt it, thinking of
Rosina, who had given it him at the theatre
door—Rosina with the broad velvet-faced
hat, the tight silk dress, the diamonds in her
ears, and the small basket of flowers on her
arm. She was pretty—oh, pretty! Having
thought how pretty she was, he wisely tossed
away her faded favor, determining to remain
cold and prudent. He shook back his
hair, as if thereby to free his mind of her,
spread his hands over the ivory keys, and
began, as he loved to do before sleeping, to
let his fancies and emotions make themselves
sound.

 He played long, losing himself, finding a
melodious vesture for his half-formed dream.
The night was very quiet; it came to be
very late without his perceiving it. Sudden ly
he felt a cool air on his forehead—he
looked up, and paused in his playing, his
hands motionless above the keys, his lips
open. He felt that he ought to speak, but
his voice failed to answer his will. He was
asking himself in the dim background of his
consciousness how the Countess Paula von
Schattenort had entered his dwelling so
noiselessly, and what she might be seeking
there. More clearly he was wondering at
her face, strangely still and white, vaguely
woe-begone, astonished, pathetic. He
recognized her, yet she seemed to him altered
from the one he sometimes saw on the
balcony and met on the stairs—that object
without interest, a woman not pretty. Perhaps
it was the wonderful hair that, shining
along her cheeks like a pale gilded mist,
transfigured her. The firm fine braids that
heretofore he had seen always wound in
austere simplicity about her head were undone;
the narrowly waved hair floated to her
knees; her face peered wistfully between
two shimmering bands of it. She was
clothed in a white garment bordered with dark fur; a heavy rosary hung about her
neck.

 She looked at him a long moment with
fixed eyes, an expression of plaintive disillusion,
and said nothing.

 He tried to ask in what manner he might
serve her, but his tongue was numb.

 She turned and looked all about the room,
very slowly, as a person seeking something.
Then she looked again at him, silently, with
that same face of disappointment; and her
hands, that had been tightly shut on the
golden crucifix appended to her rosary,
opened and slipped softly to her sides. She
turned to the door. He rose from his seat,
and without taking his eyes from her, fumbled
to lift the candle from its socket, to light
her way; he was awkward in his amazement.
He saw her pass the threshold. In a second
he followed her. She was not in the next
room. He passed through the two rooms
that separated him from the door leading to
the common stairway. He came to the door;
it was as he had left it, secured for the night.
Seized with dismay, in spite of the thought that she must have lingered behind in the
shady embrasure of a window, he undid the
chain and bolt and came out on the landing
and looked, expecting inconsistently to see a
white figure vanishing down the steps. He
saw nothing but a faint light cast upon the
wall at the turn of the stairs. He stood hesitating.

 In a moment he heard below a sound of
weeping; he went down with a trembling of
the knees. On the landing of the piano
nobile was the landlady. She had set her
little brass lamp on the last step, and was crying.
The door to the Countess's apartment
was wide open, and the draught from there
made the tiny flame flicker and smoke.

 "What is it?" said Prospero, in a husky
whisper.

 "She is dead, the poor lady!" sobbed the padrona .

 He felt his hair softly rising.