PIERROT
    

      Mme. Lefevre was a country dame, a widow, one of these half peasants, with
      ribbons and bonnets with trimming on them, one of those persons who
      clipped her words and put on great airs in public, concealing the soul of
      a pretentious animal beneath a comical and bedizened exterior, just as the
      country-folks hide their coarse red hands in ecru silk gloves.
    

      She had a servant, a good simple peasant, called Rose.
    

      The two women lived in a little house with green shutters by the side of
      the high road in Normandy, in the centre of the country of Caux. As they
      had a narrow strip of garden in front of the house, they grew some
      vegetables.
    

      One night someone stole twelve onions. As soon as Rose became aware of the
      theft, she ran to tell madame, who came downstairs in her woolen
      petticoat. It was a shame and a disgrace! They had robbed her, Mme.
      Lefevre! As there were thieves in the country, they might come back.
    

      And the two frightened women examined the foot tracks, talking, and
      supposing all sorts of things.
    

      “See, they went that way! They stepped on the wall, they jumped into
      the garden!”
    

      And they became apprehensive for the future. How could they sleep in peace
      now!
    

      The news of the theft spread. The neighbors came, making examinations and
      discussing the matter in their turn, while the two women explained to each
      newcomer what they had observed and their opinion.
    

      A farmer who lived near said to them:
    

      “You ought to have a dog.”
    

      That is true, they ought to have a dog, if it were only to give the alarm.
      Not a big dog. Heavens! what would they do with a big dog? He would eat
      their heads off. But a little dog (in Normandy they say “quin”),
      a little puppy who would bark.
    

      As soon as everyone had left, Mme. Lefevre discussed this idea of a dog
      for some time. On reflection she made a thousand objections, terrified at
      the idea of a bowl full of soup, for she belonged to that race of
      parsimonious country women who always carry centimes in their pocket to
      give alms in public to beggars on the road and to put in the Sunday
      collection plate.
    

      Rose, who loved animals, gave her opinion and defended it shrewdly. So it
      was decided that they should have a dog, a very small dog.
    

      They began to look for one, but could find nothing but big dogs, who would
      devour enough soup to make one shudder. The grocer of Rolleville had one,
      a tiny one, but he demanded two francs to cover the cost of sending it.
      Mme. Lefevre declared that she would feed a “quin,” but would
      not buy one.
    

      The baker, who knew all that occurred, brought in his wagon one morning a
      strange little yellow animal, almost without paws, with the body of a
      crocodile, the head of a fox, and a curly tail—a true cockade, as
      big as all the rest of him. Mme. Lefevre thought this common cur that cost
      nothing was very handsome. Rose hugged it and asked what its name was.
    

      “Pierrot,” replied the baker.
    

      The dog was installed in an old soap box and they gave it some water which
      it drank. They then offered it a piece of bread. He ate it. Mme. Lefevre,
      uneasy, had an idea.
    

      “When he is thoroughly accustomed to the house we can let him run.
      He can find something to eat, roaming about the country.”
    

      They let him run, in fact, which did not prevent him from being famished.
      Also he never barked except to beg for food, and then he barked furiously.
    

      Anyone might come into the garden, and Pierrot would run up and fawn on
      each one in turn and not utter a bark.
    

      Mme. Lefevre, however, had become accustomed to the animal. She even went
      so far as to like it and to give it from time to time pieces of bread
      soaked in the gravy on her plate.
    

      But she had not once thought of the dog tax, and when they came to collect
      eight francs—eight francs, madame—for this puppy who never
      even barked, she almost fainted from the shock.
    

      It was immediately decided that they must get rid of Pierrot. No one
      wanted him. Every one declined to take him for ten leagues around. Then
      they resolved, not knowing what else to do, to make him “piquer du
      mas.”
    

      “Piquer du mas” means to eat chalk. When one wants to get rid
      of a dog they make him “Piquer du mas.”
    

      In the midst of an immense plain one sees a kind of hut, or rather a very
      small roof standing above the ground. This is the entrance to the clay
      pit. A big perpendicular hole is sunk for twenty metres underground and
      ends in a series of long subterranean tunnels.
    

      Once a year they go down into the quarry at the time they fertilize the
      ground. The rest of the year it serves as a cemetery for condemned dogs,
      and as one passed by this hole plaintive howls, furious or despairing
      barks and lamentable appeals reach one's ear.
    

      Sportsmen's dogs and sheep dogs flee in terror from this mournful place,
      and when one leans over it one perceives a disgusting odor of
      putrefaction.
    

      Frightful dramas are enacted in the darkness.
    

      When an animal has suffered down there for ten or twelve days, nourished
      on the foul remains of his predecessors, another animal, larger and more
      vigorous, is thrown into the hole. There they are, alone, starving, with
      glittering eyes. They watch each other, follow each other, hesitate in
      doubt. But hunger impels them; they attack each other, fight desperately
      for some time, and the stronger eats the weaker, devours him alive.
    

      When it was decided to make Pierrot “piquer du mas” they
      looked round for an executioner. The laborer who mended the road demanded
      six sous to take the dog there. That seemed wildly exorbitant to Mme.
      Lefevre. The neighbor's hired boy wanted five sous; that was still too
      much. So Rose having observed that they had better carry it there
      themselves, as in that way it would not be brutally treated on the way and
      made to suspect its fate, they resolved to go together at twilight.
    

      They offered the dog that evening a good dish of soup with a piece of
      butter in it. He swallowed every morsel of it, and as he wagged his tail
      with delight Rose put him in her apron.
    

      They walked quickly, like thieves, across the plain. They soon perceived
      the chalk pit and walked up to it. Mme. Lefevre leaned over to hear if any
      animal was moaning. No, there were none there; Pierrot would be alone.
      Then Rose, who was crying, kissed the dog and threw him into the chalk
      pit, and they both leaned over, listening.
    

      First they heard a dull sound, then the sharp, bitter, distracting cry of
      an animal in pain, then a succession of little mournful cries, then
      despairing appeals, the cries of a dog who is entreating, his head raised
      toward the opening of the pit.
    

      He yelped, oh, how he yelped!
    

      They were filled with remorse, with terror, with a wild inexplicable fear,
      and ran away from the spot. As Rose went faster Mme. Lefevre cried:
      “Wait for me, Rose, wait for me!”
    

      At night they were haunted by frightful nightmares.
    

      Mme. Lefevre dreamed she was sitting down at table to eat her soup, but
      when she uncovered the tureen Pierrot was in it. He jumped out and bit her
      nose.
    

      She awoke and thought she heard him yelping still. She listened, but she
      was mistaken.
    

      She fell asleep again and found herself on a high road, an endless road,
      which she followed. Suddenly in the middle of the road she perceived a
      basket, a large farmer's basket, lying there, and this basket frightened
      her.
    

      She ended by opening it, and Pierrot, concealed in it, seized her hand and
      would not let go. She ran away in terror with the dog hanging to the end
      of her arm, which he held between his teeth.
    

      At daybreak she arose, almost beside herself, and ran to the chalk pit.
    

      He was yelping, yelping still; he had yelped all night. She began to sob
      and called him by all sorts of endearing names. He answered her with all
      the tender inflections of his dog's voice.
    

      Then she wanted to see him again, promising herself that she would give
      him a good home till he died.
    

      She ran to the chalk digger, whose business it was to excavate for chalk,
      and told him the situation. The man listened, but said nothing. When she
      had finished he said:
    

      “You want your dog? That will cost four francs.” She gave a
      jump. All her grief was at an end at once.
    

      “Four francs!” she said. “You would die of it! Four
      francs!”
    

      “Do you suppose I am going to bring my ropes, my windlass, and set
      it up, and go down there with my boy and let myself be bitten, perhaps, by
      your cursed dog for the pleasure of giving it back to you? You should not
      have thrown it down there.”
    

      She walked away, indignant. Four francs!
    

      As soon as she entered the house she called Rose and told her of the
      quarryman's charges. Rose, always resigned, repeated:
    

      “Four francs! That is a good deal of money, madame.” Then she
      added: “If we could throw him something to eat, the poor dog, so he
      will not die of hunger.”
    

      Mme. Lefevre approved of this and was quite delighted. So they set out
      again with a big piece of bread and butter.
    

      They cut it in mouthfuls, which they threw down one after the other,
      speaking by turns to Pierrot. As soon as the dog finished one piece he
      yelped for the next.
    

      They returned that evening and the next day and every day. But they made
      only one trip.
    

      One morning as they were just letting fall the first mouthful they
      suddenly heard a tremendous barking in the pit. There were two dogs there.
      Another had been thrown in, a large dog.
    

      “Pierrot!” cried Rose. And Pierrot yelped and yelped. Then
      they began to throw down some food. But each time they noticed distinctly
      a terrible struggle going on, then plaintive cries from Pierrot, who had
      been bitten by his companion, who ate up everything as he was the
      stronger.
    

      It was in vain that they specified, saying:
    

      “That is for you, Pierrot.” Pierrot evidently got nothing.
    

      The two women, dumfounded, looked at each other and Mme. Lefevre said in a
      sour tone:
    

      “I could not feed all the dogs they throw in there! We must give it
      up.”
    

      And, suffocating at the thought of all the dogs living at her expense, she
      went away, even carrying back what remained of the bread, which she ate as
      she walked along.
    

      Rose followed her, wiping her eyes on the corner of her blue apron.