PIG.

 Go, stalk the red deer o'er the heather
     Ride, follow the fox if you can!
   But, for pleasure and profit together,
     Allow me the hunting of Man,—
   The chase of the Human, the search for the Soul
     To its ruin,—the hunting of Man.
                —The Old Shikarri.

 I believe the difference began in the matter of a horse, with a twist in
      his temper, whom Pinecoffin sold to Nafferton and by whom Nafferton was
      nearly slain. There may have been other causes of offence; the horse was
      the official stalking-horse. Nafferton was very angry; but Pinecoffin
      laughed and said that he had never guaranteed the beast's manners.
      Nafferton laughed, too, though he vowed that he would write off his fall
      against Pinecoffin if he waited five years. Now, a Dalesman from beyond
      Skipton will forgive an injury when the Strid lets a man live; but a South
      Devon man is as soft as a Dartmoor bog. You can see from their names that
      Nafferton had the race-advantage of Pinecoffin. He was a peculiar man, and
      his notions of humor were cruel. He taught me a new and fascinating form
      of shikar. He hounded Pinecoffin from Mithankot to Jagadri, and from
      Gurgaon to Abbottabad up and across the Punjab, a large province and in
      places remarkably dry. He said that he had no intention of allowing
      Assistant Commissioners to “sell him pups,” in the shape of ramping,
      screaming countrybreds, without making their lives a burden to them.

 Most Assistant Commissioners develop a bent for some special work after
      their first hot weather in the country. The boys with digestions hope to
      write their names large on the Frontier and struggle for dreary places
      like Bannu and Kohat. The bilious ones climb into the Secretariat. Which
      is very bad for the liver.

 Others are bitten with a mania for District work, Ghuznivide coins or
      Persian poetry; while some, who come of farmers' stock, find that the
      smell of the Earth after the Rains gets into their blood, and calls them
      to “develop the resources of the Province.” These men are enthusiasts.
      Pinecoffin belonged to their class. He knew a great many facts bearing on
      the cost of bullocks and temporary wells, and opium-scrapers, and what
      happens if you burn too much rubbish on a field, in the hope of enriching
      used-up soil. All the Pinecoffins come of a landholding breed, and so the
      land only took back her own again. Unfortunately—most unfortunately
      for Pinecoffin—he was a Civilian, as well as a farmer. Nafferton
      watched him, and thought about the horse. Nafferton said:—“See me
      chase that boy till he drops!” I said:—“You can't get your knife
      into an Assistant Commissioner.” Nafferton told me that I did not
      understand the administration of the Province.

 Our Government is rather peculiar. It gushes on the agricultural and
      general information side, and will supply a moderately respectable man
      with all sorts of “economic statistics,” if he speaks to it prettily. For
      instance, you are interested in gold-washing in the sands of the Sutlej.
      You pull the string, and find that it wakes up half a dozen Departments,
      and finally communicates, say, with a friend of yours in the Telegraph,
      who once wrote some notes on the customs of the gold-washers when he was
      on construction-work in their part of the Empire. He may or may not be
      pleased at being ordered to write out everything he knows for your
      benefit. This depends on his temperament. The bigger man you are, the more
      information and the greater trouble can you raise.

 Nafferton was not a big man; but he had the reputation of being very
      “earnest.” An “earnest” man can do much with a Government. There was an
      earnest man who once nearly wrecked... but all India knows THAT story. I
      am not sure what real “earnestness” is. A very fair imitation can be
      manufactured by neglecting to dress decently, by mooning about in a
      dreamy, misty sort of way, by taking office-work home after staying in
      office till seven, and by receiving crowds of native gentlemen on Sundays.
      That is one sort of “earnestness.”

 Nafferton cast about for a peg whereon to hang his earnestness, and for a
      string that would communicate with Pinecoffin. He found both.

 They were Pig. Nafferton became an earnest inquirer after Pig. He informed
      the Government that he had a scheme whereby a very large percentage of the
      British Army in India could be fed, at a very large saving, on Pig. Then
      he hinted that Pinecoffin might supply him with the “varied information
      necessary to the proper inception of the scheme.” So the Government wrote
      on the back of the letter:—“Instruct Mr. Pinecoffin to furnish Mr.
      Nafferton with any information in his power.” Government is very prone to
      writing things on the backs of letters which, later, lead to trouble and
      confusion.

 Nafferton had not the faintest interest in Pig, but he knew that
      Pinecoffin would flounce into the trap. Pinecoffin was delighted at being
      consulted about Pig. The Indian Pig is not exactly an important factor in
      agricultural life; but Nafferton explained to Pinecoffin that there was
      room for improvement, and corresponded direct with that young man.

 You may think that there is not much to be evolved from Pig. It all
      depends how you set to work. Pinecoffin being a Civilian and wishing to do
      things thoroughly, began with an essay on the Primitive Pig, the Mythology
      of the Pig, and the Dravidian Pig.

 Nafferton filed that information—twenty-seven foolscap sheets—and
      wanted to know about the distribution of the Pig in the Punjab, and how it
      stood the Plains in the hot weather. From this point onwards, remember
      that I am giving you only the barest outlines of the affair—the
      guy-ropes, as it were, of the web that Nafferton spun round Pinecoffin.

 Pinecoffin made a colored Pig-population map, and collected observations
      on the comparative longevity of the Pig (a) in the sub-montane tracts of
      the Himalayas, and (b) in the Rechna Doab.

 Nafferton filed that, and asked what sort of people looked after Pig. This
      started an ethnological excursus on swineherds, and drew from Pinecoffin
      long tables showing the proportion per thousand of the caste in the
      Derajat. Nafferton filed that bundle, and explained that the figures which
      he wanted referred to the Cis-Sutlej states, where he understood that Pigs
      were very fine and large, and where he proposed to start a Piggery. By
      this time, Government had quite forgotten their instructions to Mr.
      Pinecoffin.

 They were like the gentlemen, in Keats' poem, who turned well-oiled wheels
      to skin other people. But Pinecoffin was just entering into the spirit of
      the Pig-hunt, as Nafferton well knew he would do. He had a fair amount of
      work of his own to clear away; but he sat up of nights reducing Pig to
      five places of decimals for the honor of his Service. He was not going to
      appear ignorant of so easy a subject as Pig.

 Then Government sent him on special duty to Kohat, to “inquire into” the
      big-seven-foot, iron-shod spades of that District. People had been killing
      each other with those peaceful tools; and Government wished to know
      “whether a modified form of agricultural implement could not, tentatively
      and as a temporary measure, be introduced among the agricultural
      population without needlessly or unduly exasperating the existing
      religious sentiments of the peasantry.”

 Between those spades and Nafferton's Pig, Pinecoffin was rather heavily
burdened.

 Nafferton now began to take up “(a) The food-supply of the indigenous Pig,
with a view to the improvement of its capacities as a flesh-former.
(b) The acclimatization of the exotic Pig, maintaining its distinctive
peculiarities.” Pinecoffin replied exhaustively that the exotic Pig
would become merged in the indigenous type; and quoted horse-breeding
statistics to prove this.

 The side-issue was debated, at great length on Pinecoffin's side, till
      Nafferton owned that he had been in the wrong, and moved the previous
      question. When Pinecoffin had quite written himself out about
      flesh-formers, and fibrins, and glucose and the nitrogenous constituents
      of maize and lucerne, Nafferton raised the question of expense. By this
      time Pinecoffin, who had been transferred from Kohat, had developed a Pig
      theory of his own, which he stated in thirty-three folio pages—all
      carefully filed by Nafferton. Who asked for more.

 These things took ten months, and Pinecoffin's interest in the potential
      Piggery seemed to die down after he had stated his own views. But
      Nafferton bombarded him with letters on “the Imperial aspect of the
      scheme, as tending to officialize the sale of pork, and thereby calculated
      to give offence to the Mahomedan population of Upper India.” He guessed
      that Pinecoffin would want some broad, free-hand work after his niggling,
      stippling, decimal details.

 Pinecoffin handled the latest development of the case in masterly style,
      and proved that no “popular ebullition of excitement was to be
      apprehended.” Nafferton said that there was nothing like Civilian insight
      in matters of this kind, and lured him up a bye-path—“the possible
      profits to accrue to the Government from the sale of hog-bristles.” There
      is an extensive literature of hog-bristles, and the shoe, brush, and
      colorman's trades recognize more varieties of bristles than you would
      think possible. After Pinecoffin had wondered a little at Nafferton's rage
      for information, he sent back a monograph, fifty-one pages, on “Products
      of the Pig.” This led him, under Nafferton's tender handling, straight to
      the Cawnpore factories, the trade in hog-skin for saddles—and thence
      to the tanners. Pinecoffin wrote that pomegranate-seed was the best cure
      for hog-skin, and suggested—for the past fourteen months had wearied
      him—that Nafferton should “raise his pigs before he tanned them.”

 Nafferton went back to the second section of his fifth question.

 How could the exotic Pig be brought to give as much pork as it did in the
      West and yet “assume the essentially hirsute characteristics of its
      oriental congener?” Pinecoffin felt dazed, for he had forgotten what he
      had written sixteen month's before, and fancied that he was about to
      reopen the entire question. He was too far involved in the hideous tangle
      to retreat, and, in a weak moment, he wrote:—“Consult my first
      letter.” Which related to the Dravidian Pig. As a matter of fact,
      Pinecoffin had still to reach the acclimatization stage; having gone off
      on a side-issue on the merging of types.

 THEN Nafferton really unmasked his batteries! He complained to the
      Government, in stately language, of “the paucity of help accorded to me in
      my earnest attempts to start a potentially remunerative industry, and the
      flippancy with which my requests for information are treated by a
      gentleman whose pseudo-scholarly attainments should at lest have taught
      him the primary differences between the Dravidian and the Berkshire
      variety of the genus Sus. If I am to understand that the letter to which
      he refers me contains his serious views on the acclimatization of a
      valuable, though possibly uncleanly, animal, I am reluctantly compelled to
      believe,” etc., etc.

 There was a new man at the head of the Department of Castigation.

 The wretched Pinecoffin was told that the Service was made for the
      Country, and not the Country for the Service, and that he had better begin
      to supply information about Pigs.

 Pinecoffin answered insanely that he had written everything that could be
      written about Pig, and that some furlough was due to him.

 Nafferton got a copy of that letter, and sent it, with the essay on the
      Dravidian Pig, to a down-country paper, which printed both in full. The
      essay was rather highflown; but if the Editor had seen the stacks of
      paper, in Pinecoffin's handwriting, on Nafferton's table, he would not
      have been so sarcastic about the “nebulous discursiveness and blatant
      self-sufficiency of the modern Competition-wallah, and his utter inability
      to grasp the practical issues of a practical question.” Many friends cut
      out these remarks and sent them to Pinecoffin.

 I have already stated that Pinecoffin came of a soft stock. This last
      stroke frightened and shook him. He could not understand it; but he felt
      he had been, somehow, shamelessly betrayed by Nafferton.

 He realized that he had wrapped himself up in the Pigskin without need,
      and that he could not well set himself right with his Government. All his
      acquaintances asked after his “nebulous discursiveness” or his “blatant
      self-sufficiency,” and this made him miserable.

 He took a train and went to Nafferton, whom he had not seen since the Pig
      business began. He also took the cutting from the paper, and blustered
      feebly and called Nafferton names, and then died down to a watery, weak
      protest of the “I-say-it's-too-bad-you-know” order.

 Nafferton was very sympathetic.

 “I'm afraid I've given you a good deal of trouble, haven't I?” said he.

 “Trouble!” whimpered Pinecoffin; “I don't mind the trouble so much, though
      that was bad enough; but what I resent is this showing up in print. It
      will stick to me like a burr all through my service. And I DID do my best
      for your interminable swine. It's too bad of you, on my soul it is!”

 “I don't know,” said Nafferton; “have you ever been stuck with a horse? It
      isn't the money I mind, though that is bad enough; but what I resent is
      the chaff that follows, especially from the boy who stuck me. But I think
      we'll cry quite now.”

 Pinecoffin found nothing to say save bad words; and Nafferton smiled ever
      so sweetly, and asked him to dinner.