REGRET
    

      Monsieur Saval, who was called in Mantes “Father Saval,” had
      just risen from bed. He was weeping. It was a dull autumn day; the leaves
      were falling. They fell slowly in the rain, like a heavier and slower
      rain. M. Saval was not in good spirits. He walked from the fireplace to
      the window, and from the window to the fireplace. Life has its sombre
      days. It would no longer have any but sombre days for him, for he had
      reached the age of sixty-two. He is alone, an old bachelor, with nobody
      about him. How sad it is to die alone, all alone, without any one who is
      devoted to you!
    

      He pondered over his life, so barren, so empty. He recalled former days,
      the days of his childhood, the home, the house of his parents; his college
      days, his follies; the time he studied law in Paris, his father's illness,
      his death. He then returned to live with his mother. They lived together
      very quietly, and desired nothing more. At last the mother died. How sad
      life is! He lived alone since then, and now, in his turn, he, too, will
      soon be dead. He will disappear, and that will be the end. There will be
      no more of Paul Saval upon the earth. What a frightful thing! Other people
      will love, will laugh. Yes, people will go on amusing themselves, and he
      will no longer exist! Is it not strange that people can laugh, amuse
      themselves, be joyful under that eternal certainty of death? If this death
      were only probable, one could then have hope; but no, it is inevitable, as
      inevitable as that night follows the day.
    

      If, however, his life had been full! If he had done something; if he had
      had adventures, great pleasures, success, satisfaction of some kind or
      another. But no, nothing. He had done nothing, nothing but rise from bed,
      eat, at the same hours, and go to bed again. And he had gone on like that
      to the age of sixty-two years. He had not even taken unto himself a wife,
      as other men do. Why? Yes, why was it that he had not married? He might
      have done so, for he possessed considerable means. Had he lacked an
      opportunity? Perhaps! But one can create opportunities. He was
      indifferent; that was all. Indifference had been his greatest drawback,
      his defect, his vice. How many men wreck their lives through indifference!
      It is so difficult for some natures to get out of bed, to move about, to
      take long walks, to speak, to study any question.
    

      He had not even been loved. No woman had reposed on his bosom, in a
      complete abandon of love. He knew nothing of the delicious anguish of
      expectation, the divine vibration of a hand in yours, of the ecstasy of
      triumphant passion.
    

      What superhuman happiness must overflow your heart, when lips encounter
      lips for the first time, when the grasp of four arms makes one being of
      you, a being unutterably happy, two beings infatuated with one another.
    

      M. Saval was sitting before the fire, his feet on the fender, in his
      dressing gown. Assuredly his life had been spoiled, completely spoiled. He
      had, however, loved. He had loved secretly, sadly, and indifferently, in a
      manner characteristic of him in everything. Yes, he had loved his old
      friend, Madame Sandres, the wife of his old companion, Sandres. Ah! if he
      had known her as a young girl! But he had met her too late; she was
      already married. Unquestionably, he would have asked her hand! How he had
      loved her, nevertheless, without respite, since the first day he set eyes
      on her!
    

      He recalled his emotion every time he saw her, his grief on leaving her,
      the many nights that he could not sleep, because he was thinking of her.
    

      On rising in the morning he was somewhat more rational than on the
      previous evening.
    

      Why?
    

      How pretty she was formerly, so dainty, with fair curly hair, and always
      laughing. Sandres was not the man she should have chosen. She was now
      fifty-two years of age. She seemed happy. Ah! if she had only loved him in
      days gone by; yes, if she had only loved him! And why should she not have
      loved him, he, Saval, seeing that he loved her so much, yes, she, Madame
      Sandres!
    

      If only she could have guessed. Had she not guessed anything, seen
      anything, comprehended anything? What would she have thought? If he had
      spoken, what would she have answered?
    

      And Saval asked himself a thousand other things. He reviewed his whole
      life, seeking to recall a multitude of details.
    

      He recalled all the long evenings spent at the house of Sandres, when the
      latter's wife was young, and so charming.
    

      He recalled many things that she had said to him, the intonations of her
      voice, the little significant smiles that meant so much.
    

      He recalled their walks, the three of them together, along the banks of
      the Seine, their luncheon on the grass on Sundays, for Sandres was
      employed at the sub-prefecture. And all at once the distinct recollection
      came to him of an afternoon spent with her in a little wood on the banks
      of the river.
    

      They had set out in the morning, carrying their provisions in baskets. It
      was a bright spring morning, one of those days which intoxicate one.
      Everything smells fresh, everything seems happy. The voices of the birds
      sound more joyous, and they fly more swiftly. They had luncheon on the
      grass, under the willow trees, quite close to the water, which glittered
      in the sun's rays. The air was balmy, charged with the odors of fresh
      vegetation; they drank it in with delight. How pleasant everything was on
      that day!
    

      After lunch, Sandres went to sleep on the broad of his back. “The
      best nap he had in his life,” said he, when he woke up.
    

      Madame Sandres had taken the arm of Saval, and they started to walk along
      the river bank.
    

      She leaned tenderly on his arm. She laughed and said to him: “I am
      intoxicated, my friend, I am quite intoxicated.” He looked at her,
      his heart going pit-a-pat. He felt himself grow pale, fearful that he
      might have looked too boldly at her, and that the trembling of his hand
      had revealed his passion.
    

      She had made a wreath of wild flowers and water-lilies, and she asked him:
      “Do I look pretty like that?”
    

      As he did not answer—for he could find nothing to say, he would have
      liked to go down on his knees—she burst out laughing, a sort of
      annoyed, displeased laugh, as she said: “Great goose, what ails you?
      You might at least say something.”
    

      He felt like crying, but could not even yet find a word to say.
    

      All these things came back to him now, as vividly as on the day when they
      took place. Why had she said this to him, “Great goose, what ails
      you? You might at least say something!”
    

      And he recalled how tenderly she had leaned on his arm. And in passing
      under a shady tree he had felt her ear brushing his cheek, and he had
      moved his head abruptly, lest she should suppose he was too familiar.
    

      When he had said to her: “Is it not time to return?” she
      darted a singular look at him. “Certainly,” she said, “certainly,”
      regarding him at the same time in a curious manner. He had not thought of
      it at the time, but now the whole thing appeared to him quite plain.
    

      “Just as you like, my friend. If you are tired let us go back.”
    

      And he had answered: “I am not fatigued; but Sandres may be awake
      now.”
    

      And she had said: “If you are afraid of my husband's being awake,
      that is another thing. Let us return.”
    

      On their way back she remained silent, and leaned no longer on his arm.
      Why?
    

      At that time it had never occurred to him, to ask himself “why.”
      Now he seemed to apprehend something that he had not then understood.
    

      Could it?
    

      M. Saval felt himself blush, and he got up at a bound, as if he were
      thirty years younger and had heard Madame Sandres say, “I love you.”
    

      Was it possible? That idea which had just entered his mind tortured him.
      Was it possible that he had not seen, had not guessed?
    

      Oh! if that were true, if he had let this opportunity of happiness pass
      without taking advantage of it!
    

      He said to himself: “I must know. I cannot remain in this state of
      doubt. I must know!” He thought: “I am sixty-two years of age,
      she is fifty-eight; I may ask her that now without giving offense.”
    

      He started out.
    

      The Sandres' house was situated on the other side of the street, almost
      directly opposite his own. He went across and knocked at the door, and a
      little servant opened it.
    

      “You here at this hour, Saval! Has some accident happened to you?”
    

      “No, my girl,” he replied; “but go and tell your
      mistress that I want to speak to her at once.”
    

      “The fact is madame is preserving pears for the winter, and she is
      in the preserving room. She is not dressed, you understand.”
    

      “Yes, but go and tell her that I wish to see her on a very important
      matter.”
    

      The little servant went away, and Saval began to walk, with long, nervous
      strides, up and down the drawing-room. He did not feel in the least
      embarrassed, however. Oh! he was merely going to ask her something, as he
      would have asked her about some cooking recipe. He was sixty-two years of
      age!
    

      The door opened and madame appeared. She was now a large woman, fat and
      round, with full cheeks and a sonorous laugh. She walked with her arms
      away from her sides and her sleeves tucked up, her bare arms all covered
      with fruit juice. She asked anxiously:
    

      “What is the matter with you, my friend? You are not ill, are you?”
    

      “No, my dear friend; but I wish to ask you one thing, which to me is
      of the first importance, something which is torturing my heart, and I want
      you to promise that you will answer me frankly.”
    

      She laughed, “I am always frank. Say on.”
    

      “Well, then. I have loved you from the first day I ever saw you. Can
      you have any doubt of this?”
    

      She responded, laughing, with something of her former tone of voice.
    

      “Great goose! what ails you? I knew it from the very first day!”
    

      Saval began to tremble. He stammered out: “You knew it? Then . . .”
    

      He stopped.
    

      She asked:
    

      “Then?”
    

      He answered:
    

      “Then—what did you think? What—what—what would you
      have answered?”
    

      She broke into a peal of laughter. Some of the juice ran off the tips of
      her fingers on to the carpet.
    

      “What?”
    

      “I? Why, you did not ask me anything. It was not for me to declare
      myself!”
    

      He then advanced a step toward her.
    

      “Tell me—tell me . . . . You remember the day when Sandres
      went to sleep on the grass after lunch . . . when we had walked together
      as far as the bend of the river, below . . .”
    

      He waited, expectantly. She had ceased to laugh, and looked at him,
      straight in the eyes.
    

      “Yes, certainly, I remember it.”
    

      He answered, trembling all over:
    

      “Well—that day—if I had been—if I had been—venturesome—what
      would you have done?”
    

      She began to laugh as only a happy woman can laugh, who has nothing to
      regret, and responded frankly, in a clear voice tinged with irony:
    

      “I would have yielded, my friend.”
    

      She then turned on her heels and went back to her jam-making.
    

      Saval rushed into the street, cast down, as though he had met with some
      disaster. He walked with giant strides through the rain, straight on,
      until he reached the river bank, without thinking where he was going. He
      then turned to the right and followed the river. He walked a long time, as
      if urged on by some instinct. His clothes were running with water, his hat
      was out of shape, as soft as a rag, and dripping like a roof. He walked
      on, straight in front of him. At last, he came to the place where they had
      lunched on that day so long ago, the recollection of which tortured his
      heart. He sat down under the leafless trees, and wept.