ROSALIE PRUDENT

 There was a real mystery in this affair which neither the jury, nor the
      president, nor the public prosecutor himself could understand.

 The girl Prudent (Rosalie), servant at the Varambots', of Nantes, having
      become enceinte without the knowledge of her masters, had, during the
      night, killed and buried her child in the garden.

 It was the usual story of the infanticides committed by servant girls. But
      there was one inexplicable circumstance about this one. When the police
      searched the girl Prudent's room they discovered a complete infant's
      outfit, made by Rosalie herself, who had spent her nights for the last
      three months in cutting and sewing it. The grocer from whom she had bought
      her candles, out of her own wages, for this long piece of work had come to
      testify. It came out, moreover, that the sage-femme of the district,
      informed by Rosalie of her condition, had given her all necessary
      instructions and counsel in case the event should happen at a time when it
      might not be possible to get help. She had also procured a place at Poissy
      for the girl Prudent, who foresaw that her present employers would
      discharge her, for the Varambot couple did not trifle with morality.

 There were present at the trial both the man and the woman, a middle-class
      pair from the provinces, living on their income. They were so exasperated
      against this girl, who had sullied their house, that they would have liked
      to see her guillotined on the spot without a trial. The spiteful
      depositions they made against her became accusations in their mouths.

 The defendant, a large, handsome girl of Lower Normandy, well educated for
      her station in life, wept continuously and would not answer to anything.

 The court and the spectators were forced to the opinion that she had
      committed this barbarous act in a moment of despair and madness, since
      there was every indication that she had expected to keep and bring up her
      child.

 The president tried for the last time to make her speak, to get some
      confession, and, having urged her with much gentleness, he finally made
      her understand that all these men gathered here to pass judgment upon her
      were not anxious for her death and might even have pity on her.

 Then she made up her mind to speak.

 “Come, now, tell us, first, who is the father of this child?”
      he asked.

 Until then she had obstinately refused to give his name.

 But she replied suddenly, looking at her masters who had so cruelly
      calumniated her:

 “It is Monsieur Joseph, Monsieur Varambot's nephew.”

 The couple started in their seats and cried with one voice—“That's
      not true! She lies! This is infamous!”

 The president had them silenced and continued, “Go on, please, and
      tell us how it all happened.”

 Then she suddenly began to talk freely, relieving her pent-up heart, that
      poor, solitary, crushed heart—laying bare her sorrow, her whole
      sorrow, before those severe men whom she had until now taken for enemies
      and inflexible judges.

 “Yes, it was Monsieur Joseph Varambot, when he came on leave last
      year.”

 “What does Mr. Joseph Varambot do?”

 “He is a non-commissioned officer in the artillery, monsieur. Well,
      he stayed two months at the house, two months of the summer. I thought
      nothing about it when he began to look at me, and then flatter me, and
      make love to me all day long. And I let myself be taken in, monsieur. He
      kept saying to me that I was a handsome girl, that I was good company,
      that I just suited him—and I, I liked him well enough. What could I
      do? One listens to these things when one is alone—all alone—as
      I was. I am alone in the world, monsieur. I have no one to talk to—no
      one to tell my troubles to. I have no father, no mother, no brother, no
      sister, nobody. And when he began to talk to me it was as if I had a
      brother who had come back. And then he asked me to go with him to the
      river one evening, so that we might talk without disturbing any one. I
      went—I don't know—I don't know how it happened. He had his arm
      around me. Really I didn't want to—no—no—I could not—I
      felt like crying, the air was so soft —the moon was shining. No, I
      swear to you—I could not—he did what he wanted. That went on
      three weeks, as long as he stayed. I could have followed him to the ends
      of the world. He went away. I did not know that I was enceinte. I did not
      know it until the month after—”

 She began to cry so bitterly that they had to give her time to collect
      herself.

 Then the president resumed with the tone of a priest at the confessional:
      “Come, now, go on.”

 She began to talk again: “When I realized my condition I went to see
      Madame Boudin, who is there to tell you, and I asked her how it would be,
      in case it should come if she were not there. Then I made the outfit,
      sewing night after night, every evening until one o'clock in the morning;
      and then I looked for another place, for I knew very well that I should be
      sent away, but I wanted to stay in the house until the very last, so as to
      save my pennies, for I have not got very much and I should need my money
      for the little one.”

 “Then you did not intend to kill him?”

 “Oh, certainly not, monsieur!”

 “Why did you kill him, then?”

 “It happened this way. It came sooner than I expected. It came upon
      me in the kitchen, while I was doing the dishes. Monsieur and Madame
      Varambot were already asleep, so I went up, not without difficulty,
      dragging myself up by the banister, and I lay down on the bare floor. It
      lasted perhaps one hour, or two, or three; I don't know, I had such pain;
      and then I pushed him out with all my strength. I felt that he came out
      and I picked him up.

 “Ah! but I was glad, I assure you! I did all that Madame Boudin told
      me to do. And then I laid him on my bed. And then such a pain griped me
      again that I thought I should die. If you knew what it meant, you there,
      you would not do so much of this. I fell on my knees, and then toppled
      over backward on the floor; and it griped me again, perhaps one hour,
      perhaps two. I lay there all alone—and then another one comes—another
      little one—two, yes, two, like this. I took him up as I did the
      first one, and then I put him on the bed, the two side by side. Is it
      possible, tell me, two children, and I who get only twenty francs a month?
      Say, is it possible? One, yes, that can be managed by going without
      things, but not two. That turned my head. What do I know about it? Had I
      any choice, tell me?

 “What could I do? I felt as if my last hour had come. I put the
      pillow over them, without knowing why. I could not keep them both; and
      then I threw myself down, and I lay there, rolling over and over and
      crying until I saw the daylight come into the window. Both of them were
      quite dead under the pillow. Then I took them under my arms and went down
      the stairs out in the vegetable garden. I took the gardener's spade and I
      buried them under the earth, digging as deep a hole as I could, one here
      and the other one there, not together, so that they might not talk of
      their mother if these little dead bodies can talk. What do I know about
      it?

 “And then, back in my bed, I felt so sick that I could not get up.
      They sent for the doctor and he understood it all. I'm telling you the
      truth, Your Honor. Do what you like with me; I'm ready.”

 Half of the jury were blowing their noses violently to keep from crying.
      The women in the courtroom were sobbing.

 The president asked her:

 “Where did you bury the other one?”

 “The one that you have?” she asked.

 “Why, this one—this one was in the artichokes.”

 “Oh, then the other one is among the strawberries, by the well.”

 And she began to sob so piteously that no one could hear her unmoved.

 The girl Rosalie Prudent was acquitted.