SAINT ANTHONY
    

      They called him Saint Anthony, because his name was Anthony, and also,
      perhaps, because he was a good fellow, jovial, a lover of practical jokes,
      a tremendous eater and a heavy drinker and a gay fellow, although he was
      sixty years old.
    

      He was a big peasant of the district of Caux, with a red face, large chest
      and stomach, and perched on two legs that seemed too slight for the bulk
      of his body.
    

      He was a widower and lived alone with his two men servants and a maid on
      his farm, which he conducted with shrewd economy. He was careful of his
      own interests, understood business and the raising of cattle, and farming.
      His two sons and his three daughters, who had married well, were living in
      the neighborhood and came to dine with their father once a month. His
      vigor of body was famous in all the countryside. “He is as strong as
      Saint Anthony,” had become a kind of proverb.
    

      At the time of the Prussian invasion Saint Anthony, at the wine shop,
      promised to eat an army, for he was a braggart, like a true Norman, a bit
      of a coward and a blusterer. He banged his fist on the wooden table,
      making the cups and the brandy glasses dance, and cried with the assumed
      wrath of a good fellow, with a flushed face and a sly look in his eye:
      “I shall have to eat some of them, nom de Dieu!” He reckoned
      that the Prussians would not come as far as Tanneville, but when he heard
      they were at Rautot he never went out of the house, and constantly watched
      the road from the little window of his kitchen, expecting at any moment to
      see the bayonets go by.
    

      One morning as he was eating his luncheon with the servants the door
      opened and the mayor of the commune, Maitre Chicot, appeared, followed by
      a soldier wearing a black copper-pointed helmet. Saint Anthony bounded to
      his feet and his servants all looked at him, expecting to see him slash
      the Prussian. But he merely shook hands with the mayor, who said:
    

      “Here is one for you, Saint Anthony. They came last night. Don't do
      anything foolish, above all things, for they talked of shooting and
      burning everything if there is the slightest unpleasantness, I have given
      you warning. Give him something to eat; he looks like a good fellow.
      Good-day. I am going to call on the rest. There are enough for all.”
      And he went out.
    

      Father Anthony, who had turned pale, looked at the Prussian. He was a big,
      young fellow with plump, white skin, blue eyes, fair hair, unshaven to his
      cheek bones, who looked stupid, timid and good. The shrewd Norman read him
      at once, and, reassured, he made him a sign to sit down. Then he said:
      “Will you take some soup?”
    

      The stranger did not understand. Anthony then became bolder, and pushing a
      plateful of soup right under his nose, he said: “Here, swallow that,
      big pig!”
    

      The soldier answered “Ya,” and began to eat greedily, while
      the farmer, triumphant, feeling he had regained his reputation, winked his
      eye at the servants, who were making strange grimaces, what with their
      terror and their desire to laugh.
    

      When the Prussian had devoured his soup, Saint Anthony gave him another
      plateful, which disappeared in like manner; but he flinched at the third
      which the farmer tried to insist on his eating, saying: “Come, put
      that into your stomach; 'twill fatten you or it is your own fault, eh,
      pig!”
    

      The soldier, understanding only that they wanted to make him eat all his
      soup, laughed in a contented manner, making a sign to show that he could
      not hold any more.
    

      Then Saint Anthony, become quite familiar, tapped him on the stomach,
      saying: “My, there is plenty in my pig's belly!” But suddenly
      he began to writhe with laughter, unable to speak. An idea had struck him
      which made him choke with mirth. “That's it, that's it, Saint
      Anthony and his pig. There's my pig!” And the three servants burst
      out laughing in their turn.
    

      The old fellow was so pleased that he had the brandy brought in, good
      stuff, 'fil en dix', and treated every one. They clinked glasses with the
      Prussian, who clacked his tongue by way of flattery to show that he
      enjoyed it. And Saint Anthony exclaimed in his face: “Eh, is not
      that superfine? You don't get anything like that in your home, pig!”
    

      From that time Father Anthony never went out without his Prussian. He had
      got what he wanted. This was his vengeance, the vengeance of an old rogue.
      And the whole countryside, which was in terror, laughed to split its sides
      at Saint Anthony's joke. Truly, there was no one like him when it came to
      humor. No one but he would have thought of a thing like that. He was a
      born joker!
    

      He went to see his neighbors every day, arm in arm with his German, whom
      he introduced in a jovial manner, tapping him on the shoulder: “See,
      here is my pig; look and see if he is not growing fat, the animal!”
    

      And the peasants would beam with smiles. “He is so comical, that
      reckless fellow, Antoine!”
    

      “I will sell him to you, Cesaire, for three pistoles” (thirty
      francs).
    

      “I will take him, Antoine, and I invite you to eat some black
      pudding.”
    

      “What I want is his feet.”
    

      “Feel his belly; you will see that it is all fat.”
    

      And they all winked at each other, but dared not laugh too loud, for fear
      the Prussian might finally suspect they were laughing at him. Anthony,
      alone growing bolder every day, pinched his thighs, exclaiming, “Nothing
      but fat”; tapped him on the back, shouting, “That is all bacon”;
      lifted him up in his arms as an old Colossus that could have lifted an
      anvil, declaring, “He weighs six hundred and no waste.”
    

      He had got into the habit of making people offer his “pig”
      something to eat wherever they went together. This was the chief pleasure,
      the great diversion every day. “Give him whatever you please, he
      will swallow everything.” And they offered the man bread and butter,
      potatoes, cold meat, chitterlings, which caused the remark, “Some of
      your own, and choice ones.”
    

      The soldier, stupid and gentle, ate from politeness, charmed at these
      attentions, making himself ill rather than refuse, and he was actually
      growing fat and his uniform becoming tight for him. This delighted Saint
      Anthony, who said: “You know, my pig, that we shall have to have
      another cage made for you.”
    

      They had, however, become the best friends in the world, and when the old
      fellow went to attend to his business in the neighborhood the Prussian
      accompanied him for the simple pleasure of being with him.
    

      The weather was severe; it was freezing hard. The terrible winter of 1870
      seemed to bring all the scourges on France at one time.
    

      Father Antoine, who made provision beforehand, and took advantage of every
      opportunity, foreseeing that manure would be scarce for the spring
      farming, bought from a neighbor who happened to be in need of money all
      that he had, and it was agreed that he should go every evening with his
      cart to get a load.
    

      So every day at twilight he set out for the farm of Haules, half a league
      distant, always accompanied by his “pig.” And each time it was
      a festival, feeding the animal. All the neighbors ran over there as they
      would go to high mass on Sunday.
    

      But the soldier began to suspect something, be mistrustful, and when they
      laughed too loud he would roll his eyes uneasily, and sometimes they
      lighted up with anger.
    

      One evening when he had eaten his fill he refused to swallow another
      morsel, and attempted to rise to leave the table. But Saint Anthony
      stopped him by a turn of the wrist and, placing his two powerful hands on
      his shoulders, he sat him down again so roughly that the chair smashed
      under him.
    

      A wild burst of laughter broke forth, and Anthony, beaming, picked up his
      pig, acted as though he were dressing his wounds, and exclaimed: “Since
      you will not eat, you shall drink, nom de Dieu!” And they went to
      the wine shop to get some brandy.
    

      The soldier rolled his eyes, which had a wicked expression, but he drank,
      nevertheless; he drank as long as they wanted him, and Saint Anthony held
      his head to the great delight of his companions.
    

      The Norman, red as a tomato, his eyes ablaze, filled up the glasses and
      clinked, saying: “Here's to you!”. And the Prussian, without
      speaking a word, poured down one after another glassfuls of cognac.
    

      It was a contest, a battle, a revenge! Who would drink the most, nom d'un
      nom! They could neither of them stand any more when the liter was emptied.
      But neither was conquered. They were tied, that was all. They would have
      to begin again the next day.
    

      They went out staggering and started for home, walking beside the dung
      cart which was drawn along slowly by two horses.
    

      Snow began to fall and the moonless night was sadly lighted by this dead
      whiteness on the plain. The men began to feel the cold, and this
      aggravated their intoxication. Saint Anthony, annoyed at not being the
      victor, amused himself by shoving his companion so as to make him fall
      over into the ditch. The other would dodge backwards, and each time he did
      he uttered some German expression in an angry tone, which made the peasant
      roar with laughter. Finally the Prussian lost his temper, and just as
      Anthony was rolling towards him he responded with such a terrific blow
      with his fist that the Colossus staggered.
    

      Then, excited by the brandy, the old man seized the pugilist round the
      waist, shook him for a few moments as he would have done with a little
      child, and pitched him at random to the other side of the road. Then,
      satisfied with this piece of work, he crossed his arms and began to laugh
      afresh.
    

      But the soldier picked himself up in a hurry, his head bare, his helmet
      having rolled off, and drawing his sword he rushed over to Father Anthony.
    

      When he saw him coming the peasant seized his whip by the top of the
      handle, his big holly wood whip, straight, strong and supple as the sinew
      of an ox.
    

      The Prussian approached, his head down, making a lunge with his sword,
      sure of killing his adversary. But the old fellow, squarely hitting the
      blade, the point of which would have pierced his stomach, turned it aside,
      and with the butt end of the whip struck the soldier a sharp blow on the
      temple and he fell to the ground.
    

      Then he, gazed aghast, stupefied with amazement, at the body, twitching
      convulsively at first and then lying prone and motionless. He bent over
      it, turned it on its back, and gazed at it for some time. The man's eyes
      were closed, and blood trickled from a wound at the side of his forehead.
      Although it was dark, Father Anthony could distinguish the bloodstain on
      the white snow.
    

      He remained there, at his wit's end, while his cart continued slowly on
      its way.
    

      What was he to do? He would be shot! They would burn his farm, ruin his
      district! What should he do? What should he do? How could he hide the
      body, conceal the fact of his death, deceive the Prussians? He heard
      voices in the distance, amid the utter stillness of the snow. All at once
      he roused himself, and picking up the helmet he placed it on his victim's
      head. Then, seizing him round the body, he lifted him up in his arms, and
      thus running with him, he overtook his team, and threw the body on top of
      the manure. Once in his own house he would think up some plan.
    

      He walked slowly, racking his brain, but without result. He saw, he felt,
      that he was lost. He entered his courtyard. A light was shining in one of
      the attic windows; his maid was not asleep. He hastily backed his wagon to
      the edge of the manure hollow. He thought that by overturning the manure
      the body lying on top of it would fall into the ditch and be buried
      beneath it, and he dumped the cart.
    

      As he had foreseen, the man was buried beneath the manure. Anthony evened
      it down with his fork, which he stuck in the ground beside it. He called
      his stableman, told him to put up the horses, and went to his room.
    

      He went to bed, still thinking of what he had best do, but no ideas came
      to him. His apprehension increased in the quiet of his room. They would
      shoot him! He was bathed in perspiration from fear, his teeth chattered,
      he rose shivering, not being able to stay in bed.
    

      He went downstairs to the kitchen, took the bottle of brandy from the
      sideboard and carried it upstairs. He drank two large glasses, one after
      another, adding a fresh intoxication to the late one, without quieting his
      mental anguish. He had done a pretty stroke of work, nom de Dieu, idiot!
    

      He paced up and down, trying to think of some stratagem, some
      explanations, some cunning trick, and from time to time he rinsed his
      mouth with a swallow of “fil en dix” to give him courage.
    

      But no ideas came to him, not one.
    

      Towards midnight his watch dog, a kind of cross wolf called “Devorant,”
      began to howl frantically. Father Anthony shuddered to the marrow of his
      bones, and each time the beast began his long and lugubrious wail the old
      man's skin turned to goose flesh.
    

      He had sunk into a chair, his legs weak, stupefied, done up, waiting
      anxiously for “Devorant” to set up another howl, and starting
      convulsively from nervousness caused by terror.
    

      The clock downstairs struck five. The dog was still howling. The peasant
      was almost insane. He rose to go and let the dog loose, so that he should
      not hear him. He went downstairs, opened the hall door, and stepped out
      into the darkness. The snow was still falling. The earth was all white,
      the farm buildings standing out like black patches. He approached the
      kennel. The dog was dragging at his chain. He unfastened it. “Devorant”
      gave a bound, then stopped short, his hair bristling, his legs rigid, his
      muzzle in the air, his nose pointed towards the manure heap.
    

      Saint Anthony, trembling from head to foot, faltered:
    

      “What's the matter with you, you dirty hound?” and he walked a
      few steps forward, gazing at the indistinct outlines, the sombre shadow of
      the courtyard.
    

      Then he saw a form, the form of a man sitting on the manure heap!
    

      He gazed at it, paralyzed by fear, and breathing hard. But all at once he
      saw, close by, the handle of the manure fork which was sticking in the
      ground. He snatched it up and in one of those transports of fear that will
      make the greatest coward brave he rushed forward to see what it was.
    

      It was he, his Prussian, come to life, covered with filth from his bed of
      manure which had kept him warm. He had sat down mechanically, and remained
      there in the snow which sprinkled down, all covered with dirt and blood as
      he was, and still stupid from drinking, dazed by the blow and exhausted
      from his wound.
    

      He perceived Anthony, and too sodden to understand anything, he made an
      attempt to rise. But the moment the old man recognized him, he foamed with
      rage like a wild animal.
    

      “Ah, pig! pig!” he sputtered. “You are not dead! You are
      going to denounce me now—wait—wait!”
    

      And rushing on the German with all the strength of leis arms he flung the
      raised fork like a lance and buried the four prongs full length in his
      breast.
    

      The soldier fell over on his back, uttering a long death moan, while the
      old peasant, drawing the fork out of his breast, plunged it over and over
      again into his abdomen, his stomach, his throat, like a madman, piercing
      the body from head to foot, as it still quivered, and the blood gushed out
      in streams.
    

      Finally he stopped, exhausted by his arduous work, swallowing great
      mouthfuls of air, calmed down at the completion of the murder.
    

      As the cocks were beginning to crow in the poultry yard and it was near
      daybreak, he set to work to bury the man.
    

      He dug a hole in the manure till he reached the earth, dug down further,
      working wildly, in a frenzy of strength with frantic motions of his arms
      and body.
    

      When the pit was deep enough he rolled the corpse into it with the fork,
      covered it with earth, which he stamped down for some time, and then put
      back the manure, and he smiled as he saw the thick snow finishing his work
      and covering up its traces with a white sheet.
    

      He then stuck the fork in the manure and went into the house. His bottle,
      still half full of brandy stood on the table. He emptied it at a draught,
      threw himself on his bed and slept heavily.
    

      He woke up sober, his mind calm and clear, capable of judgment and
      thought.
    

      At the end of an hour he was going about the country making inquiries
      everywhere for his soldier. He went to see the Prussian officer to find
      out why they had taken away his man.
    

      As everyone knew what good friends they were, no one suspected him. He
      even directed the research, declaring that the Prussian went to see the
      girls every evening.
    

      An old retired gendarme who had an inn in the next village, and a pretty
      daughter, was arrested and shot.