SHROVE TUESDAY

  “P

AVEL
      VASSILITCH!” cries Pelageya Ivanovna, waking her husband. “Pavel
      Vassilitch! You might go and help Styopa with his lessons, he is sitting
      crying over his book. He can’t understand something again!”

 Pavel Vassilitch gets up, makes the sign of the cross over his mouth as he
      yawns, and says softly: “In a minute, my love!”

 The cat who has been asleep beside him gets up too, straightens out its
      tail, arches its spine, and half-shuts its eyes. There is stillness. . . .
      Mice can be heard scurrying behind the wall-paper. Putting on his boots
      and his dressing-gown, Pavel Vassilitch, crumpled and frowning from
      sleepiness, comes out of his bedroom into the dining-room; on his entrance
      another cat, engaged in sniffing a marinade of fish in the window, jumps
      down to the floor, and hides behind the cupboard.

 “Who asked you to sniff that!” he says angrily, covering the
      fish with a sheet of newspaper. “You are a pig to do that, not a
      cat. . . .”

 From the dining-room there is a door leading into the nursery. There, at a
      table covered with stains and deep scratches, sits Styopa, a high-school
      boy in the second class, with a peevish expression of face and
      tear-stained eyes. With his knees raised almost to his chin, and his hands
      clasped round them, he is swaying to and fro like a Chinese idol and
      looking crossly at a sum book.

 “Are you working?” asks Pavel Vassilitch, sitting down to the
      table and yawning. “Yes, my boy. . . . We have enjoyed ourselves,
      slept, and eaten pancakes, and to-morrow comes Lenten fare, repentance,
      and going to work. Every period of time has its limits. Why are your eyes
      so red? Are you sick of learning your lessons? To be sure, after pancakes,
      lessons are nasty to swallow. That’s about it.”

 “What are you laughing at the child for?” Pelageya Ivanovna
      calls from the next room. “You had better show him instead of
      laughing at him. He’ll get a one again to-morrow, and make me
      miserable.”

 “What is it you don’t understand?” Pavel Vassilitch asks
      Styopa.

 “Why this . . . division of fractions,” the boy answers
      crossly. “The division of fractions by fractions. . . .”

 “H’m . . . queer boy! What is there in it? There’s
      nothing to understand in it. Learn the rules, and that’s all. . . .
      To divide a fraction by a fraction you must multiply the numerator of the
      first fraction by the denominator of the second, and that will be the
      numerator of the quotient. . . . In this case, the numerator of the first
      fraction. . . .”

 “I know that without your telling me,” Styopa interrupts him,
      flicking a walnut shell off the table. “Show me the proof.”

 “The proof? Very well, give me a pencil. Listen. . . . Suppose we
      want to divide seven eighths by two fifths. Well, the point of it is, my
      boy, that it’s required to divide these fractions by each other. . .
      . Have they set the samovar?”

 “I don’t know.”

 “It’s time for tea. . . . It’s past seven. Well, now
      listen. We will look at it like this. . . . Suppose we want to divide
      seven eighths not by two fifths but by two, that is, by the numerator
      only. We divide it, what do we get?

 “Seven sixteenths.”

 “Right. Bravo! Well, the trick of it is, my boy, that if we . . . so
      if we have divided it by two then. . . . Wait a bit, I am getting muddled.
      I remember when I was at school, the teacher of arithmetic was called
      Sigismund Urbanitch, a Pole. He used to get into a muddle over every
      lesson. He would begin explaining some theory, get in a tangle, and turn
      crimson all over and race up and down the class-room as though someone
      were sticking an awl in his back, then he would blow his nose half a dozen
      times and begin to cry. But you know we were magnanimous to him, we
      pretended not to see it. ‘What is it, Sigismund Urbanitch?’ we
      used to ask him. ‘Have you got toothache?’ And what a set of
      young ruffians, regular cut-throats, we were, but yet we were magnanimous,
      you know! There weren’t any boys like you in my day, they were all
      great hulking fellows, great strapping louts, one taller than another. For
      instance, in our third class, there was Mamahin. My goodness, he was a
      solid chap! You know, a regular maypole, seven feet high. When he moved,
      the floor shook; when he brought his great fist down on your back, he
      would knock the breath out of your body! Not only we boys, but even the
      teachers were afraid of him. So this Mamahin used to . . .”

 Pelageya Ivanovna’s footsteps are heard through the door. Pavel
      Vassilitch winks towards the door and says:

 “There’s mother coming. Let’s get to work. Well, so you
      see, my boy,” he says, raising his voice. “This fraction has
      to be multiplied by that one. Well, and to do that you have to take the
      numerator of the first fraction. . .”

 “Come to tea!” cries Pelageya Ivanovna. Pavel Vassilitch and
      his son abandon arithmetic and go in to tea. Pelageya Ivanovna is already
      sitting at the table with an aunt who never speaks, another aunt who is
      deaf and dumb, and Granny Markovna, a midwife who had helped Styopa into
      the world. The samovar is hissing and puffing out steam which throws
      flickering shadows on the ceiling. The cats come in from the entry sleepy
      and melancholy with their tails in the air. . . .

 “Have some jam with your tea, Markovna,” says Pelageya
      Ivanovna, addressing the midwife. “To-morrow the great fast begins.
      Eat well to-day.”

 Markovna takes a heaped spoonful of jam hesitatingly as though it were a
      powder, raises it to her lips, and with a sidelong look at Pavel
      Vassilitch, eats it; at once her face is overspread with a sweet smile, as
      sweet as the jam itself.

 “The jam is particularly good,” she says. “Did you make
      it yourself, Pelageya Ivanovna, ma’am?”

 “Yes. Who else is there to do it? I do everything myself.
      Styopotchka, have I given you your tea too weak? Ah, you have drunk it
      already. Pass your cup, my angel; let me give you some more.”

 “So this Mamahin, my boy, could not bear the French master,”
      Pavel Vassilitch goes on, addressing his son. “‘I am a
      nobleman,’ he used to shout, ‘and I won’t allow a
      Frenchman to lord it over me! We beat the French in 1812!’ Well, of
      course they used to thrash him for it . . . thrash him dre-ead-fully, and
      sometimes when he saw they were meaning to thrash him, he would jump out
      of window, and off he would go! Then for five or six days afterwards he
      would not show himself at the school. His mother would come to the
      head-master and beg him for God’s sake: ‘Be so kind, sir, as
      to find my Mishka, and flog him, the rascal!’ And the head-master
      would say to her: ‘Upon my word, madam, our five porters aren’t
      a match for him!’”

 “Good heavens, to think of such ruffians being born,” whispers
      Pelageya Ivanovna, looking at her husband in horror. “What a trial
      for the poor mother!”

 A silence follows. Styopa yawns loudly, and scrutinises the Chinaman on
      the tea-caddy whom he has seen a thousand times already. Markovna and the
      two aunts sip tea carefully out of their saucers. The air is still and
      stifling from the stove. . . . Faces and gestures betray the sloth and
      repletion that comes when the stomach is full, and yet one must go on
      eating. The samovar, the cups, and the table-cloth are cleared away, but
      still the family sits on at the table. . . . Pelageya Ivanovna is
      continually jumping up and, with an expression of alarm on her face,
      running off into the kitchen, to talk to the cook about the supper. The
      two aunts go on sitting in the same position immovably, with their arms
      folded across their bosoms and doze, staring with their pewtery little
      eyes at the lamp. Markovna hiccups every minute and asks:

 “Why is it I have the hiccups? I don’t think I have eaten
      anything to account for it . . . nor drunk anything either. . . . Hic!”

 Pavel Vassilitch and Styopa sit side by side, with their heads touching,
      and, bending over the table, examine a volume of the “Neva”
      for 1878.

 “‘The monument of Leonardo da Vinci, facing the gallery of
      Victor Emmanuel at Milan.’ I say! . . . After the style of a
      triumphal arch. . . . A cavalier with his lady. . . . And there are little
      men in the distance. . . .”

 “That little man is like a schoolfellow of mine called Niskubin,”
      says Styopa.

 “Turn over. . . . ‘The proboscis of the common house-fly seen
      under the microscope.’ So that’s a proboscis! I say—a
      fly. Whatever would a bug look like under a microscope, my boy? Wouldn’t
      it be horrid!”

 The old-fashioned clock in the drawing-room does not strike, but coughs
      ten times huskily as though it had a cold. The cook, Anna, comes into the
      dining-room, and plumps down at the master’s feet.

 “Forgive me, for Christ’s sake, Pavel Vassilitch!” she
      says, getting up, flushed all over.

 “You forgive me, too, for Christ’s sake,” Pavel
      Vassilitch responds unconcernedly.

 In the same manner, Anna goes up to the other members of the family,
      plumps down at their feet, and begs forgiveness. She only misses out
      Markovna to whom, not being one of the gentry, she does not feel it
      necessary to bow down.

 Another half-hour passes in stillness and tranquillity. The “Neva”
      is by now lying on the sofa, and Pavel Vassilitch, holding up his finger,
      repeats by heart some Latin verses he has learned in his childhood. Styopa
      stares at the finger with the wedding ring, listens to the unintelligible
      words, and dozes; he rubs his eyelids with his fists, and they shut all
      the tighter.

 “I am going to bed . . .” he says, stretching and yawning.

 “What, to bed?” says Pelageya Ivanovna. “What about
      supper before the fast?”

 “I don’t want any.”

 “Are you crazy?” says his mother in alarm. “How can you
      go without your supper before the fast? You’ll have nothing but
      Lenten food all through the fast!”

 Pavel Vassilitch is scared too.

 “Yes, yes, my boy,” he says. “For seven weeks mother
      will give you nothing but Lenten food. You can’t miss the last
      supper before the fast.”

 “Oh dear, I am sleepy,” says Styopa peevishly.

 “Since that is how it is, lay the supper quickly,” Pavel
      Vassilitch cries in a fluster. “Anna, why are you sitting there,
      silly? Make haste and lay the table.”

 Pelageya Ivanovna clasps her hands and runs into the kitchen with an
      expression as though the house were on fire.

 “Make haste, make haste,” is heard all over the house. “Styopotchka
      is sleepy. Anna! Oh dear me, what is one to do? Make haste.”

 Five minutes later the table is laid. Again the cats, arching their
      spines, and stretching themselves with their tails in the air, come into
      the dining-room. . . . The family begin supper. . . . No one is hungry,
      everyone’s stomach is overfull, but yet they must eat.