SIMON'S PAPA

 Noon had just struck. The school door opened and the youngsters darted
      out, jostling each other in their haste to get out quickly. But instead of
      promptly dispersing and going home to dinner as usual, they stopped a few
      paces off, broke up into knots, and began whispering.

 The fact was that, that morning, Simon, the son of La Blanchotte, had, for
      the first time, attended school.

 They had all of them in their families heard talk of La Blanchotte; and,
      although in public she was welcome enough, the mothers among themselves
      treated her with a somewhat disdainful compassion, which the children had
      imitated without in the least knowing why.

 As for Simon himself, they did not know him, for he never went out, and
      did not run about with them in the streets of the village, or along the
      banks of the river. And they did not care for him; so it was with a
      certain delight, mingled with considerable astonishment, that they met and
      repeated to each other what had been said by a lad of fourteen or fifteen
      who appeared to know all about it, so sagaciously did he wink. “You
      know—Simon—well, he has no papa.”

 Just then La Blanchotte's son appeared in the doorway of the school.

 He was seven or eight years old, rather pale, very neat, with a timid and
      almost awkward manner.

 He was starting home to his mother's house when the groups of his
      schoolmates, whispering and watching him with the mischievous and
      heartless eyes of children bent upon playing a nasty trick, gradually
      closed in around him and ended by surrounding him altogether. There he
      stood in their midst, surprised and embarrassed, not understanding what
      they were going to do with him. But the lad who had brought the news,
      puffed up with the success he had met with already, demanded:

 “What is your name, you?”

 He answered: “Simon.”

 “Simon what?” retorted the other.

 The child, altogether bewildered, repeated: “Simon.”

 The lad shouted at him: “One is named Simon something—that is
      not a name—Simon indeed.”

 The child, on the brink of tears, replied for the third time:

 “My name is Simon.”

 The urchins began to laugh. The triumphant tormentor cried: “You can
      see plainly that he has no papa.”

 A deep silence ensued. The children were dumfounded by this extraordinary,
      impossible, monstrous thing—a boy who had not a papa; they looked
      upon him as a phenomenon, an unnatural being, and they felt that hitherto
      inexplicable contempt of their mothers for La Blanchotte growing upon
      them. As for Simon, he had leaned against a tree to avoid falling, and he
      remained as if prostrated by an irreparable disaster. He sought to
      explain, but could think of nothing-to say to refute this horrible charge
      that he had no papa. At last he shouted at them quite recklessly: “Yes,
      I have one.”

 “Where is he?” demanded the boy.

 Simon was silent, he did not know. The children roared, tremendously
      excited; and those country boys, little more than animals, experienced
      that cruel craving which prompts the fowls of a farmyard to destroy one of
      their number as soon as it is wounded. Simon suddenly espied a little
      neighbor, the son of a widow, whom he had seen, as he himself was to be
      seen, always alone with his mother.

 “And no more have you,” he said; “no more have you a
      papa.”

 “Yes,” replied the other, “I have one.”

 “Where is he?” rejoined Simon.

 “He is dead,” declared the brat, with superb dignity; “he
      is in the cemetery, is my papa.”

 A murmur of approval rose among the little wretches as if this fact of
      possessing a papa dead in a cemetery had caused their comrade to grow big
      enough to crush the other one who had no papa at all. And these boys,
      whose fathers were for the most part bad men, drunkards, thieves, and who
      beat their wives, jostled each other to press closer and closer, as though
      they, the legitimate ones, would smother by their pressure one who was
      illegitimate.

 The boy who chanced to be next Simon suddenly put his tongue out at him
      with a mocking air and shouted at him:

 “No papa! No papa!”

 Simon seized him by the hair with both hands and set to work to disable
      his legs with kicks, while he bit his cheek ferociously. A tremendous
      struggle ensued between the two combatants, and Simon found himself
      beaten, torn, bruised, rolled on the ground in the midst of the ring of
      applauding schoolboys. As he arose, mechanically brushing with his hand
      his little blouse all covered with dust, some one shouted at him:

 “Go and tell your papa.”

 Then he felt a great sinking at his heart. They were stronger than he was,
      they had beaten him, and he had no answer to give them, for he knew well
      that it was true that he had no papa. Full of pride, he attempted for some
      moments to struggle against the tears which were choking him. He had a
      feeling of suffocation, and then without any sound he commenced to weep,
      with great shaking sobs. A ferocious joy broke out among his enemies, and,
      with one accord, just like savages in their fearful festivals, they took
      each other by the hand and danced round him in a circle, repeating as a
      refrain:

 “No papa! No papa!”

 But suddenly Simon ceased sobbing. He became ferocious. There were stones
      under his feet; he picked them up and with all his strength hurled them at
      his tormentors. Two or three were struck and rushed off yelling, and so
      formidable did he appear that the rest became panic-stricken. Cowards, as
      the mob always is in presence of an exasperated man, they broke up and
      fled. Left alone, the little fellow without a father set off running
      toward the fields, for a recollection had been awakened in him which
      determined his soul to a great resolve. He made up his mind to drown
      himself in the river.

 He remembered, in fact, that eight days before, a poor devil who begged
      for his livelihood had thrown himself into the water because he had no
      more money. Simon had been there when they fished him out again; and the
      wretched man, who usually seemed to him so miserable, and ugly, had then
      struck him as being so peaceful with his pale cheeks, his long drenched
      beard, and his open eyes full of calm. The bystanders had said:

 “He is dead.”

 And some one had said:

 “He is quite happy now.”

 And Simon wished to drown himself also, because he had no father, just
      like the wretched being who had no money.

 He reached the water and watched it flowing. Some fish were sporting
      briskly in the clear stream and occasionally made a little bound and
      caught the flies flying on the surface. He stopped crying in order to
      watch them, for their maneuvers interested him greatly. But, at intervals,
      as in a tempest intervals of calm alternate suddenly with tremendous gusts
      of wind, which snap off the trees and then lose themselves in the horizon,
      this thought would return to him with intense pain:

 “I am going to drown myself because I have no papa.”

 It was very warm, fine weather. The pleasant sunshine warmed the grass.
      The water shone like a mirror. And Simon enjoyed some minutes of
      happiness, of that languor which follows weeping, and felt inclined to
      fall asleep there upon the grass in the warm sunshine.

 A little green frog leaped from under his feet. He endeavored to catch it.
      It escaped him. He followed it and lost it three times in succession. At
      last he caught it by one of its hind legs and began to laugh as he saw the
      efforts the creature made to escape. It gathered itself up on its hind
      legs and then with a violent spring suddenly stretched them out as stiff
      as two bars; while it beat the air with its front legs as though they were
      hands, its round eyes staring in their circle of yellow. It reminded him
      of a toy made of straight slips of wood nailed zigzag one on the other;
      which by a similar movement regulated the movements of the little soldiers
      fastened thereon. Then he thought of his home, and then of his mother,
      and, overcome by sorrow, he again began to weep. A shiver passed over him.
      He knelt down and said his prayers as before going to bed. But he was
      unable to finish them, for tumultuous, violent sobs shook his whole frame.
      He no longer thought, he no longer saw anything around him, and was wholly
      absorbed in crying.

 Suddenly a heavy hand was placed upon his shoulder, and a rough voice
      asked him:

 “What is it that causes you so much grief, my little man?”

 Simon turned round. A tall workman with a beard and black curly hair was
      staring at him good-naturedly. He answered with his eyes and throat full
      of tears:

 “They beat me—because—I—I have no—papa—no
      papa.”

 “What!” said the man, smiling; “why, everybody has one.”

 The child answered painfully amid his spasms of grief:

 “But I—I—I have none.”

 Then the workman became serious. He had recognized La Blanchotte's son,
      and, although himself a new arrival in the neighborhood, he had a vague
      idea of her history.

 “Well,” said he, “console yourself, my boy, and come
      with me home to your mother. They will give you—a papa.”

 And so they started on the way, the big fellow holding the little fellow
      by the hand, and the man smiled, for he was not sorry to see this
      Blanchotte, who was, it was said, one of the prettiest girls of the
      countryside, and, perhaps, he was saying to himself, at the bottom of his
      heart, that a lass who had erred might very well err again.

 They arrived in front of a very neat little white house.

 “There it is,” exclaimed the child, and he cried, “Mamma!”

 A woman appeared, and the workman instantly left off smiling, for he saw
      at once that there was no fooling to be done with the tall pale girl who
      stood austerely at her door as though to defend from one man the threshold
      of that house where she had already been betrayed by another. Intimidated,
      his cap in his hand, he stammered out:

 “See, madame, I have brought you back your little boy who had lost
      himself near the river.”

 But Simon flung his arms about his mother's neck and told her, as he again
      began to cry:

 “No, mamma, I wished to drown myself, because the others had beaten
      me —had beaten me—because I have no papa.”

 A burning redness covered the young woman's cheeks; and, hurt to the
      quick, she embraced her child passionately, while the tears coursed down
      her face. The man, much moved, stood there, not knowing how to get away.

 But Simon suddenly ran to him and said:

 “Will you be my papa?”

 A deep silence ensued. La Blanchotte, dumb and tortured with shame, leaned
      herself against the wall, both her hands upon her heart. The child, seeing
      that no answer was made him, replied:

 “If you will not, I shall go back and drown myself.”

 The workman took the matter as a jest and answered, laughing:

 “Why, yes, certainly I will.”

 “What is your name,” went on the child, “so that I may
      tell the others when they wish to know your name?”

 “Philip,” answered the man:

 Simon was silent a moment so that he might get the name well into his
      head; then he stretched out his arms, quite consoled, as he said:

 “Well, then, Philip, you are my papa.”

 The workman, lifting him from the ground, kissed him hastily on both
      cheeks, and then walked away very quickly with great strides. When the
      child returned to school next day he was received with a spiteful laugh,
      and at the end of school, when the lads were on the point of recommencing,
      Simon threw these words at their heads as he would have done a stone:
      “He is named Philip, my papa.”

 Yells of delight burst out from all sides.

 “Philip who? Philip what? What on earth is Philip? Where did you
      pick up your Philip?”

 Simon answered nothing; and, immovable in his faith, he defied them with
      his eye, ready to be martyred rather than fly before them. The school
      master came to his rescue and he returned home to his mother.

 During three months, the tall workman, Philip, frequently passed by La
      Blanchotte's house, and sometimes he made bold to speak to her when he saw
      her sewing near the window. She answered him civilly, always sedately,
      never joking with him, nor permitting him to enter her house.
      Notwithstanding, being, like all men, a bit of a coxcomb, he imagined that
      she was often rosier than usual when she chatted with him.

 But a lost reputation is so difficult to regain and always remains so
      fragile that, in spite of the shy reserve of La Blanchotte, they already
      gossiped in the neighborhood.

 As for Simon he loved his new papa very much, and walked with him nearly
      every evening when the day's work was done. He went regularly to school,
      and mixed with great dignity with his schoolfellows without ever answering
      them back.

 One day, however, the lad who had first attacked him said to him:

 “You have lied. You have not a papa named Philip.”

 “Why do you say that?” demanded Simon, much disturbed.

 The youth rubbed his hands. He replied:

 “Because if you had one he would be your mamma's husband.”

 Simon was confused by the truth of this reasoning; nevertheless, he
      retorted:

 “He is my papa, all the same.”

 “That can very well be,” exclaimed the urchin with a sneer,
      “but that is not being your papa altogether.”

 La Blanchotte's little one bowed his head and went off dreaming in the
      direction of the forge belonging to old Loizon, where Philip worked. This
      forge was as though buried beneath trees. It was very dark there; the red
      glare of a formidable furnace alone lit up with great flashes five
      blacksmiths; who hammered upon their anvils with a terrible din. They were
      standing enveloped in flame, like demons, their eyes fixed on the red-hot
      iron they were pounding; and their dull ideas rose and fell with their
      hammers.

 Simon entered without being noticed, and went quietly to pluck his friend
      by the sleeve. The latter turned round. All at once the work came to a
      standstill, and all the men looked on, very attentive. Then, in the midst
      of this unaccustomed silence, rose the slender pipe of Simon:

 “Say, Philip, the Michaude boy told me just now that you were not
      altogether my papa.”

 “Why not?” asked the blacksmith,

 The child replied with all innocence:

 “Because you are not my mamma's husband.”

 No one laughed. Philip remained standing, leaning his forehead upon the
      back of his great hands, which supported the handle of his hammer standing
      upright upon the anvil. He mused. His four companions watched him, and
      Simon, a tiny mite among these giants, anxiously waited. Suddenly, one of
      the smiths, answering to the sentiment of all, said to Philip:

 “La Blanchotte is a good, honest girl, and upright and steady in
      spite of her misfortune, and would make a worthy wife for an honest man.”

 “That is true,” remarked the three others.

 The smith continued:

 “Is it the girl's fault if she went wrong? She had been promised
      marriage; and I know more than one who is much respected to-day, and who
      sinned every bit as much.”

 “That is true,” responded the three men in chorus.

 He resumed:

 “How hard she has toiled, poor thing, to bring up her child all
      alone, and how she has wept all these years she has never gone out except
      to church, God only knows.”

 “This is also true,” said the others.

 Then nothing was heard but the bellows which fanned the fire of the
      furnace. Philip hastily bent himself down to Simon:

 “Go and tell your mother that I am coming to speak to her this
      evening.” Then he pushed the child out by the shoulders. He returned
      to his work, and with a single blow the five hammers again fell upon their
      anvils. Thus they wrought the iron until nightfall, strong, powerful,
      happy, like contented hammers. But just as the great bell of a cathedral
      resounds upon feast days above the jingling of the other bells, so
      Philip's hammer, sounding above the rest, clanged second after second with
      a deafening uproar. And he stood amid the flying sparks plying his trade
      vigorously.

 The sky was full of stars as he knocked at La Blanchotte's door. He had on
      his Sunday blouse, a clean shirt, and his beard was trimmed. The young
      woman showed herself upon the threshold, and said in a grieved tone:

 “It is ill to come thus when night has fallen, Mr. Philip.”

 He wished to answer, but stammered and stood confused before her.

 She resumed:

 “You understand, do you not, that it will not do for me to be talked
      about again.”

 “What does that matter to me, if you will be my wife!”

 No voice replied to him, but he believed that he heard in the shadow of
      the room the sound of a falling body. He entered quickly; and Simon, who
      had gone to bed, distinguished the sound of a kiss and some words that his
      mother murmured softly. Then, all at once, he found himself lifted up by
      the hands of his friend, who, holding him at the length of his herculean
      arms, exclaimed:

 “You will tell them, your schoolmates, that your papa is Philip
      Remy, the blacksmith, and that he will pull the ears of all who do you any
      harm.”

 On the morrow, when the school was full and lessons were about to begin,
      little Simon stood up, quite pale with trembling lips:

 “My papa,” said he in a clear voice, “is Philip Remy,
      the blacksmith, and he has promised to pull the ears of all who does me
      any harm.”

 This time no one laughed, for he was very well known, was Philip Remy, the
      blacksmith, and was a papa of whom any one in the world would have been
      proud.

  

  









 ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 12.

 GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others

  

  









 VOLUME XII.