SLEEPY
    

NIGHT. Varka, the
      little nurse, a girl of thirteen, is rocking the cradle in which the baby
      is lying, and humming hardly audibly:
    

                “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,
                 While I sing a song for thee.”
 

      A little green lamp is burning before the ikon; there is a string
      stretched from one end of the room to the other, on which baby-clothes and
      a pair of big black trousers are hanging. There is a big patch of green on
      the ceiling from the ikon lamp, and the baby-clothes and the trousers
      throw long shadows on the stove, on the cradle, and on Varka. . . . When
      the lamp begins to flicker, the green patch and the shadows come to life,
      and are set in motion, as though by the wind. It is stuffy. There is a
      smell of cabbage soup, and of the inside of a boot-shop.
    

      The baby’s crying. For a long while he has been hoarse and exhausted
      with crying; but he still goes on screaming, and there is no knowing when
      he will stop. And Varka is sleepy. Her eyes are glued together, her head
      droops, her neck aches. She cannot move her eyelids or her lips, and she
      feels as though her face is dried and wooden, as though her head has
      become as small as the head of a pin.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,” she hums, “while I cook the
      groats for thee. . . .”
    

      A cricket is churring in the stove. Through the door in the next room the
      master and the apprentice Afanasy are snoring. . . . The cradle creaks
      plaintively, Varka murmurs—and it all blends into that soothing
      music of the night to which it is so sweet to listen, when one is lying in
      bed. Now that music is merely irritating and oppressive, because it goads
      her to sleep, and she must not sleep; if Varka—God forbid!—should
      fall asleep, her master and mistress would beat her.
    

      The lamp flickers. The patch of green and the shadows are set in motion,
      forcing themselves on Varka’s fixed, half-open eyes, and in her half
      slumbering brain are fashioned into misty visions. She sees dark clouds
      chasing one another over the sky, and screaming like the baby. But then
      the wind blows, the clouds are gone, and Varka sees a broad high road
      covered with liquid mud; along the high road stretch files of wagons,
      while people with wallets on their backs are trudging along and shadows
      flit backwards and forwards; on both sides she can see forests through the
      cold harsh mist. All at once the people with their wallets and their
      shadows fall on the ground in the liquid mud. “What is that for?”
      Varka asks. “To sleep, to sleep!” they answer her. And they
      fall sound asleep, and sleep sweetly, while crows and magpies sit on the
      telegraph wires, scream like the baby, and try to wake them.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee, and I will sing a song to thee,”
      murmurs Varka, and now she sees herself in a dark stuffy hut.
    

      Her dead father, Yefim Stepanov, is tossing from side to side on the
      floor. She does not see him, but she hears him moaning and rolling on the
      floor from pain. “His guts have burst,” as he says; the pain
      is so violent that he cannot utter a single word, and can only draw in his
      breath and clack his teeth like the rattling of a drum:
    

      “Boo—boo—boo—boo. . . .”
    

      Her mother, Pelageya, has run to the master’s house to say that
      Yefim is dying. She has been gone a long time, and ought to be back. Varka
      lies awake on the stove, and hears her father’s “boo—boo—boo.”
      And then she hears someone has driven up to the hut. It is a young doctor
      from the town, who has been sent from the big house where he is staying on
      a visit. The doctor comes into the hut; he cannot be seen in the darkness,
      but he can be heard coughing and rattling the door.
    

      “Light a candle,” he says.
    

      “Boo—boo—boo,” answers Yefim.
    

      Pelageya rushes to the stove and begins looking for the broken pot with
      the matches. A minute passes in silence. The doctor, feeling in his
      pocket, lights a match.
    

      “In a minute, sir, in a minute,” says Pelageya. She rushes out
      of the hut, and soon afterwards comes back with a bit of candle.
    

      Yefim’s cheeks are rosy and his eyes are shining, and there is a
      peculiar keenness in his glance, as though he were seeing right through
      the hut and the doctor.
    

      “Come, what is it? What are you thinking about?” says the
      doctor, bending down to him. “Aha! have you had this long?”
    

      “What? Dying, your honour, my hour has come. . . . I am not to stay
      among the living.”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense! We will cure you!”
    

      “That’s as you please, your honour, we humbly thank you, only
      we understand. . . . Since death has come, there it is.”
    

      The doctor spends a quarter of an hour over Yefim, then he gets up and
      says:
    

      “I can do nothing. You must go into the hospital, there they will
      operate on you. Go at once . . . You must go! It’s rather late, they
      will all be asleep in the hospital, but that doesn’t matter, I will
      give you a note. Do you hear?”
    

      “Kind sir, but what can he go in?” says Pelageya. “We
      have no horse.”
    

      “Never mind. I’ll ask your master, he’ll let you have a
      horse.”
    

      The doctor goes away, the candle goes out, and again there is the sound of
      “boo—boo—boo.” Half an hour later someone drives
      up to the hut. A cart has been sent to take Yefim to the hospital. He gets
      ready and goes. . . .
    

      But now it is a clear bright morning. Pelageya is not at home; she has
      gone to the hospital to find what is being done to Yefim. Somewhere there
      is a baby crying, and Varka hears someone singing with her own voice:
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee, I will sing a song to thee.”
    

      Pelageya comes back; she crosses herself and whispers:
    

      “They put him to rights in the night, but towards morning he gave up
      his soul to God. . . . The Kingdom of Heaven be his and peace everlasting.
      . . . They say he was taken too late. . . . He ought to have gone sooner.
      . . .”
    

      Varka goes out into the road and cries there, but all at once someone hits
      her on the back of her head so hard that her forehead knocks against a
      birch tree. She raises her eyes, and sees facing her, her master, the
      shoemaker.
    

      “What are you about, you scabby slut?” he says. “The
      child is crying, and you are asleep!”
    

      He gives her a sharp slap behind the ear, and she shakes her head, rocks
      the cradle, and murmurs her song. The green patch and the shadows from the
      trousers and the baby-clothes move up and down, nod to her, and soon take
      possession of her brain again. Again she sees the high road covered with
      liquid mud. The people with wallets on their backs and the shadows have
      lain down and are fast asleep. Looking at them, Varka has a passionate
      longing for sleep; she would lie down with enjoyment, but her mother
      Pelageya is walking beside her, hurrying her on. They are hastening
      together to the town to find situations.
    

      “Give alms, for Christ’s sake!” her mother begs of the
      people they meet. “Show us the Divine Mercy, kind-hearted
      gentlefolk!”
    

      “Give the baby here!” a familiar voice answers. “Give
      the baby here!” the same voice repeats, this time harshly and
      angrily. “Are you asleep, you wretched girl?”
    

      Varka jumps up, and looking round grasps what is the matter: there is no
      high road, no Pelageya, no people meeting them, there is only her
      mistress, who has come to feed the baby, and is standing in the middle of
      the room. While the stout, broad-shouldered woman nurses the child and
      soothes it, Varka stands looking at her and waiting till she has done. And
      outside the windows the air is already turning blue, the shadows and the
      green patch on the ceiling are visibly growing pale, it will soon be
      morning.
    

      “Take him,” says her mistress, buttoning up her chemise over
      her bosom; “he is crying. He must be bewitched.”
    

      Varka takes the baby, puts him in the cradle and begins rocking it again.
      The green patch and the shadows gradually disappear, and now there is
      nothing to force itself on her eyes and cloud her brain. But she is as
      sleepy as before, fearfully sleepy! Varka lays her head on the edge of the
      cradle, and rocks her whole body to overcome her sleepiness, but yet her
      eyes are glued together, and her head is heavy.
    

      “Varka, heat the stove!” she hears the master’s voice
      through the door.
    

      So it is time to get up and set to work. Varka leaves the cradle, and runs
      to the shed for firewood. She is glad. When one moves and runs about, one
      is not so sleepy as when one is sitting down. She brings the wood, heats
      the stove, and feels that her wooden face is getting supple again, and
      that her thoughts are growing clearer.
    

      “Varka, set the samovar!” shouts her mistress.
    

      Varka splits a piece of wood, but has scarcely time to light the splinters
      and put them in the samovar, when she hears a fresh order:
    

      “Varka, clean the master’s goloshes!”
    

      She sits down on the floor, cleans the goloshes, and thinks how nice it
      would be to put her head into a big deep golosh, and have a little nap in
      it. . . . And all at once the golosh grows, swells, fills up the whole
      room. Varka drops the brush, but at once shakes her head, opens her eyes
      wide, and tries to look at things so that they may not grow big and move
      before her eyes.
    

      “Varka, wash the steps outside; I am ashamed for the customers to
      see them!”
    

      Varka washes the steps, sweeps and dusts the rooms, then heats another
      stove and runs to the shop. There is a great deal of work: she hasn’t
      one minute free.
    

      But nothing is so hard as standing in the same place at the kitchen table
      peeling potatoes. Her head droops over the table, the potatoes dance
      before her eyes, the knife tumbles out of her hand while her fat, angry
      mistress is moving about near her with her sleeves tucked up, talking so
      loud that it makes a ringing in Varka’s ears. It is agonising, too,
      to wait at dinner, to wash, to sew, there are minutes when she longs to
      flop on to the floor regardless of everything, and to sleep.
    

      The day passes. Seeing the windows getting dark, Varka presses her temples
      that feel as though they were made of wood, and smiles, though she does
      not know why. The dusk of evening caresses her eyes that will hardly keep
      open, and promises her sound sleep soon. In the evening visitors come.
    

      “Varka, set the samovar!” shouts her mistress. The samovar is
      a little one, and before the visitors have drunk all the tea they want,
      she has to heat it five times. After tea Varka stands for a whole hour on
      the same spot, looking at the visitors, and waiting for orders.
    

      “Varka, run and buy three bottles of beer!”
    

      She starts off, and tries to run as quickly as she can, to drive away
      sleep.
    

      “Varka, fetch some vodka! Varka, where’s the corkscrew? Varka,
      clean a herring!”
    

      But now, at last, the visitors have gone; the lights are put out, the
      master and mistress go to bed.
    

      “Varka, rock the baby!” she hears the last order.
    

      The cricket churrs in the stove; the green patch on the ceiling and the
      shadows from the trousers and the baby-clothes force themselves on Varka’s
      half-opened eyes again, wink at her and cloud her mind.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,” she murmurs, “and I will sing
      a song to thee.”
    

      And the baby screams, and is worn out with screaming. Again Varka sees the
      muddy high road, the people with wallets, her mother Pelageya, her father
      Yefim. She understands everything, she recognises everyone, but through
      her half sleep she cannot understand the force which binds her, hand and
      foot, weighs upon her, and prevents her from living. She looks round,
      searches for that force that she may escape from it, but she cannot find
      it. At last, tired to death, she does her very utmost, strains her eyes,
      looks up at the flickering green patch, and listening to the screaming,
      finds the foe who will not let her live.
    

      That foe is the baby.
    

      She laughs. It seems strange to her that she has failed to grasp such a
      simple thing before. The green patch, the shadows, and the cricket seem to
      laugh and wonder too.
    

      The hallucination takes possession of Varka. She gets up from her stool,
      and with a broad smile on her face and wide unbDlinking eyes, she walks up
      and down the room. She feels pleased and tickled at the thought that she
      will be rid directly of the baby that binds her hand and foot. . . . Kill
      the baby and then sleep, sleep, sleep. . . .
    

      Laughing and winking and shaking her fingers at the green patch, Varka
      steals up to the cradle and bends over the baby. When she has strangled
      him, she quickly lies down on the floor, laughs with delight that she can
      sleep, and in a minute is sleeping as sound as the dead.