[

123 ] 

‘SOJUR JIM.’

 Brightly

blazed the watch-fires into the still night air,
brightly from within the circle formed by them gleamed
thousands of sparkling eyes, and fell on the ear a low,
continuous sound, like the soft distant murmur of some
summer sea on a shingly beach, as twelve thousand
sheep peacefully chewed their cuds after the long day’s
travel.

 The weather was close and sultry. So, feeling indisposed
to sleep, I had left my hot tent and was walking
round the whitish, indistinct mass of recumbent figures,
when I nearly stumbled against the watchman, who, as
one of the fires flared up, I saw was the eccentric
individual known in the camp by the nickname of ‘Sojur
Jim’; and, in pursuance of an idea I had long borne
in mind, first assuring myself that all was right with my
fleecy charges, I lit my pipe, stretched myself out on
the short, thick grass and sand, and said, whilst looking
at my watch,—

 ‘Now, Jim, spin us a yarn that will help to pass
away the time.’

 But my companion is well-deserving of a more particular
description. ‘Sojur Jim’ was the only name by
which he was called, and this he had gained by an [

124 ]

extraordinary mania he possessed for destroying those
small terrors of the Australian bush, familiar to all
dwellers therein as ‘Soldier’ or ‘Bull-dog’ ants; insects
fierce, intractable and venomous. These, then, seemed
objects of especial aversion to Jim; and many a time,
whilst travelling along, would one of the men sing out,
‘Jim, Jim, sojurs!’ The effect was electrical; Jim,
leaving his flock, would bound away towards the nest,
and, dexterously using the long stick, flattened at both
ends in rude shovel shape, which was his constant
companion, he would furiously, regardless of innumerable
stings, uproot and turn over the ‘sojurs’’ stronghold,
and, having exposed its inmost recesses, complete
the work of destruction by lighting a great fire upon it,
and all this he would do with a set stern expression on
his grim face, as of one who avenges never-to-be-forgiven
or forgotten injuries.

 He was indeed a remarkable looking man, strong
and athletic, and, in spite of his snow-white hair, probably
not more than fifty years of age. Part of his
nose, the lobes and cartilages of his ears, and one eye
were wanting, whilst the rest of his face was scarred
and seamed as if at one time a cross-cut saw had been
roughly drawn to and fro over it. And as I watched
him sitting there on a fallen log, the flickering blaze
playing fitfully on the white hair and corrugated, mutilated
features, I felt more than ever sure that the man
had a story well worth the hearing could he but be
induced to tell it.

 Amongst his fellows in the camp he was taciturn and [

125 ]

morose, never smiling, speaking rarely, apparently always
lost in his own gloomy reflections. My request, therefore,
was made with but faint hopes of success; but, to
my surprise, after a few minutes silence, he replied,—

 ‘Very well, I’ll tell you a story. I don’t often tell it;
but I will to-night. If at times you feel disinclined to
believe it you have only to look at my face. I’m going
now to tell you how I got all these pretty lumps and
scars and ridges, and how I partly paid the men who
made me what I am. “Sojur Jim” they call me, and
think I am mad. God knows, I fancy so myself sometimes.
Well,’ he went on, in language at times rude
and unpolished, at others showing signs of more than
average education, ‘Did you ever hear of Captain
Jakes?’

 ‘Of course,’ I answered, for the notoriously cruel
bushranger had, after his own fashion, helped to make
minor Australian history.

 ‘Yes,’ muttered Jim abstractedly, ‘he’s accounted
for. So is his mate—the one who laughed the loudest
of any. But there were three of them, and there’s still
another left somewhere. Not dead yet!’ he suddenly
exclaimed in a loud voice. ‘Surely not! My God, no!
After all these years of ceaseless search! That would
be too hard!’ And here he stood up and gazed
excitedly into the outer darkness.

 ‘But the story, Jim,’ I ventured to remark, after a long
pause.

 ‘Right you are,’ he replied, as he again sat down, and
calmly resumed. ‘Well, it was the year of the big rush, [

126 ]

the first one, to the Ovens. I was a strapping young
fellow then, with all my life hopeful and bright before
me, as I left the old mother and the girl I loved to try
my luck on the diggings. Three years went by before I
thought of returning to the little Victorian township on
the Avoca, where we had long been settled; but then
I struck it pretty rich, and made up my mind to go back
and marry, and settle down alongside the old farm; for
a pair of loving hearts were, I knew, growing weary of
waiting for the return of the wanderer.

 ‘Like a fool, however, instead of sending down my
last lot of gold by the escort, I all of a sudden got
impatient, and, packing it in my saddle-bags, along with
a tidy parcel of notes and sovereigns, I set off alone.
The third night out I camped on a good-sized creek,
hobbled my horses, and after planting my saddle-bags in TN: original lacks "in" a hollow log, I started to boil the billy for supper.
Presently, up rides three chaps, and, before I could
get to my swag, I was covered by as many revolvers;
while one of the men says, “Come along, now, hand
over the metal. We know you’ve got it, and if you
don’t give it quiet, why, we’ll take it rough.”

 ‘“You’ve got hold of the wrong party, this time,
mates,” says I, as cool as I could. “I’m on the
wallaby, looking for shearing, and, worse luck, hav’n’t
got no gold.”

 ‘“Gammon,” says the first speaker. “Turn his swag
over, mates.”

 ‘Well, they found nothing, of course. Then they
searched all over the bush round about, and one fellow [

127 ]

actually puts his hand up the hollow of the log in which
lay hid my treasure; and I thought it was all up with
it, when he lets a yell out of him and starts cutting
all sorts of capers, with half-a-dozen big sojurs hanging
to his fingers.

 ‘Jakes (for he was the leader of the gang) now got
real savage, and putting a pistol to my head, swore
that he would blow my brains out unless I told where
the gold was. Well, I wouldn’t let on, for I thought
they were trying to bounce me, and that if I held out
I might get clear off, so I still stuck to it that they’d
mistaken their man.

 ‘Seeing I was pretty firm, they drew off for a while,
and, after a short talk, they began to laugh like madmen;
and one, taking a tomahawk, cut down a couple of
saplings, whilst another gets ready some stout cord;
and Jakes himself goes poking about in the saltbush
as if looking for something he’d lost. Before this they
had tied my arms and legs together with saddle-straps
and greenhide thongs; and there I lay, quite helpless,
wondering greatly what they were up to.

 ‘Presently the three came up, and tying me tightly
to the saplings—one along my back, and one cross-ways—they
carried me away a short distance to where
I had noticed Jakes searching around, and then laid
me down face uppermost, partly stripping me at the
same time. I lay there quietly enough, puzzling my
brains to try and guess what it was all about, and
those three devils standing laughing fit to split their
sides.

 [

128 ] 

‘“Tell us now, will you,” said they, “where that gold’s
planted? How does your bed feel? Are you warm
enough?” and such like chaff, till I began to think they
must have gone suddenly cranky, for I felt nothing at
all. Perceiving that was the case, one of them took a
stick and thrust it under me into the ground; and then—oh,
God! it was awful!’

 Here Sojur Jim paused suddenly, and a baleful light
gleamed from that solitary bright eye of his, whilst a
spasm shook his whole frame, and his scarred features
were contorted as if once more undergoing the agonies
of that terrible torture.

 The wind sighed with an eerie sound through the
tall forest trees around us; the cry of some night-bird
came mournfully through the darkness, whilst black
clouds flitted across the young moon, filling the sombre
Australian glade with weird shadows—making the scene,
all at once, dismally in unison with the story, as with
a shiver I stirred the fire, and patiently waited for its
narrator to go on.

 ‘Yes,’ he continued at length, ‘I dropped down to it
quickly enough then. I was tied on to a sojur-ants’
nest, and they swarmed about me in thousands—into
my nose, ears, eyes, mouth, everywhere—sting, sting,
sting, and tear, tear, tear, till I shrieked and yelled for
mercy. TN: original has superfluous closing quote

 ‘“Tell us where the gold is planted,” said one of the
laughing fiends—I heard him laugh again years afterward
over the same story—“and we’ll let you
go.”

 [

129 ] 

‘“Yes!” I screamed, “I’ll tell you. But for God
Almighty’s sake take me out of this!” “Not much,”
replied he. “Tell us first, and then you can jump into
the creek and give your little friends a drink.” “Look
in the big log,” I groaned at last. Then, one of them,
remembering the sojurs, gets a stick and fossicks about
till he felt the bags, when he shoves his arm up and
drags them out.

 ‘“A square thing, by G—d!” says Jakes, and turning
to me, he said, “Mate, you’ve given us a lot of trouble,
and as you look as if you were comfortably turned in for
the night, it would be a pity to disturb you. So long,
and pleasant dreams!” And, with that, away the three
of them rode, laughing loudly at my screams for mercy.
As you may think,’ went on Jim, ‘I was by this time
nearly raving mad with pain. Thousands of those
devil-ants were eating into my flesh, and me lying
there like a log. Hell! hell will never be as bad as
that was!

 ‘Six months afterward I came to my senses again.
It was a sunshiny spring morning, and I heard the
magpies whistling outside the old humpy on the Ovens,
as I tried to get up and go down to the claim, thinking
that I’d had the nightmare terrible bad. But when I
got off my bunk I fainted clean away on the floor, and
there my mates found me when they came home to
dinner. Good lads they were true men, who had
nursed me and tended me through all the long months
of fever and madness that had passed since the Escort,
for which I should have waited, had by the merest [

130 ]

chance come across me and sent me back again to die,
as everyone thought.

 ‘But,’ and here, for the first time, Jim’s voice faltered
and shook, ‘there was another and a gentler nurse who—God
bless her—helped me back to life; the little
girl who loved me came up—my mother was dead—and
would have kept her word to me, too, and taken my
half-eaten carcase into her keeping wholly, had I been
mean enough to let her do it. But that was more than I
could stand the thought of. So one morning I slipped
quietly away to begin my man-hunting; for I had vowed
a merciless retribution upon my undoers if I had to
track them the wide world over. That’s close on
fifteen years ago. I can account for two, and live on in
hopes of yet meeting with the third.

 ‘You’ve heard how Jakes pegged out?’ asked Jim
abruptly.

 ‘Yes,’ I answered, ‘Sergeant O’Brien shot him in the
Long Swamp.’

 ‘So most people think,’ was his reply. ‘But I know
who was first in at the end; and when, crouching up to
his neck in the mud and long reeds, with my fingers
grasping his throat, I think, as he turned his bloodshot
and protruding eyes on mine, I think, I say, that he
knew me again, all changed as I was. He never spoke,
though, and I let him die slowly, for I was sure that
the sergeant was a long way behind. I held him there,
I tell you, and watched him as he tried to blow the
bubbles of blood and froth from out his pale lips, and at
last I told him who I was, and how I had tracked him [

131 ]

down, and was now about to send his vile soul to perdition.
Then, as I heard the galloping tramp of the
trooper’s horse, I smothered him in the stagnant ooze
of that foul swamp. Truly a dog’s death, but one too
good for him! O’Brien, coming up soon afterward,
found the body, put a couple of pistol bullets into it,
and received the Government reward and promotion,
whilst I set off in search of the others.

 ‘One I came across four years afterwards on the
Adelaide side. I had taken a job of shepherding up
Port Augusta way, when, one night, who should come to
the hut but Number Two, the one who laughed the longest
and loudest of the three, as I lay in agony on the sojurs’
nest. I knew him in a minute and heartily welcomed
him to stop that night. “Just put those sheep in the
yard, matey,” I says, “while I make some bread for our
supper.”

 ‘Well, I makes two smallish johnnycakes, and we had
our tea. Then we starts smoking and yarning, and at
length I turned the talk on to ants, saying I couldn’t
keep nothing there because of them. With that he falls
to laughing, and, says he, “My word, mate, I could tell
you a yarn if I liked ’bout ants—sojurs—that’d make
you laugh for a week, only you see it ain’t always safe,
even in the bush, to talk among strangers.”

 ‘All of a sudden he turned as white as a sheet, and
drops off the stool, and twists and groans. Then he
sings out, “I’m going to die.”

 ‘You see,’ remarked Jim, with the cold impassiveness
which had, almost throughout, characterised his manner, [

132 ]

‘the strychnine in the johnnycake that had fallen to his
share was beginning to work him, and as I laughingly
reminded him of old times, and asked him to go on with
his story about the sojur ants, he also knew me, and
shrieked and prayed for the mercy that I had once so
unavailingly implored at his hands. He was very soon,
however, too far gone to say much. A few more
struggles and it was all over, and then I dragged the
dead carrion out of my hut and buried it eight feet deep
under the sheep-dung in the yard, where, likely enough, it
is yet. So much for Number Two!’ exclaimed Jim, as I
sat looking rather doubtfully at him. Not that I questioned
the truthfulness of his story—that was stamped
on every word he uttered—but that I began to think
him rather a dangerous kind of monomaniac to have in
a drover’s camp. ‘And now, sir,’ he went on presently,
‘you’ve had the story you asked me for, and if ever we
meet again after this trip, maybe I’ll have something to
tell you about Number Three; that business it is that
brought me down about these parts, for I heard he was
working at some of the stations on the river. And as
God made me!’ he exclaimed, with a subdued sort of
gloomy ferocity in his voice, ‘when we do meet,
he shall feel the vengeance of the man whose life
and love and fortune he helped to ruin so utterly.
I could pick him out of a thousand, with his great
nose all of a skew, and his one leg shorter than the
other.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 The watch-fires were glimmering dimly. The cool air [

133 ]

which heralds the Australian dawn was blowing, and the
sheep were moving silently out of their camp in long
strings as I rose to my feet. In the white tents all was
silence. Thanks to Sojur Jim, their occupants had
passed an undisturbed night. Absorbed in his gruesome
story—that dark tale of torture and retribution,
with just that one little trait of woman’s constancy and
devotion shining out like some bright star from a murky
sky—the time had slipped away unheeded. Sending
him to call the cook, I put the sheep together, wondering
mightily to myself, as the man, with his bent-down
head and slouching gait, moved away, whether he really
could be the same creature who through the silent
watches of the night had unfolded to my view such a
concentrated, tireless, and as yet unsatiated thirst for
revenge, such a fixed and relentless purpose of retaliation,
unweakened through the years, but burning freshly
and fiercely to-day, as, when with the scarcely healed
scars still smarting, disfigured, ruined, hopeless, forsaking
all, he went forth alone into the world to hunt down
his persecutors.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 A few days after Sojur Jim had related to me the
story told above, one evening, at dusk, a swagman
entered the camp and asked the cook for a piece of
meat and some bread. Instead of eating it at once with
the accompanying offered drink of tea, he turned away,
and, a few minutes later, we saw his fire burning brightly
a little further along the lagoon, the banks of which
formed our resting-place for the night. Evidently, as [

134 ]

the men remarked amongst themselves, our visitor was a
‘hatter.’

 Next morning, when Sojur Jim was called out to take
his flock, he was missing. His blankets and few belongings
still lay as he had arranged them in the tent
the night before, ready for turning in; and I at once
ordered a search to be made.

 It was of very short duration. Just in front of the
swagman’s fire, in the shallow water of the lagoon,
we found the two bodies. The stranger’s throat was
grasped by Jim’s fingers in a vice-like clutch, that, even
in death, we long strove in vain to sunder. When
parted at last, and we had washed the slimy mud from the
features of the dead traveller, a truly villainous countenance
was disclosed to view; the huge mouth, low,
retreating forehead, and heavy, thick-set jaws, all betokened
their owner to have belonged to the very lowest
order of humanity. TN: punctuation invisible But what struck me at once was
that the nose, which was of great size, had, at one time,
been knocked completely over to the left side of the
face, and as we straightened the body out, it could
plainly be seen that one leg was much shorter than its
fellow.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Was this, then, indeed ‘Number Three,’ and had
Sojur Jim’s vengeful quest, his vow of bitter retaliation,
ended at last? I believed so. But, as I gazed down
upon the poor, scarred dead clay of a wasted and ruined
life lying there, now so calm and still, all its fierce
desires and useless repinings, all its feverish passions [

135 ]

and longings for dread retribution at rest, forcibly came
to my mind the words of the sacred and solemn injunction—‘Vengeance
is Mine, saith the Lord; I will
repay.’