VI 

 

SUBHA

 When

the girl was given the name of Subhashini,
who could have guessed that she would prove dumb?
Her two elder sisters were Sukeshini and Suhasini,
and for the sake of her father named
his youngest girl Subhashini. She was called Subha
for short.

 Her two elder sisters had been married with the
usual cost and difficulty, and now the youngest
daughter lay like a silent weight upon the heart of
her parents. All the world seemed to think that,
because she did not speak, therefore she did not feel;
it discussed her future and its own anxiety freely
in her presence. She had understood from her
earliest childhood that God had sent her like a curse
to her father's house, so she withdrew herself from
ordinary people and tried to live apart. If only
they would all forget her she felt she could endure
it. But who can forget pain? Night and day her
parents' minds were aching on her account. Especially
her mother looked upon her as a deformity in herself. To a mother a daughter is a more
closely intimate part of herself than a son can be;
and a fault in her is a source of personal shame.
Banikantha, Subha's father, loved her rather better
than his other daughters; her mother regarded her
with aversion as a stain upon her own body.

 If Subha lacked speech, she did not lack a pair of
large dark eyes, shaded with long lashes; and her lips
trembled like a leaf in response to any thought that
rose in her mind.

 When we express our thought in words, the
medium is not found easily. There must be a
process of , which is often inexact, and
then we fall into error. But black eyes need no
translating; the mind itself throws a shadow upon
them. In them thought opens or shuts, shines forth
or goes out in darkness, hangs steadfast like the
setting moon or like the swift and restless lightning
illumines all quarters of the sky. They who from
birth have had no other speech than the trembling
of their lips learn a language of the eyes, endless in
expression, deep as the sea, clear as the heavens,
wherein play dawn and sunset, light and shadow.
The dumb have a lonely grandeur like Nature's own.
Wherefore the other children almost dreaded Subha
and never played with her. She was silent and companionless
as noontide.  The hamlet where she lived was Chandipur. Its
river, small for a river of Bengal, kept to its narrow
bounds like a daughter of the middle class. This
busy streak of water never overflowed its banks, but
went about its duties as though it were a member of
every family in the villages beside it. On either side
were houses and banks shaded with trees. So
stepping from her queenly throne, the river-goddess
became a garden deity of each home, and forgetful
of herself performed her task of endless benediction
with swift and cheerful foot.

 Banikantha's house looked out upon the stream.
Every hut and stack in the place could be seen by
the passing boatmen. I know not if amid these
signs of worldly wealth any one noticed the little
girl who, when her work was done, stole away to
the waterside and sat there. But here Nature fulfilled
her want of speech and spoke for her. The
murmur of the brook, the voice of the village folk,
the songs of the boatmen, the crying of the birds
and rustle of trees mingled and were one with the
trembling of her heart. They became one vast
wave of sound which beat upon her restless soul.
This murmur and movement of Nature were the
dumb girl's language; that speech of the dark eyes,
which the long lashes shaded, was the language of
the world about her. From the trees, where the cicalas chirped, to the quiet stars there was nothing
but signs and gestures, weeping and sighing. And in
the deep mid-noon, when the boatmen and fisher-folk
had gone to their dinner, when the villagers
slept and birds were still, when the ferry-boats were
idle, when the great busy world paused in its toil
and became suddenly a lonely, awful giant, then
beneath the vast impressive heavens there were only
dumb Nature and a dumb girl, sitting very silent,—one
under the spreading sunlight, the other where
a small tree cast its shadow.

 But Subha was not altogether without friends.
In the stall were two cows, Sarbbashi and Panguli.
They had never heard their names from her lips,
but they knew her footfall. Though she had no
words, she murmured lovingly and they understood
her gentle murmuring better than all speech. When
she fondled them or scolded or coaxed them, they
understood her better than men could do. Subha
would come to the shed and throw her arms round
Sarbbashi's neck; she would rub her cheek against
her friend's, and Panguli would turn her great kind
eyes and lick her face. The girl paid them three
regular visits every day and others that were irregular.
Whenever she heard any words that hurt
her, she would come to these dumb friends out of
due time. It was as though they guessed her anguish of spirit from her quiet look of sadness. Coming
close to her, they would rub their horns softly against
her arms, and in dumb, fashion try to comfort
her. Besides these two, there were goats and
a kitten; but Subha had not the same equality of
friendship with them, though they showed the same
attachment. Every time it got a chance, night or
day, the kitten would jump into her lap, and settle
down to slumber, and show its appreciation of an
aid to sleep as Subha drew her soft fingers over its
neck and back.

 Subha had a comrade also among the higher
animals, and it is hard to say what were the girl's
relations with him; for he could speak, and his gift
of speech left them without any common language.
He was the youngest boy of the Gosains, Pratap by
name, an idle fellow. After long effort, his parents
had abandoned the hope that he would ever make his
living. Now have this advantage, that,
though their own folk disapprove of them, they are
generally popular with every one else. Having no
work to chain them, they become public property.
Just as every town needs an open space where all
may breathe, so a village needs two or three gentlemen
of leisure, who can give time to all; then, if we
are lazy and want a companion, one is to hand.

 Pratap's chief ambition was to catch fish. He managed to waste a lot of time this way, and might
be seen almost any afternoon so employed. It was
thus most often that he met Subha. Whatever he
was about, he liked a companion; and, when one
is catching fish, a silent companion is best of all.
Pratap respected Subha for her , and, as
every one called her Subha, he showed his affection
by calling her Su. Subha used to sit beneath a
tamarind, and Pratap, a little distance off, would
cast his line. Pratap took with him a small allowance
of betel, and Subha prepared it for him. And
I think that, sitting and gazing a long while, she
desired ardently to bring some great help to Pratap,
to be of real aid, to prove by any means that she
was not a useless burden to the world. But there
was nothing to do. Then she turned to the Creator
in prayer for some rare power, that by an astonishing
miracle she might startle Pratap into exclaiming:
" I never dreamt our Su could have done
this!"

 Only think, if Subha had been a water nymph, she
might have risen slowly from the river, bringing
the gem of a snake's crown to the landing-place.
Then Pratap, leaving his paltry fishing, might dive
into the lower world, and see there, on a golden bed
in a palace of silver, whom else but dumb little
Su, Banikantha's child? Yes, our Su, the only daughter of the king of that shining city of jewels!
But that might not be, it was impossible. Not that
anything is really impossible, but Su had been born,
not into the royal house of Patalpur, but into
Banikantha's family, and she knew no means of
astonishing the Gosains' boy.

 Gradually she grew up. Gradually she began to
find herself. A new inexpressible consciousness like
a tide from the central places of the sea, when the
moon is full, swept through her. She saw herself,
questioned herself, but no answer came that she could
understand.

 Once upon a time, late on a night of full moon,
she slowly opened her door and peeped out timidly.
Nature, herself at full moon, like lonely Subha, was
looking down on the sleeping earth. Her strong
young life beat within her; joy and sadness filled her
being to its brim; she reached the limits even of her
own illimitable loneliness, nay, passed beyond them.
Her heart was heavy, and she could not speak. At
the skirts of this silent troubled Mother there stood
a silent troubled girl.

 The thought of her marriage filled her parents
with an anxious care. People blamed them, and
even talked of making them outcasts. Banikantha
was well off; they had fish-curry twice daily; and
consequently he did not lack enemies. Then the women interfered, and Bani went away for a few
days. Presently he returned and said: "We must
go to Calcutta."

 They got ready to go to this strange country.
Subha's heart was heavy with tears, like a mist-wrapt
dawn. With a vague fear that had been
gathering for days, she her father and
mother like a dumb animal. With her large eyes
wide open, she scanned their faces as though she
wished to learn something. But not a word did
they vouchsafe. One afternoon in the midst of all
this, as Pratap was fishing, he laughed: "So then,
Su, they have caught your bridegroom, and you are
going to be married! Mind you don't forget me
altogether!" Then he turned his mind again to his
fish. As a stricken doe looks in the hunter's face,
asking in silent agony: "What have I done to
you?" so Subha looked at Pratap. That day she
sat no longer beneath her tree. Banikantha, having
finished his nap, was smoking in his bedroom when
Subha dropped down at his feet and burst out weeping
as she gazed towards him. Banikantha tried to
comfort her, and his cheek grew wet with tears.

 It was settled that on the morrow they should go
to Calcutta. Subha went to the cow-shed to bid farewell
to her childhood's comrades. She fed them
with her hand; she clasped their necks; she looked into their faces, and tears fell fast from the eyes
which spoke for her. That night was the tenth of
the moon. Subha left her room, and flung herself
down on her grassy couch beside her dear river.
It was as if she threw her arms about Earth, her
strong silent mother, and tried to say: "Do not let
me leave you, mother. Put your arms about me, as
I have put mine about you, and hold me fast."

 One day in a house in Calcutta, Subha's mother
dressed her up with great care. She imprisoned
her hair, knotting it up in laces, she hung her about
with ornaments, and did her best to kill her natural
beauty. Subha's eyes filled with tears. Her
mother, fearing they would grow swollen with weeping,
scolded her harshly, but the tears the scolding. The bridegroom came with a friend
to inspect the bride. Her parents were with
anxiety and fear when they saw the god arrive to
select the beast for his sacrifice. Behind the stage,
the mother called her instructions aloud, and increased
her daughter's weeping twofold, before she
sent her into the examiner's presence. The great
man, after scanning her a long time, observed:
"Not so bad."

 He took special note of her tears, and thought
she must have a tender heart. He put it to her
credit in the account, arguing that the heart, which to-day was distressed at leaving her parents, would
presently prove a useful possession. Like the
oyster's pearls, the child's tears only increased her
value, and he made no other comment.

 The almanac was consulted, and the marriage took
place on an auspicious day. Having delivered over
their dumb girl into another's hands, Subha's parents
returned home. Thank God! Their caste in this
and their safety in the next world were assured!
The bridegroom's work lay in the west, and shortly
after the marriage he took his wife thither.

 In less than ten days every one knew that the
bride was dumb! At least, if any one did not, it
was not her fault, for she no one. Her
eyes told them everything, though no one understood
her. She looked on every hand, she found
no speech, she missed the faces, familiar from birth,
of those who had understood a dumb girl's language.
In her silent heart there sounded an endless, voiceless
weeping, which only the Searcher of Hearts
could hear.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . From the Latin "unus," meaning "one" and
"forma" meaning "form." Compare universe , unison , unite , formalism , formation , reform , deformed , deformity (the last word occurs in the next paragraph
of the story).

  . The Latin word meaning "to bring" has
two roots, viz. "fer" and "lat." This word is taken
from the second root. We have the two parallel series
of words in English: 

 transfer, refer, confer, differ, etc.



 translate, relate, collate, dilate, etc.

 . This is one of the few words in the English language
whose origin is doubtful. It probably comes
from the word to "pose" (which itself is a shortened
form of "oppose") meaning to set forward a difficult
problem.

 . An uncommon English word meaning a person
who is good for nothing. The word is derived from
the verb to "lose."

 . The Latin word "tacitus," means "quiet"
or "silent." Compare tacit , tacitly , reticence , reticent .

 This is used by common people in England. It is
probably the short form of "My eye!"

 . The word in this sense means to follow like a
dog; to follow closely. From this we have the adjective
"dogged" pronounced as two syllables dog-géd,
meaning persevering, persistent, never giving in, e.g.
doggéd courage.

 . From the French "garder" or "guarder,"
meaning "to keep." This French word appears in
many English forms. Compare reward , guard , guerdon , guardian , ward , warder , regard .

 . This word comes from an old Saxon root, which has
left many words in modern English. Compare daze , dazed , dazzle , doze , drowse , drowsy .

 . From the Latin word "capere," meaning to take.
The English verbs such as "receive," "conceive,"
"perceive" have come into English from the French.
The Latin root is more clearly seen in the nouns such
as "deception," "reception," "perception," etc. It
should be carefully noticed that these "French" forms are spelt eive instead of ieve . A simple rule is this,
that after c write ei not ie , but after other consonants
write ie . Compare the spelling of believe , grieve , relieve with that of receive , deceive .

   THE POSTMASTER