SUICIDES

 To Georges Legrand.

 Hardly a day goes by without our reading a news item like the following in
      some newspaper:

 “On Wednesday night the people living in No. 40 Rue de——-,
      were awakened by two successive shots. The explosions seemed to come from
      the apartment occupied by M. X——. The door was broken in and
      the man was found bathed in his blood, still holding in one hand the
      revolver with which he had taken his life.

 “M. X——was fifty-seven years of age, enjoying a
      comfortable income, and had everything necessary to make him happy. No
      cause can be found for his action.”

 What terrible grief, what unknown suffering, hidden despair, secret wounds
      drive these presumably happy persons to suicide? We search, we imagine
      tragedies of love, we suspect financial troubles, and, as we never find
      anything definite, we apply to these deaths the word “mystery.”

 A letter found on the desk of one of these “suicides without cause,”
      and written during his last night, beside his loaded revolver, has come
      into our hands. We deem it rather interesting. It reveals none of those
      great catastrophes which we always expect to find behind these acts of
      despair; but it shows us the slow succession of the little vexations of
      life, the disintegration of a lonely existence, whose dreams have
      disappeared; it gives the reason for these tragic ends, which only nervous
      and high-strung people can understand.

 Here it is:

 “It is midnight. When I have finished this letter I shall kill
      myself. Why? I shall attempt to give the reasons, not for those who may
      read these lines, but for myself, to kindle my waning courage, to impress
      upon myself the fatal necessity of this act which can, at best, be only
      deferred.

 “I was brought up by simple-minded parents who were unquestioning
      believers. And I believed as they did.

 “My dream lasted a long time. The last veil has just been torn from
      my eyes.

 “During the last few years a strange change has been taking place
      within me. All the events of Life, which formerly had to me the glow of a
      beautiful sunset, are now fading away. The true meaning of things has
      appeared to me in its brutal reality; and the true reason for love has
      bred in me disgust even for this poetic sentiment: 'We are the eternal
      toys of foolish and charming illusions, which are always being renewed.'

 “On growing older, I had become partly reconciled to the awful
      mystery of life, to the uselessness of effort; when the emptiness of
      everything appeared to me in a new light, this evening, after dinner.

 “Formerly, I was happy! Everything pleased me: the passing women,
      the appearance of the streets, the place where I lived; and I even took an
      interest in the cut of my clothes. But the repetition of the same sights
      has had the result of filling my heart with weariness and disgust, just as
      one would feel were one to go every night to the same theatre.

 “For the last thirty years I have been rising at the same hour; and,
      at the same restaurant, for thirty years, I have been eating at the same
      hours the same dishes brought me by different waiters.

 “I have tried travel. The loneliness which one feels in strange
      places terrified me. I felt so alone, so small on the earth that I quickly
      started on my homeward journey.

 “But here the unchanging expression of my furniture, which has stood
      for thirty years in the same place, the smell of my apartments (for, with
      time, each dwelling takes on a particular odor) each night, these and
      other things disgust me and make me sick of living thus.

 “Everything repeats itself endlessly. The way in which I put my key
      in the lock, the place where I always find my matches, the first object
      which meets my eye when I enter the room, make me feel like jumping out of
      the window and putting an end to those monotonous events from which we can
      never escape.

 “Each day, when I shave, I feel an inordinate desire to cut my
      throat; and my face, which I see in the little mirror, always the same,
      with soap on my cheeks, has several times made me weak from sadness.

 “Now I even hate to be with people whom I used to meet with
      pleasure; I know them so well, I can tell just what they are going to say
      and what I am going to answer. Each brain is like a circus, where the same
      horse keeps circling around eternally. We must circle round always, around
      the same ideas, the same joys, the same pleasures, the same habits, the
      same beliefs, the same sensations of disgust.

 “The fog was terrible this evening. It enfolded the boulevard, where
      the street lights were dimmed and looked like smoking candles. A heavier
      weight than usual oppressed me. Perhaps my digestion was bad.

 “For good digestion is everything in life. It gives the inspiration
      to the artist, amorous desires to young people, clear ideas to thinkers,
      the joy of life to everybody, and it also allows one to eat heartily
      (which is one of the greatest pleasures). A sick stomach induces
      scepticism unbelief, nightmares and the desire for death. I have often
      noticed this fact. Perhaps I would not kill myself, if my digestion had
      been good this evening.

 “When I sat down in the arm-chair where I have been sitting every
      day for thirty years, I glanced around me, and just then I was seized by
      such a terrible distress that I thought I must go mad.

 “I tried to think of what I could do to run away from myself. Every
      occupation struck me as being worse even than inaction. Then I bethought
      me of putting my papers in order.

 “For a long time I have been thinking of clearing out my drawers;
      for, for the last thirty years, I have been throwing my letters and bills
      pell-mell into the same desk, and this confusion has often caused me
      considerable trouble. But I feel such moral and physical laziness at the
      sole idea of putting anything in order that I have never had the courage
      to begin this tedious business.

 “I therefore opened my desk, intending to choose among my old papers
      and destroy the majority of them.

 “At first I was bewildered by this array of documents, yellowed by
      age, then I chose one.

 “Oh! if you cherish life, never disturb the burial place of old
      letters!

 “And if, perchance, you should, take the contents by the handful,
      close your eyes that you may not read a word, so that you may not
      recognize some forgotten handwriting which may plunge you suddenly into a
      sea of memories; carry these papers to the fire; and when they are in
      ashes, crush them to an invisible powder, or otherwise you are lost—just
      as I have been lost for an hour.

 “The first letters which I read did not interest me greatly. They
      were recent, and came from living men whom I still meet quite often, and
      whose presence does not move me to any great extent. But all at once one
      envelope made me start. My name was traced on it in a large, bold
      handwriting; and suddenly tears came to my eyes. That letter was from my
      dearest friend, the companion of my youth, the confidant of my hopes; and
      he appeared before me so clearly, with his pleasant smile and his hand
      outstretched, that a cold shiver ran down my back. Yes, yes, the dead come
      back, for I saw him! Our memory is a more perfect world than the universe:
      it gives back life to those who no longer exist.

 “With trembling hand and dimmed eyes I reread everything that he
      told me, and in my poor sobbing heart I felt a wound so painful that I
      began to groan as a man whose bones are slowly being crushed.

 “Then I travelled over my whole life, just as one travels along a
      river. I recognized people, so long forgotten that I no longer knew their
      names. Their faces alone lived in me. In my mother's letters I saw again
      the old servants, the shape of our house and the little insignificant odds
      and ends which cling to our minds.

 “Yes, I suddenly saw again all my mother's old gowns, the different
      styles which she adopted and the several ways in which she dressed her
      hair. She haunted me especially in a silk dress, trimmed with old lace;
      and I remembered something she said one day when she was wearing this
      dress. She said: 'Robert, my child, if you do not stand up straight you
      will be round-shouldered all your life.'

 “Then, opening another drawer, I found myself face to face with
      memories of tender passions: a dancing-pump, a torn handkerchief, even a
      garter, locks of hair and dried flowers. Then the sweet romances of my
      life, whose living heroines are now white-haired, plunged me into the deep
      melancholy of things. Oh, the young brows where blond locks curl, the
      caress of the hands, the glance which speaks, the hearts which beat, that
      smile which promises the lips, those lips which promise the embrace! And
      the first kiss-that endless kiss which makes you close your eyes, which
      drowns all thought in the immeasurable joy of approaching possession!

 “Taking these old pledges of former love in both my hands, I covered
      them with furious caresses, and in my soul, torn by these memories, I saw
      them each again at the hour of surrender; and I suffered a torture more
      cruel than all the tortures invented in all the fables about hell.

 “One last letter remained. It was written by me and dictated fifty
      years ago by my writing teacher. Here it is:

 “'MY DEAR LITTLE MAMMA:

   “'I am seven years old to-day. It is the age of reason. I take
   advantage of it to thank you for having brought me into this world.

   “'Your little son, who loves you

                    “'ROBERT.'

 “It is all over. I had gone back to the beginning, and suddenly I
      turned my glance on what remained to me of life. I saw hideous and lonely
      old age, and approaching infirmities, and everything over and gone. And
      nobody near me!

 “My revolver is here, on the table. I am loading it . . . . Never
      reread your old letters!”

 And that is how many men come to kill themselves; and we search in vain to
      discover some great sorrow in their lives.