THAT COSTLY RIDE
    

      The household lived frugally on the meager income derived from the
      husband's insignificant appointments. Two children had been born of the
      marriage, and the earlier condition of the strictest economy had become
      one of quiet, concealed, shamefaced misery, the poverty of a noble family—which
      in spite of misfortune never forgets its rank.
    

      Hector de Gribelin had been educated in the provinces, under the paternal
      roof, by an aged priest. His people were not rich, but they managed to
      live and to keep up appearances.
    

      At twenty years of age they tried to find him a position, and he entered
      the Ministry of Marine as a clerk at sixty pounds a year. He foundered on
      the rock of life like all those who have not been early prepared for its
      rude struggles, who look at life through a mist, who do not know how to
      protect themselves, whose special aptitudes and faculties have not been
      developed from childhood, whose early training has not developed the rough
      energy needed for the battle of life or furnished them with tool or
      weapon.
    

      His first three years of office work were a martyrdom.
    

      He had, however, renewed the acquaintance of a few friends of his family
      —elderly people, far behind the times, and poor like himself, who
      lived in aristocratic streets, the gloomy thoroughfares of the Faubourg
      Saint-Germain; and he had created a social circle for himself.
    

      Strangers to modern life, humble yet proud, these needy aristocrats lived
      in the upper stories of sleepy, old-world houses. From top to bottom of
      their dwellings the tenants were titled, but money seemed just as scarce
      on the ground floor as in the attics.
    

      Their eternal prejudices, absorption in their rank, anxiety lest they
      should lose caste, filled the minds and thoughts of these families once so
      brilliant, now ruined by the idleness of the men of the family. Hector de
      Gribelin met in this circle a young girl as well born and as poor as
      himself and married her.
    

      They had two children in four years.
    

      For four years more the husband and wife, harassed by poverty, knew no
      other distraction than the Sunday walk in the Champs-Elysees and a few
      evenings at the theatre (amounting in all to one or two in the course of
      the winter) which they owed to free passes presented by some comrade or
      other.
    

      But in the spring of the following year some overtime work was entrusted
      to Hector de Gribelin by his chief, for which he received the large sum of
      three hundred francs.
    

      The day he brought the money home he said to his wife:
    

      “My dear Henrietta, we must indulge in some sort of festivity—say
      an outing for the children.”
    

      And after a long discussion it was decided that they should go and lunch
      one day in the country.
    

      “Well,” cried Hector, “once will not break us, so we'll
      hire a wagonette for you, the children and the maid. And I'll have a
      saddle horse; the exercise will do me good.”
    

      The whole week long they talked of nothing but the projected excursion.
    

      Every evening, on his return from the office, Hector caught up his elder
      son, put him astride his leg, and, making him bounce up and down as hard
      as he could, said:
    

      “That's how daddy will gallop next Sunday.”
    

      And the youngster amused himself all day long by bestriding chairs,
      dragging them round the room and shouting:
    

      “This is daddy on horseback!”
    

      The servant herself gazed at her master with awestruck eyes as she thought
      of him riding alongside the carriage, and at meal-times she listened with
      all her ears while he spoke of riding and recounted the exploits of his
      youth, when he lived at home with his father. Oh, he had learned in a good
      school, and once he felt his steed between his legs he feared nothing—nothing
      whatever!
    

      Rubbing his hands, he repeated gaily to his wife:
    

      “If only they would give me a restive animal I should be all the
      better pleased. You'll see how well I can ride; and if you like we'll come
      back by the Champs-Elysees just as all the people are returning from the
      Bois. As we shall make a good appearance, I shouldn't at all object to
      meeting some one from the ministry. That is all that is necessary to
      insure the respect of one's chiefs.”
    

      On the day appointed the carriage and the riding horse arrived at the same
      moment before the door. Hector went down immediately to examine his mount.
      He had had straps sewn to his trousers and flourished in his hand a whip
      he had bought the evening before.
    

      He raised the horse's legs and felt them one after another, passed his
      hand over the animal's neck, flank and hocks, opened his mouth, examined
      his teeth, declared his age; and then, the whole household having
      collected round him, he delivered a discourse on the horse in general and
      the specimen before him in particular, pronouncing the latter excellent in
      every respect.
    

      When the rest of the party had taken their seats in the carriage he
      examined the saddle-girth; then, putting his foot in the stirrup, he
      sprang to the saddle. The animal began to curvet and nearly threw his
      rider.
    

      Hector, not altogether at his ease, tried to soothe him:
    

      “Come, come, good horse, gently now!”
    

      Then, when the horse had recovered his equanimity and the rider his nerve,
      the latter asked:
    

      “Are you ready?”
    

      The occupants of the carriage replied with one voice:
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Forward!” he commanded.
    

      And the cavalcade set out.
    

      All looks were centered on him. He trotted in the English style, rising
      unnecessarily high in the saddle; looking at times as if he were mounting
      into space. Sometimes he seemed on the point of falling forward on the
      horse's mane; his eyes were fixed, his face drawn, his cheeks pale.
    

      His wife, holding one of the children on her knees, and the servant, who
      was carrying the other, continually cried out:
    

      “Look at papa! look at papa!”
    

      And the two boys, intoxicated by the motion of the carriage, by their
      delight and by the keen air, uttered shrill cries. The horse, frightened
      by the noise they made, started off at a gallop, and while Hector was
      trying to control his steed his hat fell off, and the driver had to get
      down and pick it up. When the equestrian had recovered it he called to his
      wife from a distance:
    

      “Don't let the children shout like that! They'll make the horse
      bolt!”
    

      They lunched on the grass in the Vesinet woods, having brought provisions
      with them in the carriage.
    

      Although the driver was looking after the three horses, Hector rose every
      minute to see if his own lacked anything; he patted him on the neck and
      fed him with bread, cakes and sugar.
    

      “He's an unequal trotter,” he declared. “He certainly
      shook me up a little at first, but, as you saw, I soon got used to it. He
      knows his master now and won't give any more trouble.”
    

      As had been decided, they returned by the Champs-Elysees.
    

      That spacious thoroughfare literally swarmed with vehicles of every kind,
      and on the sidewalks the pedestrians were so numerous that they looked
      like two indeterminate black ribbons unfurling their length from the Arc
      de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde. A flood of sunlight played on
      this gay scene, making the varnish of the carriages, the steel of the
      harness and the handles of the carriage doors shine with dazzling
      brilliancy.
    

      An intoxication of life and motion seemed to have invaded this assemblage
      of human beings, carriages and horses. In the distance the outlines of the
      Obelisk could be discerned in a cloud of golden vapor.
    

      As soon as Hector's horse had passed the Arc de Triomphe he became
      suddenly imbued with fresh energy, and, realizing that his stable was not
      far off, began to trot rapidly through the maze of wheels, despite all his
      rider's efforts to restrain him.
    

      The carriage was now far behind. When the horse arrived opposite the
      Palais de l'Industrie he saw a clear field before him, and, turning to the
      right, set off at a gallop.
    

      An old woman wearing an apron was crossing the road in leisurely fashion.
      She happened to be just in Hector's way as he arrived on the scene riding
      at full speed. Powerless to control his mount, he shouted at the top of
      his voice:
    

      “Hi! Look out there! Hi!”
    

      She must have been deaf, for she continued peacefully on her way until the
      awful moment when, struck by the horse's chest as by a locomotive under
      full steam, she rolled ten paces off, turning three somersaults on the
      way.
    

      Voices yelled:
    

      “Stop him!”
    

      Hector, frantic with terror, clung to the horse's mane and shouted:
    

      “Help! help!”
    

      A terrible jolt hurled him, as if shot from a gun, over his horse's ears
      and cast him into the arms of a policeman who was running up to stop him.
    

      In the space of a second a furious, gesticulating, vociferating group had
      gathered round him. An old gentleman with a white mustache, wearing a
      large round decoration, seemed particularly exasperated. He repeated:
    

      “Confound it! When a man is as awkward as all that he should remain
      at home and not come killing people in the streets, if he doesn't know how
      to handle a horse.”
    

      Four men arrived on the scene, carrying the old woman. She appeared to be
      dead. Her skin was like parchment, her cap on one side and she was covered
      with dust.
    

      “Take her to a druggist's,” ordered the old gentleman, “and
      let us go to the commissary of police.”
    

      Hector started on his way with a policeman on either side of him, a third
      was leading his horse. A crowd followed them—and suddenly the
      wagonette appeared in sight. His wife alighted in consternation, the
      servant lost her head, the children whimpered. He explained that he would
      soon be at home, that he had knocked a woman down and that there was not
      much the matter. And his family, distracted with anxiety, went on their
      way.
    

      When they arrived before the commissary the explanation took place in few
      words. He gave his name—Hector de Gribelin, employed at the Ministry
      of Marine; and then they awaited news of the injured woman. A policeman
      who had been sent to obtain information returned, saying that she had
      recovered consciousness, but was complaining of frightful internal pain.
      She was a charwoman, sixty-five years of age, named Madame Simon.
    

      When he heard that she was not dead Hector regained hope and promised to
      defray her doctor's bill. Then he hastened to the druggist's. The door way
      was thronged; the injured woman, huddled in an armchair, was groaning. Her
      arms hung at her sides, her face was drawn. Two doctors were still engaged
      in examining her. No bones were broken, but they feared some internal
      lesion.
    

      Hector addressed her:
    

      “Do you suffer much?”
    

      “Oh, yes!”
    

      “Where is the pain?”
    

      “I feel as if my stomach were on fire.”
    

      A doctor approached.
    

      “Are you the gentleman who caused the accident?”
    

      “I am.”
    

      “This woman ought to be sent to a home. I know one where they would
      take her at six francs a day. Would you like me to send her there?”
    

      Hector was delighted at the idea, thanked him and returned home much
      relieved.
    

      His wife, dissolved in tears, was awaiting him. He reassured her.
    

      “It's all right. This Madame Simon is better already and will be
      quite well in two or three days. I have sent her to a home. It's all
      right.”
    

      When he left his office the next day he went to inquire for Madame Simon.
      He found her eating rich soup with an air of great satisfaction.
    

      “Well?” said he.
    

      “Oh, sir,” she replied, “I'm just the same. I feel sort
      of crushed—not a bit better.”
    

      The doctor declared they must wait and see; some complication or other
      might arise.
    

      Hector waited three days, then he returned. The old woman, fresh-faced and
      clear-eyed, began to whine when she saw him:
    

      “I can't move, sir; I can't move a bit. I shall be like this for the
      rest of my days.”
    

      A shudder passed through Hector's frame. He asked for the doctor, who
      merely shrugged his shoulders and said:
    

      “What can I do? I can't tell what's wrong with her. She shrieks when
      they try to raise her. They can't even move her chair from one place to
      another without her uttering the most distressing cries. I am bound to
      believe what she tells me; I can't look into her inside. So long as I have
      no chance of seeing her walk I am not justified in supposing her to be
      telling lies about herself.”
    

      The old woman listened, motionless, a malicious gleam in her eyes.
    

      A week passed, then a fortnight, then a month. Madame Simon did not leave
      her armchair. She ate from morning to night, grew fat, chatted gaily with
      the other patients and seemed to enjoy her immobility as if it were the
      rest to which she was entitled after fifty years of going up and down
      stairs, of turning mattresses, of carrying coal from one story to another,
      of sweeping and dusting.
    

      Hector, at his wits' end, came to see her every day. Every day he found
      her calm and serene, declaring:
    

      “I can't move, sir; I shall never be able to move again.”
    

      Every evening Madame de Gribelin, devoured with anxiety, said:
    

      “How is Madame Simon?”
    

      And every time he replied with a resignation born of despair:
    

      “Just the same; no change whatever.”
    

      They dismissed the servant, whose wages they could no longer afford. They
      economized more rigidly than ever. The whole of the extra pay had been
      swallowed up.
    

      Then Hector summoned four noted doctors, who met in consultation over the
      old woman. She let them examine her, feel her, sound her, watching them
      the while with a cunning eye.
    

      “We must make her walk,” said one.
    

      “But, sirs, I can't!” she cried. “I can't move!”
    

      Then they took hold of her, raised her and dragged her a short distance,
      but she slipped from their grasp and fell to the floor, groaning and
      giving vent to such heartrending cries that they carried her back to her
      seat with infinite care and precaution.
    

      They pronounced a guarded opinion—agreeing, however, that work was
      an impossibility to her.
    

      And when Hector brought this news to his wife she sank on a chair,
      murmuring:
    

      “It would be better to bring her here; it would cost us less.”
    

      He started in amazement.
    

      “Here? In our own house? How can you think of such a thing?”
    

      But she, resigned now to anything, replied with tears in her eyes:
    

      “But what can we do, my love? It's not my fault!”