Ivan Ivanich Lapkin, a pleasant looking young man, and Anna Zamblizky, a
      young girl with a little snub nose, walked down the sloping bank and sat
      down on the bench. The bench was close to the water's edge, among thick
      bushes of young willow. A heavenly spot! You sat down, and you were hidden
      from the world. Only the fish could see you and the catspaws which flashed
      over the water like lightning. The two young persons were equipped with
      rods, fish hooks, bags, tins of worms and everything else necessary. Once
      seated, they immediately began to fish.

 "I am glad that we're left alone at last," said Lapkin, looking round.
      I've got a lot to tell you, Anna—tremendous ... when I saw you for
      the first time ... you've got a nibble ... I understood then—why I
      am alive, I knew where my idol was, to whom I can devote my honest,
      hardworking life.... It must be a big one ... it is biting.... When I saw
      you—for the first time in my life I fell in love—fell in love
      passionately I Don't pull. Let it go on biting.... Tell me, darling, tell
      me—will you let me hope? No! I'm not worth it. I dare not even think
      of it—may I hope for.... Pull!

 Anna lifted her hand that held the rod—pulled, cried out. A silvery
      green fish shone in the air.

 "Goodness! it's a perch! Help—quick! It's slipping off." The perch
      tore itself from the hook—danced in the grass towards its native
      element and ... leaped into the water.

 But instead of the little fish that he was chasing, Lapkin quite by
      accident caught hold of Anna's hand—quite by accident pressed it to
      his lips. She drew back, but it was too late; quite by accident their lips
      met and kissed; yes, it was an absolute accident! They kissed and kissed.
      Then came vows and assurances.... Blissful moments! But there is no such
      thing as absolute happiness in this life. If happiness itself does not
      contain a poison, poison will enter in from without. Which happened this
      time. Suddenly, while the two were kissing, a laugh was heard. They looked
      at the river and were paralysed. The schoolboy Kolia, Anna's brother, was
      standing in the water, watching the young people and maliciously laughing.

 "Ah—ha! Kissing!" said he. "Right O, I'll tell Mother."

 "I hope that you—as a man of honour," Lapkin muttered, blushing.
      "It's disgusting to spy on us, it's loathsome to tell tales, it's rotten.
      As a man of honour...."

 "Give me a shilling, then I'll shut up!" the man of honour retorted. "If
      you don't, I'll tell."

 Lapkin took a shilling out of his pocket and gave it to Kolia, who
      squeezed it in his wet fist, whistled, and swam away. And the young people
      did not kiss any more just then.

 Next day Lapkin brought Kolia some paints and a ball from town, and his
      sister gave him all her empty pill boxes. Then they had to present him
      with a set of studs like dogs' heads. The wretched boy enjoyed this game
      immensely, and to keep it going he began to spy on them. Wherever Lapkin
      and Anna went, he was there too. He did not leave them alone for a single
      moment.

 "Beast!" Lapkin gnashed his teeth. "So young and yet such a full fledged
      scoundrel. What on earth will become of him later!"

 During the whole of July the poor lovers had no life apart from him. He
      threatened to tell on them; he dogged them and demanded more presents.
      Nothing satisfied him—finally he hinted at a gold watch. All right,
      they had to promise the watch.

 Once, at table, when biscuits were being handed round, he burst out
      laughing and said to Lapkin: "Shall I let on? Ah—ha!"

 Lapkin blushed fearfully and instead of a biscuit he began to chew his
      table napkin. Anna jumped up from the table and rushed out of the room.

 And this state of things went on until the end of August, up to the day
      when Lapkin at last proposed to Anna. Ah! What a happy day that was! When
      he had spoken to her parents and obtained their consent Lapkin rushed into
      the garden after Kolia. When he found him he nearly cried for joy and
      caught hold of the wretched boy by the ear. Anna, who was also looking for
      Kolia came running up and grabbed him by the other ear. You should have
      seen the happiness depicted on their faces while Kolia roared and begged
      them:

 "Darling, precious pets, I won't do it again. O-oh—O-oh! Forgive
      me!" And both of them confessed afterwards that during all the time they
      were in love with each other they never experienced such happiness, such
      overwhelming joy as during those moments when they pulled the wretched
      boy's ears.

   

 About ten o'clock of a dark September evening the Zemstvo doctor Kirilov's
      only son, six-year-old Andrey, died of diphtheria. As the doctor's wife
      dropped on to her knees before the dead child's cot and the first paroxysm
      of despair took hold of her, the bell rang sharply in the hall.

 When the diphtheria came all the servants were sent away from the house,
      that very morning. Kirilov himself went to the door, just as he was, in
      his shirt-sleeves with his waistcoat unbuttoned, without wiping his wet
      face or hands, which had been burnt with carbolic acid. It was dark in the
      hall, and of the person who entered could be distinguished only his middle
      height, a white scarf and a big, extraordinarily pale face, so pale that
      it seemed as though its appearance made the hall brighter....

 "Is the doctor in?" the visitor asked abruptly.

 "I'm at home," answered Kirilov. "What do you want?"

 "Oh, you're the doctor? I'm so glad!" The visitor was overjoyed and began
      to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness. He found it and squeezed it
      hard in his own. "I'm very ... very glad! We were introduced ... I am
      Aboguin ... had the pleasure of meeting you this summer at Mr. Gnouchev's.
      I am very glad to have found you at home.... For God's sake, don't say you
      won't come with me immediately.... My wife has been taken dangerously
      ill.... I have the carriage with me...."

 From the visitor's voice and movements it was evident that he had been in
      a state of violent agitation. Exactly as though he had been frightened by
      a fire or a mad dog, he could hardly restrain his hurried breathing, and
      he spoke quickly in a trembling voice. In his speech there sounded a note
      of real sincerity, of childish fright. Like all men who are frightened and
      dazed, he spoke in short, abrupt phrases and uttered many superfluous,
      quite unnecessary, words.

 "I was afraid I shouldn't find you at home," he continued. "While I was
      coming to you I suffered terribly.... Dress yourself and let us go, for
      God's sake.... It happened like this. Papchinsky came to me—Alexander
      Siemionovich, you know him.... We were chatting.... Then we sat down to
      tea. Suddenly my wife cries out, presses her hands to her heart, and falls
      back in her chair. We carried her off to her bed and ... and I rubbed her
      forehead with sal-volatile, and splashed her with water.... She lies like
      a corpse.... I'm afraid that her heart's failed.... Let us go.... Her
      father too died of heart-failure."

 Kirilov listened in silence as though he did not understand the Russian
      language.

 When Aboguin once more mentioned Papchinsky and his wife's father, and
      once more began to seek for the doctor's hand in the darkness, the doctor
      shook his head and said, drawling each word listlessly:

 "Excuse me, but I can't go.... Five minutes ago my ... my son died."

 "Is that true?" Aboguin whispered, stepping back. "My God, what an awful
      moment to come! It's a terribly fated day ... terribly! What a coincidence
      ... and it might have been on purpose!"

 Aboguin took hold of the door handle and drooped his head in meditation.
      Evidently he was hesitating, not knowing whether to go away, or to ask the
      doctor once more.

 "Listen," he said eagerly, seizing Kirilov by the sleeve. "I fully
      understand your state! God knows I'm ashamed to try to hold your attention
      at such a moment, but what can I do? Think yourself—who can I go to?
      There isn't another doctor here besides you. For heaven's sake come. I'm
      not asking for myself. It's not I that's ill!"

 Silence began. Kirilov turned his back to Aboguin, stood still for a while
      and slowly went out of the hall into the drawing-room. To judge by his
      uncertain, machine-like movement, and by the attentiveness with which he
      arranged the hanging shade on the unlighted lamp in the drawing-room and
      consulted a thick book which lay on the table—at such a moment he
      had neither purpose nor desire, nor did he think of anything, and probably
      had already forgotten that there was a stranger standing in his hall. The
      gloom and the quiet of the drawing-room apparently increased his insanity.
      As he went from the drawing-room to his study he raised his right foot
      higher than he need, felt with his hands for the door-posts, and then one
      felt a certain perplexity in his whole figure, as though he had entered a
      strange house by chance, or for the first time in his life had got drunk,
      and now was giving himself up in bewilderment to the new sensation. A wide
      line of light stretched across the bookshelves on one wall of the study;
      this light, together with the heavy stifling smell of carbolic acid and
      ether came from the door ajar that led from the study into the
      bed-room.... The doctor sank into a chair before the table; for a while he
      looked drowsily at the shining books, then rose and went into the
      bed-room.

 Here, in the bed-room, dead quiet reigned. Everything, down to the last
      trifle, spoke eloquently of the tempest undergone, of weariness, and
      everything rested. The candle which stood among a close crowd of phials,
      boxes and jars on the stool and the big lamp on the chest of drawers
      brightly lit the room. On the bed, by the window, the boy lay open-eyed,
      with a look of wonder on his face. He did not move, but it seemed that his
      open eyes became darker and darker every second and sank into his skull.
      Having laid her hands on his body and hid her face in the folds of the
      bed-clothes, the mother now was on her knees before the bed. Like the boy
      she did not move, but how much living movement was felt in the coil of her
      body and in her hands! She was pressing close to the bed with her whole
      being, with eager vehemence, as though she were afraid to violate the
      quiet and comfortable pose which she had found at last for her weary body.
      Blankets, cloths, basins, splashes on the floor, brushes and spoons
      scattered everywhere, a white bottle of lime-water, the stifling heavy air
      itself—everything died away, and as it were plunged into quietude.

 The doctor stopped by his wife, thrust his hands into his trouser pockets
      and bending his head on one side looked fixedly at his son. His face
      showed indifference; only the drops which glistened on his beard revealed
      that he had been lately weeping.

 The repulsive terror of which we think when we speak of death was absent
      from the bed-room. In the pervading dumbness, in the mother's pose, in the
      indifference of the doctor's face was something attractive that touched
      the heart, the subtle and elusive beauty of human grief, which it will
      take men long to understand and describe, and only music, it seems, is
      able to express. Beauty too was felt in the stern stillness. Kirilov and
      his wife were silent and did not weep, as though they confessed all the
      poetry of their condition. As once the season of their youth passed away,
      so now in this boy their right to bear children had passed away, alas! for
      ever to eternity. The doctor is forty-four years old, already grey and
      looks like an old man; his faded sick wife is thirty-five. Audrey was not
      merely the only son but the last.

 In contrast to his wife the doctor's nature belonged to those which feel
      the necessity of movement when their soul is in pain. After standing by
      his wife for about five minutes, he passed from the bed-room, lifting his
      right foot too high, into a little room half filled with a big broad
      divan. From there he went to the kitchen. After wandering about the
      fireplace and the cook's bed, he stooped through a little door and came
      into the hall.

 Here he saw the white scarf and the pale face again.

 "At last," sighed Aboguin, seizing the doorhandle. "Let us go, please."

 The doctor shuddered, glanced at him and remembered.

 "Listen. I've told you already that I can't go," he said, livening. "What
      a strange idea!"

 "Doctor, I'm made of flesh and blood, too. I fully understand your
      condition. I sympathise with you," Aboguin said in an imploring voice,
      putting his hand to his scarf. "But I am not asking for myself. My wife is
      dying. If you had heard her cry, if you'd seen her face, you would
      understand my insistence! My God—and I thought that you'd gone to
      dress yourself. The time is precious, Doctor! Let us go, I beg of you."

 "I can't come," Kirilov said after a pause, and stepped into his
      drawing-room.

 Aboguin followed him and seized him by the sleeve.

 "You're in sorrow. I understand. But I'm not asking you to cure a
      toothache, or to give expert evidence,—but to save a human life." He
      went on imploring like a beggar. "This life is more than any personal
      grief. I ask you for courage, for a brave deed—in the name of
      humanity."

 "Humanity cuts both ways," Kirilov said irritably. "In the name of the
      same humanity I ask you not to take me away. My God, what a strange idea!
      I can hardly stand on my feet and you frighten me with humanity. I'm not
      fit for anything now. I won't go for anything. With whom shall I leave my
      wife? No, no...."

 Kirilov flung out his open hands and drew back.

 "And ... and don't ask me," he continued, disturbed. "I'm sorry.... Under
      the Laws, Volume XIII., I'm obliged to go and you have the right to drag
      me by the neck.... Well, drag me, but ... I'm not fit.... I'm not even
      able to speak. Excuse me."

 "It's quite unfair to speak to me in that tone, Doctor," said Aboguin,
      again taking the doctor by the sleeve. "The thirteenth volume be damned! I
      have no right to do violence to your will. If you want to, come; if you
      don't, then God be with you; but it's not to your will that I apply, but
      to your feelings. A young woman is dying! You say your son died just now.
      Who could understand my terror better than you?"

 Aboguin's voice trembled with agitation. His tremor and his tone were much
      more convincing than his words. Aboguin was sincere, but it is remarkable
      that every phrase he used came out stilted, soulless, inopportunely
      florid, and as it were insulted the atmosphere of the doctor's house and
      the woman who was dying. He felt it himself, and in his fear of being
      misunderstood he exerted himself to the utmost to make his voice soft and
      tender so as to convince by the sincerity of his tone at least, if not by
      his words. As a rule, however deep and beautiful the words they affect
      only the unconcerned. They cannot always satisfy those who are happy or
      distressed because the highest expression of happiness or distress is most
      often silence. Lovers understand each other best when they are silent, and
      a fervent passionate speech at the graveside affects only outsiders. To
      the widow and children it seems cold and trivial.

 Kirilov stood still and was silent. When Aboguin uttered some more words
      on the higher vocation of a doctor, and self-sacrifice, the doctor sternly
      asked:

 "Is it far?"

 "Thirteen or fourteen versts. I've got good horses, doctor. I give you my
      word of honour that I'll take you there and back in an hour. Only an
      hour."

 The last words impressed the doctor more strongly than the references to
      humanity or the doctor's vocation. He thought for a while and said with a
      sigh.

 "Well, let us go!"

 He went off quickly, with a step that was now sure, to his study and soon
      after returned in a long coat. Aboguin, delighted, danced impatiently
      round him, helped him on with his overcoat, and accompanied him out of the
      house.

 Outside it was dark, but brighter than in the hall. Now in the darkness
      the tall stooping figure of the doctor was clearly visible with the long,
      narrow beard and the aquiline nose. Besides his pale face Aboguin's big
      face could now be seen and a little student's cap which hardly covered the
      crown of his head. The scarf showed white only in front, but behind it was
      hid under his long hair.

 "Believe me, I'm able to appreciate your magnanimity," murmured Aboguin,
      as he helped the doctor to a seat in the carriage. "We'll whirl away.
      Luke, dear man, drive as fast as you can, do!"

 The coachman drove quickly. First appeared a row of bare buildings, which
      stood along the hospital yard. It was dark everywhere, save that at the
      end of the yard a bright light from someone's window broke through the
      garden fence, and three windows in the upper story of the separate house
      seemed to be paler than the air. Then the carriage drove into dense
      obscurity where you could smell mushroom damp, and hear the whisper of the
      trees. The noise of the wheels awoke the rooks who began to stir in the
      leaves and raised a doleful, bewildered cry as if they knew that the
      doctor's son was dead and Aboguin's wife ill. Then began to appear
      separate trees, a shrub. Sternly gleamed the pond, where big black shadows
      slept. The carriage rolled along over an even plain. Now the cry of the
      rooks was but faintly heard far away behind. Soon it became completely
      still.

 Almost all the way Kirilov and Aboguin were silent; save that once Aboguin
      sighed profoundly and murmured.

 "It's terrible pain. One never loves his nearest so much as when there is
      the risk of losing them."

 And when the carriage was quietly passing through the river, Kirilov gave
      a sudden start, as though the dashing of the water frightened him, and he
      began to move impatiently.

 "Let me go," he said in anguish. "I'll come to you later. I only want to
      send the attendant to my wife. She is all alone."

 Aboguin was silent. The carriage, swaying and rattling against the stones,
      drove over the sandy bank and went on. Kirilov began to toss about in
      anguish, and glanced around. Behind the road was visible in the scant
      light of the stars and the willows that fringed the bank disappearing into
      the darkness. To the right the plain stretched smooth and boundless as
      heaven. On it in the distance here and there dim lights were burning,
      probably on the turf-pits. To the left, parallel with the road stretched a
      little hill, tufted with tiny shrubs, and on the hill a big half-moon
      stood motionless, red, slightly veiled with a mist, and surrounded with
      fine clouds which seemed to be gazing upon it from every side, and
      guarding it, lest it should disappear.

 In all nature one felt something hopeless and sick. Like a fallen woman
      who sits alone in a dark room trying not to think of her past, the earth
      languished with reminiscence of spring and summer and waited in apathy for
      ineluctable winter. Wherever one's glance turned nature showed everywhere
      like a dark, cold, bottomless pit, whence neither Kirilov nor Aboguin nor
      the red half-moon could escape....

 The nearer the carriage approached the destination the more impatient did
      Aboguin become. He moved about, jumped up and stared over the driver's
      shoulder in front of him. And when at last the carriage drew up at the
      foot of the grand staircase, nicely covered with a striped linen awning
      and he looked up at the lighted windows of the first floor one could hear
      his breath trembling.

 "If anything happens ... I shan't survive it," he said entering the hall
      with the doctor and slowly rubbing his hands in his agitation. "But I
      can't hear any noise. That means it's all right so far," he added,
      listening to the stillness.

 No voices or steps were heard in the hall. For all the bright illumination
      the whole house seemed asleep. Now the doctor and Aboguin who had been in
      darkness up till now could examine each other. The doctor was tall, with a
      stoop, slovenly dressed, and his face was plain. There was something
      unpleasantly sharp, ungracious, and severe in his thick negro lips, his
      aquiline nose and his faded, indifferent look. His tangled hair, his
      sunken temples, the early grey in his long thin beard, that showed his
      shining chin, his pale grey complexion and the slipshod awkwardness of his
      manners—the hardness of it all suggested to the mind bad times
      undergone, an unjust lot and weariness of life and men. To look at the
      hard figure of the man, you could not believe that he had a wife and could
      weep over his child. Aboguin revealed something different. He was robust,
      solid and fair-haired, with a big head and large, yet soft, features,
      exquisitely dressed in the latest fashion. In his carriage, his
      tight-buttoned coat and his mane of hair you felt something noble and
      leonine. He walked with his head straight and his chest prominent, he
      spoke in a pleasant baritone, and in his manner of removing his scarf or
      arranging his hair there appeared a subtle, almost feminine, elegance.
      Even his pallor and childish fear as he glanced upwards to the staircase
      while taking off his coat, did not disturb his carriage or take from the
      satisfaction, the health and aplomb which his figure breathed.

 "There's no one about, nothing I can hear," he said walking upstairs. "No
      commotion. May God be good!"

 He accompanied the doctor through the hall to a large salon, where a big
      piano showed dark and a lustre hung in a white cover. Thence they both
      passed into a small and beautiful drawing-room, very cosy, filled with a
      pleasant, rosy half-darkness.

 "Please sit here a moment, Doctor," said Aboguin, "I ... I won't be a
      second. I'll just have a look and tell them."

 Kirilov was left alone. The luxury of the drawing-room, the pleasant
      half-darkness, even his presence in a stranger's unfamiliar house
      evidently did not move him. He sat in a chair looking at his hands burnt
      with carbolic acid. He had no more than a glimpse of the bright red
      lampshade, the cello case, and when he looked sideways across the room to
      where the dock was ticking, he noticed a stuffed wolf, as solid and
      satisfied as Aboguin himself.

 It was still.... Somewhere far away in the other rooms someone uttered a
      loud "Ah!" A glass door, probably a cupboard door, rang, and again
      everything was still. After five minutes had passed, Kirilov did not look
      at his hands any more. He raised his eyes to the door through which
      Aboguin had disappeared.

 Aboguin was standing on the threshold, but not the same man as went out.
      The expression of satisfaction and subtle elegance had disappeared from
      him. His face and hands, the attitude of his body were distorted with a
      disgusting expression either of horror or of tormenting physical pain. His
      nose, lips, moustache, all his features were moving and as it were trying
      to tear themselves away from his face, but the eyes were as though
      laughing from pain.

 Aboguin took a long heavy step into the middle of the room, stooped,
      moaned, and shook his fists.

 "Deceived!" he cried, emphasising the syllable cei. "She deceived
      me! She's gone! She fell ill and sent me for the doctor only to run away
      with this fool Papchinsky. My God!" Aboguin stepped heavily towards the
      doctor, thrust his white soft fists before his face, and went on wailing,
      shaking his fists the while.

 "She's gone off! She's deceived me! But why this lie? My God, my God! Why
      this dirty, foul trick, this devilish, serpent's game? What have I done to
      her? She's gone off." Tears gushed from his eyes. He turned on his heel
      and began to pace the drawing-room. Now in his short jacket and his
      fashionable narrow trousers in which his legs seemed too thin for his
      body, he was extraordinarily like a lion. Curiosity kindled in the
      doctor's impassive face. He rose and eyed Aboguin.

 "Well, where's the patient?"

 "The patient, the patient," cried Aboguin, laughing, weeping, and still
      shaking his fists. "She's not ill, but accursed. Vile—dastardly. The
      Devil himself couldn't have planned a fouler trick. She sent me so that
      she could run away with a fool, an utter clown, an Alphonse! My God, far
      better she should have died. I'll not bear it. I shall not bear it."

 The doctor stood up straight. His eyes began to blink, filled with tears;
      his thin beard began to move with his jaw right and left.

 "What's this?" he asked, looking curiously about. "My child's dead. My
      wife in anguish, alone in all the house.... I can hardly stand on my feet,
      I haven't slept for three nights ... and I'm made to play in a vulgar
      comedy, to play the part of a stage property! I don't ... I don't
      understand it!"

 Aboguin opened one fist, flung a crumpled note on the floor and trod on
      it, as upon an insect he wished to crush.

 "And I didn't see ... didn't understand," he said through his set teeth,
      brandishing one fist round his head, with an expression as though someone
      had trod on a corn. "I didn't notice how he came to see us every day. I
      didn't notice that he came in a carriage to-day! What was the carriage
      for? And I didn't see! Innocent!"

 "I don't ... I don't understand," the doctor murmured. "What's it all
      mean? It's jeering at a man, laughing at a man's suffering! That's
      impossible.... I've never seen it in my life before!"

 With the dull bewilderment of a man who has just begun to understand that
      someone has bitterly offended him, the doctor shrugged his shoulders,
      waved his hands and not knowing what to say or do, dropped exhausted into
      a chair.

 "Well, she didn't love me any more. She loved another man. Very well. But
      why the deceit, why this foul treachery?" Aboguin spoke with tears in his
      voice. "Why, why? What have I done to you? Listen, doctor," he said
      passionately approaching Kirilov. "You were the unwilling witness of my
      misfortune, and I am not going to hide the truth from you. I swear I loved
      this woman. I loved her with devotion, like a slave. I sacrificed
      everything for her. I broke with my family, I gave up the service and my
      music. I forgave her things I could not have forgiven my mother and
      sister.... I never once gave her an angry look ... I never gave her any
      cause. Why this lie then? I do not demand love, but why this abominable
      deceit? If you don't love any more then speak out honestly, above all when
      you know what I feel about this matter...."

 With tears in his eyes and trembling in all his bones, Aboguin was pouring
      out his soul to the doctor. He spoke passionately, pressing both hands to
      his heart. He revealed all the family secrets without hesitation, as
      though he were glad that these secrets were being tom from his heart. Had
      he spoken thus for an hour or two and poured out all his soul, he would
      surely have been easier.

 Who can say whether, had the doctor listened and given him friendly
      sympathy, he would not, as so often happens, have been reconciled to his
      grief unprotesting, without turning to unprofitable follies? But it
      happened otherwise. While Aboguin was speaking the offended doctor changed
      countenance visibly. The indifference and amazement in his face gradually
      gave way to an expression of bitter outrage, indignation, and anger. His
      features became still sharper, harder, and more forbidding. When Aboguin
      put before his eyes the photograph of his young wife, with a pretty, but
      dry, inexpressive face like a nun's, and asked if it were possible to look
      at that face and grant that it could express a lie, the doctor suddenly
      started away, with flashing eyes, and said, coarsely forging out each
      several word:

 "Why do you tell me all this? I do not want to hear! I don't want to," he
      cried and banged his fist upon the table. "I don't want your trivial
      vulgar secrets—to Hell with them. You dare not tell me such
      trivialities. Or do you think I have not yet been insulted enough! That
      I'm a lackey to whom you can give the last insult? Yes?"

 Aboguin drew back from Kirilov and stared at him in surprise.

 "Why did you bring me here?" the doctor went on, shaking his beard. "You
      marry out of high spirits, get angry out of high spirits, and make a
      melodrama—but where do I come in? What have I got to do with your
      romances? Leave me alone I Get on with your noble grabbing, parade your
      humane ideas, play—" the doctor gave a side-glance at the cello-case—"the
      double-bass and the trombone, stuff yourselves like capons, but don't dare
      to jeer at a real man! If you can't respect him, then you can at least
      spare him your attentions."

 "What does all this mean?" Aboguin asked, blushing.

 "It means that it's vile and foul to play with a man I I'm a doctor. You
      consider doctors and all men who work and don't reek of scent and
      harlotry, your footmen, your mauvais tons. Very well, but no one
      gave you the right to turn a man who suffers into a property."

 "How dare you say that?" Aboguin asked quietly. Again his face began to
      twist about, this time in visible anger.

 "How dare you bring me here to listen to trivial rubbish, when you
      know that I'm in sorrow?" the doctor cried and banged his fists on the
      table once more. "Who gave you the right to jeer at another's grief?"

 "You're mad," cried Aboguin. "You're ungenerous. I too am deeply unhappy
      and ... and ..."

 "Unhappy"—the doctor gave a sneering laugh—"Don't touch the
      word, it's got nothing to do with you. Wasters who can't get money on a
      bill call themselves unhappy too. A capon's unhappy, oppressed with all
      its superfluous fat. You worthless lot!"

 "Sir, you're forgetting yourself," Aboguin gave a piercing scream. "For
      words like those, people are beaten. Do you understand?"

 Aboguin thrust his hand into his side pocket, took out a pocket-book,
      found two notes and flung them on the table.

 "There's your fee," he said, and his nostrils trembled. "You're paid."

 "You dare not offer me money," said the doctor, and brushed the notes from
      the table to the floor. "You don't settle an insult with money."

 Aboguin and the doctor stood face to face, heaping each other with
      undeserved insults. Never in their lives, even in a frenzy, had they said
      so much that was unjust and cruel and absurd. In both the selfishness of
      the unhappy is violently manifest. Unhappy men are selfish, wicked,
      unjust, and less able to understand each other than fools. Unhappiness
      does not unite people, but separates them; and just where one would
      imagine that people should be united by the community of grief, there is
      more injustice and cruelty done than among the comparatively contented.

 "Send me home, please," the doctor cried, out of breath.

 Aboguin rang the bell violently. Nobody came. He rang once more; then
      flung the bell angrily to the floor. It struck dully on the carpet and
      gave out a mournful sound like a death-moan. The footman appeared.

 "Where have you been hiding, damn you?" The master sprang upon him with
      clenched fists. "Where have you been just now? Go away and tell them to
      said the carriage round for this gentleman, and get the brougham ready for
      me. Wait," he called out as the footman turned to go. "Not a single
      traitor remains to-morrow. Pack off all of you! I will engage new ones ...
      Rabble!"

 While they waited Aboguin and the doctor were silent. Already the
      expression of satisfaction and the subtle elegance had returned to the
      former. He paced the drawing-room, shook his head elegantly and evidently
      was planning something. His anger was not yet cool, but he tried to make
      as if he did not notice his enemy.... The doctor stood with one hand on
      the edge of the table, looking at Aboguin with that deep, rather cynical,
      ugly contempt with which only grief and an unjust lot can look, when they
      see satiety and elegance before them.

 A little later, when the doctor took his seat in the carriage and drove
      away, his eyes still glanced contemptuously. It was dark, much darker than
      an hour ago. The red half-moon had now disappeared behind the little hill,
      and the clouds which watched it lay in dark spots round the stars. The
      brougham with the red lamps began to rattle on the road and passed the
      doctor. It was Aboguin on his way to protest, to commit all manner of
      folly.

 All the way the doctor thought not of his wife or Andrey, but only of
      Aboguin and those who lived in the house he just left. His thoughts were
      unjust, inhuman, and cruel. He passed sentence on Aboguin, his wife,
      Papchinsky, and all those who live in rosy semi-darkness and smell of
      scent. All the way he hated them, and his heart ached with his contempt
      for them. The conviction he formed about them would last his life long.

 Time will pass and Kirilov's sorrow, but this conviction, unjust and
      unworthy of the human heart, will not pass, but will remain in the
      doctor's mind until the grave.