THAT PIG OF A MORIN
    

      “Here, my friend,” I said to Labarbe, “you have just
      repeated those five words, that pig of a Morin. Why on earth do I never
      hear Morin's name mentioned without his being called a pig?”
    

      Labarbe, who is a deputy, looked at me with his owl-like eyes and said:
      “Do you mean to say that you do not know Morin's story and you come
      from La Rochelle?” I was obliged to declare that I did not know
      Morin's story, so Labarbe rubbed his hands and began his recital.
    

      “You knew Morin, did you not, and you remember his large
      linen-draper's shop on the Quai de la Rochelle?”
    

      “Yes, perfectly.”
    

      “Well, then. You must know that in 1862 or '63 Morin went to spend a
      fortnight in Paris for pleasure; or for his pleasures, but under the
      pretext of renewing his stock, and you also know what a fortnight in Paris
      means to a country shopkeeper; it fires his blood. The theatre every
      evening, women's dresses rustling up against you and continual excitement;
      one goes almost mad with it. One sees nothing but dancers in tights,
      actresses in very low dresses, round legs, fat shoulders, all nearly
      within reach of one's hands, without daring, or being able, to touch them,
      and one scarcely tastes food. When one leaves the city one's heart is
      still all in a flutter and one's mind still exhilarated by a sort of
      longing for kisses which tickles one's lips.
    

      “Morin was in that condition when he took his ticket for La Rochelle
      by the eight-forty night express. As he was walking up and down the
      waiting-room at the station he stopped suddenly in front of a young lady
      who was kissing an old one. She had her veil up, and Morin murmured with
      delight: 'By Jove what a pretty woman!'
    

      “When she had said 'good-by' to the old lady she went into the
      waiting-room, and Morin followed her; then she went on the platform and
      Morin still followed her; then she got into an empty carriage, and he
      again followed her. There were very few travellers on the express. The
      engine whistled and the train started. They were alone. Morin devoured her
      with his eyes. She appeared to be about nineteen or twenty and was fair,
      tall, with a bold look. She wrapped a railway rug round her and stretched
      herself on the seat to sleep.
    

      “Morin asked himself: 'I wonder who she is?' And a thousand
      conjectures, a thousand projects went through his head. He said to
      himself: 'So many adventures are told as happening on railway journeys
      that this may be one that is going to present itself to me. Who knows? A
      piece of good luck like that happens very suddenly, and perhaps I need
      only be a little venturesome. Was it not Danton who said: “Audacity,
      more audacity and always audacity”? If it was not Danton it was
      Mirabeau, but that does not matter. But then I have no audacity, and that
      is the difficulty. Oh! If one only knew, if one could only read people's
      minds! I will bet that every day one passes by magnificent opportunities
      without knowing it, though a gesture would be enough to let me know her
      mind.'
    

      “Then he imagined to himself combinations which conducted him to
      triumph. He pictured some chivalrous deed or merely some slight service
      which he rendered her, a lively, gallant conversation which ended in a
      declaration.
    

      “But he could find no opening, had no pretext, and he waited for
      some fortunate circumstance, with his heart beating and his mind
      topsy-turvy. The night passed and the pretty girl still slept, while Morin
      was meditating his own fall. The day broke and soon the first ray of
      sunlight appeared in the sky, a long, clear ray which shone on the face of
      the sleeping girl and woke her. She sat up, looked at the country, then at
      Morin and smiled. She smiled like a happy woman, with an engaging and
      bright look, and Morin trembled. Certainly that smile was intended for
      him; it was discreet invitation, the signal which he was waiting for. That
      smile meant to say: 'How stupid, what a ninny, what a dolt, what a donkey
      you are, to have sat there on your seat like a post all night!
    

      “'Just look at me, am I not charming? And you have sat like that for
      the whole night, when you have been alone with a pretty woman, you great
      simpleton!'
    

      “She was still smiling as she looked at him; she even began to
      laugh; and he lost his head trying to find something suitable to say, no
      matter what. But he could think of nothing, nothing, and then, seized with
      a coward's courage, he said to himself:
    

      “'So much the worse, I will risk everything,' and suddenly, without
      the slightest warning, he went toward her, his arms extended, his lips
      protruding, and, seizing her in his arms, he kissed her.
    

      “She sprang up immediately with a bound, crying out: 'Help! help!'
      and screaming with terror; and then she opened the carriage door and waved
      her arm out, mad with terror and trying to jump out, while Morin, who was
      almost distracted and feeling sure that she would throw herself out, held
      her by the skirt and stammered: 'Oh, madame! oh, madame!'
    

      “The train slackened speed and then stopped. Two guards rushed up at
      the young woman's frantic signals. She threw herself into their arms,
      stammering: 'That man wanted—wanted—to—to—' And
      then she fainted.
    

      “They were at Mauze station, and the gendarme on duty arrested
      Morin. When the victim of his indiscreet admiration had regained her
      consciousness, she made her charge against him, and the police drew it up.
      The poor linen draper did not reach home till night, with a prosecution
      hanging over him for an outrage to morals in a public place.” II
    

      “At that time I was editor of the Fanal des Charentes, and I used to
      meet Morin every day at the Cafe du Commerce, and the day after his
      adventure. he came to see me, as he did not know what to do. I did not
      hide my opinion from him, but said to him: 'You are no better than a pig.
      No decent man behaves like that.'
    

      “He cried. His wife had given him a beating, and he foresaw his
      trade ruined, his name dragged through the mire and dishonored, his
      friends scandalized and taking no notice of him. In the end he excited my
      pity, and I sent for my colleague, Rivet, a jocular but very sensible
      little man, to give us his advice.
    

      “He advised me to see the public prosecutor, who was a friend of
      mine, and so I sent Morin home and went to call on the magistrate. He told
      me that the woman who had been insulted was a young lady, Mademoiselle
      Henriette Bonnel, who had just received her certificate as governess in
      Paris and spent her holidays with her uncle and aunt, who were very
      respectable tradespeople in Mauze. What made Morin's case all the more
      serious was that the uncle had lodged a complaint, but the public official
      had consented to let the matter drop if this complaint were withdrawn, so
      we must try and get him to do this.
    

      “I went back to Morin's and found him in bed, ill with excitement
      and distress. His wife, a tall raw-boned woman with a beard, was abusing
      him continually, and she showed me into the room, shouting at me: 'So you
      have come to see that pig of a Morin. Well, there he is, the darling!' And
      she planted herself in front of the bed, with her hands on her hips. I
      told him how matters stood, and he begged me to go and see the girl's
      uncle and aunt. It was a delicate mission, but I undertook it, and the
      poor devil never ceased repeating: 'I assure you I did not even kiss her;
      no, not even that. I will take my oath to it!'
    

      “I replied: 'It is all the same; you are nothing but a pig.' And I
      took a thousand francs which he gave me to employ as I thought best, but
      as I did not care to venture to her uncle's house alone, I begged Rivet to
      go with me, which he agreed to do on condition that we went immediately,
      for he had some urgent business at La Rochelle that afternoon. So two
      hours later we rang at the door of a pretty country house. An attractive
      girl came and opened the door to us assuredly the young lady in question,
      and I said to Rivet in a low voice: 'Confound it! I begin to understand
      Morin!'
    

      “The uncle, Monsieur Tonnelet, subscribed to the Fanal, and was a
      fervent political coreligionist of ours. He received us with open arms and
      congratulated us and wished us joy; he was delighted at having the two
      editors in his house, and Rivet whispered to me: 'I think we shall be able
      to arrange the matter of that pig of a Morin for him.'
    

      “The niece had left the room and I introduced the delicate subject.
      I waved the spectre of scandal before his eyes; I accentuated the
      inevitable depreciation which the young lady would suffer if such an
      affair became known, for nobody would believe in a simple kiss, and the
      good man seemed undecided, but he could not make up his mind about
      anything without his wife, who would not be in until late that evening.
      But suddenly he uttered an exclamation of triumph: 'Look here, I have an
      excellent idea; I will keep you here to dine and sleep, and when my wife
      comes home I hope we shall be able to arrange matters:
    

      “Rivet resisted at first, but the wish to extricate that pig of a
      Morin decided him, and we accepted the invitation, and the uncle got up
      radiant, called his niece and proposed that we should take a stroll in his
      grounds, saying: 'We will leave serious matters until the morning.' Rivet
      and he began to talk politics, while I soon found myself lagging a little
      behind with 'the girl who was really charming—charming—and
      with the greatest precaution I began to speak to her about her adventure
      and try to make her my ally. She did not, however, appear the least
      confused, and listened to me like a person who was enjoying the whole
      thing very much.
    

      “I said to her: 'Just think, mademoiselle, how unpleasant it will be
      for you. You will have to appear in court, to encounter malicious looks,
      to speak before everybody and to recount that unfortunate occurrence in
      the railway carriage in public. Do you not think, between ourselves, that
      it would have been much better for you to have put that dirty scoundrel
      back in his place without calling for assistance, and merely to change
      your carriage?' She began to laugh and replied: 'What you say is quite
      true, but what could I do? I was frightened, and when one is frightened
      one does not stop to reason with one's self. As soon as I realized the
      situation I was very sorry, that I had called out, but then it was too
      late. You must also remember that the idiot threw himself upon me like a
      madman, without saying a word and looking like a lunatic. I did not even
      know what he wanted of me.'
    

      “She looked me full in the face without being nervous or intimidated
      and I said to myself: 'She is a queer sort of girl, that: I can quite see
      how that pig Morin came to make a mistake,' and I went on jokingly: 'Come,
      mademoiselle, confess that he was excusable, for, after all, a man cannot
      find himself opposite such a pretty girl as you are without feeling a
      natural desire to kiss her.'
    

      “She laughed more than ever and showed her teeth and said: 'Between
      the desire and the act, monsieur, there is room for respect.' It was an
      odd expression to use, although it was not very clear, and I asked
      abruptly: 'Well, now, suppose I were to kiss you, what would you do?' She
      stopped to look at me from head to foot and then said calmly: 'Oh, you?
      That is quite another matter.'
    

      “I knew perfectly well, by Jove, that it was not the same thing at
      all, as everybody in the neighborhood called me 'Handsome Labarbe'—I
      was thirty years old in those days—but I asked her: 'And why, pray?'
      She shrugged her shoulders and replied: 'Well! because you are not so
      stupid as he is.' And then she added, looking at me slyly: 'Nor so ugly,
      either: And before she could make a movement to avoid me I had implanted a
      hearty kiss on her cheek. She sprang aside, but it was too late, and then
      she said: 'Well, you are not very bashful, either! But don't do that sort
      of thing again.'
    

      “I put on a humble look and said in a low voice: 'Oh, mademoiselle!
      as for me, if I long for one thing more than another it is to be summoned
      before a magistrate for the same reason as Morin.'
    

      “'Why?' she asked. And, looking steadily at her, I replied: 'Because
      you are one of the most beautiful creatures living; because it would be an
      honor and a glory for me to have wished to offer you violence, and because
      people would have said, after seeing you: “Well, Labarbe has richly
      deserved what he has got, but he is a lucky fellow, all the same.”'
    

      “She began to laugh heartily again and said: 'How funny you are!'
      And she had not finished the word 'funny' before I had her in my arms and
      was kissing her ardently wherever I could find a place, on her forehead,
      on her eyes, on her lips occasionally, on her cheeks, all over her head,
      some part of which she was obliged to leave exposed, in spite of herself,
      to defend the others; but at last she managed to release herself, blushing
      and angry. 'You are very unmannerly, monsieur,' she said, 'and I am sorry
      I listened to you.'
    

      “I took her hand in some confusion and stammered out: 'I beg your
      pardon. I beg your pardon, mademoiselle. I have offended you; I have acted
      like a brute! Do not be angry with me for what I have done. If you knew—'
      I vainly sought for some excuse, and in a few moments she said: 'There is
      nothing for me to know, monsieur.' But I had found something to say, and I
      cried: 'Mademoiselle, I love you!'
    

      “She was really surprised and raised her eyes to look at me, and I
      went on: 'Yes, mademoiselle, and pray listen to me. I do not know Morin,
      and I do not care anything about him. It does not matter to me the least
      if he is committed for trial and locked up meanwhile. I saw you here last
      year, and I was so taken with you that the thought of you has never left
      me since, and it does not matter to me whether you believe me or not. I
      thought you adorable, and the remembrance of you took such a hold on me
      that I longed to see you again, and so I made use of that fool Morin as a
      pretext, and here I am. Circumstances have made me exceed the due limits
      of respect, and I can only beg you to pardon me.'
    

      “She looked at me to see if I was in earnest and was ready to smile
      again. Then she murmured: 'You humbug!' But I raised my hand and said in a
      sincere voice (and I really believe that I was sincere): 'I swear to you
      that I am speaking the truth,' and she replied quite simply: 'Don't talk
      nonsense!'
    

      “We were alone, quite alone, as Rivet and her uncle had disappeared
      down a sidewalk, and I made her a real declaration of love, while I
      squeezed and kissed her hands, and she listened to it as to something new
      and agreeable, without exactly knowing how much of it she was to believe,
      while in the end I felt agitated, and at last really myself believed what
      I said. I was pale, anxious and trembling, and I gently put my arm round
      her waist and spoke to her softly, whispering into the little curls over
      her ears. She seemed in a trance, so absorbed in thought was she.
    

      “Then her hand touched mine, and she pressed it, and I gently
      squeezed her waist with a trembling, and gradually firmer, grasp. She did
      not move now, and I touched her cheek with my lips, and suddenly without
      seeking them my lips met hers. It was a long, long kiss, and it would have
      lasted longer still if I had not heard a hm! hm! just behind me, at which
      she made her escape through the bushes, and turning round I saw Rivet
      coming toward me, and, standing in the middle of the path, he said without
      even smiling: 'So that is the way you settle the affair of that pig of a
      Morin.' And I replied conceitedly: 'One does what one can, my dear fellow.
      But what about the uncle? How have you got on with him? I will answer for
      the niece.' 'I have not been so fortunate with him,' he replied.
    

      “Whereupon I took his arm and we went indoors.” III
    

      “Dinner made me lose my head altogether. I sat beside her, and my
      hand continually met hers under the tablecloth, my foot touched hers and
      our glances met.
    

      “After dinner we took a walk by moonlight, and I whispered all the
      tender things I could think of to her. I held her close to me, kissed her
      every moment, while her uncle and Rivet were arguing as they walked in
      front of us. They went in, and soon a messenger brought a telegram from
      her aunt, saying that she would not return until the next morning at seven
      o'clock by the first train.
    

      “'Very well, Henriette,' her uncle said, 'go and show the gentlemen
      their rooms.' She showed Rivet his first, and he whispered to me: 'There
      was no danger of her taking us into yours first.' Then she took me to my
      room, and as soon as she was alone with me I took her in my arms again and
      tried to arouse her emotion, but when she saw the danger she escaped out
      of the room, and I retired very much put out and excited and feeling
      rather foolish, for I knew that I should not sleep much, and I was
      wondering how I could have committed such a mistake, when there was a
      gentle knock at my door, and on my asking who was there a low voice
      replied: 'I'
    

      “I dressed myself quickly and opened the door, and she came in. 'I
      forgot to ask you what you take in the morning,' she said; 'chocolate, tea
      or coffee?' I put my arms round her impetuously and said, devouring her
      with kisses: 'I will take—I will take—'
    

      “But she freed herself from my arms, blew out my candle and
      disappeared and left me alone in the dark, furious, trying to find some
      matches, and not able to do so. At last I got some and I went into the
      passage, feeling half mad, with my candlestick in my hand.
    

      “What was I about to do? I did not stop to reason, I only wanted to
      find her, and I would. I went a few steps without reflecting, but then I
      suddenly thought: 'Suppose I should walk into the uncle's room what should
      I say?' And I stood still, with my head a void and my heart beating. But
      in a few moments I thought of an answer: 'Of course, I shall say that I
      was looking for Rivet's room to speak to him about an important matter,'
      and I began to inspect all the doors, trying to find hers, and at last I
      took hold of a handle at a venture, turned it and went in. There was
      Henriette, sitting on her bed and looking at me in tears. So I gently
      turned the key, and going up to her on tiptoe I said: 'I forgot to ask you
      for something to read, mademoiselle.'
    

      “I was stealthily returning to my room when a rough hand seized me
      and a voice—it was Rivet's—whispered in my ear: 'So you have
      not yet quite settled that affair of Morin's?'
    

      “At seven o'clock the next morning Henriette herself brought me a
      cup of chocolate. I never have drunk anything like it, soft, velvety,
      perfumed, delicious. I could hardly take away my lips from the cup, and
      she had hardly left the room when Rivet came in. He seemed nervous and
      irritable, like a man who had not slept, and he said to me crossly:
    

      “'If you go on like this you will end by spoiling the affair of that
      pig of a Morin!'
    

      “At eight o'clock the aunt arrived. Our discussion was very short,
      for they withdrew their complaint, and I left five hundred francs for the
      poor of the town. They wanted to keep us for the day, and they arranged an
      excursion to go and see some ruins. Henriette made signs to me to stay,
      behind her parents' back, and I accepted, but Rivet was determined to go,
      and though I took him aside and begged and prayed him to do this for me,
      he appeared quite exasperated and kept saying to me: 'I have had enough of
      that pig of a Morin's affair, do you hear?'
    

      “Of course I was obliged to leave also, and it was one of the
      hardest moments of my life. I could have gone on arranging that business
      as long as I lived, and when we were in the railway carriage, after
      shaking hands with her in silence, I said to Rivet: 'You are a mere
      brute!' And he replied: 'My dear fellow, you were beginning to annoy me
      confoundedly.'
    

      “On getting to the Fanal office, I saw a crowd waiting for us, and
      as soon as they saw us they all exclaimed: 'Well, have you settled the
      affair of that pig of a Morin?' All La Rochelle was excited about it, and
      Rivet, who had got over his ill-humor on the journey, had great difficulty
      in keeping himself from laughing as he said: 'Yes, we have managed it,
      thanks to Labarbe: And we went to Morin's.
    

      “He was sitting in an easy-chair with mustard plasters on his legs
      and cold bandages on his head, nearly dead with misery. He was coughing
      with the short cough of a dying man, without any one knowing how he had
      caught it, and his wife looked at him like a tigress ready to eat him, and
      as soon as he saw us he trembled so violently as to make his hands and
      knees shake, so I said to him immediately: 'It is all settled, you dirty
      scamp, but don't do such a thing again.'
    

      “He got up, choking, took my hands and kissed them as if they had
      belonged to a prince, cried, nearly fainted, embraced Rivet and even
      kissed Madame Morin, who gave him such a push as to send him staggering
      back into his chair; but he never got over the blow; his mind had been too
      much upset. In all the country round, moreover, he was called nothing but
      'that pig of a Morin,' and that epithet went through him like a
      sword-thrust every time he heard it. When a street boy called after him
      'Pig!' he turned his head instinctively. His friends also overwhelmed him
      with horrible jokes and used to ask him, whenever they were eating ham,
      'Is it a bit of yourself?' He died two years later.
    

      “As for myself, when I was a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies
      in 1875, I called on the new notary at Fousserre, Monsieur Belloncle, to
      solicit his vote, and a tall, handsome and evidently wealthy lady received
      me. 'You do not know me again?' she said. And I stammered out: 'Why—no—madame.'
      'Henriette Bonnel.' 'Ah!' And I felt myself turning pale, while she seemed
      perfectly at her ease and looked at me with a smile.
    

      “As soon as she had left me alone with her husband he took both my
      hands, and, squeezing them as if he meant to crush them, he said: 'I have
      been intending to go and see you for a long time, my dear sir, for my wife
      has very often talked to me about you. I know—yes, I know under what
      painful circumstances you made her acquaintance, and I know also how
      perfectly you behaved, how full of delicacy, tact and devotion you showed
      yourself in the affair—' He hesitated and then said in a lower tone,
      as if he had been saying something low and coarse, 'in the affair of that
      pig of a Morin.'”