THE BEAUTIES
    

      I
    

      I REMEMBER, when I was a high school boy in the fifth or sixth class, I
      was driving with my grandfather from the village of Bolshoe Kryepkoe in
      the Don region to Rostov-on-the-Don. It was a sultry, languidly dreary day
      of August. Our eyes were glued together, and our mouths were parched from
      the heat and the dry burning wind which drove clouds of dust to meet us;
      one did not want to look or speak or think, and when our drowsy driver, a
      Little Russian called Karpo, swung his whip at the horses and lashed me on
      my cap, I did not protest or utter a sound, but only, rousing myself from
      half-slumber, gazed mildly and dejectedly into the distance to see whether
      there was a village visible through the dust. We stopped to feed the
      horses in a big Armenian village at a rich Armenian’s whom my
      grandfather knew. Never in my life have I seen a greater caricature than
      that Armenian. Imagine a little shaven head with thick overhanging
      eyebrows, a beak of a nose, long gray mustaches, and a wide mouth with a
      long cherry-wood chibouk sticking out of it. This little head was clumsily
      attached to a lean hunch-back carcass attired in a fantastic garb, a short
      red jacket, and full bright blue trousers. This figure walked straddling
      its legs and shuffling with its slippers, spoke without taking the chibouk
      out of its mouth, and behaved with truly Armenian dignity, not smiling,
      but staring with wide-open eyes and trying to take as little notice as
      possible of its guests.
    

      There was neither wind nor dust in the Armenian’s rooms, but it was
      just as unpleasant, stifling, and dreary as in the steppe and on the road.
      I remember, dusty and exhausted by the heat, I sat in the corner on a
      green box. The unpainted wooden walls, the furniture, and the floors
      colored with yellow ocher smelt of dry wood baked by the sun. Wherever I
      looked there were flies and flies and flies.... Grandfather and the
      Armenian were talking about grazing, about manure, and about oats.... I
      knew that they would be a good hour getting the samovar; that grandfather
      would be not less than an hour drinking his tea, and then would lie down
      to sleep for two or three hours; that I should waste a quarter of the day
      waiting, after which there would be again the heat, the dust, the jolting
      cart. I heard the muttering of the two voices, and it began to seem to me
      that I had been seeing the Armenian, the cupboard with the crockery, the
      flies, the windows with the burning sun beating on them, for ages and
      ages, and should only cease to see them in the far-off future, and I was
      seized with hatred for the steppe, the sun, the flies....
    

      A Little Russian peasant woman in a kerchief brought in a tray of
      tea-things, then the samovar. The Armenian went slowly out into the
      passage and shouted: “Mashya, come and pour out tea! Where are you,
      Mashya?”
    

      Hurried footsteps were heard, and there came into the room a girl of
      sixteen in a simple cotton dress and a white kerchief. As she washed the
      crockery and poured out the tea, she was standing with her back to me, and
      all I could see was that she was of a slender figure, barefooted, and that
      her little bare heels were covered by long trousers.
    

      The Armenian invited me to have tea. Sitting down to the table, I glanced
      at the girl, who was handing me a glass of tea, and felt all at once as
      though a wind were blowing over my soul and blowing away all the
      impressions of the day with their dust and dreariness. I saw the
      bewitching features of the most beautiful face I have ever met in real
      life or in my dreams. Before me stood a beauty, and I recognized that at
      the first glance as I should have recognized lightning.
    

      I am ready to swear that Masha—or, as her father called her, Mashya—was
      a real beauty, but I don’t know how to prove it. It sometimes
      happens that clouds are huddled together in disorder on the horizon, and
      the sun hiding behind them colors them and the sky with tints of every
      possible shade—crimson, orange, gold, lilac, muddy pink; one cloud
      is like a monk, another like a fish, a third like a Turk in a turban. The
      glow of sunset enveloping a third of the sky gleams on the cross on the
      church, flashes on the windows of the manor house, is reflected in the
      river and the puddles, quivers on the trees; far, far away against the
      background of the sunset, a flock of wild ducks is flying homewards....
      And the boy herding the cows, and the surveyor driving in his chaise over
      the dam, and the gentleman out for a walk, all gaze at the sunset, and
      every one of them thinks it terribly beautiful, but no one knows or can
      say in what its beauty lies.
    

      I was not the only one to think the Armenian girl beautiful. My
      grandfather, an old man of seventy, gruff and indifferent to women and the
      beauties of nature, looked caressingly at Masha for a full minute, and
      asked:
    

      “Is that your daughter, Avert Nazaritch?”
    

      “Yes, she is my daughter,” answered the Armenian.
    

      “A fine young lady,” said my grandfather approvingly.
    

      An artist would have called the Armenian girl’s beauty classical and
      severe, it was just that beauty, the contemplation of which—God
      knows why!—inspires in one the conviction that one is seeing correct
      features; that hair, eyes, nose, mouth, neck, bosom, and every movement of
      the young body all go together in one complete harmonious accord in which
      nature has not blundered over the smallest line. You fancy for some reason
      that the ideally beautiful woman must have such a nose as Masha’s,
      straight and slightly aquiline, just such great dark eyes, such long
      lashes, such a languid glance; you fancy that her black curly hair and
      eyebrows go with the soft white tint of her brow and cheeks as the green
      reeds go with the quiet stream. Masha’s white neck and her youthful
      bosom were not fully developed, but you fancy the sculptor would need a
      great creative genius to mold them. You gaze, and little by little the
      desire comes over you to say to Masha something extraordinarily pleasant,
      sincere, beautiful, as beautiful as she herself was.
    

      At first I felt hurt and abashed that Masha took no notice of me, but was
      all the time looking down; it seemed to me as though a peculiar
      atmosphere, proud and happy, separated her from me and jealously screened
      her from my eyes.
    

      “That’s because I am covered with dust,” I thought,
      “am sunburnt, and am still a boy.”
    

      But little by little I forgot myself, and gave myself up entirely to the
      consciousness of beauty. I thought no more now of the dreary steppe, of
      the dust, no longer heard the buzzing of the flies, no longer tasted the
      tea, and felt nothing except that a beautiful girl was standing only the
      other side of the table.
    

      I felt this beauty rather strangely. It was not desire, nor ecstacy, nor
      enjoyment that Masha excited in me, but a painful though pleasant sadness.
      It was a sadness vague and undefined as a dream. For some reason I felt
      sorry for myself, for my grandfather and for the Armenian, even for the
      girl herself, and I had a feeling as though we all four had lost something
      important and essential to life which we should never find again. My
      grandfather, too, grew melancholy; he talked no more about manure or about
      oats, but sat silent, looking pensively at Masha.
    

      After tea my grandfather lay down for a nap while I went out of the house
      into the porch. The house, like all the houses in the Armenian village
      stood in the full sun; there was not a tree, not an awning, no shade. The
      Armenian’s great courtyard, overgrown with goosefoot and wild
      mallows, was lively and full of gaiety in spite of the great heat.
      Threshing was going on behind one of the low hurdles which intersected the
      big yard here and there. Round a post stuck into the middle of the
      threshing-floor ran a dozen horses harnessed side by side, so that they
      formed one long radius. A Little Russian in a long waistcoat and full
      trousers was walking beside them, cracking a whip and shouting in a tone
      that sounded as though he were jeering at the horses and showing off his
      power over them.
    

      “A—a—a, you damned brutes!... A—a—a, plague
      take you! Are you frightened?”
    

      The horses, sorrel, white, and piebald, not understanding why they were
      made to run round in one place and to crush the wheat straw, ran
      unwillingly as though with effort, swinging their tails with an offended
      air. The wind raised up perfect clouds of golden chaff from under their
      hoofs and carried it away far beyond the hurdle. Near the tall fresh
      stacks peasant women were swarming with rakes, and carts were moving, and
      beyond the stacks in another yard another dozen similar horses were
      running round a post, and a similar Little Russian was cracking his whip
      and jeering at the horses.
    

      The steps on which I was sitting were hot; on the thin rails and here and
      there on the window-frames sap was oozing out of the wood from the heat;
      red ladybirds were huddling together in the streaks of shadow under the
      steps and under the shutters. The sun was baking me on my head, on my
      chest, and on my back, but I did not notice it, and was conscious only of
      the thud of bare feet on the uneven floor in the passage and in the rooms
      behind me. After clearing away the tea-things, Masha ran down the steps,
      fluttering the air as she passed, and like a bird flew into a little grimy
      outhouse—I suppose the kitchen—from which came the smell of
      roast mutton and the sound of angry talk in Armenian. She vanished into
      the dark doorway, and in her place there appeared on the threshold an old
      bent, red-faced Armenian woman wearing green trousers. The old woman was
      angry and was scolding someone. Soon afterwards Masha appeared in the
      doorway, flushed with the heat of the kitchen and carrying a big black
      loaf on her shoulder; swaying gracefully under the weight of the bread,
      she ran across the yard to the threshing-floor, darted over the hurdle,
      and, wrapt in a cloud of golden chaff, vanished behind the carts. The
      Little Russian who was driving the horses lowered his whip, sank into
      silence, and gazed for a minute in the direction of the carts. Then when
      the Armenian girl darted again by the horses and leaped over the hurdle,
      he followed her with his eyes, and shouted to the horses in a tone as
      though he were greatly disappointed:
    

      “Plague take you, unclean devils!”
    

      And all the while I was unceasingly hearing her bare feet, and seeing how
      she walked across the yard with a grave, preoccupied face. She ran now
      down the steps, swishing the air about me, now into the kitchen, now to
      the threshing-floor, now through the gate, and I could hardly turn my head
      quickly enough to watch her.
    

      And the oftener she fluttered by me with her beauty, the more acute became
      my sadness. I felt sorry both for her and for myself and for the Little
      Russian, who mournfully watched her every time she ran through the cloud
      of chaff to the carts. Whether it was envy of her beauty, or that I was
      regretting that the girl was not mine, and never would be, or that I was a
      stranger to her; or whether I vaguely felt that her rare beauty was
      accidental, unnecessary, and, like everything on earth, of short duration;
      or whether, perhaps, my sadness was that peculiar feeling which is excited
      in man by the contemplation of real beauty, God only knows.
    

      The three hours of waiting passed unnoticed. It seemed to me that I had
      not had time to look properly at Masha when Karpo drove up to the river,
      bathed the horse, and began to put it in the shafts. The wet horse snorted
      with pleasure and kicked his hoofs against the shafts. Karpo shouted to
      it: “Ba—ack!” My grandfather woke up. Masha opened the
      creaking gates for us, we got into the chaise and drove out of the yard.
      We drove in silence as though we were angry with one another.
    

      When, two or three hours later, Rostov and Nahitchevan appeared in the
      distance, Karpo, who had been silent the whole time, looked round quickly,
      and said:
    

      “A fine wench, that at the Armenian’s.”
    

      And he lashed his horses.
    

      II
    

      Another time, after I had become a student, I was traveling by rail to the
      south. It was May. At one of the stations, I believe it was between
      Byelgorod and Harkov, I got out of the tram to walk about the platform.
    

      The shades of evening were already lying on the station garden, on the
      platform, and on the fields; the station screened off the sunset, but on
      the topmost clouds of smoke from the engine, which were tinged with rosy
      light, one could see the sun had not yet quite vanished.
    

      As I walked up and down the platform I noticed that the greater number of
      the passengers were standing or walking near a second-class compartment,
      and that they looked as though some celebrated person were in that
      compartment. Among the curious whom I met near this compartment I saw,
      however, an artillery officer who had been my fellow-traveler, an
      intelligent, cordial, and sympathetic fellow—as people mostly are
      whom we meet on our travels by chance and with whom we are not long
      acquainted.
    

      “What are you looking at there?” I asked.
    

      He made no answer, but only indicated with his eyes a feminine figure. It
      was a young girl of seventeen or eighteen, wearing a Russian dress, with
      her head bare and a little shawl flung carelessly on one shoulder; not a
      passenger, but I suppose a sister or daughter of the station-master. She
      was standing near the carriage window, talking to an elderly woman who was
      in the train. Before I had time to realize what I was seeing, I was
      suddenly overwhelmed by the feeling I had once experienced in the Armenian
      village.
    

      The girl was remarkably beautiful, and that was unmistakable to me and to
      those who were looking at her as I was.
    

      If one is to describe her appearance feature by feature, as the practice
      is, the only really lovely thing was her thick wavy fair hair, which hung
      loose with a black ribbon tied round her head; all the other features were
      either irregular or very ordinary. Either from a peculiar form of
      coquettishness, or from short-sightedness, her eyes were screwed up, her
      nose had an undecided tilt, her mouth was small, her profile was feebly
      and insipidly drawn, her shoulders were narrow and undeveloped for her age—and
      yet the girl made the impression of being really beautiful, and looking at
      her, I was able to feel convinced that the Russian face does not need
      strict regularity in order to be lovely; what is more, that if instead of
      her turn-up nose the girl had been given a different one, correct and
      plastically irreproachable like the Armenian girl’s, I fancy her
      face would have lost all its charm from the change.
    

      Standing at the window talking, the girl, shrugging at the evening damp,
      continually looking round at us, at one moment put her arms akimbo, at the
      next raised her hands to her head to straighten her hair, talked, laughed,
      while her face at one moment wore an expression of wonder, the next of
      horror, and I don’t remember a moment when her face and body were at
      rest. The whole secret and magic of her beauty lay just in these tiny,
      infinitely elegant movements, in her smile, in the play of her face, in
      her rapid glances at us, in the combination of the subtle grace of her
      movements with her youth, her freshness, the purity of her soul that
      sounded in her laugh and voice, and with the weakness we love so much in
      children, in birds, in fawns, and in young trees.
    

      It was that butterfly’s beauty so in keeping with waltzing, darting
      about the garden, laughter and gaiety, and incongruous with serious
      thought, grief, and repose; and it seemed as though a gust of wind blowing
      over the platform, or a fall of rain, would be enough to wither the
      fragile body and scatter the capricious beauty like the pollen of a
      flower.
    

      “So—o!...” the officer muttered with a sigh when, after
      the second bell, we went back to our compartment.
    

      And what that “So—o” meant I will not undertake to
      decide.
    

      Perhaps he was sad, and did not want to go away from the beauty and the
      spring evening into the stuffy train; or perhaps he, like me, was
      unaccountably sorry for the beauty, for himself, and for me, and for all
      the passengers, who were listlessly and reluctantly sauntering back to
      their compartments. As we passed the station window, at which a pale,
      red-haired telegraphist with upstanding curls and a faded, broad-cheeked
      face was sitting beside his apparatus, the officer heaved a sigh and said:
    

      “I bet that telegraphist is in love with that pretty girl. To live
      out in the wilds under one roof with that ethereal creature and not fall
      in love is beyond the power of man. And what a calamity, my friend! what
      an ironical fate, to be stooping, unkempt, gray, a decent fellow and not a
      fool, and to be in love with that pretty, stupid little girl who would
      never take a scrap of notice of you! Or worse still: imagine that
      telegraphist is in love, and at the same time married, and that his wife
      is as stooping, as unkempt, and as decent a person as himself.”
    

      On the platform between our carriage and the next the guard was standing
      with his elbows on the railing, looking in the direction of the beautiful
      girl, and his battered, wrinkled, unpleasantly beefy face, exhausted by
      sleepless nights and the jolting of the train, wore a look of tenderness
      and of the deepest sadness, as though in that girl he saw happiness, his
      own youth, soberness, purity, wife, children; as though he were repenting
      and feeling in his whole being that that girl was not his, and that for
      him, with his premature old age, his uncouthness, and his beefy face, the
      ordinary happiness of a man and a passenger was as far away as heaven....
    

      The third bell rang, the whistles sounded, and the train slowly moved off.
      First the guard, the station-master, then the garden, the beautiful girl
      with her exquisitely sly smile, passed before our windows....
    

      Putting my head out and looking back, I saw how, looking after the train,
      she walked along the platform by the window where the telegraph clerk was
      sitting, smoothed her hair, and ran into the garden. The station no longer
      screened off the sunset, the plain lay open before us, but the sun had
      already set and the smoke lay in black clouds over the green, velvety
      young corn. It was melancholy in the spring air, and in the darkening sky,
      and in the railway carriage.
    

      The familiar figure of the guard came into the carriage, and he began
      lighting the candles.
    







      THE SHOEMAKER AND THE DEVIL
    

IT was Christmas
      Eve. Marya had long been snoring on the stove; all the paraffin in the
      little lamp had burnt out, but Fyodor Nilov still sat at work. He would
      long ago have flung aside his work and gone out into the street, but a
      customer from Kolokolny Lane, who had a fortnight before ordered some
      boots, had been in the previous day, had abused him roundly, and had
      ordered him to finish the boots at once before the morning service.
    

      “It’s a convict’s life!” Fyodor grumbled as he
      worked. “Some people have been asleep long ago, others are enjoying
      themselves, while you sit here like some Cain and sew for the devil knows
      whom....”
    

      To save himself from accidentally falling asleep, he kept taking a bottle
      from under the table and drinking out of it, and after every pull at it he
      twisted his head and said aloud:
    

      “What is the reason, kindly tell me, that customers enjoy themselves
      while I am forced to sit and work for them? Because they have money and I
      am a beggar?”
    

      He hated all his customers, especially the one who lived in Kolokolny
      Lane. He was a gentleman of gloomy appearance, with long hair, a yellow
      face, blue spectacles, and a husky voice. He had a German name which one
      could not pronounce. It was impossible to tell what was his calling and
      what he did. When, a fortnight before, Fyodor had gone to take his
      measure, he, the customer, was sitting on the floor pounding something in
      a mortar. Before Fyodor had time to say good-morning the contents of the
      mortar suddenly flared up and burned with a bright red flame; there was a
      stink of sulphur and burnt feathers, and the room was filled with a thick
      pink smoke, so that Fyodor sneezed five times; and as he returned home
      afterwards, he thought: “Anyone who feared God would not have
      anything to do with things like that.”
    

      When there was nothing left in the bottle Fyodor put the boots on the
      table and sank into thought. He leaned his heavy head on his fist and
      began thinking of his poverty, of his hard life with no glimmer of light
      in it. Then he thought of the rich, of their big houses and their
      carriages, of their hundred-rouble notes.... How nice it would be if the
      houses of these rich men—the devil flay them!—were smashed, if
      their horses died, if their fur coats and sable caps got shabby! How
      splendid it would be if the rich, little by little, changed into beggars
      having nothing, and he, a poor shoemaker, were to become rich, and were to
      lord it over some other poor shoemaker on Christmas Eve.
    

      Dreaming like this, Fyodor suddenly thought of his work, and opened his
      eyes.
    

      “Here’s a go,” he thought, looking at the boots. “The
      job has been finished ever so long ago, and I go on sitting here. I must
      take the boots to the gentleman.”
    

      He wrapped up the work in a red handkerchief, put on his things, and went
      out into the street. A fine hard snow was falling, pricking the face as
      though with needles. It was cold, slippery, dark, the gas-lamps burned
      dimly, and for some reason there was a smell of paraffin in the street, so
      that Fyodor coughed and cleared his throat. Rich men were driving to and
      fro on the road, and every rich man had a ham and a bottle of vodka in his
      hands. Rich young ladies peeped at Fyodor out of the carriages and
      sledges, put out their tongues and shouted, laughing:
    

      “Beggar! Beggar!”
    

      Students, officers, and merchants walked behind Fyodor, jeering at him and
      crying:
    

      “Drunkard! Drunkard! Infidel cobbler! Soul of a boot-leg! Beggar!”
    

      All this was insulting, but Fyodor held his tongue and only spat in
      disgust. But when Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw, a master-bootmaker, met him
      and said: “I’ve married a rich woman and I have men working
      under me, while you are a beggar and have nothing to eat,” Fyodor
      could not refrain from running after him. He pursued him till he found
      himself in Kolokolny Lane. His customer lived in the fourth house from the
      corner on the very top floor. To reach him one had to go through a long,
      dark courtyard, and then to climb up a very high slippery stair-case which
      tottered under one’s feet. When Fyodor went in to him he was sitting
      on the floor pounding something in a mortar, just as he had been the
      fortnight before.
    

      “Your honor, I have brought your boots,” said Fyodor sullenly.
    

      The customer got up and began trying on the boots in silence. Desiring to
      help him, Fyodor went down on one knee and pulled off his old, boot, but
      at once jumped up and staggered towards the door in horror. The customer
      had not a foot, but a hoof like a horse’s.
    

      “Aha!” thought Fyodor; “here’s a go!”
    

      The first thing should have been to cross himself, then to leave
      everything and run downstairs; but he immediately reflected that he was
      meeting a devil for the first and probably the last time, and not to take
      advantage of his services would be foolish. He controlled himself and
      determined to try his luck. Clasping his hands behind him to avoid making
      the sign of the cross, he coughed respectfully and began:
    

      “They say that there is nothing on earth more evil and impure than
      the devil, but I am of the opinion, your honor, that the devil is highly
      educated. He has—excuse my saying it—hoofs and a tail behind,
      but he has more brains than many a student.”
    

      “I like you for what you say,” said the devil, flattered.
      “Thank you, shoemaker! What do you want?”
    

      And without loss of time the shoemaker began complaining of his lot. He
      began by saying that from his childhood up he had envied the rich. He had
      always resented it that all people did not live alike in big houses and
      drive with good horses. Why, he asked, was he poor? How was he worse than
      Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw, who had his own house, and whose wife wore a
      hat? He had the same sort of nose, the same hands, feet, head, and back,
      as the rich, and so why was he forced to work when others were enjoying
      themselves? Why was he married to Marya and not to a lady smelling of
      scent? He had often seen beautiful young ladies in the houses of rich
      customers, but they either took no notice of him whatever, or else
      sometimes laughed and whispered to each other: “What a red nose that
      shoemaker has!” It was true that Marya was a good, kind,
      hard-working woman, but she was not educated; her hand was heavy and hit
      hard, and if one had occasion to speak of politics or anything
      intellectual before her, she would put her spoke in and talk the most
      awful nonsense.
    

      “What do you want, then?” his customer interrupted him.
    

      “I beg you, your honor Satan Ivanitch, to be graciously pleased to
      make me a rich man.”
    

      “Certainly. Only for that you must give me up your soul! Before the
      cocks crow, go and sign on this paper here that you give me up your soul.”
    

      “Your honor,” said Fyodor politely, “when you ordered a
      pair of boots from me I did not ask for the money in advance. One has
      first to carry out the order and then ask for payment.”
    

      “Oh, very well!” the customer assented.
    

      A bright flame suddenly flared up in the mortar, a pink thick smoke came
      puffing out, and there was a smell of burnt feathers and sulphur. When the
      smoke had subsided, Fyodor rubbed his eyes and saw that he was no longer
      Fyodor, no longer a shoemaker, but quite a different man, wearing a
      waistcoat and a watch-chain, in a new pair of trousers, and that he was
      sitting in an armchair at a big table. Two foot men were handing him
      dishes, bowing low and saying:
    

      “Kindly eat, your honor, and may it do you good!”
    

      What wealth! The footmen handed him a big piece of roast mutton and a dish
      of cucumbers, and then brought in a frying-pan a roast goose, and a little
      afterwards boiled pork with horse-radish cream. And how dignified, how
      genteel it all was! Fyodor ate, and before each dish drank a big glass of
      excellent vodka, like some general or some count. After the pork he was
      handed some boiled grain moistened with goose fat, then an omelette with
      bacon fat, then fried liver, and he went on eating and was delighted. What
      more? They served, too, a pie with onion and steamed turnip with kvass.
    

      “How is it the gentry don’t burst with such meals?” he
      thought.
    

      In conclusion they handed him a big pot of honey. After dinner the devil
      appeared in blue spectacles and asked with a low bow:
    

      “Are you satisfied with your dinner, Fyodor Pantelyeitch?”
    

      But Fyodor could not answer one word, he was so stuffed after his dinner.
      The feeling of repletion was unpleasant, oppressive, and to distract his
      thoughts he looked at the boot on his left foot.
    

      “For a boot like that I used not to take less than seven and a half
      roubles. What shoemaker made it?” he asked.
    

      “Kuzma Lebyodkin,” answered the footman.
    

      “Send for him, the fool!”
    

      Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw soon made his appearance. He stopped in a
      respectful attitude at the door and asked:
    

      “What are your orders, your honor?”
    

      “Hold your tongue!” cried Fyodor, and stamped his foot.
      “Don’t dare to argue; remember your place as a cobbler!
      Blockhead! You don’t know how to make boots! I’ll beat your
      ugly phiz to a jelly! Why have you come?”
    

      “For money.”
    

      “What money? Be off! Come on Saturday! Boy, give him a cuff!”
    

      But he at once recalled what a life the customers used to lead him, too,
      and he felt heavy at heart, and to distract his attention he took a fat
      pocketbook out of his pocket and began counting his money. There was a
      great deal of money, but Fyodor wanted more still. The devil in the blue
      spectacles brought him another notebook fatter still, but he wanted even
      more; and the more he counted it, the more discontented he became.
    

      In the evening the evil one brought him a full-bosomed lady in a red
      dress, and said that this was his new wife. He spent the whole evening
      kissing her and eating gingerbreads, and at night he went to bed on a
      soft, downy feather-bed, turned from side to side, and could not go to
      sleep. He felt uncanny.
    

      “We have a great deal of money,” he said to his wife; “we
      must look out or thieves will be breaking in. You had better go and look
      with a candle.”
    

      He did not sleep all night, and kept getting up to see if his box was all
      right. In the morning he had to go to church to matins. In church the same
      honor is done to rich and poor alike. When Fyodor was poor he used to pray
      in church like this: “God, forgive me, a sinner!” He said the
      same thing now though he had become rich. What difference was there? And
      after death Fyodor rich would not be buried in gold, not in diamonds, but
      in the same black earth as the poorest beggar. Fyodor would burn in the
      same fire as cobblers. Fyodor resented all this, and, too, he felt weighed
      down all over by his dinner, and instead of prayer he had all sorts of
      thoughts in his head about his box of money, about thieves, about his
      bartered, ruined soul.
    

      He came out of church in a bad temper. To drive away his unpleasant
      thoughts as he had often done before, he struck up a song at the top of
      his voice. But as soon as he began a policeman ran up and said, with his
      fingers to the peak of his cap:
    

      “Your honor, gentlefolk must not sing in the street! You are not a
      shoemaker!”
    

      Fyodor leaned his back against a fence and fell to thinking: what could he
      do to amuse himself?
    

      “Your honor,” a porter shouted to him, “don’t lean
      against the fence, you will spoil your fur coat!”
    

      Fyodor went into a shop and bought himself the very best concertina, then
      went out into the street playing it. Everybody pointed at him and laughed.
    

      “And a gentleman, too,” the cabmen jeered at him; “like
      some cobbler....”
    

      “Is it the proper thing for gentlefolk to be disorderly in the
      street?” a policeman said to him. “You had better go into a
      tavern!”
    

      “Your honor, give us a trifle, for Christ’s sake,” the
      beggars wailed, surrounding Fyodor on all sides.
    

      In earlier days when he was a shoemaker the beggars took no notice of him,
      now they wouldn’t let him pass.
    

      And at home his new wife, the lady, was waiting for him, dressed in a
      green blouse and a red skirt. He meant to be attentive to her, and had
      just lifted his arm to give her a good clout on the back, but she said
      angrily:
    

      “Peasant! Ignorant lout! You don’t know how to behave with
      ladies! If you love me you will kiss my hand; I don’t allow you to
      beat me.”
    

      “This is a blasted existence!” thought Fyodor. “People
      do lead a life! You mustn’t sing, you mustn’t play the
      concertina, you mustn’t have a lark with a lady.... Pfoo!”
    

      He had no sooner sat down to tea with the lady when the evil spirit in the
      blue spectacles appeared and said:
    

      “Come, Fyodor Pantelyeitch, I have performed my part of the bargain.
      Now sign your paper and come along with me!”
    

      And he dragged Fyodor to hell, straight to the furnace, and devils flew up
      from all directions and shouted:
    

      “Fool! Blockhead! Ass!”
    

      There was a fearful smell of paraffin in hell, enough to suffocate one.
      And suddenly it all vanished. Fyodor opened his eyes and saw his table,
      the boots, and the tin lamp. The lamp-glass was black, and from the faint
      light on the wick came clouds of stinking smoke as from a chimney. Near
      the table stood the customer in the blue spectacles, shouting angrily:
    

      “Fool! Blockhead! Ass! I’ll give you a lesson, you scoundrel!
      You took the order a fortnight ago and the boots aren’t ready yet!
      Do you suppose I want to come trapesing round here half a dozen times a
      day for my boots? You wretch! you brute!”
    

      Fyodor shook his head and set to work on the boots. The customer went on
      swearing and threatening him for a long time. At last when he subsided,
      Fyodor asked sullenly:
    

      “And what is your occupation, sir?”
    

      “I make Bengal lights and fireworks. I am a pyrotechnician.”
    

      They began ringing for matins. Fyodor gave the customer the boots, took
      the money for them, and went to church.
    

      Carriages and sledges with bearskin rugs were dashing to and fro in the
      street; merchants, ladies, officers were walking along the pavement
      together with the humbler folk.... But Fyodor did not envy them nor repine
      at his lot. It seemed to him now that rich and poor were equally badly
      off. Some were able to drive in a carriage, and others to sing songs at
      the top of their voice and to play the concertina, but one and the same
      thing, the same grave, was awaiting all alike, and there was nothing in
      life for which one would give the devil even a tiny scrap of one’s
      soul.
    

 


The Wife and Other Stories