THE BACKSLIDING OF HARRIET BLAKE

 The Rev. Mr. Freeland looked down the long,
narrow poorhouse table, and then glanced inquiringly
at the matron.

 "What has become of Harriet Blake, Mrs.
Markham?" he asked. "I thought she sat at this
table—I hope she's not ill?"

 "Harriet's backslid," announced the Widow
Sheldon laconically. She was a Baptist, of the
variety sometimes known as hard-shelled, and made
nothing of interrupting the discourse of any representative
of a denomination unpleasing to her.

 "Backslid?" repeated the reverend guest, dropping
his napkin.

 "She don't believe in——"

 "Harriet," interrupted the matron, somewhat
crossly, and with an unconcealed frown for the
Widow Sheldon, "Harriet is taking her dinner
alone. She—she is not quite well, I think. I will speak to you about her later," she added as the
pastor's eyes grew round at her. The widow
Sheldon sniffed loudly.

 "A person who has ter have her vittles carried
up ter the bed-chamber on account o' losing any
little faith she might 'a had," she began, but old
Uncle Peterson broke in with his gentle drawl:

 "Oh, come on, Mis' Sheldon, don't go and spile
a good biled dinner with words o' bitterness," he
urged. "Harriet's a good woman, as is known to
all, and if she's travellin' through dark ways just
now——"

 The pastor looked puzzled, but he saw that the
subject was better left alone: previous visits to
the poorhouse had led him to dread the Widow
Sheldon's tongue. He nodded approvingly at
Uncle Peterson.

 "Quite right, quite right," he said quickly.
"That's the spirit for us all to have. Shall I ask
the blessing, Mrs. Markham?" And the meal
went on.

 But there was something in the air that hot
Sunday noon; something that lent variety to the usual monotony of the querulous meal-times. There
was less comment on the food than was usual, and
the Widow Sheldon's resentful silence was more
impressive than her ordinary vindictive volubility.
It appeared that something had actually happened.

 Once in her private sitting-room the matron
began, low-voiced, with an occasional glance at the
closed door, as if to make certain that no curious
inmate lurked behind it:

 "If Harriet Blake doesn't grow more sensible
very soon I shall certainly go crazy; I invited you,
Mr. Freeland, to dinner to-day because Harriet
used to like your prayers in the afternoon, and
it may help her to talk to you—but I don't know.
She's a very obstinate old lady. The whole house
talks about nothing else, and she's just morbid
enough to like it. They gossip about her and fight
about her till the air is blue with it. It was bad
enough at election time, but religion is worse than
politics."

 The pastor made as if he would interrupt, but
she overbore him.

 "If you can't stop her she must go home to
her niece, though she can't really afford to keep
her and oughtn't to be asked——"

 "Do I understand that Harriet is in doubt—has
lost her Christian faith?"

 "Oh, well—no; but in a way I suppose she
has. She says that she—she can't see—in fact,
she doesn't believe any more in the Holy
Ghost!"

 "Doesn't believe in h—in it?" Mr. Freeland
was absolutely unprepared for precisely this form
of agnosticism, and showed it.

 "She says she doesn't see any sense in it," responded
Mrs. Markham, briefly.

 "Oh—ah, yes!" The pastor looked vaguely over
her head. There was a pause, and then he gathered
himself together.

 "But this—this is all wrong!" he said forcibly.

 "So we tell her," replied the matron.

 "It is sinful—it is extremely dangerous!" he
repeated, still more forcibly.

 "That's what the Widow Sheldon says," replied
the matron. "She lectures her about it every meal, and Harriet can't stand it. She says she can't help
what she believes, and I can't blame her for
that."

 "How long——"

 "She's been so for two weeks now, and she gets
worse and worse. I had the Methodist minister—Harriet
used to attend that church—up to talk
to her about it, to see if she'd feel better, and he
talked for four hours. Harriet sat as still as a
stone, he said, and never moved or paid the least
attention to him. Finally he asked her why she
didn't answer, and she said he hadn't asked her
opinion that she could see. So he asked her what it
was, and she said that the Lord Almighty created
the earth and that his Son, the Redeemer, saved
it, and she didn't see anything more for the Holy
Ghost to do. And everything that he told her she
said one or the other could do perfectly well alone!
And the angrier Mr. Dent got, the calmer Harriet
was, I suppose, for he left in a rage, almost—I
suppose it was trying, even for a minister—and
when I went up to Harriet she seemed very calm.
She told me triumphantly that the last thing she did was to show him that big Bible of hers with
the picture in the front, where she's crossed out
the figure of the dove with ink, and to tell him
that she was no Papist, to worship graven images
of birds!"

 Mr. Freeland shook his head gravely. "Dear,
dear, dear!" he said.

 "And then I got Dr. Henshawe from St. Mary's,
in the city, you know, who's out here this summer,
to come in. He's a very fine man, and very interesting.
He stayed a while with Harriet, and told
her not to mind, but to go on, and pray, and do
the best she could, and she couldn't be blamed.
He told me afterwards that he was far from considering
her religious condition a safe one, but
that she would soon be ill, and was growing morbid,
and he tried to soothe her. She fell into a
dreadful passion, and called him a lukewarm
Jesuit, and told him that she was going to hell
just because she couldn't believe in the Holy
Ghost! He was very polite and quiet, and picked
a rose when he went—he complimented the house—but
Harriet wouldn't eat any dinner nor tea, she was so angry. Of course it excites the others—they
haven't much to think about, you know—and
I'm really growing nervous. Old William
Peterson, that gentle old man, preached a revivalist
sermon day before yesterday, and got
them all stirred up, so that Mrs. Sheldon groaned
and cried all night, and kept Sarah Waters awake.
And when Sarah stays awake all night, there's
no living with her—none!"

 Mr. Freeland looked frankly puzzled. He was
not a particularly able man, and very far from
originality of any sort. His doctrinal position,
though always considered very solid, was somewhat
stereotyped, and he had never happened to
run against this peculiar form of apostasy. But he
was a kindly man, and very honestly convinced of
the responsibility of his position; moreover, he remembered
Harriet pleasantly; he had thought her
a very nice old lady. So he took his little Bible out
of his pocket, and hoped that a desire to succeed
where Mr. Dent and Dr. Henshawe had failed
would not be accounted to him for unrighteousness.

 Mrs. Markham led the way across the hall and
up the stairs. Before a door she paused to say,
"As long as Harriet is upset in this way she has
the room alone, because Mary Smith scolds her all
night for being so sinful, and it makes them both
cross. Mary is in the hall-room, and talks in her
sleep so that nobody can rest very well. It doesn't
disturb Harriet at all, she's such a sound sleeper,
and I wish she could go back! You don't know
how this disturbs us! Remember that we have
prayer-meeting at half-past four," and she left
him alone before the door.

 Mr. Freeland knocked loudly and entered. Before
him in the clean, bare room, with its rag-carpets,
mats, and pine furnishings, sat a little
old woman, her hands folded in her lap, her head
erect, her eyes fixed uncompromisingly on the
door. He started as he saw her face; it was so
changed from the time, two weeks or more ago,
when he had delivered that admirable prayer for
charity and loving kindness on the occasion when
the Widow Sheldon had thrown the butter-plate
at old Mis' Landers. Thin and sunken, with dark serried hollows under her still bright eyes—she
had aged ten years in those weeks.

 "My sister, my poor, suffering, misled sister,"
began the pastor; but Harriet's eyes flashed
ominously.

 "If you come to talk to me about that Holy
Ghost, I ain't got nothin' to say," she declared,
"an' if you think I'm goin' to say another word
myself, you're mistaken. I'm a pore sinful woman,
but I ain't goin' to be pestered t' death! I'm doin'
the best I can 'bout it, an' I've prayed 'bout it,
an' Mr. Dent an' a Papist, they both talked 'bout
it till I nearly died. I don't see any more sense
in it than I did before—not a morsel. So if that's
what brought you, you might just as well start
back this minute!"

 Her reverend guest stared at her dumfounded.
Was this the little woman who had pressed his
hand at the prayer-meeting and thanked him so
piously, so meekly, for such "beautiful prayin'?"

 "You are greatly changed since I saw you last,
Miss Blake," he said gravely. "Your spirit was gentler, your mind was more religiously inclined.
I found you——"

 "You didn't find me pestered t' death," said
Harriet briefly, somewhat mollified by his "Miss
Blake."

 "I was led to believe that you were suffering,
that you were in trouble," hazarded the
pastor.

 Never in his somewhat self-sufficient life had he
felt such difficulty in giving spiritual advice. Even
to his thick-skinned personality it was deeply evident
that this sharp-tongued little woman was in
great trouble. Ordinarily, a certain facility for
quotation and application made him a confident
speaker, but to-day he felt impeded, held back
by the self-control and patience of his listener.
For he saw that she was patient; that she
could say much more if she chose; that she
was, beneath all her sharpness, alarmed and worried.

 His somewhat perplexed air, his evident memory
of her earlier estate, his startled recognition
of her changed appearance had the effect that nothing else could have had. Her hands twisted
nervously in her lap, her mouth twitched, she
dropped her eyes, and opened her lips once or
twice without speaking. Suddenly, with a little
gasp, she began:

 "If you think I don't care, you're mistaken.
I'm just about sick. I been a Christian and a
good believer all my life, and now I ain't. Maybe
I don't care about that? They just pester me
t' death, and Mis' Markham, she can't stop 'em.
They'll send me back to Sarah's, that's my niece,
and they can't keep me there. They ain't good to
me there, and I get fever 'n ague every day o'
my life there. But I can't help it—I can't help
it! I got ter go!"

 Some good angel held Mr. Freeland silent, and
after a moment she went on.

 "I'm sixty-two years old, and I never was anything
but a churchgoer an' a believer. Two weeks
ago to-day I set in this chair an' looked out the
winder, an' I see the birds pickin' in the front
yard."

 He followed her eyes and watched for a mo ment
the poor house pigeons preening and posing
in the noon sun. They whitened the summer grass,
and their clucking and cooing formed the undertone
of the old woman's confession.

 "I see 'em there, and I got thinkin' about the
dove in my Bible an' the Holy Ghost. And it just
come into my mind like a shot—what's the good
of it? What'd it ever done for me? What's the
sense of a bird, anyhow? An' I worked over it,
and I worried over it, an' I got to talkin' with Mis'
Sheldon about it while we was workin' together, and
she just made me hate it more. She said I'd go to
hell—me, a believer for sixty-two years! An' I've
cried till I can't cry any more, an' I've prayed
till I'm tired of prayin', and nothin' happens to
me exceptin' I hate it more. An' if they send me
back to Sarah's I'll die, that's the truth. But I'll
have t' go—I'll have t' go!"

 She rocked back and forth, dry-eyed, but in an
agony of grief. The pastor remembered the time
when he had wrestled with certain damnation in
the form of terrible religious doubt, and experienced
again that peculiar helplessness, that isola tion,
that terror of hope gone from him that had
dignified even his commonplace life. His vocabulary
forsook him, his periods and phrases receded
from his mind like the tide from the beach, and
left it bare of suggestion. He looked at her for a
moment, and as she bent her tired old head over
her arm and sobbed the dry, creaking sob of
the ageing spirit that looks forward to no long
and gayer future, he felt that the time was short
and kindness not too lenient for the sinner.

 "I will send my wife over," he said, suddenly.
"Would—would you want to see her?"

 Harriet had stiffened again and got herself in
hand. "I don't want that any one should put 'emselves
out for me," she said dryly. "I guess I'll
get along. I'd just as lief see Mis' Freeland if it
ain't any trouble to any one. But I don't know
as anybody c'n do anything. I ain't very pleasant
comp'ny. An' I dunno as the room's cleared up
enough. I ain't swept it sence day before yesterday."

 Her guest had risen and moved toward the door.
He felt curiously cold and dull. Was this the help he had come to give? His tongue was
tied; his lips refused to utter even one text.

 "Good-afternoon, Miss Blake," he said.

 "Good-afternoon," said Harriet, and he went
out.

 She shut the door behind him, and stood for a
moment looking at the pigeons. Emotion had
shaken her too often of late, and she was too tired
to bear more confusion of feeling. She only knew
that she was very tired, and that she should like
to get away from the scene of so many struggles.
Suddenly she took her gingham sunbonnet from
the wall, and left the room. She went softly down
the hall, and slipping through the screen door near
the lower end crept down the back stairs and
through the deserted kitchen.

 A Sunday stillness reigned there, and no one
was near to see her. She got a piece of bread from
the large pantry, and noticed with disgust that
the shelves were dusty and the bread-tin full of
pieces and crusts. To keep this neat was her work,
but she had been excused for the last three days,
since she was far too weak to manage it. Out through the last blind-door, and she was in the field
behind the barn. She walked feverishly to the little
wood close by and sank down exhausted under a
large chestnut-tree.

 "I'm tired—I'm dead tired out!" she whispered
to herself. "I'll just stay here a minute 'fore I
go on."

 Had Mr. Freeland seen her then he would have
been more startled than before, for two red
spots burned in her sunken cheeks and her eyes
glittered unnaturally. She had not eaten since
breakfast, for the boiled dinner had sickened her,
and though she was weak for want of food she
had not strength to munch the great piece of rye
bread. Her head swam a little and strange tunes
seemed to sound all about her. Her mother's voice,
almost in her ear, sang her to sleep with the Old
Hundred Doxology, and for a moment she listened
entranced, but as the phantom voice reached the
last line she opened her eyes.

 "No, no!" she screamed. "No, no! I won't sing
to a bird! I won't! I'll go to Sarah's first!"

 A stillness that frightened her followed. Some thing
pattered beside her, and she looked apprehensively
at the sky through a rift in the branches.

 "Don't say it's rain!" she whispered, nervously.
"I'm fearful scairt o' thunder-storms!"

 The sky was rapidly clouding over, and a growl
of thunder answered her. She started up, but fell
helplessly back.

 "O Lord, I can't move! I can't move a step!
I'm too heavy!" she cried in terror. The storm
came on fast; the branches shook under a sudden
wind, and the birds grew still. She was too
weak to realise fully her situation, but what consciousness
she owned was swallowed up in terror. A
sudden flash, and she shrank together with a moan.

 "I'm out o' my head—I'm not really here—I'm
in the house—I wouldn't be here f'r anything!"
she whispered. A heavy clap, and she screamed
with fear. The time when she left the house was
far away and misty in her mind. She could not
remember coming. The drops struck her in quick
succession and the muttering grew more frequent,
the flashes brighter. Sick with fright, she cowered
under the tree. Her childhood unfolded before her, her girlhood; her poor pinched life assumed a
glory and fulness it had never had. So warm, so
sheltered, so contented it seemed to her.

 A great harsh clap shook the little wood and a
vivid glare wrapped her about. With a wail she
fell back against the tree-trunk. Her mind was
clear again, she recalled everything. She had been
led out here to die. She was summoned forth to
meet the judgment of God. Heretic, infidel, blasphemer
that she was, she was to go before Him
that day!

 Her clothes were soaked with rain, she shivered
with cold, she was too weak to take a step, but
she staggered to her knees and folded her hands.
The tree swayed above her, the wood was dark
as night, the rain to her weak nerves was deafening;
the powers of darkness raged about her. She
tried to pray for forgiveness, for peace at the last,
but in her mind, all too clear, was the remembrance
of her life for two weeks past. She set her teeth to
keep them from chattering so, and shivering at
each clap and gasping at each flash, she prayed:

 "O Lord, if you are sendin' this storm to pun ish
me, I can't help it. I've believed in you all my
life, and I'm sixty-two and I'm going to die in
a thunder-storm. If it'll save me to believe in the
Holy Ghost, then I'll have to be damned eternally
as the Widder Sheldon says you'll do, for I can't,
I can't, I can't! I' been a believer all my life, and
I' only been this way two weeks, and if that counts
against all the rest, I'll just haf' to go to hell,
that's all. Feelin' as I do, you can't expect me to
change for a thunder-storm, Lord, scairt as I be.
It don't make no difference that I'm scairt, I feel
just the same. I' been a sinful woman, an' I pray
to be forgiven, but I can't change, Lord, I can't,
an' you wouldn't respect me if I was ter. Amen."

 A glare that seemed to brighten the wood for
minutes and a terrific burst of thunder answered
her. With a little gasp she fell backward and lay
unconscious. The storm raged about her, but she
knew nothing of it. A little withered old woman,
she lay in a heap in the lap of all the elements,
and they beat upon her like a leaf.

 If it were hours or minutes she did not know,
but she opened her eyes with pain upon a quiet world. The storm had passed, the leaves were
dripping, the sun was just beginning to brighten
the blue, the birds were twittering again. She got
up heavily, but with a certain fitful strength. She
turned around and dragged herself further into
the wood. Then, in dread of the thicker foliage,
she struck off uncertainly to the right. To her
the vengeance of God was only delayed; there was
only a momentary escape, but it was precious.
She was confused, terrified, beaten. She had no
notion in what direction the house lay. She felt
her legs tottering and reached painfully down to
pick up a large, gnarled, broken bough. The
effort all but stretched her beside it. But she leaned
on it, and turned her shaking head from one side
to another. All was thick, wet, glistening, confusing.
Only the twitter of the birds and the drip,
drip of the wet leaves broke the deadly stillness.
A nameless horror caught her. She felt alone in
the world.

 "O Lord, O dear Lord, show me the way home!"
she prayed. "Let me die at home, Lord; don't let
me die out here—a poor old woman like me! Sixty two,
Lord, an' a believer all my life! Send me
home!"

 There was a little rustling noise in the tree near
the tiny clearing just before her; a low, soft
heavenly sound.

 "I know I'm goin' to die, Lord, only let me die
at home! Don't do it here! I'm scairt, an' I'm
weak, an' I'm too old to die in the woods! Jus'
send me home, Lord; show me where the house is!"

 The great sun suddenly sent a long, bright ray
down across the open space, and as she looked at it,
there hovered, full in the brightness, a gleaming
silver dove. With wings outspread, motionless, too
bright to look at with steady eyes, it hovered there.
It never fluttered its wings; it made no sound; in
a ray from heaven it held its quiet position
serenely and glistened from every tiniest feather.

 The old woman's knees tottered beneath her.
She held with both hands to the gnarled staff, and
shuddered as she gazed.

 "The Holy Ghost! The Holy Ghost!" she
panted. The bird's eyes met hers, and she could
not take her own away. To her blurred, smarting vision it seemed that an aureole of glory outlined
its head. She had no thoughts; only a confused
sensation of immediate and inescapable doom.
Death, death here, with this grave and moveless
vision was her part. She closed her eyes and
waited. A second, and she opened them, to see the
vision changed; the bird had turned around, and
was slowly guiding down the little clearing before
her. Just above her head it flew, with steady pace,
and with it went all the brightness of the sun.

 Her lips moved. She took a step forward, and
the bird advanced. "Glory be to God!" she whispered,
"It'll show me the way!"

 She never took her aching eyes for one second
from the wonderful white thing. She scorned to
watch the ground. With a magnificent faith she
walked, her head lifted, her heart too full
to know if she stumbled. In the clear places, always
where there were no branches, the white guide
flew and Harriet walked after with her staff. A
few moments took them out of the wood, but she
never looked for the house. In the full glare of
day, against the blue, the bird looked only snowier, and to her dazzled, burning eyes the aureole grew
only brighter and bigger. She could not see its
wings move; it hovered steadily and floated serenely
upon the clear air, and the old woman saw
it, and it only.

 She did not see the anxious crowd on the porch,
she did not hear their exclamations, she did not
know that her lips were moving, that her voice,
low, husky, but distinguishable, repeated over and
over, almost mechanically: "Forgive me, Lord!
forgive me, Lord! O Lord, forgive me!"

 She only followed, followed with all her heart
and soul and strength, up the little hill, up the
path, up to the porch, a strange, shaking pilgrim,
leaning heavily on her staff, guided by the white
pigeon.

 On the steps they received her, and as she sank
on the lowest, they caught her, falling. Her almost
sightless eyes were yet uplifted, and while to their
view the dove dropped down among its mates,
a patch among the white, to her it was mingled
with the summer blue, and vanished in the sky
whence it came.

 Her body was utterly exhausted, but her spirit
could not yet lose its consciousness. On the wave of
her exaltation she rose higher and higher. She
looked at them with a look they had never seen
in any human being.

 "I'm saved! I'm saved!" she cried.

 They watched her, silent, terrified, awed beyond
words at this redemption they could only feel but
could not understand. But as they stared, her eyes
glazed, her head fell back against the matron's
arm.

 "Pray! pray!" she whispered. The pastor looked
at her and steadied himself. Wonder and a sense
of strength flowed in on him suddenly. But there
was scant time for prayer. Though the light in her
face had not yet died away, her breath was scarcely
moving. He came near her and repeated gently
the hymn she had in the time of her trouble disowned,
but which she had always loved:

   " Praise God from whom all blessings flow,  Praise Him all creatures here below,  Praise Him above ye heavenly host ——"



 Her eyes opened and looked wide into the blue;
what she saw there they did not know, but she
smiled faintly.

   " Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost! "



 "Oh, yes! Oh, yes!" the matron guessed that
she murmured; and with the cooing and clucking
of pigeons sounding through the summer air, she
died.

 A white, arrow-swift creature whirred through
the stillness, up, up, and out in a great proud
curve; their eyes were too dim to know if it turned
again to the earth.