THE PASSING OF SPRING

 In the crowded, unbeautiful part of the
city were two streets forming as if the two
long legs of the A we knew as children, the
A with feet wide apart, that stood for Ape.
A third street went from one to the other, as
the little bar does across the A, but crooked,
as a child's hand would draw it. This street
was narrow, gloomy, and relatively quiet.
The tide of traffic kept to the larger streets;
the small street knew, beyond the occupants
of its own houses and visitors to these, few
but hurried foot-travellers who used it as a
short cut, and people of inferior pretensions
coming there to trade. The ground-story
of almost every house was a shop; a person
might have spent a life without real necessity
for leaving the street. Here boots were made and mended; in the next door, clothes were
sold (the dim show-windows were full of decent
dresses, very good still for what you
paid; you could be fitted even with a ball-dress,
all beads and satin bows), yonder you
could get money on deposit of your watch,
or your flute, or your ear-drops; farther you
could have yourself shaved. There was a
window full of tarts and loaves; another window
in which a roast fowl set its gold note,
as some would say, between the pink note of
half a ham and the coral note of a lobster.

 Across a certain one of the windows in
that street for a long time had hung from a
line, as from the belt of a savage, tails of hair—black,
brown, blond. Below these, two
featureless wax faces presented their sallow
blankness to the passer, one wreathed with
yellow curls, the other capped with brown
waves of a regular pattern. Ordered around
the twin turned-ebony stands were hairpins,
sticks of cosmetic wrapped in silver paper,
slabs of chalk laid on pink cotton, china pots
with pictures of flowers or beauties and pleasing
inscriptions in French, fuzzy white balls of down, combs, gilt-brass ornaments, kid-capped
phials containing amber and ruby
liquids. On the inside of the heavy shutter,
caught back against the street-wall by day,
was pasted a large print. This told you in
what a prodigious way Madame Finibald's
Gold Elixir would make your hair grow, and
showed you the picture of a lady who doubtless
had used it—her hair was extraordinary,
it nearly reached to her feet.

 Perhaps it had been found that the neighborhood
was become hardened to the sight
of the luxuriant pictured hair; perhaps some
who had provided themselves with the small
copy of it, to be obtained inside on a bottle
full of brown stuff, had grown inclined to
treat of it lightly: "Ah, Madame Finibald!"
perhaps one irritated customer had said to
the old proprietress, coming to have made
clear to her why after three bottles of Gold
Elixir her locks were still not thick, still not
glossy and splendid as the announcement
promised they should be, "it's easy to cork
up herb tea. It's easy to make hair long in
a picture, and it's easy to make it thick. I don't believe there ever was any such person
as that young woman on the label!" One
morning saw a change in Madame Finibald's
window. All the accustomed things were
crowded to the sides to make room for a
chair; on this sat a girl with brown-gold hair
that reached in very truth to the floor.

 On every morning and every afternoon,
through a long winter, first one end and then
the other of the little street was crossed by
a youth who kept to the larger thoroughfares
with the stream. He carried books; he
went rapidly, granting small attention to the
things he passed. It is not from that to be
supposed that he was profoundly thinking.
His face, agreeable in feature and color, was
rather wanting in expression; no more interesting
than it was interested. He passed
at precisely the same hour every morning,
and the time of his passing in the afternoon
varied but little. This, from October unto
April. But when April set its gold stamp
on the weather, had there been any wise person
observing this well—constructed blond
machine, applauding its regularity, holding it up perhaps as an example to other young
frequenters of schools and lecture-rooms—that
wise person would have been troubled,
he would have had misgivings, he would
have been at last full of grief.

 A change had come over the young man's
mood. His eye was acquiring a roving habit.
If his step had before been bent on duty, it was
now less directly bent; if before he had been
on time at his appointments, he must now
have been always more or less late. He
walked leisurely, swinging his books by a
strap. He loitered before shop-windows, he
turned to look after a face. The sky smiled
down between the rows of buildings on the
occasion of the first balmy day; little clouds
floated in it, shimmering like dissolving
pearls. He returned the soft sky's compliment;
he looked up at it, the winter sternness
melting from his eyes. At every street
corner he was seen to stop, foolishly smiling
upward; and, yes, positively, he was seen
there, forgetful of all the people, to sigh and
stretch! On that very day he lost three
books out of his strap, and did not for some time notice it; when he did, he cared nothing!
From a scrawl on the fly-leaf the finder
of these books learned their rightful owner
to be of the house of Fraisier.

 He had come hundreds of miles from an
obscure town to study in this great city; he
had been a serious, mechanical plodder for
months, feeling that he owed it to himself
and to his distant family to fill his head full,
full with precious notions. He had formed
no friendships with his fellow-students, fearing
that they would divert him, or perhaps,
fearing the young fellows themselves, among
whom he felt singularly green. He lived
alone in one little room at the end of the
world, took no holidays, had no fun, went to
bed early so as to be fresh for his book in
the morning. And now, suddenly, he had
completely lost the point of view from which
it had seemed necessary that he should get
dizzily high marks, that he should conquer
field after field in the realm of learning, and
return to his home exuding glory. He could
not persuade himself any more but that it
befitted him perfectly to spend many hours strolling through the streets with his hands
in his pockets, amusing his eyes with sights
of every sort. He could find no argument
that satisfied him why he should not lounge
on a garden seat warm with sun, smoking
cigarettes half the day, thinking nothing
profitable. The wretched boy had lost all
sober sense of the duty of man.

 If he had limited himself to sitting idle in
the garden, watching the year develop in that
narrow, charming enclosure, one might have
found an excuse for him, the same as for the
scientist who studies a specimen under a
glass; or, one might have said he had been
overworking, his new circumstances on coming
to the city had induced in him a false
sort of fervor for work—a reaction was to
be expected. But the mood whose first
stage had been simple disinclination for study
and a taste for pointless wanderings, by the
time that in the march of the year the crocuses
had gone, took on developments. It
was not so often before a many-colored
flower-bed he stopped, as before a window
full of hats and bonnets.

  If, again, he had limited himself to staring
in at milliners' fronts! The wares there do
somewhat resemble fantastic flowers, and
might explain the interest of a botanist.
But he halted in the same way before shops
that offered no excuse for the same attention;
windows in which were only idle feminine
frocks displayed, flippant fans, frills of fluted
lace, feathery things for the neck.

 One might have imagined from his wonder
and interest that all these things had just
been invented, that they were a strange
spring-crop; that new, too, was the race of
smiling, chatting, shopping beings crowding
the street on sunny days, new and in fashion
only since this spring, such unaccustomed
pleasure spoke in his eye that shyly followed
them in their prettiest representatives. What
exquisite sense shown, O ever-young Creator,
in making the lip red, and the neck white,
and the temperate cheek between white and
red!

 The boy had moments of being drunk in a
glorified way even as is the innocent bee,
with nothing but wandering among flowers. Owing to a confusion in the ideas attendant
on that mysterious soft travailing among the
atoms of the heart warmed through by spring,
all sorts of things to him were as flowers!
His imagination was so increased in power,
that with nothing but a pair of little shoes in
a show-case to start from he could build up
the most astonishing, dreamy stories: he
could set feet in the shoes and rear a palatial
flesh-and-blood structure over them, as easy
as sigh; fit the whole with graces, laces, circumstances
and adventures—contrive even
to tangle its fate pleasingly with his own.

 Which may make supposed that he was a
youth of some boldness. Far from it. He
scarcely knew what a woman's eyes were like,
except in profile or fugitive three-quarters;
on the other hand, he was well acquainted
with her back hair. Hair, in which he could
pursue long studies unconfounded, seemed
to him the most beautiful thing in all the
world.

 One day, with a view to lengthening the
way by taking a road that though shorter
must from novelty be richer in diversion than his daily track, he turned into the little street
that cut off the triangle of the A. He paused
before the window of the worn watches and
sleeve-links; he took his time over the faded
finery of the second-hand clothes shop; he
examined certain yellowed wood-cuts and
stained books he found in a narrow open
stall. As he seemed coming to the end of
the street's resources, he looked over the way
and thoughtfully felt his cheek: he could not
find there what would have justified a refreshing
station at the barber's. He continued
his way slowly, to make it last. Now, he
stopped where several others were likewise
stopping—he had come to Madame Finibald's.

 The girl sat amid her hair, either unconscious
or disdainful of the eyes watching her
beyond the glass. She looked in a book
open on her lap; now and then she turned
over a leaf, sometimes revealing a picture on
the page. Her chair was low, perhaps so
that her hair should amply trail; its lowness
made an excuse for the listlessness of her
posture; her feet were outstretched and crossed, the passers might know that one of
her shoes was laced with pink twine. If she
moved her eyes from her book a moment, it
was only to sweep them past the faces, unseeing,
and lift them to the strip of sky between
the houses—so blue this day, the little bit
there was of it.

 Her face one scarcely noticed for the first
moment more than any rosy apple; for oh!
her hair!—her hair claimed all the attention
a man had to give, did her shining hair falling
stately along her cheeks, all over her shoulders,
below her waist, beyond her garment—richer,
of course, than any possible queen's
cloak. The light rippled over it, changing
on it all the time, when nothing else in the
window appeared to live.

 Within the shadow of the shop was discerned
a watchful, wrinkled old face, chiefly
differing from a parrot's in the slyness of its
eyes. Fraisier catching sight of it thought
of a witch on guard over a princess enchanted
and imprisoned in a glass-case.

 The little group in front of Madame Finibald's
dispersed, formed anew with other faces many times in the hour; Fraisier remained,
his eyes climbing up, sliding down
the golden ropes of hair.

 At last, though the girl gave no sign, he
was made uncomfortable by the sense that
she must, even without looking, have seen
how long he stood. He inquired timidly
of her face. It was informed with a gentle
brazenness, fortified to be stared at all the
day. Yet there was a suggestion of childishness
in its abstracted expression; she
wore the sort of look one has seen on the
face of a little girl playing at being somebody
else far more splendid than herself.
A close observer might have suspected that
she really thought it rather grand to sit there
in the gorgeousness of her hair, and was
amused with pretending not to know that a
soul looked on.

 Fraisier, because her eyes were lowered,
found hardihood to stare his fill at her face.
He surrendered without struggle before the
round cheeks, the short little nose, the good-natured
mouth and chin, which, in truth, took
more than their just space in the face. But most—oh, still most! delighted him the
brown-gold hair that tumbled over her forehead
and ears in little curls.

 He was realizing from the mutterings of
what was left him of a conscience how late
it must be getting—he must be taking himself
off; he was making long the one minute
more he allowed himself, when her pupils slid
between the lashes in his direction. He had
lost all presence of mind, he could not withdraw
his glance. After a second's pause
upon his, her eyes slid back to her book and
were hidden. Then, without another thought
towards duty, he crossed the street to the
barber's, from whose window he could see
Madame Finibald's; and, coming forth with
a smoother face than the rose, entered the
little eating-shop next door, from which likewise
he could command Madame Finibald's.

 He went through the little street every day.
He took many atrocious meals in the shop,
on the table nearest the window.

 On such days as brought perfect weather,
the girl in Madame Finibald's would turn
very often to the sky a look easily inter preted
as longing. Then would Fraisier
look up too and sigh. It seemed such a
pity, this wasted blue weather.

 It seemed such a pity, all this wasted
sweetness, he thought in crossing a public
garden on his occasional unwilling way to a
lecture. The quince-tree blossomed in red;
under the cherry were little drifts of scented
snow; up out of the vigorous, rested earth
were flowers springing in mad, gay multitudes.
The air was silver made air in the
morning; and in the afternoon it was gold
made air. Birds, busily building, busily twittered.
These things did nothing to him, but
the more they were lovely and penetrated the
heart, the more to make him lonesome.

 He took himself away from their radiance
without one regret for them, to spend his
time in preference in an ugly little street
where one could scarcely have known what
season it was, where there was nothing to see
that was beautiful but certain long, long hair.
In thought, though, let it be said in vindication
of spring's power of enthralling, having
done up the hair in braids, and extinguished it with a hat, he was always, always guiding
it to the contemned garden. When once it
was in the garden, May there had become
perfect.

 He wondered whether it could be she had
become aware of his persistent presence. He
feared she had, and as often that she had not.
He imagined sometimes that when he looked
her face was quivering with a conquered
desire to smile. That disconcerted him a
shade. Sometimes he thought she looked
suspiciously rosy for a girl unconscious of all
the world. Sometimes he looked away, with
the idea that if he turned suddenly he should
find her stealing a glance at him. But he
dared not look very quickly, lest the action
should be too marked; and turning with discreet
alacrity, he could never feel sure.

 One day, at last, having settled in his mind
that this tame conduct was unworthy of a
man, refusing himself a second in which to
think better of any matter, he crossed the
street and charged the shop. A bell snapped
sharply as he opened the door. It startled
him to the point of gasping. He grew crimson, finding himself opposed in truth, as
many a night before in dream, by Madame
Finibald's sly and lowly smile, breathing the
same faintly drug-perfumed air as the princess
breathed, no glass screen between himself
and the hair. He could have touched it,
had he been so bold.

 He stammered a request for soap—scented
soap. He wished himself tens of ten miles
away, or time out of mind dead, when—wonderful!
The maiden in the window
looked frankly over her shoulder. Was it
that her eyes brimmed with friendly laughter,
or did it seem so to him because his head
had become incapable of a true notion?
His heart, so to speak, found its feet; he
made a muddle of every sentence he launched
upon, but his words had a voice behind them.
So much he contrived to convey: he was
very hard to please in the matter of soap. He
sniffed at a variety of proffered tablets, whose
virtues Madame Finibald, in very truth like
a witch with a philter to sell, assiduously set
forth; each cake he examined seemed to
hold in her estimation just a little higher place than the foregoing. At the end of ten
minutes, without positively losing her good-humor,
she declared that he had seen all in
the shop, she was sorry and surprised they
could not suit him, they might have a fresh
stock in on the morrow. He was leaving in
clumsy embarrassment, empty handed, with
a promise to return, when the princess
lightly jumped from the window-place, and,
sweeping the hair off her face, said: "There
is one more sort, ma'am. I saw it up there,
high, when I dusted. Let me get it."

 She fetched the steps, and in a moment
had climbed and lifted down a box. She
set it on the counter; she opened it herself
and held towards him, with a direct glance,
a packet with a red rose printed on the
wrapper.

 Madame Finibald, with an exclamation,
snatched it from the girl's hand, and began,
as if here had been a little grandchild recovered
to her old age, to speak with tenderness
of its merits. The girl stood near, twining
and untwining a lock around her finger,
while she unaffectedly looked at the cus tomer.
Her hair came below her knees;
every moment she had to toss it back out of
her face.

 "Go back to your window, wicked child!"
cried the old witch, suddenly, as if catching
at a piece of gold as it was being taken out
of her pocket. "Go back!"

 "I am tired of sitting!" said the little
princess, twisting her shoulders in her frock
with the prettiest peevishness. "I have sat
and sat and sat! I have finished my story.
Let me go out and get a bun. You know
you said I could when it was noon."

 She caught at her hair, and, to the infinite
wonder of one looking on, began twisting,
twisting, twisting, coiling, coiling, coiling,
driving in great skewers—while he filled his
blissful pockets with rose-scented soap.

 The bell snapped in fretful reprehension
for her passing out. Less than a minute
after, it exclaimed in annoyed surprise for
his.

 Now was he no longer made lonesome by
every coquettish touch the more that the
year put to her toilet. For the girl of the regal hair smiled to him, surreptitiously with
her lips, but unguardedly with her eyes, when
he came by her glass-case; while he dawdled
in the window opposite, she communicated
with him by signs no other eye could have
perceived. Even before their acquaintance
had become very old, she slipped out to walk
in the garden, and they sat on the green seats
and had long, foolish, youthful talks—delightful,
foolish, youthful times.

 Her conversation took an amusing interest
from the peculiarities of her education. She
had seen and heard much in her short life in
a hard world, where it was no one's affair to
keep anything from her young ken—much of
dark, and petty, and unpicturesque—preserving
through all a sort of hardy innocence;
and she had borrowed from a cheap circulating
library a vast lot of fiction dealing with
the supremely grand. Her preference in
literature, however, had remained for fairy
tales, a taste formed when it had been one
of her duties to read aloud to certain little
children of the rich. She knew them by the
score. It was to this, perhaps, some of her remarks owed the fanciful touch that redeemed
them from the commonness of her
general conversation—a genial commonness,
condoned to such young lips. She had a
childish way of lending a personality to
everything, that amused him more than
epigram would have done. She ascribed
intention to the wind that blew off her hat,
and stopped to express her mind to it. She
assumed consciousness in the bench they sat
on; she wanted to take the same one, lest it
should think they slighted it because it was
rickety, for which it was not to blame. Every
flower was to her a person. "Hush!
They are listening!" she said, looking from
the corner of her eye at a bank of knowing
pansies. She scolded a button for coming
off, as if the want of principle shown
by it had been a thing to revolt her. She
stood in a one-sided relation of good-fellowship
with the brown birds hopping
among the gravel, and the fishes in the
pond; she spared them many crumbs. With
homely good-heartedness she took into an
amused regard all the family of spring— buds,
blades, insects—addressing speech to
them as if she had been a giant and they a
very little people.

 Never can spring return without Fraisier's
remembering that spring. It was bright; by
it all the springs following have been cast in
the shadow.

 The long hair was woven through and
through his thoughts; but not as a disturbing,
upheaving element. The girl made him
waste a great deal of time, but nothing else—not
the life of his heart. Because of her
good-nature, her entire want of coquetry or
perverseness, his feeling for her complicated
itself in nowise; rather it grew simpler as it
insensibly changed. His wonder and fine
dread at feminine appurtenances had worn
away a little with increased familiarity; he
reposed on that fact as if it had been such
an one as becoming accustomed to the noise
of guns. He felt under delicate obligations
to her for having routed his shyness, and not
at all tormented him in any of the thousand
ways he apprehended a feminine being would
have at her command.

  As he was less and less in awe of her and
that suspected arsenal, though a charming,
fearful element went out of his sentiment,
his affection perhaps grew more. She made
such a good little comrade! Insidiously,
she connected herself in his mind with future
days—she who cared only for the day and
the pleasure thereof. When he spoke of a
thing it would be pleasant to do, a place
pleasant to visit, he said, always unreflectingly,
yet from a sincere heart: "Some day
we must go there. Let us do such a thing
some time." When he described the hills
and ponds of home, he said what they might
have done had she been there last summer
or the years before, how they might have
rowed and rambled. He painted the good
time they might have together, in some not
impossible, but not specified time, place, and
circumstances.

 So the green from tender grew brilliant—grew
deep—became void of interest to the
accustomed eye, and more or less dust settled
over it. It was manifest to all that spring
was past.

  Then began an anxious time. Those
lectures, those miserable lectures! Those
courses, those wretched courses, which he
had neglected! That blessed information
he had spared to cull when the time was for
it! These things seemed likely to get their
revenge. When he awoke to a sense of his
danger—very late! only when the bloom
was off the year, when lily and early rose
had gone where they could divert no mortal
more—he could not believe that he should
not, by fitting exertion, catch up in time at
the appointed goal. He worked rabidly,
with a wet cloth around his head. He
thought not of girls in those days, I promise
you; he recked not of bronze-gold hair!

 It was written that he should not be
saved. He closed his school term pitiably
conditioned.

 When the worst was known, at least was
time to breathe, however sore the lungs,
then his mind reverted to her. He had
been man enough to harbor no spite towards
her, accuse her of nothing. He sent her a
message and waited at the appointed place, wondering a little, while he waited, at his
follies of the spring. They seemed so unnecessary,
looked back upon now. Why,
in a very real, practical world like this one,
where a man's failure to pass his exams was
sure to call forth from his progenitor letters
such as his pocket at this moment contained,
conduct one's self as if existing in a world
of lambs and purling streams and shepherdesses?
He was one with the actual world in
looking with astonishment and condemnation
upon his own works. The sky above
was hard, barren blue; it seemed so easy,
looking back, to have stuck to the approved
road. What had possessed him?

 Then she appeared. At sight of her his
heart dropped its armor. She brought back
a whiff of the sweetness of a past atmosphere.
Was it possible he had ever been the happy
boy he seemed to remember! He smiled up
in her face with cheek-muscles stiffened by
disuse, and eyes ringed with studious shadows.
She had on a flimsy frock, printed all over
with little flowers that seemed to him to
smell good; her hair, where the great wad projected beyond the straw brim, was touched
with a warm, peculiar glory. He had meant
to keep himself well hardened against her,
tell her the various things necessary in a
matter-of-fact way, and bid her good-bye
indefinitely. He felt more like crying with
his disgraced head in her lap.

 He conquered his weakness.... A pretty
man he made!

 He got out with sufficient composure and
dignity what he had to say. He told her all
that had happened, the change it made in
the coming months. He was not going
home for the holidays; he could not endure
to see the folks. He was going into the
country to spend the summer in hard study,
to make sure of "passing" next term. He
was going to the particular place he mentioned
because he had a friend there, a fellow
he had taken up with in the last weeks, one
that had had the same bad luck as himself.
This man's family lived there; it would not
be quite so dreary as being alone.

 She chaffed and consoled him in turns.
Now that the world had gone all wrong with him, her eyes seemed to him sweeter and
softer than he had ever observed. What a
good, kind little friend! Lord! what a good,
crazy, light-hearted time they had had, and
how pretty she looked to-day! What wonderful,
thrice wonderful hair it was, waving
and ringletting about her glowing summer
face, coiling massively on the back of her
head! No woman on earth had such hair!

 He did wish for a moment that Green, his
new friend, might see her—he was proud of
her. One night, when they had sat grinding
together for mutual assistance, the oil giving
out, Green had told him of a cousin of his.
Fraisier had said nothing of any girl. He
only wished that Green might see the hair
of this girl whose name he had foreborne to
speak.

 Good-bye, Minnie! He should be working
like a slave all through the burning golden
days—let her think of him a little. He
should be very lonesome. When he had
studied until his eyes smarted and his head
swam, there would be nothing pleasant to
do, no one pleasant to talk with—she might spare a moment to be sorry for him now
and then. He should be back in the fall.
Bless the beautiful and beautiful and beautiful
hair! Good-bye, Minnie!

 She so little perished from his mind after
their parting that whenever—as Green and
he lay under the trees, withdrawn from the
world and devoted to arduous studies, keeping
off the insects by smoke—Green began
talking about that cousin of his, Fraisier
became half sick with reminiscence. He
could not resist replying by talking—with
the finest, shyest reverence always—of Minnie.
There was a dreamy solace in talking
of her to some one. She described so well,
too; so unusually. He had a proud secret
assurance that as an incident in a man's life
she altogether eclipsed a cousin in interest.

 "How long is your cousin's hair?" he
asked, with assumed casualness, once. Green
stared a little, and confessed not having the
slightest idea. Fraisier opened his arms as
wide as they could go, and said, vaguely
blushing, "The young lady I spoke of has
hair as long as this!"

  "Come! I should like to see it!" spoke
Green, in such a tone that Fraisier turned a
deep, vexed red.

 He said nothing, but on the next day took
his books to a different place, choosing to
keep to himself so long as Green did not seek
him with a suitable apology.

 The spot selected by the young men as a
meeting ground lay at an equal distance
between Green's home and the cottage in
which Fraisier had taken up his summer
quarters. It was on the skirts of a wood,
and, by some accident of the land, often cool
when other places were hot. The rolling
pasture it commanded was dotted with
scrubby evergreens, and crossed by a small
brook the cow's hoofs had in some places
trodden broad and shallow. It was colored
in patches with the frequent pink of clover-heads,
surprised here and there with the
white of a long-necked, belated daisy.

 Fraisier took himself to a spot just not so
far from the usual haunt but that Green
when he came might see him.

 It was a fair, soft, simmering morning, promising a scorching day. He stretched
himself under the trees and lighted a pipe—he
had taken to a pipe in place of cigarettes since
coming into the wilderness. He composed
himself for a serious forenoon's work, deciding
that it was much more profitable, after all, to
study alone—Green was always digressing.

 The spot he had chosen was not so good,
it proved, as the one he had left clear for
Green. A path ran through the woods, just
within the trees; there was a frequent patter
of bare feet on the dust, children with pails
passed looking for things. He waited to
proceed with his theorem till their high
piping, scattered voices had died away. It
was not so cool, either; as a fact, it was
hotter than most places. He did not crave
the exertion of seeking a better; this was at
least shady. He turned over on his back
and closed his eyes, yielding gracefully to
the force of circumstances.

 A light blow in the face, from an acorn,
perhaps, roused him. He thought of Green,
and, instantly broad awake, looked for the
development of some practical joke.

  It was not Green—he saw it with a sort of
disappointment. It was one of the berry-seeking
children that had caught sight of him
snoozing, and followed its natural instinct.
A boy's grinning head was seen bobbing
above one of the neighboring bushes. He
turned from it in disgust and felt surlily
about the grass for his pipe, about his person
for a match—

 Gracious powers! what sort did the young
one take him for, with this free persecution?
Another acorn had hit him smartly on the
head.

 "Look out, there!" he called, making a
feint of rising to give chase.

 "Come on!" shouted the boy, gayly, from
behind the bush. There was a burst of
laughter, a flash and flutter of pink, and the
boy, who turned out to be a girl, came precipitately
towards him. She stopped just
short of a collision, and dropped in the grass
panting with laughter. He stared at her
blankly. Every time she looked up and
caught sight of his expression she doubled
herself and fairly writhed.

  "He doesn't know me!—he doesn't know
me!" she brought forth amid her convulsive
giggling.

 "Minnie! My God! What—what have
you done to yourself?" he exclaimed, and
had no breath left.

 She moderated her laughter, and presented
her smiling face a moment for him to see
well what had happened. She ran her fingers
over her cropped head, ruffling it absurdly,
making the short locks stand on end.

 "Isn't it funny? Doesn't a person look
funny at first? The rest of it is hanging,
like a fairy horse's tail, in the window, across
the picture of the Elixir lady. (Bad old
woman! Cheat! She didn't give me much
for it! But, Natty Fraisier, I would have
taken even less, I did want to come so!)
You poor, lonesome boy! I can stay a whole
week—perhaps more. I have found a place
in the village, just near you. The first child
I met told me all I wanted to know. I
thought it would have been harder. Mercy!
isn't it heavenly still and sweet here, with
hills and cows? I was never in the true country before. Mercy! isn't it good? Look
out, you flower there—over there, you, miss!
That is called a bee; he has a terrible stinger—oh,
he is an old acquaintance? Go ahead,
then, and give him a nice swing, and honey
for his tea. Oh, Natty, I am so glad! Aren't
you glad?"

 He choked and cleared his throat. No,
without that voice, never in the world would
he have known her. Before him seemed to
be a common little street-boy who had run
off in a girl's new pink dress and shiny shoes—an
unknown boy whose features had something
painfully familiar. Strange! He remembered
Minnie's face as possessing a certain
harmony in its lines, however childish
and trivial they were; this terrible little impostor,
though not ill favored, was broad of
jaw and narrow of forehead; his eyes even
were not the same, but smaller and nearer
together, while the mouth was larger—its
very proneness to laughter increased its commonness.
And that ridiculous hair—literally
chopped off by an unskilled hand and twisted
here and there with unpractised tongs! It was so thick, it had no more light or lustre
than a hearth-brush.

 Her face sobered ever so little as she looked
at him. "What is the matter? Poor dear!
you haven't got over those exams. But I
won't bother, you know, and take up all your
time; I have learned better. I won't interfere
with any work, I promise, Natty. See me
swear? On this algebra! Only, before you
begin and when you have done each day, we
will go for walks and rows. I saw a boat on
the pond. We will have lunch on the grass,
and make a fire with sticks we pick up.
Look! you put three long sticks like that
and hang the kettle in the middle. We will
do all those things we used to plan when we
never much thought there would be a chance.
You poor, lonesome boy, have you been having
a horrid time? We will make up for it
now. Natty, you don't care about the hair ,
do you? You needn't. You know, I had
got mortally sick of sitting in that window.
I could not have stood it a day longer.
When a fly buzzed on the pane I wanted to
scream. Again and again I have come near putting my foot through the glass at one of
the gaping faces, then jumping down and
catching the old woman while she told lies
about my having used her Elixir faithfully—never
touched a drop!—and dancing her
up and down all around the room until she
dropped. I shall go back to taking care of
little children now, as I did before she found
me. I do love children! And in that business,
I don't mind telling you, I shall do
better without all that hair. No matter how
tight I did it up, some one was always grumbling
that it made too much show. You
mustn't care a bit about the hair, Natty; I
gave it up without a twinge. I cut it off
with my own hands. You have no idea
how much comfortabler this is in hot weather.
My head feels so light! I can dip it in
the water any minute. I do love it like
this!"

 She ran her hands through her hair again,
ruffling it still more fantastically. Fraisier
winced. He was sick beyond calculating
the degree. "Oh, my poor girl!" he contrived
at last to say.

  She looked at him more closely than before
in her overrunning joy, and her face
fell a little. No doubt she had seen herself
in mirrors since her alteration, but not in a
real mirror until she saw herself reflected in
his very pale face. She smiled still, but a
little foolishly; then no more, and stopped
chatting. It was as if a stone had been set
to seal up a spring—a large stone laid upon
her bubbling heart. There was a silence.

 He saw that she must be seeing what he
could not keep out of his face. He could
not help it; he could get no control over his
feelings, over his expression. He was not
sure he cared to—he did not try. He was
at sea: he did not know what he felt, what
he did not feel. The bottom seemed to
have dropped out of his heart, out of the
world—out of something, everything. He
knew not! He only knew he was sick—sick,
and incapable of speech, of action, of
reflection.

 "You can't stay here, child," he heard
some one saying, in a matter-of-fact, superficial
voice. "Don't you see, yourself, that you can't? For your own sake, I mean. It
would never do, Minnie. You must understand
that. You don't know what a thing
a small country village like this is, for gossip
and slanderous tongues. I couldn't let you
injure yourself so, don't you see?"

 "It wouldn't be proper?" she inquired,
faintly.

 "No, Minnie; no, it wouldn't—at all.
Don't you see it?"

 She got to her feet, full as pale as he now.

 "All right," she said, and after a few mechanical
steps, paused a moment, looking
down, biting her finger—lost in thought, or
waiting for something to happen, for him
to say something further.

 He could not speak—he could not make
himself speak.

 "All right," she said again, very distinctly,
and turned to go without another word.

 "Minnie! Minnie!" he faltered, and had
instinctively cast himself after her. His
outstretched hand almost touched her pink
draperies. She turned on him fiercely, whisking
herself out of reach. He was confront ed
for a second by a little angry street-boy
face, but with the gathered experience and
woe of half a race in the eyes. "Let me
alone! Don't dare to touch me! Nathaniel
Fraisier, I hate you!"

 She began desperately to run. He saw
her clutch her poor little ruined head, and
heard her cry out, breaking into sobs: "Oh,
my hair! Oh, my hair!"

 He dropped in the grass, face downward,
and pressed his hands over his ears, trembling.
It all seemed so strange, so out of
proportion.

 In the late afternoon of that same hot
day the crabbed little bell on Madame Finibald's
door snapped to let in a tired, dusty
youth, whose dejected face was so flushed,
one's thought at sight of him turned at once
on sunstroke. He leaned wearily over the
counter and asked a few questions, at which
madame's liver seemed so shaken she could
not keep a hold on her good manners. At
the height of her voice she began berating
all the world, and one absent person. Fraisier
tried to calm her, with vague, soothing mo tions
of his hands patting down the air.
When she subsided enough for him to be
heard, he pointed to a long tail of shining
hair in the window, and spoke again, growing
redder, if possible, than before—so red
that his eyes watered, and he had to shade
them a moment, leaning his elbows on the
counter. She unhitched the hair, shaking it
brutally. He put out his hands in remonstrance.
She flung it down before him with
a forbidding proposition and a deep snort of
malice. Meekly he emptied his purse on
the counter, unfolding the bills, spreading
out the silver and lucky pieces to count, reserving
only for himself a crumpled ticket.

 She watched him with gleeful, avaricious
eyes. After computation, he rose without
breath of argument and went down the
street to pawn his watch and studs and
cigarette-case, returning solvent.

 He left with a rather unsightly parcel in
his hand; the cover was burst in more than
one place. Madame Finibald had not been
so particular as she sometimes was in the
selection of her wrapping-paper. He had no overcoat and no pocket large enough to put
his prize in; he was forced to hold it, conscious
how it was heavy and soft and its
contents gleamed through the holes.

 He got home at dark, reporting to his
landlady with his back to the light. He
wanted nothing to eat: there were lamps
and voices in the dining-room. He could
not go to bed, worn out as he was: on the
porch below his window was singing and
picking of strings.

 He went forth into the fields. At last,
beyond all sounds but the summer's own,
he sank on the grass. He did not look up
once at the stars, but lay sprawling with his
forehead on his crossed arms, and let his
heart torture itself at its own good leisure.
He drank deeper and deeper of its dark
bitterness, forcing himself recklessly to it,
reaching a sort of desperate drunkenness.
It seemed to his inexperience there could
be nothing worse at any time in this life
to taste.

 He woke long hours afterwards, wondering
a little at first, feeling somewhat stiff. The air was warm and still, tremulous with
crickets—thrilled through with the shaken
baubles of the summer's myriad little jesters.
In his sleep he had rolled over; his
face was to heaven. The sky was faint with
starlight; the Milky Way was a road of diamond
sand; the great constellations had
hung themselves with solemn jewels; down
near the rim of the world watched far-spaced
large earnest beacon-lights—but above, the
tiniest irresponsible stars twinkled in and out,
like shining ants in ant-hills. He looked,
almost wondering why his eyes felt so queer—sore
besides heavy; why his breast felt so
heavy. He rose sitting; he was on a hillock.
Like an opaque reproduction of the transparent,
lightsome sky looked the ground
about him, which the scythe had this season
respected; it was dark dotted with
daisies. He rubbed his aching head a little,
then lay back again, the grass shooting
coolly up along his cheeks. After the sound,
dreamless sleep of utter exhaustion from
which he had waked, because he had drained
it to satisfaction, his head was numbed, but, the little it worked, clear in its working; his
heart was sore, but quieted. Something had
changed; all wore another aspect; all seemed
farther removed. Hours had gone by already,
a month would go—a year—fifteen
years. This would be lived out of memory.
If it is realized that a thing must cease, has
it not begun to die already? At the first
one must be patient, and take suffering as
a matter of course. He stretched his limbs
wearily, not entirely deceived by himself,
nor unaware of depths of heartache under
this film of philosophy that had scummed
them over in sleep. He drew his hot palms
over the grass; his hand came upon the
parcel that he had not dared to leave behind
nor to open, that he never would have the
strength to open—and his philosophy was
severely shaken. His heart was near bursting
out afresh; he laid his face on the
wretched, soft, dead little bundle, and agonized.

 Then he revolted against this suffering
that seemed to him undeserved, disproportionate.
He was not a bad fellow; looking into his heart, he could declare truthfully
that it was not in him to willingly harm anything—give
any one pain. Why should he
feel so endlessly mean, so endlessly miserable?
He appealed to Minnie, his reasonable
Minnie of old, against this state of things.
He defended himself to her; she defended
him to himself. When all was said, he had
at no time done anything to blame, had that
day said nothing that was not wise and for
the best, that he would not in like case be
forced to say over again. He had been
taken unawares; he had not expressed himself
with tact—he had been fatally slow.
The fact remained that the girl could not
have stayed by him, setting the whole country-side
agog. But if his heart still refused
to be at peace about this matter, let it be
assured he meant to seek till he found the
girl; it must be easy enough to find her,
though he had failed that day. Alas! poor
little forlorn head, shorn of its great gleaming
beauty—poor little discrowned head, at
this hour full of what thoughts, God knew!
He would make all things right to her; he was extravagantly ready to pay any price;
he was lavish of his future, free of all the
gods gave him to give. At the same time
that he made these protestations to himself
and to her, and he was sincere in making
them, he knew that Minnie would never
look at him again—he knew that she had
understood how he was changed with the
change in her; it was beyond his governing,
but she must be forgiven for not forgiving
it. And looking into his man's heart, he
wondered at the mystery of it.

 In that hour of being honest, after revolting
at it, reasoning about it, trying to sophisticate
it away, he came back always to a
hopeless contemplation of it as a simple fact,
not to be done away with. In the face of it
he might clear himself of all blame, perhaps,
but he remained humiliated and full of a
vague pity. As he lay in the grass so,
plucking heedlessly in the dark at the little
tufts, emptied of all pride under the
lofty stars, a dreamy mood followed upon
what degree of success he had in suppressing
feelings he was determined not to en dure,
so did they hurt! His thoughts in
search of soothing travelled back to days
before last spring, when he could hardly
have conceived what he had this night been
suffering. Peaceful period, but without great
charm, he decided, loyal to his altered taste.
He thought of the past spring, the soft
awakening all without and within a man—the
tender, vast burgeoning, fluttering, shimmering,
outreaching! He judged it sadly
from a midsummer night. Not all were
flowers that put forth in that mad amenity
of nature; no, not all flowers.

 And in connection with all that freshness
and fragrance and beauty of spring,
he thought unavoidably of what had seemed
to his new-quickened heart its very expression,
its chiefest adornment—the gentle
order he loved in so general and devoted a
way. His conjuring head filled with charming
phantoms, pathetic to his sense at this
juncture; they passed, exquisite pageant,
leaving as if a perfume of themselves through
the halls of his mind, not one little grace,
one foolish trick, one dainty manner of be ing,
lost on his worshipping sensibility: silver
laughter—odors of violets—sunny loose
hairs and white hand tucking them behind
the ear—pretty feet tiptoeing across the street
in bad weather—pouted lips cooing to a baby,
or quaintly attempting its own language to a
bird—languid attitudes—belts of a span—caprices—teasing
humors—tenderness—pity for
small creatures—long lashes blinking a tear—queenly
bearing—rods of lily held over bowing
heads with such assurance of power as
never a sceptre—aye, power greater than
any emperor's, founded, dear God—upon
what? at the mercy—of what? And he
yearned and grieved over them, poor youth,
as if he had been their maker.