THE APPARITION

 The subject of sequestration of the person came up in speaking of a recent
      lawsuit, and each of us had a story to tell—a true story, he said.
      We had been spending the evening together at an old family mansion in the
      Rue de Grenelle, just a party of intimate friends. The old Marquis de la
      Tour-Samuel, who was eighty-two, rose, and, leaning his elbow on the
      mantelpiece, said in his somewhat shaky voice:

 “I also know of something strange, so strange that it has haunted me
      all my life. It is now fifty-six years since the incident occurred, and
      yet not a month passes that I do not see it again in a dream, so great is
      the impression of fear it has left on my mind. For ten minutes I
      experienced such horrible fright that ever since then a sort of constant
      terror has remained with me. Sudden noises startle me violently, and
      objects imperfectly distinguished at night inspire me with a mad desire to
      flee from them. In short, I am afraid of the dark!

 “But I would not have acknowledged that before I reached my present
      age. Now I can say anything. I have never receded before real danger,
      ladies. It is, therefore, permissible, at eighty-two years of age, not to
      be brave in presence of imaginary danger.

 “That affair so completely upset me, caused me such deep and
      mysterious and terrible distress, that I never spoke of it to any one. I
      will now tell it to you exactly as it happened, without any attempt at
      explanation.

 “In July, 1827, I was stationed at Rouen. One day as I was walking
      along the quay I met a man whom I thought I recognized without being able
      to recall exactly who he was. Instinctively I made a movement to stop. The
      stranger perceived it and at once extended his hand.

 “He was a friend to whom I had been deeply attached as a youth. For
      five years I had not seen him; he seemed to have aged half a century. His
      hair was quite white and he walked bent over as though completely
      exhausted. He apparently understood my surprise, and he told me of the
      misfortune which had shattered his life.

 “Having fallen madly in love with a young girl, he had married her,
      but after a year of more than earthly happiness she died suddenly of an
      affection of the heart. He left his country home on the very day of her
      burial and came to his town house in Rouen, where he lived, alone and
      unhappy, so sad and wretched that he thought constantly of suicide.

 “'Since I have found you again in this manner,' he said, 'I will ask
      you to render me an important service. It is to go and get me out of the
      desk in my bedroom—our bedroom—some papers of which I have
      urgent need. I cannot send a servant or a business clerk, as discretion
      and absolute silence are necessary. As for myself, nothing on earth would
      induce me to reenter that house. I will give you the key of the room,
      which I myself locked on leaving, and the key of my desk, also a few words
      for my gardener, telling him to open the chateau for you. But come and
      breakfast with me tomorrow and we will arrange all that.'

 “I promised to do him the slight favor he asked. It was, for that
      matter, only a ride which I could make in an hour on horseback, his
      property being but a few miles distant from Rouen.

 “At ten o'clock the following day I breakfasted, tete-a-tete, with
      my friend, but he scarcely spoke.

 “He begged me to pardon him; the thought of the visit I was about to
      make to that room, the scene of his dead happiness, overcame him, he said.
      He, indeed, seemed singularly agitated and preoccupied, as though
      undergoing some mysterious mental struggle.

 “At length he explained to me exactly what I had to do. It was very
      simple. I must take two packages of letters and a roll of papers from the
      first right-hand drawer of the desk, of which I had the key. He added:

 “'I need not beg you to refrain from glancing at them.'

 “I was wounded at that remark and told him so somewhat sharply. He
      stammered:

 “'Forgive me, I suffer so,' and tears came to his eyes.

 “At about one o'clock I took leave of him to accomplish my mission.

 “'The weather was glorious, and I trotted across the fields,
      listening to the song of the larks and the rhythmical clang of my sword
      against my boot. Then I entered the forest and walked my horse. Branches
      of trees caressed my face as I passed, and now and then I caught a leaf
      with my teeth and chewed it, from sheer gladness of heart at being alive
      and vigorous on such a radiant day.

 “As I approached the chateau I took from my pocket the letter I had
      for the gardener, and was astonished at finding it sealed. I was so
      irritated that I was about to turn back without having fulfilled my
      promise, but reflected that I should thereby display undue susceptibility.
      My friend in his troubled condition might easily have fastened the
      envelope without noticing that he did so.

 “The manor looked as if it had been abandoned for twenty years. The
      open gate was falling from its hinges, the walks were overgrown with grass
      and the flower beds were no longer distinguishable.

 “The noise I made by kicking at a shutter brought out an old man
      from a side door. He seemed stunned with astonishment at seeing me. On
      receiving my letter, he read it, reread it, turned it over and over,
      looked me up and down, put the paper in his pocket and finally said:

 “'Well, what is it you wish?'

 “I replied shortly:

 “'You ought to know, since you have just read your master's orders.
      I wish to enter the chateau.'

 “He seemed overcome.

 “'Then you are going in—into her room?'

 “I began to lose patience.

 “'Damn it! Are you presuming to question me?'

 “He stammered in confusion:

 “'No—sir—but—but it has not been opened since—since
      the-death. If you will be kind enough to wait five minutes I will go and—and
      see if—'

 “I interrupted him angrily:

 “'See here, what do you mean by your tricks?

 “'You know very well you cannot enter the room, since here is the
      key!'

 “He no longer objected.

 “'Then, sir, I will show you the way.'

 “'Show me the staircase and leave me. I'll find my way without you.'

 “'But—sir—indeed—'

 “This time I lost patience, and pushing him aside, went into the
      house.

 “I first went through the kitchen, then two rooms occupied by this
      man and his wife. I then crossed a large hall, mounted a staircase and
      recognized the door described by my friend.

 “I easily opened it, and entered the apartment. It was so dark that
      at first I could distinguish nothing. I stopped short, disagreeably
      affected by that disagreeable, musty odor of closed, unoccupied rooms. As
      my eyes slowly became accustomed to the darkness I saw plainly enough a
      large and disordered bedroom, the bed without sheets but still retaining
      its mattresses and pillows, on one of which was a deep impression, as
      though an elbow or a head had recently rested there.

 “The chairs all seemed out of place. I noticed that a door,
      doubtless that of a closet, had remained half open.

 “I first went to the window, which I opened to let in the light, but
      the fastenings of the shutters had grown so rusty that I could not move
      them. I even tried to break them with my sword, but without success. As I
      was growing irritated over my useless efforts and could now see fairly
      well in the semi-darkness, I gave up the hope of getting more light, and
      went over to the writing desk.

 “I seated myself in an armchair and, letting down the lid of the
      desk, I opened the drawer designated. It was full to the top. I needed but
      three packages, which I knew how to recognize, and began searching for
      them.

 “I was straining my eyes in the effort to read the superscriptions
      when I seemed to hear, or, rather, feel, something rustle back of me. I
      paid no attention, believing that a draught from the window was moving
      some drapery. But in a minute or so another movement, almost
      imperceptible, sent a strangely disagreeable little shiver over my skin.
      It was so stupid to be affected, even slightly, that self-respect
      prevented my turning around. I had just found the second package I needed
      and was about to lay my hand on the third when a long and painful sigh,
      uttered just at my shoulder, made me bound like a madman from my seat and
      land several feet off. As I jumped I had turned round my hand on the hilt
      of my sword, and, truly, if I had not felt it at my side I should have
      taken to my heels like a coward.

 “A tall woman dressed in white, stood gazing at me from the back of
      the chair where I had been sitting an instant before.

 “Such a shudder ran through all my limbs that I nearly fell
      backward. No one who has not experienced it can understand that frightful,
      unreasoning terror! The mind becomes vague, the heart ceases to beat, the
      entire body grows as limp as a sponge.

 “I do not believe in ghosts, nevertheless I collapsed from a hideous
      dread of the dead, and I suffered, oh! I suffered in a few moments more
      than in all the rest of my life from the irresistible terror of the
      supernatural. If she had not spoken I should have died perhaps. But she
      spoke, she spoke in a sweet, sad voice that set my nerves vibrating. I
      dare not say that I became master of myself and recovered my reason. No! I
      was terrified and scarcely knew what I was doing. But a certain innate
      pride, a remnant of soldierly instinct, made me, almost in spite of
      myself, maintain a bold front. She said:

 “'Oh, sir, you can render me a great service.'

 “I wanted to reply, but it was impossible for me to pronounce a
      word. Only a vague sound came from my throat. She continued:

 “'Will you? You can save me, cure me. I suffer frightfully. I
      suffer, oh! how I suffer!' and she slowly seated herself in my armchair,
      still looking at me.

 “'Will you?' she said.

 “I nodded in assent, my voice still being paralyzed.

 “Then she held out to me a tortoise-shell comb and murmured:

 “'Comb my hair, oh! comb my hair; that will cure me; it must be
      combed. Look at my head—how I suffer; and my hair pulls so!'

 “Her hair, unbound, very long and very black, it seemed to me, hung
      over the back of the armchair and touched the floor.

 “Why did I promise? Why did I take that comb with a shudder, and why
      did I hold in my hands her long black hair that gave my skin a frightful
      cold sensation, as though I were handling snakes? I cannot tell.

 “That sensation has remained in my fingers, and I still tremble in
      recalling it.

 “I combed her hair. I handled, I know not how, those icy locks. I
      twisted, knotted, and unknotted, and braided them. She sighed, bowed her
      head, seemed happy. Suddenly she said, 'Thank you!' snatched the comb from
      my hands and fled by the door that I had noticed ajar.

 “Left alone, I experienced for several seconds the horrible
      agitation of one who awakens from a nightmare. At length I regained my
      senses. I ran to the window and with a mighty effort burst open the
      shutters, letting a flood of light into the room. Immediately I sprang to
      the door by which that being had departed. I found it closed and
      immovable!

 “Then the mad desire to flee overcame me like a panic the panic
      which soldiers know in battle. I seized the three packets of letters on
      the open desk, ran from the room, dashed down the stairs four steps at a
      time, found myself outside, I know not how, and, perceiving my horse a few
      steps off, leaped into the saddle and galloped away.

 “I stopped only when I reached Rouen and alighted at my lodgings.
      Throwing the reins to my orderly, I fled to my room and shut myself in to
      reflect. For an hour I anxiously asked myself if I were not the victim of
      a hallucination. Undoubtedly I had had one of those incomprehensible
      nervous attacks those exaltations of mind that give rise to visions and
      are the stronghold of the supernatural. And I was about to believe I had
      seen a vision, had a hallucination, when, as I approached the window, my
      eyes fell, by chance, upon my breast. My military cape was covered with
      long black hairs! One by one, with trembling fingers, I plucked them off
      and threw them away.

 “I then called my orderly. I was too disturbed, too upset to go and
      see my friend that day, and I also wished to reflect more fully upon what
      I ought to tell him. I sent him his letters, for which he gave the soldier
      a receipt. He asked after me most particularly, and, on being told I was
      ill—had had a sunstroke—appeared exceedingly anxious. Next
      morning I went to him, determined to tell him the truth. He had gone out
      the evening before and had not yet returned. I called again during the
      day; my friend was still absent. After waiting a week longer without news
      of him, I notified the authorities and a judicial search was instituted.
      Not the slightest trace of his whereabouts or manner of disappearance was
      discovered.

 “A minute inspection of the abandoned chateau revealed nothing of a
      suspicious character. There was no indication that a woman had been
      concealed there.

 “After fruitless researches all further efforts were abandoned, and
      for fifty-six years I have heard nothing; I know no more than before.”

  

  









 ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 8.

 GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others

  

  









 VOLUME VIII.