THE ARREST OF LIEUTENANT GOLIGHTLY.
    

  “'I've forgotten the countersign,' sez 'e.

  'Oh! You 'ave, 'ave you?' sez I.

  'But I'm the Colonel,' sez 'e.

  'Oh! You are, are you?' sez I. 'Colonel nor no Colonel, you
   waits 'ere till I'm relieved, an' the Sarjint reports on
   your ugly old mug. Coop!' sez I.

  .........

  An' s'help me soul, 'twas the Colonel after all! But I was
  a recruity then.”

           The Unedited Autobiography of Private Ortheris.


      IF there was one thing on which Golightly prided himself more than
      another, it was looking like “an Officer and a gentleman.” He said it was
      for the honor of the Service that he attired himself so elaborately; but
      those who knew him best said that it was just personal vanity. There was
      no harm about Golightly—not an ounce.
    

      He recognized a horse when he saw one, and could do more than fill a
      cantle. He played a very fair game at billiards, and was a sound man at
      the whist-table. Everyone liked him; and nobody ever dreamed of seeing him
      handcuffed on a station platform as a deserter. But this sad thing
      happened.
    

      He was going down from Dalhousie, at the end of his leave—riding
      down. He had cut his leave as fine as he dared, and wanted to come down in
      a hurry.
    

      It was fairly warm at Dalhousie, and knowing what to expect below, he
      descended in a new khaki suit—tight fitting—of a delicate
      olive-green; a peacock-blue tie, white collar, and a snowy white solah
      helmet. He prided himself on looking neat even when he was riding post. He
      did look neat, and he was so deeply concerned about his appearance before
      he started that he quite forgot to take anything but some small change
      with him. He left all his notes at the hotel. His servants had gone down
      the road before him, to be ready in waiting at Pathankote with a change of
      gear. That was what he called travelling in “light marching-order.” He was
      proud of his faculty of organization—what we call bundobust.
    

      Twenty-two miles out of Dalhousie it began to rain—not a mere
      hill-shower, but a good, tepid monsoonish downpour. Golightly bustled on,
      wishing that he had brought an umbrella. The dust on the roads turned into
      mud, and the pony mired a good deal. So did Golightly's khaki gaiters. But
      he kept on steadily and tried to think how pleasant the coolth was.
    

      His next pony was rather a brute at starting, and Golightly's hands being
      slippery with the rain, contrived to get rid of Golightly at a corner. He
      chased the animal, caught it, and went ahead briskly.
    

      The spill had not improved his clothes or his temper, and he had lost one
      spur. He kept the other one employed. By the time that stage was ended,
      the pony had had as much exercise as he wanted, and, in spite of the rain,
      Golightly was sweating freely. At the end of another miserable half-hour,
      Golightly found the world disappear before his eyes in clammy pulp. The
      rain had turned the pith of his huge and snowy solah-topee into an
      evil-smelling dough, and it had closed on his head like a half-opened
      mushroom. Also the green lining was beginning to run.
    

      Golightly did not say anything worth recording here. He tore off and
      squeezed up as much of the brim as was in his eyes and ploughed on. The
      back of the helmet was flapping on his neck and the sides stuck to his
      ears, but the leather band and green lining kept things roughly together,
      so that the hat did not actually melt away where it flapped.
    

      Presently, the pulp and the green stuff made a sort of slimy mildew which
      ran over Golightly in several directions—down his back and bosom for
      choice. The khaki color ran too—it was really shockingly bad dye—and
      sections of Golightly were brown, and patches were violet, and contours
      were ochre, and streaks were ruddy red, and blotches were nearly white,
      according to the nature and peculiarities of the dye. When he took out his
      handkerchief to wipe his face and the green of the hat-lining and the
      purple stuff that had soaked through on to his neck from the tie became
      thoroughly mixed, the effect was amazing.
    

      Near Dhar the rain stopped and the evening sun came out and dried him up
      slightly. It fixed the colors, too. Three miles from Pathankote the last
      pony fell dead lame, and Golightly was forced to walk. He pushed on into
      Pathankote to find his servants. He did not know then that his khitmatgar
      had stopped by the roadside to get drunk, and would come on the next day
      saying that he had sprained his ankle. When he got into Pathankote, he
      couldn't find his servants, his boots were stiff and ropy with mud, and
      there were large quantities of dirt about his body. The blue tie had run
      as much as the khaki. So he took it off with the collar and threw it away.
      Then he said something about servants generally and tried to get a peg. He
      paid eight annas for the drink, and this revealed to him that he had only
      six annas more in his pocket—or in the world as he stood at that
      hour.
    

      He went to the Station-Master to negotiate for a first-class ticket to
      Khasa, where he was stationed. The booking-clerk said something to the
      Station-Master, the Station-Master said something to the Telegraph Clerk,
      and the three looked at him with curiosity. They asked him to wait for
      half-an-hour, while they telegraphed to Umritsar for authority. So he
      waited, and four constables came and grouped themselves picturesquely
      round him. Just as he was preparing to ask them to go away, the
      Station-Master said that he would give the Sahib a ticket to Umritsar, if
      the Sahib would kindly come inside the booking-office. Golightly stepped
      inside, and the next thing he knew was that a constable was attached to
      each of his legs and arms, while the Station-Master was trying to cram a
      mailbag over his head.
    

      There was a very fair scuffle all round the booking-office, and Golightly
      received a nasty cut over his eye through falling against a table. But the
      constables were too much for him, and they and the Station-Master
      handcuffed him securely. As soon as the mail-bag was slipped, he began
      expressing his opinions, and the head-constable said:—“Without doubt
      this is the soldier-Englishman we required. Listen to the abuse!” Then
      Golightly asked the Station-Master what the this and the that the
      proceedings meant. The Station-Master told him he was “Private John Binkle
      of the——Regiment, 5 ft. 9 in., fair hair, gray eyes, and a
      dissipated appearance, no marks on the body,” who had deserted a fortnight
      ago. Golightly began explaining at great length; and the more he explained
      the less the Station-Master believed him. He said that no Lieutenant could
      look such a ruffian as did Golightly, and that his instructions were to
      send his capture under proper escort to Umritsar. Golightly was feeling
      very damp and uncomfortable, and the language he used was not fit for
      publication, even in an expurgated form. The four constables saw him safe
      to Umritsar in an “intermediate” compartment, and he spent the four-hour
      journey in abusing them as fluently as his knowledge of the vernaculars
      allowed.
    

      At Umritsar he was bundled out on the platform into the arms of a Corporal
      and two men of the——Regiment. Golightly drew himself up and
      tried to carry off matters jauntily. He did not feel too jaunty in
      handcuffs, with four constables behind him, and the blood from the cut on
      his forehead stiffening on his left cheek. The Corporal was not jocular
      either. Golightly got as far as—“This is a very absurd mistake, my
      men,” when the Corporal told him to “stow his lip” and come along.
      Golightly did not want to come along. He desired to stop and explain. He
      explained very well indeed, until the Corporal cut in with:—“YOU a
      orficer! It's the like o' YOU as brings disgrace on the likes of US.
      Bloom-in' fine orficer you are! I know your regiment. The Rogue's March is
      the quickstep where you come from. You're a black shame to the Service.”
     

      Golightly kept his temper, and began explaining all over again from the
      beginning. Then he was marched out of the rain into the refreshment-room
      and told not to make a qualified fool of himself.
    

      The men were going to run him up to Fort Govindghar. And “running up” is a
      performance almost as undignified as the Frog March.
    

      Golightly was nearly hysterical with rage and the chill and the mistake
      and the handcuffs and the headache that the cut on his forehead had given
      him. He really laid himself out to express what was in his mind. When he
      had quite finished and his throat was feeling dry, one of the men said:—“I've
      'eard a few beggars in the click blind, stiff and crack on a bit; but I've
      never 'eard any one to touch this 'ere 'orficer.'” They were not angry
      with him. They rather admired him. They had some beer at the
      refreshment-room, and offered Golightly some too, because he had “swore
      won'erful.” They asked him to tell them all about the adventures of
      Private John Binkle while he was loose on the countryside; and that made
      Golightly wilder than ever. If he had kept his wits about him he would
      have kept quiet until an officer came; but he attempted to run.
    

      Now the butt of a Martini in the small of your back hurts a great deal,
      and rotten, rain-soaked khaki tears easily when two men are jerking at
      your collar.
    

      Golightly rose from the floor feeling very sick and giddy, with his shirt
      ripped open all down his breast and nearly all down his back.
    

      He yielded to his luck, and at that point the down-train from Lahore came
      in carrying one of Golightly's Majors.
    

      This is the Major's evidence in full:—
    

      “There was the sound of a scuffle in the second-class refreshment-room, so
      I went in and saw the most villainous loafer that I ever set eyes on. His
      boots and breeches were plastered with mud and beer-stains. He wore a
      muddy-white dunghill sort of thing on his head, and it hung down in slips
      on his shoulders, which were a good deal scratched. He was half in and
      half out of a shirt as nearly in two pieces as it could be, and he was
      begging the guard to look at the name on the tail of it. As he had rucked
      the shirt all over his head, I couldn't at first see who he was, but I
      fancied that he was a man in the first stage of D. T. from the way he
      swore while he wrestled with his rags. When he turned round, and I had
      made allowance for a lump as big as a pork-pie over one eye, and some
      green war-paint on the face, and some violet stripes round the neck, I saw
      that it was Golightly. He was very glad to see me,” said the Major, “and
      he hoped I would not tell the Mess about it. I didn't, but you can if you
      like, now that Golightly has gone Home.”
     

      Golightly spent the greater part of that summer in trying to get the
      Corporal and the two soldiers tried by Court-Martial for arresting an
      “officer and a gentleman.” They were, of course, very sorry for their
      error. But the tale leaked into the regimental canteen, and thence ran
      about the Province.