THE LOCKET

  

  









 I

 One night in autumn a few men were gathered about a fire on the slope of a
      hill. They belonged to a small detachment of Confederate forces and were
      awaiting orders to march. Their gray uniforms were worn beyond the point
      of shabbiness. One of the men was heating something in a tin cup over the
      embers. Two were lying at full length a little distance away, while a
      fourth was trying to decipher a letter and had drawn close to the light.
      He had unfastened his collar and a good bit of his flannel shirt front.

 “What's that you got around your neck, Ned?” asked one of the men lying in
      the obscurity.

 Ned—or Edmond—mechanically fastened another button of his
      shirt and did not reply. He went on reading his letter.

 “Is it your sweet heart's picture?”

 “'Taint no gal's picture,” offered the man at the fire. He had removed his
      tin cup and was engaged in stirring its grimy contents with a small stick.
      “That's a charm; some kind of hoodoo business that one o' them priests
      gave him to keep him out o' trouble. I know them Cath'lics. That's how
      come Frenchy got permoted an never got a scratch sence he's been in the
      ranks. Hey, French! aint I right?” Edmond looked up absently from his
      letter.

 “What is it?” he asked.

 “Aint that a charm you got round your neck?”

 “It must be, Nick,” returned Edmond with a smile. “I don't know how I
      could have gone through this year and a half without it.”

 The letter had made Edmond heart sick and home sick. He stretched himself
      on his back and looked straight up at the blinking stars. But he was not
      thinking of them nor of anything but a certain spring day when the bees
      were humming in the clematis; when a girl was saying good bye to him. He
      could see her as she unclasped from her neck the locket which she fastened
      about his own. It was an old fashioned golden locket bearing miniatures of
      her father and mother with their names and the date of their marriage. It
      was her most precious earthly possession. Edmond could feel again the
      folds of the girl's soft white gown, and see the droop of the
      angel-sleeves as she circled her fair arms about his neck. Her sweet face,
      appealing, pathetic, tormented by the pain of parting, appeared before him
      as vividly as life. He turned over, burying his face in his arm and there
      he lay, still and motionless.

 The profound and treacherous night with its silence and semblance of peace
      settled upon the camp. He dreamed that the fair Octavie brought him a
      letter. He had no chair to offer her and was pained and embarrassed at the
      condition of his garments. He was ashamed of the poor food which comprised
      the dinner at which he begged her to join them.

 He dreamt of a serpent coiling around his throat, and when he strove to
      grasp it the slimy thing glided away from his clutch. Then his dream was
      clamor.

 “Git your duds! you! Frenchy!” Nick was bellowing in his face. There was
      what appeared to be a scramble and a rush rather than any regulated
      movement. The hill side was alive with clatter and motion; with sudden
      up-springing lights among the pines. In the east the dawn was unfolding
      out of the darkness. Its glimmer was yet dim in the plain below.

 “What's it all about?” wondered a big black bird perched in the top of the
      tallest tree. He was an old solitary and a wise one, yet he was not wise
      enough to guess what it was all about. So all day long he kept blinking
      and wondering.

 The noise reached far out over the plain and across the hills and awoke
      the little babes that were sleeping in their cradles. The smoke curled up
      toward the sun and shadowed the plain so that the stupid birds thought it
      was going to rain; but the wise one knew better.

 “They are children playing a game,” thought he. “I shall know more about
      it if I watch long enough.”

 At the approach of night they had all vanished away with their din and
      smoke. Then the old bird plumed his feathers. At last he had understood!
      With a flap of his great, black wings he shot downward, circling toward
      the plain.

 A man was picking his way across the plain. He was dressed in the garb of
      a clergyman. His mission was to administer the consolations of religion to
      any of the prostrate figures in whom there might yet linger a spark of
      life. A negro accompanied him, bearing a bucket of water and a flask of
      wine.

 There were no wounded here; they had been borne away. But the retreat had
      been hurried and the vultures and the good Samaritans would have to look
      to the dead.

 There was a soldier—a mere boy—lying with his face to the sky.
      His hands were clutching the sward on either side and his finger nails
      were stuffed with earth and bits of grass that he had gathered in his
      despairing grasp upon life. His musket was gone; he was hatless and his
      face and clothing were begrimed. Around his neck hung a gold chain and
      locket. The priest, bending over him, unclasped the chain and removed it
      from the dead soldier's neck. He had grown used to the terrors of war and
      could face them unflinchingly; but its pathos, someway, always brought the
      tears to his old, dim eyes.

 The angelus was ringing half a mile away. The priest and the negro knelt
      and murmured together the evening benediction and a prayer for the dead.

  

  









 II

 The peace and beauty of a spring day had descended upon the earth like a
      benediction. Along the leafy road which skirted a narrow, tortuous stream
      in central Louisiana, rumbled an old fashioned cabriolet, much the worse
      for hard and rough usage over country roads and lanes. The fat, black
      horses went in a slow, measured trot, notwithstanding constant urging on
      the part of the fat, black coachman. Within the vehicle were seated the
      fair Octavie and her old friend and neighbor, Judge Pillier, who had come
      to take her for a morning drive.

 Octavie wore a plain black dress, severe in its simplicity. A narrow belt
      held it at the waist and the sleeves were gathered into close fitting
      wristbands. She had discarded her hoopskirt and appeared not unlike a nun.
      Beneath the folds of her bodice nestled the old locket. She never
      displayed it now. It had returned to her sanctified in her eyes; made
      precious as material things sometimes are by being forever identified with
      a significant moment of one's existence.

 A hundred times she had read over the letter with which the locket had
      come back to her. No later than that morning she had again pored over it.
      As she sat beside the window, smoothing the letter out upon her knee,
      heavy and spiced odors stole in to her with the songs of birds and the
      humming of insects in the air.

 She was so young and the world was so beautiful that there came over her a
      sense of unreality as she read again and again the priest's letter. He
      told of that autumn day drawing to its close, with the gold and the red
      fading out of the west, and the night gathering its shadows to cover the
      faces of the dead. Oh! She could not believe that one of those dead was
      her own! with visage uplifted to the gray sky in an agony of supplication.
      A spasm of resistance and rebellion seized and swept over her. Why was the
      spring here with its flowers and its seductive breath if he was dead! Why
      was she here! What further had she to do with life and the living!

 Octavie had experienced many such moments of despair, but a blessed
      resignation had never failed to follow, and it fell then upon her like a
      mantle and enveloped her.

 “I shall grow old and quiet and sad like poor Aunt Tavie,” she murmured to
      herself as she folded the letter and replaced it in the secretary. Already
      she gave herself a little demure air like her Aunt Tavie. She walked with
      a slow glide in unconscious imitation of Mademoiselle Tavie whom some
      youthful affliction had robbed of earthly compensation while leaving her
      in possession of youth's illusions.

 As she sat in the old cabriolet beside the father of her dead lover, again
      there came to Octavie the terrible sense of loss which had assailed her so
      often before. The soul of her youth clamored for its rights; for a share
      in the world's glory and exultation. She leaned back and drew her veil a
      little closer about her face. It was an old black veil of her Aunt
      Tavie's. A whiff of dust from the road had blown in and she wiped her
      cheeks and her eyes with her soft, white handkerchief, a homemade
      handkerchief, fabricated from one of her old fine muslin petticoats.

 “Will you do me the favor, Octavie,” requested the judge in the courteous
      tone which he never abandoned, “to remove that veil which you wear. It
      seems out of harmony, someway, with the beauty and promise of the day.”

 The young girl obediently yielded to her old companion's wish and
      unpinning the cumbersome, sombre drapery from her bonnet, folded it neatly
      and laid it upon the seat in front of her.

 “Ah! that is better; far better!” he said in a tone expressing unbounded
      relief. “Never put it on again, dear.” Octavie felt a little hurt; as if
      he wished to debar her from share and parcel in the burden of affliction
      which had been placed upon all of them. Again she drew forth the old
      muslin handkerchief.

 They had left the big road and turned into a level plain which had
      formerly been an old meadow. There were clumps of thorn trees here and
      there, gorgeous in their spring radiance. Some cattle were grazing off in
      the distance in spots where the grass was tall and luscious. At the far
      end of the meadow was the towering lilac hedge, skirting the lane that led
      to Judge Pillier's house, and the scent of its heavy blossoms met them
      like a soft and tender embrace of welcome.

 As they neared the house the old gentleman placed an arm around the girl's
      shoulders and turning her face up to him he said: “Do you not think that
      on a day like this, miracles might happen? When the whole earth is vibrant
      with life, does it not seem to you, Octavie, that heaven might for once
      relent and give us back our dead?” He spoke very low, advisedly, and
      impressively. In his voice was an old quaver which was not habitual and
      there was agitation in every line of his visage. She gazed at him with
      eyes that were full of supplication and a certain terror of joy.

 They had been driving through the lane with the towering hedge on one side
      and the open meadow on the other. The horses had somewhat quickened their
      lazy pace. As they turned into the avenue leading to the house, a whole
      choir of feathered songsters fluted a sudden torrent of melodious greeting
      from their leafy hiding places.

 Octavie felt as if she had passed into a stage of existence which was like
      a dream, more poignant and real than life. There was the old gray house
      with its sloping eaves. Amid the blur of green, and dimly, she saw
      familiar faces and heard voices as if they came from far across the
      fields, and Edmond was holding her. Her dead Edmond; her living Edmond,
      and she felt the beating of his heart against her and the agonizing
      rapture of his kisses striving to awake her. It was as if the spirit of
      life and the awakening spring had given back the soul to her youth and
      bade her rejoice.

 It was many hours later that Octavie drew the locket from her bosom and
      looked at Edmond with a questioning appeal in her glance.

 “It was the night before an engagement,” he said. “In the hurry of the
      encounter, and the retreat next day, I never missed it till the fight was
      over. I thought of course I had lost it in the heat of the struggle, but
      it was stolen.”

 “Stolen,” she shuddered, and thought of the dead soldier with his face
      uplifted to the sky in an agony of supplication.

 Edmond said nothing; but he thought of his messmate; the one who had lain
      far back in the shadow; the one who had said nothing.