THE SON

 The two old friends were walking in the garden in bloom, where spring was
      bringing everything to life.

 One was a senator, the other a member of the French Academy, both serious
      men, full of very logical but solemn arguments, men of note and
      reputation.

 They talked first of politics, exchanging opinions; not on ideas, but on
      men, personalities in this regard taking the predominance over ability.
      Then they recalled some memories. Then they walked along in silence,
      enervated by the warmth of the air.

 A large bed of wallflowers breathed out a delicate sweetness. A mass of
      flowers of all species and color flung their fragrance to the breeze,
      while a cytisus covered with yellow clusters scattered its fine pollen
      abroad, a golden cloud, with an odor of honey that bore its balmy seed
      across space, similar to the sachet-powders of perfumers.

 The senator stopped, breathed in the cloud of floating pollen, looked at
      the fertile shrub, yellow as the sun, whose seed was floating in the air,
      and said:

 “When one considers that these imperceptible fragrant atoms will
      create existences at a hundred leagues from here, will send a thrill
      through the fibres and sap of female trees and produce beings with roots,
      growing from a germ, just as we do, mortal like ourselves, and who will be
      replaced by other beings of the same order, like ourselves again!”

 And, standing in front of the brilliant cytisus, whose live pollen was
      shaken off by each breath of air, the senator added:

 “Ah, old fellow, if you had to keep count of all your children you
      would be mightily embarrassed. Here is one who generates freely, and then
      lets them go without a pang and troubles himself no more about them.”

 “We do the same, my friend,” said the academician.

 “Yes, I do not deny it; we let them go sometimes,” resumed the
      senator, “but we are aware that we do, and that constitutes our
      superiority.”

 “No, that is not what I mean,” said the other, shaking his
      head. “You see, my friend, that there is scarcely a man who has not
      some children that he does not know, children—'father unknown'—whom
      he has generated almost unconsciously, just as this tree reproduces.

 “If we had to keep account of our amours, we should be just as
      embarrassed as this cytisus which you apostrophized would be in counting
      up his descendants, should we not?

 “From eighteen to forty years, in fact, counting in every chance
      cursory acquaintanceship, we may well say that we have been intimate with
      two or three hundred women.

 “Well, then, my friend, among this number can you be sure that you
      have not had children by at least one of them, and that you have not in
      the streets, or in the bagnio, some blackguard of a son who steals from
      and murders decent people, i.e., ourselves; or else a daughter in some
      disreputable place, or, if she has the good fortune to be deserted by her
      mother, as cook in some family?

 “Consider, also, that almost all those whom we call 'prostitutes'
      have one or two children of whose paternal parentage they are ignorant,
      generated by chance at the price of ten or twenty francs. In every
      business there is profit and loss. These wildings constitute the 'loss' in
      their profession. Who generated them? You—I—we all did, the
      men called 'gentlemen'! They are the consequences of our jovial little
      dinners, of our gay evenings, of those hours when our comfortable physical
      being impels us to chance liaisons.

 “Thieves, marauders, all these wretches, in fact, are our children.
      And that is better for us than if we were their children, for those
      scoundrels generate also!

 “I have in my mind a very horrible story that I will relate to you.
      It has caused me incessant remorse, and, further than that, a continual
      doubt, a disquieting uncertainty, that, at times, torments me frightfully.

 “When I was twenty-five I undertook a walking tour through Brittany
      with one of my friends, now a member of the cabinet.

 “After walking steadily for fifteen or twenty days and visiting the
      Cotes-du-Nord and part of Finistere we reached Douarnenez. From there we
      went without halting to the wild promontory of Raz by the bay of Les
      Trepaases, and passed the night in a village whose name ends in 'of.' The
      next morning a strange lassitude kept my friend in bed; I say bed from
      habit, for our couch consisted simply of two bundles of straw.

 “It would never do to be ill in this place. So I made him get up,
      and we reached Andierne about four or five o'clock in the evening.

 “The following day he felt a little better, and we set out again.
      But on the road he was seized with intolerable pain, and we could scarcely
      get as far as Pont Labbe.

 “Here, at least, there was an inn. My friend went to bed, and the
      doctor, who had been sent for from Quimper, announced that he had a high
      fever, without being able to determine its nature.

 “Do you know Pont Labbe? No? Well, then, it is the most Breton of
      all this Breton Brittany, which extends from the promontory of Raz to the
      Morbihan, of this land which contains the essence of the Breton manners,
      legends and customs. Even to-day this corner of the country has scarcely
      changed. I say 'even to-day,' for I now go there every year, alas!

 “An old chateau laves the walls of its towers in a great melancholy
      pond, melancholy and frequented by flights of wild birds. It has an outlet
      in a river on which boats can navigate as far as the town. In the narrow
      streets with their old-time houses the men wear big hats, embroidered
      waistcoats and four coats, one on top of the other; the inside one, as
      large as your hand, barely covering the shoulder-blades, and the outside
      one coming to just above the seat of the trousers.

 “The girls, tall, handsome and fresh have their bosoms crushed in a
      cloth bodice which makes an armor, compresses them, not allowing one even
      to guess at their robust and tortured neck. They also wear a strange
      headdress. On their temples two bands embroidered in colors frame their
      face, inclosing the hair, which falls in a shower at the back of their
      heads, and is then turned up and gathered on top of the head under a
      singular cap, often woven with gold or silver thread.

 “The servant at our inn was eighteen at most, with very blue eyes, a
      pale blue with two tiny black pupils, short teeth close together, which
      she showed continually when she laughed, and which seemed strong enough to
      grind granite.

 “She did not know a word of French, speaking only Breton, as did
      most of her companions.

 “As my friend did not improve much, and although he had no definite
      malady, the doctor forbade him to continue his journey yet, ordering
      complete rest. I spent my days with him, and the little maid would come in
      incessantly, bringing either my dinner or some herb tea.

 “I teased her a little, which seemed to amuse her, but we did not
      chat, of course, as we could not understand each other.

 “But one night, after I had stayed quite late with my friend and was
      going back to my room, I passed the girl, who was going to her room. It
      was just opposite my open door, and, without reflection, and more for fun
      than anything else, I abruptly seized her round the waist, and before she
      recovered from her astonishment I had thrown her down and locked her in my
      room. She looked at me, amazed, excited, terrified, not daring to cry out
      for fear of a scandal and of being probably driven out, first by her
      employers and then, perhaps, by her father.

 “I did it as a joke at first. She defended herself bravely, and at
      the first chance she ran to the door, drew back the bolt and fled.

 “I scarcely saw her for several days. She would not let me come near
      her. But when my friend was cured and we were to get out on our travels
      again I saw her coming into my room about midnight the night before our
      departure, just after I had retired.

 “She threw herself into my arms and embraced me passionately, giving
      me all the assurances of tenderness and despair that a woman can give when
      she does not know a word of our language.

 “A week later I had forgotten this adventure, so common and frequent
      when one is travelling, the inn servants being generally destined to amuse
      travellers in this way.

 “I was thirty before I thought of it again, or returned to Pont
      Labbe.

 “But in 1876 I revisited it by chance during a trip into Brittany,
      which I made in order to look up some data for a book and to become
      permeated with the atmosphere of the different places.

 “Nothing seemed changed. The chateau still laved its gray wall in
      the pond outside the little town; the inn was the same, though it had been
      repaired, renovated and looked more modern. As I entered it I was received
      by two young Breton girls of eighteen, fresh and pretty, bound up in their
      tight cloth bodices, with their silver caps and wide embroidered bands on
      their ears.

 “It was about six o'clock in the evening. I sat down to dinner, and
      as the host was assiduous in waiting on me himself, fate, no doubt,
      impelled me to say:

 “'Did you know the former proprietors of this house? I spent about
      ten days here thirty years ago. I am talking old times.'

 “'Those were my parents, monsieur,' he replied.

 “Then I told him why we had stayed over at that time, how my comrade
      had been delayed by illness. He did not let me finish.

 “'Oh, I recollect perfectly. I was about fifteen or sixteen. You
      slept in the room at the end and your friend in the one I have taken for
      myself, overlooking the street.'

 “It was only then that the recollection of the little maid came
      vividly to my mind. I asked: 'Do you remember a pretty little servant who
      was then in your father's employ, and who had, if my memory does not
      deceive me, pretty eyes and fresh-looking teeth?'

 “'Yes, monsieur; she died in childbirth some time after.'

 “And, pointing to the courtyard where a thin, lame man was stirring
      up the manure, he added:

 “'That is her son.'

 “I began to laugh:

 “'He is not handsome and does not look much like his mother. No
      doubt he looks like his father.'

 “'That is very possible,' replied the innkeeper; 'but we never knew
      whose child it was. She died without telling any one, and no one here knew
      of her having a beau. Every one was hugely astonished when they heard she
      was enceinte, and no one would believe it.'

 “A sort of unpleasant chill came over me, one of those painful
      surface wounds that affect us like the shadow of an impending sorrow. And
      I looked at the man in the yard. He had just drawn water for the horses
      and was carrying two buckets, limping as he walked, with a painful effort
      of his shorter leg. His clothes were ragged, he was hideously dirty, with
      long yellow hair, so tangled that it looked like strands of rope falling
      down at either side of his face.

 “'He is not worth much,' continued the innkeeper; 'we have kept him
      for charity's sake. Perhaps he would have turned out better if he had been
      brought up like other folks. But what could one do, monsieur? No father,
      no mother, no money! My parents took pity on him, but he was not their
      child, you understand.'

 “I said nothing.

 “I slept in my old room, and all night long I thought of this
      frightful stableman, saying to myself: 'Supposing it is my own son? Could
      I have caused that girl's death and procreated this being? It was quite
      possible!'

 “I resolved to speak to this man and to find out the exact date of
      his birth. A variation of two months would set my doubts at rest.

 “I sent for him the next day. But he could not speak French. He
      looked as if he could not understand anything, being absolutely ignorant
      of his age, which I had inquired of him through one of the maids. He stood
      before me like an idiot, twirling his hat in 'his knotted, disgusting
      hands, laughing stupidly, with something of his mother's laugh in the
      corners of his mouth and of his eyes.

 “The landlord, appearing on the scene, went to look for the birth
      certificate of this wretched being. He was born eight months and
      twenty-six days after my stay at Pont Labbe, for I recollect perfectly
      that we reached Lorient on the fifteenth of August. The certificate
      contained this description: 'Father unknown.' The mother called herself
      Jeanne Kerradec.

 “Then my heart began to beat rapidly. I could not utter a word, for
      I felt as if I were choking. I looked at this animal whose long yellow
      hair reminded me of a straw heap, and the beggar, embarrassed by my gaze,
      stopped laughing, turned his head aside, and wanted to get away.

 “All day long I wandered beside the little river, giving way to
      painful reflections. But what was the use of reflection? I could be sure
      of nothing. For hours and hours I weighed all the pros and cons in favor
      of or against the probability of my being the father, growing nervous over
      inexplicable suppositions, only to return incessantly to the same horrible
      uncertainty, then to the still more atrocious conviction that this man was
      my son.

 “I could eat no dinner, and went to my room.

 “I lay awake for a long time, and when I finally fell asleep I was
      haunted by horrible visions. I saw this laborer laughing in my face and
      calling me 'papa.' Then he changed into a dog and bit the calves of my
      legs, and no matter how fast I ran he still followed me, and instead of
      barking, talked and reviled me. Then he appeared before my colleagues at
      the Academy, who had assembled to decide whether I was really his father;
      and one of them cried out: 'There can be no doubt about it! See how he
      resembles him.' And, indeed, I could see that this monster looked like me.
      And I awoke with this idea fixed in my mind and with an insane desire to
      see the man again and assure myself whether or not we had similar
      features.

 “I joined him as he was going to mass (it was Sunday) and I gave him
      five francs as I gazed at him anxiously. He began to laugh in an idiotic
      manner, took the money, and then, embarrassed afresh at my gaze, he ran
      off, after stammering an almost inarticulate word that, no doubt, meant
      'thank you.'

 “My day passed in the same distress of mind as on the previous
      night. I sent for the landlord, and, with the greatest caution, skill and
      tact, I told him that I was interested in this poor creature, so abandoned
      by every one and deprived of everything, and I wished to do something for
      him.

 “But the man replied: 'Oh, do not think of it, monsieur; he is of no
      account; you will only cause yourself annoyance. I employ him to clean out
      the stable, and that is all he can do. I give him his board and let him
      sleep with the horses. He needs nothing more. If you have an old pair of
      trousers, you might give them to him, but they will be in rags in a week.'

 “I did not insist, intending to think it over.

 “The poor wretch came home that evening frightfully drunk, came near
      setting fire to the house, killed a horse by hitting it with a pickaxe,
      and ended up by lying down to sleep in the mud in the midst of the pouring
      rain, thanks to my donation.

 “They begged me next day not to give him any more money. Brandy
      drove him crazy, and as soon as he had two sous in his pocket he would
      spend it in drink. The landlord added: 'Giving him money is like trying to
      kill him.' The man had never, never in his life had more than a few
      centimes, thrown to him by travellers, and he knew of no destination for
      this metal but the wine shop.

 “I spent several hours in my room with an open book before me which
      I pretended to read, but in reality looking at this animal, my son! my
      son! trying to discover if he looked anything like me. After careful
      scrutiny I seemed to recognize a similarity in the lines of the forehead
      and the root of the nose, and I was soon convinced that there was a
      resemblance, concealed by the difference in garb and the man's hideous
      head of hair.

 “I could not stay here any longer without arousing suspicion, and I
      went away, my heart crushed, leaving with the innkeeper some money to
      soften the existence of his servant.

 “For six years now I have lived with this idea in my mind, this
      horrible uncertainty, this abominable suspicion. And each year an
      irresistible force takes me back to Pont Labbe. Every year I condemn
      myself to the torture of seeing this animal raking the manure, imagining
      that he resembles me, and endeavoring, always vainly, to render him some
      assistance. And each year I return more uncertain, more tormented, more
      worried.

 “I tried to have him taught, but he is a hopeless idiot. I tried to
      make his life less hard. He is an irreclaimable drunkard, and spends in
      drink all the money one gives him, and knows enough to sell his new
      clothes in order to get brandy.

 “I tried to awaken his master's sympathy, so that he should look
      after him, offering to pay him for doing so. The innkeeper, finally
      surprised, said, very wisely: 'All that you do for him, monsieur, will
      only help to destroy him. He must be kept like a prisoner. As soon as he
      has any spare time, or any comfort, he becomes wicked. If you wish to do
      good, there is no lack of abandoned children, but select one who will
      appreciate your attention.'

 “What could I say?

 “If I allowed the slightest suspicion of the doubts that tortured me
      to escape, this idiot would assuredly become cunning, in order to
      blackmail me, to compromise me and ruin me. He would call out 'papa,' as
      in my dream.

 “And I said to myself that I had killed the mother and lost this
      atrophied creature, this larva of the stable, born and raised amid the
      manure, this man who, if brought up like others, would have been like
      others.

 “And you cannot imagine what a strange, embarrassed and intolerable
      feeling comes over me when he stands before me and I reflect that he came
      from myself, that he belongs to me through the intimate bond that links
      father and son, that, thanks to the terrible law of heredity, he is my own
      self in a thousand ways, in his blood and his flesh, and that he has even
      the same germs of disease, the same leaven of emotions.

 “I have an incessant restless, distressing longing to see him, and
      the sight of him causes me intense suffering, as I look down from my
      window and watch him for hours removing and carting the horse manure,
      saying to myself: 'That is my son.'

 “And I sometimes feel an irresistible longing to embrace him. I have
      never even touched his dirty hand.”

 The academician was silent. His companion, a tactful man, murmured:
      “Yes, indeed, we ought to take a closer interest in children who
      have no father.”

 A gust of wind passing through the tree shook its yellow clusters,
      enveloping in a fragrant and delicate mist the two old men, who inhaled in
      the fragrance with deep breaths.

 The senator added: “It is good to be twenty-five and even to have
      children like that.”