THE EDUCATION OF OTIS YEERE

 I

 In the pleasant orchard-closes
    “God bless all our gains,” say we;
    But “May God bless all our losses,”
     Better suits with our degree.
                  —The Lost Bower.

 This is the history of a failure; but the woman who failed said that it
      might be an instructive tale to put into print for the benefit of the
      younger generation. The younger generation does not want instruction,
      being perfectly willing to instruct if any one will listen to it. None the
      less, here begins the story where every right-minded story should begin,
      that is to say at Simla, where all things begin and many come to an evil
      end.

 The mistake was due to a very clever woman making a blunder and not
      retrieving it. Men are licensed to stumble, but a clever woman's mistake
      is outside the regular course of Nature and Providence; since all good
      people know that a woman is the only infallible thing in this world,
      except Government Paper of the '70 issue, bearing interest at four and a
      half per cent. Yet, we have to remember that six consecutive days of
      rehearsing the leading part of The Fallen Age, at the New Gaiety Theatre
      where the plaster is not yet properly dry, might have brought about an
      unhingement of spirits which, again, might have led to eccentricities.

 Mrs. Hauksbee came to “The Foundry” to tiffin with Mrs. Mallowe, her one
      bosom friend, for she was in no sense “a woman's woman.” And it was a
      woman's tiffin, the door shut to all the world; and they both talked
      chiffons, which is French for Mysteries.

 “I've enjoyed an interval of sanity,” Mrs. Hauksbee announced, after
      tiffin was over and the two were comfortably settled in the little
      writing-room that opened out of Mrs. Mallowe's bedroom.

 “My dear girl, what has he done?” said Mrs. Mallowe, sweetly. It is
      noticeable that ladies of a certain age call each other “dear girl,” just
      as commissioners of twenty-eight years' standing address their equals in
      the Civil List as “my boy.”

 “There's no he in the case. Who am I that an imaginary man should be
      always credited to me? Am I an Apache?”

 “No, dear, but somebody's scalp is generally drying at your wigwam-door.
      Soaking, rather.”

 This was an allusion to the Hawley Boy, who was in the habit of riding all
      across Simla in the Rains, to call on Mrs. Hauksbee. That lady laughed.

 “For my sins, the Aide at Tyrconnel last night told me off to The Mussuck.
      Hsh! Don't laugh. One of my most devoted admirers. When the duff came—some
      one really ought to teach them to make pudding at Tyrconnel—The
      Mussuck was at liberty to attend to me.”

 “Sweet soul! I know his appetite,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “Did he, oh did he,
      begin his wooing?”

 “By a special mercy of Providence, no. He explained his importance as a
      Pillar of the Empire. I didn't laugh.”

 “Lucy, I don't believe you.”

 “Ask Captain Sangar; he was on the other side. Well, as I was saying, The
      Mussuck dilated.”

 “I think I can see him doing it,” said Mrs. Mallowe, pensively, scratching
      her fox-terrier's ears.

 “I was properly impressed. Most properly. I yawned openly. 'Strict
      supervision, and play them off one against the other,' said The Mussuck,
      shoveling down his ice by tureenfuls, I assure you. 'That, Mrs. Hauksbee,
      is the secret of our Government.'”

 Mrs. Mallowe laughed long and merrily. “And what did you say?”

 “Did you ever know me at loss for an answer yet? I said: 'So I have
      observed in my dealings with you.' The Mussuck swelled with pride. He is
      coming to call on me tomorrow. The Hawley Boy is coming too.”

 “'Strict supervision and play them off one against the other. That, Mrs.
      Hauksbee, is the secret of our Government.' And I dare say if we could get
      to The Mussuck's heart, we should find that he considers himself a man of
      the world.”

 “As he is of the other two things. I like The Mussuck, and I won't have
      you call him names. He amuses me.”

 “He has reformed you, too, by what appears. Explain the interval of
      sanity, and hit Tim on the nose with the paper-cutter, please. That dog is
      too fond of sugar. Do you take milk in yours?”

 “No, thanks. Polly, I'm wearied of this life. It's hollow.”

 “Turn religious, then. I always said that Rome would be your fate.”

 “Only exchanging half a dozen attaches in red for one and in black, and if
      I fasted, the wrinkles would come, and never, never go. Has it ever struck
      you, dear, that I'm getting old?”

 “Thanks for your courtesy. I'll return it. Ye-es we are both not exactly—how
      shall I put it?”

 “What we have been. 'I feel it in my bones,' as Mrs. Crossley says. Polly,
      I've wasted my life.”

 “As how?”

 “Never mind how. I feel it. I want to be a Power before I die.”

 “Be a Power then. You've wits enough for anything—and beauty?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee pointed a teaspoon straight at her hostess. “Polly, if you
      heap compliments on me like this, I shall cease to believe that you're a
      woman. Tell me how I am to be a Power.”

 “Inform The Mussuck that he is the most fascinating and slimmest man in
      Asia, and he'll tell you anything and everything you please.”

 “Bother The Mussuck! I mean an intellectual Power—not a gas-power.
      Polly, I'm going to start a salon.”

 Mrs. Mallowe turned lazily on the sofa and rested her head on her hand.
      “Hear the words of the Preacher, the son of Baruch,” she said.

 “Will you talk sensibly?”

 “I will, dear, for I see that you are going to make a mistake.”

 “I never made a mistake in my life at least, never one that I couldn't
      explain away afterward.”

 “Going to make a mistake,” went on Mrs. Mallowe, composedly. “It is
      impossible to start a salon in Simla. A bar would be much more to the
      point.”

 “Perhaps, but why? It seems so easy.”

 “Just what makes it so difficult. How many clever women are there in
      Simla?”

 “Myself and yourself,” said Mrs. Hauksbee, without a moment's hesitation.

 “Modest woman! Mrs. Feardon would thank you for that. And how many clever
      men?”

 “Oh—er—hundreds,” said Mrs. Hauksbee, vaguely.

 “What a fatal blunder! Not one. They are all bespoke of the Government.
      Take my husband, for instance. Jack was a clever man, though I say so who
      shouldn't. Government has eaten him up. All his ideas and powers of
      conversation—he really used to be a good talker, even to his wife,
      in the old days—are taken from him by this—this kitchen-sink
      of a Government. That's the case with every man up here who is at work. I
      don't suppose a Russian convict under the knout is able to amuse the rest
      of his gang; and all our men-folk here are gilded convicts.”

 “But there are scores—”

 “I know what you're going to say. Scores of idle men up on leave. I admit
      it, but they are all of two objectionable sets, The Civilian who'd be
      delightful if he had the military man's knowledge of the world and style,
      and the military man who'd be adorable if lie had the Civilian's culture.”

 “Detestable word! Have Civilians Culchaw? I never studied the breed
      deeply.”

 “Don't make fun of Jack's service. Yes. They're like the teapots in the
      Lakka Bazar—good material but not polished. They can't help
      themselves, poor dears. A Civilian only begins to be tolerable after he
      has knocked about the world for fifteen years.”

 “And a military man?”

 “When he has had the same amount of service. The young of both species are
      horrible. You would have scores of them in your salon.”

 “I would not!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, fiercely. “I would tell the bearer to
      darwaza band them. I'd put their own colonels and commissioners at the
      door to turn them away. I'd give them to the Topsham girl to play with.”

 “The Topsham girl would be grateful for the gift. But to go back to the
      salon. Allowing that you had gathered all your men and women together,
      what would you do with them? Make them talk? They would all with one
      accord begin to flirt. Your salon would become a glorified Peliti's—a
      'Scandal Point' by lamplight.”

 “There's a certain amount of wisdom in that view.”

 “There's all the wisdom in the world in it. Surely, twelve Simla seasons
      ought to have taught you that you can't focus anything in India; and a
      salon, to be any good at all, must be permanent. In two seasons your
      roomful would be scattered all over Asia. We are only little bits of dirt
      on the hillsides—here one day and blown down the khud the next. We
      have lost the art of talking—at least our men have. We have no
      cohesion”—

 “George Eliot in the flesh,” interpolated Mrs. Hauksbee, wickedly.

 “And collectively, my dear scoffer, we, men and women alike, have no
      influence.

 “Come into the veranda and look at the Mall!”

 The two looked down on the now rapidly filling road, for all Simla was
      abroad to steal a stroll between a shower and a fog.

 “How do you propose to fix that river? Look! There's The Mussuck—head
      of goodness knows what. He is a power in the land, though he does eat like
      a costermonger. There's Colonel Blone, and General Grucher, and Sir Dugald
      Delane, and Sir Henry Haughton, and Mr. Jellalatty. All Heads of
      Departments, and all powerful.”

 “And all my fervent admirers,” said Mrs. Hauksbee, piously. “Sir Henry
      Haughton raves about me. But go on.”

 “One by one, these men are worth something. Collectively, they're just a
      mob of Anglo-Indians. Who cares for what Anglo-Indians say? Your salon
      won't weld the Departments together and make you mistress of India, dear.
      And these creatures won't talk administrative 'shop' in a crowd—your
      salon—because they are so afraid of the men in the lower ranks
      overhearing it. They have forgotten what of Literature and Art they ever
      knew, and the women”—

 “Can't talk about anything except the last Gymkhana, or the sins of their
      last nurse. I was calling on Mrs. Derwills this morning.”

 “You admit that? They can talk to the subalterns though, and the
      subalterns can talk to them. Your salon would suit their views admirably,
      if you respected the religious prejudices of the country and provided
      plenty of kala juggahs.”

 “Plenty of kala juggahs. Oh my poor little idea! Kala juggahs in a salon!
      But who made you so awfully clever?”

 “Perhaps I've tried myself; or perhaps I know a woman who has. I have
      preached and expounded the whole matter and the conclusion thereof”—

 “You needn't go on. 'Is Vanity.' Polly, I thank you. These vermin—”
       Mrs. Hauksbee waved her hand from the veranda to two men in the crowd
      below who had raised their hats to her—“these vermin shall not
      rejoice in a new Scandal Point or an extra Peliti's. I will abandon the
      notion of a salon. It did seem so tempting, though. But what shall I do? I
      must do something.”

 “Why? Are not Abana and Pharphar”—

 “Jack has made you nearly as bad as himself! I want to, of course. I'm
      tired of everything and everybody, from a moonlight picnic at Seepee to
      the blandishments of The Mussuck.”

 “Yes—that comes, too, sooner or later, Have you nerve enough to make
      your bow yet?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee's mouth shut grimly. Then she laughed. “I think I see myself
      doing it. Big pink placards on the Mall: 'Mrs. Hauksbee! Positively her
      last appearance on any stage! This is to give notice!' No more dances; no
      more rides; no more luncheons; no more theatricals with supper to follow;
      no more sparring with one's dearest, dearest friend; no more fencing with
      an inconvenient man who hasn't wit enough to clothe what he's pleased to
      call his sentiments in passable speech; no more parading of The Mussuck
      while Mrs. Tarkass calls all round Simla, spreading horrible stories about
      me? No more of anything that is thoroughly wearying, abominable and
      detestable, but, all the same, makes life worth the having. Yes! I see it
      all! Don't interrupt, Polly, I'm inspired. A mauve and white striped
      'cloud' round my excellent shoulders, a seat in the fifth row of the
      Gaiety, and both horses sold. Delightful vision! A comfortable armchair,
      situated in three different draughts, at every ballroom; and nice, large,
      sensible shoes for all the couples to stumble over as they go into the
      veranda! Then at supper. Can't you imagine the scene? The greedy mob gone
      away. Reluctant subaltern, pink all over like a newly-powdered baby—they
      really ought to tan subalterns before they are exported—Polly—sent
      back by the hostess to do his duty. Slouches up to me across the room,
      tugging at a glove two sizes too large for him—I hate a man who
      wears gloves like overcoats—and trying to look as if he'd thought of
      it from the first. 'May I ah—have the pleasure 'f takin' you 'nt'
      supper?' Then I get up with a hungry smile. Just like this.”

 “Lucy, how can you be so absurd?”

 “And sweep out on his arm. So! After supper I shall go away early, you
      know, because I shall be afraid of catching cold. No one will look for my
      'rickshaw. Mine, so please you! I shall stand, always with that mauve and
      white 'cloud' over my head, while the wet soaks into my dear, old,
      venerable feet and Tom swears and shouts for the mem-sahib's gharri. Then
      home to bed at half-past eleven! Truly excellent life helped out by the
      visits of the Padri, just fresh from burying somebody down below there.”
       She pointed through the pines, toward the Cemetery, and continued with
      vigorous dramatic gesture—“Listen! I see it all down, down even to
      the stays! Such stays! Six-eight a pair, Polly, with red flannel—or
      list is it?—that they put into the tops of those fearful things. I
      can draw you a picture of them.”

 “Lucy, for Heaven's sake, don't go waving your arms about in that idiotic
      manner! Recollect, every one can see you from the Mall.”

 “Let them see! They'll think I am rehearsing for The Fallen Angel. Look!
      There's The Mussuck. How badly he rides. There!”

 She blew a kiss to the venerable Indian administrator with infinite grace.

 “Now,” she continued, “he'll be chaffed about that at the Club in the
      delicate manner those brutes of men affect, and the Hawley Boy will tell
      me all about it—softening the details for fear of shocking me. That
      boy is too good to live, Polly. I've serious thoughts of recommending him
      to throw up his Commission and go into the Church. In his present frame of
      mind he would obey me. Happy, happy child.”

 “Never again,” said Mrs. Mallowe, with an affectation of indignation,
      “shall you tiffin here! 'Lucindy, your behavior is scand'lus.'”

 “All your fault,” retorted Mrs. Hauksbee, “for suggesting such a thing as
      my abdication. No! Jamais—nevaire! I will act, dance, ride, frivol,
      talk scandal, dine out, and appropriate the legitimate captives of any
      woman I choose until I d-r-r-rop or a better woman than I puts me to shame
      before all Simla—and it's dust and ashes in my mouth while I'm doing
      it!”

 She swept into the drawing-room, Mrs. Mallowe followed and put an arm
      round her waist.

 “I'm not!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, defiantly, rummaging for her handkerchief.
      “I've been dining out the last ten nights, and rehearsing in the
      afternoon. You'd be tired yourself. It's only because I'm tired.”

 Mrs. Mallowe did not offer Mrs. Hauksbee any pity or ask her to lie down,
      but gave her another cup of tea, and went on with the talk.

 “I've been through that too, dear,” she said.

 “I remember,” said Mrs. Hauksbee, a gleam of fun on her face. “In '84
      wasn't it? You went out a great deal less next season.”

 Mrs. Mallowe smiled in a superior and Sphinxlike fashion.

 “I became an Influence,” said she.

 “Good gracious, child, you didn't join the Theosophists and kiss Buddha's
      big toe, did you? I tried to get into their set once, but they cast me out
      for a skeptic—without a chance of improving my poor little mind,
      too.”

 “No, I didn't Theosophilander. Jack says”—

 “Never mind Jack. What a husband says is known before. What did you do?”

 “I made a lasting impression.”

 “So have I—for four months. But that didn't console me in the least.
      I hated the man. Will you stop smiling in that inscrutable way and tell me
      what you mean?”

 Mrs. Mallowe told.

 * * * * * *

 “And—you—mean—to—say that it is absolutely
      Platonic on both sides?”

 “Absolutely, or I should never have taken it up.”

 “And his last promotion was due to you?”

 Mrs. Mallowe nodded.

 “And you warned him against the Topsham girl?”

 Another nod.

 “And told him of Sir Dugald Delane's private memo about him?”

 A third nod.

 “Why?”

 “What a question to ask a woman! Because it amused me at first. I am proud
      of my property now. If I live he shall continue to be successful. Yes, I
      will put him upon the straight road to Knighthood, and everything else
      that a man values. The rest depends upon himself.”

 “Polly, you are a most extraordinary woman.”

 “Not in the least. I'm concentrated, that's all. You diffuse yourself,
      dear; and though all Simla knows your skill in managing a team”—

 “Can't you choose a prettier word?”

 “Team, of half a dozen, from The Mussuck to the Hawley Boy, you gain
      nothing by it. Not even amusement.”

 “And you?”

 “Try my recipe. Take a man, not a boy, mind, but an almost mature,
      unattached man, and be this guide, philosopher, and friend. You'll find it
      the most interesting occupation that you ever embarked on. It can be done—you
      needn't look like that—because I've done it.”

 “There's an element of risk about it that makes the notion attractive.
      I'll get such a man and say to him, 'Now, understand that there must be no
      flirtation. Do exactly what I tell you, profit by my instruction and
      counsels, and all will yet be well,' as Toole says. Is that the idea?”

 “More or less,” said Mrs. Mallowe with an unfathomable smile. “But be sure
      he understands that there must be no flirtation.”

 II

 Dribble-dribble-trickle-trickle
     What a lot of raw dust!
     My dollie's had an accident
     And out came all the sawdust! —Nursery Rhyme.

 So Mrs. Hauksbee, in “The Foundry” which overlooks Simla Mall, sat at the
      feet of Mrs. Mallowe and gathered wisdom. The end of the Conference was
      the Great Idea upon which Mrs. Hauksbee so plumed herself.

 “I warn you,” said Mrs. Mallowe, beginning to repent of her suggestion,
      “that the matter is not half so easy as it looks. Any woman—even the
      Topsham girl—can catch a man, but very, very few know how to manage
      him when caught.”

 “My child,” was the answer, “I've been a female St. Simon Stylites looking
      down upon men for these—these years past. Ask The Mussuck whether I
      can manage them.”

 Mrs. Hauksbee departed humming, “I'll go to him and say to him in manner
      most ironical.” Mrs. Mallowe laughed to herself. Then she grew suddenly
      sober. “I wonder whether I've done well in advising that amusement? Lucy's
      a clever woman, but a thought too careless.”

 A week later, the two met at a Monday Pop. “Well?” said Mrs. Mallowe.

 “I've caught him!” said Mrs. Hauksbee; her eyes were dancing with
      merriment.

 “Who is it, mad woman? I'm sorry I ever spoke to you about it.”

 “Look between the pillars. In the third row; fourth from the end. You can
      see his face now. Look!”

 “Otis Yeere! Of all the improbable and impossible people! I don't believe
      you.”

 “Hsh! Wait till Mrs. Tarkass begins murdering Milton Wellings; and I'll
      tell you all about it. S-s-ss! That woman's voice always reminds me of an
      Underground train coming into Earl's Court with the brakes on. Now listen.
      It is really Otis Yeere.”

 “So I see, but does it follow that he is your property?”

 “He is! By right of trove. I found him, lonely and unbefriended, the very
      next night after our talk, at the Dugald Delane's burra-khana. I liked his
      eyes, and I talked to him. Next day he called. Next day we went for a ride
      together, and today he's tied to my 'rickshaw-wheels hand and foot. You'll
      see when the concert's over. He doesn't know I'm here yet.”

 “Thank goodness you haven't chosen a boy. What are you going to do with
      him, assuming that you've got him?”

 “Assuming, indeed! Does a woman—do I—ever make a mistake in
      that sort of thing? First”—Mrs. Hauksbee ticked off the items
      ostentatiously on her little gloved fingers—“First, my dear, I shall
      dress him properly. At present his raiment is a disgrace, and he wears a
      dress shirt like a crumpled sheet of the 'Pioneer'. Secondly, after I have
      made him presentable, I shall form his manners—his morals are above
      reproach.”

 “You seem to have discovered a great deal about him considering the
      shortness of your acquaintance.”

 “Surely you ought to know that the first proof a man gives of his interest
      in a woman is by talking to her about his own sweet self. If the woman
      listens without yawning, he begins to like her. If she flatters the
      animal's vanity, he ends by adoring her.”

 “In some cases.”

 “Never mind the exceptions. I know which one you are thinking of. Thirdly,
      and lastly, after he is polished and made pretty, I shall, as you said, be
      his guide, philosopher and friend, and he shall become a success—as
      great a success as your friend. I always wondered how that man got on. Did
      The Mussuck come to you with the Civil List and, dropping on one knee—no,
      two knees, a' la Gibbon—hand it to you and say, 'Adorable angel,
      choose your friend's appointment'?”

 “Lucy, your long experiences of the Military Department have demoralized
      you. One doesn't do that sort of thing on the Civil Side.”

 “No disrespect meant to Jack's Service, my dear. I only asked for
      information. Give me three months, and see what changes I shall work in my
      prey.”

 “Go your own way since you must. But I'm sorry that I was weak enough to
      suggest the amusement.”

 “'I am all discretion, and may be trusted to an in-finite extent,'” quoted
      Mrs. Hauksbee from The Fallen Angel; and the conversation ceased with Mrs.
      Tarkass's last, long-drawn war-whoop.

 Her bitterest enemies—and she had many—could hardly accuse
      Mrs. Hauksbee of wasting her time. Otis Yeere was one of those wandering
      “dumb” characters, foredoomed through life to be nobody's property. Ten
      years in Her Majesty's Bengal Civil Service, spent, for the most part, in
      undesirable Districts, had given him little to be proud of, and nothing to
      bring confidence. Old enough to have lost the first fine careless rapture
      that showers on the immature 'Stunt imaginary Commissionerships and Stars,
      and sends him into the collar with coltish earnestness and abandon; too
      young to be yet able to look back upon the progress he had made, and thank
      Providence that under the conditions of the day he had come even so far,
      he stood upon the “dead-centre” of his career. And when a man stands
      still, he feels the slightest impulse from without. Fortune had ruled that
      Otis Yeere should be, for the first part of his service, one of the rank
      and file who are ground up in the wheels of the Administration; losing
      heart and soul, and mind and strength, in the process. Until steam
      replaces manual power in the working of the Empire, there must always be
      this percentage—must always be the men who are used up, expended, in
      the mere mechanical routine. For these promotion is far off and the
      mill-grind of every day very near and instant. The Secretariats know them
      only by name; they are not the picked men of the Districts with the
      Divisions and Collectorates awaiting them. They are simply the rank and
      file—the food for fever—sharing with the ryot and the
      plough-bullock the honor of being the plinth on which the State rests. The
      older ones have lost their aspirations; the younger are putting theirs
      aside with a sigh. Both learn to endure patiently until the end of the
      day. Twelve years in the rank and file, men say, will sap the hearts of
      the bravest and dull the wits of the most keen.

 Out of this life Otis Yeere had fled for a few months, drifting, for the
      sake of a little masculine society, into Simla. When his leave was over he
      would return to his swampy, sour-green, undermanned district, the native
      Assistant, the native Doctor, the native Magistrate, the steaming,
      sweltering Station, the ill-kempt City, and the undisguised insolence of
      the Municipality that babbled away the lives of men. Life was cheap,
      however. The soil spawned humanity, as it bred frogs in the Rains, and the
      gap of the sickness of one season was filled to overflowing by the
      fecundity of the next. Otis was unfeignedly thankful to lay down his work
      for a little while and escape from the seething, whining, weakly hive,
      impotent to help itself, but strong in its power to cripple, thwart, and
      annoy the weary-eyed man who, by official irony, was said to be “in
      charge” of it.

  “I knew there were women-dowdies in Bengal. They come up here sometimes.
      But I didn't know that there were men-dowdies, too.”

 Then, for the first time, it occurred to Otis Yeere that his clothes were
      rather ancestral in appearance. It will be seen from the above that his
      friendship with Mrs Hauksbee had made great strides.

 As that lady truthfully says, a man is never so happy as when he is
      talking about himself. From Otis Yeere's lips Mrs Hauksbee, before long,
      learned everything that she wished to know about the subject of her
      experiment; learned what manner of life he had led in what she vaguely
      called “those awful cholera districts”; learned too, but this knowledge
      came later, what manner of life he had purposed to lead and what dreams he
      had dreamed in the year of grace '77, before the reality had knocked the
      heart out of him. Very pleasant are the shady bridle-paths round Prospect
      Hill for the telling of such confidences.

 “Not yet,” said Mrs. Hauksbee to Mrs. Mallowe. “Not yet. I must wait until
      the man is properly dressed, at least. Great Heavens, is it possible that
      he doesn't know what an honor it is to be taken up by Me!”

 Mrs. Hauksbee did not reckon false modesty as one of her failings.

 “Always with Mrs. Hauksbee!” murmured Mrs. Mallowe, with her sweetest
      smile, to Otis. “Oh you men, you men! Here are our Punjabis growling
      because you've monopolized the nicest woman in Simla. They'll tear you to
      pieces on the Mall, some day, Mr. Yeere.”

 Mrs. Mallowe rattled down-hill, having satisfied herself, by a glance
      through the fringe of her sunshade, of the effect of her words.

 The shot went home. Of a surety Otis Yeere was somebody in this
      bewildering whirl of Simla—had monopolized the nicest woman in it
      and the Punjabis were growling. The notion justified a mild glow of
      vanity. He had never looked upon his acquaintance with Mrs. Hauksbee as a
      matter for general interest.

 The knowledge of envy was a pleasant feeling to the man of no account. It
      was intensified later in the day when a luncher at the Club said,
      spitefully, “Well, for a debilitated Ditcher, Yeere, you are going it.
      Hasn't any kind friend told you that she's the most dangerous woman in
      Simla?”

 Yeere chuckled and passed out. When, oh when, would his new clothes be
      ready? He descended into the Mall to inquire; and Mrs. Hauksbee, coming
      over the Church Ridge in her 'rickshaw, looked down upon him approvingly.
      “He's learning to carry himself as if he were a man, instead of a piece of
      furniture, and”—she screwed up her eyes to see the better through
      the sunlight—“he is a man when he holds himself like that. Oh
      blessed Conceit, what should we be without you?”

 With the new clothes came a new stock of self-confidence. Otis Yeere
      discovered that he could enter a room without breaking into a gentle
      perspiration—could cross one, even to talk to Mrs. Hauksbee, as
      though rooms were meant to be crossed. He was for the first time in nine
      years proud of himself, and contented with his life, satisfied with his
      new clothes, and rejoicing in the friendship of Mrs. Hauksbee.

 “Conceit is what the poor fellow wants,” she said in confidence to Mrs.
      Mallowe. “I believe they must use Civilians to plough the fields with in
      Lower Bengal. You see I have to begin from the very beginning—haven't
      I? But you'll admit, won't you, dear, that he is immensely improved since
      I took him in hand. Only give me a little more time and he won't know
      himself.”

 Indeed, Yeere was rapidly beginning to forget what he had been. One of his
      own rank and file put the matter brutally when he asked Yeere, in
      reference to nothing, “And who has been making you a Member of Council,
      lately? You carry the side of half a dozen of 'em.”

 “I—I'm awf'ly sorry. I didn't mean it, you know,” said Yeere,
      apologetically.

 “There'll be no holding you,” continued the old stager, grimly. “Climb
      down, Otis—climb down, and get all that beastly affectation knocked
      out of you with fever! Three thousand a month wouldn't support it.”

 Yeere repeated the incident to Mrs. Hauksbee. He had come to look upon her
      as his Mother Confessor.

 “And you apologized!” she said. “Oh, shame! I hate a man who apologizes.
      Never apologize for what your friend called 'side.' Never! It's a man's
      business to be insolent and overbearing until he meets with a stronger.
      Now, you bad boy, listen to me.”

 Simply and straightforwardly, as the 'rickshaw loitered round Jakko, Mrs.
      Hauksbee preached to Otis Yeere the Great Gospel of Conceit, illustrating
      it with living pictures encountered during their Sunday afternoon stroll.

 “Good gracious!” she ended, with the personal argument, “you'll apologize
      next for being my attache?”

 “Never!” said Otis Yeere. “That's another thing altogether. I shall always
      be”—

 “What's coming?” thought Mrs. Hauksbee.

 “Proud of that,” said Otis.

 “Safe for the present,” she said to herself.

 “But I'm afraid I have grown conceited. Like Jeshurun, you know. When he
      waxed fat, then he kicked. It's the having no worry on one's mind and the
      Hill air, I suppose.”

 “Hill air, indeed!” said Mrs. Hauksbee to herself. “He'd have been hiding
      in the Club till the last day of his leave, if I hadn't discovered him.”
       And aloud—“Why shouldn't you be? You have every right to.”

 “I! Why?”

 “Oh, hundreds of things. I'm not going to waste this lovely afternoon by
      explaining; but I know you have. What was that heap of manuscript you
      showed me about the grammar of the aboriginal—what's their names?”

 “Gullals. A piece of nonsense. I've far too much work to do to bother over
      Gullals now. You should see my District. Come down with your husband some
      day and I'll show you round. Such a lovely place in the Rains! A sheet of
      water with the railway-embankment and the snakes sticking out, and, in the
      summer, green flies and green squash. The people would die of fear if you
      shook a dogwhip at 'em. But they know you're forbidden to do that, so they
      conspire to make your life a burden to you. My District's worked by some
      man at Darjiling, on the strength of u native pleader's false reports. Oh,
      it's a heavenly place!”

 Otis Yeere laughed bitterly.

 “There's not the least necessity that you should stay in it. Why do you?”

 “Because I must. How'm I to get out of it?”

 “How! In a hundred and fifty ways. If there weren't so many people on the
      road, I'd like to box your ears. Ask, my dear boy, ask! Look, There is
      young Hexarly with six years' service and half your talents. He asked for
      what he wanted, and he got it. See, down by the Convent! There's
      McArthurson who has come to his present position by asking—sheer,
      downright asking—after he had pushed himself out of the rank and
      file. One man is as good as another in your service—believe me. I've
      seen Simla for more seasons than I care to think about. Do you suppose men
      are chosen for appointments because of their special fitness beforehand?
      You have all passed a high test—what do you call it?—in the
      beginning, and, except for the few who have gone altogether to the bad,
      you can all work hard. Asking does the rest. Call it cheek, call it
      insolence, call it anything you like, but ask! Men argue—yes, I know
      what men say—that a man, by the mere audacity of his request, must
      have some good in him. A weak man doesn't say: 'Give me this and that.' He
      whines 'Why haven't I been given this and that?' If you were in the Army,
      I should say learn to spin plates or play a tambourine with your toes. As
      it is—ask! You belong to a Service that ought to be able to command
      the Channel Fleet, or set a leg at twenty minutes' notice, and yet you
      hesitate over asking to escape from a squashy green district where you
      admit you are not master. Drop the Bengal Government altogether. Even
      Darjiling is a little out-of-the-way hole. I was there once, and the rents
      were extortionate. Assert yourself. Get the Government of India to take
      you over. Try to get on the Frontier, where every man has a grand chance
      if he can trust himself. Go somewhere! Do something! You have twice the
      wits and three times the presence of the men up here, and, and”—

 Mrs. Hauksbee paused for breath; then continued—“and in any way you
      look at it, you ought to. You who could go so far!”

 “I don't know,” said Yeere, rather taken aback by the unexpected
      eloquence. “1 haven't such a good opinion of myself.”

 It was not strictly Platonic, but it was Policy. Mrs. Hauksbee laid her
      hand lightly upon the ungloved paw that rested on the turned-back
      'rickshaw hood, and, looking the man full in the face, said tenderly,
      almost too tenderly, “I believe in you if you mistrust yourself. Is that
      enough, my friend?”

 “It is enough,” answered Otis, very solemnly.

 He was silent for a long time, redreaming the dreams that he had dreamed
      eight years ago, but through them all ran, as sheet-lightning through
      golden cloud, the light of Mrs. Hauksbee's violet eyes.

 Curious and impenetrable are the mazes of Simla life—the only
      existence in this desolate land worth the living. Gradually it went abroad
      among men and women, in the pauses between dance, play and Gymkhana, that
      Otis Yeere, the man with the newly-lit light of self-confidence in his
      eyes, had “done something decent” in the wilds whence he came. He had
      brought an erring Municipality to reason, appropriated the funds on his
      own responsibility, and saved the lives of hundreds, He knew more about
      the Gullals than any living man. Had a vast knowledge of the aboriginal
      tribes; was, in spite of his juniority, the greatest authority on the
      aboriginal Gullals. No one quite knew who or what the Gullals were till
      The Mussuck, who had been calling on Mrs. Hauksbee, and prided himself
      upon picking people's brains, explained they were a tribe of ferocious
      hillmen, somewhere near Sikkim, whose friendship even the Great Indian
      Empire would find it worth her while to secure. Now we know that Otis
      Yeere had showed Mrs. Hauksbee his MS notes of six years' standing on the
      same Gullals. He had told her, too, how, sick and shaken with the fever
      their negligence had bred, crippled by the loss of his pet clerk, and
      savagely angry at the desolation in his charge, he had once damned the
      collective eyes of his “intelligent local board” for a set of haramzadas.
      Which act of “brutal and tyrannous oppression” won him a Reprimand Royal
      from the Bengal Government; but in the anecdote as amended for Northern
      consumption we find no record of this. Hence we are forced to conclude
      that Mrs. Hauksbee “edited” his reminiscences before sowing them in idle
      ears, ready, as she well knew, to exaggerate good or evil. And Otis Yeere
      bore himself as befitted the hero of many tales.

 “You can talk to me when you don't fall into a brown study. Talk now, and
      talk your brightest and best,” said Mrs. Hauksbee.

 Otis needed no spur. Look to a man who has the counsel of a woman of or
      above the world to back him. So long as he keeps his head, he can meet
      both sexes on equal ground—an advantage never intended by
      Providence, who fashioned Man on one day and Woman on another, in sign
      that neither should know more than a very little of the other's life. Such
      a man goes far, or, the counsel being withdrawn, collapses suddenly while
      his world seeks the reason.

 Generalled by Mrs. Hauksbee who, again, had all Mrs. Mallowe's wisdom at
      her disposal, proud of himself and, in the end, believing in himself
      because he was believed in, Otis Yeere stood ready for any fortune that
      might befall, certain that it would be good. He would fight for his own
      hand, and intended that this second struggle should lead to better issue
      than the first helpless surrender of the bewildered 'Stunt.

 What might have happened, it is impossible to say. This lamentable thing
      befell, bred directly by a statement of Mrs. Hauksbee that she would spend
      the next season in Darjiling.

 “Are you certain of that?” said Otis Yeere.

 “Quite. We're writing about a house now.”

 Otis Yeere “stopped dead,” as Mrs. Hauksbee put it in discussing the
      relapse with Mrs. Mallowe.

 “He has behaved,” she said, angrily, “just like Captain Kerrington's pony—only
      Otis is a donkey—at the last Gymkhana. Planted his forefeet and
      refused to go on another step. Polly, my man's going to disappoint me.
      What shall I do?”

 As a rule, Mrs. Mallowe does not approve of staring, but on this occasion
      she opened her eyes to the utmost.

 “You have managed cleverly so far,” she said. “Speak to him, and ask him
      what he means.”

 “I will—at tonight's dance.”

 “No-o, not at a dance,” said Mrs. Mallowe, cautiously. “Men are never
      themselves quite at dances. Better wait till tomorrow morning.”

 “Nonsense. If he's going to revert in this insane way, there isn't a day
      to lose. Are you going? No? Then sit up for me, there's a dear. I shan't
      stay longer than supper under any circumstances.”

 Mrs. Mallowe waited through the evening, looking long and earnestly into
      the fire, and sometimes smiling to herself.

  “Oh! oh! oh! The man's an idiot! A raving, positive idiot! I'm sorry I
      ever saw him!”

 Mrs. Hauksbee burst into Mrs. Mallowe's house, at midnight, almost in
      tears.

 “What in the world has happened?” said Mrs. Mallowe, but her eyes showed
      that she had guessed an answer.

 “Happened! Everything has happened! He was there. I went to him and said,
      'Now, what does this nonsense mean?' Don't laugh, dear, I can't bear it.
      But you know what I mean I said. Then it was a square, and I sat it out
      with him and wanted an explanation, and he said—Oh! I haven't
      patience with such idiots! You know what I said about going to Darjiling
      next year? It doesn't matter to me where I go. I'd have changed the
      Station and lost the rent to have saved this. He said, in so many words,
      that he wasn't going to try to work up any more, because—because he
      would be shifted into a province away from Darjiling, and his own
      District, where these creatures are, is within a day's journey”—

 “Ah-hh!” said Mrs. Mallowe, in a tone of one who has successfully tracked
      an obscure word through a large dictionary.

 “Did you ever hear of anything so mad—so absurd? And he had the ball
      at his feet. He had only to kick it! I would have made him anything!
      Anything in the wide world. He could have gone to the world's end. I would
      have helped him. I made him, didn't I, Polly? Didn't I create that man?
      Doesn't he owe everything to me? And to reward me, just when everything
      was nicely arranged, by this lunacy that spoiled everything!”

 “Very few men understand your devotion thoroughly.”

 “Oh, Polly, don't laugh at me! I give men up from this hour. I could have
      killed him then and there. What right had this man—this Thing I had
      picked out of his filthy paddy-fields—to make love to me?”

 “He did that, did he?”

 “He did. I don't remember half he said, I was so angry. Oh, but such a
      funny thing happened! I can't help laughing at it now, though I felt
      nearly ready to cry with rage. He raved and I stormed—I'm afraid we
      must have made an awful noise in our kala juggah. Protect my character,
      dear, if it's all over Simla by tomorrow—and then he bobbed forward
      in the middle of this insanity—I firmly believe the man's demented—and
      kissed me!”

 “Morals above reproach,” purred Mrs. Mallowe.

 “So they were—so they are! It was the most absurd kiss. I don't
      believe he'd ever kissed a woman in his life before. I threw my head back,
      and it was a sort of slidy, pecking dab, just on the end of the chin—here.”
       Mrs. Hauksbee tapped her masculine little chin with her fan. “Then, of
      course, I was furiously angry, and told him that he was no gentleman, and
      I was sorry I'd ever met him, and so on. He was crushed so easily that I
      couldn't be very angry. Then I came away straight to you.”

 “Was this before or after supper?”

 “Oh! before—oceans before. Isn't it perfectly disgusting?”

 “Let me think. I withhold judgment till tomorrow. Morning brings counsel.”

 But morning brought only a servant with a dainty bouquet of Annandale
      roses for Mrs. Hauksbee to wear at the dance at Viceregal Lodge that
      night.

 “He doesn't seem to be very penitent,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “What's the
      billet-doux in the centre?”

 Mrs. Hauksbee opened the neatly folded note,—another accomplishment
      that she had taught Otis,—read it, and groaned tragically.

 “Last wreck of a feeble intellect! Poetry! Is it his own, do you think?
      Oh, that I ever built my hopes on such a maudlin idiot!”

 “No. It's a quotation from Mrs. Browning, and, in view of the facts of the
      case, as Jack says, uncommonly well chosen. Listen:

 “'Sweet thou has trod on a heart—
    Pass! There's a world full of men
   And women as fair as thou art,
    Must do such things now and then.

   “'Thou only hast stepped unaware—
    Malice not one can impute;
   And why should a heart have been there,
    In the way of a fair woman's foot?'

 “I didn't—I didn't—I didn't!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, angrily, her
      eyes filling with tears; “there was no malice at all. Oh, it's too
      vexatious!”

 “You've misunderstood the compliment,” said Mrs. Mallowe. “He clears you
      completely and—ahem—I should think by this, that he has
      cleared completely too. My experience of men is that when they begin to
      quote poetry, they are going to flit. Like swans singing before they die,
      you know.”

 “Polly, you take my sorrows in a most unfeeling way.”

 “Do I? Is it so terrible? If he's hurt your vanity, I should say that
      you've done a certain amount of damage to his heart.”

 “Oh, you never can tell about a man!” said Mrs. Hauksbee, with deep scorn.

  Reviewing the matter as an impartial outsider, it strikes me that I'm
      about the only person who has profited by the education of Otis Yeere. It
      comes to twenty-seven pages and bittock.