THE MARQUIS DE FUMEROL
    

      Roger de Tourneville was whiffing a cigar and blowing out small clouds of
      smoke every now and then, as he sat astride a chair amid a party of
      friends. He was talking.
    

      “We were at dinner when a letter was brought in which my father
      opened. You know my father, who thinks that he is king of France ad
      interim. I call him Don Quixote, because for twelve years he has been
      running a tilt against the windmill of the Republic, without quite knowing
      whether it was in the cause of the Bourbons or the Orleanists. At present
      he is bearing the lance in the cause of the Orleanists alone, because
      there is no one else left. In any case, he thinks himself the first
      gentleman of France, the best known, the most influential, the head of the
      party; and as he is an irremovable senator, he thinks that the thrones of
      the neighboring kings are very insecure.
    

      “As for my mother, she is my father's soul, she is the soul of the
      kingdom and of religion, and the scourge of all evil-thinkers.
    

      “Well, a letter was brought in while we were at dinner, and my
      father opened and read it, and then he said to mother: 'Your brother is
      dying.' She grew very pale. My uncle was scarcely ever mentioned in the
      house, and I did not know him at all; all I knew from public talk was,
      that he had led, and was still leading, a gay life. After having spent his
      fortune in fast living, he was now in small apartments in the Rue des
      Martyrs.
    

      “An ancient peer of France and former colonel of cavalry, it was
      said that he believed in neither God nor devil. Not believing, therefore,
      in a future life he had abused the present life in every way, and had
      become a live wound in my mother's heart.
    

      “'Give me that letter, Paul,' she said, and when she read it, I
      asked for it in my turn. Here it is:
    

   'Monsieur le Comte, I think I ought to let you know that your
   brother-in-law, the Comte Fumerol, is going to die. Perhaps you
   would like to make some arrangements, and do not forget I told you.
   Your servant,
                       'MELANIE.'


      “'We must take counsel,' papa murmured. 'In my position, I ought to
      watch over your brother's last moments.'
    

      “Mamma continued: 'I will send for Abbe Poivron and ask his advice,
      and then I will go to my brother with the abbe and Roger. Remain here,
      Paul, for you must not compromise yourself; but a woman can, and ought to
      do these things. For a politician in your position, it is another matter.
      It would be a fine thing for one of your opponents to be able to bring one
      of your most laudable actions up against you.' 'You are right,' my father
      said. 'Do as you think best, my dear wife.'
    

      “A quarter of an hour, later, the Abbe Poivron came into the
      drawing-room, and the situation was explained to him, analyzed and
      discussed in all its bearings. If the Marquis de Fumerol, one of the
      greatest names in France, were to die without the ministrations of
      religion, it would assuredly be a terrible blow to the nobility in
      general, and to the Count de Tourneville in particular, and the
      freethinkers would be triumphant. The liberal newspapers would sing songs
      of victory for six months; my mother's name would be dragged through the
      mire and brought into the prose of Socialistic journals, and my father's
      name would be smirched. It was impossible that such a thing should be.
    

      “A crusade was therefore immediately decided upon, which was to be
      led by the Abbe Poivron, a little, fat, clean, priest with a faint perfume
      about him, a true vicar of a large church in a noble and rich quarter.
    

      “The landau was ordered and we all three set out, my mother, the
      cure and I, to administer the last sacraments to my uncle.
    

      “It had been decided first of all we should see Madame Melanie who
      had written the letter, and who was most likely the porter's wife, or my
      uncle's servant, and I dismounted, as an advance guard, in front of a
      seven-story house and went into a dark passage, where I had great
      difficulty in finding the porter's den. He looked at me distrustfully, and
      I said:
    

      “'Madame Melanie, if you please.' 'Don't know her!' 'But I have
      received a letter from her.' 'That may be, but I don't know her. Are you
      asking for a lodger?' 'No, a servant probably. She wrote me about a
      place.' 'A servant?—a servant? Perhaps it is the marquis'. Go and
      see, the fifth story on the left.'
    

      “As soon as he found I was not asking for a doubtful character he
      became more friendly and came as far as the corridor with me. He was a
      tall, thin man with white whiskers, the manners of a beadle and majestic
      gestures.
    

      “I climbed up a long spiral staircase, the railing of which I did
      not venture to touch, and I gave three discreet knocks at the left-hand
      door on the fifth story. It opened immediately, and an enormous dirty
      woman appeared before me. She barred the entrance with her extended arms
      which she placed against the two doorposts, and growled:
    

      “'What do you want?' 'Are you Madame Melanie?' 'Yes.' 'I am the
      Visconte de Tourneville.' 'Ah! All right! Come in.' 'Well, the fact is, my
      mother is downstairs with a priest.' 'Oh! All right; go and bring them up;
      but be careful of the porter.'
    

      “I went downstairs and came up again with my mother, who was
      followed by the abbe, and I fancied that I heard other footsteps behind
      us. As soon as we were in the kitchen, Melanie offered us chairs, and we
      all four sat down to deliberate.
    

      “'Is he very ill?' my mother asked. 'Oh! yes, madame; he will not be
      here long.' 'Does he seem disposed to receive a visit from a priest?' 'Oh!
      I do not think so.' 'Can I see him?' 'Well—yes madame—only
      —only—those young ladies are with him.' 'What young ladies?'
      'Why—why—his lady friends, of course.' 'Oh!' Mamma had grown
      scarlet, and the Abbe Poivron had lowered his eyes.
    

      “The affair began to amuse me, and I said: 'Suppose I go in first? I
      shall see how he receives me, and perhaps I shall be able to prepare him
      to receive you.'
    

      “My mother, who did not suspect any trick, replied: 'Yes, go, my
      dear.' But a woman's voice cried out: 'Melanie!'
    

      “The servant ran out and said: 'What do you want, Mademoiselle
      Claire?' 'The omelette; quickly.' 'In a minute, mademoiselle.' And coming
      back to us, she explained this summons.
    

      “They had ordered a cheese omelette at two o'clock as a slight
      collation. And she at once began to break the eggs into a salad bowl, and
      to whip them vigorously, while I went out on the landing and pulled the
      bell, so as to formally announce my arrival. Melanie opened the door to
      me, and made me sit down in an ante-room, while she went to tell my uncle
      that I had come; then she came back and asked me to go in, while the abbe
      hid behind the door, so that he might appear at the first signal.
    

      “I was certainly very much surprised at the sight of my uncle, for
      he was very handsome, very solemn and very elegant, the old rake.
    

      “Sitting, almost lying, in a large armchair, his legs wrapped in
      blankets, his hands, his long, white hands, over the arms of the chair, he
      was waiting for death with the dignity of a patriarch. His white beard
      fell on his chest, and his hair, which was also white, mingled with it on
      his cheeks.
    

      “Standing behind his armchair, as if to defend him against me, were
      two young women, who looked at me with bold eyes. In their petticoats and
      morning wrappers, with bare arms, with coal black hair twisted in a knot
      on the nape of their neck, with embroidered, Oriental slippers, which
      showed their ankles and silk stockings, they looked like the figures in
      some symbolical painting, by the side of the dying man. Between the
      easy-chair and the bed, there was a table covered with a white cloth, on
      which two plates, two glasses, two forks and two knives, were waiting for
      the cheese omelette which had been ordered some time before of Melanie.
    

      “My uncle said in a weak, almost breathless, but clear voice:
    

      “'Good-morning, my child; it is rather late in the day to come and
      see me; our acquaintanceship will not last long.' I stammered out, 'It was
      not my fault, uncle:' 'No; I know that,' he replied. 'It is your father
      and mother's fault more than yours. How are they?' 'Pretty well, thank
      you. When they heard that you were ill, they sent me to ask after you.'
      'Ah! Why did they not come themselves?'
    

      “I looked up at the two girls and said gently: 'It is not their
      fault if they could not come, uncle. But it would be difficult for my
      father, and impossible for my mother to come in here.' The old man did not
      reply, but raised his hand toward mine, and I took the pale, cold hand and
      held it in my own.
    

      “The door opened, Melanie came in with the omelette and put it on
      the table, and the two girls immediately sat down at the table, and began
      to eat without taking their eyes off me. Then I said: 'Uncle, it would
      give great pleasure to my mother to embrace you.' 'I also,' he murmured,
      'should like——' He said no more, and I could think of nothing
      to propose to him, and there was silence except for the noise of the
      plates and that vague sound of eating.
    

      “Now, the abbe, who was listening behind the door, seeing our
      embarrassment, and thinking we had won the game, thought the time had come
      to interpose, and showed himself. My uncle was so stupefied at sight of
      him that at first he remained motionless; and then he opened his mouth as
      if he meant to swallow up the priest, and shouted to him in a strong,
      deep, furious voice: 'What are you doing here?'
    

      “The abbe, who was used to difficult situations, came forward into
      the room, murmuring: 'I have come in your sister's name, Monsieur le
      Marquis; she has sent me. She would be happy, monsieur—'
    

      “But the marquis was not listening. Raising one hand, he pointed to
      the door with a proud, tragic gesture, and said angrily and breathing
      hard: 'Leave this room—go out—robber of souls. Go out from
      here, you violator of consciences. Go out from here, you pick-lock of
      dying men's doors!'
    

      “The abbe retreated, and I also went to the door, beating a retreat
      with the priest; the two young women, who had the best of it, got up,
      leaving their omelette only half eaten, and went and stood on either side
      of my uncle's easy-chair, putting their hands on his arms to calm him, and
      to protect him against the criminal enterprises of the Family, and of
      Religion.
    

      “The abbe and I rejoined my mother in the kitchen, and Melanie again
      offered us chairs. 'I knew quite well that this method would not work; we
      must try some other means, otherwise he will escape us.' And they began
      deliberating afresh, my mother being of one opinion and the abbe of
      another, while I held a third.
    

      “We had been discussing the matter in a low voice for half an hour,
      perhaps, when a great noise of furniture being moved and of cries uttered
      by my uncle, more vehement and terrible even than the former had been,
      made us all four jump up.
    

      “Through the doors and walls we could hear him shouting: 'Go out—out
      —rascals—humbugs, get out, scoundrels—get out—get
      out!'
    

      “Melanie rushed in, but came back immediately to call me to help
      her, and I hastened in. Opposite to my uncle, who was terribly excited by
      anger, almost standing up and vociferating, stood two men, one behind the
      other, who seemed to be waiting till he should be dead with rage.
    

      “By his ridiculous long coat, his long English shoes, his manners of
      a tutor out of a position, his high collar, white necktie and straight
      hair, his humble face of a false priest of a bastard religion, I
      immediately recognized the first as a Protestant minister.
    

      “The second was the porter of the house, who belonged to the
      reformed religion and had followed us, and having seen our defeat, had
      gone to fetch his own pastor, in hopes that he might meet a better
      reception. My uncle seemed mad with rage! If the sight of the Catholic
      priest, of the priest of his ancestors, had irritated the Marquis de
      Fumerol, who had become a freethinker, the sight of his porter's minister
      made him altogether beside himself. I therefore took the two men by the
      arm and threw them out of the room so roughly that they bumped against
      each other twice, between the two doors which led to the staircase; and
      then I disappeared in my turn and returned to the kitchen, which was our
      headquarters in order to take counsel with my mother and the abbe.
    

      “But Melanie came back in terror, sobbing out:
    

      “'He is dying—he is dying—come immediately—he is
      dying.'
    

      “My mother rushed out. My uncle had fallen to the ground, and lay
      full length along the floor, without moving. I fancy he was already dead.
      My mother was superb at that moment! She went straight up to the two girls
      who were kneeling by the body and trying to raise it up, and pointing to
      the door with irresistible authority, dignity and majesty, she said: 'Now
      it is time for you to leave the room.'
    

      “And they went out without a word of protest. I must add, that I was
      getting ready to turn them out as unceremoniously as I had done the parson
      and the porter.
    

      “Then the Abbe Poivron administered the last sacraments to my uncle
      with all the customary prayers, and remitted all his sins, while my mother
      sobbed as she knelt near her brother. Suddenly, however, she exclaimed:
      'He recognized me; he pressed my hand; I am sure he recognized me!!!—and
      that he thanked me! Oh, God, what happiness!'
    

      “Poor mamma! If she had known or guessed for whom those thanks were
      intended!
    

      “They laid my uncle on his bed; he was certainly dead this time.
    

      “'Madame,' Melanie said, 'we have no sheets to bury him in; all the
      linen belongs to these two young ladies,' and when I looked at the
      omelette which they had not finished, I felt inclined to laugh and to cry
      at the same time. There are some humorous moments and some humorous
      situations in life, occasionally!
    

      “We gave my uncle a magnificent funeral, with five speeches at the
      grave. Baron de Croiselles, the senator, showed in admirable terms that
      God always returns victorious into well-born souls which have temporarily
      been led into error. All the members of the Royalist and Catholic party
      followed the funeral procession with the enthusiasm of victors, as they
      spoke of that beautiful death after a somewhat troublous life.”
    

      Viscount Roger ceased speaking; his audience was laughing. Then somebody
      said: “Bah! That is the story of all conversions in extremis.”