THE UNKNOWN

 We were speaking of adventures, and each one of us was relating his story
      of delightful experiences, surprising meetings, on the train, in a hotel,
      at the seashore. According to Roger des Annettes, the seashore was
      particularly favorable to the little blind god.

 Gontran, who was keeping mum, was asked what he thought of it.

 “I guess Paris is about the best place for that,” he said.
      “Woman is like a precious trinket, we appreciate her all the more
      when we meet her in the most unexpected places; but the rarest ones are
      only to be found in Paris.”

 He was silent for a moment, and then continued:

 “By Jove, it's great! Walk along the streets on some spring morning.
      The little women, daintily tripping along, seem to blossom out like
      flowers. What a delightful, charming sight! The dainty perfume of violet
      is everywhere. The city is gay, and everybody notices the women. By Jove,
      how tempting they are in their light, thin dresses, which occasionally
      give one a glimpse of the delicate pink flesh beneath!

 “One saunters along, head up, mind alert, and eyes open. I tell you
      it's great! You see her in the distance, while still a block away; you
      already know that she is going to please you at closer quarters. You can
      recognize her by the flower on her hat, the toss of her head, or her gait.
      She approaches, and you say to yourself: 'Look out, here she is!' You come
      closer to her and you devour her with your eyes.

 “Is it a young girl running errands for some store, a young woman
      returning from church, or hastening to see her lover? What do you care?
      Her well-rounded bosom shows through the thin waist. Oh, if you could only
      take her in your arms and fondle and kiss her! Her glance may be timid or
      bold, her hair light or dark. What difference does it make? She brushes
      against you, and a cold shiver runs down your spine. Ah, how you wish for
      her all day! How many of these dear creatures have I met this way, and how
      wildly in love I would have been had I known them more intimately.

 “Have you ever noticed that the ones we would love the most
      distractedly are those whom we never meet to know? Curious, isn't it? From
      time to time we barely catch a glimpse of some woman, the mere sight of
      whom thrills our senses. But it goes no further. When I think of all the
      adorable creatures that I have elbowed in the streets of Paris, I fairly
      rave. Who are they! Where are they? Where can I find them again? There is
      a proverb which says that happiness often passes our way; I am sure that I
      have often passed alongside the one who could have caught me like a linnet
      in the snare of her fresh beauty.”

 Roger des Annettes had listened smilingly. He answered: “I know that
      as well as you do. This is what happened to me: About five years ago, for
      the first time I met, on the Pont de la Concorde, a young woman who made a
      wonderful impression on me. She was dark, rather stout, with glossy hair,
      and eyebrows which nearly met above two dark eyes. On her lip was a
      scarcely perceptible down, which made one dream-dream as one dreams of
      beloved woods, on seeing a bunch of wild violets. She had a small waist
      and a well-developed bust, which seemed to present a challenge, offer a
      temptation. Her eyes were like two black spots on white enamel. Her glance
      was strange, vacant, unthinking, and yet wonderfully beautiful.

 “I imagined that she might be a Jewess. I followed her, and then
      turned round to look at her, as did many others. She walked with a
      swinging gait that was not graceful, but somehow attracted one. At the
      Place de la Concorde she took a carriage, and I stood there like a fool,
      moved by the strongest desire that had ever assailed me.

 “For about three weeks I thought only of her; and then her memory
      passed out of my mind.

 “Six months later I descried her in the Rue de la Paix again. On
      seeing her I felt the same shock that one experiences on seeing a once
      dearly loved woman. I stopped that I might better observe her. When she
      passed close enough to touch me I felt as though I were standing before a
      red hot furnace. Then, when she had passed by, I noticed a delicious
      sensation, as of a cooling breeze blowing over my face. I did not follow
      her. I was afraid of doing something foolish. I was afraid of myself.

 “She haunted all my dreams.

 “It was a year before I saw her again. But just as the sun was going
      down on one beautiful evening in May I recognized her walking along the
      Avenue des Champs-Elysees. The Arc de Triomphe stood out in bold relief
      against the fiery glow of the sky. A golden haze filled the air; it was
      one of those delightful spring evenings which are the glory of Paris.

 “I followed her, tormented by a desire to address her, to kneel
      before her, to pour forth the emotion which was choking me. Twice I passed
      by her only to fall back, and each time as I passed by I felt this
      sensation, as of scorching heat, which I had noticed in the Rue de la
      Paix.

 “She glanced at me, and then I saw her enter a house on the Rue de
      Presbourg. I waited for her two hours and she did not come out. Then I
      decided to question the janitor. He seemed not to understand me. 'She must
      be visiting some one,' he said.

 “The next time I was eight months without seeing her. But one
      freezing morning in January, I was walking along the Boulevard Malesherbes
      at a dog trot, so as to keep warm, when at the corner I bumped into a
      woman and knocked a small package out of her hand. I tried to apologize.
      It was she!

 “At first I stood stock still from the shock; then having returned
      to her the package which she had dropped, I said abruptly:

 “'I am both grieved and delighted, madame, to have jostled you. For
      more than two years I have known you, admired you, and had the most ardent
      wish to be presented to you; nevertheless I have been unable to find out
      who you are, or where you live. Please excuse these foolish words.
      Attribute them to a passionate desire to be numbered among your
      acquaintances. Such sentiments can surely offend you in no way! You do not
      know me. My name is Baron Roger des Annettes. Make inquiries about me, and
      you will find that I am a gentleman. Now, if you refuse my request, you
      will throw me into abject misery. Please be good to me and tell me how I
      can see you.'

 “She looked at me with her strange vacant stare, and answered
      smilingly:

 “'Give me your address. I will come and see you.'

 “I was so dumfounded that I must have shown my surprise. But I
      quickly gathered my wits together and gave her a visiting card, which she
      slipped into her pocket with a quick, deft movement.

 “Becoming bolder, I stammered:

 “'When shall I see you again?'

 “She hesitated, as though mentally running over her list of
      engagements, and then murmured:

 “'Will Sunday morning suit you?'

 “'I should say it would!'

 “She went on, after having stared at me, judged, weighed and
      analyzed me with this heavy and vacant gaze which seemed to leave a
      quieting and deadening impression on the person towards whom it was
      directed.

 “Until Sunday my mind was occupied day and night trying to guess who
      she might be and planning my course of conduct towards her. I finally
      decided to buy her a jewel, a beautiful little jewel, which I placed in
      its box on the mantelpiece, and left it there awaiting her arrival.

 “I spent a restless night waiting for her.

 “At ten o'clock she came, calm and quiet, and with her hand
      outstretched, as though she had known me for years. Drawing up a chair, I
      took her hat and coat and furs, and laid them aside. And then, timidly, I
      took her hand in mine; after that all went on without a hitch.

 “Ah, my friends! what a bliss it is, to stand at a discreet distance
      and watch the hidden pink and blue ribbons, partly concealed, to observe
      the hazy lines of the beloved one's form, as they become visible through
      the last of the filmy garments! What a delight it is to watch the
      ostrich-like modesty of those who are in reality none too modest. And what
      is so pretty as their motions!

 “Her back was turned towards me, and suddenly, my eyes were
      irresistibly drawn to a large black spot right between her shoulders. What
      could it be? Were my eyes deceiving me? But no, there it was, staring me
      in the face! Then my mind reverted to the faint down on her lip, the heavy
      eyebrows almost meeting over her coal-black eyes, her glossy black hair
      —I should have been prepared for some surprise.

 “Nevertheless I was dumfounded, and my mind was haunted by dim
      visions of strange adventures. I seemed to see before me one of the evil
      genii of the Thousand and One Nights, one of these dangerous and crafty
      creatures whose mission it is to drag men down to unknown depths. I
      thought of Solomon, who made the Queen of Sheba walk on a mirror that he
      might be sure that her feet were not cloven.

 “And when the time came for me to sing of love to her, my voice
      forsook me. At first she showed surprise, which soon turned to anger; and
      she said, quickly putting on her wraps:

 “'It was hardly worth while for me to go out of my way to come
      here.'

 “I wanted her to accept the ring which I had bought for her, but she
      replied haughtily: 'For whom do you take me, sir?' I blushed to the roots
      of my hair. She left without saying another word.

 “There is my whole adventure. But the worst part of it is that I am
      now madly in love with her. I can't see a woman without thinking of her.
      All the others disgust me, unless they remind me of her. I cannot kiss a
      woman without seeing her face before me, and without suffering the torture
      of unsatisfied desire. She is always with me, always there, dressed or
      nude, my true love. She is there, beside the other one, visible but
      intangible. I am almost willing to believe that she was bewitched, and
      carried a talisman between her shoulders.

 “Who is she? I don't know yet. I have met her once or twice since. I
      bowed, but she pretended not to recognize me. Who is she? An Oriental?
      Yes, doubtless an oriental Jewess! I believe that she must be a Jewess!
      But why? Why? I don't know!”