THE DOWRY
    

      The marriage of Maitre Simon Lebrument with Mademoiselle Jeanne Cordier
      was a surprise to no one. Maitre Lebrument had bought out the practice of
      Maitre Papillon; naturally, he had to have money to pay for it; and
      Mademoiselle Jeanne Cordier had three hundred thousand francs clear in
      currency, and in bonds payable to bearer.
    

      Maitre Lebrument was a handsome man. He was stylish, although in a
      provincial way; but, nevertheless, he was stylish—a rare thing at
      Boutigny-le-Rebours.
    

      Mademoiselle Cordier was graceful and fresh-looking, although a trifle
      awkward; nevertheless, she was a handsome girl, and one to be desired.
    

      The marriage ceremony turned all Boutigny topsy-turvy. Everybody admired
      the young couple, who quickly returned home to domestic felicity, having
      decided simply to take a short trip to Paris, after a few days of
      retirement.
    

      This tete-a-tete was delightful, Maitre Lebrument having shown just the
      proper amount of delicacy. He had taken as his motto: “Everything
      comes to him who waits.” He knew how to be at the same time patient
      and energetic. His success was rapid and complete.
    

      After four days, Madame Lebrument adored her husband. She could not get
      along without him. She would sit on his knees, and taking him by the ears
      she would say: “Open your mouth and shut your eyes.” He would
      open his mouth wide and partly close his eyes, and he would try to nip her
      fingers as she slipped some dainty between his teeth. Then she would give
      him a kiss, sweet and long, which would make chills run up and down his
      spine. And then, in his turn, he would not have enough caresses to please
      his wife from morning to night and from night to morning.
    

      When the first week was over, he said to his young companion:
    

      “If you wish, we will leave for Paris next Tuesday. We will be like
      two lovers, we will go to the restaurants, the theatres, the concert
      halls, everywhere, everywhere!”
    

      She was ready to dance for joy.
    

      “Oh! yes, yes. Let us go as soon as possible.”
    

      He continued:
    

      “And then, as we must forget nothing, ask your father to have your
      dowry ready; I shall pay Maitre Papillon on this trip.”
    

      She answered:
    

      “All right: I will tell him to-morrow morning.”
    

      And he took her in his arms once more, to renew those sweet games of love
      which she had so enjoyed for the past week.
    

      The following Tuesday, father-in-law and mother-in-law went to the station
      with their daughter and their son-in-law who were leaving for the capital.
    

      The father-in-law said:
    

      “I tell you it is very imprudent to carry so much money about in a
      pocketbook.” And the young lawyer smiled.
    

      “Don't worry; I am accustomed to such things. You understand that,
      in my profession, I sometimes have as much as a million about me. In this
      manner, at least we avoid a great amount of red tape and delay. You
      needn't worry.”
    

      The conductor was crying:
    

      “All aboard for Paris!”
    

      They scrambled into a car, where two old ladies were already seated.
    

      Lebrument whispered into his wife's ear:
    

      “What a bother! I won't be able to smoke.”
    

      She answered in a low voice
    

      “It annoys me too, but not an account of your cigar.”
    

      The whistle blew and the train started. The trip lasted about an hour,
      during which time they did not say very much to each other, as the two old
      ladies did not go to sleep.
    

      As soon as they were in front of the Saint-Lazare Station, Maitre
      Lebrument said to his wife:
    

      “Dearie, let us first go over to the Boulevard and get something to
      eat; then we can quietly return and get our trunk and bring it to the
      hotel.”
    

      She immediately assented.
    

      “Oh! yes. Let's eat at the restaurant. Is it far?”
    

      He answered:
    

      “Yes, it's quite a distance, but we will take the omnibus.”
    

      She was surprised:
    

      “Why don't we take a cab?”
    

      He began to scold her smilingly:
    

      “Is that the way you save money? A cab for a five minutes' ride at
      six cents a minute! You would deprive yourself of nothing.”
    

      “That's so,” she said, a little embarrassed.
    

      A big omnibus was passing by, drawn by three big horses, which were
      trotting along. Lebrument called out:
    

      “Conductor! Conductor!”
    

      The heavy carriage stopped. And the young lawyer, pushing his wife, said
      to her quickly:
    

      “Go inside; I'm going up on top, so that I may smoke at least one
      cigarette before lunch.”
    

      She had no time to answer. The conductor, who had seized her by the arm to
      help her up the step, pushed her inside, and she fell into a seat,
      bewildered, looking through the back window at the feet of her husband as
      he climbed up to the top of the vehicle.
    

      And she sat there motionless, between a fat man who smelled of cheap
      tobacco and an old woman who smelled of garlic.
    

      All the other passengers were lined up in silence—a grocer's boy, a
      young girl, a soldier, a gentleman with gold-rimmed spectacles and a big
      silk hat, two ladies with a self-satisfied and crabbed look, which seemed
      to say: “We are riding in this thing, but we don't have to,”
      two sisters of charity and an undertaker. They looked like a collection of
      caricatures.
    

      The jolting of the wagon made them wag their heads and the shaking of the
      wheels seemed to stupefy them—they all looked as though they were
      asleep.
    

      The young woman remained motionless.
    

      “Why didn't he come inside with me?” she was saying to
      herself. An unaccountable sadness seemed to be hanging over her. He really
      need not have acted so.
    

      The sisters motioned to the conductor to stop, and they got off one after
      the other, leaving in their wake the pungent smell of camphor. The bus
      started tip and soon stopped again. And in got a cook, red-faced and out
      of breath. She sat down and placed her basket of provisions on her knees.
      A strong odor of dish-water filled the vehicle.
    

      “It's further than I imagined,” thought Jeanne.
    

      The undertaker went out, and was replaced by a coachman who seemed to
      bring the atmosphere of the stable with him. The young girl had as a
      successor a messenger, the odor of whose feet showed that he was
      continually walking.
    

      The lawyer's wife began to feel ill at ease, nauseated, ready to cry
      without knowing why.
    

      Other persons left and others entered. The stage went on through
      interminable streets, stopping at stations and starting again.
    

      “How far it is!” thought Jeanne. “I hope he hasn't gone
      to sleep! He has been so tired the last few days.”
    

      Little by little all the passengers left. She was left alone, all alone.
      The conductor cried:
    

      “Vaugirard!”
    

      Seeing that she did not move, he repeated:
    

      “Vaugirard!”
    

      She looked at him, understanding that he was speaking to her, as there was
      no one else there. For the third time the man said:
    

      “Vaugirard!”
    

      Then she asked:
    

      “Where are we?”
    

      He answered gruffly:
    

      “We're at Vaugirard, of course! I have been yelling it for the last
      half hour!”
    

      “Is it far from the Boulevard?” she said.
    

      “Which boulevard?”
    

      “The Boulevard des Italiens.”
    

      “We passed that a long time ago!”
    

      “Would you mind telling my husband?”
    

      “Your husband! Where is he?”
    

      “On the top of the bus.”
    

      “On the top! There hasn't been anybody there for a long time.”
    

      She started, terrified.
    

      “What? That's impossible! He got on with me. Look well! He must be
      there.”
    

      The conductor was becoming uncivil:
    

      “Come on, little one, you've talked enough! You can find ten men for
      every one that you lose. Now run along. You'll find another one somewhere.”
    

      Tears were coming to her eyes. She insisted:
    

      “But, monsieur, you are mistaken; I assure you that you must be
      mistaken. He had a big portfolio under his arm.”
    

      The man began to laugh:
    

      “A big portfolio! Oh, yes! He got off at the Madeleine. He got rid
      of you, all right! Ha! ha! ha!”
    

      The stage had stopped. She got out and, in spite of herself, she looked up
      instinctively to the roof of the bus. It was absolutely deserted.
    

      Then she began to cry, and, without thinking that anybody was listening or
      watching her, she said out loud:
    

      “What is going to become of me?”
    

      An inspector approached:
    

      “What's the matter?”
    

      The conductor answered, in a bantering tone of voice:
    

      “It's a lady who got left by her husband during the trip.”
    

      The other continued:
    

      “Oh! that's nothing. You go about your business.”
    

      Then he turned on his heels and walked away.
    

      She began to walk straight ahead, too bewildered, too crazed even to
      understand what had happened to her. Where was she to go? What could she
      do? What could have happened to him? How could he have made such a
      mistake? How could he have been so forgetful?
    

      She had two francs in her pocket. To whom could she go? Suddenly she
      remembered her cousin Barral, one of the assistants in the offices of the
      Ministry of the Navy.
    

      She had just enough to pay for a cab. She drove to his house. He met her
      just as he was leaving for his office. He was carrying a large portfolio
      under his arm, just like Lebrument.
    

      She jumped out of the carriage.
    

      “Henry!” she cried.
    

      He stopped, astonished:
    

      “Jeanne! Here—all alone! What are you doing? Where have you
      come from?”
    

      Her eyes full of tears, she stammered:
    

      “My husband has just got lost!”
    

      “Lost! Where?”
    

      “On an omnibus.”
    

      “On an omnibus?”
    

      Weeping, she told him her whole adventure.
    

      He listened, thought, and then asked:
    

      “Was his mind clear this morning?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Good. Did he have much money with him?”
    

      “Yes, he was carrying my dowry.”
    

      “Your dowry! The whole of it?”
    

      “The whole of it—in order to pay for the practice which he
      bought.”
    

      “Well, my dear cousin, by this time your husband must be well on his
      way to Belgium.”
    

      She could not understand. She kept repeating:
    

      “My husband—you say—”
    

      “I say that he has disappeared with your—your capital—that's
      all!”
    

      She stood there, a prey to conflicting emotions, sobbing.
    

      “Then he is—he is—he is a villain!”
    

      And, faint from excitement, she leaned her head on her cousin's shoulder
      and wept.
    

      As people were stopping to look at them, he pushed her gently into the
      vestibule of his house, and, supporting her with his arm around her waist,
      he led her up the stairs, and as his astonished servant opened the door,
      he ordered:
    

      “Sophie, run to the restaurant and get a luncheon for two. I am not
      going to the office to-day.”