I 

 

THE CABULIWALLAH

 My

five years' old daughter Mini cannot live without
chattering. I really believe that in all her life she
has not wasted a minute in silence. Her mother is
often vexed at this, and would stop her prattle, but I
would not. To see Mini quiet is unnatural, and I
cannot bear it long. And so my own talk with her is
always lively.

 One morning, for instance, when I was in the midst
of the seventeenth chapter of my new novel, my little
Mini stole into the room, and putting her hand into
mine, said: "Father! Ramdayal the door-keeper
calls a crow a krow! He doesn't know anything,
does he?"

 Before I could explain to her the differences of
language in this world, she was embarked on the full
tide of another subject. "What do you think,
Father? Bhola says there is an elephant in the clouds, blowing water out of his trunk, and that is
why it rains!"

 And then, darting off anew, while I sat still making
ready some reply to this last saying: "Father!
what relation is Mother to you?"

 With a grave face I contrived to say: "Go and
play with Bhola, Mini! I am busy!"

 The window of my room overlooks the road.
The child had seated herself at my feet near my table,
and was playing softly, drumming on her knees. I
was hard at work on my seventeenth chapter, where
Pratap Singh, the hero, had just caught Kanchanlata,
the heroine, in his arms, and was about to escape with
her by the third-story window of the castle, when
all of a sudden Mini left her play, and ran to the
window, crying: "A Cabuliwallah! a Cabuliwallah!"
Sure enough in the street below was a
Cabuliwallah, passing slowly along. He wore the
loose, soiled clothing of his people, with a tall turban;
there was a bag on his back, and he carried
boxes of grapes in his hand.

 I cannot tell what were my daughter's feelings at
the sight of this man, but she began to call him
loudly. "Ah!" I thought, "he will come in, and
my seventeenth chapter will never be finished!" At
which exact moment the Cabuliwallah turned, and
looked up at the child. When she saw this, overcome by terror, she fled to her mother's protection
and disappeared. She had a blind belief that inside
the bag, which the big man carried, there were
perhaps two or three other children like herself.
The pedlar meanwhile entered my doorway and
greeted me with a smiling face.

 So was the position of my hero and
my heroine, that my first impulse was to stop and buy
something, since the man had been called. I made
some small purchases, and a conversation began about
Abdurrahman, the Russians, the English, and the
Frontier Policy.

 As he was about to leave, he asked: "And where
is the little girl, sir?"

 And I, thinking that Mini must get rid of her
false fear, had her brought out.

 She stood by my chair, and looked at the Cabuliwallah
and his bag. He offered her nuts and raisins,
but she would not be tempted, and only clung the
closer to me, with all her doubts increased.

 This was their first meeting.

 One morning, however, not many days later, as
I was leaving the house, I was startled to find Mini,
seated on a bench near the door, laughing and talking,
with the great Cabuliwallah at her feet. In
all her life, it appeared, my small daughter had never
found so patient a listener, save her father. And already the corner of her little sari was stuffed with
almonds and raisins, the gift of her visitor. "Why
did you give her those?" I said, and taking out an
eight-anna bit, I handed it to him. The man accepted
the money without demur, and slipped it into
his pocket.

 Alas, on my return an hour later, I found the unfortunate
coin had made twice its own worth of
trouble! For the Cabuliwallah had given it to Mini;
and her mother, catching sight of the bright round
object, had pounced on the child with: "Where
did you get that eight-anna bit?"

 "The Cabuliwallah gave it me," said Mini cheerfully.

 "The Cabuliwallah gave it you!" cried her
mother much shocked. "O Mini! how could you
take it from him?"

 I, entering at the moment, saved her from disaster, and proceeded to make my own inquiries.

 It was not the first or second time, I found, that
the two had met. The Cabuliwallah had overcome
the child's first terror by a bribery of nuts
and almonds, and the two were now great friends.

 They had many quaint jokes, which afforded them
much amusement. Seated in front of him, looking
down on his gigantic frame in all her tiny dignity, Mini would ripple her face with laughter and begin:
"O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah! what have you
got in your bag?"

 And he would reply, in the nasal accents of the
mountaineer: "An elephant!" Not much cause
for merriment, perhaps; but how they both enjoyed
the fun! And for me, this child's talk with a grown-up
man had always in it something strangely fascinating.

 Then the Cabuliwallah, not to be behindhand,
would take his turn: "Well, little one, and when
are you going to the father-in-law's house?"

 Now most small Bengali maidens have heard long
ago about the father-in-law's house; but we, being
a little new-fangled, had kept these things from our
child, and Mini at this question must have been a
trifle bewildered. But she would not show it, and
with ready tact replied: "Are you going there?"

 Amongst men of the Cabuliwallah's class, however,
it is well known that the words father-in-law's
house have a double meaning. It is a for jail , the place where we are well cared for, at no expense
to ourselves. In this sense would the sturdy
pedlar take my daughter's question. "Ah," he
would say, shaking his fist at an invisible policeman,
"I will thrash my father-in-law!" Hearing this,
and picturing the poor discomfited relative, Mini would go off into peals of laughter, in which her
formidable friend would join.

 These were autumn mornings, the very time of
year when kings of old went forth to conquest; and
I, never stirring from my little corner in Calcutta,
would let my mind wander over the whole world.
At the very name of another country, my heart would
go out to it, and at the sight of a foreigner in the
streets, I would fall to weaving a network of dreams,—the
mountains, the glens, and the forests of his
distant home, with his cottage in its setting, and the
free and independent life of far-away wilds. Perhaps
the scenes of travel conjure themselves up before
me and pass and repass in my imagination all
the more vividly, because I lead such a vegetable existence
that a call to travel would fall upon me like a
thunder-bolt. In the presence of this Cabuliwallah
I was immediately to the foot of arid
mountain peaks, with narrow little defiles twisting in
and out amongst their towering heights. I could
see the string of camels bearing the merchandise, and
the company of turbanned merchants carrying some
their queer old firearms, and some their spears,
journeying downward towards the plains. I could
see—. But at some such point Mini's mother would , imploring me to "beware of that man."

 Mini's mother is unfortunately a very timid lady. Whenever she hears a noise in the street, or sees
people coming towards the house, she always jumps
to the that they are either thieves, or
drunkards, or snakes, or tigers, or malaria, or cockroaches,
or caterpillars. Even after all these years
of experience, she is not able to overcome her terror.
So she was full of doubts about the Cabuliwallah, and
used to beg me to keep a watchful eye on him.

 I tried to laugh her fear gently away, but then
she would turn round on me seriously, and ask me
solemn questions:—

 Were children never kidnapped?

 Was it, then, not true that there was slavery in
Cabul?

 Was it so very absurd that this big man should be
able to carry off a tiny child?

 I urged that, though not impossible, it was highly
improbable. But this was not enough, and her dread
persisted. As it was indefinite, however, it did not
seem right to forbid the man the house, and the intimacy
went on unchecked.

 Once a year in the middle of January Rahmun, the
Cabuliwallah, was in the habit of returning to his
country, and as the time approached he would be
very busy, going from house to house collecting his
debts. This year, however, he could always find
time to come and see Mini. It would have seemed to an outsider that there was some conspiracy between
the two, for when he could not come in the
morning, he would appear in the evening.

 Even to me it was a little startling now and then,
in the corner of a dark room, suddenly to surprise
this tall, loose-garmented, much bebagged man; but
when Mini would run in smiling, with her "O
Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" and the two friends,
so far apart in age, would subside into their old
laughter and their old jokes, I felt reassured.

 One morning, a few days before he had made up
his mind to go, I was correcting my proof sheets in
my study. It was chilly weather. Through the
window the rays of the sun touched my feet, and
the slight warmth was very welcome. It was almost
eight o'clock, and the early pedestrians were returning
home with their heads covered. All at once I
heard an uproar in the street, and, looking out, saw
Rahmun being led away bound between two policemen,
and behind them a crowd of curious boys.
There were blood-stains on the clothes of the Cabuliwallah,
and one of the policemen carried a knife.
Hurrying out, I stopped them, and inquired what it
all meant. Partly from one, partly from another, I
gathered that a certain neighbour had owed the pedlar
something for a Rampuri shawl, but had falsely denied having bought it, and that in the course of the
quarrel Rahmun had struck him. Now, in the heat
of his excitement, the prisoner began calling his enemy
all sorts of names, when suddenly in a verandah
of my house appeared my little Mini, with her usual : "O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!"
Rahmun's face lighted up as he turned to her. He
had no bag under his arm to-day, so she could not
discuss the elephant with him. She at once therefore
proceeded to the next question: "Are you going to
the father-in-law's house?" Rahmun laughed and
said: "Just where I am going, little one!" Then,
seeing that the reply did not amuse the child, he held
up his fettered hands. "Ah!" he said, "I would
have thrashed that old father-in-law, but my hands
are bound!"

 On a charge of murderous assault, Rahmun was
sentenced to some years' imprisonment.

 Time passed away and he was not remembered.
The accustomed work in the accustomed place was
ours, and the thought of the once free mountaineer
spending his years in prison seldom or never occurred
to us. Even my light-hearted Mini, I am ashamed
to say, forgot her old friend. New companions
filled her life. As she grew older, she spent more
of her time with girls. So much time indeed did she spend with them that she came no more, as she
used to do, to her father's room. I was scarcely
on speaking terms with her.

 Years had passed away. It was once more autumn
and we had made arrangements for our Mini's
marriage. It was to take place during the Puja Holidays.
With Durga returning to Kailas, the light of
our home also was to depart to her husband's house,
and leave her father's in the shadow.

 The morning was bright. After the rains, there
was a sense of ablution in the air, and the sun-rays
looked like pure gold. So bright were they, that
they gave a beautiful radiance even to the sordid
brick walls of our Calcutta lanes. Since early dawn
that day the wedding-pipes had been sounding, and
at each beat my own heart throbbed. The wail of
the tune, Bhairavi, seemed to intensify my pain at
the approaching . My Mini was to be
married that night.

 From early morning noise and bustle had pervaded
the house. In the courtyard the canopy had
to be slung on its bamboo poles; the chandeliers with
their tinkling sound must be hung in each room and
verandah. There was no end of hurry and excitement.
I was sitting in my study, looking through the
accounts, when some one entered, saluting respectfully,
and stood before me. It was Rahmun the Cabuliwallah. At first I did not recognise him. He
had no bag, nor the long hair, nor the same vigour
that he used to have. But he smiled, and I knew
him again.

 "When did you come, Rahmun?" I asked him.

 "Last evening," he said, "I was released from
jail."

 The words struck harsh upon my ears. I had
never before talked with one who had wounded his
fellow, and my heart shrank within itself when I
realised this; for I felt that the day would have been
better-omened had he not turned up.

 "There are ceremonies going on," I said, "and
I am busy. Could you perhaps come another day?"

 At once he turned to go; but as he reached the
door he hesitated, and said: "May I not see the
little one, sir, for a moment?" It was his belief that
Mini was still the same. He had pictured her running
to him as she used, calling "O Cabuliwallah!
Cabuliwallah!" He had imagined too that they
would laugh and talk together, just as of old. In
fact, in memory of former days he had brought, carefully
wrapped up in paper, a few almonds and raisins
and grapes, obtained somehow from a countryman;
for his own little fund was dispersed.

 I said again: "There is a ceremony in the house,
and you will not be able to see any one to-day."  The man's face fell. He looked wistfully at me
for a moment, then said "Good morning," and went
out.

 I felt a little sorry, and would have called him
back, but I found he was returning of his own accord.
He came close up to me holding out his offerings with
the words: "I brought these few things, sir, for
the little one. Will you give them to her?"

 I took them and was going to pay him, but he
caught my hand and said: "You are very kind, sir!
Keep me in your ion. Do not offer me
money!—You have a little girl: I too have one like
her in my own home. I think of her, and bring fruits
to your child—not to make a profit for myself."

 Saying this, he put his hand inside his big loose
robe, and brought out a small and dirty piece of
paper. With great care he unfolded this, and
smoothed it out with both hands on my table. It
bore the of a little hand. Not a .
Not a drawing. The impression of an ink-smeared
hand laid flat on the paper. This touch of
his own little daughter had been always on his heart,
as he had come year after year to Calcutta to sell his
wares in the streets.

 Tears came to my eyes. I forgot that he was a
poor Cabuli fruit-seller, while I was—. But no,
what was I more than he? He also was a father.  That impression of the hand of his little Pārbati in
her distant mountain home reminded me of my own
little Mini.

 I sent for Mini immediately from the inner apartment.
Many difficulties were raised, but I would not
listen. Clad in the red silk of her wedding-day,
with the sandal paste on her forehead, and adorned
as a young bride, Mini came, and stood bashfully
before me.

 The Cabuliwallah looked a little staggered at the
apparition. He could not revive their old friendship.
At last he smiled and said: "Little one, are
you going to your father-in-law's house?"

 But Mini now understood the meaning of the word
"father-in-law," and she could not reply to him as of
old. She flushed up at the question, and stood
before him with her bride-like face turned down.

 I remembered the day when the Cabuliwallah and
my Mini had first met, and I felt sad. When she
had gone, Rahmun heaved a deep sigh, and sat down
on the floor. The idea had suddenly come to him
that his daughter too must have grown in this long
time, and that he would have to make friends with
her anew. Assuredly he would not find her as he
used to know her. And besides, what might not
have happened to her in these eight years?

 The marriage-pipes sounded, and the mild autumn sun streamed round us. But Rahmun sat in the little
Calcutta lane, and saw before him the barren mountains
of Afghanistan.

 I took out a bank-note and gave it to him, saying:
"Go back to your own daughter, Rahmun, in your
own country, and may the happiness of your meeting
bring good fortune to my child!"

 Having made this present, I had to curtail some
of the festivities. I could not have the electric lights
I had , nor the military band, and the ladies
of the house were despondent at it. But to me the
wedding-feast was all the brighter for the thought
that in a distant land a long-lost father met again
with his only child.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . From the root "prec," meaning prayer.
Compare deprecate , imprecation ; "precarious" means,
therefore, held by entreaty, and thus insecure.

 . From the Latin "pendere," to hang. Compare depend , expend , expensive , pendant , suspend , interdependent , independent .

 . From the root "jus," "jud," meaning law,
right. Compare judge , judicial , judgment , just , prejudge , adjustment , adjudicate .

 . A Greek root "phe," meaning speech. Compare blasphemy .

 . From the Latin "portare," to carry. Compare porter , import , export , deport , support , deportation .

 . From the Latin "venire," to come. Compare convenient , convene , supervene , prevent .  . From the Latin "claudere," to close, shut.
Compare include , preclude , exclude , exclusive , exclusion .

 . From the Latin "clamare," to cry out.
Compare clamour , proclaim , proclamation , clamorous , disclaim , declaim .

 . From the Latin "parare," to make ready.
Compare prepare , preparation , compare , comparison , comparative .

 . From the Latin "legere," to choose. Compare collect , elect , election , college , eligible .

 . From the Latin "premere," to press. Compare impressive , depress , express , suppress , oppress , pressure .

 . From two Greek roots "phōt," meaning light
and "graph," meaning to write. Compare epigraph , epigram , photographic , phosphorus , graph , diagram .

 . From the Latin "tendere," meaning to stretch.
Compare extend , superintend , attend , attendant , extensive , tense , pretend , distend , contend .

    THE HOME-COMING