THE PURLOINED LETTER

 Nil sapientiae odiosius acumine nimio. Seneca .

 At Paris, just after dark one gusty evening in the autumn of 18-, I was
      enjoying the twofold luxury of meditation and a meerschaum, in company
      with my friend C. Auguste Dupin, in his little back library, or
      book-closet, au troisi?me, No. 33, Rue Dun?t, Faubourg St. Germain. For
      one hour at least we had maintained a profound silence; while each, to any
      casual observer, might have seemed intently and exclusively occupied with
      the curling eddies of smoke that oppressed the atmosphere of the chamber.
      For myself, however, I was mentally discussing certain topics which had
      formed matter for conversation between us at an earlier period of the
      evening; I mean the affair of the Rue Morgue, and the mystery attending
      the murder of Marie Rog?t. I looked upon it, therefore, as something of a
      coincidence, when the door of our apartment was thrown open and admitted
      our old acquaintance, Monsieur G—, the Prefect of the Parisian
      police.

 We gave him a hearty welcome; for there was nearly half as much of the
      entertaining as of the contemptible about the man, and we had not seen him
      for several years. We had been sitting in the dark, and Dupin now arose
      for the purpose of lighting a lamp, but sat down again, without doing so,
      upon G.‘s saying that he had called to consult us, or rather to ask
      the opinion of my friend, about some official business which had
      occasioned a great deal of trouble.

 “If it is any point requiring reflection,” observed Dupin, as
      he forebore to enkindle the wick, “we shall examine it to better
      purpose in the dark.”

 “That is another of your odd notions,” said the Prefect, who
      had a fashion of calling every thing “odd” that was beyond his
      comprehension, and thus lived amid an absolute legion of “oddities.”

 “Very true,” said Dupin, as he supplied his visiter with a
      pipe, and rolled towards him a comfortable chair.

 “And what is the difficulty now?” I asked. “Nothing more
      in the assassination way, I hope?”

 “Oh no; nothing of that nature. The fact is, the business is very
      simple indeed, and I make no doubt that we can manage it sufficiently well
      ourselves; but then I thought Dupin would like to hear the details of it,
      because it is so excessively odd.”

 “Simple and odd,” said Dupin.

 “Why, yes; and not exactly that, either. The fact is, we have all
      been a good deal puzzled because the affair is so simple, and yet baffles
      us altogether.”

 “Perhaps it is the very simplicity of the thing which puts you at
      fault,” said my friend.

 “What nonsense you do talk!” replied the Prefect, laughing
      heartily.

 “Perhaps the mystery is a little too plain,” said Dupin.

 “Oh, good heavens! who ever heard of such an idea?”

 “A little too self-evident.”

 “Ha! ha! ha—ha! ha! ha!—ho! ho! ho!” roared our
      visiter, profoundly amused, “oh, Dupin, you will be the death of me
      yet!”

 “And what, after all, is the matter on hand?” I asked.

 “Why, I will tell you,” replied the Prefect, as he gave a
      long, steady and contemplative puff, and settled himself in his chair.
      “I will tell you in a few words; but, before I begin, let me caution
      you that this is an affair demanding the greatest secrecy, and that I
      should most probably lose the position I now hold, were it known that I
      confided it to any one.”

 “Proceed,” said I.

 “Or not,” said Dupin.

 “Well, then; I have received personal information, from a very high
      quarter, that a certain document of the last importance, has been
      purloined from the royal apartments. The individual who purloined it is
      known; this beyond a doubt; he was seen to take it. It is known, also,
      that it still remains in his possession.”

 “How is this known?” asked Dupin.

 “It is clearly inferred,” replied the Prefect, “from the
      nature of the document, and from the non-appearance of certain results
      which would at once arise from its passing out of the robber’s
      possession; that is to say, from his employing it as he must design in the
      end to employ it.”

 “Be a little more explicit,” I said.

 “Well, I may venture so far as to say that the paper gives its
      holder a certain power in a certain quarter where such power is immensely
      valuable.” The Prefect was fond of the cant of diplomacy.

 “Still I do not quite understand,” said Dupin.

 “No? Well; the disclosure of the document to a third person, who
      shall be nameless, would bring in question the honor of a personage of
      most exalted station; and this fact gives the holder of the document an
      ascendancy over the illustrious personage whose honor and peace are so
      jeopardized.”

 “But this ascendancy,” I interposed, “would depend upon
      the robber’s knowledge of the loser’s knowledge of the robber.
      Who would dare—”

 “The thief,” said G., “is the Minister D—, who
      dares all things, those unbecoming as well as those becoming a man. The
      method of the theft was not less ingenious than bold. The document in
      question—a letter, to be frank—had been received by the
      personage robbed while alone in the royal boudoir. During its perusal she
      was suddenly interrupted by the entrance of the other exalted personage
      from whom especially it was her wish to conceal it. After a hurried and
      vain endeavor to thrust it in a drawer, she was forced to place it, open
      as it was, upon a table. The address, however, was uppermost, and, the
      contents thus unexposed, the letter escaped notice. At this juncture
      enters the Minister D—. His lynx eye immediately perceives the
      paper, recognises the handwriting of the address, observes the confusion
      of the personage addressed, and fathoms her secret. After some business
      transactions, hurried through in his ordinary manner, he produces a letter
      somewhat similar to the one in question, opens it, pretends to read it,
      and then places it in close juxtaposition to the other. Again he
      converses, for some fifteen minutes, upon the public affairs. At length,
      in taking leave, he takes also from the table the letter to which he had
      no claim. Its rightful owner saw, but, of course, dared not call attention
      to the act, in the presence of the third personage who stood at her elbow.
      The minister decamped; leaving his own letter—one of no importance—upon
      the table.”

 “Here, then,” said Dupin to me, “you have precisely what
      you demand to make the ascendancy complete—the robber’s
      knowledge of the loser’s knowledge of the robber.”

 “Yes,” replied the Prefect; “and the power thus attained
      has, for some months past, been wielded, for political purposes, to a very
      dangerous extent. The personage robbed is more thoroughly convinced, every
      day, of the necessity of reclaiming her letter. But this, of course,
      cannot be done openly. In fine, driven to despair, she has committed the
      matter to me.”

 “Than whom,” said Dupin, amid a perfect whirlwind of smoke,
      “no more sagacious agent could, I suppose, be desired, or even
      imagined.”

 “You flatter me,” replied the Prefect; “but it is
      possible that some such opinion may have been entertained.”

 “It is clear,” said I, “as you observe, that the letter
      is still in possession of the minister; since it is this possession, and
      not any employment of the letter, which bestows the power. With the
      employment the power departs.”

 “True,” said G.; “and upon this conviction I proceeded.
      My first care was to make thorough search of the minister’s hotel;
      and here my chief embarrassment lay in the necessity of searching without
      his knowledge. Beyond all things, I have been warned of the danger which
      would result from giving him reason to suspect our design.”

 “But,” said I, “you are quite au fait in these
      investigations. The Parisian police have done this thing often before.”

 “O yes; and for this reason I did not despair. The habits of the
      minister gave me, too, a great advantage. He is frequently absent from
      home all night. His servants are by no means numerous. They sleep at a
      distance from their master’s apartment, and, being chiefly
      Neapolitans, are readily made drunk. I have keys, as you know, with which
      I can open any chamber or cabinet in Paris. For three months a night has
      not passed, during the greater part of which I have not been engaged,
      personally, in ransacking the D— Hotel. My honor is interested, and,
      to mention a great secret, the reward is enormous. So I did not abandon
      the search until I had become fully satisfied that the thief is a more
      astute man than myself. I fancy that I have investigated every nook and
      corner of the premises in which it is possible that the paper can be
      concealed.”

 “But is it not possible,” I suggested, “that although
      the letter may be in possession of the minister, as it unquestionably is,
      he may have concealed it elsewhere than upon his own premises?”

 “This is barely possible,” said Dupin. “The present
      peculiar condition of affairs at court, and especially of those intrigues
      in which D— is known to be involved, would render the instant
      availability of the document—its susceptibility of being produced at
      a moment’s notice—a point of nearly equal importance with its
      possession.”

 “Its susceptibility of being produced?” said I.

 “That is to say, of being destroyed,” said Dupin.

 “True,” I observed; “the paper is clearly then upon the
      premises. As for its being upon the person of the minister, we may
      consider that as out of the question.”

 “Entirely,” said the Prefect. “He has been twice
      waylaid, as if by footpads, and his person rigorously searched under my
      own inspection.”

 “You might have spared yourself this trouble,” said Dupin.
      “D—, I presume, is not altogether a fool, and, if not, must
      have anticipated these waylayings, as a matter of course.”

 “Not altogether a fool,” said G., “but then he’s a
      poet, which I take to be only one remove from a fool.”

 “True,” said Dupin, after a long and thoughtful whiff from his
      meerschaum, “although I have been guilty of certain doggrel myself.”

 “Suppose you detail,” said I, “the particulars of your
      search.”

 “Why the fact is, we took our time, and we searched every where. I
      have had long experience in these affairs. I took the entire building,
      room by room; devoting the nights of a whole week to each. We examined,
      first, the furniture of each apartment. We opened every possible drawer;
      and I presume you know that, to a properly trained police agent, such a
      thing as a secret drawer is impossible. Any man is a dolt who permits a
      ‘secret’ drawer to escape him in a search of this kind. The
      thing is so plain. There is a certain amount of bulk—of space—to
      be accounted for in every cabinet. Then we have accurate rules. The
      fiftieth part of a line could not escape us. After the cabinets we took
      the chairs. The cushions we probed with the fine long needles you have
      seen me employ. From the tables we removed the tops.”

 “Why so?”

 “Sometimes the top of a table, or other similarly arranged piece of
      furniture, is removed by the person wishing to conceal an article; then
      the leg is excavated, the article deposited within the cavity, and the top
      replaced. The bottoms and tops of bedposts are employed in the same way.”

 “But could not the cavity be detected by sounding?” I asked.

 “By no means, if, when the article is deposited, a sufficient
      wadding of cotton be placed around it. Besides, in our case, we were
      obliged to proceed without noise.”

 “But you could not have removed—you could not have taken to
      pieces all articles of furniture in which it would have been possible to
      make a deposit in the manner you mention. A letter may be compressed into
      a thin spiral roll, not differing much in shape or bulk from a large
      knitting-needle, and in this form it might be inserted into the rung of a
      chair, for example. You did not take to pieces all the chairs?”

 “Certainly not; but we did better—we examined the rungs of
      every chair in the hotel, and, indeed the jointings of every description
      of furniture, by the aid of a most powerful microscope. Had there been any
      traces of recent disturbance we should not have failed to detect it
      instantly. A single grain of gimlet-dust, for example, would have been as
      obvious as an apple. Any disorder in the glueing—any unusual gaping
      in the joints—would have sufficed to insure detection.”

 “I presume you looked to the mirrors, between the boards and the
      plates, and you probed the beds and the bed-clothes, as well as the
      curtains and carpets.”

 “That of course; and when we had absolutely completed every particle
      of the furniture in this way, then we examined the house itself. We
      divided its entire surface into compartments, which we numbered, so that
      none might be missed; then we scrutinized each individual square inch
      throughout the premises, including the two houses immediately adjoining,
      with the microscope, as before.”

 “The two houses adjoining!” I exclaimed; “you must have
      had a great deal of trouble.”

 “We had; but the reward offered is prodigious!”

 “You include the grounds about the houses?”

 “All the grounds are paved with brick. They gave us comparatively
      little trouble. We examined the moss between the bricks, and found it
      undisturbed.”

 “You looked among D—‘s papers, of course, and into the
      books of the library?”

 “Certainly; we opened every package and parcel; we not only opened
      every book, but we turned over every leaf in each volume, not contenting
      ourselves with a mere shake, according to the fashion of some of our
      police officers. We also measured the thickness of every book-cover, with
      the most accurate admeasurement, and applied to each the most jealous
      scrutiny of the microscope. Had any of the bindings been recently meddled
      with, it would have been utterly impossible that the fact should have
      escaped observation. Some five or six volumes, just from the hands of the
      binder, we carefully probed, longitudinally, with the needles.”

 “You explored the floors beneath the carpets?”

 “Beyond doubt. We removed every carpet, and examined the boards with
      the microscope.”

 “And the paper on the walls?”

 “Yes.”

 “You looked into the cellars?”

 “We did.”

 “Then,” I said, “you have been making a miscalculation,
      and the letter is not upon the premises, as you suppose.”

 “I fear you are right there,” said the Prefect. “And
      now, Dupin, what would you advise me to do?”

 “To make a thorough re-search of the premises.”

 “That is absolutely needless,” replied G—. “I am
      not more sure that I breathe than I am that the letter is not at the
      Hotel.”

 “I have no better advice to give you,” said Dupin. “You
      have, of course, an accurate description of the letter?”

 “Oh yes!”—And here the Prefect, producing a
      memorandum-book proceeded to read aloud a minute account of the internal,
      and especially of the external appearance of the missing document. Soon
      after finishing the perusal of this description, he took his departure,
      more entirely depressed in spirits than I had ever known the good
      gentleman before. In about a month afterwards he paid us another visit,
      and found us occupied very nearly as before. He took a pipe and a chair
      and entered into some ordinary conversation. At length I said,—

 “Well, but G—, what of the purloined letter? I presume you
      have at last made up your mind that there is no such thing as overreaching
      the Minister?”

 “Confound him, say I—yes; I made the re-examination, however,
      as Dupin suggested—but it was all labor lost, as I knew it would be.”

 “How much was the reward offered, did you say?” asked Dupin.

 “Why, a very great deal—a very liberal reward—I don’t
      like to say how much, precisely; but one thing I will say, that I wouldn’t
      mind giving my individual check for fifty thousand francs to any one who
      could obtain me that letter. The fact is, it is becoming of more and more
      importance every day; and the reward has been lately doubled. If it were
      trebled, however, I could do no more than I have done.”

 “Why, yes,” said Dupin, drawlingly, between the whiffs of his
      meerschaum, “I really—think, G—, you have not exerted
      yourself—to the utmost in this matter. You might—do a little
      more, I think, eh?”

 “How?—in what way?’

 “Why—puff, puff—you might—puff, puff—employ
      counsel in the matter, eh?—puff, puff, puff. Do you remember the
      story they tell of Abernethy?”

 “No; hang Abernethy!”

 “To be sure! hang him and welcome. But, once upon a time, a certain
      rich miser conceived the design of spunging upon this Abernethy for a
      medical opinion. Getting up, for this purpose, an ordinary conversation in
      a private company, he insinuated his case to the physician, as that of an
      imaginary individual.

 “‘We will suppose,’ said the miser, ‘that his
      symptoms are such and such; now, doctor, what would you have directed him
      to take?’

 “‘Take!’ said Abernethy, ‘why, take advice, to be
      sure.’”

 “But,” said the Prefect, a little discomposed, “I am
      perfectly willing to take advice, and to pay for it. I would really give
      fifty thousand francs to any one who would aid me in the matter.”

 “In that case,” replied Dupin, opening a drawer, and producing
      a check-book, “you may as well fill me up a check for the amount
      mentioned. When you have signed it, I will hand you the letter.”

 I was astounded. The Prefect appeared absolutely thunder-stricken. For
      some minutes he remained speechless and motionless, looking incredulously
      at my friend with open mouth, and eyes that seemed starting from their
      sockets; then, apparently recovering himself in some measure, he seized a
      pen, and after several pauses and vacant stares, finally filled up and
      signed a check for fifty thousand francs, and handed it across the table
      to Dupin. The latter examined it carefully and deposited it in his
      pocket-book; then, unlocking an escritoire, took thence a letter and gave
      it to the Prefect. This functionary grasped it in a perfect agony of joy,
      opened it with a trembling hand, cast a rapid glance at its contents, and
      then, scrambling and struggling to the door, rushed at length
      unceremoniously from the room and from the house, without having uttered a
      syllable since Dupin had requested him to fill up the check.

 When he had gone, my friend entered into some explanations.

 “The Parisian police,” he said, “are exceedingly able in
      their way. They are persevering, ingenious, cunning, and thoroughly versed
      in the knowledge which their duties seem chiefly to demand. Thus, when G—
      detailed to us his mode of searching the premises at the Hotel D—, I
      felt entire confidence in his having made a satisfactory investigation—so
      far as his labors extended.”

 “So far as his labors extended?” said I.

 “Yes,” said Dupin. “The measures adopted were not only
      the best of their kind, but carried out to absolute perfection. Had the
      letter been deposited within the range of their search, these fellows
      would, beyond a question, have found it.”

 I merely laughed—but he seemed quite serious in all that he said.

 “The measures, then,” he continued, “were good in their
      kind, and well executed; their defect lay in their being inapplicable to
      the case, and to the man. A certain set of highly ingenious resources are,
      with the Prefect, a sort of Procrustean bed, to which he forcibly adapts
      his designs. But he perpetually errs by being too deep or too shallow, for
      the matter in hand; and many a schoolboy is a better reasoner than he. I
      knew one about eight years of age, whose success at guessing in the game
      of ‘even and odd’ attracted universal admiration. This game is
      simple, and is played with marbles. One player holds in his hand a number
      of these toys, and demands of another whether that number is even or odd.
      If the guess is right, the guesser wins one; if wrong, he loses one. The
      boy to whom I allude won all the marbles of the school. Of course he had
      some principle of guessing; and this lay in mere observation and
      admeasurement of the astuteness of his opponents. For example, an arrant
      simpleton is his opponent, and, holding up his closed hand, asks, ‘are
      they even or odd?’ Our schoolboy replies, ‘odd,’ and
      loses; but upon the second trial he wins, for he then says to himself,
      ‘the simpleton had them even upon the first trial, and his amount of
      cunning is just sufficient to make him have them odd upon the second; I
      will therefore guess odd;’—he guesses odd, and wins. Now, with
      a simpleton a degree above the first, he would have reasoned thus: ‘This
      fellow finds that in the first instance I guessed odd, and, in the second,
      he will propose to himself, upon the first impulse, a simple variation
      from even to odd, as did the first simpleton; but then a second thought
      will suggest that this is too simple a variation, and finally he will
      decide upon putting it even as before. I will therefore guess even;’—he
      guesses even, and wins. Now this mode of reasoning in the schoolboy, whom
      his fellows termed ‘lucky,’—what, in its last analysis,
      is it?”

 “It is merely,” I said, “an identification of the
      reasoner’s intellect with that of his opponent.”

 “It is,” said Dupin; “and, upon inquiring of the boy by
      what means he effected the thorough identification in which his success
      consisted, I received answer as follows: ‘When I wish to find out
      how wise, or how stupid, or how good, or how wicked is any one, or what
      are his thoughts at the moment, I fashion the expression of my face, as
      accurately as possible, in accordance with the expression of his, and then
      wait to see what thoughts or sentiments arise in my mind or heart, as if
      to match or correspond with the expression.’ This response of the
      schoolboy lies at the bottom of all the spurious profundity which has been
      attributed to Rochefoucault, to La Bougive, to Machiavelli, and to
      Campanella.”

 “And the identification,” I said, “of the reasoner’s
      intellect with that of his opponent, depends, if I understand you aright,
      upon the accuracy with which the opponent’s intellect is admeasured.”

 “For its practical value it depends upon this,” replied Dupin;
      “and the Prefect and his cohort fail so frequently, first, by
      default of this identification, and, secondly, by ill-admeasurement, or
      rather through non-admeasurement, of the intellect with which they are
      engaged. They consider only their own ideas of ingenuity; and, in
      searching for anything hidden, advert only to the modes in which they
      would have hidden it. They are right in this much—that their own
      ingenuity is a faithful representative of that of the mass; but when the
      cunning of the individual felon is diverse in character from their own,
      the felon foils them, of course. This always happens when it is above
      their own, and very usually when it is below. They have no variation of
      principle in their investigations; at best, when urged by some unusual
      emergency—by some extraordinary reward—they extend or
      exaggerate their old modes of practice, without touching their principles.
      What, for example, in this case of D—, has been done to vary the
      principle of action? What is all this boring, and probing, and sounding,
      and scrutinizing with the microscope and dividing the surface of the
      building into registered square inches—what is it all but an
      exaggeration of the application of the one principle or set of principles
      of search, which are based upon the one set of notions regarding human
      ingenuity, to which the Prefect, in the long routine of his duty, has been
      accustomed? Do you not see he has taken it for granted that all men
      proceed to conceal a letter,—not exactly in a gimlet hole bored in a
      chair-leg—but, at least, in some out-of-the-way hole or corner
      suggested by the same tenor of thought which would urge a man to secrete a
      letter in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg? And do you not see also,
      that such recherch?s nooks for concealment are adapted only for ordinary
      occasions, and would be adopted only by ordinary intellects; for, in all
      cases of concealment, a disposal of the article concealed—a disposal
      of it in this recherch? manner,—is, in the very first instance,
      presumable and presumed; and thus its discovery depends, not at all upon
      the acumen, but altogether upon the mere care, patience, and determination
      of the seekers; and where the case is of importance—or, what amounts
      to the same thing in the policial eyes, when the reward is of magnitude,—the
      qualities in question have never been known to fail. You will now
      understand what I meant in suggesting that, had the purloined letter been
      hidden any where within the limits of the Prefect’s examination—in
      other words, had the principle of its concealment been comprehended within
      the principles of the Prefect—its discovery would have been a matter
      altogether beyond question. This functionary, however, has been thoroughly
      mystified; and the remote source of his defeat lies in the supposition
      that the Minister is a fool, because he has acquired renown as a poet. All
      fools are poets; this the Prefect feels; and he is merely guilty of a non
      distributio medii in thence inferring that all poets are fools.”

 “But is this really the poet?” I asked. “There are two
      brothers, I know; and both have attained reputation in letters. The
      Minister I believe has written learnedly on the Differential Calculus. He
      is a mathematician, and no poet.”

 “You are mistaken; I know him well; he is both. As poet and
      mathematician, he would reason well; as mere mathematician, he could not
      have reasoned at all, and thus would have been at the mercy of the
      Prefect.”

 “You surprise me,” I said, “by these opinions, which
      have been contradicted by the voice of the world. You do not mean to set
      at naught the well-digested idea of centuries. The mathematical reason has
      long been regarded as the reason par excellence.”

 “‘Il y a ? pari?r,’” replied Dupin, quoting from
      Chamfort, “‘que toute id?e publique, toute convention re?ue
      est une sottise, car elle a convenue au plus grand nombre.’ The
      mathematicians, I grant you, have done their best to promulgate the
      popular error to which you allude, and which is none the less an error for
      its promulgation as truth. With an art worthy a better cause, for example,
      they have insinuated the term ‘analysis’ into application to
      algebra. The French are the originators of this particular deception; but
      if a term is of any importance—if words derive any value from
      applicability—then ‘analysis’ conveys ‘algebra’
      about as much as, in Latin, ‘ambitus’ implies ‘ambition,’
      ‘religio’ ‘religion,’ or ‘homines honesti,’
      a set of honorablemen.”

 “You have a quarrel on hand, I see,” said I, “with some
      of the algebraists of Paris; but proceed.”

 “I dispute the availability, and thus the value, of that reason
      which is cultivated in any especial form other than the abstractly
      logical. I dispute, in particular, the reason educed by mathematical
      study. The mathematics are the science of form and quantity; mathematical
      reasoning is merely logic applied to observation upon form and quantity.
      The great error lies in supposing that even the truths of what is called
      pure algebra, are abstract or general truths. And this error is so
      egregious that I am confounded at the universality with which it has been
      received. Mathematical axioms are not axioms of general truth. What is
      true of relation—of form and quantity—is often grossly false
      in regard to morals, for example. In this latter science it is very
      usually untrue that the aggregated parts are equal to the whole. In
      chemistry also the axiom fails. In the consideration of motive it fails;
      for two motives, each of a given value, have not, necessarily, a value
      when united, equal to the sum of their values apart. There are numerous
      other mathematical truths which are only truths within the limits of
      relation. But the mathematician argues, from his finite truths, through
      habit, as if they were of an absolutely general applicability—as the
      world indeed imagines them to be. Bryant, in his very learned ‘Mythology,’
      mentions an analogous source of error, when he says that ‘although
      the Pagan fables are not believed, yet we forget ourselves continually,
      and make inferences from them as existing realities.’ With the
      algebraists, however, who are Pagans themselves, the ‘Pagan fables’
      are believed, and the inferences are made, not so much through lapse of
      memory, as through an unaccountable addling of the brains. In short, I
      never yet encountered the mere mathematician who could be trusted out of
      equal roots, or one who did not clandestinely hold it as a point of his
      faith that x 2

+px was absolutely and unconditionally equal to q.
      Say to one of these gentlemen, by way of experiment, if you please, that
      you believe occasions may occur where x 2

+px is not altogether
      equal to q, and, having made him understand what you mean, get out of his
      reach as speedily as convenient, for, beyond doubt, he will endeavor to
      knock you down.

 “I mean to say,” continued Dupin, while I merely laughed at
      his last observations, “that if the Minister had been no more than a
      mathematician, the Prefect would have been under no necessity of giving me
      this check. I know him, however, as both mathematician and poet, and my
      measures were adapted to his capacity, with reference to the circumstances
      by which he was surrounded. I knew him as a courtier, too, and as a bold
      intriguant. Such a man, I considered, could not fail to be aware of the
      ordinary policial modes of action. He could not have failed to anticipate—and
      events have proved that he did not fail to anticipate—the waylayings
      to which he was subjected. He must have foreseen, I reflected, the secret
      investigations of his premises. His frequent absences from home at night,
      which were hailed by the Prefect as certain aids to his success, I
      regarded only as ruses, to afford opportunity for thorough search to the
      police, and thus the sooner to impress them with the conviction to which G—,
      in fact, did finally arrive—the conviction that the letter was not
      upon the premises. I felt, also, that the whole train of thought, which I
      was at some pains in detailing to you just now, concerning the invariable
      principle of policial action in searches for articles concealed—I
      felt that this whole train of thought would necessarily pass through the
      mind of the Minister. It would imperatively lead him to despise all the
      ordinary nooks of concealment. He could not, I reflected, be so weak as
      not to see that the most intricate and remote recess of his hotel would be
      as open as his commonest closets to the eyes, to the probes, to the
      gimlets, and to the microscopes of the Prefect. I saw, in fine, that he
      would be driven, as a matter of course, to simplicity, if not deliberately
      induced to it as a matter of choice. You will remember, perhaps, how
      desperately the Prefect laughed when I suggested, upon our first
      interview, that it was just possible this mystery troubled him so much on
      account of its being so very self-evident.”

 “Yes,” said I, “I remember his merriment well. I really
      thought he would have fallen into convulsions.”

 “The material world,” continued Dupin, “abounds with
      very strict analogies to the immaterial; and thus some color of truth has
      been given to the rhetorical dogma, that metaphor, or simile, may be made
      to strengthen an argument, as well as to embellish a description. The
      principle of the vis inerti?, for example, seems to be identical in
      physics and metaphysics. It is not more true in the former, that a large
      body is with more difficulty set in motion than a smaller one, and that
      its subsequent momentum is commensurate with this difficulty, than it is,
      in the latter, that intellects of the vaster capacity, while more
      forcible, more constant, and more eventful in their movements than those
      of inferior grade, are yet the less readily moved, and more embarrassed
      and full of hesitation in the first few steps of their progress. Again:
      have you ever noticed which of the street signs, over the shop-doors, are
      the most attractive of attention?”

 “I have never given the matter a thought,” I said.

 “There is a game of puzzles,” he resumed, “which is
      played upon a map. One party playing requires another to find a given word—the
      name of town, river, state or empire—any word, in short, upon the
      motley and perplexed surface of the chart. A novice in the game generally
      seeks to embarrass his opponents by giving them the most minutely lettered
      names; but the adept selects such words as stretch, in large characters,
      from one end of the chart to the other. These, like the over-largely
      lettered signs and placards of the street, escape observation by dint of
      being excessively obvious; and here the physical oversight is precisely
      analogous with the moral inapprehension by which the intellect suffers to
      pass unnoticed those considerations which are too obtrusively and too
      palpably self-evident. But this is a point, it appears, somewhat above or
      beneath the understanding of the Prefect. He never once thought it
      probable, or possible, that the Minister had deposited the letter
      immediately beneath the nose of the whole world, by way of best preventing
      any portion of that world from perceiving it.

 “But the more I reflected upon the daring, dashing, and
      discriminating ingenuity of D—; upon the fact that the document must
      always have been at hand, if he intended to use it to good purpose; and
      upon the decisive evidence, obtained by the Prefect, that it was not
      hidden within the limits of that dignitary’s ordinary search—the
      more satisfied I became that, to conceal this letter, the Minister had
      resorted to the comprehensive and sagacious expedient of not attempting to
      conceal it at all.

 “Full of these ideas, I prepared myself with a pair of green
      spectacles, and called one fine morning, quite by accident, at the
      Ministerial hotel. I found D— at home, yawning, lounging, and
      dawdling, as usual, and pretending to be in the last extremity of ennui.
      He is, perhaps, the most really energetic human being now alive—but
      that is only when nobody sees him.

 “To be even with him, I complained of my weak eyes, and lamented the
      necessity of the spectacles, under cover of which I cautiously and
      thoroughly surveyed the whole apartment, while seemingly intent only upon
      the conversation of my host.

 “I paid especial attention to a large writing-table near which he
      sat, and upon which lay confusedly, some miscellaneous letters and other
      papers, with one or two musical instruments and a few books. Here,
      however, after a long and very deliberate scrutiny, I saw nothing to
      excite particular suspicion.

 “At length my eyes, in going the circuit of the room, fell upon a
      trumpery fillagree card-rack of pasteboard, that hung dangling by a dirty
      blue ribbon, from a little brass knob just beneath the middle of the
      mantel-piece. In this rack, which had three or four compartments, were
      five or six visiting cards and a solitary letter. This last was much
      soiled and crumpled. It was torn nearly in two, across the middle—as
      if a design, in the first instance, to tear it entirely up as worthless,
      had been altered, or stayed, in the second. It had a large black seal,
      bearing the D— cipher very conspicuously, and was addressed, in a
      diminutive female hand, to D—, the minister, himself. It was thrust
      carelessly, and even, as it seemed, contemptuously, into one of the
      uppermost divisions of the rack.

 “No sooner had I glanced at this letter, than I concluded it to be
      that of which I was in search. To be sure, it was, to all appearance,
      radically different from the one of which the Prefect had read us so
      minute a description. Here the seal was large and black, with the D—
      cipher; there it was small and red, with the ducal arms of the S—
      family. Here, the address, to the Minister, diminutive and feminine; there
      the superscription, to a certain royal personage, was markedly bold and
      decided; the size alone formed a point of correspondence. But, then, the
      radicalness of these differences, which was excessive; the dirt; the
      soiled and torn condition of the paper, so inconsistent with the true
      methodical habits of D—, and so suggestive of a design to delude the
      beholder into an idea of the worthlessness of the document; these things,
      together with the hyper-obtrusive situation of this document, full in the
      view of every visiter, and thus exactly in accordance with the conclusions
      to which I had previously arrived; these things, I say, were strongly
      corroborative of suspicion, in one who came with the intention to suspect.

 “I protracted my visit as long as possible, and, while I maintained
      a most animated discussion with the Minister upon a topic which I knew
      well had never failed to interest and excite him, I kept my attention
      really riveted upon the letter. In this examination, I committed to memory
      its external appearance and arrangement in the rack; and also fell, at
      length, upon a discovery which set at rest whatever trivial doubt I might
      have entertained. In scrutinizing the edges of the paper, I observed them
      to be more chafed than seemed necessary. They presented the broken
      appearance which is manifested when a stiff paper, having been once folded
      and pressed with a folder, is refolded in a reversed direction, in the
      same creases or edges which had formed the original fold. This discovery
      was sufficient. It was clear to me that the letter had been turned, as a
      glove, inside out, re-directed, and re-sealed. I bade the Minister good
      morning, and took my departure at once, leaving a gold snuff-box upon the
      table.

 “The next morning I called for the snuff-box, when we resumed, quite
      eagerly, the conversation of the preceding day. While thus engaged,
      however, a loud report, as if of a pistol, was heard immediately beneath
      the windows of the hotel, and was succeeded by a series of fearful
      screams, and the shoutings of a terrified mob. D— rushed to a
      casement, threw it open, and looked out. In the meantime, I stepped to the
      card-rack, took the letter, put it in my pocket, and replaced it by a
      fac-simile, (so far as regards externals,) which I had carefully prepared
      at my lodgings—imitating the D— cipher, very readily, by means
      of a seal formed of bread.

 “The disturbance in the street had been occasioned by the frantic
      behavior of a man with a musket. He had fired it among a crowd of women
      and children. It proved, however, to have been without ball, and the
      fellow was suffered to go his way as a lunatic or a drunkard. When he had
      gone, D— came from the window, whither I had followed him
      immediately upon securing the object in view. Soon afterwards I bade him
      farewell. The pretended lunatic was a man in my own pay.”

 “But what purpose had you,” I asked, “in replacing the
      letter by a fac-simile? Would it not have been better, at the first visit,
      to have seized it openly, and departed?”

 “D—,” replied Dupin, “is a desperate man, and a
      man of nerve. His hotel, too, is not without attendants devoted to his
      interests. Had I made the wild attempt you suggest, I might never have
      left the Ministerial presence alive. The good people of Paris might have
      heard of me no more. But I had an object apart from these considerations.
      You know my political prepossessions. In this matter, I act as a partisan
      of the lady concerned. For eighteen months the Minister has had her in his
      power. She has now him in hers—since, being unaware that the letter
      is not in his possession, he will proceed with his exactions as if it was.
      Thus will he inevitably commit himself, at once, to his political
      destruction. His downfall, too, will not be more precipitate than awkward.
      It is all very well to talk about the facilis descensus Averni; but in all
      kinds of climbing, as Catalani said of singing, it is far more easy to get
      up than to come down. In the present instance I have no sympathy—at
      least no pity—for him who descends. He is that monstrum horrendum,
      an unprincipled man of genius. I confess, however, that I should like very
      well to know the precise character of his thoughts, when, being defied by
      her whom the Prefect terms ‘a certain personage’ he is reduced
      to opening the letter which I left for him in the card-rack.”

 “How? did you put any thing particular in it?”

 “Why—it did not seem altogether right to leave the interior
      blank—that would have been insulting. D—, at Vienna once, did
      me an evil turn, which I told him, quite good-humoredly, that I should
      remember. So, as I knew he would feel some curiosity in regard to the
      identity of the person who had outwitted him, I thought it a pity not to
      give him a clue. He is well acquainted with my MS., and I just copied into
      the middle of the blank sheet the words—

 “‘— — Un dessein si funeste, S’il n’est
      digne d’Atr?e, est digne de Thyeste. They are to be found in
      Crebillon’s ‘Atr?e.’”

  

  









 THE THOUSAND-AND-SECOND TALE OF SCHEHERAZADE

 Truth is stranger than fiction.

                              OLD SAYING.

 HAVING had occasion, lately, in the course of some Oriental
      investigations, to consult the Tellmenow Isitsoornot, a work which (like
      the Zohar of Simeon Jochaides) is scarcely known at all, even in Europe;
      and which has never been quoted, to my knowledge, by any American—if
      we except, perhaps, the author of the “Curiosities of American
      Literature”;—having had occasion, I say, to turn over some
      pages of the first-mentioned very remarkable work, I was not a little
      astonished to discover that the literary world has hitherto been strangely
      in error respecting the fate of the vizier’s daughter, Scheherazade,
      as that fate is depicted in the “Arabian Nights”; and that the
      denouement there given, if not altogether inaccurate, as far as it goes,
      is at least to blame in not having gone very much farther.

 For full information on this interesting topic, I must refer the
      inquisitive reader to the “Isitsoornot” itself, but in the
      meantime, I shall be pardoned for giving a summary of what I there
      discovered.

 It will be remembered, that, in the usual version of the tales, a certain
      monarch having good cause to be jealous of his queen, not only puts her to
      death, but makes a vow, by his beard and the prophet, to espouse each
      night the most beautiful maiden in his dominions, and the next morning to
      deliver her up to the executioner.

 Having fulfilled this vow for many years to the letter, and with a
      religious punctuality and method that conferred great credit upon him as a
      man of devout feeling and excellent sense, he was interrupted one
      afternoon (no doubt at his prayers) by a visit from his grand vizier, to
      whose daughter, it appears, there had occurred an idea.

 Her name was Scheherazade, and her idea was, that she would either redeem
      the land from the depopulating tax upon its beauty, or perish, after the
      approved fashion of all heroines, in the attempt.

 Accordingly, and although we do not find it to be leap-year (which makes
      the sacrifice more meritorious), she deputes her father, the grand vizier,
      to make an offer to the king of her hand. This hand the king eagerly
      accepts—(he had intended to take it at all events, and had put off
      the matter from day to day, only through fear of the vizier),—but,
      in accepting it now, he gives all parties very distinctly to understand,
      that, grand vizier or no grand vizier, he has not the slightest design of
      giving up one iota of his vow or of his privileges. When, therefore, the
      fair Scheherazade insisted upon marrying the king, and did actually marry
      him despite her father’s excellent advice not to do any thing of the
      kind—when she would and did marry him, I say, will I, nill I, it was
      with her beautiful black eyes as thoroughly open as the nature of the case
      would allow.

 It seems, however, that this politic damsel (who had been reading
      Machiavelli, beyond doubt), had a very ingenious little plot in her mind.
      On the night of the wedding, she contrived, upon I forget what specious
      pretence, to have her sister occupy a couch sufficiently near that of the
      royal pair to admit of easy conversation from bed to bed; and, a little
      before cock-crowing, she took care to awaken the good monarch, her husband
      (who bore her none the worse will because he intended to wring her neck on
      the morrow),—she managed to awaken him, I say, (although on account
      of a capital conscience and an easy digestion, he slept well) by the
      profound interest of a story (about a rat and a black cat, I think) which
      she was narrating (all in an undertone, of course) to her sister. When the
      day broke, it so happened that this history was not altogether finished,
      and that Scheherazade, in the nature of things could not finish it just
      then, since it was high time for her to get up and be bowstrung—a
      thing very little more pleasant than hanging, only a trifle more genteel.

 The king’s curiosity, however, prevailing, I am sorry to say, even
      over his sound religious principles, induced him for this once to postpone
      the fulfilment of his vow until next morning, for the purpose and with the
      hope of hearing that night how it fared in the end with the black cat (a
      black cat, I think it was) and the rat.

 The night having arrived, however, the lady Scheherazade not only put the
      finishing stroke to the black cat and the rat (the rat was blue) but
      before she well knew what she was about, found herself deep in the
      intricacies of a narration, having reference (if I am not altogether
      mistaken) to a pink horse (with green wings) that went, in a violent
      manner, by clockwork, and was wound up with an indigo key. With this
      history the king was even more profoundly interested than with the other—and,
      as the day broke before its conclusion (notwithstanding all the queen’s
      endeavors to get through with it in time for the bowstringing), there was
      again no resource but to postpone that ceremony as before, for twenty-four
      hours. The next night there happened a similar accident with a similar
      result; and then the next—and then again the next; so that, in the
      end, the good monarch, having been unavoidably deprived of all opportunity
      to keep his vow during a period of no less than one thousand and one
      nights, either forgets it altogether by the expiration of this time, or
      gets himself absolved of it in the regular way, or (what is more probable)
      breaks it outright, as well as the head of his father confessor. At all
      events, Scheherazade, who, being lineally descended from Eve, fell heir,
      perhaps, to the whole seven baskets of talk, which the latter lady, we all
      know, picked up from under the trees in the garden of Eden—Scheherazade,
      I say, finally triumphed, and the tariff upon beauty was repealed.

 Now, this conclusion (which is that of the story as we have it upon
      record) is, no doubt, excessively proper and pleasant—but alas! like
      a great many pleasant things, is more pleasant than true, and I am
      indebted altogether to the “Isitsoornot” for the means of
      correcting the error. “Le mieux,” says a French proverb,
      “est l’ennemi du bien,” and, in mentioning that
      Scheherazade had inherited the seven baskets of talk, I should have added
      that she put them out at compound interest until they amounted to
      seventy-seven.

 “My dear sister,” said she, on the thousand-and-second night,
      (I quote the language of the “Isitsoornot” at this point,
      verbatim) “my dear sister,” said she, “now that all this
      little difficulty about the bowstring has blown over, and that this odious
      tax is so happily repealed, I feel that I have been guilty of great
      indiscretion in withholding from you and the king (who I am sorry to say,
      snores—a thing no gentleman would do) the full conclusion of Sinbad
      the sailor. This person went through numerous other and more interesting
      adventures than those which I related; but the truth is, I felt sleepy on
      the particular night of their narration, and so was seduced into cutting
      them short—a grievous piece of misconduct, for which I only trust
      that Allah will forgive me. But even yet it is not too late to remedy my
      great neglect—and as soon as I have given the king a pinch or two in
      order to wake him up so far that he may stop making that horrible noise, I
      will forthwith entertain you (and him if he pleases) with the sequel of
      this very remarkable story.”

 Hereupon the sister of Scheherazade, as I have it from the “Isitsoornot,”
      expressed no very particular intensity of gratification; but the king,
      having been sufficiently pinched, at length ceased snoring, and finally
      said, “hum!” and then “hoo!” when the queen,
      understanding these words (which are no doubt Arabic) to signify that he
      was all attention, and would do his best not to snore any more—the
      queen, I say, having arranged these matters to her satisfaction,
      re-entered thus, at once, into the history of Sinbad the sailor:

 “‘At length, in my old age,’ [these are the words of
      Sinbad himself, as retailed by Scheherazade]—‘at length, in my
      old age, and after enjoying many years of tranquillity at home, I became
      once more possessed of a desire of visiting foreign countries; and one
      day, without acquainting any of my family with my design, I packed up some
      bundles of such merchandise as was most precious and least bulky, and,
      engaged a porter to carry them, went with him down to the sea-shore, to
      await the arrival of any chance vessel that might convey me out of the
      kingdom into some region which I had not as yet explored.

 “‘Having deposited the packages upon the sands, we sat down
      beneath some trees, and looked out into the ocean in the hope of
      perceiving a ship, but during several hours we saw none whatever. At
      length I fancied that I could hear a singular buzzing or humming sound;
      and the porter, after listening awhile, declared that he also could
      distinguish it. Presently it grew louder, and then still louder, so that
      we could have no doubt that the object which caused it was approaching us.
      At length, on the edge of the horizon, we discovered a black speck, which
      rapidly increased in size until we made it out to be a vast monster,
      swimming with a great part of its body above the surface of the sea. It
      came toward us with inconceivable swiftness, throwing up huge waves of
      foam around its breast, and illuminating all that part of the sea through
      which it passed, with a long line of fire that extended far off into the
      distance.

 “‘As the thing drew near we saw it very distinctly. Its length
      was equal to that of three of the loftiest trees that grow, and it was as
      wide as the great hall of audience in your palace, O most sublime and
      munificent of the Caliphs. Its body, which was unlike that of ordinary
      fishes, was as solid as a rock, and of a jetty blackness throughout all
      that portion of it which floated above the water, with the exception of a
      narrow blood-red streak that completely begirdled it. The belly, which
      floated beneath the surface, and of which we could get only a glimpse now
      and then as the monster rose and fell with the billows, was entirely
      covered with metallic scales, of a color like that of the moon in misty
      weather. The back was flat and nearly white, and from it there extended
      upwards of six spines, about half the length of the whole body.

 “‘The horrible creature had no mouth that we could perceive,
      but, as if to make up for this deficiency, it was provided with at least
      four score of eyes, that protruded from their sockets like those of the
      green dragon-fly, and were arranged all around the body in two rows, one
      above the other, and parallel to the blood-red streak, which seemed to
      answer the purpose of an eyebrow. Two or three of these dreadful eyes were
      much larger than the others, and had the appearance of solid gold.

 “‘Although this beast approached us, as I have before said,
      with the greatest rapidity, it must have been moved altogether by
      necromancy—for it had neither fins like a fish nor web-feet like a
      duck, nor wings like the seashell which is blown along in the manner of a
      vessel; nor yet did it writhe itself forward as do the eels. Its head and
      its tail were shaped precisely alike, only, not far from the latter, were
      two small holes that served for nostrils, and through which the monster
      puffed out its thick breath with prodigious violence, and with a
      shrieking, disagreeable noise.

 “‘Our terror at beholding this hideous thing was very great,
      but it was even surpassed by our astonishment, when upon getting a nearer
      look, we perceived upon the creature’s back a vast number of animals
      about the size and shape of men, and altogether much resembling them,
      except that they wore no garments (as men do), being supplied (by nature,
      no doubt) with an ugly uncomfortable covering, a good deal like cloth, but
      fitting so tight to the skin, as to render the poor wretches laughably
      awkward, and put them apparently to severe pain. On the very tips of their
      heads were certain square-looking boxes, which, at first sight, I thought
      might have been intended to answer as turbans, but I soon discovered that
      they were excessively heavy and solid, and I therefore concluded they were
      contrivances designed, by their great weight, to keep the heads of the
      animals steady and safe upon their shoulders. Around the necks of the
      creatures were fastened black collars, (badges of servitude, no doubt,)
      such as we keep on our dogs, only much wider and infinitely stiffer, so
      that it was quite impossible for these poor victims to move their heads in
      any direction without moving the body at the same time; and thus they were
      doomed to perpetual contemplation of their noses—a view puggish and
      snubby in a wonderful, if not positively in an awful degree.

 “‘When the monster had nearly reached the shore where we
      stood, it suddenly pushed out one of its eyes to a great extent, and
      emitted from it a terrible flash of fire, accompanied by a dense cloud of
      smoke, and a noise that I can compare to nothing but thunder. As the smoke
      cleared away, we saw one of the odd man-animals standing near the head of
      the large beast with a trumpet in his hand, through which (putting it to
      his mouth) he presently addressed us in loud, harsh, and disagreeable
      accents, that, perhaps, we should have mistaken for language, had they not
      come altogether through the nose.

 “‘Being thus evidently spoken to, I was at a loss how to
      reply, as I could in no manner understand what was said; and in this
      difficulty I turned to the porter, who was near swooning through affright,
      and demanded of him his opinion as to what species of monster it was, what
      it wanted, and what kind of creatures those were that so swarmed upon its
      back. To this the porter replied, as well as he could for trepidation,
      that he had once before heard of this sea-beast; that it was a cruel
      demon, with bowels of sulphur and blood of fire, created by evil genii as
      the means of inflicting misery upon mankind; that the things upon its back
      were vermin, such as sometimes infest cats and dogs, only a little larger
      and more savage; and that these vermin had their uses, however evil—for,
      through the torture they caused the beast by their nibbling and stingings,
      it was goaded into that degree of wrath which was requisite to make it
      roar and commit ill, and so fulfil the vengeful and malicious designs of
      the wicked genii.

 “This account determined me to take to my heels, and, without once
      even looking behind me, I ran at full speed up into the hills, while the
      porter ran equally fast, although nearly in an opposite direction, so
      that, by these means, he finally made his escape with my bundles, of which
      I have no doubt he took excellent care—although this is a point I
      cannot determine, as I do not remember that I ever beheld him again.

 “‘For myself, I was so hotly pursued by a swarm of the
      men-vermin (who had come to the shore in boats) that I was very soon
      overtaken, bound hand and foot, and conveyed to the beast, which
      immediately swam out again into the middle of the sea.

 “‘I now bitterly repented my folly in quitting a comfortable
      home to peril my life in such adventures as this; but regret being
      useless, I made the best of my condition, and exerted myself to secure the
      goodwill of the man-animal that owned the trumpet, and who appeared to
      exercise authority over his fellows. I succeeded so well in this endeavor
      that, in a few days, the creature bestowed upon me various tokens of his
      favor, and in the end even went to the trouble of teaching me the
      rudiments of what it was vain enough to denominate its language; so that,
      at length, I was enabled to converse with it readily, and came to make it
      comprehend the ardent desire I had of seeing the world.

 “‘Washish squashish squeak, Sinbad, hey-diddle diddle, grunt
      unt grumble, hiss, fiss, whiss,’ said he to me, one day after dinner—but
      I beg a thousand pardons, I had forgotten that your majesty is not
      conversant with the dialect of the Cock-neighs (so the man-animals were
      called; I presume because their language formed the connecting 2148link
      between that of the horse and that of the rooster). With your permission,
      I will translate. ‘Washish squashish,’ and so forth:—that
      is to say, ‘I am happy to find, my dear Sinbad, that you are really
      a very excellent fellow; we are now about doing a thing which is called
      circumnavigating the globe; and since you are so desirous of seeing the
      world, I will strain a point and give you a free passage upon back of the
      beast.’”

 When the Lady Scheherazade had proceeded thus far, relates the “Isitsoornot,”
      the king turned over from his left side to his right, and said:

 “It is, in fact, very surprising, my dear queen, that you omitted,
      hitherto, these latter adventures of Sinbad. Do you know I think them
      exceedingly entertaining and strange?”

 The king having thus expressed himself, we are told, the fair Scheherazade
      resumed her history in the following words:

 “Sinbad went on in this manner with his narrative to the caliph—‘I
      thanked the man-animal for its kindness, and soon found myself very much
      at home on the beast, which swam at a prodigious rate through the ocean;
      although the surface of the latter is, in that part of the world, by no
      means flat, but round like a pomegranate, so that we went—so to say—either
      up hill or down hill all the time.’

 “That I think, was very singular,” interrupted the king.

 “Nevertheless, it is quite true,” replied Scheherazade.

 “I have my doubts,” rejoined the king; “but, pray, be so
      good as to go on with the story.”

 “I will,” said the queen. “‘The beast,’
      continued Sinbad to the caliph, ‘swam, as I have related, up hill
      and down hill until, at length, we arrived at an island, many hundreds of
      miles in circumference, but which, nevertheless, had been built in the
      middle of the sea by a colony of little things like caterpillars’”
      (*1)

 “Hum!” said the king.

 “‘Leaving this island,’ said Sinbad—(for
      Scheherazade, it must be understood, took no notice of her husband’s
      ill-mannered ejaculation) ‘leaving this island, we came to another
      where the forests were of solid stone, and so hard that they shivered to
      pieces the finest-tempered axes with which we endeavoured to cut them
      down.”’ (*2)

 “Hum!” said the king, again; but Scheherazade, paying him no
      attention, continued in the language of Sinbad.

 “‘Passing beyond this last island, we reached a country where
      there was a cave that ran to the distance of thirty or forty miles within
      the bowels of the earth, and that contained a greater number of far more
      spacious and more magnificent palaces than are to be found in all Damascus
      and Bagdad. From the roofs of these palaces there hung myriads of gems,
      like diamonds, but larger than men; and in among the streets of towers and
      pyramids and temples, there flowed immense rivers as black as ebony, and
      swarming with fish that had no eyes.’” (*3)

 “Hum!” said the king. “‘We then swam into a region
      of the sea where we found a lofty mountain, down whose sides there
      streamed torrents of melted metal, some of which were twelve miles wide
      and sixty miles long (*4); while from an abyss on the summit, issued so
      vast a quantity of ashes that the sun was entirely blotted out from the
      heavens, and it became darker than the darkest midnight; so that when we
      were even at the distance of a hundred and fifty miles from the mountain,
      it was impossible to see the whitest object, however close we held it to
      our eyes.’” (*5)

 “Hum!” said the king.

 “‘After quitting this coast, the beast continued his voyage
      until we met with a land in which the nature of things seemed reversed—for
      we here saw a great lake, at the bottom of which, more than a hundred feet
      beneath the surface of the water, there flourished in full leaf a forest
      of tall and luxuriant trees.’” (*6)

 “Hoo!” said the king.

 “Some hundred miles farther on brought us to a climate where the
      atmosphere was so dense as to sustain iron or steel, just as our own does
      feather.’” (*7)

 “Fiddle de dee,” said the king.

 “Proceeding still in the same direction, we presently arrived at the
      most magnificent region in the whole world. Through it there meandered a
      glorious river for several thousands of miles. This river was of
      unspeakable depth, and of a transparency richer than that of amber. It was
      from three to six miles in width; and its banks which arose on either side
      to twelve hundred feet in perpendicular height, were crowned with
      ever-blossoming trees and perpetual sweet-scented flowers, that made the
      whole territory one gorgeous garden; but the name of this luxuriant land
      was the Kingdom of Horror, and to enter it was inevitable death’”
      (*8)

 “Humph!” said the king.

 “‘We left this kingdom in great haste, and, after some days,
      came to another, where we were astonished to perceive myriads of monstrous
      animals with horns resembling scythes upon their heads. These hideous
      beasts dig for themselves vast caverns in the soil, of a funnel shape, and
      line the sides of them with rocks, so disposed one upon the other that
      they fall instantly, when trodden upon by other animals, thus
      precipitating them into the monster’s dens, where their blood is
      immediately sucked, and their carcasses afterwards hurled contemptuously
      out to an immense distance from “the caverns of death."’”
      (*9)

 “Pooh!” said the king.

 “‘Continuing our progress, we perceived a district with
      vegetables that grew not upon any soil but in the air. (*10) There were
      others that sprang from the substance of other vegetables; (*11) others
      that derived their substance from the bodies of living animals; (*12) and
      then again, there were others that glowed all over with intense fire;
      (*13) others that moved from place to place at pleasure, (*14) and what
      was still more wonderful, we discovered flowers that lived and breathed
      and moved their limbs at will and had, moreover, the detestable passion of
      mankind for enslaving other creatures, and confining them in horrid and
      solitary prisons until the fulfillment of appointed tasks.’”
      (*15)

 “Pshaw!” said the king.

 “‘Quitting this land, we soon arrived at another in which the
      bees and the birds are mathematicians of such genius and erudition, that
      they give daily instructions in the science of geometry to the wise men of
      the empire. The king of the place having offered a reward for the solution
      of two very difficult problems, they were solved upon the spot—the
      one by the bees, and the other by the birds; but the king keeping their
      solution a secret, it was only after the most profound researches and
      labor, and the writing of an infinity of big books, during a long series
      of years, that the men-mathematicians at length arrived at the identical
      solutions which had been given upon the spot by the bees and by the birds.’”
      (*16)

 “Oh my!” said the king.

 “‘We had scarcely lost sight of this empire when we found
      ourselves close upon another, from whose shores there flew over our heads
      a flock of fowls a mile in breadth, and two hundred and forty miles long;
      so that, although they flew a mile during every minute, it required no
      less than four hours for the whole flock to pass over us—in which
      there were several millions of millions of fowl.’” (*17)

 “Oh fy!” said the king.

 “‘No sooner had we got rid of these birds, which occasioned us
      great annoyance, than we were terrified by the appearance of a fowl of
      another kind, and infinitely larger than even the rocs which I met in my
      former voyages; for it was bigger than the biggest of the domes on your
      seraglio, oh, most Munificent of Caliphs. This terrible fowl had no head
      that we could perceive, but was fashioned entirely of belly, which was of
      a prodigious fatness and roundness, of a soft-looking substance, smooth,
      shining and striped with various colors. In its talons, the monster was
      bearing away to his eyrie in the heavens, a house from which it had
      knocked off the roof, and in the interior of which we distinctly saw human
      beings, who, beyond doubt, were in a state of frightful despair at the
      horrible fate which awaited them. We shouted with all our might, in the
      hope of frightening the bird into letting go of its prey, but it merely
      gave a snort or puff, as if of rage and then let fall upon our heads a
      heavy sack which proved to be filled with sand!’”

 “Stuff!” said the king.

 “‘It was just after this adventure that we encountered a
      continent of immense extent and prodigious solidity, but which,
      nevertheless, was supported entirely upon the back of a sky-blue cow that
      had no fewer than four hundred horns.’” (*18)

 “That, now, I believe,” said the king, “because I have
      read something of the kind before, in a book.”

 “‘We passed immediately beneath this continent, (swimming in
      between the legs of the cow), and, after some hours, found ourselves in a
      wonderful country indeed, which, I was informed by the man-animal, was his
      own native land, inhabited by things of his own species. This elevated the
      man-animal very much in my esteem, and in fact, I now began to feel
      ashamed of the contemptuous familiarity with which I had treated him; for
      I found that the man-animals in general were a nation of the most powerful
      magicians, who lived with worms in their brain, (*19) which, no doubt,
      served to stimulate them by their painful writhings and wrigglings to the
      most miraculous efforts of imagination!’”

 “Nonsense!” said the king.

 “‘Among the magicians, were domesticated several animals of
      very singular kinds; for example, there was a huge horse whose bones were
      iron and whose blood was boiling water. In place of corn, he had black
      stones for his usual food; and yet, in spite of so hard a diet, he was so
      strong and swift that he would drag a load more weighty than the grandest
      temple in this city, at a rate surpassing that of the flight of most
      birds.’” (*20)

 “Twattle!” said the king.

 “‘I saw, also, among these people a hen without feathers, but
      bigger than a camel; instead of flesh and bone she had iron and brick; her
      blood, like that of the horse, (to whom, in fact, she was nearly related,)
      was boiling water; and like him she ate nothing but wood or black stones.
      This hen brought forth very frequently, a hundred chickens in the day;
      and, after birth, they took up their residence for several weeks within
      the stomach of their mother.’” (*21)

 “Fa! lal!” said the king.

 “‘One of this nation of mighty conjurors created a man out of
      brass and wood, and leather, and endowed him with such ingenuity that he
      would have beaten at chess, all the race of mankind with the exception of
      the great Caliph, Haroun Alraschid. (*22) Another of these magi
      constructed (of like material) a creature that put to shame even the
      genius of him who made it; for so great were its reasoning powers that, in
      a second, it performed calculations of so vast an extent that they would
      have required the united labor of fifty thousand fleshy men for a year.
      (*23) But a still more wonderful conjuror fashioned for himself a mighty
      thing that was neither man nor beast, but which had brains of lead,
      intermixed with a black matter like pitch, and fingers that it employed
      with such incredible speed and dexterity that it would have had no trouble
      in writing out twenty thousand copies of the Koran in an hour, and this
      with so exquisite a precision, that in all the copies there should not be
      found one to vary from another by the breadth of the finest hair. This
      thing was of prodigious strength, so that it erected or overthrew the
      mightiest empires at a breath; but its powers were exercised equally for
      evil and for good.’”

 “Ridiculous!” said the king.

 “‘Among this nation of necromancers there was also one who had
      in his veins the blood of the salamanders; for he made no scruple of
      sitting down to smoke his chibouc in a red-hot oven until his dinner was
      thoroughly roasted upon its floor. (*24) Another had the faculty of
      converting the common metals into gold, without even looking at them
      during the process. (*25) Another had such a delicacy of touch that he
      made a wire so fine as to be invisible. (*26) Another had such quickness
      of perception that he counted all the separate motions of an elastic body,
      while it was springing backward and forward at the rate of nine hundred
      millions of times in a second.’” (*27)

 “Absurd!” said the king.

 “‘Another of these magicians, by means of a fluid that nobody
      ever yet saw, could make the corpses of his friends brandish their arms,
      kick out their legs, fight, or even get up and dance at his will. (*28)
      Another had cultivated his voice to so great an extent that he could have
      made himself heard from one end of the world to the other. (*29) Another
      had so long an arm that he could sit down in Damascus and indite a letter
      at Bagdad—or indeed at any distance whatsoever. (*30) Another
      commanded the lightning to come down to him out of the heavens, and it
      came at his call; and served him for a plaything when it came. Another
      took two loud sounds and out of them made a silence. Another constructed a
      deep darkness out of two brilliant lights. (*31) Another made ice in a
      red-hot furnace. (*32) Another directed the sun to paint his portrait, and
      the sun did. (*33) Another took this luminary with the moon and the
      planets, and having first weighed them with scrupulous accuracy, probed
      into their depths and found out the solidity of the substance of which
      they were made. But the whole nation is, indeed, of so surprising a
      necromantic ability, that not even their infants, nor their commonest cats
      and dogs have any difficulty in seeing objects that do not exist at all,
      or that for twenty millions of years before the birth of the nation itself
      had been blotted out from the face of creation.”’ (*34)

 “Preposterous!” said the king.

 “‘The wives and daughters of these incomparably great and wise
      magi,’” continued Scheherazade, without being in any manner
      disturbed by these frequent and most ungentlemanly interruptions on the
      part of her husband—“‘the wives and daughters of these
      eminent conjurers are every thing that is accomplished and refined; and
      would be every thing that is interesting and beautiful, but for an unhappy
      fatality that besets them, and from which not even the miraculous powers
      of their husbands and fathers has, hitherto, been adequate to save. Some
      fatalities come in certain shapes, and some in others—but this of
      which I speak has come in the shape of a crotchet.’”

 “A what?” said the king.

 “‘A crotchet’” said Scheherazade. “‘One
      of the evil genii, who are perpetually upon the watch to inflict ill, has
      put it into the heads of these accomplished ladies that the thing which we
      describe as personal beauty consists altogether in the protuberance of the
      region which lies not very far below the small of the back. Perfection of
      loveliness, they say, is in the direct ratio of the extent of this lump.
      Having been long possessed of this idea, and bolsters being cheap in that
      country, the days have long gone by since it was possible to distinguish a
      woman from a dromedary-’”

 “Stop!” said the king—“I can’t stand that,
      and I won’t. You have already given me a dreadful headache with your
      lies. The day, too, I perceive, is beginning to break. How long have we
      been married?—my conscience is getting to be troublesome again. And
      then that dromedary touch—do you take me for a fool? Upon the whole,
      you might as well get up and be throttled.”

 These words, as I learn from the “Isitsoornot,” both grieved
      and astonished Scheherazade; but, as she knew the king to be a man of
      scrupulous integrity, and quite unlikely to forfeit his word, she
      submitted to her fate with a good grace. She derived, however, great
      consolation, (during the tightening of the bowstring,) from the reflection
      that much of the history remained still untold, and that the petulance of
      her brute of a husband had reaped for him a most righteous reward, in
      depriving him of many inconceivable adventures.