THE PARROT

 I

 Everybody in Fecamp knew Mother Patin's story. She had certainly been
      unfortunate with her husband, for in his lifetime he used to beat her,
      just as wheat is threshed in the barn.

 He was master of a fishing bark and had married her, formerly, because she
      was pretty, although poor.

 Patin was a good sailor, but brutal. He used to frequent Father Auban's
      inn, where he would usually drink four or five glasses of brandy, on lucky
      days eight or ten glasses and even more, according to his mood. The brandy
      was served to the customers by Father Auban's daughter, a pleasing
      brunette, who attracted people to the house only by her pretty face, for
      nothing had ever been gossiped about her.

 Patin, when he entered the inn, would be satisfied to look at her and to
      compliment her politely and respectfully. After he had had his first glass
      of brandy he would already find her much nicer; at the second he would
      wink; at the third he would say. “If you were only willing,
      Mam'zelle Desiree——” without ever finishing his
      sentence; at the fourth he would try to hold her back by her skirt in
      order to kiss her; and when he went as high as ten it was Father Auban who
      brought him the remaining drinks.

 The old innkeeper, who knew all the tricks of the trade, made Desiree walk
      about between the tables in order to increase the consumption of drinks;
      and Desiree, who was a worthy daughter of Father Auban, flitted around
      among the benches and joked with them, her lips smiling and her eyes
      sparkling.

 Patin got so well accustomed to Desiree's face that he thought of it even
      while at sea, when throwing out his nets, in storms or in calms, on
      moonlit or dark evenings. He thought of her while holding the tiller in
      the stern of his boat, while his four companions were slumbering with
      their heads on their arms. He always saw her, smiling, pouring out the
      yellow brandy with a peculiar shoulder movement and then exclaiming as she
      turned away: “There, now; are you satisfied?”

 He saw her so much in his mind's eye that he was overcome by an
      irresistible desire to marry her, and, not being able to hold out any
      longer, he asked for her hand.

 He was rich, owned his own vessel, his nets and a little house at the foot
      of the hill on the Retenue, whereas Father Auban had nothing. The marriage
      was therefore eagerly agreed upon and the wedding took place as soon as
      possible, as both parties were desirous for the affair to be concluded as
      early as convenient.

 Three days after the wedding Patin could no longer understand how he had
      ever imagined Desiree to be different from other women. What a fool he had
      been to encumber himself with a penniless creature, who had undoubtedly
      inveigled him with some drug which she had put in his brandy!

 He would curse all day lung, break his pipe with his teeth and maul his
      crew. After he had sworn by every known term at everything that came his
      way he would rid himself of his remaining anger on the fish and lobsters,
      which he pulled from the nets and threw into the baskets amid oaths and
      foul language. When he returned home he would find his wife, Father
      Auban's daughter, within reach of his mouth and hand, and it was not long
      before he treated her like the lowest creature in the world. As she
      listened calmly, accustomed to paternal violence, he grew exasperated at
      her quiet, and one evening he beat her. Then life at his home became
      unbearable.

 For ten years the principal topic of conversation on the Retenue was about
      the beatings that Patin gave his wife and his manner of cursing at her for
      the least thing. He could, indeed, curse with a richness of vocabulary in
      a roundness of tone unequalled by any other man in Fecamp. As soon as his
      ship was sighted at the entrance of the harbor, returning from the fishing
      expedition, every one awaited the first volley he would hurl from the
      bridge as soon as he perceived his wife's white cap.

 Standing at the stern he would steer, his eye fixed on the bows and on the
      sail, and, notwithstanding the difficulty of the narrow passage and the
      height of the turbulent waves, he would search among the watching women
      and try to recognize his wife, Father Auban's daughter, the wretch!

 Then, as soon as he saw her, notwithstanding the noise of the wind and
      waves, he would let loose upon her with such power and volubility that
      every one would laugh, although they pitied her greatly. When he arrived
      at the dock he would relieve his mind, while unloading the fish, in such
      an expressive manner that he attracted around him all the loafers of the
      neighborhood. The words left his mouth sometimes like shots from a cannon,
      short and terrible, sometimes like peals of thunder, which roll and rumble
      for five minutes, such a hurricane of oaths that he seemed to have in his
      lungs one of the storms of the Eternal Father.

 When he left his ship and found himself face to face with her, surrounded
      by all the gossips of the neighborhood, he would bring up a new cargo of
      insults and bring her back to their dwelling, she in front, he behind, she
      weeping, he yelling at her.

 At last, when alone with her behind closed doors, he would thrash her on
      the slightest pretext. The least thing was sufficient to make him raise
      his hand, and when he had once begun he did not stop, but he would throw
      into her face the true motive for his anger. At each blow he would roar:
      “There, you beggar! There, you wretch! There, you pauper! What a
      bright thing I did when I rinsed my mouth with your rascal of a father's
      apology for brandy.”

 The poor woman lived in continual fear, in a ceaseless trembling of body
      and soul, in everlasting expectation of outrageous thrashings.

 This lasted ten years. She was so timorous that she would grow pale
      whenever she spoke to any one, and she thought of nothing but the blows
      with which she was threatened; and she became thinner, more yellow and
      drier than a smoked fish.

 II

 One night, when her husband was at sea, she was suddenly awakened by the
      wild roaring of the wind!

 She sat up in her bed, trembling, but, as she hear nothing more, she lay
      down again; almost immediately there was a roar in the chimney which shook
      the entire house; it seemed to cross the heavens like a pack of furious
      animals snorting and roaring.

 Then she arose and rushed to the harbor. Other women were arriving from
      all sides, carrying lanterns. The men also were gathering, and all were
      watching the foaming crests of the breaking wave.

 The storm lasted fifteen hours. Eleven sailors never returned; Patin was
      among them.

 In the neighborhood of Dieppe the wreck of his bark, the Jeune-Amelie, was
      found. The bodies of his sailors were found near Saint-Valery, but his
      body was never recovered. As his vessel seemed to have been cut in two,
      his wife expected and feared his return for a long time, for if there had
      been a collision he alone might have been picked up and carried afar off.

 Little by little she grew accustomed to the thought that she was rid of
      him, although she would start every time that a neighbor, a beggar or a
      peddler would enter suddenly.

 One afternoon, about four years after the disappearance of her husband,
      while she was walking along the Rue aux Juifs, she stopped before the
      house of an old sea captain who had recently died and whose furniture was
      for sale. Just at that moment a parrot was at auction. He had green
      feathers and a blue head and was watching everybody with a displeased
      look. “Three francs!” cried the auctioneer. “A bird that
      can talk like a lawyer, three francs!”

 A friend of the Patin woman nudged her and said:

 “You ought to buy that, you who are rich. It would be good company
      for you. That bird is worth more than thirty francs. Anyhow, you can
      always sell it for twenty or twenty-five!”

 Patin's widow added fifty centimes, and the bird was given her in a little
      cage, which she carried away. She took it home, and, as she was opening
      the wire door in order to give it something to drink, he bit her finger
      and drew blood.

 “Oh, how naughty he is!” she said.

 Nevertheless she gave it some hemp-seed and corn and watched it pruning
      its feathers as it glanced warily at its new home and its new mistress. On
      the following morning, just as day was breaking, the Patin woman
      distinctly heard a loud, deep, roaring voice calling: “Are you going
      to get up, carrion?”

 Her fear was so great that she hid her head under the sheets, for when
      Patin was with her as soon as he would open his eyes he would shout those
      well-known words into her ears.

 Trembling, rolled into a ball, her back prepared for the thrashing which
      she already expected, her face buried in the pillows, she murmured:
      “Good Lord! he is here! Good Lord! he is here! Good Lord! he has
      come back!”

 Minutes passed; no noise disturbed the quiet room. Then, trembling, she
      stuck her head out of the bed, sure that he was there, watching, ready to
      beat her. Except for a ray of sun shining through the window, she saw
      nothing, and she said to her self: “He must be hidden.”

 She waited a long time and then, gaining courage, she said to herself:
      “I must have dreamed it, seeing there is nobody here.”

 A little reassured, she closed her eyes, when from quite near a furious
      voice, the thunderous voice of the drowned man, could be heard crying:
      “Say! when in the name of all that's holy are you going to get up,
      you b——?”

 She jumped out of bed, moved by obedience, by the passive obedience of a
      woman accustomed to blows and who still remembers and always will remember
      that voice! She said: “Here I am, Patin; what do you want?”

 Put Patin did not answer. Then, at a complete loss, she looked around her,
      then in the chimney and under the bed and finally sank into a chair, wild
      with anxiety, convinced that Patin's soul alone was there, near her, and
      that he had returned in order to torture her.

 Suddenly she remembered the loft, in order to reach which one had to take
      a ladder. Surely he must have hidden there in order to surprise her. He
      must have been held by savages on some distant shore, unable to escape
      until now, and he had returned, worse that ever. There was no doubting the
      quality of that voice. She raised her head and asked: “Are you up
      there, Patin?”

 Patin did not answer. Then, with a terrible fear which made her heart
      tremble, she climbed the ladder, opened the skylight, looked, saw nothing,
      entered, looked about and found nothing. Sitting on some straw, she began
      to cry, but while she was weeping, overcome by a poignant and supernatural
      terror, she heard Patin talking in the room below.

 He seemed less angry and he was saying: “Nasty weather! Fierce wind!
      Nasty weather! I haven't eaten, damn it!”

 She cried through the ceiling: “Here I am, Patin; I am getting your
      meal ready. Don't get angry.”

 She ran down again. There was no one in the room. She felt herself growing
      weak, as if death were touching her, and she tried to run and get help
      from the neighbors, when a voice near her cried out: “I haven't had
      my breakfast, by G—!”

 And the parrot in his cage watched her with his round, knowing, wicked
      eye. She, too, looked at him wildly, murmuring: “Ah! so it's you!”

 He shook his head and continued: “Just you wait! I'll teach you how
      to loaf.”

 What happened within her? She felt, she understood that it was he, the
      dead man, who had come back, who had disguised himself in the feathers of
      this bird in order to continue to torment her; that he would curse, as
      formerly, all day long, and bite her, and swear at her, in order to
      attract the neighbors and make them laugh. Then she rushed for the cage
      and seized the bird, which scratched and tore her flesh with its claws and
      beak. But she held it with all her strength between her hands. She threw
      it on the ground and rolled over it with the frenzy of one possessed. She
      crushed it and finally made of it nothing but a little green, flabby lump
      which no longer moved or spoke. Then she wrapped it in a cloth, as in a
      shroud, and she went out in her nightgown, barefoot; she crossed the dock,
      against which the choppy waves of the sea were beating, and she shook the
      cloth and let drop this little, dead thing, which looked like so much
      grass. Then she returned, threw herself on her knees before the empty
      cage, and, overcome by what she had done, kneeled and prayed for
      forgiveness, as if she had committed some heinous crime.