THE GAMEKEEPER

 It was after dinner, and we were talking about adventures and accidents
      which happened while out shooting.

 An old friend, known to all of us, M. Boniface, a great sportsman and a
      connoisseur of wine, a man of wonderful physique, witty and gay, and
      endowed with an ironical and resigned philosophy, which manifested itself
      in caustic humor, and never in melancholy, suddenly exclaimed:

 “I know a story, or rather a tragedy, which is somewhat peculiar. It
      is not at all like those which one hears of usually, and I have never told
      it, thinking that it would interest no one.

 “It is not at all sympathetic. I mean by that, that it does not
      arouse the kind of interest which pleases or which moves one agreeably.

 “Here is the story:

 “I was then about thirty-five years of age, and a most enthusiastic
      sportsman.

 “In those days I owned a lonely bit of property in the neighborhood
      of Jumieges, surrounded by forests and abounding in hares and rabbits. I
      was accustomed to spending four or five days alone there each year, there
      not being room enough to allow of my bringing a friend with me.

 “I had placed there as gamekeeper, an old retired gendarme, a good
      man, hot-tempered, a severe disciplinarian, a terror to poachers and
      fearing nothing. He lived all alone, far from the village, in a little
      house, or rather hut, consisting of two rooms downstairs, with kitchen and
      store-room, and two upstairs. One of them, a kind of box just large enough
      to accommodate a bed, a cupboard and a chair, was reserved for my use.

 “Old man Cavalier lived in the other one. When I said that he was
      alone in this place, I was wrong. He had taken his nephew with him, a
      young scamp about fourteen years old, who used to go to the village and
      run errands for the old man.

 “This young scapegrace was long and lanky, with yellow hair, so
      light that it resembled the fluff of a plucked chicken, so thin that he
      seemed bald. Besides this, he had enormous feet and the hands of a giant.

 “He was cross-eyed, and never looked at anyone. He struck me as
      being in the same relation to the human race as ill-smelling beasts are to
      the animal race. He reminded me of a polecat.

 “He slept in a kind of hole at the top of the stairs which led to
      the two rooms.

 “But during my short sojourns at the Pavilion—so I called the
      hut —Marius would give up his nook to an old woman from
      Ecorcheville, called Celeste, who used to come and cook for me, as old man
      Cavalier's stews were not sufficient for my healthy appetite.

 “You now know the characters and the locality. Here is the story:

 “It was on the fifteenth of October, 1854—I shall remember
      that date as long as I live.

 “I left Rouen on horseback, followed by my dog Bock, a big Dalmatian
      hound from Poitou, full-chested and with a heavy jaw, which could retrieve
      among the bushes like a Pont-Andemer spaniel.

 “I was carrying my satchel slung across my back and my gun
      diagonally across my chest. It was a cold, windy, gloomy day, with clouds
      scurrying across the sky.

 “As I went up the hill at Canteleu, I looked over the broad valley
      of the Seine, the river winding in and out along its course as far as the
      eye could see. To the right the towers of Rouen stood out against the sky,
      and to the left the landscape was bounded by the distant slopes covered
      with trees. Then I crossed the forest of Roumare and, toward five o'clock,
      reached the Pavilion, where Cavalier and Celeste were expecting me.

 “For ten years I had appeared there at the same time, in the same
      manner; and for ten years the same faces had greeted me with the same
      words:

 “'Welcome, master! We hope your health is good.'

 “Cavalier had hardly changed. He withstood time like an old tree;
      but Celeste, especially in the past four years, had become unrecognizable.

 “She was bent almost double, and, although still active, when she
      walked her body was almost at right angles to her legs.

 “The old woman, who was very devoted to me, always seemed affected
      at seeing me again, and each time, as I left, she would say:

 “'This may be the last time, master.'

 “The sad, timid farewell of this old servant, this hopeless
      resignation to the inevitable fate which was not far off for her, moved me
      strangely each year.

 “I dismounted, and while Cavalier, whom I had greeted, was leading
      my horse to the little shed which served as a stable, I entered the
      kitchen, which also served as dining-room, followed by Celeste.

 “Here the gamekeeper joined us. I saw at first glance that something
      was the matter. He seemed preoccupied, ill at ease, worried.

 “I said to him:

 “'Well, Cavalier, is everything all right?'

 “He muttered:

 “'Yes and no. There are things I don't like.'

 “I asked:

 “'What? Tell me about it.'

 “But he shook his head.

 “'No, not yet, monsieur. I do not wish to bother you with my little
      troubles so soon after your arrival.'

 “I insisted, but he absolutely refused to give me any information
      before dinner. From his expression, I could tell that it was something
      very serious.

 “Not knowing what to say to him, I asked:

 “'How about game? Much of it this year?'

 “'Oh, yes! You'll find all you want. Thank heaven, I looked out for
      that.'

 “He said this with so much seriousness, with such sad solemnity,
      that it was really almost funny. His big gray mustache seemed almost ready
      to drop from his lips.

 “Suddenly I remembered that I had not yet seen his nephew.

 “'Where is Marius? Why does he not show himself?'

 “The gamekeeper started, looking me suddenly in the face:

 “Well, monsieur, I had rather tell you the whole business right
      away; it's on account of him that I am worrying.'

 “'Ah! Well, where is he?'

 “'Over in the stable, monsieur. I was waiting for the right time to
      bring him out.'

 “'What has he done?'

 “'Well, monsieur——'

 “The gamekeeper, however, hesitated, his voice altered and shaky,
      his face suddenly furrowed by the deep lines of an old man.

 “He continued slowly:

 “'Well, I found out, last winter, that someone was poaching in the
      woods of Roseraies, but I couldn't seem to catch the man. I spent night
      after night on the lookout for him. In vain. During that time they began
      poaching over by Ecorcheville. I was growing thin from vexation. But as
      for catching the trespasser, impossible! One might have thought that the
      rascal was forewarned of my plans.

 “'But one day, while I was brushing Marius' Sunday trousers, I found
      forty cents in his pocket. Where did he get it?

 “'I thought the matter over for about a week, and I noticed that he
      used to go out; he would leave the house just as I was coming home to go
      to bed—yes, monsieur.

 “'Then I started to watch him, without the slightest suspicion of
      the real facts. One morning, just after I had gone to bed before him, I
      got right up again, and followed him. For shadowing a man, there is nobody
      like me, monsieur.

 “'And I caught him, Marius, poaching on your land, monsieur; he my
      nephew, I your keeper!

 “'The blood rushed to my head, and I almost killed him on the spot,
      I hit him so hard. Oh! yes, I thrashed him all right. And I promised him
      that he would get another beating from my hand, in your presence, as an
      example.

 “'There! I have grown thin from sorrow. You know how it is when one
      is worried like that. But tell me, what would you have done? The boy has
      no father or mother, and I am the last one of his blood; I kept him, I
      couldn't drive him out, could I?

 “'I told him that if it happened again I would have no more pity for
      him, all would be over. There! Did I do right, monsieur?'

 “I answered, holding out my hand:

 “'You did well, Cavalier; you are an honest man.'

 “He rose.

 “'Thank you, monsieur. Now I am going to fetch him. I must give him
      his thrashing, as an example.'

 “I knew that it was hopeless to try and turn the old man from his
      idea. I therefore let him have his own way.

 “He got the rascal and brought him back by the ear.

 “I was seated on a cane chair, with the solemn expression of a
      judge.

 “Marius seemed to have grown; he was homelier even than the year
      before, with his evil, sneaking expression.

 “His big hands seemed gigantic.

 “His uncle pushed him up to me, and, in his soldierly voice, said:

 “'Beg the gentleman's pardon.'

 “The boy didn't say a word.

 “Then putting one arm round him, the former gendarme lifted him
      right off the ground, and began to whack him with such force that I rose
      to stop the blows.

 “The boy was now howling: 'Mercy! mercy! mercy! I promise——'

 “Cavalier put him back on the ground and forced him to his knees:

 “'Beg for pardon,' he said.

 “With eyes lowered, the scamp murmured:

 “'I ask for pardon!'

 “Then his uncle lifted him to his feet, and dismissed him with a
      cuff which almost knocked him down again.

 “He made his escape, and I did not see him again that evening.

 “Cavalier appeared overwhelmed.'

 “'He is a bad egg,' he said.

 “And throughout the whole dinner, he kept repeating:

 “'Oh! that worries me, monsieur, that worries me.'

 “I tried to comfort him, but in vain.

 “I went to bed early, so that I might start out at daybreak.

 “My dog was already asleep on the floor, at the foot of my bed, when
      I put out the light.

 “I was awakened toward midnight by the furious barking of my dog
      Bock. I immediately noticed that my room was full of smoke. I jumped out
      of bed, struck a light, ran to the door and opened it. A cloud of flames
      burst in. The house was on fire.

 “I quickly closed the heavy oak door and, drawing on my trousers, I
      first lowered the dog through the window, by means of a rope made of my
      sheets; then, having thrown out the rest of my clothes, my game-bag and my
      gun, I in turn escaped the same way.

 “I began to shout with all my might: 'Cavalier! Cavalier! Cavalier!'

 “But the gamekeeper did not wake up. He slept soundly like an old
      gendarme.

 “However, I could see through the lower windows that the whole
      ground-floor was nothing but a roaring furnace; I also noticed that it had
      been filled with straw to make it burn readily.

 “Somebody must purposely have set fire to the place!

 “I continued shrieking wildly: 'Cavalier!'

 “Then the thought struck me that the smoke might be suffocating him.
      An idea came to me. I slipped two cartridges into my gun, and shot
      straight at his window.

 “The six panes of glass shattered into the room in a cloud of glass.
      This time the old man had heard me, and he appeared, dazed, in his
      nightshirt, bewildered by the glare which illumined the whole front of his
      'house.

 “I cried to him:

 “'Your house is on fire! Escape through the window! Quick! Quick!'

 “The flames were coming out through all the cracks downstairs, were
      licking along the wall, were creeping toward him and going to surround
      him. He jumped and landed on his feet, like a cat.

 “It was none too soon. The thatched roof cracked in the middle,
      right over the staircase, which formed a kind of flue for the fire
      downstairs; and an immense red jet jumped up into the air, spreading like
      a stream of water and sprinkling a shower of sparks around the hut. In a
      few seconds it was nothing but a pool of flames.

 “Cavalier, thunderstruck, asked:

 “'How did the fire start?'

 “I answered:

 “'Somebody lit it in the kitchen.'

 “He muttered:

 “'Who could have started the fire?'

 “And I, suddenly guessing, answered:

 “'Marius!'

 “The old man understood. He stammered:

 “'Good God! That is why he didn't return.'

 “A terrible thought flashed through my mind. I cried:

 “'And Celeste! Celeste!'

 “He did not answer. The house caved in before us, forming only an
      enormous, bright, blinding brazier, an awe-inspiring funeral-pile, where
      the poor woman could no longer be anything but a glowing ember, a glowing
      ember of human flesh.

 “We had not heard a single cry.

 “As the fire crept toward the shed, I suddenly bethought me of my
      horse, and Cavalier ran to free it.

 “Hardly had he opened the door of the stable, when a supple, nimble
      body darted between his legs, and threw him on his face. It was Marius,
      running for all he was worth.

 “The man was up in a second. He tried to run after the wretch, but,
      seeing that he could not catch him, and maddened by an irresistible anger,
      yielding to one of those thoughtless impulses which we cannot foresee or
      prevent, he picked up my gun, which was lying on the ground. near him, put
      it to his shoulder, and, before I could make a motion, he pulled the
      trigger without even noticing whether or not the weapon was loaded.

 “One of the cartridges which I had put in to announce the fire was
      still intact, and the charge caught the fugitive right in the back,—throwing
      him forward on the ground, bleeding profusely. He immediately began to
      claw the earth with his hands and with his knees, as though trying to run
      on all fours like a rabbit who has been mortally wounded, and sees the
      hunter approaching.

 “I rushed forward to the boy, but I could already hear the
      death-rattle. He passed away before the fire was extinguished, without
      having said a word.

 “Cavalier, still in his shirt, his legs bare, was standing near us,
      motionless, dazed.

 “When the people from the village arrived, my gamekeeper was taken
      away, like an insane man.

 “I appeared at the trial as witness, and related the facts in
      detail, without changing a thing. Cavalier was acquitted. He disappeared
      that very day, leaving the country.

 “I have never seen him since.

 “There, gentlemen, that is my story.”