THE BLIND MAN

 How is it that the sunlight gives us such joy? Why does this radiance when
      it falls on the earth fill us with the joy of living? The whole sky is
      blue, the fields are green, the houses all white, and our enchanted eyes
      drink in those bright colors which bring delight to our souls. And then
      there springs up in our hearts a desire to dance, to run, to sing, a happy
      lightness of thought, a sort of enlarged tenderness; we feel a longing to
      embrace the sun.

 The blind, as they sit in the doorways, impassive in their eternal
      darkness, remain as calm as ever in the midst of this fresh gaiety, and,
      not understanding what is taking place around them, they continually check
      their dogs as they attempt to play.

 When, at the close of the day, they are returning home on the arm of a
      young brother or a little sister, if the child says: “It was a very
      fine day!” the other answers: “I could notice that it was
      fine. Loulou wouldn't keep quiet.”

 I knew one of these men whose life was one of the most cruel martyrdoms
      that could possibly be conceived.

 He was a peasant, the son of a Norman farmer. As long as his father and
      mother lived, he was more or less taken care of; he suffered little save
      from his horrible infirmity; but as soon as the old people were gone, an
      atrocious life of misery commenced for him. Dependent on a sister of his,
      everybody in the farmhouse treated him as a beggar who is eating the bread
      of strangers. At every meal the very food he swallowed was made a subject
      of reproach against him; he was called a drone, a clown, and although his
      brother-in-law had taken possession of his portion of the inheritance, he
      was helped grudgingly to soup, getting just enough to save him from
      starving.

 His face was very pale and his two big white eyes looked like wafers. He
      remained unmoved at all the insults hurled at him, so reserved that one
      could not tell whether he felt them.

 Moreover, he had never known any tenderness, his mother having always
      treated him unkindly and caring very little for him; for in country places
      useless persons are considered a nuisance, and the peasants would be glad
      to kill the infirm of their species, as poultry do.

 As soon as he finished his soup he went and sat outside the door in summer
      and in winter beside the fireside, and did not stir again all the evening.
      He made no gesture, no movement; only his eyelids, quivering from some
      nervous affection, fell down sometimes over his white, sightless orbs. Had
      he any intellect, any thinking faculty, any consciousness of his own
      existence? Nobody cared to inquire.

 For some years things went on in this fashion. But his incapacity for work
      as well as his impassiveness eventually exasperated his relatives, and he
      became a laughingstock, a sort of butt for merriment, a prey to the inborn
      ferocity, to the savage gaiety of the brutes who surrounded him.

 It is easy to imagine all the cruel practical jokes inspired by his
      blindness. And, in order to have some fun in return for feeding him, they
      now converted his meals into hours of pleasure for the neighbors and of
      punishment for the helpless creature himself.

 The peasants from the nearest houses came to this entertainment; it was
      talked about from door to door, and every day the kitchen of the farmhouse
      was full of people. Sometimes they placed before his plate, when he was
      beginning to eat his soup, some cat or dog. The animal instinctively
      perceived the man's infirmity, and, softly approaching, commenced eating
      noiselessly, lapping up the soup daintily; and, when they lapped the food
      rather noisily, rousing the poor fellow's attention, they would prudently
      scamper away to avoid the blow of the spoon directed at random by the
      blind man!

 Then the spectators ranged along the wall would burst out laughing, nudge
      each other and stamp their feet on the floor. And he, without ever
      uttering a word, would continue eating with his right hand, while
      stretching out his left to protect his plate.

 Another time they made him chew corks, bits of wood, leaves or even filth,
      which he was unable to distinguish.

 After this they got tired even of these practical jokes, and the
      brother-in-law, angry at having to support him always, struck him, cuffed
      him incessantly, laughing at his futile efforts to ward off or return the
      blows. Then came a new pleasure—the pleasure of smacking his face.
      And the plough-men, the servant girls and even every passing vagabond were
      every moment giving him cuffs, which caused his eyelashes to twitch
      spasmodically. He did not know where to hide himself and remained with his
      arms always held out to guard against people coming too close to him.

 At last he was forced to beg.

 He was placed somewhere on the high-road on market-days, and as soon as he
      heard the sound of footsteps or the rolling of a vehicle, he reached out
      his hat, stammering:

 “Charity, if you please!”

 But the peasant is not lavish, and for whole weeks he did not bring back a
      sou.

 Then he became the victim of furious, pitiless hatred. And this is how he
      died.

 One winter the ground was covered with snow, and it was freezing hard. His
      brother-in-law led him one morning a great distance along the high road in
      order that he might solicit alms. The blind man was left there all day;
      and when night came on, the brother-in-law told the people of his house
      that he could find no trace of the mendicant. Then he added:

 “Pooh! best not bother about him! He was cold and got someone to
      take him away. Never fear! he's not lost. He'll turn up soon enough
      tomorrow to eat the soup.”

 Next day he did not come back.

 After long hours of waiting, stiffened with the cold, feeling that he was
      dying, the blind man began to walk. Being unable to find his way along the
      road, owing to its thick coating of ice, he went on at random, falling
      into ditches, getting up again, without uttering a sound, his sole object
      being to find some house where he could take shelter.

 But, by degrees, the descending snow made a numbness steal over him, and
      his feeble limbs being incapable of carrying him farther, he sat down in
      the middle of an open field. He did not get up again.

 The white flakes which fell continuously buried him, so that his body,
      quite stiff and stark, disappeared under the incessant accumulation of
      their rapidly thickening mass, and nothing was left to indicate the place
      where he lay.

 His relatives made a pretence of inquiring about him and searching for him
      for about a week. They even made a show of weeping.

 The winter was severe, and the thaw did not set in quickly. Now, one
      Sunday, on their way to mass, the farmers noticed a great flight of crows,
      who were whirling incessantly above the open field, and then descending
      like a shower of black rain at the same spot, ever going and coming.

 The following week these gloomy birds were still there. There was a crowd
      of them up in the air, as if they had gathered from all corners of the
      horizon, and they swooped down with a great cawing into the shining snow,
      which they covered like black patches, and in which they kept pecking
      obstinately. A young fellow went to see what they were doing and
      discovered the body of the blind man, already half devoured, mangled. His
      wan eyes had disappeared, pecked out by the long, voracious beaks.

 And I can never feel the glad radiance of sunlit days without sadly
      remembering and pondering over the fate of the beggar who was such an
      outcast in life that his horrible death was a relief to all who had known
      him.