THE MOUNTAIN POOL
    

                  Saint Agnes, May 6.
MY DEAR FRIEND:
You asked me to write to you often and to tell you in particular about
the things I might see. You also begged me to rummage among my
recollections of travels for some of those little anecdotes gathered from
a chance peasant, from an innkeeper, from some strange traveling
acquaintance, which remain as landmarks in the memory. With a landscape
depicted in a few lines, and a little story told in a few sentences you
think one can give the true characteristics of a country, make it living,
visible, dramatic. I will try to do as you wish. I will, therefore,
send you from time to time letters in which I will mention neither you
nor myself, but only the landscape and the people who move about in it.
And now I will begin.


      Spring is a season in which one ought, it seems to me, to drink and eat
      the landscape. It is the season of chills, just as autumn is the season of
      reflection. In spring the country rouses the physical senses, in autumn it
      enters into the soul.
    

      I desired this year to breathe the odor of orange blossoms and I set out
      for the South of France just at the time that every one else was returning
      home. I visited Monaco, the shrine of pilgrims, rival of Mecca and
      Jerusalem, without leaving any gold in any one else's pockets, and I
      climbed the high mountain beneath a covering of lemon, orange and olive
      branches.
    

      Have you ever slept, my friend, in a grove of orange trees in flower? The
      air that one inhales with delight is a quintessence of perfumes. The
      strong yet sweet odor, delicious as some dainty, seems to blend with our
      being, to saturate us, to intoxicate us, to enervate us, to plunge us into
      a sleepy, dreamy torpor. As though it were an opium prepared by the hands
      of fairies and not by those of druggists.
    

      This is a country of ravines. The surface of the mountains is cleft,
      hollowed out in all directions, and in these sinuous crevices grow
      veritable forests of lemon trees. Here and there where the steep gorge is
      interrupted by a sort of step, a kind of reservoir has been built which
      holds the water of the rain storms.
    

      They are large holes with slippery walls with nothing for any one to grasp
      hold of should they fall in.
    

      I was walking slowly in one of these ascending valleys or gorges, glancing
      through the foliage at the vivid-hued fruit that remained on the branches.
      The narrow gorge made the heavy odor of the flowers still more
      penetrating; the air seemed to be dense with it. A feeling of lassitude
      came over me and I looked for a place to sit down. A few drops of water
      glistened in the grass. I thought that there was a spring near by and I
      climbed a little further to look for it. But I only reached the edge of
      one of these large, deep reservoirs.
    

      I sat down tailor fashion, with my legs crossed under me, and remained
      there in a reverie before this hole, which looked as if it were filled
      with ink, so black and stagnant was the liquid it contained. Down yonder,
      through the branches, I saw, like patches, bits of the Mediterranean
      gleaming so that they fairly dazzled my eyes. But my glance always
      returned to the immense somber well that appeared to be inhabited by no
      aquatic animals, so motionless was its surface. Suddenly a voice made me
      tremble. An old gentleman who was picking flowers—this country is
      the richest in Europe for herbalists—asked me:
    

      “Are you a relation of those poor children, monsieur?”
    

      I looked at him in astonishment.
    

      “What children, monsieur?”
    

      He seemed embarrassed and answered with a bow:
    

      “I beg your pardon. On seeing you sitting thus absorbed in front of
      this reservoir I thought you were recalling the frightful tragedy that
      occurred here.”
    

      Now I wanted to know about it, and I begged him to tell me the story.
    

      It is very dismal and very heart-rending, my dear friend, and very trivial
      at the same time. It is a simple news item. I do not know whether to
      attribute my emotion to the dramatic manner in which the story was told to
      me, to the setting of the mountains, to the contrast between the joy of
      the sunlight and the flowers and this black, murderous hole, but my heart
      was wrung, all my nerves unstrung by this tale which, perhaps, may not
      appear so terribly harrowing to you as you read it in your room without
      having the scene of the tragedy before your eyes.
    

      It was one spring in recent years. Two little boys frequently came to play
      on the edge of this cistern while their tutor lay under a tree reading a
      book. One warm afternoon a piercing cry awoke the tutor who was dozing and
      the sound of splashing caused by something falling into the water made him
      jump to his feet abruptly. The younger of the children, eight years of
      age, was shouting, as he stood beside the reservoir, the surface of which
      was stirred and eddying at the spot where the older boy had fallen in as
      he ran along the stone coping.
    

      Distracted, without waiting or stopping to think what was best to do, the
      tutor jumped into the black water and did not rise again, having struck
      his head at the bottom of the cistern.
    

      At the same moment the young boy who had risen to the surface was waving
      his stretched-out arms toward his brother. The little fellow on land lay
      down full length, while the other tried to swim, to approach the wall, and
      presently the four little hands clasped each other, tightened in each
      other's grasp, contracted as though they were fastened together. They both
      felt the intense joy of an escape from death, a shudder at the danger
      past.
    

      The older boy tried to climb up to the edge, but could not manage it, as
      the wall was perpendicular, and his brother, who was too weak, was sliding
      slowly towards the hole.
    

      Then they remained motionless, filled anew with terror. And they waited.
    

      The little fellow squeezed his brother's hands with all his might and wept
      from nervousness as he repeated: “I cannot drag you out, I cannot
      drag you out.” And all at once he began to shout, “Help! Help!”
      But his light voice scarcely penetrated beyond the dome of foliage above
      their heads.
    

      They remained thus a long time, hours and hours, facing each other, these
      two children, with one thought, one anguish of heart and the horrible
      dread that one of them, exhausted, might let go the hands of the other.
      And they kept on calling, but all in vain.
    

      At length the older boy, who was shivering with cold, said to the little
      one: “I cannot hold out any longer. I am going to fall. Good-by,
      little brother.” And the other, gasping, replied: “Not yet,
      not yet, wait.”
    

      Evening came on, the still evening with its stars mirrored in the water.
      The older lad, his endurance giving out, said: “Let go my hand, I am
      going to give you my watch.” He had received it as a present a few
      days before, and ever since it had been his chief amusement. He was able
      to get hold of it, and held it out to the little fellow who was sobbing
      and who laid it down on the grass beside him.
    

      It was night now. The two unhappy beings, exhausted, had almost loosened
      their grasp. The elder, at last, feeling that he was lost, murmured once
      more: “Good-by, little brother, kiss mamma and papa.” And his
      numbed fingers relaxed their hold. He sank and did not rise again . . . .
      The little fellow, left alone, began to shout wildly: “Paul! Paul!”
      But the other did not come to the surface.
    

      Then he darted across the mountain, falling among the stones, overcome by
      the most frightful anguish that can wring a child's heart, and with a face
      like death reached the sitting-room, where his parents were waiting. He
      became bewildered again as he led them to the gloomy reservoir. He could
      not find his way. At last he reached the spot. “It is there; yes, it
      is there!”
    

      But the cistern had to be emptied, and the proprietor would not permit it
      as he needed the water for his lemon trees.
    

      The two bodies were found, however, but not until the next day.
    

      You see, my dear friend, that this is a simple news item. But if you had
      seen the hole itself your heart would have been wrung, as mine was, at the
      thought of the agony of that child hanging to his brother's hands, of the
      long suspense of those little chaps who were accustomed only to laugh and
      to play, and at the simple incident of the giving of the watch.
    

      I said to myself: “May Fate preserve me from ever receiving a
      similar relic!” I know of nothing more terrible than such a
      recollection connected with a familiar object that one cannot dispose of.
      Only think of it; each time that he handles this sacred watch the survivor
      will picture once more the horrible scene; the pool, the wall, the still
      water, and the distracted face of his brother-alive, and yet as lost as
      though he were already dead. And all through his life, at any moment, the
      vision will be there, awakened the instant even the tip of his finger
      touches his watch pocket.
    

      And I was sad until evening. I left the spot and kept on climbing, leaving
      the region of orange trees for the region of olive trees, and the region
      of olive trees for the region of pines; then I came to a valley of stones,
      and finally reached the ruins of an ancient castle, built, they say, in
      the tenth century by a Saracen chief, a good man, who was baptized a
      Christian through love for a young girl. Everywhere around me were
      mountains, and before me the sea, the sea with an almost imperceptible
      patch on it: Corsica, or, rather, the shadow of Corsica. But on the
      mountain summits, blood-red in the glow of the sunset, in the boundless
      sky and on the sea, in all this superb landscape that I had come here to
      admire I saw only two poor children, one lying prone on the edge of a hole
      filled with black water, the other submerged to his neck, their hands
      intertwined, weeping opposite each other, in despair. And it seemed as
      though I continually heard a weak, exhausted voice saying: “Good-by,
      little brother, I am going to give you my watch.”
    

      This letter may seem rather melancholy, dear friend. I will try to be more
      cheerful some other day.