THE BARONESS

 “Come with me,” said my friend Boisrene, “you will see
      some very interesting bric-a-brac and works of art there.”

 He conducted me to the first floor of an elegant house in one of the big
      streets of Paris. We were welcomed by a very pleasing man, with excellent
      manners, who led us from room to room, showing us rare things, the price
      of which he mentioned carelessly. Large sums, ten, twenty, thirty, fifty
      thousand francs, dropped from his lips with such grace and ease that one
      could not doubt that this gentleman-merchant had millions shut up in his
      safe.

 I had known him by reputation for a long time. Very bright, clever,
      intelligent, he acted as intermediary in all sorts of transactions. He
      kept in touch with all the richest art amateurs in Paris, and even of
      Europe and America, knowing their tastes and preferences; he apprised them
      by letter, or by wire if they lived in a distant city, as soon as he knew
      of some work of art which might suit them.

 Men of the best society had had recourse to him in times of difficulty,
      either to find money for gambling, or to pay off a debt, or to sell a
      picture, a family jewel, or a tapestry.

 It was said that he never refused his services when he saw a chance of
      gain.

 Boisrene seemed very intimate with this strange merchant. They must have
      worked together in many a deal. I observed the man with great interest.

 He was tall, thin, bald, and very elegant. His soft, insinuating voice had
      a peculiar, tempting charm which seemed to give the objects a special
      value. When he held anything in his hands, he turned it round and round,
      looking at it with such skill, refinement, and sympathy that the object
      seemed immediately to be beautiful and transformed by his look and touch.
      And its value increased in one's estimation, after the object had passed
      from the showcase into his hands.

 “And your Crucifix,” said Boisrene, “that beautiful
      Renaissance Crucifix which you showed me last year?”

 The man smiled and answered:

 “It has been sold, and in a very peculiar manner. There is a real
      Parisian story for you! Would you like to hear it?”

 “With pleasure.”

 “Do you know the Baroness Samoris?”

 “Yes and no. I have seen her once, but I know what she is!”

 “You know—everything?”

 “Yes.”

 “Would you mind telling me, so that I can see whether you are not
      mistaken?”

 “Certainly. Mme. Samoris is a woman of the world who has a daughter,
      without anyone having known her husband. At any rate, she is received in a
      certain tolerant, or blind society. She goes to church and devoutly
      partakes of Communion, so that everyone may know it, and she never
      compromises herself. She expects her daughter to marry well. Is that
      correct?”

 “Yes, but I will complete your information. She is a woman who makes
      herself respected by her admirers in spite of everything. That is a rare
      quality, for in this manner she can get what she wishes from a man. The
      man whom she has chosen without his suspecting it courts her for a long
      time, longs for her timidly, wins her with astonishment and possesses her
      with consideration. He does not notice that he is paying, she is so
      tactful; and she maintains her relations on such a footing of reserve and
      dignity that he would slap the first man who dared doubt her in the least.
      And all this in the best of faith.

 “Several times I have been able to render little services to this
      woman. She has no secrets from me.

 “Toward the beginning of January she came to me in order to borrow
      thirty thousand francs. Naturally, I did not lend them to her; but, as I
      wished to oblige her, I told her to explain her situation to me
      completely, so that I might see whether there was not something I could do
      for her.

 “She told me her troubles in such cautious language that she could
      not have spoken more delicately of her child's first communion. I finally
      managed to understand that times were hard, and that she was penniless.

 “The commercial crisis, political unrest, rumors of war, had made
      money scarce even in the hands of her clients. And then, of course, she
      was very particular.

 “She would associate only with a man in the best of society, who
      could strengthen her reputation as well as help her financially. A
      reveller, no matter how rich, would have compromised her forever, and
      would have made the marriage of her daughter quite doubtful.

 “She had to maintain her household expenses and continue to
      entertain, in order not to lose the opportunity of finding, among her
      numerous visitors, the discreet and distinguished friend for whom she was
      waiting, and whom she would choose.

 “I showed her that my thirty thousand francs would have but little
      likelihood of returning to me; for, after spending them all, she would
      have to find at least sixty thousand more, in a lump, to pay me back.

 “She seemed very disheartened when she heard this. I did not know
      just what to do, when an idea, a really fine idea, struck me.

 “I had just bought this Renaissance Crucifix which I showed you, an
      admirable piece of workmanship, one of the finest of its land that I have
      ever seen.

 “'My dear friend,' I said to her, 'I am going to send you that piece
      of ivory. You will invent some ingenious, touching, poetic story, anything
      that you wish, to explain your desire for parting with it. It is, of
      course, a family heirloom left you by your father.

 “'I myself will send you amateurs, or will bring them to you. The
      rest concerns you. Before they come I will drop you a line about their
      position, both social and financial. This Crucifix is worth fifty thousand
      francs; but I will let it go for thirty thousand. The difference will
      belong to you.'

 “She considered the matter seriously for several minutes, and then
      answered: 'Yes, it is, perhaps, a good idea. I thank you very-much.'

 “The next day I sent her my Crucifix, and the same evening the Baron
      de Saint-Hospital.

 “For three months I sent her my best clients, from a business point
      of view. But I heard nothing more from her.

 “One day I received a visit from a foreigner who spoke very little
      French. I decided to introduce him personally to the baroness, in order to
      see how she was getting along.

 “A footman in black livery received us and ushered us into a quiet
      little parlor, furnished with taste, where we waited for several minutes.
      She appeared, charming as usual, extended her hand to me and invited us to
      be seated; and when I had explained the reason of my visit, she rang.

 “The footman appeared.

 “'See if Mlle. Isabelle can let us go into her oratory.' The young
      girl herself brought the answer. She was about fifteen years of age,
      modest and good to look upon in the sweet freshness of her youth. She
      wished to conduct us herself to her chapel.

 “It was a kind of religious boudoir where a silver lamp was burning
      before the Crucifix, my Crucifix, on a background of black velvet. The
      setting was charming and very clever. The child crossed herself and then
      said:

 “'Look, gentlemen. Isn't it beautiful?'

 “I took the object, examined it and declared it to be remarkable.
      The foreigner also examined it, but he seemed much more interested in the
      two women than in the crucifix.

 “A delicate odor of incense, flowers and perfume pervaded the whole
      house. One felt at home there. This really was a comfortable home, where
      one would have liked to linger.

 “When we had returned to the parlor I delicately broached the
      subject of the price. Mme. Samoris, lowering her eyes, asked fifty
      thousand francs.

 “Then she added: 'If you wish to see it again, monsieur, I very
      seldom go out before three o'clock; and I can be found at home every day.'

 “In the street the stranger asked me for some details about the
      baroness, whom he had found charming. But I did not hear anything more
      from either of them.

 “Three months passed by.

 “One morning, hardly two weeks ago, she came here at about lunch
      time, and, placing a roll of bills in my hand, said: 'My dear, you are an
      angel! Here are fifty thousand francs; I am buying your crucifix, and I am
      paying twenty thousand francs more for it than the price agreed upon, on
      condition that you always—always send your clients to me—for
      it is still for sale.'”