THE RESCUE OF PLUFFLES.
    

   Thus, for a season, they fought it fair—
     She and his cousin May—
   Tactful, talented, debonnaire,
     Decorous foes were they;
   But never can battle of man compare
     With merciless feminine fray.
              —Two and One.


      Mrs. Hauksbee was sometimes nice to her own sex. Here is a story to prove
      this; and you can believe just as much as ever you please.
    

      Pluffles was a subaltern in the “Unmentionables.” He was callow, even for
      a subaltern. He was callow all over—like a canary that had not
      finished fledging itself. The worst of it was he had three times as much
      money as was good for him; Pluffles' Papa being a rich man and Pluffles
      being the only son. Pluffles' Mamma adored him. She was only a little less
      callow than Pluffles and she believed everything he said.
    

      Pluffles' weakness was not believing what people said. He preferred what
      he called “trusting to his own judgment.” He had as much judgment as he
      had seat or hands; and this preference tumbled him into trouble once or
      twice. But the biggest trouble Pluffles ever manufactured came about at
      Simla—some years ago, when he was four-and-twenty.
    

      He began by trusting to his own judgment, as usual, and the result was
      that, after a time, he was bound hand and foot to Mrs. Reiver's 'rickshaw
      wheels.
    

      There was nothing good about Mrs. Reiver, unless it was her dress.
    

      She was bad from her hair—which started life on a Brittany's girl's
      head—to her boot-heels, which were two and three-eighth inches high.
      She was not honestly mischievous like Mrs. Hauksbee; she was wicked in a
      business-like way.
    

      There was never any scandal—she had not generous impulses enough for
      that. She was the exception which proved the rule that Anglo-Indian ladies
      are in every way as nice as their sisters at Home.
    

      She spent her life in proving that rule.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee and she hated each other fervently. They heard far too much
      to clash; but the things they said of each other were startling—not
      to say original. Mrs. Hauksbee was honest—honest as her own front
      teeth—and, but for her love of mischief, would have been a woman's
      woman. There was no honesty about Mrs. Reiver; nothing but selfishness.
      And at the beginning of the season, poor little Pluffles fell a prey to
      her. She laid herself out to that end, and who was Pluffles, to resist? He
      went on trusting to his judgment, and he got judged.
    

      I have seen Hayes argue with a tough horse—I have seen a
      tonga-driver coerce a stubborn pony—I have seen a riotous setter
      broken to gun by a hard keeper—but the breaking-in of Pluffles of
      the “Unmentionables” was beyond all these. He learned to fetch and carry
      like a dog, and to wait like one, too, for a word from Mrs. Reiver. He
      learned to keep appointments which Mrs. Reiver had no intention of
      keeping. He learned to take thankfully dances which Mrs. Reiver had no
      intention of giving him. He learned to shiver for an hour and a quarter on
      the windward side of Elysium while Mrs. Reiver was making up her mind to
      come for a ride. He learned to hunt for a 'rickshaw, in a light dress-suit
      under a pelting rain, and to walk by the side of that 'rickshaw when he
      had found it. He learned what it was to be spoken to like a coolie and
      ordered about like a cook. He learned all this and many other things
      besides. And he paid for his schooling.
    

      Perhaps, in some hazy way, he fancied that it was fine and impressive,
      that it gave him a status among men, and was altogether the thing to do.
      It was nobody's business to warn Pluffles that he was unwise. The pace
      that season was too good to inquire; and meddling with another man's folly
      is always thankless work.
    

      Pluffles' Colonel should have ordered him back to his regiment when he
      heard how things were going. But Pluffles had got himself engaged to a
      girl in England the last time he went home; and if there was one thing
      more than another which the Colonel detested, it was a married subaltern.
      He chuckled when he heard of the education of Pluffles, and said it was
      “good training for the boy.” But it was not good training in the least. It
      led him into spending money beyond his means, which were good: above that,
      the education spoilt an average boy and made it a tenth-rate man of an
      objectionable kind. He wandered into a bad set, and his little bill at
      Hamilton's was a thing to wonder at.
    

      Then Mrs. Hauksbee rose to the occasion. She played her game alone,
      knowing what people would say of her; and she played it for the sake of a
      girl she had never seen. Pluffles' fiancee was to come out, under the
      chaperonage of an aunt, in October, to be married to Pluffles.
    

      At the beginning of August, Mrs. Hauksbee discovered that it was time to
      interfere. A man who rides much knows exactly what a horse is going to do
      next before he does it. In the same way, a woman of Mrs. Hauksbee's
      experience knows accurately how a boy will behave under certain
      circumstances—notably when he is infatuated with one of Mrs.
      Reiver's stamp. She said that, sooner or later, little Pluffles would
      break off that engagement for nothing at all—simply to gratify Mrs.
      Reiver, who, in return, would keep him at her feet and in her service just
      so long as she found it worth her while.
    

      She said she knew the signs of these things. If she did not, no one else
      could.
    

      Then she went forth to capture Pluffles under the guns of the enemy; just
      as Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil carried away Bremmil under Mrs. Hauksbee's eyes.
    

      This particular engagement lasted seven weeks—we called it the Seven
      Weeks' War—and was fought out inch by inch on both sides. A detailed
      account would fill a book, and would be incomplete then.
    

      Any one who knows about these things can fit in the details for himself.
      It was a superb fight—there will never be another like it as long as
      Jakko stands—and Pluffles was the prize of victory.
    

      People said shameful things about Mrs. Hauksbee. They did not know what
      she was playing for. Mrs. Reiver fought, partly because Pluffles was
      useful to her, but mainly because she hated Mrs. Hauksbee, and the matter
      was a trial of strength between them. No one knows what Pluffles thought.
      He had not many ideas at the best of times, and the few he possessed made
      him conceited. Mrs. Hauksbee said:—“The boy must be caught; and the
      only way of catching him is by treating him well.”
     

      So she treated him as a man of the world and of experience so long as the
      issue was doubtful. Little by little, Pluffles fell away from his old
      allegiance and came over to the enemy, by whom he was made much of. He was
      never sent on out-post duty after 'rickshaws any more, nor was he given
      dances which never came off, nor were the drains on his purse continued.
      Mrs. Hauksbee held him on the snaffle; and after his treatment at Mrs.
      Reiver's hands, he appreciated the change.
    

      Mrs. Reiver had broken him of talking about himself, and made him talk
      about her own merits. Mrs. Hauksbee acted otherwise, and won his
      confidence, till he mentioned his engagement to the girl at Home, speaking
      of it in a high and mighty way as a “piece of boyish folly.” This was when
      he was taking tea with her one afternoon, and discoursing in what he
      considered a gay and fascinating style.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee had seen an earlier generation of his stamp bud and blossom,
      and decay into fat Captains and tubby Majors.
    

      At a moderate estimate there were about three and twenty sides to that
      lady's character. Some men say more. She began to talk to Pluffles after
      the manner of a mother, and as if there had been three hundred years,
      instead of fifteen, between them. She spoke with a sort of throaty quaver
      in her voice which had a soothing effect, though what she said was
      anything but soothing. She pointed out the exceeding folly, not to say
      meanness, of Pluffles' conduct, and the smallness of his views. Then he
      stammered something about “trusting to his own judgment as a man of the
      world;” and this paved the way for what she wanted to say next. It would
      have withered up Pluffles had it come from any other woman; but in the
      soft cooing style in which Mrs. Hauksbee put it, it only made him feel
      limp and repentant—as if he had been in some superior kind of
      church. Little by little, very softly and pleasantly, she began taking the
      conceit out of Pluffles, as you take the ribs out of an umbrella before
      re-covering it. She told him what she thought of him and his judgment and
      his knowledge of the world; and how his performances had made him
      ridiculous to other people; and how it was his intention to make love to
      herself if she gave him the chance. Then she said that marriage would be
      the making of him; and drew a pretty little picture—all rose and
      opal—of the Mrs. Pluffles of the future going through life relying
      on the “judgment” and “knowledge of the world” of a husband who had
      nothing to reproach himself with. How she reconciled these two statements
      she alone knew. But they did not strike Pluffles as conflicting.
    

      Hers was a perfect little homily—much better than any clergyman
      could have given—and it ended with touching allusions to Pluffles'
      Mamma and Papa, and the wisdom of taking his bride Home.
    

      Then she sent Pluffles out for a walk, to think over what she had said.
      Pluffles left, blowing his nose very hard and holding himself very
      straight. Mrs. Hauksbee laughed.
    

      What Pluffles had intended to do in the matter of the engagement only Mrs.
      Reiver knew, and she kept her own counsel to her death. She would have
      liked it spoiled as a compliment, I fancy.
    

      Pluffles enjoyed many talks with Mrs. Hauksbee during the next few days.
      They were all to the same end, and they helped Pluffles in the path of
      Virtue.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee wanted to keep him under her wing to the last.
    

      Therefore she discountenanced his going down to Bombay to get married.
      “Goodness only knows what might happen by the way!” she said. “Pluffles is
      cursed with the curse of Reuben, and India is no fit place for him!”
     

      In the end, the fiancee arrived with her aunt; and Pluffles, having
      reduced his affairs to some sort of order—here again Mrs. Hauksbee
      helped him—was married.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee gave a sigh of relief when both the “I wills” had been said,
      and went her way.
    

      Pluffles took her advice about going Home. He left the Service, and is now
      raising speckled cattle inside green painted fences somewhere at Home. I
      believe he does this very judiciously. He would have come to extreme grief
      out here.
    

      For these reasons if any one says anything more than usually nasty about
      Mrs. Hauksbee, tell him the story of the Rescue of Pluffles.