THE McWILLIAMSES AND THE BURGLAR ALARM

 The conversation drifted smoothly and pleasantly along from weather to
      crops, from crops to literature, from literature to scandal, from scandal
      to religion; then took a random jump, and landed on the subject of burglar
      alarms. And now for the first time Mr. McWilliams showed feeling. Whenever
      I perceive this sign on this man's dial, I comprehend it, and lapse into
      silence, and give him opportunity to unload his heart. Said he, with but
      ill-controlled emotion:

 “I do not go one single cent on burglar alarms, Mr. Twain—not a
      single cent—and I will tell you why. When we were finishing our
      house, we found we had a little cash left over, on account of the plumber
      not knowing it. I was for enlightening the heathen with it, for I was
      always unaccountably down on the heathen somehow; but Mrs. McWilliams said
      no, let's have a burglar alarm. I agreed to this compromise. I will
      explain that whenever I want a thing, and Mrs. McWilliams wants another
      thing, and we decide upon the thing that Mrs. McWilliams wants—as we
      always do—she calls that a compromise. Very well: the man came up
      from New York and put in the alarm, and charged three hundred and
      twenty-five dollars for it, and said we could sleep without uneasiness
      now. So we did for awhile—say a month. Then one night we smelled
      smoke, and I was advised to get up and see what the matter was. I lit a
      candle, and started toward the stairs, and met a burglar coming out of a
      room with a basket of tinware, which he had mistaken for solid silver in
      the dark. He was smoking a pipe. I said, 'My friend, we do not allow
      smoking in this room.' He said he was a stranger, and could not be
      expected to know the rules of the house: said he had been in many houses
      just as good as this one, and it had never been objected to before. He
      added that as far as his experience went, such rules had never been
      considered to apply to burglars, anyway.

 “I said: 'Smoke along, then, if it is the custom, though I think that the
      conceding of a privilege to a burglar which is denied to a bishop is a
      conspicuous sign of the looseness of the times. But waiving all that, what
      business have you to be entering this house in this furtive and
      clandestine way, without ringing the burglar alarm?'

 “He looked confused and ashamed, and said, with embarrassment: 'I beg a
      thousand pardons. I did not know you had a burglar alarm, else I would
      have rung it. I beg you will not mention it where my parents may hear of
      it, for they are old and feeble, and such a seemingly wanton breach of the
      hallowed conventionalities of our Christian civilization might all too
      rudely sunder the frail bridge which hangs darkling between the pale and
      evanescent present and the solemn great deeps of the eternities. May I
      trouble you for a match?'

 “I said: 'Your sentiments do you honor, but if you will allow me to say
      it, metaphor is not your best hold. Spare your thigh; this kind light only
      on the box, and seldom there, in fact, if my experience may be trusted.
      But to return to business: how did you get in here?'

 “'Through a second-story window.'

 “It was even so. I redeemed the tinware at pawnbroker's rates, less cost
      of advertising, bade the burglar good-night, closed the window after him,
      and retired to headquarters to report. Next morning we sent for the
      burglar-alarm man, and he came up and explained that the reason the alarm
      did not 'go off' was that no part of the house but the first floor was
      attached to the alarm. This was simply idiotic; one might as well have no
      armor on at all in battle as to have it only on his legs. The expert now
      put the whole second story on the alarm, charged three hundred dollars for
      it, and went his way. By and by, one night, I found a burglar in the third
      story, about to start down a ladder with a lot of miscellaneous property.
      My first impulse was to crack his head with a billiard cue; but my second
      was to refrain from this attention, because he was between me and the cue
      rack. The second impulse was plainly the soundest, so I refrained, and
      proceeded to compromise. I redeemed the property at former rates, after
      deducting ten per cent. for use of ladder, it being my ladder, and, next
      day we sent down for the expert once more, and had the third story
      attached to the alarm, for three hundred dollars.

 “By this time the 'annunciator' had grown to formidable dimensions. It had
      forty-seven tags on it, marked with the names of the various rooms and
      chimneys, and it occupied the space of an ordinary wardrobe. The gong was
      the size of a wash-bowl, and was placed above the head of our bed. There
      was a wire from the house to the coachman's quarters in the stable, and a
      noble gong alongside his pillow.

 “We should have been comfortable now but for one defect. Every morning at
      five the cook opened the kitchen door, in the way of business, and rip
      went that gong! The first time this happened I thought the last day was
      come sure. I didn't think it in bed—no, but out of it—for the
      first effect of that frightful gong is to hurl you across the house, and
      slam you against the wall, and then curl you up, and squirm you like a
      spider on a stove lid, till somebody shuts the kitchen door. In solid
      fact, there is no clamor that is even remotely comparable to the dire
      clamor which that gong makes. Well, this catastrophe happened every
      morning regularly at five o'clock, and lost us three hours sleep; for,
      mind you, when that thing wakes you, it doesn't merely wake you in spots;
      it wakes you all over, conscience and all, and you are good for eighteen
      hours of wide-awakeness subsequently—eighteen hours of the very most
      inconceivable wide-awakeness that you ever experienced in your life. A
      stranger died on our hands one time, and we vacated and left him in our
      room overnight. Did that stranger wait for the general judgment? No, sir;
      he got up at five the next morning in the most prompt and unostentatious
      way. I knew he would; I knew it mighty well. He collected his
      life-insurance, and lived happy ever after, for there was plenty of proof
      as to the perfect squareness of his death.

 “Well, we were gradually fading toward a better land, on account of the
      daily loss of sleep; so we finally had the expert up again, and he ran a
      wire to the outside of the door, and placed a switch there, whereby
      Thomas, the butler, always made one little mistake—he switched the
      alarm off at night when he went to bed, and switched it on again at
      daybreak in the morning, just in time for the cook to open the kitchen
      door, and enable that gong to slam us across the house, sometimes breaking
      a window with one or the other of us. At the end of a week we recognized
      that this switch business was a delusion and a snare. We also discovered
      that a band of burglars had been lodging in the house the whole time—not
      exactly to steal, for there wasn't much left now, but to hide from the
      police, for they were hot pressed, and they shrewdly judged that the
      detectives would never think of a tribe of burglars taking sanctuary in a
      house notoriously protected by the most imposing and elaborate burglar
      alarm in America.

 “Sent down for the expert again, and this time he struck a most dazzling
      idea—he fixed the thing so that opening the kitchen door would take
      off the alarm. It was a noble idea, and he charged accordingly. But you
      already foresee the result. I switched on the alarm every night at
      bed-time, no longer trusting on Thomas's frail memory; and as soon as the
      lights were out the burglars walked in at the kitchen door, thus taking
      the alarm off without waiting for the cook to do it in the morning. You
      see how aggravatingly we were situated. For months we couldn't have any
      company. Not a spare bed in the house; all occupied by burglars.

 “Finally, I got up a cure of my own. The expert answered the call, and ran
      another ground wire to the stable, and established a switch there, so that
      the coachman could put on and take off the alarm. That worked first rate,
      and a season of peace ensued, during which we got to inviting company once
      more and enjoying life.

 “But by and by the irrepressible alarm invented a new kink. One winter's
      night we were flung out of bed by the sudden music of that awful gong, and
      when we hobbled to the annunciator, turned up the gas, and saw the word
      'Nursery' exposed, Mrs. McWilliams fainted dead away, and I came precious
      near doing the same thing myself. I seized my shotgun, and stood timing
      the coachman whilst that appalling buzzing went on. I knew that his gong
      had flung him out, too, and that he would be along with his gun as soon as
      he could jump into his clothes. When I judged that the time was ripe, I
      crept to the room next the nursery, glanced through the window, and saw
      the dim outline of the coachman in the yard below, standing at
      present-arms and waiting for a chance. Then I hopped into the nursery and
      fired, and in the same instant the coachman fired at the red flash of my
      gun. Both of us were successful; I crippled a nurse, and he shot off all
      my back hair. We turned up the gas, and telephoned for a surgeon. There
      was not a sign of a burglar, and no window had been raised. One glass was
      absent, but that was where the coachman's charge had come through. Here
      was a fine mystery—a burglar alarm 'going off' at midnight of its
      own accord, and not a burglar in the neighborhood!

 “The expert answered the usual call, and explained that it was a 'False
      alarm.' Said it was easily fixed. So he overhauled the nursery window,
      charged a remunerative figure for it, and departed.

 “What we suffered from false alarms for the next three years no
      stylographic pen can describe. During the next three months I always flew
      with my gun to the room indicated, and the coachman always sallied forth
      with his battery to support me. But there was never anything to shoot at—windows
      all tight and secure. We always sent down for the expert next day, and he
      fixed those particular windows so they would keep quiet a week or so, and
      always remembered to send us a bill about like this:

 Wire ............................$2.15
          Nipple...........................  .75
          Two hours' labor ................ 1.50
          Wax..............................  .47
          Tape.............................  .34
          Screws...........................  .15
          Recharging battery ..............  .98
          Three hours' labor .............. 2.25
          String...........................  .02
          Lard ............................  .66
          Pond's Extract .................. 1.25
          Springs at 50.................... 2.00
          Railroad fares................... 7.25

 “At length a perfectly natural thing came about—after we had
      answered three or four hundred false alarms—to wit, we stopped
      answering them. Yes, I simply rose up calmly, when slammed across the
      house by the alarm, calmly inspected the annunciator, took note of the
      room indicated; and then calmly disconnected that room from the alarm, and
      went back to bed as if nothing had happened. Moreover, I left that room
      off permanently, and did not send for the expert. Well, it goes without
      saying that in the course of time all the rooms were taken off, and the
      entire machine was out of service.

 “It was at this unprotected time that the heaviest calamity of all
      happened. The burglars walked in one night and carried off the burglar
      alarm! yes, sir, every hide and hair of it: ripped it out, tooth and nail;
      springs, bells, gongs, battery, and all; they took a hundred and fifty
      miles of copper wire; they just cleaned her out, bag and baggage, and
      never left us a vestige of her to swear at—swear by, I mean.

 “We had a time of it to get her back; but we accomplished it finally, for
      money. The alarm firm said that what we needed now was to have her put in
      right—with their new patent springs in the windows to make false
      alarms impossible, and their new patent clock attached to take off and put
      on the alarm morning and night without human assistance. That seemed a
      good scheme. They promised to have the whole thing finished in ten days.
      They began work, and we left for the summer. They worked a couple of days;
      then they left for the summer. After which the burglars moved in, and
      began their summer vacation. When we returned in the fall, the house was
      as empty as a beer closet in premises where painters have been at work. We
      refurnished, and then sent down to hurry up the expert. He came up and
      finished the job, and said: 'Now this clock is set to put on the alarm
      every night at 10, and take it off every morning at 5:45. All you've got
      to do is to wind her up every week, and then leave her alone—she
      will take care of the alarm herself.'

 “After that we had a most tranquil season during three months. The bill
      was prodigious, of course, and I had said I would not pay it until the new
      machinery had proved itself to be flawless. The time stipulated was three
      months. So I paid the bill, and the very next day the alarm went to
      buzzing like ten thousand bee swarms at ten o'clock in the morning. I
      turned the hands around twelve hours, according to instructions, and this
      took off the alarm; but there was another hitch at night, and I had to set
      her ahead twelve hours once more to get her to put the alarm on again.
      That sort of nonsense went on a week or two, then the expert came up and
      put in a new clock. He came up every three months during the next three
      years, and put in a new clock. But it was always a failure. His clocks all
      had the same perverse defect: they would put the alarm on in the daytime,
      and they would not put it on at night; and if you forced it on yourself,
      they would take it off again the minute your back was turned.

 “Now there is the history of that burglar alarm—everything just as
      it happened; nothing extenuated, and naught set down in malice. Yes, sir,—and
      when I had slept nine years with burglars, and maintained an expensive
      burglar alarm the whole time, for their protection, not mine, and at my
      sole cost—for not a d—-d cent could I ever get THEM to
      contribute—I just said to Mrs. McWilliams that I had had enough of
      that kind of pie; so with her full consent I took the whole thing out and
      traded it off for a dog, and shot the dog. I don't know what you think
      about it, Mr. Twain; but I think those things are made solely in the
      interest of the burglars. Yes, sir, a burglar alarm combines in its person
      all that is objectionable about a fire, a riot, and a harem, and at the
      same time had none of the compensating advantages, of one sort or another,
      that customarily belong with that combination. Good-by: I get off here.”