THE RONDOLI SISTERS
    

      I
    

      I set out to see Italy thoroughly on two occasions, and each time I was
      stopped at the frontier and could not get any further. So I do not know
      Italy, said my friend, Charles Jouvent. And yet my two attempts gave me a
      charming idea of the manners of that beautiful country. Some time,
      however, I must visit its cities, as well as the museums and works of art
      with which it abounds. I will make another attempt to penetrate into the
      interior, which I have not yet succeeded in doing.
    

      You don't understand me, so I will explain: In the spring of 1874 I was
      seized with an irresistible desire to see Venice, Florence, Rome and
      Naples. I am, as you know, not a great traveller; it appears to me a
      useless and fatiguing business. Nights spent in a train, the disturbed
      slumbers of the railway carriage, with the attendant headache, and
      stiffness in every limb, the sudden waking in that rolling box, the
      unwashed feeling, with your eyes and hair full of dust, the smell of the
      coal on which one's lungs feed, those bad dinners in the draughty
      refreshment rooms are, according to my ideas, a horrible way of beginning
      a pleasure trip.
    

      After this introduction, we have the miseries of the hotel; of some great
      hotel full of people, and yet so empty; the strange room and the doubtful
      bed!
    

      I am most particular about my bed; it is the sanctuary of life. We entrust
      our almost naked and fatigued bodies to it so that they may be reanimated
      by reposing between soft sheets and feathers.
    

      There we find the most delightful hours of our existence, the hours of
      love and of sleep. The bed is sacred, and should be respected, venerated
      and loved by us as the best and most delightful of our earthly
      possessions.
    

      I cannot lift up the sheets of a hotel bed without a shudder of disgust.
      Who has occupied it the night before? Perhaps dirty, revolting people have
      slept in it. I begin, then, to think of all the horrible people with whom
      one rubs shoulders every day, people with suspicious-looking skin which
      makes one think of the feet and all the rest! I call to mind those who
      carry about with them the sickening smell of garlic or of humanity. I
      think of those who are deformed and unhealthy, of the perspiration
      emanating from the sick, of everything that is ugly and filthy in man.
    

      And all this, perhaps, in the bed in which I am about to sleep! The mere
      idea of it makes me feel ill as I get into it.
    

      And then the hotel dinners—those dreary table d'hote dinners in the
      midst of all sorts of extraordinary people, or else those terrible
      solitary dinners at a small table in a restaurant, feebly lighted by a
      wretched composite candle under a shade.
    

      Again, those terribly dull evenings in some unknown town! Do you know
      anything more wretched than the approach of dusk on such an occasion? One
      goes about as if almost in a dream, looking at faces that one never has
      seen before and never will see again; listening to people talking about
      matters which are quite indifferent to you in a language that perhaps you
      do not understand. You have a terrible feeling, almost as if you were
      lost, and you continue to walk on so as not to be obliged to return to the
      hotel, where you would feel more lost still because you are at home, in a
      home which belongs to anyone who can pay for it; and at last you sink into
      a chair of some well-lighted cafe, whose gilding and lights oppress you a
      thousand times more than the shadows in the streets. Then you feel so
      abominably lonely sitting in front of the glass of flat bock beer that a
      kind of madness seizes you, the longing to go somewhere or other, no
      matter where, as long as you need not remain in front of that marble table
      amid those dazzling lights.
    

      And then, suddenly, you are aware that you are really alone in the world,
      always and everywhere, and that in places which we know, the familiar
      jostlings give us the illusion only of human fraternity. At such moments
      of self-abandonment and sombre isolation in distant cities one thinks
      broadly, clearly and profoundly. Then one suddenly sees the whole of life
      outside the vision of eternal hope, apart from the deceptions of our
      innate habits, and of our expectations of happiness, which we indulge in
      dreams never to be realized.
    

      It is only by going a long distance from home that we can fully understand
      how short-lived and empty everything near at hand is; by searching for the
      unknown, we perceive how commonplace and evanescent everything is; only by
      wandering over the face of the earth can we understand how small the world
      is, and how very much alike it is everywhere.
    

      How well I know, and how I hate and almost fear, those haphazard walks
      through unknown streets; and this was the reason why, as nothing would
      induce me to undertake a tour in Italy by myself, I made up my mind to
      accompany my friend Paul Pavilly.
    

      You know Paul, and how he idealizes women. To him the earth is habitable
      only because they are there; the sun gives light and is warm because it
      shines upon them; the air is soft and balmy because it blows upon their
      skin and ruffles the soft hair on their temples; and the moon is charming
      because it makes them dream and imparts a languorous charm to love. Every
      act and action of Paul's has woman for its motive; all his thoughts, all
      his efforts and hopes are centered in them.
    

      When I mentioned Italy to Paul he at first absolutely refused to leave
      Paris. I, however, began to tell him of the adventures I had on my
      travels. I assured him that all Italian women are charming, and I made him
      hope for the most refined pleasures at Naples, thanks to certain letters
      of introduction which I had; and so at last he allowed himself to be
      persuaded.
    

      II
    

      We took the express one Thursday evening, Paul and I. Hardly anyone goes
      south at that time of the year, so that we had the carriages to ourselves,
      and both of us were in a bad temper on leaving Paris, sorry for having
      yielded to the temptation of this journey, and regretting Marly, the
      Seine, and our lazy boating excursions, and all those pleasures in and
      near Paris which are so dear to every true Parisian.
    

      As soon as the train started Paul stuck himself in his corner, and said,
      “It is most idiotic to go all that distance,” and as it was
      too late for him to change his mind then, I said, “Well, you should
      not have come.”
    

      He made no answer, and I felt very much inclined to laugh when I saw how
      furious he looked. He is certainly always rather like a squirrel, but then
      every one of us has retained the type of some animal or other as the mark
      of his primitive origin. How many people have jaws like a bulldog, or
      heads like goats, rabbits, foxes, horses, or oxen. Paul is a squirrel
      turned into a man. He has its bright, quick eyes, its hair, its pointed
      nose, its small, fine, supple, active body, and a certain mysterious
      resemblance in his general bearing; in fact, a similarity of movement, of
      gesture, and of bearing which might almost be taken for a recollection.
    

      At last we both went to sleep with that uncomfortable slumber of the
      railway carriage, which is interrupted by horrible cramps in the arms and
      neck, and by the sudden stoppages of the train.
    

      We woke up as we were passing along the Rhone. Soon the continued noise of
      crickets came in through the windows, that cry which seems to be the voice
      of the warm earth, the song of Provence; and seemed to instill into our
      looks, our breasts, and our souls the light and happy feeling of the
      south, that odor of the parched earth, of the stony and light soil of the
      olive with its gray-green foliage.
    

      When the train stopped again a railway guard ran along the train calling
      out “Valence” in a sonorous voice, with an accent that again
      gave us a taste of that Provence which the shrill note of the crickets had
      already imparted to us.
    

      Nothing fresh happened till we got to Marseilles, where we alighted for
      breakfast, but when we returned to our carriage we found a woman installed
      there.
    

      Paul, with a delighted glance at me, gave his short mustache a mechanical
      twirl, and passed his fingers through his, hair, which had become slightly
      out of order with the night's journey. Then he sat down opposite the
      newcomer.
    

      Whenever I happen to see a striking new face, either in travelling or in
      society, I always have the strongest inclination to find out what
      character, mind, and intellectual capacities are hidden beneath those
      features.
    

      She was a young and pretty woman, certainly a native of the south of
      France, with splendid eyes, beautiful wavy black hair, which was so thick
      and long that it seemed almost too heavy for her head. She was dressed
      with a certain southern bad taste which made her look a little vulgar. Her
      regular features had none of the grace and finish of the refined races, of
      that slight delicacy which members of the aristocracy inherit from their
      birth, and which is the hereditary mark of thinner blood.
    

      Her bracelets were too big to be of gold; she wore earrings with large
      white stones that were certainly not diamonds, and she belonged
      unmistakably to the People. One surmised that she would talk too loud, and
      shout on every occasion with exaggerated gestures.
    

      When the train started she remained motionless in her place, in the
      attitude of a woman who was indignant, without even looking at us.
    

      Paul began to talk to me, evidently with an eye to effect, trying to
      attract her attention, as shopkeepers expose their choice wares to catch
      the notice of passersby.
    

      She, however, did not appear to be paying the least attention.
    

      “Toulon! Ten minutes to wait! Refreshment room!” the porters
      shouted.
    

      Paul motioned to me to get out, and as soon as we had done so, he said:
    

      “I wonder who on earth she can be?”
    

      I began to laugh. “I am sure I don't know, and I don't in the least
      care.”
    

      He was quite excited.
    

      “She is an uncommonly fresh and pretty girl. What eyes she has, and
      how cross she looks. She must have been dreadfully worried, for she takes
      no notice of anything.”
    

      “You will have all your trouble for nothing,” I growled.
    

      He began to lose his temper.
    

      “I am not taking any trouble, my dear fellow. I think her an
      extremely pretty woman, that is all. If one could only speak to her! But I
      don't know how to begin. Cannot you give me an idea? Can't you guess who
      she is?”
    

      “Upon my word, I cannot. However, I should rather think she is some
      strolling actress who is going to rejoin her company after a love
      adventure.”
    

      He seemed quite upset, as if I had said something insulting.
    

      “What makes you think that? On the contrary, I think she looks most
      respectable.”
    

      “Just look at her bracelets,” I said, “her earrings and
      her whole dress. I should not be the least surprised if she were a dancer
      or a circus rider, but most likely a dancer. Her whole style smacks very
      much of the theatre.”
    

      He evidently did not like the idea.
    

      “She is much too young, I am sure; why, she is hardly twenty.”
    

      “Well,” I replied, “there are many things which one can
      do before one is twenty; dancing and elocution are among them.”
    

      “Take your seats for Nice, Vintimiglia,” the guards and
      porters called.
    

      We got in; our fellow passenger was eating an orange, and certainly she
      did not do it elegantly. She had spread her pocket-handkerchief on her
      knees, and the way in which she tore off the peel and opened her mouth to
      put in the pieces, and then spat the pips out of the window, showed that
      her training had been decidedly vulgar.
    

      She seemed, also, more put out than ever, and swallowed the fruit with an
      exceedingly comic air of rage.
    

      Paul devoured her with his eyes, and tried to attract her attention and
      excite her curiosity; but in spite of his talk, and of the manner in which
      he brought in well-known names, she did not pay the least attention to
      him.
    

      After passing Frejus and St. Raphael, the train passed through a veritable
      garden, a paradise of roses, and groves of oranges and lemons covered with
      fruits and flowers at the same time. That delightful coast from Marseilles
      to Genoa is a kingdom of perfumes in a home of flowers.
    

      June is the time to see it in all its beauty, when in every narrow valley
      and on every slope, the most exquisite flowers are growing luxuriantly.
      And the roses! fields, hedges, groves of roses. They climb up the walls,
      blossom on the roofs, hang from the trees, peep out from among the bushes;
      they are white, red, yellow, large and small, single, with a simple
      self-colored dress, or full and heavy in brilliant toilettes.
    

      Their breath makes the air heavy and relaxing, and the still more
      penetrating odor of the orange blossoms sweetens the atmosphere till it
      might almost be called the refinement of odor.
    

      The shore, with its brown rocks, was bathed by the motionless
      Mediterranean. The hot summer sun stretched like a fiery cloth over the
      mountains, over the long expanses of sand, and over the motionless,
      apparently solid blue sea. The train went on through the tunnels, along
      the slopes, above the water, on straight, wall-like viaducts, and a soft,
      vague, saltish smell, a smell of drying seaweed, mingled at times with the
      strong, heavy perfume of the flowers.
    

      But Paul neither saw, looked at, nor smelled anything, for our fellow
      traveller engrossed all his attention.
    

      When we reached Cannes, as he wished to speak to me he signed to me to get
      out, and as soon as I did so, he took me by the arm.
    

      “Do you know, she is really charming. Just look at her eyes; and I
      never saw anything like her hair.”
    

      “Don't excite yourself,” I replied, “or else address
      her, if you have any intentions that way. She does not look
      unapproachable; I fancy, although she appear to be a little bit grumpy.”
    

      “Why don't you speak to her?” he said.
    

      “I don't know what to say, for I am always terribly stupid at first;
      I can never make advances to a woman in the street. I follow them, go
      round and round them, and quite close to them, but never know what to say
      at first. I only once tried to enter into conversation with a woman in
      that way. As I clearly saw that she was waiting for me to make overtures,
      and as I felt bound to say something, I stammered out, 'I hope you are
      quite well, madame?' She laughed in my face, and I made my escape.”
    

      I promised Paul to do all I could to bring about a conversation, and when
      we had taken our places again, I politely asked our neighbor:
    

      “Have you any objection to the smell of tobacco, madame?”
    

      She merely replied, “Non capisco.”
    

      So she was an Italian! I felt an absurd inclination to laugh. As Paul did
      not understand a word of that language, I was obliged to act as his
      interpreter, so I said in Italian:
    

      “I asked you, madame, whether you had any objection to tobacco
      smoke?”
    

      With an angry look she replied, “Che mi fa!”
    

      She had neither turned her head nor looked at me, and I really did not
      know whether to take this “What do I care” for an
      authorization, a refusal, a real sign of indifference, or for a mere
      “Let me alone.”
    

      “Madame,” I replied, “if you mind the smell of tobacco
      in the least—”
    

      She again said, “Mica,” in a tone which seemed to mean,
      “I wish to goodness you would leave me alone!” It was,
      however, a kind of permission, so I said to Paul:
    

      “You may smoke.”
    

      He looked at me in that curious sort of way that people have when they try
      to understand others who are talking in a strange language before them,
      and asked me:
    

      “What did you say to her?”
    

      “I asked whether we might smoke, and she said we might do whatever
      we liked.”
    

      Whereupon I lighted my cigar.
    

      “Did she say anything more?”
    

      “If you had counted her words you would have noticed that she used
      exactly six, two of which gave me to understand that she knew no French,
      so four remained, and much can be said in four words.”
    

      Paul seemed quite unhappy, disappointed, and at sea, so to speak.
    

      But suddenly the Italian asked me, in that tone of discontent which seemed
      habitual to her, “Do you know at what time we shall get to Genoa?”
    

      “At eleven o'clock,” I replied. Then after a moment I went on:
    

      “My friend and I are also going to Genoa, and if we can be of any
      service to you, we shall be very happy, as you are quite alone.” But
      she interrupted with such a “Mica!” that I did not venture on
      another word.
    

      “What did she say?” Paul asked.
    

      “She said she thought you were charming.”
    

      But he was in no humor for joking, and begged me dryly not to make fun of
      him; so I translated her question and my polite offer, which had been so
      rudely rejected.
    

      Then he really became as restless as a caged squirrel.
    

      “If we only knew,” he said, “what hotel she was going
      to, we would go to the same. Try to find out so as to have another
      opportunity to make her talk.”
    

      It was not particularly easy, and I did not know what pretext to invent,
      desirous as I was to make the acquaintance of this unapproachable person.
    

      We passed Nice, Monaco, Mentone, and the train stopped at the frontier for
      the examination of luggage.
    

      Although I hate those ill-bred people who breakfast and dine in
      railway-carriages, I went and bought a quantity of good things to make one
      last attack on her by their means. I felt sure that this girl must,
      ordinarily, be by no means inaccessible. Something had put her out and
      made her irritable, but very little would suffice, a mere word or some
      agreeable offer, to decide her and vanquish her.
    

      We started again, and we three were still alone. I spread my eatables on
      the seat. I cut up the fowl, put the slices of ham neatly on a piece of
      paper, and then carefully laid out our dessert, strawberries, plums,
      cherries and cakes, close to the girl.
    

      When she saw that we were about to eat she took a piece of chocolate and
      two little crisp cakes out of her pocket and began to munch them.
    

      “Ask her to have some of ours,” Paul said in a whisper.
    

      “That is exactly what I wish to do, but it is rather a difficult
      matter.”
    

      As she, however, glanced from time to time at our provisions, I felt sure
      that she would still be hungry when she had finished what she had with
      her; so, as soon as her frugal meal was over, I said to her:
    

      “It would be very kind of you if you would take some of this fruit.”
    

      Again she said “Mica!” but less crossly than before.
    

      “Well, then,” I said, “may I offer you a little wine? I
      see you have not drunk anything. It is Italian wine, and as we are now in
      your own country, we should be very pleased to see such a pretty Italian
      mouth accept the offer of its French neighbors.”
    

      She shook her head slightly, evidently wishing to refuse, but very
      desirous of accepting, and her mica this time was almost polite. I took
      the flask, which was covered with straw in the Italian fashion, and
      filling the glass, I offered it to her.
    

      “Please drink it,” I said, “to bid us welcome to your
      country.”
    

      She took the glass with her usual look, and emptied it at a draught, like
      a woman consumed with thirst, and then gave it back to me without even
      saying “Thank you.”
    

      I then offered her the cherries. “Please take some,” I said;
      “we shall be so glad if you will.”
    

      Out of her corner she looked at all the fruit spread out beside her, and
      said so rapidly that I could scarcely follow her: “A me non
      piacciono ne le ciriegie ne le susine; amo soltano le fragole.”
    

      “What does she say?” Paul asked.
    

      “That she does riot care for cherries or plums, but only for
      strawberries.”
    

      I put a newspaper full of wild strawberries on her lap, and she ate them
      quickly, tossing them into her mouth from some distance in a coquettish
      and charming manner.
    

      When she had finished the little red heap, which soon disappeared under
      the rapid action of her hands, I asked her:
    

      “What may I offer you now?”
    

      “I will take a little chicken,” she replied.
    

      She certainly devoured half of it, tearing it to pieces with the rapid
      movements of her jaws like some carnivorous animal. Then she made up her
      mind to have some cherries, which she “did not like,” and then
      some plums, then some little cakes. Then she said, “I have had
      enough,” and sat back in her corner.
    

      I was much amused, and tried to make her eat more, insisting, in fact,
      till she suddenly flew into a rage, and flung such a furious mica at me,
      that I would no longer run the risk of spoiling her digestion.
    

      I turned to my friend. “My poor Paul,” I said, “I am
      afraid we have had our trouble for nothing.”
    

      The night came on, one of those hot summer nights which extend their warm
      shade over the burning and exhausted earth. Here and there, in the
      distance, by the sea, on capes and promontories, bright stars, which I
      was, at times, almost inclined to confound with lighthouses, began to
      shine on the dark horizon:
    

      The scent of the orange trees became more penetrating, and we breathed
      with delight, distending our lungs to inhale it more deeply. The balmy air
      was soft, delicious, almost divine.
    

      Suddenly I noticed something like a shower of stars under the dense shade
      of the trees along the line, where it was quite dark. It might have been
      taken for drops of light, leaping, flying, playing and running among the
      leaves, or for small stars fallen from the skies in order to have an
      excursion on the earth; but they were only fireflies dancing a strange
      fiery ballet in the perfumed air.
    

      One of them happened to come into our carriage, and shed its intermittent
      light, which seemed to be extinguished one moment and to be burning the
      next. I covered the carriage-lamp with its blue shade and watched the
      strange fly careering about in its fiery flight. Suddenly it settled on
      the dark hair of our neighbor, who was half dozing after dinner. Paul
      seemed delighted, with his eyes fixed on the bright, sparkling spot, which
      looked like a living jewel on the forehead of the sleeping woman.
    

      The Italian woke up about eleven o'clock, with the bright insect still in
      her hair. When I saw her move, I said: “We are just getting to
      Genoa, madame,” and she murmured, without answering me, as if
      possessed by some obstinate and embarrassing thought:
    

      “What am I going to do, I wonder?”
    

      And then she suddenly asked:
    

      “Would you like me to come with you?”
    

      I was so taken aback that I really did not understand her.
    

      “With us? How do you mean?”
    

      She repeated, looking more and more furious:
    

      “Would you like me to be your guide now, as soon as we get out of
      the train?”
    

      “I am quite willing; but where do you want to go.”
    

      She shrugged her shoulders with an air of supreme indifference.
    

      “Wherever you like; what does it matter to me?” She repeated
      her “Che mi fa” twice.
    

      “But we are going to the hotel.”
    

      “Very well, let us all go to the hotel,” she said, in a
      contemptuous voice.
    

      I turned to Paul, and said:
    

      “She wishes to know whether we should like her to come with us.”
    

      My friend's utter surprise restored my self-possession. He stammered:
    

      “With us? Where to? What for? How?”
    

      “I don't know, but she made this strange proposal to me in a most
      irritated voice. I told her that we were going to the hotel, and she said:
      'Very well, let us all go there!' I suppose she is without a penny. She
      certainly has a very strange way of making acquaintances.”
    

      Paul, who 'was very much excited, exclaimed:
    

      “I am quite agreeable. Tell her that we will go wherever she likes.”
      Then, after a moment's hesitation, he said uneasily:
    

      “We must know, however, with whom she wishes to go—with you or
      with me?”
    

      I turned to the Italian, who did not even seem to be listening to us, and
      said:
    

      “We shall be very happy to have you with us, but my friend wishes to
      know whether you will take my arm or his?”
    

      She opened her black eyes wide with vague surprise, and said, “Che
      ni fa?”
    

      I was obliged to explain myself. “In Italy, I believe, when a man
      looks after a woman, fulfils all her wishes, and satisfies all her
      caprices, he is called a patito. Which of us two will you take for your
      patito?”
    

      Without the slightest hesitation she replied:
    

      “You!”
    

      I turned to Paul. “You see, my friend, she chooses me; you have no
      chance.”
    

      “All the better for you,” he replied in a rage. Then, after
      thinking for a few moments, he went on:
    

      “Do you really care about taking this creature with you? She will
      spoil our journey. What are we to do with this woman, who looks like I
      don't know what? They will not take us in at any decent hotel.”
    

      I, however, just began to find the Italian much nicer than I had thought
      her at first, and I was now very desirous to take her with us. The idea
      delighted me.
    

      I replied, “My dear fellow, we have accepted, and it is too late to
      recede. You were the first to advise me to say 'Yes.'”
    

      “It is very stupid,” he growled, “but do as you please.”
    

      The train whistled, slackened speed, and we ran into the station.
    

      I got out of the carriage, and offered my new companion my hand. She
      jumped out lightly, and I gave her my arm, which she took with an air of
      seeming repugnance. As soon as we had claimed our luggage we set off into
      the town, Paul walking in utter silence.
    

      “To what hotel shall we go?” I asked him. “It may be
      difficult to get into the City of Paris with a woman, especially with this
      Italian.”
    

      Paul interrupted me. “Yes, with an Italian who looks more like a
      dancer than a duchess. However, that is no business of mine. Do just as
      you please.”
    

      I was in a state of perplexity. I had written to the City of Paris to
      retain our rooms, and now I did not know what to do.
    

      Two commissionaires followed us with our luggage. I continued: “You
      might as well go on first, and say that we are coming; and give the
      landlord to understand that I have a—a friend with me and that we
      should like rooms quite by themselves for us three, so as not to be
      brought in contact with other travellers. He will understand, and we will
      decide according to his answer.”
    

      But Paul growled, “Thank you, such commissions and such parts do not
      suit me, by any means. I did not come here to select your apartments or to
      minister to your pleasures.”
    

      But I was urgent: “Look here, don't be angry. It is surely far
      better to go to a good hotel than to a bad one, and it is not difficult to
      ask the landlord for three separate bedrooms and a dining-room.”
    

      I put a stress on three, and that decided him.
    

      He went on first, and I saw him go into a large hotel while I remained on
      the other side of the street, with my fair Italian, who did not say a
      word, and followed the porters with the luggage.
    

      Paul came back at last, looking as dissatisfied as my companion.
    

      “That is settled,” he said, “and they will take us in;
      but here are only two bedrooms. You must settle it as you can.”
    

      I followed him, rather ashamed of going in with such a strange companion.
    

      There were two bedrooms separated by a small sitting-room. I ordered a
      cold supper, and then I turned to the Italian with a perplexed look.
    

      “We have only been able to get two rooms, so you must choose which
      you like.”
    

      She replied with her eternal “Che mi fa!” I thereupon took up
      her little black wooden trunk, such as servants use, and took it into the
      room on the right, which I had chosen for her. A bit of paper was fastened
      to the box, on which was written, Mademoiselle Francesca Rondoli, Genoa.
    

      “Your name is Francesca?” I asked, and she nodded her head,
      without replying.
    

      “We shall have supper directly,” I continued. “Meanwhile,
      I dare say you would like to arrange your toilette a little?”
    

      She answered with a 'mica', a word which she employed just as frequently
      as 'Che me fa', but I went on: “It is always pleasant after a
      journey.”
    

      Then I suddenly remembered that she had not, perhaps, the necessary
      requisites, for she appeared to me in a very singular position, as if she
      had just escaped from some disagreeable adventure, and I brought her my
      dressing-case.
    

      I put out all the little instruments for cleanliness and comfort which it
      contained: a nail-brush, a new toothbrush—I always carry a selection
      of them about with me—my nail-scissors, a nail-file, and sponges. I
      uncorked a bottle of eau de cologne, one of lavender-water, and a little
      bottle of new-mown hay, so that she might have a choice. Then I opened my
      powder-box, and put out the powder-puff, placed my fine towels over the
      water-jug, and a piece of new soap near the basin.
    

      She watched my movements with a look of annoyance in her wide-open eyes,
      without appearing either astonished or pleased at my forethought.
    

      “Here is all that you require,” I then said; “I will
      tell you when supper is ready.”
    

      When I returned to the sitting-room I found that Paul had shut himself in
      the other room, so I sat down to wait.
    

      A waiter went to and fro, bringing plates and glasses. He laid the table
      slowly, then put a cold chicken on it, and told me that all was ready.
    

      I knocked gently at Mademoiselle Rondoli's door. “Come in,”
      she said, and when I did so I was struck by a strong, heavy smell of
      perfumes, as if I were in a hairdresser's shop.
    

      The Italian was sitting on her trunk in an attitude either of thoughtful
      discontent or absent-mindedness. The towel was still folded over the
      waterjug that was full of water, and the soap, untouched and dry, was
      lying beside the empty basin; but one would have thought that the young
      woman had used half the contents of the bottles of perfume. The eau de
      cologne, however, had been spared, as only about a third of it had gone;
      but to make up for that she had used a surprising amount of lavender-water
      and new-mown hay. A cloud of violet powder, a vague white mist, seemed
      still to be floating in the air, from the effects of her over-powdering
      her face and neck. It seemed to cover her eyelashes, eyebrows, and the
      hair on her temples like snow, while her cheeks were plastered with it,
      and layers of it covered her nostrils, the corners of her eyes, and her
      chin.
    

      When she got up she exhaled such a strong odor of perfume that it almost
      made me feel faint.
    

      When we sat down to supper, I found that Paul was in a most execrable
      temper, and I could get nothing out of him but blame, irritable words, and
      disagreeable remarks.
    

      Mademoiselle Francesca ate like an ogre, and as soon as she had finished
      her meal she threw herself upon the sofa in the sitting-room. Sitting down
      beside her, I said gallantly, kissing her hand:
    

      “Shall I have the bed prepared, or will you sleep on the couch?”
    

      “It is all the same to me. 'Che mi fa'!”
    

      Her indifference vexed me.
    

      “Should you like to retire at once?”
    

      “Yes; I am very sleepy.”
    

      She got up, yawned, gave her hand to Paul, who took it with a furious
      look, and I lighted her into the bedroom. A disquieting feeling haunted
      me. “Here is all you want,” I said again.
    

      The next morning she got up early, like a woman who is accustomed to work.
      She woke me by doing so, and I watched her through my half-closed eyelids.
    

      She came and went without hurrying herself, as if she were astonished at
      having nothing to do. At length she went to the dressing-table, and in a
      moment emptied all my bottles of perfume. She certainly also used some
      water, but very little.
    

      When she was quite dressed, she sat down on her trunk again, and clasping
      one knee between her hands, she seemed to be thinking.
    

      At that moment I pretended to first notice her, and said:
    

      “Good-morning, Francesca.”
    

      Without seeming in at all a better temper than the previous night, she
      murmured, “Good-morning!”
    

      When I asked her whether she had slept well, she nodded her head, and
      jumping out of bed, I went and kissed her.
    

      She turned her face toward me like a child who is being kissed against its
      will; but I took her tenderly in my arms, and gently pressed my lips on
      her eyelids, which she closed with evident distaste under my kisses on her
      fresh cheek and full lips, which she turned away.
    

      “You don't seem to like being kissed,” I said to her.
    

      “Mica!” was her only answer.
    

      I sat down on the trunk by her side, and passing my arm through hers, I
      said: “Mica! mica! mica! in reply to everything. I shall call you
      Mademoiselle Mica, I think.”
    

      For the first time I fancied that I saw the shadow of a smile on her lips,
      but it passed by so quickly that I may have been mistaken.
    

      “But if you never say anything but Mica, I shall not know what to do
      to please you. Let me see; what shall we do to-day?”
    

      She hesitated a moment, as if some fancy had flitted through her head, and
      then she said carelessly: “It is all the same to me; whatever you
      like.”
    

      “Very well, Mademoiselle Mica, we will have a carriage and go for a
      drive.”
    

      “As you please,” she said.
    

      Paul was waiting for us in the dining-room, looking as bored as third
      parties usually do in love affairs. I assumed a delighted air, and shook
      hands with him with triumphant energy.
    

      “What are you thinking of doing?” he asked.
    

      “First of all, we will go and see a little of the town, and then we
      might get a carriage and take a drive in the neighborhood.”
    

      We breakfasted almost in silence, and then set out. I dragged Francesca
      from palace to palace, and she either looked at nothing or merely glanced
      carelessly at the various masterpieces. Paul followed us, growling all
      sorts of disagreeable things. Then we all three took a drive in silence
      into the country and returned to dinner.
    

      The next day it was the same thing and the next day again; and on the
      third Paul said to me: “Look here, I am going to leave you; I am not
      going to stop here for three weeks watching you make love to this
      creature.”
    

      I was perplexed and annoyed, for to my great surprise I had become
      singularly attached to Francesca. A man is but weak and foolish, carried
      away by the merest trifle, and a coward every time that his senses are
      excited or mastered. I clung to this unknown girl, silent and dissatisfied
      as she always was. I liked her somewhat ill-tempered face, the
      dissatisfied droop of her mouth, the weariness of her look; I liked her
      fatigued movements, the contemptuous way in which she let me kiss her, the
      very indifference of her caresses. A secret bond, that mysterious bond of
      physical love, which does not satisfy, bound me to her. I told Paul so,
      quite frankly. He treated me as if I were a fool, and then said:
    

      “Very well, take her with you.”
    

      But she obstinately refused to leave Genoa, without giving any reason. I
      besought, I reasoned, I promised, but all was of no avail, and so I stayed
      on.
    

      Paul declared that he would go by himself, and went so far as to pack up
      his portmanteau; but he remained all the same.
    

      Thus a fortnight passed. Francesca was always silent and irritable, lived
      beside me rather than with me, responded to all my requirements and all my
      propositions with her perpetual Che mi fa, or with her no less perpetual
      Mica.
    

      My friend became more and more furious, but my only answer was, “You
      can go if you are tired of staying. I am not detaining you.”
    

      Then he called me names, overwhelmed me with reproaches, and exclaimed:
      “Where do you think I can go now? We had three weeks at our
      disposal, and here is a fortnight gone! I cannot continue my journey now;
      and, in any case, I am not going to Venice, Florence and Rome all by
      myself. But you will pay for it, and more dearly than you think, most
      likely. You are not going to bring a man all the way from Paris in order
      to shut him up at a hotel in Genoa with an Italian adventuress.”
    

      When I told him, very calmly, to return to Paris, he exclaimed that he
      intended to do so the very next day; but the next day he was still there,
      still in a rage and swearing.
    

      By this time we began to be known in the streets through which we wandered
      from morning till night. Sometimes French people would turn round
      astonished at meeting their fellow-countrymen in the company of this girl
      with her striking costume, who looked singularly out of place, not to say
      compromising, beside us.
    

      She used to walk along, leaning on my arm, without looking at anything.
      Why did she remain with me, with us, who seemed to do so little to amuse
      her? Who was she? Where did she come from? What was she doing? Had she any
      plan or idea? Where did she live? As an adventuress, or by chance
      meetings? I tried in vain to find out and to explain it. The better I knew
      her the more enigmatical she became. She seemed to be a girl of poor
      family who had been taken away, and then cast aside and lost. What did she
      think would become of her, or whom was she waiting for? She certainly did
      not appear to be trying to make a conquest of me, or to make any real
      profit out of me.
    

      I tried to question her, to speak to her of her childhood and family; but
      she never gave me an answer. I stayed with her, my heart unfettered and my
      senses enchained, never wearied of holding her in my arms, that proud and
      quarrelsome woman, captivated by my senses, or rather carried away,
      overcome by a youthful, healthy, powerful charm, which emanated from her
      fragrant person and from the well-molded lines of her body.
    

      Another week passed, and the term of my journey was drawing on, for I had
      to be back in Paris by the eleventh of July. By this time Paul had come to
      take his part in the adventure, though still grumbling at me, while I
      invented pleasures, distractions and excursions to amuse Francesca and my
      friend; and in order to do this I gave myself a great amount of trouble.
    

      One day I proposed an excursion to Sta Margarita, that charming little
      town in the midst of gardens, hidden at the foot of a slope which
      stretches far into the sea up to the village of Portofino. We three walked
      along the excellent road which goes along the foot of the mountain.
      Suddenly Francesca said to me: “I shall not be able to go with you
      to-morrow; I must go and see some of my relatives.”
    

      That was all; I did not ask her any questions, as I was quite sure she
      would not answer me.
    

      The next morning she got up very early. When she spoke to me it was in a
      constrained and hesitating voice:
    

      “If I do not come back again, shall you come and fetch me?”
    

      “Most certainly I shall,” was my reply. “Where shall I
      go to find you?”
    

      Then she explained: “You must go into the Street Victor-Emmanuel,
      down the Falcone road and the side street San-Rafael and into the
      furniture shop in the building at the right at the end of a court, and
      there you must ask for Madame Rondoli. That is the place.”
    

      And so she went away, leaving me rather astonished.
    

      When Paul saw that I was alone, he stammered out: “Where; is
      Francesca?” And when I told him what had happened, he exclaimed:
    

      “My dear fellow, let us make use of our opportunity, and bolt; as it
      is, our time is up. Two days, more or less, make no difference. Let us go
      at once; go and pack up your things. Off we go!”
    

      But I refused. I could not, as I told him, leave the girl in that manner
      after such companionship for nearly three weeks. At any rate, I ought to
      say good-by to her, and make her accept a present; I certainly had no
      intention of behaving badly to her.
    

      But he would not listen; he pressed and worried me, but I would not give
      way.
    

      I remained indoors for several hours, expecting Francesca's return, but
      she did not come, and at last, at dinner, Paul said with a triumphant air:
    

      “She has flown, my dear fellow; it is certainly very strange.”
    

      I must acknowledge that I was surprised and rather vexed. He laughed in my
      face, and made fun of me.
    

      “It is not exactly a bad way of getting rid of you, though rather
      primitive. 'Just wait for me, I shall be back in a moment,' they often
      say. How long are you going to wait? I should not wonder if you were
      foolish enough to go and look for her at the address she gave you. 'Does
      Madame Rondoli live here, please?' 'No, monsieur.' I'll bet that you are
      longing to go there.”
    

      “Not in the least,” I protested, “and I assure you that
      if she does not come back to-morrow morning I shall leave by the express
      at eight o'clock. I shall have waited twenty-four hours, and that is
      enough; my conscience will be quite clear.”
    

      I spent an uneasy and unpleasant evening, for I really had at heart a very
      tender feeling for her. I went to bed at twelve o'clock, and hardly slept
      at all. I got up at six, called Paul, packed up my things, and two hours
      later we set out for France together.
    

      III
    

      The next year, at just about the same period, I was seized as one is with
      a periodical fever, with a new desire to go to Italy, and I immediately
      made up my mind to carry it into effect. There is no doubt that every
      really well-educated man ought to see Florence, Venice and Rome. This
      travel has, also, the additional advantage of providing many subjects of
      conversation in society, and of giving one an opportunity for bringing
      forward artistic generalities which appear profound.
    

      This time I went alone, and I arrived at Genoa at the same time as the
      year before, but without any adventure on the road. I went to the same
      hotel, and actually happened to have the same room.
    

      I was hardly in bed when the recollection of Francesca which, since the
      evening before, had been floating vaguely through my mind, haunted me with
      strange persistency. I thought of her nearly the whole night, and by
      degrees the wish to see her again seized me, a confused desire at first,
      which gradually grew stronger and more intense. At last I made up my mind
      to spend the next day in Genoa to try to find her, and if I should not
      succeed, to take the evening train.
    

      Early in the morning I set out on my search. I remembered the directions
      she had given me when she left me, perfectly—Victor-Emmanuel Street,
      house of the furniture-dealer, at the bottom of the yard on the right.
    

      I found it without the least difficulty, and I knocked at the door of a
      somewhat dilapidated-looking dwelling. It was opened by a stout woman, who
      must have been very handsome, but who actually was only very dirty.
      Although she had too much embonpoint, she still bore the lines of majestic
      beauty; her untidy hair fell over her forehead and shoulders, and one
      fancied one could see her floating about in an enormous dressing-gown
      covered with spots of dirt and grease. Round her neck she wore a great
      gilt necklace, and on her wrists were splendid bracelets of Genoa filigree
      work.
    

      In rather a hostile manner she asked me what I wanted, and I replied by
      requesting her to tell me whether Francesca Rondoli lived there.
    

      “What do you want with her?” she asked.
    

      “I had the pleasure of meeting her last year, and I should like to
      see her again.”
    

      The old woman looked at me suspiciously.
    

      “Where did you meet her?” she asked.
    

      “Why, here in Genoa itself.”
    

      “What is your name?”
    

      I hesitated a moment, and then I told her. I had hardly done so when the
      Italian put out her arms as if to embrace me. “Oh! you are the
      Frenchman how glad I am to see you! But what grief you caused the poor
      child! She waited for you a month; yes, a whole month. At first she
      thought you would come to fetch her. She wanted to see whether you loved
      her. If you only knew how she cried when she saw that you were not coming!
      She cried till she seemed to have no tears left. Then she went to the
      hotel, but you had gone. She thought that most likely you were travelling
      in Italy, and that you would return by Genoa to fetch her, as she would
      not go with you. And she waited more than a month, monsieur; and she was
      so unhappy; so unhappy. I am her mother.”
    

      I really felt a little disconcerted, but I regained my self-possession,
      and asked:
    

      “Where is she now?”
    

      “She has gone to Paris with a painter, a delightful man, who loves
      her very much, and who gives her everything that she wants. Just look at
      what she sent me; they are very pretty, are they not?”
    

      And she showed me, with quite southern animation, her heavy bracelets and
      necklace. “I have also,” she continued, “earrings with
      stones in them, a silk dress, and some rings; but I only wear them on
      grand occasions. Oh! she is very happy, monsieur, very happy. She will be
      so pleased when I tell her you have been here. But pray come in and sit
      down. You will take something or other, surely?”
    

      But I refused, as I now wished to get away by the first train; but she
      took me by the arm and pulled me in, saying:
    

      “Please, come in; I must tell her that you have been in here.”
    

      I found myself in a small, rather dark room, furnished with only a table
      and a few chairs.
    

      She continued: “Oh, she is very happy now, very happy. When you met
      her in the train she was very miserable; she had had an unfortunate love
      affair in Marseilles, and she was coming home, poor child. But she liked
      you at once, though she was still rather sad, you understand. Now she has
      all she wants, and she writes and tells me everything that she does. His
      name is Bellemin, and they say he is a great painter in your country. He
      fell in love with her at first sight. But you will take a glass of
      sirup?-it is very good. Are you quite alone, this year?”
    

      “Yes,” I said, “quite alone.”
    

      I felt an increasing inclination to laugh, as my first disappointment was
      dispelled by what Mother Rondoli said. I was obliged; however, to drink a
      glass of her sirup.
    

      “So you are quite alone?” she continued. “How sorry I am
      that Francesca is not here now; she would have been company for you all
      the time you stayed. It is not very amusing to go about all by oneself,
      and she will be very sorry also.”
    

      Then, as I was getting up to go, she exclaimed:
    

      “But would you not like Carlotta to go with you? She knows all the
      walks very well. She is my second daughter, monsieur.”
    

      No doubt she took my look of surprise for consent, for she opened the
      inner door and called out up the dark stairs which I could not see:
    

      “Carlotta! Carlotta! make haste down, my dear child.”
    

      I tried to protest, but she would not listen.
    

      “No; she will be very glad to go with you; she is very nice, and
      much more cheerful than her sister, and she is a good girl, a very good
      girl, whom I love very much.”
    

      In a few moments a tall, slender, dark girl appeared, her hair hanging
      down, and her youthful figure showing unmistakably beneath an old dress of
      her mother's.
    

      The latter at once told her how matters stood.
    

      “This is Francesca's Frenchman, you know, the one whom she knew last
      year. He is quite alone, and has come to look for her, poor fellow; so I
      told him that you would go with him to keep him company.”
    

      The girl looked at me with her handsome dark eyes, and said, smiling:
    

      “I have no objection, if he wishes it”
    

      I could not possibly refuse, and merely said:
    

      “Of course, I shall be very glad of your company.”
    

      Her mother pushed her out. “Go and get dressed directly; put on your
      blue dress and your hat with the flowers, and make haste.”
    

      As soon as she had left the room the old woman explained herself: “I
      have two others, but they are much younger. It costs a lot of money to
      bring up four children. Luckily the eldest is off my hands at present.”
    

      Then she told all about herself, about her husband, who had been an
      employee on the railway, but who was dead, and she expatiated on the good
      qualities of Carlotta, her second girl, who soon returned, dressed, as her
      sister had been, in a striking, peculiar manner.
    

      Her mother examined her from head to foot, and, after finding everything
      right, she said:
    

      “Now, my children, you can go.” Then turning to the girl, she
      said: “Be sure you are back by ten o'clock to-night; you know the
      door is locked then.” The answer was:
    

      “All right, mamma; don't alarm yourself.”
    

      She took my arm and we went wandering about the streets, just as I had
      wandered the previous year with her sister.
    

      We returned to the hotel for lunch, and then I took my new friend to Santa
      Margarita, just as I had taken her sister the year previously.
    

      During the whole fortnight which I had at my disposal, I took Carlotta to
      all the places of interest in and about Genoa. She gave me no cause to
      regret her sister.
    

      She cried when I left her, and the morning of my departure I gave her four
      bracelets for her mother, besides a substantial token of my affection for
      herself.
    

      One of these days I intend to return to Italy, and I cannot help
      remembering with a certain amount of uneasiness, mingled with hope, that
      Madame Rondoli has two more daughters.
    







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 7.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME VII.