THE EFFEMINATES

 How often we hear people say, “He is charming, that man, but he is a
      girl, a regular girl.” They are alluding to the effeminates, the
      bane of our land.

 For we are all girl-like men in France—that is, fickle, fanciful,
      innocently treacherous, without consistency in our convictions or our
      will, violent and weak as women are.

 But the most irritating of girl—men is assuredly the Parisian and
      the boulevardier, in whom the appearance of intelligence is more marked
      and who combines in himself all the attractions and all the faults of
      those charming creatures in an exaggerated degree in virtue of his
      masculine temperament.

 Our Chamber of Deputies is full of girl-men. They form the greater number
      of the amiable opportunists whom one might call “The Charmers.”
      These are they who control by soft words and deceitful promises, who know
      how to shake hands in such a manner as to win hearts, how to say “My
      dear friend” in a certain tactful way to people he knows the least,
      to change his mind without suspecting it, to be carried away by each new
      idea, to be sincere in their weathercock convictions, to let themselves be
      deceived as they deceive others, to forget the next morning what he
      affirmed the day before.

 The newspapers are full of these effeminate men. That is probably where
      one finds the most, but it is also where they are most needed. The Journal
      des Debats and the Gazette de France are exceptions.

 Assuredly, every good journalist must be somewhat effeminate—that
      is, at the command of the public, supple in following unconsciously the
      shades of public opinion, wavering and varying, sceptical and credulous,
      wicked and devout, a braggart and a true man, enthusiastic and ironical,
      and always convinced while believing in nothing.

 Foreigners, our anti-types, as Mme. Abel called them, the stubborn English
      and the heavy Germans, regard us with a certain amazement mingled with
      contempt, and will continue to so regard us till the end of time. They
      consider us frivolous. It is not that, it is that we are girls. And that
      is why people love us in spite of our faults, why they come back to us
      despite the evil spoken of us; these are lovers' quarrels! The effeminate
      man, as one meets him in this world, is so charming that he captivates you
      after five minutes' chat. His smile seems made for you; one cannot believe
      that his voice does not assume specially tender intonations on their
      account. When he leaves you it seems as if one had known him for twenty
      years. One is quite ready to lend him money if he asks for it. He has
      enchanted you, like a woman.

 If he commits any breach of manners towards you, you cannot bear any
      malice, he is so pleasant when you next meet him. If he asks your pardon
      you long to ask pardon of him. Does he tell lies? You cannot believe it.
      Does he put you off indefinitely with promises that he does not keep? One
      lays as much store by his promises as though he had moved heaven and earth
      to render them a service.

 When he admires anything he goes into such raptures that he convinces you.
      He once adored Victor Hugo, whom he now treats as a back number. He would
      have fought for Zola, whom he has abandoned for Barbey and d'Aurevilly.
      And when he admires, he permits no limitation, he would slap your face for
      a word. But when he becomes scornful, his contempt is unbounded and allows
      of no protest.

 In fact, he understands nothing.

 Listen to two girls talking.

 “Then you are angry with Julia?” “I slapped her face.”
      “What had she done?” “She told Pauline that I had no
      money thirteen months out of twelve, and Pauline told Gontran—you
      understand.” “You were living together in the Rue Clanzel?”
      “We lived together four years in the Rue Breda; we quarrelled about
      a pair of stockings that she said I had worn —it wasn't true—silk
      stockings that she had bought at Mother Martin's. Then I gave her a
      pounding and she left me at once. I met her six months ago and she asked
      me to come and live with her, as she has rented a flat that is twice too
      large.”

 One goes on one's way and hears no more. But on the following Sunday as
      one is on the way to Saint Germain two young women get into the same
      railway carriage. One recognizes one of them at once; it is Julia's enemy.
      The other is Julia!

 And there are endearments, caresses, plans. “Say, Julia—listen,
      Julia,” etc.

 The girl-man has his friendships of this kind. For three months he cannot
      bear to leave his old Jack, his dear Jack. There is no one but Jack in the
      world. He is the only one who has any intelligence, any sense, any talent.
      He alone amounts to anything in Paris. One meets them everywhere together,
      they dine together, walk about in company, and every evening walk home
      with each other back and forth without being able to part with one
      another.

 Three months later, if Jack is mentioned:

 “There is a drinker, a sorry fellow, a scoundrel for you. I know him
      well, you may be sure. And he is not even honest, and ill-bred,”
      etc., etc.

 Three months later, and they are living together.

 But one morning one hears that they have fought a duel, then embraced each
      other, amid tears, on the duelling ground.

 Just now they are the dearest friends in the world, furious with each
      other half the year, abusing and loving each other by turns, squeezing
      each other's hands till they almost crush the bones, and ready to run each
      other through the body for a misunderstanding.

 For the relations of these effeminate men are uncertain. Their temper is
      by fits and starts, their delight unexpected, their affection
      turn-about-face, their enthusiasm subject to eclipse. One day they love
      you, the next day they will hardly look at you, for they have in fact a
      girl's nature, a girl's charm, a girl's temperament, and all their
      sentiments are like the affections of girls.

 They treat their friends as women treat their pet dogs.

 It is the dear little Toutou whom they hug, feed with sugar, allow to
      sleep on the pillow, but whom they would be just as likely to throw out of
      a window in a moment of impatience, whom they turn round like a sling,
      holding it by the tail, squeeze in their arms till they almost strangle
      it, and plunge, without any reason, in a pail of cold water.

 Then, what a strange thing it is when one of these beings falls in love
      with a real girl! He beats her, she scratches him, they execrate each
      other, cannot bear the sight of each other and yet cannot part, linked
      together by no one knows what mysterious psychic bonds. She deceives him,
      he knows it, sobs and forgives her. He despises and adores her without
      seeing that she would be justified in despising him. They are both
      atrociously unhappy and yet cannot separate. They cast invectives,
      reproaches and abominable accusations at each other from morning till
      night, and when they have reached the climax and are vibrating with rage
      and hatred, they fall into each other's arms and kiss each other ardently.

 The girl-man is brave and a coward at the same time. He has, more than
      another, the exalted sentiment of honor, but is lacking in the sense of
      simple honesty, and, circumstances favoring him, would defalcate and
      commit infamies which do not trouble his conscience, for he obeys without
      questioning the oscillations of his ideas, which are always impulsive.

 To him it seems permissible and almost right to cheat a haberdasher. He
      considers it honorable not to pay his debts, unless they are gambling
      debts—that is, somewhat shady. He dupes people whenever the laws of
      society admit of his doing so. When he is short of money he borrows in all
      ways, not always being scrupulous as to tricking the lenders, but he
      would, with sincere indignation, run his sword through anyone who should
      suspect him of only lacking in politeness.