[

91 ] 

THE PROTECTION OF THE
‘SPARROWHAWK.’

 Many

people have their special antipathies. There
are instances on record of one fainting at the scent of
heliotrope; of another becoming hysterical at the mewing
of a cat; and so on, and so on, ad infinitum . The
Scotch, as a rule, are anything but a nervously susceptible
nation, taken either collectively or individually. Nor
have I heard that those members of it who follow the
sea as a calling are more so than their shorekeeping
compatriots.

 Still, to the present day, and probably to the day of his
departure, John M‘Cracken, retired master mariner, of
Aberdeen, becomes signally and powerfully moved by
the cry of the domestic duck, rendered universally and
approximately as ‘Quack!’ His red face grows redder,
his light blue eyes glower menacingly, and his hands
open and close nervously, as if longing for some missile
wherewith to annihilate the unconscious fowl—or its
human imitator.

 The Sparrowhawk

, barque, M‘Cracken master, was
chartered to convey returning Chinese passengers from
Singapore to Amoy.

 [

92 ] 

I think the regulations as to space, numbers, etc., etc.,
could not, in those days, have been very strict. Be this
as it may, Skipper M‘Cracken filled up until he could fill
no more. The ’tween deck was like a freshly-opened
sardine tin; on the main deck they lay in double tiers.
Many roosted in the tops. The boats on the davits and
the long-boat on the skids swarmed with the home-going
children of the Flowery Land. The better class,
merchants, tradesmen, etc., had secured everything aft,
from the captain’s cabin to the steward’s pantry, for
which accommodation fabulous sums found their way
into the pockets of M‘Cracken and his mates. For’ard,
the crew had vacated the forecastle in consideration of
sundry handfuls per man of dollars, which they had
subsequently discovered to be ‘chop.’

 The mild-eyed heathen in his leisure moments had
amused himself by punching pellets of good silver out of
them, and filling the holes up with lead. From taffrail
to bowsprit-heel, from waterways to keelson, the Sparrowhawk

seethed and stank with a sweltering mass of yellow
humanity. Every soul had a square of matting and a
water-jar, also an umbrella. They also all had money—more
or less. The fellows aft, with the flowing silk gowns
and long finger-nails, owned chests of it, all in silver
specie, stowed snugly away in the lazarette. The herd
carried their little fortunes, hardly earned by years of
incessant toil as sampan men, porters, or what not, in the
great border city on the sea, hidden upon their persons.

 The vessel looked grotesque to a degree. She was
flying light, and towered loftily out of the water. Upon [

93 ]

her deck, amidships, rose two big arrangements after the
nature of boilers. These were for cooking rice, and were
occasionally the scenes of fierce fighting, during which
the Europeans would clamber into the rigging, leaving
a clear field, and applaud vociferously. They were a
harmless people, and fought like sheep-dogs, rarely
doing one another much harm.

 From the barque’s side protruded curious cage-like
structures connected with the sanitary affairs of the
multitude. This last lay everywhere, pervaded everything.
If you wanted a rope you had to dislodge
half-a-dozen grunting, naked bodies. Trimming the yards
o’ nights the watches tripped and fell amongst the
prostrate ranks.

 The passengers, however, bore it all placidly. They
had paid M‘Cracken so many dollars per head for a piece
of his deck, and the situation of it was quite immaterial.
Moreover, were they not homeward bound after years of
separation from wives and little ones with fortunes made
beyond the sea? Men in such circumstances are apt to
be good-tempered. A heavy squall would probably have
caused the loss of the Sparrowhawk

and all on board.
But Captain M‘Cracken took the risk—and the dollars.
He slept on an old sail folded across the cuddy skylight.
His mattress he had leased along with his state-room to
one of the merchants who, he understood, was a convert
to Christianity. The wind kept light, with showers at
intervals. At the first drop, up would go every umbrella;
and, looking from aloft, the sight was a queer one.

 On leaving Singapore the skipper had been warned [

94 ]

that pirates were still to be met with in Chinese waters,
and, short though the passage was, advised to arm, at all
events in some sort, his ship and crew. This he did.
At a marine store he bought, second-hand, a couple of
cannon—three pounders—also several dozen of grape
shot. In exchange for a worn mizzen-topsail and the fat
saved by the cook (of usage the latter’s perquisite) on the
passage out, he procured some old Tower muskets, a few
boarding-pikes, and three horse-pistols for his own and
his officers’ especial use. These last had flintlocks and
mouths like a bell. Thus equipped, he declared himself
ready for any piratical attack.

 The ship’s agents smiled meaningly, and winked at
each other; but, knowing their man, forbore further
advice, well recognising the inutility of it. A Scotchman
who owns a full half interest in his ship, who hails
from Aberdeen, and habitually comes ashore in latitude 0 with a Glengarry cap on, no umbrella, and
naked feet, is not a being to stand argument.

 One night the moon rose full, and right aft. She
rose, too, with a big black spot in her disc that had no
right to be there.

 There was too much samshoo aboard for a very sharp
look-out to be kept for’ard. That native spirit gets into
men’s eyes and weakens them. But aft the skipper
caught sight of the object.

 ‘It’ll be a junk, I’m thinkin’!’ he said presently, after
working away for a while with his glass; ‘an a muckle
ane at that. She’s fetchin’ a breezie wi’ her, whilk’s
a comfort.’

 [

95 ] 

Some of the long-nailed aristocrats were lounging
about the poop. They needed no glass to make out the
approaching vessel. Gathering in a group, they cackled
noisily, pointing and gesticulating among themselves.

 Then, coming up to the captain, one—it was his
Christian friend—plucked him by the arm and uttered
laconically, with extended digit, ‘Prat!’

 ‘Weel, Johnnie,’ replied old M‘Cracken coolly, as he
gathered the other’s meaning, ‘pireet, or no pireet, gin
he come a wee closer, we’ll just pepper the hide o’ him
wi’ cauld airn.’

 Without more ado, the Chinaman dived into his
cabin and in a minute or two reappeared with a most
hideous idol and a bundle of perfumed paper. Placing
the thing right under the skipper’s nose, he lit a yard of
paper and began to screech an invocation. As of good
Presbyterian stock, M‘Cracken was irritated and shocked.

 ‘Mon, mon,’ he exclaimed, ‘what wad ye be at!
Hae ye niver been tauld that a’ graven eemages is an
abomination in the sicht o’ the Lord? An’ I thocht
ye was a Christian.’ So saying, he seized the joss and
flung it far overboard into the silvery water, just rippling
under the coming breeze. The worshipper uttered a
yell of dismay. But there was no time to lose, and,
rushing below, he brought up another god, ten times as
hideous as the first one, and, descending to the main
deck, aroused the ship with his devotions.

 Then arose the sound of a multitude waking in fear—an
impressive sound and a catching. Up the open
hatchways from the steaming, fœtid ’tween decks they [

96 ]

streamed in hundreds, like disturbed ants, with cries of
alarm and grief, and strong callings upon their gods.
In a minute the ship was alive with lights burning
before idols of every description. A thousand half-naked
figures crouched cowering from the break of
the poop right for’ard. Aft, a handful of rugged Scotch
seamen gazed quietly at the black spot over the water.
Presently the two little guns were crammed half up to
the muzzle with powder and grape, and placed each in a
socket cut out for it after leaving Singapore. The
remainder of the weapons were, with a stock of ammunition,
divided amongst the crew. Hot irons were put in
the galley fire; and the skipper, having thus placed his
ship in a thorough state of defence, felt complacent, and
half-inclined to shorten sail, wait for the pirates to come
up, and then give them a lesson. Old seaman though
he was, he was a new hand in these Eastern waters.

 Confiding his notion to the second mate, who was also
carpenter, also sailmaker, a grizzled ancient shellback of
much experience and endless voyaging, the other laughed
aloud, but not mirthfully.

 ‘If,’ said he, ‘yon’s a “prat,” as Johnnie there ca’s it,
we’ll a’ be meat for the fishes afore the sun’s risen!’

 ‘Hoots!’ exclaimed the skipper angrily, ‘whaur’s TN: apostrophe invisible yer
pluck, Davie, mon! I didna think ye’d be for showin’
the white feather a’ready, an’ ye a Newburgh lad as
weel’s mysel’! What’s a handfu’ o’ naked salvages like
yon, in compare wi’ us an’ oor arteelery?’

 ‘An’ hoo mony men micht she carry yonder, div ye
think?’ queried the other, taking a squint at the junk, [

97 ]

whose huge oblong sails shone whitely under the moonbeams.

 ‘Mebbe a score or sae,’ replied M‘Cracken, ‘airmed
maistley wi’ spears, an’ skeens, sic, as I’ve been tauld,
bein’ their usual weepons.’

 The other chuckled hoarsely as he said, ‘If she’s
a pireet, she’ll hae at the vera leest a guid twa ’unnered
aboord, a’ airmed wi’ muskets an’ swords, forbye things
they ca’ gingals, takin’ a sax-ounce ball, to say nothin’ o’
stinkpots an’ ither deviltries. Mon, I’ve seen ’em wi’
guns they cannonies there wadna mak’ rammars for.
But if that chap has ony, I doubt we sud ha’ heard frae
him ere the noo.

 ‘I was ance,’ continued he, ‘lyin’ in Hongkong
Harbour, when they cut oot the Cashmere

, a bouncin’
ocean steamer, in the braid daylicht, an’ murthered
ivery soul on boord o’ her. Na, na, skipper; let her
but get a haud on us, and ye’ll see the deil gang o’er
Jock Wabster sure aneuch.’

 The skipper listened silently. Then, wetting his
finger and holding it up, he said,—

 ‘Perhaps, after a’, Davie, mon, ye might ’s weel set
they t’g’nt stun’s’ls, gin ye can get them up, wi’ sic
an awfu’ rabble as is aboot the deck.’

 The breeze had died away again. There was only
just enough of it to keep the sails full. The fresh
canvas, however, sent the Sparrowhawk

through the
water half a knot faster, and she was beginning to perceptibly
leave the junk astern, when suddenly out
from her sides flashed a long row of sweeps, under [

98 ]

whose impulse she recovered her lost ground very
quickly. If there had been any doubt about the
character of the stranger, there remained none now;
and the uproar, which had partially ceased, arose with
tenfold vigour.

 Some of the passengers went down into the lazarette
and commenced to stow as many dollars as they could
about their clothing. Others divided their attention
between their idols and the skipper, running frantically
from one to the other. Curiously enough the junk
appeared satisfied to maintain her distance, although,
had she so desired, she could with her sweeps have
easily overhauled the barque.

 Now, from away on the port hand, where lay the
outline of the Chinese coast, black beneath the moon,
came a gentle mist hanging low and thick upon the
water. As it gradually enveloped the ship, hiding all
but close objects from view, she was kept away three
or four points. But, presently, with the haze, what wind
there was left her, the sails gave a few ominous flaps,
and then hung limply down. At this moment a Chinaman,
uttering a loud yell of fright, pointed over the
starboard quarter. There, close aboard, loomed up
a dark mass almost, high as she was, on a level with
the Sparrowhawk’s

poop-railing. It was the junk.

 ‘The het poker, quick!’ shouted the captain. Some
one brought it and, unheeding the skipper, dabbed it
straightway on the touch-hole of the little cannon pointing
directly, as it happened, at the pirate.

 The powder being damp, fizzed for a minute, and, [

99 ]

just as M‘Cracken sung out, ‘More pouther; she’s
fluffed ’i the pan!’ with a roar the thing went off. Off
and up as well, for it sprung six feet in the air, and
descended with a crash into the binnacle.

 ‘Fetch the ither ane,’ shouted M‘Cracken, ‘ TN: opening quote invisible an’ gie
’em anither dose i’ the wame. Hear till ’em,’ he continued,
as a most extraordinary noise arose from the
junk now just abreast of the mizzen-rigging. ‘Hear till
’em scraighin’, the thievin’ heathen pireets. They havena
muckle likin’ for sic a med’cin’. It gives them the
mirligoes. Pit yer fut on her, Tam Wulson, whiles I
send her aff,’ he went on, addressing a sailor, as the other
gun was brought over and shipped.

 ‘Pit yer ain fut on her, captain,’ answered the man.
‘I dinna a’thegither like the notion. She’ll lat oot
like ony cuddy, judgin’ frae her mate.’ But the skipper
was too excited to argue, and, applying the hot iron,
spit—fizzle—bang, and the piece went up, and, this time,
clean overboard.

 A thousand capering madmen were yelling at the
top of their voices on board the Sparrowhawk

; but
high and shrill above even that clamour could be heard
the screech from the junk at that last discharge. The
fog was still thick around the latter, and the ship’s sails
being aback, she was making a stern board towards the
enemy, to whom M‘Cracken, exulting, determined to
administer a coup de grâce TN: original lacks circumflex .

 ‘Noo then, a’thegither,’ he cried, and the old muskets
and the bell-muzzled pistols roared and kicked and
sent a leaden shower somewhere, while, amidst an [

100 ]

indescribable medley of yells and cheers, the defeated
pirate vanished into the mist.

 Someone cried out that she had sunk. But presently
the sound of her sweeps could be heard in the distance.

 Then the skipper, flushed and elated with victory,
snapped his fingers in the second mate’s face, as he exclaimed,—

 ‘That for yer Chinese pireets, Davie M‘Phairson!
Whaurs a’ their muskets an’ gingals an’ sic-like the noo?
Gin they had ony, they were ower frichted to make use
o’ them I expeck! But,’ growing serious, ‘my name’s
nae Sandy M‘Cracken gin I dinna chairge Tam Wulson
two pun ten shillin’—whilk is the price o’ her at cost—for
lettin’ the wee bit cannonie gang overboord. I tellt
him to keep her down wi’ his feet, and he wadna.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Swatow at last; and the Sparrowhawk

surrounded
with a thousand sampans whose occupants welcomed
their returned friends and relatives by trying to emulate
Babel.

 M‘Cracken was deified. His cabin could not hold
the presents—mostly in kind—that he received. Also,
his grateful passengers, having set apart a day for special
rejoicing and thanksgiving, returned, and, willy nilly, decorated
the Sparrowhawk

after the manner of their
land with banners and lanterns, and had a high old
time on board under the leadership of the convert, who
bewailed his backsliding, and privately asked M‘Cracken
to baptise him anew.

 The story of the fight ran all up and down the [

101 ]

seaboard. Hongkong heard of it, or a version of it, and
the Gazette

published a long story headed in big caps:
‘Another Piratical Outrage.—The Sparrowhawk

turns
on her Pursuer—Conspicuous Bravery of the Captain
and Crew—The Pirate Beaten off with Great Loss.’
Singapore heard it, and the Straits Times

followed
suit with ‘Four Junks and Terrible Slaughter.’ This
latter item, as we shall presently see, being pretty near
the mark.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 But what cripple is this that, in a couple of days,
comes staggering up to the Swatow anchorage with
her mat sails full of holes and her decks covered with
scarcely dry blood, and whose crew dance and screech
a wild defiance at the Sparrowhawk

as she passes on
to the inner harbour?

 Presently off comes a mandarin and a guard of soldiers
and hales M‘Cracken ashore, protesting and threatening.

 The British Consul is just dead of enteric fever. There
is, however, a French one, and in his room the complaint
of Sum Kum On, master of the Delight of the Foaming
Seas

, is heard. The tribunal is a mixed one, consisting
of two mandarins and the Consul. The first witness
called is Sum Kum On. He states that his vessel is a
coaster, engaged mostly in the poultry trade. That, on
the present trip, he left Kin Fo, a small port four days’
sail from Swatow, laden with a deck cargo of ducks for
the Swatow and Chee Foo markets. Had on board one
passenger, a wealthy tea-grower of Honan, who, carrying
with him many dollars, was naturally nervous, and afraid [

102 ]

of pirates. Sighting the big vessel, the tea-grower, now
in court, and prepared to give evidence, prayed him
(Sum Kum On) to keep close to it for protection from
said pirates.

 He did so. But in the calm and mist he unwittingly,
and without evil intent (being, as their Highnesses could
see, only a poor trader) came too near, when to his
amazement showers of bullets and great cannon balls
tore his sails to pieces; and, but for the coops being
piled high on deck, assuredly every soul must have
perished.

 In spite of explanations and shouts for mercy he was
repeatedly fired into, all his cargo killed, sixty new coops
of the best bamboo knocked to atoms; one of his crew
desperately wounded, his vessel irretrievably damaged.
His claim was for five hundred dollars; and he retired,
secure in the knowledge that the Heaven-Born Son of
the great foreign nation who, that day, with the Twin
Lights of Justice, occupied the judgment-seat, would
mete out compensation with an unsparing hand.

 The dealer gave evidence much to the same effect.
Then the wounded sailor, whose scalp had been furrowed
by a ball, ghastly with bandages and the gore which he
had liberally smeared over his features, told his tale. To
wind up with, the unlucky jumping cannon, which had
pitched on to the deck of the junk, was produced as
evidence of identity. Outside, in piles, lay other witnesses—hundreds
of fine fat ducks, stiff and ‘high.’

 Around the building the fickle crowd could be heard
raging for the blood of the unfortunate M‘Cracken, so [

103 ]

lately their hero. The Consul, who spoke English well,
was obviously ill at ease. The two mandarins glared
sourly at the poor skipper.

 ‘I think, captain, you’d better pay at once,’ said the
Consul. ‘Evidently a most unfortunate mistake has
been made; and that is the only way out of it that I
can see. TN: original has comma ’

 ‘I’ll see him dom’d afore I do!’ exclaimed the skipper.
‘Five hundred dollars! Why, it’s a hundred pun sterlin’
o’ oor money! An’ a’ for a wheen dukes an’ a crackit
heid! Na, na! Tell the skirlin’ fule I’ll gie him fifty
dollars, and that’s mair than a’ his gear’s worth. I’ll
gang to preesin suner than pay as muckle siller as he’s
askin’!’

 Outside the ‘Children of far Cathay’ could be heard
yelling louder than ever for the heart, liver, and entrails
of the white devil. The Consul’s face grew graver as he
listened to the wounded sailor, just below the open
window haranguing the crowd.

 ‘What’s a’ that claver aboot?’ asked the skipper.

 ‘They are demanding,’ replied the Consul, ‘that these
gentlemen’—indicating the mandarins—‘should have
you crucified at once. And, upon my word, captain, if
you don’t soon make up your mind, they’ll do it. I am
powerless to assist you in any way beyond finding you
the money.’

 M‘Cracken turned blue. It was like parting with his
life, the parting with that hundred pounds. But he
could see no escape. As the Consul quickly told him,
this was no question of imprisonment, but one of cash [

104 ]

down. So he paid; and, presently, followed by a coolie
carrying the little cannon, made his way to the boat
between lines of grinning soldiery, over whose shoulders
the rabble, derisive now, quacked itself hoarse. And
amongst the noisiest TN: original reads "noisest" of them he caught sight of his
Christian passenger.

 The Sparrowhawk

took no freight from Swatow. She
sailed for Rangoon speedily; but there it was just as bad.
The joke was too good not to circulate. In every
eastern port she and her people were greeted with volleys
of ‘quacks’ by the native population both on land and
water. Legions of imps, black and copper-coloured, and
all quacking with might and main, formed the skipper’s
retinue if he went ashore anywhere between Yokohama
and Bombay.

 Native masters of country wallahs , lying within hail,
would grin, and ask him for the protection of the Sparrowhawk

to their next port of call. It became
unbearable. India, China and Japan seemed to turn
into duck-pens at his approach.

 So he took the Sparrowhawk

out of those waters altogether,
and shortly afterwards gave up the sea. But,
although there are no ducks within a mile of his house
on the Aythen, there are urchins—Scotch urchins—and
he has not perfect peace. The story is too well
known.

 As for his crew, even yet, if one should, with intent,
imitate the cry of that fowl disastrous where two or three
of them happen to be foregathered, they will come at you
with the weapons nearest.