[

20 ] 

THE SHANGHAI-ING OF PETER
BARLOW.

 ‘ Yes

, Peter, no doubt they’re a couple of fine colts, and
should make good steppers. I hope you’ll have them
well broken in for the drag by the time I return. Then,
with the other pair of browns, they ought to turn out
about the smartest four-in-hand in the district.’

 ‘Goin’ away, sir?’ asked Peter Barlow, Head Stockman
and Chief of Horse at Wicklow Downs.

 ‘Yes, Peter; I’m thinking of taking a trip to the Old
Country,’ replied Mr Forrest, owner of the big cattle
station on the border. ‘I mean to take Mrs Forrest and
the children, and be away twelve months; so you’ll have
plenty of time to fix up a team. We start in three weeks
from to-day.’

 ‘Well, sir,’ said Peter, ‘afore you goes I shouldn’t
mind takin’ a spell down country myself, if you haven’t
no objection.’

 His employer turned sharply round from the horse-yard
rail, and looked at the young fellow.

 Twenty-five, born on the station, an orphan, fairly
steady, very useful, the best rough-rider in the district, [

21 ]

never more than fifty miles away from home in his life.
Such was the record of Peter Barlow, who chewed a
straw, and smiled as he noticed his master’s surprise.

 ‘Why, what’s bitten you, my lad,’ said the latter, ‘that
you want to get away amongst the spielers and forties of
the big smoke? Isn’t Combington large enough for a
spree?’

 ‘Well, sir,’ replied Peter, rather sheepishly, ‘you see,
they’re always a-poking borack an’ a-chiackin’ o’ me over
in the hut because I’ve never seed nothin’. There’s
chaps there as has been everywheres, an’ can talk nineteen
to the dozen o’ the things they’ve gone through, an’
me a-settin’ listenin’ like a stuffed dummy.’

 ‘I see, Peter,’ said Mr Forrest, laughing, ‘you want to
travel. “Home-keeping youths have ever homely wits,”
eh, Peter? Believe me, my lad, for all that, you’re
better off as you are, notwithstanding the gas of those
other fellows. However, you may take a month if you
like. I think, though, that you’ll be glad to get back in
the half of it. But how would it do for you to come
down with us? I shall be staying in town for a week or
so, and could often see you, and that you didn’t get into
any mischief.’

 But Peter shook his head sagely, saying,—

 ‘You see, sir, I’d like to git back in about a fortnight
or so. There’s that lot o’ calves in the heifer paddock
to be weaned, an’ that last lot o’ foals ’ll want brandin’, an’—’

 ‘All right, Peter, my boy,’ interrupted the squatter,
laughing again. ‘Put money in thy purse, go forth and [

22 ]

see the world. Only, when you’re tired, don’t forget the
track back to the old station.’

 So, after a day or two, Peter rode 150 miles to
the railway terminus, and, leaving his horse in a paddock,
embarked on a very strange adventure, and one
that will be handed down with ever-increasing embroidery
to each generation of Barlows, until, in time,
the narrative overshadows that of Munchausen. It
would be tedious to attempt to depict Peter’s astonishment
at the first sight of steam. As a matter of fact, he
was not a bit surprised—or, if he was, he didn’t show it.
It takes more than the first sight of an express train to
upset the marvellous stoicism, or adaptability—which is
it?—of the Native-Born. It takes all that subsequently
befel TN: a bit old-fashioned but ok by OED to do so. Peter arrived in safety at the first large
inland town. Here he tarried awhile and enjoyed himself
after the manner of his kind. He stared into shop
windows; went to a race meeting, and there lost five
pounds to a monte man. With a dim notion percolating
under his cabbage-tree that he had been cheated, he
made a furious attack on both man and table. Sequel—five
shillings or twenty-four hours. This, now, was something
like life! Would he not soon be able to ruffle it
with the loudest of them on his return?

 After this exploit Peter decided to proceed on his travels.

 His first emotion of expressed surprise was displayed
at sight of the sea. As the train ran along the embankment,
and the stretch of water studded with ships’ masts
caught his eye, he exclaimed,—

 ‘By Jinks! that’s a thunderin’ big lagoon if yer likes. [

23 ]

But what’s all that dead timber a-stickin’ up in it?
Must ha’ been a good-sized flood hereabout!’

 Then his fellow-travellers laughed; and Peter, abashed,
withdrew into himself, but stared steadily over that
wondrous expanse of water whose like so far exceeded
his imaginings.

 At the port Fate led him—of all people in the world—to
put up at a sailors’ boarding-house. And here, for the
first time in his life, he found himself an oracle.

 Many sailors ‘go up the Bush.’ But those who get so
far as where Peter hailed from seldom or never return to
the sea.

 Therefore, no one criticising, wondrous were the yarns
he spun to an ever-shifting audience of all nations. Wondrous
yarns of fierce blacks, of men perishing of thirst and
hunger in the lonely bush, of wild cattle, of bucking horses,
of the far inland life. And, in return, they told him tales of
the stormy seas, and drank heartily at his expense. The
port was busy, wages high, and men scarce. But Peter’s
audience never failed him. The fame of the ‘Jolly
Bushman down at Gallagher’s’ had spread about the
shipping, and whole crews used to drop in of an evening
to listen to Peter and drink his beer and rum.

 It would have taken a longer purse than Peter’s to
stand this kind of thing.

 He had put aside enough money to take him back, and
now he resolved to travel no further. He had heard and
seen sufficient; and, above all, been listened to with
deference and attention.

 Besides, had he not been on board of ships and there [

24 ]

drank rum of such strength as made his very hair stand
on end; and eaten biscuits and salt junk.

 Moreover, once his friends had taken him out and
away upon the ‘lagoon,’ away so far, than when he
looked for his native land he beheld it not. Then the
water, hitherto smooth, gradually began to heave and
swell into hills as tall as the Wonga Ranges, and,
presently, he fell deadly sick and lay in the salt water in
the boat’s bottom, feeling as if the very soul-bolts were
being wrenched out of him.

 Afterwards his friends had apologised, and said something
about ‘a squall.’ But Peter would venture no more.

 These things, and many others, would he have to tell.
Also the time was approaching for the weaning of calves
and branding of foals. He had spent nearly all his money.
But that did not trouble him. For the future he must be a
bold man who, in the hut, or on the run, could snub Peter
Barlow. One last jovial evening he and his sea-friends
would have together, and then, hey for the far-inland
scrubs and rolling downs.

 So far as Peter recollected, it was

a jovial evening.
He had sung his famous ballad of ‘The Wild Australian
Boy,’ applauded to the echo as he had never been at
home. He had drunk healths innumerable in divers
liquors; had accepted as much strong ‘niggerhead’ in
parting gifts—it was all they possessed—as would have
stocked a tobacconist’s shop, and seen the last guest
lurch out into the night.

 Then Gallagher had proposed one more drink, ‘for
luck!’ After that—oblivion.

 [

25 ] 

.        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 When Peter awoke, his first thought was that he must
have fallen asleep in the saddle, as he had done before
now when camping out with cattle from the back of the run.

 But, on this occasion, his throat was hot and dry, and
his head full of ringing bells. Raising himself, he
bumped his nose sharply, and fell back to consider.

 It was almost dark, and he could hear a noise of wind
and of rushing waters. Also he felt a rocking motion
which assuredly was not that of a feeding horse.

 He had heard the same sounds and felt the same
motion recently, but he could not recollect when.
Presently a door slid open, and a flood of sunshine came
in, with a black face in the midst of it.

 ‘Ahi,’ said a voice, as Peter blinked at its owner.
‘You ’wake now, eh? Copper hot, I ’spect? Have
drink?’ and the speaker handed up a hook-pot full of
water.

 Peter drank copiously, and made shift to get out.

 ‘Where the blazes am I?’ he exclaimed, weak and
trembling all over, as his feet touched the deck.

 ‘Barque John F. Harkins

, o’ Boston, State o’ Maine.
I’m de doctor. Guess you’ve been shanghaied. Best
come out afore de greaser gets mad.’

 This was Greek to poor Peter. But, stumbling over
the door-sill, he gazed about him with a wildly-amazed
look, which made the negro cook grin more widely than
ever.

 All around was blue water, blue water from where it
touched the sky-line to where, close to him, it rushed [

26 ]

swiftly past, curling, white-tipped. Above his head acres
of snowy canvas bellied in graceful curves aloft into a
blue sky; everywhere a maze of ropes and gear, crossed
and re-crossed like the threads of a spider’s web.

 Peter gasped. He was astonished and dismayed too
deeply for words; and at the expression of his face the
darkey laughed outright.

 The ship giving a sudden lurch, he staggered, slipped
over to leeward, and clutched a belaying pin. Then he
heard a bell strike somewhere. Then men came out of a
hole in the deck near by, and one, staring hard, exclaimed,—

 ‘Why, damn my rags, if this ain’t the Jolly Bushman
come to sea!’

 ‘What!’ shouted the mate, walking for’ard to meet his
watch. ‘Isn’t he a sailor-man?’

 ‘Nary sailor-man,’ replied the other. ‘He’s a fellow
from the country—a good sort o’ chap—but as green’s
they make ’em as regards o’ salt water.’

 ‘Damn that Gallagher!’ exclaimed the officer. ‘He
brought the coon aboard, an’ got the bounty, swearin’ he
was a shellback all over—blood Stockholm tar, and every
hair on his head a rope yarn! If ever we fetch Coalport
again I’ll skin that Irish thief!’

 So also affirmed the captain of the John F. Harkins

,
who was out of pocket a month’s advance, besides two
pounds “head money,” to the crimp who had netted
poor Peter.

 Luckily, very luckily for Peter, he had not fallen into
the hands of a set of ‘white-washed Americans,’
half Irish, half anything, proficients in the art of [

27 ]

sea-bullying, and in the use of revolvers and knuckle-dusters.

 The officers and most of the men of the John F.

were
genuine Down-Easters, natives of Salem, Martha’s Vineyard,
and thereabout, shrewd and kindly people; and,
though all naturally indignant at the trick played upon
them, too just to visit their wrath on its unfortunate object.

 Presently Peter was recognised by the steward, who
had tasted of his hospitality ashore, and who now, seeing
the poor fellow still suffering from the effects of the
narcotic administered in that last ‘for luck’ drink of
scamp Gallagher’s, put him to bed and brought him
restoratives. So, in due course, Peter became his own
man again, and got fine-weather sea-legs upon him, and
would have been comparatively happy but for thoughts
of those far-away calves and foals, and the clumsy fingers
of a certain assistant stockman. They taught him how
to sweep decks, coil up ropes, and make sinnet. They
also coaxed him aloft; but he never could get further up
the rigging than the futtock-shrouds. There he stuck
helplessly, and over them he never went. He was young
and light and active; but, somehow, he couldn’t bend his
body outward into empty air and trust its weight to
a little bit of rope no thicker than a clothes-line. It
didn’t seem natural. One cannot make a sailor at
twenty-five.

 The John F.

was bound for Colombo, thence to Hamburg,
and, so far, everything had been fine sailing. But
one day a dead-ahead gale arose and blew fiercely for
three days.

 [

28 ] 

Then it was that Peter began to realise earnestly what
he had before but dimly suspected, viz., that on such an
occasion one foot of dry land is worth ten thousand
acres of foaming ocean. Easier by far would it have
been for him to sit the roughest colt that ever
bucked than to stand a minute erect on the barque’s
deck.

 Of such jumping and rearing, plunging and swerving,
Peter had possessed no conception before, except in the
saddle. There, however, he would have been comparatively
safe. Here he was tossed about apparently at
the pleasure of the great creature beneath him—one
minute on to the back of his head, the next in the
lee-scuppers. When he arose, dripping and grasping
blindly for support, the rushing past of big seas, the wild,
stern hum in the strained rigging, the roar of the blast
in the bellies of the tugging topsails, and the swirling of
green water round his legs, so bewildered him that he
was unable to distinguish one end of the ship from the
other.

 Under the circumstances, he did the wisest thing he
could, and turned into his bunk. There he lay, and
wondered with all his might why men should go to sea.

 On the fourth day, the gale moderating, they made sail
again. During this operation an unfortunate A.B. fell from
the main-yard, and broke his leg. The captain did his
best, but he was, like the rest, quite unskilled, and the
poor fellow lay in agony. Two days after this, when
nearly a calm, the mate roused the skipper out of a nap with,—

 [

29 ] 

‘Here’s one of them big packet boats a-overhaulin’ us,
sir.’

 ‘Well,’ replied the skipper sleepily, ‘what about it?
Let her rip. I don’t want her. Wish we had her wind,
that’s all.’

 ‘Poor Bill’s leg, sir,’ answered the other.

 ‘Why, of course; I forgot,’ said the skipper. ‘Stop the
beggar, by all manner of means. She’ll have a doctor,
an’ ice, an’ all sorts o’ fixin’s on board. Run the gridiron
half-mast, Mr Stokes. They packets don’t care much
about losin’ time for sich a trifle as a broken leg, but thet
oughter ease her down.’

 And so it did. No sooner was the American flag seen
flying half-way up the signal halliards than the steamer
kept away, and came thundering down upon the barque.

 ‘What’s the matter?’ shouted someone, as she slowed
nearly alongside.

 ‘A doctor!’ roared the mate. ‘Man very bad with a
broken leg!’

 ‘Send him on board, and look smart,’ was the reply.

 So a boat was lowered, and amongst its crew was Peter
Barlow, who, from the first, had been told off to attend
the injured man, and who assisted to carry him up the
gangway-ladder of the R.M.S. Barcelona

.

 ‘Umph, umph,’ said the surgeon; ‘he’ll have to stay
here if he wants to save his leg.’ Then to Peter, ‘Off
you go back, my lad, and get his kit and what money’s
coming to him. It’ll be many a long day before he sails
the sea again.’

 But Peter, whose eyes had been roving over the [

30 ]

surrounding crowd, suddenly, to the medico’s astonishment,
shouting,—‘The boss, by G—d!’ rushed through the
people, and, regardless of appearances, seized a gentleman’s
hand and shook it frantically, exclaiming,—

 ‘Oh, Mr Forrest, sir, don’t you know me? I’m Peter,
sir—Peter Barlow, from the ole station. I’ve been
shanghaied an’ locussed away to sea, an’ I wants to git
back home again!’

 Mr Forrest was more astonished than Peter at such a
meeting. Matters, however, were soon arranged.

 Peter went on to Colombo in the Barcelona

, and, in a
fortnight, joining another boat, duly arrived at Wicklow
Downs, whence he has never since stirred.

 And, if the reader chance one day to journey thither,
he may hear at first hand this story, embellished with
breezy Bush idioms and phrases that render it infinitely
more graphic and stirring a version, but which, somehow,
do not read well in type.