“THE TERROR”
    

      You say you cannot possibly understand it, and I believe you. You think I
      am losing my mind? Perhaps I am, but for other reasons than those you
      imagine, my dear friend.
    

      Yes, I am going to be married, and will tell you what has led me to take
      that step.
    

      I may add that I know very little of the girl who is going to become my
      wife to-morrow; I have only seen her four or five times. I know that there
      is nothing unpleasing about her, and that is enough for my purpose. She is
      small, fair, and stout; so, of course, the day after to-morrow I shall
      ardently wish for a tall, dark, thin woman.
    

      She is not rich, and belongs to the middle classes. She is a girl such as
      you may find by the gross, well adapted for matrimony, without any
      apparent faults, and with no particularly striking qualities. People say
      of her:
    

      “Mlle. Lajolle is a very nice girl,” and tomorrow they will
      say: “What a very nice woman Madame Raymon is.” She belongs,
      in a word, to that immense number of girls whom one is glad to have for
      one's wife, till the moment comes when one discovers that one happens to
      prefer all other women to that particular woman whom one has married.
    

      “Well,” you will say to me, “what on earth did you get
      married for?”
    

      I hardly like to tell you the strange and seemingly improbable reason that
      urged me on to this senseless act; the fact, however, is that I am afraid
      of being alone.
    

      I don't know how to tell you or to make you understand me, but my state of
      mind is so wretched that you will pity me and despise me.
    

      I do not want to be alone any longer at night. I want to feel that there
      is some one close to me, touching me, a being who can speak and say
      something, no matter what it be.
    

      I wish to be able to awaken somebody by my side, so that I may be able to
      ask some sudden question, a stupid question even, if I feel inclined, so
      that I may hear a human voice, and feel that there is some waking soul
      close to me, some one whose reason is at work; so that when I hastily
      light the candle I may see some human face by my side—because—because
      —I am ashamed to confess it—because I am afraid of being
      alone.
    

      Oh, you don't understand me yet.
    

      I am not afraid of any danger; if a man were to come into the room, I
      should kill him without trembling. I am not afraid of ghosts, nor do I
      believe in the supernatural. I am not afraid of dead people, for I believe
      in the total annihilation of every being that disappears from the face of
      this earth.
    

      Well—yes, well, it must be told: I am afraid of myself, afraid of
      that horrible sensation of incomprehensible fear.
    

      You may laugh, if you like. It is terrible, and I cannot get over it. I am
      afraid of the walls, of the furniture, of the familiar objects; which are
      animated, as far as I am concerned, by a kind of animal life. Above all, I
      am afraid of my own dreadful thoughts, of my reason, which seems as if it
      were about to leave me, driven away by a mysterious and invisible agony.
    

      At first I feel a vague uneasiness in my mind, which causes a cold shiver
      to run all over me. I look round, and of course nothing is to be seen, and
      I wish that there were something there, no matter what, as long as it were
      something tangible. I am frightened merely because I cannot understand my
      own terror.
    

      If I speak, I am afraid of my own voice. If I walk, I am afraid of I know
      not what, behind the door, behind the curtains, in the cupboard, or under
      my bed, and yet all the time I know there is nothing anywhere, and I turn
      round suddenly because I am afraid of what is behind me, although there is
      nothing there, and I know it.
    

      I become agitated. I feel that my fear increases, and so I shut myself up
      in my own room, get into bed, and hide under the clothes; and there,
      cowering down, rolled into a ball, I close my eyes in despair, and remain
      thus for an indefinite time, remembering that my candle is alight on the
      table by my bedside, and that I ought to put it out, and yet—I dare
      not do it.
    

      It is very terrible, is it not, to be like that?
    

      Formerly I felt nothing of all that. I came home quite calm, and went up
      and down my apartment without anything disturbing my peace of mind. Had
      any one told me that I should be attacked by a malady—for I can call
      it nothing else—of most improbable fear, such a stupid and terrible
      malady as it is, I should have laughed outright. I was certainly never
      afraid of opening the door in the dark. I went to bed slowly, without
      locking it, and never got up in the middle of the night to make sure that
      everything was firmly closed.
    

      It began last year in a very strange manner on a damp autumn evening. When
      my servant had left the room, after I had dined, I asked myself what I was
      going to do. I walked up and down my room for some time, feeling tired
      without any reason for it, unable to work, and even without energy to
      read. A fine rain was falling, and I felt unhappy, a prey to one of those
      fits of despondency, without any apparent cause, which make us feel
      inclined to cry, or to talk, no matter to whom, so as to shake off our
      depressing thoughts.
    

      I felt that I was alone, and my rooms seemed to me to be more empty than
      they had ever been before. I was in the midst of infinite and overwhelming
      solitude. What was I to do? I sat down, but a kind of nervous impatience
      seemed to affect my legs, so I got up and began to walk about again. I
      was, perhaps, rather feverish, for my hands, which I had clasped behind
      me, as one often does when walking slowly, almost seemed to burn one
      another. Then suddenly a cold shiver ran down my back, and I thought the
      damp air might have penetrated into my rooms, so I lit the fire for the
      first time that year, and sat down again and looked at the flames. But
      soon I felt that I could not possibly remain quiet, and so I got up again
      and determined to go out, to pull myself together, and to find a friend to
      bear me company.
    

      I could not find anyone, so I walked to the boulevard to try and meet some
      acquaintance or other there.
    

      It was wretched everywhere, and the wet pavement glistened in the
      gaslight, while the oppressive warmth of the almost impalpable rain lay
      heavily over the streets and seemed to obscure the light of the lamps.
    

      I went on slowly, saying to myself: “I shall not find a soul to talk
      to.”
    

      I glanced into several cafes, from the Madeleine as far as the Faubourg
      Poissoniere, and saw many unhappy-looking individuals sitting at the
      tables who did not seem even to have enough energy left to finish the
      refreshments they had ordered.
    

      For a long time I wandered aimlessly up and down, and about midnight I
      started for home. I was very calm and very tired. My janitor opened the
      door at once, which was quite unusual for him, and I thought that another
      lodger had probably just come in.
    

      When I go out I always double-lock the door of my room, and I found it
      merely closed, which surprised me; but I supposed that some letters had
      been brought up for me in the course of the evening.
    

      I went in, and found my fire still burning so that it lighted up the room
      a little, and, while in the act of taking up a candle, I noticed somebody
      sitting in my armchair by the fire, warming his feet, with his back toward
      me.
    

      I was not in the slightest degree frightened. I thought, very naturally,
      that some friend or other had come to see me. No doubt the porter, to whom
      I had said I was going out, had lent him his own key. In a moment I
      remembered all the circumstances of my return, how the street door had
      been opened immediately, and that my own door was only latched and not
      locked.
    

      I could see nothing of my friend but his head, and he had evidently gone
      to sleep while waiting for me, so I went up to him to rouse him. I saw him
      quite distinctly; his right arm was hanging down and his legs were
      crossed; the position of his head, which was somewhat inclined to the left
      of the armchair, seemed to indicate that he was asleep. “Who can it
      be?” I asked myself. I could not see clearly, as the room was rather
      dark, so I put out my hand to touch him on the shoulder, and it came in
      contact with the back of the chair. There was nobody there; the seat was
      empty.
    

      I fairly jumped with fright. For a moment I drew back as if confronted by
      some terrible danger; then I turned round again, impelled by an imperious
      standing upright, panting with fear, so upset that I could not collect my
      thoughts, and ready to faint.
    

      But I am a cool man, and soon recovered myself. I thought: “It is a
      mere hallucination, that is all,” and I immediately began to reflect
      on this phenomenon. Thoughts fly quickly at such moments.
    

      I had been suffering from an hallucination, that was an incontestable
      fact. My mind had been perfectly lucid and had acted regularly and
      logically, so there was nothing the matter with the brain. It was only my
      eyes that had been deceived; they had had a vision, one of those visions
      which lead simple folk to believe in miracles. It was a nervous seizure of
      the optical apparatus, nothing more; the eyes were rather congested,
      perhaps.
    

      I lit my candle, and when I stooped down to the fire in doing so I noticed
      that I was trembling, and I raised myself up with a jump, as if somebody
      had touched me from behind.
    

      I was certainly not by any means calm.
    

      I walked up and down a little, and hummed a tune or two. Then I
      double-locked the door and felt rather reassured; now, at any rate, nobody
      could come in.
    

      I sat down again and thought over my adventure for a long time; then I
      went to bed and blew out my light.
    

      For some minutes all went well; I lay quietly on my back, but presently an
      irresistible desire seized me to look round the room, and I turned over on
      my side.
    

      My fire was nearly out, and the few glowing embers threw a faint light on
      the floor by the chair, where I fancied I saw the man sitting again.
    

      I quickly struck a match, but I had been mistaken; there was nothing
      there. I got up, however, and hid the chair behind my bed, and tried to
      get to sleep, as the room was now dark; but I had not forgotten myself for
      more than five minutes, when in my dream I saw all the scene which I had
      previously witnessed as clearly as if it were reality. I woke up with a
      start, and having lit the candle, sat up in bed, without venturing even to
      try to go to sleep again.
    

      Twice, however, sleep overcame me for a few moments in spite of myself,
      and twice I saw the same thing again, till I fancied I was going mad. When
      day broke, however, I thought that I was cured, and slept peacefully till
      noon.
    

      It was all past and over. I had been feverish, had had the nightmare. I
      know not what. I had been ill, in fact, but yet thought I was a great
      fool.
    

      I enjoyed myself thoroughly that evening. I dined at a restaurant and
      afterward went to the theatre, and then started for home. But as I got
      near the house I was once more seized by a strange feeling of uneasiness.
      I was afraid of seeing him again. I was not afraid of him, not afraid of
      his presence, in which I did not believe; but I was afraid of being
      deceived again. I was afraid of some fresh hallucination, afraid lest fear
      should take possession of me.
    

      For more than an hour I wandered up and down the pavement; then, feeling
      that I was really too foolish, I returned home. I breathed so hard that I
      could hardly get upstairs, and remained standing outside my door for more
      than ten minutes; then suddenly I had a courageous impulse and my will
      asserted itself. I inserted my key into the lock, and went into the
      apartment with a candle in my hand. I kicked open my bedroom door, which
      was partly open, and cast a frightened glance toward the fireplace. There
      was nothing there. A-h! What a relief and what a delight! What a
      deliverance! I walked up and down briskly and boldly, but I was not
      altogether reassured, and kept turning round with a jump; the very shadows
      in the corners disquieted me.
    

      I slept badly, and was constantly disturbed by imaginary noises, but did
      not see him; no, that was all over.
    

      Since that time I have been afraid of being alone at night. I feel that
      the spectre is there, close to me, around me; but it has not appeared to
      me again.
    

      And supposing it did, what would it matter, since I do not believe in it,
      and know that it is nothing?
    

      However, it still worries me, because I am constantly thinking of it. His
      right arm hanging down and his head inclined to the left like a man who
      was asleep—I don't want to think about it!
    

      Why, however, am I so persistently possessed with this idea? His feet were
      close to the fire!
    

      He haunts me; it is very stupid, but who and what is he? I know that he
      does not exist except in my cowardly imagination, in my fears, and in my
      agony. There—enough of that!
    

      Yes, it is all very well for me to reason with myself, to stiffen my
      backbone, so to say; but I cannot remain at home because I know he is
      there. I know I shall not see him again; he will not show himself again;
      that is all over. But he is there, all the same, in my thoughts. He
      remains invisible, but that does not prevent his being there. He is behind
      the doors, in the closed cupboard, in the wardrobe, under the bed, in
      every dark corner. If I open the door or the cupboard, if I take the
      candle to look under the bed and throw a light on the dark places he is
      there no longer, but I feel that he is behind me. I turn round, certain
      that I shall not see him, that I shall never see him again; but for all
      that, he is behind me.
    

      It is very stupid, it is dreadful; but what am I to do? I cannot help it.
    

      But if there were two of us in the place I feel certain that he would not
      be there any longer, for he is there just because I am alone, simply and
      solely because I am alone!