THE ACCURSED BREAD
    

      Daddy Taille had three daughters: Anna, the eldest, who was scarcely ever
      mentioned in the family; Rose, the second girl, who was eighteen, and
      Clara, the youngest, who was a girl of fifteen.
    

      Old Taille was a widower and a foreman in M. Lebrument's button
      manufactory. He was a very upright man, very well thought of, abstemious;
      in fact, a sort of model workman. He lived at Havre, in the Rue
      d'Angouleme.
    

      When Anna ran away from home the old man flew into a fearful rage. He
      threatened to kill the head clerk in a large draper's establishment in
      that town, whom he suspected. After a time, when he was told by various
      people that she was very steady and investing money in government
      securities, that she was no gadabout, but was a great friend of Monsieur
      Dubois, who was a judge of the Tribunal of Commerce, the father was
      appeased.
    

      He even showed some anxiety as to how she was getting on, and asked some
      of her old friends who had been to see her, and when told that she had her
      own furniture, and that her mantelpiece was covered with vases and the
      walls with pictures, that there were clocks and carpets everywhere, he
      gave a broad contented smile. He had been working for thirty years to get
      together a wretched five or six thousand francs. This girl was evidently
      no fool.
    

      One fine morning the son of Touchard, the cooper, at the other end of the
      street, came and asked him for the hand of Rose, the second girl. The old
      man's heart began to beat, for the Touchards were rich and in a good
      position. He was decidedly lucky with his girls.
    

      The marriage was agreed upon, and it was settled that it should be a grand
      affair, and the wedding dinner was to be held at Sainte-Adresse, at Mother
      Jusa's restaurant. It would cost a lot certainly, but never mind, it did
      not matter just for once in a way.
    

      But one morning, just as the old man was going home to luncheon with his
      two daughters, the door opened suddenly, and Anna appeared. She was well
      dressed and looked undeniably pretty and nice. She threw her arms round
      her father's neck before he could say a word, then fell into her sisters'
      arms with many tears and then asked for a plate, so that she might share
      the family soup. Taille was moved to tears in his turn and said several
      times:
    

      “That is right, dear, that is right.”
    

      Then she told them about herself. She did not wish Rose's wedding to take
      place at Sainte-Adresse—certainly not. It should take place at her
      house and would cost her father nothing. She had settled everything and
      arranged everything, so it was “no good to say any more about it—there!”
    

      “Very well, my dear! very well!” the old man said; “we
      will leave it so.” But then he felt some doubt. Would the Touchards
      consent? But Rose, the bride-elect, was surprised and asked: “Why
      should they object, I should like to know? Just leave that to me; I will
      talk to Philip about it.”
    

      She mentioned it to her lover the very same day, and he declared it would
      suit him exactly. Father and Mother Touchard were naturally delighted at
      the idea of a good dinner which would cost them nothing and said:
    

      “You may be quite sure that everything will be in first-rate style.”
    

      They asked to be allowed to bring a friend, Madame Florence, the cook on
      the first floor, and Anna agreed to everything.
    

      The wedding was fixed for the last Tuesday of the month.
    

      After the civil formalities and the religious ceremony the wedding party
      went to Anna's house. Among those whom the Tailles had brought was a
      cousin of a certain age, a Monsieur Sauvetanin, a man given to
      philosophical reflections, serious, and always very self-possessed, and
      Madame Lamondois, an old aunt.
    

      Monsieur Sautevanin had been told off to give Anna his arm, as they were
      looked upon as the two most important persons in the company.
    

      As soon as they had arrived at the door of Anna's house she let go her
      companion's arm, and ran on ahead, saying: “I will show you the way,”
      and ran upstairs while the invited guests followed more slowly; and, when
      they got upstairs, she stood on one side to let them pass, and they rolled
      their eyes and turned their heads in all directions to admire this
      mysterious and luxurious dwelling.
    

      The table was laid in the drawing-room, as the dining-room had been
      thought too small. Extra knives, forks and spoons had been hired from a
      neighboring restaurant, and decanters stood full of wine under the rays of
      the sun which shone in through the window.
    

      The ladies went into the bedroom to take off their shawls and bonnets, and
      Father Touchard, who was standing at the door, made funny and suggestive
      signs to the men, with many a wink and nod. Daddy Taille, who thought a
      great deal of himself, looked with fatherly pride at his child's
      well-furnished rooms and went from one to the other, holding his hat in
      his hand, making a mental inventory of everything, and walking like a
      verger in a church.
    

      Anna went backward and forward, ran about giving orders and hurrying on
      the wedding feast. Soon she appeared at the door of the dining-room and
      cried: “Come here, all of you, for a moment,” and as the
      twelve guests entered the room they saw twelve glasses of Madeira on a
      small table.
    

      Rose and her husband had their arms round each other's waists and were
      kissing each other in every corner. Monsieur Sauvetanin never took his
      eyes off Anna.
    

      They sat down, and the wedding breakfast began, the relations sitting at
      one end of the table and the young people at the other. Madame Touchard,
      the mother, presided on the right and the bride on the left. Anna looked
      after everybody, saw that the glasses were kept filled and the plates well
      supplied. The guests evidently felt a certain respectful embarrassment at
      the sight of all the sumptuousness of the rooms and at the lavish manner
      in which they were treated. They all ate heartily of the good things
      provided, but there were no jokes such as are prevalent at weddings of
      that sort; it was all too grand, and it made them feel uncomfortable. Old
      Madame Touchard, who was fond of a bit of fun, tried to enliven matters a
      little, and at the beginning of the dessert she exclaimed: “I say,
      Philip, do sing us something.” The neighbors in their street
      considered that he had the finest voice in all Havre.
    

      The bridegroom got up, smiled, and, turning to his sister-in-law, from
      politeness and gallantry, tried to think of something suitable for the
      occasion, something serious and correct, to harmonize with the seriousness
      of the repast.
    

      Anna had a satisfied look on her face, and leaned back in her chair to
      listen, and all assumed looks of attention, though prepared to smile
      should smiles be called for.
    

      The singer announced “The Accursed Bread,” and, extending his
      right arm, which made his coat ruck up into his neck, he began.
    

      It was decidedly long, three verses of eight lines each, with the last
      line and the last but one repeated twice.
    

      All went well for the first two verses; they were the usual commonplaces
      about bread gained by honest labor and by dishonesty. The aunt and the
      bride wept outright. The cook, who was present, at the end of the first
      verse looked at a roll which she held in her hand, with streaming eyes, as
      if it applied to her, while all applauded vigorously. At the end of the
      second verse the two servants, who were standing with their backs to the
      wall, joined loudly in the chorus, and the aunt and the bride wept
      outright.
    

      Daddy Taille blew his nose with the noise of a trombone, and old Touchard
      brandished a whole loaf half over the table, and the cook shed silent
      tears on the crust which she was still holding.
    

      Amid the general emotion Monsieur Sauvetanin said:
    

      “That is the right sort of song; very different from the nasty,
      risky things one generally hears at weddings.”
    

      Anna, who was visibly affected, kissed her hand to her sister and pointed
      to her husband with an affectionate nod, as if to congratulate her.
    

      Intoxicated by his success, the young man continued, and unfortunately the
      last verse contained words about the “bread of dishonor”
      gained by young girls who had been led astray. No one took up the refrain
      about this bread, supposed to be eaten with tears, except old Touchard and
      the two servants. Anna had grown deadly pale and cast down her eyes, while
      the bridegroom looked from one to the other without understanding the
      reason for this sudden coldness, and the cook hastily dropped the crust as
      if it were poisoned.
    

      Monsieur Sauvetanin said solemnly, in order to save the situation: “That
      last couplet is not at all necessary”; and Daddy Taille, who had got
      red up to his ears, looked round the table fiercely.
    

      Then Anna, her eyes swimming in tears, told the servants in the faltering
      voice of a woman trying to stifle her sobs, to bring the champagne.
    

      All the guests were suddenly seized with exuberant joy, and all their
      faces became radiant again. And when old Touchard, who had seen, felt and
      understood nothing of what was going on, and pointing to the guests so as
      to emphasize his words, sang the last words of the refrain:
    

      “Children, I warn you all to eat not of that bread,” the whole
      company, when they saw the champagne bottles, with their necks covered
      with gold foil, appear, burst out singing, as if electrified by the sight:
    

      “Children, I warn you all to eat not of that bread.”