THE OTHER MAN.

 When the earth was sick and the skies were gray,
     And the woods were rotted with rain,
   The Dead Man rode through the autumn day
     To visit his love again.
             —Old Ballad.

 Far back in the “seventies,” before they had built any Public Offices at
      Simla, and the broad road round Jakko lived in a pigeon-hole in the P. W.
      D. hovels, her parents made Miss Gaurey marry Colonel Schreiderling. He
      could not have been MUCH more than thirty-five years her senior; and, as
      he lived on two hundred rupees a month and had money of his own, he was
      well off. He belonged to good people, and suffered in the cold weather
      from lung complaints. In the hot weather he dangled on the brink of
      heat-apoplexy; but it never quite killed him.

 Understand, I do not blame Schreiderling. He was a good husband according
      to his lights, and his temper only failed him when he was being nursed.
      Which was some seventeen days in each month. He was almost generous to his
      wife about money matters, and that, for him, was a concession. Still Mrs.
      Schreiderling was not happy. They married her when she was this side of
      twenty and had given all her poor little heart to another man. I have
      forgotten his name, but we will call him the Other Man. He had no money
      and no prospects.

 He was not even good-looking; and I think he was in the Commissariat or
      Transport. But, in spite of all these things, she loved him very madly;
      and there was some sort of an engagement between the two when
      Schreiderling appeared and told Mrs. Gaurey that he wished to marry her
      daughter. Then the other engagement was broken off—washed away by
      Mrs. Gaurey's tears, for that lady governed her house by weeping over
      disobedience to her authority and the lack of reverence she received in
      her old age. The daughter did not take after her mother. She never cried.
      Not even at the wedding.

 The Other Man bore his loss quietly, and was transferred to as bad a
      station as he could find. Perhaps the climate consoled him. He suffered
      from intermittent fever, and that may have distracted him from his other
      trouble. He was weak about the heart also. Both ways. One of the valves
      was affected, and the fever made it worse.

 This showed itself later on.

 Then many months passed, and Mrs. Schreiderling took to being ill.

 She did not pine away like people in story books, but she seemed to pick
      up every form of illness that went about a station, from simple fever
      upwards. She was never more than ordinarily pretty at the best of times;
      and the illness made her ugly. Schreiderling said so. He prided himself on
      speaking his mind.

 When she ceased being pretty, he left her to her own devices, and went
      back to the lairs of his bachelordom. She used to trot up and down Simla
      Mall in a forlorn sort of way, with a gray Terai hat well on the back of
      her head, and a shocking bad saddle under her.

 Schreiderling's generosity stopped at the horse. He said that any saddle
      would do for a woman as nervous as Mrs. Schreiderling. She never was asked
      to dance, because she did not dance well; and she was so dull and
      uninteresting, that her box very seldom had any cards in it. Schreiderling
      said that if he had known that she was going to be such a scare-crow after
      her marriage, he would never have married her. He always prided himself on
      speaking his mind, did Schreiderling!

 He left her at Simla one August, and went down to his regiment.

 Then she revived a little, but she never recovered her looks. I found out
      at the Club that the Other Man is coming up sick—very sick—on
      an off chance of recovery. The fever and the heart-valves had nearly
      killed him. She knew that, too, and she knew—what I had no interest
      in knowing—when he was coming up. I suppose he wrote to tell her.
      They had not seen each other since a month before the wedding. And here
      comes the unpleasant part of the story.

 A late call kept me down at the Dovedell Hotel till dusk one evening. Mrs.
      Schreidlerling had been flitting up and down the Mall all the afternoon in
      the rain. Coming up along the Cart-road, a tonga passed me, and my pony,
      tired with standing so long, set off at a canter. Just by the road down to
      the Tonga Office Mrs. Schreiderling, dripping from head to foot, was
      waiting for the tonga. I turned up-hill, as the tonga was no affair of
      mine; and just then she began to shriek. I went back at once and saw,
      under the Tonga Office lamps, Mrs. Schreiderling kneeling in the wet road
      by the back seat of the newly-arrived tonga, screaming hideously.

 Then she fell face down in the dirt as I came up.

 Sitting in the back seat, very square and firm, with one hand on the
      awning-stanchion and the wet pouring off his hat and moustache, was the
      Other Man—dead. The sixty-mile up-hill jolt had been too much for
      his valve, I suppose. The tonga-driver said:—“The Sahib died two
      stages out of Solon. Therefore, I tied him with a rope, lest he should
      fall out by the way, and so came to Simla. Will the Sahib give me
      bukshish? IT,” pointing to the Other Man, “should have given one rupee.”

 The Other Man sat with a grin on his face, as if he enjoyed the joke of
      his arrival; and Mrs. Schreiderling, in the mud, began to groan. There was
      no one except us four in the office and it was raining heavily. The first
      thing was to take Mrs. Schreiderling home, and the second was to prevent
      her name from being mixed up with the affair. The tonga-driver received
      five rupees to find a bazar 'rickshaw for Mrs. Schreiderling. He was to
      tell the tonga Babu afterwards of the Other Man, and the Babu was to make
      such arrangements as seemed best.

 Mrs. Schreiderling was carried into the shed out of the rain, and for
      three-quarters of an hour we two waited for the 'rickshaw. The Other Man
      was left exactly as he had arrived. Mrs. Schreiderling would do everything
      but cry, which might have helped her. She tried to scream as soon as her
      senses came back, and then she began praying for the Other Man's soul. Had
      she not been as honest as the day, she would have prayed for her own soul
      too. I waited to hear her do this, but she did not. Then I tried to get
      some of the mud off her habit. Lastly, the 'rickshaw came, and I got her
      away—partly by force. It was a terrible business from beginning to
      end; but most of all when the 'rickshaw had to squeeze between the wall
      and the tonga, and she saw by the lamp-light that thin, yellow hand
      grasping the awning-stanchion.

 She was taken home just as every one was going to a dance at Viceregal
      Lodge—“Peterhoff” it was then—and the doctor found that she
      had fallen from her horse, that I had picked her up at the back of Jakko,
      and really deserved great credit for the prompt manner in which I had
      secured medical aid. She did not die—men of Schreiderling's stamp
      marry women who don't die easily. They live and grow ugly.

 She never told of her one meeting, since her marriage, with the Other Man;
      and, when the chill and cough following the exposure of that evening,
      allowed her abroad, she never by word or sign alluded to having met me by
      the Tonga Office. Perhaps she never knew.

 She used to trot up and down the Mall, on that shocking bad saddle,
      looking as if she expected to meet some one round the corner every minute.
      Two years afterward, she went Home, and died—at Bournemouth, I
      think.

 Schreiderling, when he grew maudlin at Mess, used to talk about “my poor
      dear wife.” He always set great store on speaking his mind, did
      Schreiderling!