THE BISARA OF POOREE.

 Little Blind Fish, thou art marvellous wise,
    Little Blind Fish, who put out thy eyes?
    Open thine ears while I whisper my wish—
    Bring me a lover, thou little Blind Fish.
           —The Charm of the Bisara.

 Some natives say that it came from the other side of Kulu, where the
      eleven-inch Temple Sapphire is. Others that it was made at the
      Devil-Shrine of Ao-Chung in Thibet, was stolen by a Kafir, from him by a
      Gurkha, from him again by a Lahouli, from him by a khitmatgar, and by this
      latter sold to an Englishman, so all its virtue was lost: because, to work
      properly, the Bisara of Pooree must be stolen—with bloodshed if
      possible, but, at any rate, stolen.

 These stories of the coming into India are all false. It was made at
      Pooree ages since—the manner of its making would fill a small book—was
      stolen by one of the Temple dancing-girls there, for her own purposes, and
      then passed on from hand to hand, steadily northward, till it reached
      Hanla: always bearing the same name—the Bisara of Pooree. In shape
      it is a tiny, square box of silver, studded outside with eight small
      balas-rubies. Inside the box, which opens with a spring, is a little
      eyeless fish, carved from some sort of dark, shiny nut and wrapped in a
      shred of faded gold-cloth. That is the Bisara of Pooree, and it were
      better for a man to take a king cobra in his hand than to touch the Bisara
      of Pooree.

 All kinds of magic are out of date and done away with except in India
      where nothing changes in spite of the shiny, toy-scum stuff that people
      call “civilization.” Any man who knows about the Bisara of Pooree will
      tell you what its powers are—always supposing that it has been
      honestly stolen. It is the only regularly working, trustworthy love-charm
      in the country, with one exception.

 [The other charm is in the hands of a trooper of the Nizam's Horse, at a
      place called Tuprani, due north of Hyderabad.] This can be depended upon
      for a fact. Some one else may explain it.

 If the Bisara be not stolen, but given or bought or found, it turns
      against its owner in three years, and leads to ruin or death. This is
      another fact which you may explain when you have time.

 Meanwhile, you can laugh at it. At present, the Bisara is safe on an
      ekka-pony's neck, inside the blue bead-necklace that keeps off the
      Evil-eye. If the ekka-driver ever finds it, and wears it, or gives it to
      his wife, I am sorry for him.

 A very dirty hill-cooly woman, with goitre, owned it at Theog in 1884. It
      came into Simla from the north before Churton's khitmatgar bought it, and
      sold it, for three times its silver-value, to Churton, who collected
      curiosities. The servant knew no more what he had bought than the master;
      but a man looking over Churton's collection of curiosities—Churton
      was an Assistant Commissioner by the way—saw and held his tongue. He
      was an Englishman; but knew how to believe. Which shows that he was
      different from most Englishmen. He knew that it was dangerous to have any
      share in the little box when working or dormant; for unsought Love is a
      terrible gift.

 Pack—“Grubby” Pack, as we used to call him—was, in every way,
      a nasty little man who must have crawled into the Army by mistake. He was
      three inches taller than his sword, but not half so strong. And the sword
      was a fifty-shilling, tailor-made one. Nobody liked him, and, I suppose,
      it was his wizenedness and worthlessness that made him fall so hopelessly
      in love with Miss Hollis, who was good and sweet, and five foot seven in
      her tennis shoes. He was not content with falling in love quietly, but
      brought all the strength of his miserable little nature into the business.
      If he had not been so objectionable, one might have pitied him. He
      vapored, and fretted, and fumed, and trotted up and down, and tried to
      make himself pleasing in Miss Hollis's big, quiet, gray eyes, and failed.
      It was one of the cases that you sometimes meet, even in this country
      where we marry by Code, of a really blind attachment all on one side,
      without the faintest possibility of return. Miss Hollis looked on Pack as
      some sort of vermin running about the road. He had no prospects beyond
      Captain's pay, and no wits to help that out by one anna. In a large-sized
      man, love like his would have been touching.

 In a good man it would have been grand. He being what he was, it was only
      a nuisance.

 You will believe this much. What you will not believe, is what follows:
      Churton, and The Man who Knew that the Bisara was, were lunching at the
      Simla Club together. Churton was complaining of life in general. His best
      mare had rolled out of stable down the hill and had broken her back; his
      decisions were being reversed by the upper Courts, more than an Assistant
      Commissioner of eight years' standing has a right to expect; he knew liver
      and fever, and, for weeks past, had felt out of sorts. Altogether, he was
      disgusted and disheartened.

 Simla Club dining-room is built, as all the world knows, in two sections,
      with an arch-arrangement dividing them. Come in, turn to your own left,
      take the table under the window, and you cannot see any one who has come
      in, turning to the right, and taken a table on the right side of the arch.
      Curiously enough, every word that you say can be heard, not only by the
      other diner, but by the servants beyond the screen through which they
      bring dinner. This is worth knowing: an echoing-room is a trap to be
      forewarned against.

 Half in fun, and half hoping to be believed, The Man who Knew told Churton
      the story of the Bisara of Pooree at rather greater length than I have
      told it to you in this place; winding up with the suggestion that Churton
      might as well throw the little box down the hill and see whether all his
      troubles would go with it. In ordinary ears, English ears, the tale was
      only an interesting bit of folk-lore. Churton laughed, said that he felt
      better for his tiffin, and went out. Pack had been tiffining by himself to
      the right of the arch, and had heard everything. He was nearly mad with
      his absurd infatuation for Miss Hollis that all Simla had been laughing
      about.

 It is a curious thing that, when a man hates or loves beyond reason, he is
      ready to go beyond reason to gratify his feelings. Which he would not do
      for money or power merely. Depend upon it, Solomon would never have built
      altars to Ashtaroth and all those ladies with queer names, if there had
      not been trouble of some kind in his zenana, and nowhere else. But this is
      beside the story. The facts of the case are these: Pack called on Churton
      next day when Churton was out, left his card, and STOLE the Bisara of
      Pooree from its place under the clock on the mantelpiece! Stole it like
      the thief he was by nature. Three days later, all Simla was electrified by
      the news that Miss Hollis had accepted Pack—the shrivelled rat,
      Pack! Do you desire clearer evidence than this? The Bisara of Pooree had
      been stolen, and it worked as it had always done when won by foul means.

 There are three or four times in a man's life when he is justified in
      meddling with other people's affairs to play Providence.

 The Man who Knew felt that he WAS justified; but believing and acting on a
      belief are quite different things. The insolent satisfaction of Pack as he
      ambled by the side of Miss Hollis, and Churton's striking release from
      liver, as soon as the Bisara of Pooree had gone, decided the Man. He
      explained to Churton and Churton laughed, because he was not brought up to
      believe that men on the Government House List steal—at least little
      things. But the miraculous acceptance by Miss Hollis of that tailor, Pack,
      decided him to take steps on suspicion. He vowed that he only wanted to
      find out where his ruby-studded silver box had vanished to. You cannot
      accuse a man on the Government House List of stealing. And if you rifle
      his room you are a thief yourself. Churton, prompted by The Man who Knew,
      decided on burglary. If he found nothing in Pack's room.... but it is not
      nice to think of what would have happened in that case.

 Pack went to a dance at Benmore—Benmore WAS Benmore in those days,
      and not an office—and danced fifteen waltzes out of twenty-two with
      Miss Hollis. Churton and The Man took all the keys that they could lay
      hands on, and went to Pack's room in the hotel, certain that his servants
      would be away. Pack was a cheap soul. He had not purchased a decent
      cash-box to keep his papers in, but one of those native imitations that
      you buy for ten rupees. It opened to any sort of key, and there at the
      bottom, under Pack's Insurance Policy, lay the Bisara of Pooree!

 Churton called Pack names, put the Bisara of Pooree in his pocket, and
      went to the dance with The Man. At least, he came in time for supper, and
      saw the beginning of the end in Miss Hollis's eyes. She was hysterical
      after supper, and was taken away by her Mamma.

 At the dance, with the abominable Bisara in his pocket, Churton twisted
      his foot on one of the steps leading down to the old Rink, and had to be
      sent home in a rickshaw, grumbling. He did not believe in the Bisara of
      Pooree any the more for this manifestation, but he sought out Pack and
      called him some ugly names; and “thief” was the mildest of them. Pack took
      the names with the nervous smile of a little man who wants both soul and
      body to resent an insult, and went his way. There was no public scandal.

 A week later, Pack got his definite dismissal from Miss Hollis.

 There had been a mistake in the placing of her affections, she said.

 So he went away to Madras, where he can do no great harm even if he lives
      to be a Colonel.

 Churton insisted upon The Man who Knew taking the Bisara of Pooree as a
      gift. The Man took it, went down to the Cart Road at once, found an ekka
      pony with a blue head-necklace, fastened the Bisara of Pooree inside the
      necklace with a piece of shoe-string and thanked Heaven that he was rid of
      a danger. Remember, in case you ever find it, that you must not destroy
      the Bisara of Pooree. I have not time to explain why just now, but the
      power lies in the little wooden fish. Mister Gubernatis or Max Muller
      could tell you more about it than I.

 You will say that all this story is made up. Very well. If ever you come
      across a little silver, ruby-studded box, seven-eighths of an inch long by
      three-quarters wide, with a dark-brown wooden fish, wrapped in gold cloth,
      inside it, keep it. Keep it for three years, and then you will discover
      for yourself whether my story is true or false.

 Better still, steal it as Pack did, and you will be sorry that you had not
      killed yourself in the beginning.