THE DANGER OF LYING IN BED

 The man in the ticket-office said:

 “Have an accident insurance ticket, also?”

 “No,” I said, after studying the matter over a little. “No, I believe not;
      I am going to be traveling by rail all day today. However, tomorrow I
      don't travel. Give me one for tomorrow.”

 The man looked puzzled. He said:

 “But it is for accident insurance, and if you are going to travel by rail—”

 “If I am going to travel by rail I sha'n't need it. Lying at home in bed
      is the thing I am afraid of.”

 I had been looking into this matter. Last year I traveled twenty thousand
      miles, almost entirely by rail; the year before, I traveled over
      twenty-five thousand miles, half by sea and half by rail; and the year
      before that I traveled in the neighborhood of ten thousand miles,
      exclusively by rail. I suppose if I put in all the little odd journeys
      here and there, I may say I have traveled sixty thousand miles during the
      three years I have mentioned. And never an accident. 

 For a good while I said to myself every morning: “Now I have escaped thus
      far, and so the chances are just that much increased that I shall catch it
      this time. I will be shrewd, and buy an accident ticket.” And to a dead
      moral certainty I drew a blank, and went to bed that night without a joint
      started or a bone splintered. I got tired of that sort of daily bother,
      and fell to buying accident tickets that were good for a month. I said to
      myself, “A man can't buy thirty blanks in one bundle.”

 But I was mistaken. There was never a prize in the the lot. I could read
      of railway accidents every day—the newspaper atmosphere was foggy
      with them; but somehow they never came my way. I found I had spent a good
      deal of money in the accident business, and had nothing to show for it. My
      suspicions were aroused, and I began to hunt around for somebody that had
      won in this lottery. I found plenty of people who had invested, but not an
      individual that had ever had an accident or made a cent. I stopped buying
      accident tickets and went to ciphering. The result was astounding. The
      peril lay not in traveling, but in staying at home. 

 I hunted up statistics, and was amazed to find that after all the glaring
      newspaper headlines concerning railroad disasters, less than three
      hundred people had really lost their lives by those disasters in the
      preceding twelve months. The Erie road was set down as the most murderous
      in the list. It had killed forty-six—or twenty-six, I do not exactly
      remember which, but I know the number was double that of any other road.
      But the fact straightway suggested itself that the Erie was an immensely
      long road, and did more business than any other line in the country; so
      the double number of killed ceased to be matter for surprise.

 By further figuring, it appeared that between New York and Rochester the
      Erie ran eight passenger-trains each way every day—16 altogether;
      and carried a daily average of 6,000 persons. That is about a million in
      six months—the population of New York City. Well, the Erie kills
      from 13 to 23 persons of its million in six months; and in the same
      time 13,000 of New York's million die in their beds! My flesh crept, my
      hair stood on end. “This is appalling!” I said. “The danger isn't in
      traveling by rail, but in trusting to those deadly beds. I will never
      sleep in a bed again.”

 I had figured on considerably less than one-half the length of the Erie
      road. It was plain that the entire road must transport at least eleven or
      twelve thousand people every day. There are many short roads running out
      of Boston that do fully half as much; a great many such roads. There are
      many roads scattered about the Union that do a prodigious passenger
      business. Therefore it was fair to presume that an average of 2,500
      passengers a day for each road in the country would be almost correct.
      There are 846 railway lines in our country, and 846 times 2,500 are
      2,115,000. So the railways of America move more than two millions of
      people every day; six hundred and fifty millions of people a year, without
      counting the Sundays. They do that, too—there is no question about
      it; though where they get the raw material is clear beyond the
      jurisdiction of my arithmetic; for I have hunted the census through and
      through, and I find that there are not that many people in the United
      States, by a matter of six hundred and ten millions at the very least.
      They must use some of the same people over again, likely.

 San Francisco is one-eighth as populous as New York; there are 60 deaths a
      week in the former and 500 a week in the latter—if they have luck.
      That is 3,120 deaths a year in San Francisco, and eight times as many in
      New York—say about 25,000 or 26,000. The health of the two places is
      the same. So we will let it stand as a fair presumption that this will
      hold good all over the country, and that consequently 25,000 out of every
      million of people we have must die every year. That amounts to
      one-fortieth of our total population. One million of us, then, die
      annually. Out of this million ten or twelve thousand are stabbed, shot,
      drowned, hanged, poisoned, or meet a similarly violent death in some other
      popular way, such as perishing by kerosene-lamp and hoop-skirt
      conflagrations, getting buried in coal-mines, falling off house-tops,
      breaking through church, or lecture-room floors, taking patent medicines,
      or committing suicide in other forms. The Erie railroad kills 23 to 46;
      the other 845 railroads kill an average of one-third of a man each; and
      the rest of that million, amounting in the aggregate to that appalling
      figure of 987,631 corpses, die naturally in their beds!

 You will excuse me from taking any more chances on those beds. The
      railroads are good enough for me.

 And my advice to all people is, Don't stay at home any more than you can
      help; but when you have got to stay at home a while, buy a package
      of those insurance tickets and sit up nights. You cannot be too cautious.

 (One can see now why I answered that ticket-agent in the manner recorded
      at the top of this sketch.)

 The moral of this composition is, that thoughtless people grumble more
      than is fair about railroad management in the United States. When we
      consider that every day and night of the year full fourteen thousand
      railway-trains of various kinds, freighted with life and armed with death,
      go thundering over the land, the marvel is, not that they kill
      three hundred human beings in a twelvemonth, but that they do not kill
      three hundred times three hundred!