X 

 

THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE

 I

 Once

upon a time the Babus at Nayanjore were
famous . They were noted for their
princely extravagance. They would tear off the
rough border of their Dacca muslin, because it
rubbed against their delicate skin. They could spend
many thousands of rupees over the wedding of a
kitten. And on a certain grand occasion it is alleged
that in order to turn night into day they lighted
numberless lamps and showered silver threads from
the sky to imitate sunlight.

 Those were the days before the flood. The flood
came. The line of succession among these old-world
Babus, with their lordly habits, could not continue
for long. Like a lamp with too many wicks burning,
the oil flared away quickly, and the light went out.

 Kailas Babu, our neighbour, is the last relic of
this magnificence. Before he grew up, his
family had very nearly reached its lowest ebb.
When his father died, there was one dazzling outburst
of funeral extravagance, and then insolvency. The property was sold to liquidate the debt. What
little ready money was left over was altogether insufficient
to keep up the past ancestral splendours.

 Kailas Babu left Nayanjore and came to Calcutta.
His son did not remain long in this world of faded
glory. He died, leaving behind him an only daughter.

 In Calcutta we are Kailas Babu's neighbours.
Curiously enough our own family history is just the
opposite of his. My father got his money by his
own exertions, and prided himself on never spending
a penny more than was needed. His clothes
were those of a working man, and his hands also.
He never had any inclination to earn the title of
Babu by extravagant display; and I myself, his only
son, owe him gratitude for that. He gave me the
very best education, and I was able to make my way
in the world. I am not ashamed of the fact that
I am a self-made man. Crisp bank-notes in my safe
are dearer to me than a long pedigree in an empty
family chest.

 I believe this was why I disliked seeing Kailas
Babu drawing his heavy on the public credit
from the bank of his ancient Babu reputation.
I used to fancy that he looked down on me,
because my father had earned money with his own
hands.  I ought to have noticed that no one showed any
vexation towards Kailas Babu except myself. Indeed
it would have been difficult to find an old man
who did less harm than he. He was always ready
with his kindly little acts of courtesy in times of
sorrow and joy. He would join in all the ceremonies
and religious observances of his neighbours.
His familiar smile would greet young and old alike.
His politeness in asking details about domestic
affairs was untiring. The friends who met him in
the street were perforce ready to be button-holed,
while a long string of questions of this kind followed
one another from his lips:

 "My dear friend, I am delighted to see you. Are
you quite well? How is Shashi? And Dada—is
he all right? Do you know, I've only just heard
that Madhu's son has got fever. How is he?
Have you heard? And Hari Charan Babu—I
have not seen him for a long time—I hope he is
not ill. What's the matter with Rakkhal? And
er—er, how are the ladies of your family?"

 Kailas Babu was spotlessly neat in his dress on
all occasions, though his supply of clothes was sorely
limited. Every day he used to air his shirts and
vests and coats and trousers carefully, and put them
out in the sun, along with his bed-quilt, his pillowcase,
and the small carpet on which he always sat. After airing them he would shake them, and brush
them, and put them carefully away. His little bits
of furniture made his small room decent, and hinted
that there was more in reserve if needed. Very
often, for want of a servant, he would shut up his
house for a while. Then he would iron out his
shirts and linen with his own hands, and do other
little menial tasks. After this he would open his
door and receive his friends again.

 Though Kailas Babu, as I have said, had lost all
his landed property, he had still some family heirlooms
left. There was a silver cruet for sprinkling
scented water, a box for , a small
gold salver, a costly ancient shawl, and the old-fashioned
ceremonial dress and ancestral .
These he had rescued with the greatest difficulty
from the money-lenders' clutches. On every suitable
occasion he would bring them out in state, and
thus try to save the world-famed dignity of the Babus
of Nayanjore. At heart the most modest of men,
in his daily speech he regarded it as a sacred duty,
owed to his rank, to give free play to his family
pride. His friends would encourage this trait in
his character with kindly good-humour, and it gave
them great amusement.

 The neighbourhood soon learnt to call him their
Thakur Dada. They would flock to his house and sit with him for hours together. To prevent his
incurring any expense, one or other of his friends
would bring him and say: "Thakur Dada,
this morning some tobacco was sent to me from Gaya.
Do take it and see how you like it."

 Thakur Dada would take it and say it was excellent.
He would then go on to tell of a certain
exquisite tobacco which they once smoked in the
old days of Nayanjore at the cost of a guinea an
ounce.

 "I wonder," he used to say, "if any one would
like to try it now. I have some left, and can get
it at once."

 Every one knew that, if they asked for it, then
somehow or other the key of the cupboard would
be missing; or else Ganesh, his old family servant,
had put it away somewhere.

 "You never can be sure," he would add, "where
things go to when servants are about. Now, this
Ganesh of mine,—I can't tell you what a fool he is,
but I haven't the heart to dismiss him."

 Ganesh, for the credit of the family, was quite
ready to bear all the blame without a word.

 One of the company usually said at this point:
"Never mind, Thakur Dada. Please don't trouble
to look for it. This tobacco we're smoking will do
quite well. The other would be too strong."  Then Thakur Dada would be relieved and settle
down again, and the talk would go on.

 When his guests got up to go away, Thakur Dada
would accompany them to the door and say to them
on the door-step: "Oh, by the way, when are you
all coming to dine with me?"

 One or other of us would answer: "Not just
yet, Thakur Dada, not just yet. We'll fix a day
later."

 "Quite right," he would answer. "Quite right.
We had much better wait till the rains come. It's
too hot now. And a grand rich dinner such as I
should want to give you would upset us in weather
like this."

 But when the rains did come, every one was very
careful not to remind him of his promise. If the
subject was brought up, some friend would suggest
gently that it was very inconvenient to get about
when the rains were so severe, and therefore it would
be much better to wait till they were over. Thus
the game went on.

 Thakur Dada's poor lodging was much too small
for his position, and we used to condole with him
about it. His friends would assure him they quite
understood his difficulties: it was next to impossible
to get a decent house in Calcutta. Indeed, they had all been looking out for years for a house to
suit him. But, I need hardly add, no friend had
been foolish enough to find one. Thakur Dada
used to say, with a sigh of resignation: "Well,
well, I suppose I shall have to put up with this house
after all." Then he would add with a genial smile:
"But, you know, I could never bear to be away from
my friends. I must be near you. That really compensates
for everything."

 Somehow I felt all this very deeply indeed. I suppose
the real reason was, that when a man is young,
stupidity appears to him the worst of crimes. Kailas
Babu was not really stupid. In ordinary business
matters every one was ready to consult him. But
with regard to Nayanjore his utterances were certainly
void of common sense. Because, out of
amused affection for him, no one contradicted his
impossible statements, he refused to keep them in
bounds. When people recounted in his hearing the
glorious history of Nayanjore with absurd exaggerations,
he would accept all they said with the utmost
gravity, and never doubted, even in his dreams, that
any one could disbelieve it.

 II

 When I sit down and try to analyse the thoughts and feelings that I had towards Kailas Babu, I see
that there was a still deeper reason for my dislike.
I will now explain.

 Though I am the son of a rich man, and might
have wasted time at college, my industry was such
that I took my M.A. degree in Calcutta University
when quite young. My moral character was flawless.
In addition, my outward appearance was so
handsome, that if I were to call myself beautiful, it
might be thought a mark of self-estimation, but could
not be considered an untruth.

 There could be no question that among the young
men of Bengal I was regarded by parents generally
as a very eligible match. I was myself quite clear
on the point and had determined to obtain my full
value in the marriage market. When I pictured my
choice, I had before my mind's eye a wealthy father's
only daughter, extremely beautiful and highly educated.
Proposals came pouring in to me from far
and near; large sums in cash were offered. I
weighed these offers with rigid impartiality in the
delicate scales of my own estimation. But there
was no one fit to be my partner. I became convinced,
with the poet Bhabavuti, that,

  In this world's endless time and boundless space 

 One may be born at last to match my sovereign grace. 



 But in this puny modern age, and this contracted space of modern Bengal, it was doubtful if the peerless
creature existed as yet.

 Meanwhile my praises were sung in many tunes,
and in different metres, by designing parents.

 Whether I was pleased with their daughters or
not, this worship which they offered was never unpleasing.
I used to regard it as my proper due, because
I was so good. We are told that when the
gods withhold their from mortals they still
expect their worshippers to pay them fervent honour
and are angry if it is withheld. I had that divine
expectance strongly developed in myself.

 I have already mentioned that Thakur Dada had
an only grand-daughter. I had seen her many
times, but had never mistaken her for beautiful. No
thought had ever entered my mind that she would
be a possible partner for myself. All the same, it
seemed quite certain to me that some day or other
Kailas Babu would offer her, with all due worship,
as an oblation at my shrine. Indeed—this was
the inner secret of my dislike—I was thoroughly
annoyed that he had not done so already.

 I heard that Thakur Dada had told his friends
that the Babus of Nayanjore never craved a boon.
Even if the girl remained unmarried, he would not
break the family tradition. It was this arrogance
of his that made me angry. My indignation  ed for some time. But I remained perfectly
silent and bore it with the utmost patience, because
I was so good.

 As lightning accompanies thunder, so in my character
a flash of humour was mingled with the mutterings
of my wrath. It was, of course, impossible for
me to punish the old man merely to give vent to
my rage; and for a long time I did nothing at all.
But suddenly one day such an amusing plan came
into my head, that I could not resist the temptation
of carrying it into effect.

 I have already said that many of Kailas Babu's
friends used to flatter the old man's vanity to the
full. One, who was a retired Government servant,
had told him that whenever he saw the Chota Lât
Sahib he always asked for the latest news about the
Babus of Nayanjore, and the Chota Lât had been
heard to say that in all Bengal the only really respectable
families were those of the Maharaja of
Cossipore and the Babus of Nayanjore. When this
monstrous falsehood was told to Kailas Babu he was
extremely gratified and often repeated the story.
And wherever after that he met this Government
servant in company he would ask, along with other
questions:

 "Oh! er—by the way, how is the Chota Lât
Sahib? Quite well, did you say? Ah, yes, I am so delighted to hear it! And the dear Mem Sahib,
is she quite well too? Ah, yes! and the little children—are
they quite well also? Ah, yes! that's very
good news! Be sure and give them my compliments
when you see them."

 Kailas Babu would constantly express his intention
of going some day and paying a visit to the Lord
Sahib. But it may be taken for granted that many
Chota Lâts and Burra Lâts also would come and go,
and much water would pass down the Hoogly, before
the family coach of Nayanjore would be furbished
up to pay a visit to Government House.

 One day I took Kailas Babu aside and told him
in a whisper: "Thakur Dada, I was at the Levee
yesterday, and the Chota Lât Sahib happened to
mention the Babus of Nayanjore. I told him that
Kailas Babu had come to town. Do you know, he
was terribly hurt because you hadn't called. He
told me he was going to put etiquette on one side
and pay you a private visit himself this very afternoon."

 Anybody else could have seen through this plot of
mine in a moment. And, if it had been directed
against another person, Kailas Babu would have
understood the joke. But after all that he had
heard from his friend the Government servant, and
after all his own exaggerations, a visit from the Lieutenant-Governor seemed the most natural thing
in the world. He became highly nervous and excited
at my news. Each detail of the coming visit
exercised him greatly,—most of all his own ignorance
of English. How on earth was that difficulty
to be met? I told him there was no difficulty at
all: it was aristocratic not to know English: and,
besides, the Lieutenant-Governor always brought an
interpreter with him, and he had expressly mentioned
that this visit was to be private.

 About midday, when most of our neighbours are
at work, and the rest are asleep, a carriage and
pair stopped before the lodging of Kailas Babu.
Two flunkeys in livery came up the stairs, and announced
in a loud voice, "The Chota Lât Sahib has
arrived!" Kailas Babu was ready, waiting for him,
in his old-fashioned ceremonial robes and ancestral
turban, and Ganesh was by his side, dressed in his
master's best suit of clothes for the occasion.

 When the Chota Lât Sahib was announced, Kailas
Babu ran panting and puffing and trembling to the
door, and led in a friend of mine, in disguise, with
repeated salaams, bowing low at each step and walking
backward as best he could. He had his old
family shawl spread over a hard wooden chair and
he asked the Lât Sahib to be seated. He then made
a high-flown speech in Urdu, the ancient Court language of the Sahibs, and presented on the golden
salver a string of gold mohurs , the last relics of his
broken fortune. The old family servant Ganesh,
with an expression of awe bordering on terror, stood
behind with the scent-sprinkler, drenching the Lât
Sahib, and touched him from time to time
with the otto-of-roses from the filigree box.

 Kailas Babu repeatedly expressed his regret at not
being able to receive His Honour Bahadur with all
the ancestral magnificence of his own family estate
at Nayanjore. There he could have welcomed him
properly with due ceremonial. But in Calcutta he
was a mere stranger and sojourner,—in fact a fish
out of water.

 My friend, with his tall silk hat on, very gravely
nodded. I need hardly say that according to English
custom the hat ought to have been removed inside
the room. But my friend did not dare to take
it off for fear of detection: and Kailas Babu and his
old servant Ganesh were sublimely unconscious of
the breach of etiquette.

 After a ten minutes' interview, which consisted
chiefly of nodding the head, my friend rose to his
feet to depart. The two flunkeys in livery, as had
been planned beforehand, carried off in state the
string of gold mohurs , the gold salver, the old ancestral
shawl, the silver scent-sprinkler, and the otto-of-roses filigree box; they placed them ceremoniously in
the carriage. Kailas Babu regarded this as the
usual habit of Chota Lât Sahibs.

 I was watching all the while from the next room.
My sides were aching with suppressed laughter.
When I could hold myself in no longer, I rushed into
a further room, suddenly to discover, in a corner, a
young girl sobbing as if her heart would break.
When she saw my uproarious laughter she stood
upright in passion, flashing the lightning of her big
dark eyes in mine, and said with a tear-choked voice:
"Tell me! What harm has my grandfather done
to you? Why have you come to deceive him?
Why have you come here? Why——"

 She could say no more. She covered her face
with her hands and broke into sobs.

 My laughter vanished in a moment. It had never
occurred to me that there was anything but a supremely
funny joke in this act of mine, and here I
discovered that I had given the cruellest pain to this
tenderest little heart. All the ugliness of my cruelty
rose up to condemn me. I slunk out of the room in
silence, like a kicked dog.

 Hitherto I had only looked upon Kusum, the
grand-daughter of Kailas Babu, as a somewhat
worthless commodity in the marriage market, waiting
in vain to attract a husband. But now I found, with a shock of surprise, that in the corner of that
room a human heart was beating.

 The whole night through I had very little sleep.
My mind was in a tumult. On the next day, very
early in the morning, I took all those stolen goods
back to Kailas Babu's lodgings, wishing to hand them
over in secret to the servant Ganesh. I waited outside
the door, and, not finding any one, went upstairs
to Kailas Babu's room. I heard from the passage
Kusum asking her grandfather in the most winning
voice: "Dada, dearest, do tell me all that the
Chota Lât Sahib said to you yesterday. Don't leave
out a single word. I am dying to hear it all over
again."

 And Dada needed no encouragement. His face
beamed over with pride as he related all manner of
praises which the Lât Sahib had been good enough
to utter concerning the ancient families of Nayanjore.
The girl was seated before him, looking up
into his face, and listening with rapt attention. She
was determined, out of love for the old man, to play
her part to the full.

 My heart was deeply touched, and tears came to
my eyes. I stood there in silence in the passage,
while Thakur Dada finished all his embellishments of
the Chota Lât Sahib's wonderful visit. When he
left the room at last, I took the stolen goods and laid them at the feet of the girl and came away without
a word.

 Later in the day I called again to see Kailas Babu
himself. According to our ugly modern custom, I
had been in the habit of making no greeting at all
to this old man when I came into the room. But
on this day I made a low bow and touched his feet.
I am convinced the old man thought that the coming
of the Chota Lât Sahib to his house was the cause of
my new politeness. He was highly gratified by it,
and an air of benign serenity shone from his eyes.
His friends had looked in, and he had already begun
to tell again at full length the story of the Lieutenant-Governor's
visit with still further adornments of a
most kind. The interview was already becoming
an epic, both in quality and in length.

 When the other visitors had taken their leave, I
made my proposal to the old man in a humble manner.
I told him that, "though I could never for a
moment hope to be worthy of marriage connection
with such an illustrious family, yet ... etc.
etc."

 When I made clear my proposal of marriage, the
old man embraced me and broke out in a tumult of
joy: "I am a poor man, and could never have expected
such great good fortune."

 That was the first and last time in his life that Kailas Babu confessed to being poor. It was also
the first and last time in his life that he forgot, if
only for a single moment, the ancestral dignity that
belongs to the Babus of Nayanjore.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . This method of forming compound words
from two original English words should be studied.
Compare the following words which have "land" for
one of their parts: landlord , landowner , landlady , landslip , landfall . When the second word is not very
closely attached to the first word, a hyphen is put between,
thus land-grabber , land-shark .

 . From the Latin "stinguere," to quench. Compare distinct , instinct , extinguish , distinguish .

 . This word is the same as "check,"—only in this
case the original French form has been kept. The
verb to "check" came into English originally from the
game of chess. In Eastern lands when the chess king
was in danger the word "Shah!" was called out, and
when the chess king could not move, "Shah mata!"
These were corrupted into "Check!" and "Checkmate!"

 . This word is a curious mixture of the old
French "banque" (compare bench , banquet ) and the
Latin "rumpere," to break (compare corrupt , disrupt ).
It is thus a hybrid word in modern English.

 . From two Latin words, "filum," a thread, and
"granum," a grain.

 . A corruption of attar. The word is originally
Arabic and Persian.

 . This word has now taken its place in most of the
European languages. It has come to Europe from the
Turkish "tulbend" and the Persian "dulband."  . This word came originally from Central America.
It was brought to Europe by the Spaniards, who
pronounced it "tabaco." It has now travelled all
round the world, and has gained a place in all the
Indian vernaculars as well as in the Further East.

 . The Old English word "ben" meant a prayer, and
this was the original meaning of "boon." But a new
word appeared in English, viz. the adjective "boon"
from the French "bon," meaning "good." (Compare boon companion ). This influenced the earlier word,
which thus gained its present meaning of a "blessing"
or "gift."

 . "Smolder" is an Old English word meaning
"smoke." Cognate words in English are smother and small , which come from the same root.

 . The origin of this word is very doubtful. Some
connect it with "ging" or "gang," meaning "to go."
Others with "gent-" meaning "gentle" or "graceful."
The word has no relation to "ginger" which is an
Eastern word coming originally from the Sanskrit çraga-vera and the Hindustani zunjubil .

 . From the Greek "phainō," to manifest. Compare emphasis , emphatic , fantasy , fancy , phenomenon .

   NOTES