THE TWILIGHT GUESTS

 When they left him, in the warm, late afternoon,
lying listless on his couch in the porch, they
thought he would stay alone there till they
came again. His little granddaughter, indeed, felt
so sad at deserting him that she ran back and
kissed him twice. "To leave Grandpapa alone!"
she said. But he was not alone; there came to him
strange guests and sweet. And this was the manner
of their coming.

 As he watched the shadow creeping up the steps,
he thought how often he had marked the time by
it in the far away days. He remembered how he
had tried to keep in the broad sunbeam that lay
along the walk, when he used to run home to supper
tired and hungry, shouting to his mother that
his school was over and out and that he had come—"So
hungry, mother dear!" And as he thought
of her, slow tears crept from under his old eyelids,
and he raised his hand feebly to wipe them away. When he saw clearly again, he started
slightly, for up the path, walking in the sunbeam,
came a boy. He smiled sweetly, cheerily at the old
man, and sat down confidingly, close to the couch.
"It is so warm in the sun!" he said.

 The old man turned uneasily and looked at him.
"Are you Arthur's son?" he asked doubtfully.
"My eyes are so dim—I cannot always tell you
apart, at first. Are you Arthur's son?"

 "No," said the child.

 "Are you——" but then the boy looked full in
his face and the old man could not take his eyes
from that searching smile. And as he looked, there
grew around his heart the sweet faint breath of
lilac trees, though it was early autumn and not at
all the spring. And deep in the child's eyes was
so strange a soul—yet so familiar! As he looked
yet deeper the lilac scent grew stronger and he
dared not turn away his eyes, lest he should lose
it. So he listened to the child, who spoke brightly
yet gravely, with his head resting against the old
man's knee.

 "See!" he said, "the lilacs are all out! I took a bunch to school, and the teacher wore them in
her dress. Oh, but I grow tired of the school in
the mornings, when the birds sing under the window!
The brook is all full with the flood water,
do you know?"

 "Yes," said the old man dreamily, "yes, I
know."

 "There are pickerel there—I saw one, anyway!"
said the boy. "The old one—he lives under the
stone all alone. If I could get him, I'd be proud
enough! But I never can—I can only catch him
on a Friday night when the moon is full, and then
I'm not allowed out! The man that weeds the garden
told me that. Do you remember?"

 "Yes, I remember," said the old man.

 "But if I don't fish, I don't care so much," said
the boy happily. "For I get so wet and dirty, and
Rachel doesn't like me then. I can't look on her
book. She is so dear! She never spots the ink on
her apron, like the other girls. And she never eats
fish, either. She thinks it hurts them too much to
kill them. I don't think so—do you? But girls are
different."

  "Where are you going to-night?" said the old
man, quietly, yet his voice trembled.

 "I'm going to sing to Rachel's grandfather.
He's blind, you know."

 "Yes," said the old man, "and old. His hair is
white. He walks with a cane. But he loves the singing."

 "Then to-morrow I must go to church," said
the boy. "The minister talks and prays and I get
so sleepy. But mother keeps a peppermint for me,
just before the second hymn. Then I have it for
the long prayer. And I can sing the hymns.
Rachel never looks at me, she sits so still in church.
And she won't play on Sunday. I can have my
whip and two of the largest marbles. Do you think
that is wrong?"

 "No," said the old man, "I don't think that is
wrong."

 "And we have gingerbread on the porch in the
afternoon," said the boy, "and Rachel comes.
Mother says children must not be vexed at the
Lord's Day."

 "Yes," said the old man, "mother is so good to us—so good——" and when he saw clearly again,
the child was gone. Only the shadow lay upon the
upper step of the porch, and the sunbeam was
shrunken to a narrow path of light.

 He stretched out his trembling hands and called
sorrowfully to the boy. "Come back! O come back!
I had forgotten so much! And the lilacs——" but
he was alone. And his hair was almost white. He
covered his face with his hands and shivered. For
the shadow was creeping up the porch.

 And then over his chilled heart there came the
breath of roses—summer roses. The air struck
warm and soft upon his cheeks. And when he
dropped his hands there stood in the sun-ray a
straight tall youth. His eyes were shining with
strength; his smile was happiness itself. In his firm
brown hands he held roses—summer roses. The
old man forgot to be afraid and raised himself
on the cushions.

 "Give them to me—give them!" he cried. The
young man laughed low and laid the red flowers
softly up against the withered cheeks. Then he sat
down and took the cold, dry hands in his.

  "What do they make you remember?" he said.

 The old man sighed for pure joy. "Ah, how
sweet—how heavenly sweet! Did they come from
the garden behind her father's house?"

 "Yes," said the youth, "from the old bush near
the wall. It was moonlight, and we picked them
together. I reached the highest ones, because
Rachel is not tall. She wore——"

 "She wore the white gown with the big shade
hat," said the old man eagerly. "And I made a
wreath for her shoulders. I called her—what did
I call her? The queen—the queen"—

 "The queen of roses," said the youth.

 "Ah, yes, the queen of roses!" said the old man.
"Her mouth was like the pink, young buds. We
went up and down the long paths, and I wanted
her to take my arm."

 "But she would not," laughed the young man.
"She said that old folks might lean, but she could
run as well as any man!"

 "So she ran through the garden, and I after!"
cried the old man, crushing the roses till they
filled the porch with sweetness. "She hid behind the old elm and let me call and call. And I had to
find her in the moonshadows. You know she grew
afraid and cried out when I caught her? And yet
she knew I would. But women are so. Her mother
knew I was with her, so she let us stay till it was
late. Rachel's mother was kind to me, you
know?"

 "Yes," said the young man. "But she knew that
Rachel——"

 "Ah!" said the old man quickly, "it seems they
all knew! All but Rachel and me! Now that is so
strange. For we should have known it first. But
Rachel laughed so when I tried to tell her, she
said—what was it she said?"

 "That you were too young to know how you
would think of it later," said the youth.

 "And I said, 'I'm old enough to know I love
you, Rachel, now and for ever!'" said the old man
softly, clasping his hands together so that the
roses dropped to the ground. "And then she did
not laugh at all, but only held her head down so
I could not see her eyes, and would not speak."

 "It was so still," said the youth. "There was no breeze, and everything in the garden listened,
listened, for what she would say."

 "But nothing in the garden could hear," said
the old man eagerly, "because she only whispered!"

 "Was it then that her mother called?" asked the
youth.

 "Yes," said the old man, and he smiled. "But
we did not come, for Rachel was afraid to go.
She thought her mother would not like to have
her leave the old home. And she feared to tell her
that she wanted to go. So we sat like silly children
in the dark. You see, I was afraid, too. Her
father and mother were old, and old people cannot
know how we feel when love first comes to us—and
yet they loved, once!"

 "Yes, they loved once," said the youth, "but
they forget. They think of lands and money and
the most prudent course—they cannot feel their
heart's blood rushing through their veins, surging
in their ears, 'She loves me!' They cannot feel that
one hour with her is dearer than years with the
others of the world!"

  "And then we went in!" said the old man softly.
"Then we went in! And her mother stood waiting
for us. Rachel would not look up and I had to
lead her by the hand. She feared that we could
not make it plain, that her mother would scold
us——"

 The youth laughed aloud. "But did she?" he
said.

 And the old man laughed too.

 "No. She came to me and kissed me and then
she held Rachel and cried. But not that she was
sorry. Older people feel strange when the younger
ones start away, you see."

 The young man picked up the roses and laid
them again by the side of the couch. "Sleep," he
said softly, "and dream of her!" And the old man's
eyelids drooped and the hands that held the roses
relaxed in quiet sleep.

 When he awoke the sun had almost set. The
path of rays had faded and the creeping shadow
had covered the highest step and lay along the
porch. He felt feebly for the roses, but they were
gone. And the sweet warm scent of them was only in his dim memory. But there sat in the shadow a
man.

 Threads of grey were in his hair and lines
around his firm mouth. But in his eyes shone yet
a sweet strength, and he held his head high as he
spoke.

 "Do you know where I have been?" he said.

 The old man shook his head.

 "Think!" said the other.

 Then while he looked into the stranger's eyes,
there stole across his heart the wind that blows
through the orchard when the fruit is ripe. He
drew in great breaths of it, in doubt, and at last
he said in a whisper so low that he hardly heard
himself, "You have been to his grave—his little
grave!"

 "Yes," said the man, "I have. His mother goes
there alone—not even I go with her. She goes
alone."

 "No," said the old man solemnly, "no. God
goes with her. I thought that she would have died—why
did she live?"

 "Because," said the other, "because you would have been alone. And you could not have kept
yourself a man, if she had gone, too."

 "Ah, yes!" said the old man softly, "that is it.
She is an angel! When he was born I was almost
afraid. I said, 'My son! I have a son! If I should
die to-night, he would live and I should live in
him!' And when she brought him herself into the
orchard—I see her now—I see her now!"

 He could not lift his head from the pillow, he
was so tired and weak, but with his eyes he begged
the other to come nearer. The man came close to
the couch and looked down tenderly at the old
man. "She wore the white trailing gown," he said.

 "Yes," whispered the old man, "and the great
wide hat. And she held him up under the brim
and said that if it should rain, she and he could
keep dry together, but I must stay in the rain!"

 "Do you remember," said the other, "how when
he could just say words, you played with him under
the apple tree?"

 "Can I ever forget?" said the old man. "But
now the angels teach him a better language, so
that he had but one to learn!"

  "Do you remember how she left him with her
mother and went away with you?" said the other.

 The old man smiled a little. "Ah, yes! Well
enough!" he said. "We thought we would be young
again, and leave him to his grandmother and his
sisters. He had enough care! It was not lack of
that——"

 "And when you had gone only a few miles she
grew anxious——"

 "Yes, yes!" said the old man. "She said, 'Suppose
he is sick? Suppose he falls into the brook?
He walks about so brave and strong—and he is
our only son!' So we came back."

 "You were good to her," said the other. "You
did always just as she wished."

 "I loved her," said the old man simply.

 The stranger's eyes grew moist and his voice
shook as he said, "When he grew sick——"

 "Ah, when he grew sick!" cried the old man
bitterly. "Almost I lost my trust in the Giver of
my child, and dared not give him back! How I
begged! How I prayed!—you know!"

 "Yes," whispered the stranger, "I know."

  "Then she left me for the first time," said the
old man slowly. "For the first time. She went alone
and prayed. Oh Rachel, my dear, dear wife, I
could not go with you to God! I think even we
go best alone! I said 'It cannot be! He cannot let
it come! I have done all my life as best I knew
how, and is this my reward?' And I heard her
crying, and I wished I had never lived."

 "But not for long?" said the other.

 The old man smiled through his tears.

 "No, no, not for long!" he said. "When Rachel
saw that I was weak she grew strong. It is strange,
but women are the strongest then. And she showed
me the folly and wickedness of throwing away my
faith because the Most Faithful had taken away
my child. And she brought me my little daughters
and set them on my knees and put her arms around
my neck. So I grew comforted. And there have
come other sons—Arthur and John. But he—ah,
Rachel! Little we thought when we laid him on
the grass under the tree and measured him with
goldenrod, that he would so soon lie there for all
our lives!"

  "And he lies there now," said the stranger.

 "Yes," said the old man softly, "he lies there
now. Under the apple tree where he lay and
laughed that day, he lies there now. For Rachel
wanted it so. 'I carried him out there the first
time,' she said, 'and he always loved it there. I
used to walk there before he came, and plan for
him, how he should grow so great and famous and
good; and now I want him to be there, while he
is asleep. And I think that all the fields are God's—the
orchard as well as the graveyard.' So we
laid him there, and she goes there often, and I."

 "You miss her?" said the stranger.

 "Miss her?" said the old man, staring at
the visitor, "miss her? Why, she is here! She is
my wife!—--" but he was alone, on the couch,
with the faint breath of ripening apples dying
on the air.

 And as he turned wearily, the shadow crept
softly and covered the porch and the couch where
he lay. The sun dropped behind the hills and the
air struck cold on his uncovered shoulders. He was
too tired to cry, too old and weak to question or find fault, but he dimly felt that to be left alone
was hard. His memory grew suddenly untrustworthy;
had they come or not? It was all so plain
to him now. He was not with Rachel, he was
neither in the church nor in the garden nor in the
orchard. He was an old man, strangely weak and
confused, left alone.

 "Ah, Rachel," he murmured, "only come again,
while I go! Come to take me—not that it will be
long to wait before I see you, dear! We have been
so happy, you and I! But it was so cold——"

 And then while he shivered helplessly and half
afraid, there came the scent of spring lilac-bushes,
and by his bed stood the bright-eyed child.

 "Come! come and sit by me!" cried the old man.
But the boy only smiled. "Take my hands—they
are so cold!" he begged. Still the boy smiled. And
as the old man looked, the child's eyes filled him
with half hope, half fear. "Are you—are you——"
he tried to speak, but no sound came from his lips.

 "If I come and touch you," said the boy, "it
will be the end. Shall I come?" The old man's face
lighted softly.

  "Yes," he said in his heart, for he could not
speak aloud, "yes, come now!" The boy laughed
and stepped to the couch and lay down beside him,
putting his cheek close to the white hair.

 Into the heart of the old man rushed a quick,
new life. "Ah, Rachel, Rachel," he said strong and
clear, "sit on the step and eat your cake with me?
Here is the flag-root I promised you—it's quite
clean. I took off all the mud! And here is the red
marble"—but the child kissed him and he went to
sleep, holding to his heart his happy youth.

 And when they found him in the evening, they
were not too grieved, for on his face was a great
content.