II 

 

THE HOME-COMING

 Phatik Chakravorti

was ringleader among the
boys of the village. A new mischief got into his
head. There was a heavy log lying on the mud-flat
of the river waiting to be shaped into a mast
for a boat. He decided that they should all work
together to shift the log by main force from its place
and roll it away. The owner of the log would be
angry and surprised, and they would all enjoy the
fun. Every one seconded the , and it was
carried .

 But just as the fun was about to begin, Mākhan,
Phatik's younger brother, sauntered up and sat down
on the log in front of them all without a word. The
boys were puzzled for a moment. He was pushed,
rather timidly, by one of the boys and told to get up;
but he remained quite unconcerned. He appeared
like a young meditating on the futility of
games. Phatik was furious. "Mākhan," he cried,
"if you don't get down this minute I'll thrash you!"  Mākhan only moved to a more comfortable position.

 Now, if Phatik was to keep his regal dignity before
the public, it was clear he ought to carry out his
threat. But his courage failed him at the crisis.
His fertile brain, however, rapidly seized upon a
new manœuvre which would discomfit his brother and
afford his followers an added amusement. He gave
the word of command to roll the log and Mākhan
over together. Mākhan heard the order and made
it a point of honour to stick on. But he overlooked
the fact, like those who attempt earthly fame in other
matters, that there was peril in it.

 The boys began to heave at the log with all their
might, calling out, "One, two, three, go!" At the
word "go" the log went; and with it went Mākhan's
philosophy, glory and all.

 The other boys shouted themselves hoarse with
delight. But Phatik was a little frightened. He
knew what was coming. And, sure enough, Mākhan
rose from Mother Earth blind as Fate and screaming
like the Furies. He rushed at Phatik and scratched
his face and beat him and kicked him, and then went
crying home. The first act of the drama was over.

 Phatik wiped his face, and sat down on the edge
of a sunken barge by the river bank, and began to
chew a piece of grass. A boat came up to the landing and a middle-aged man, with grey hair and dark , stepped on shore. He saw the boy sitting
there doing nothing and asked him where the
Chakravortis lived. Phatik went on chewing the
grass and said: "Over there," but it was quite impossible
to tell where he pointed. The stranger
asked him again. He swung his legs to and fro
on the side of the barge and said: "Go and find
out," and continued to chew the grass as before.

 But now a servant came down from the house and
told Phatik his mother wanted him. Phatik refused
to move. But the servant was the master on this
occasion. He took Phatik up roughly and carried
him, kicking and struggling in impotent rage.

 When Phatik came into the house, his mother saw
him. She called out angrily: "So you have been
hitting Mākhan again?"

 Phatik answered indignantly: "No, I haven't!
Who told you that?"

 His mother shouted: "Don't tell lies! You
have."

 Phatik said sullenly: "I tell you, I haven't.
You ask Mākhan!" But Mākhan thought it best
to stick to his previous statement. He said: "Yes,
mother. Phatik did hit me."

 Phatik's patience was already exhausted. He
could not bear this injustice. He rushed at Mākhan and hammered him with blows: "Take that," he
cried, "and that, and that, for telling lies."

 His mother took Mākhan's side in a moment, and
pulled Phatik away, beating him with her hands.
When Phatik pushed her aside, she shouted out:
"What! you little villain! Would you hit your own
mother?"

 It was just at this critical that the grey-haired
stranger arrived. He asked what was the
matter. Phatik looked sheepish and ashamed.

 But when his mother stepped back and looked at
the stranger, her anger was changed to surprise.
For she recognized her brother and cried: "Why,
Dada! Where have you come from?"

 As she said these words, she bowed to the ground
and touched his feet. Her brother had gone away
soon after she had married; and he had started business
in Bombay. His sister had lost her husband
while he was there. Bishamber had now come back
to Calcutta and had at once made enquiries about
his sister. He had then hastened to see her as soon
as he found out where she was.

 The next few days were full of rejoicing. The
brother asked after the education of the two boys.
He was told by his sister that Phatik was a perpetual
nuisance. He was lazy, disobedient, and wild.
But Mākhan was as good as gold, as quiet as a lamb, and very fond of reading. Bishamber kindly offered
to take Phatik off his sister's hands and educate him
with his own children in Calcutta. The widowed
mother readily agreed. When his uncle asked Phatik
if he would like to go to Calcutta with him, his
joy knew no bounds and he said: "Oh, yes, uncle!"
in a way that made it quite clear that he meant it.

 It was an immense relief to the mother to get rid
of Phatik. She had a prejudice against the boy, and
no love was lost between the two brothers. She was
in daily fear that he would either drown Mākhan
some day in the river, or break his head in a fight,
or run him into some danger. At the same time she
was a little distressed to see Phatik's extreme eagerness
to get away.

 Phatik, as soon as all was settled, kept asking his
uncle every minute when they were to start. He
was on pins and needles all day long with excitement
and lay awake most of the night. He bequeathed
to Mākhan, in perpetuity, his fishing-rod, his big kite,
and his marbles. Indeed, at this time of departure,
his generosity towards Mākhan was unbounded.

 When they reached Calcutta, Phatik made the acquaintance
of his aunt for the first time. She was
by no means pleased with this unnecessary addition
to her family. She found her own three boys quite
enough to manage without taking any one else. And to bring a village lad of fourteen into their midst was
terribly upsetting. Bishamber should really have
thought twice before committing such an indiscretion.

 In this world of human affairs there is no worse
nuisance than a boy at the age of fourteen. He is
neither ornamental nor useful. It is impossible to
shower affection on him as on a little boy; and he is
always getting in the way. If he talks with a childish
lisp he is called a baby, and if he answers in a
grown-up way he is called impertinent. In fact any
talk at all from him is resented. Then he is at the , growing age. He grows out of his
clothes with indecent haste; his voice grows hoarse
and breaks and quavers; his face grows suddenly angular
and unsightly. It is easy to excuse the shortcomings
of early childhood, but it is hard to tolerate
even unavoidable lapses in a boy of fourteen. The
lad himself becomes painfully self-conscious. When
he talks with elderly people he is either unduly forward,
or else so unduly shy that he appears ashamed
of his very existence.

 Yet it is at this very age when, in his heart of
hearts, a young lad most craves for recognition and
love; and he becomes the devoted slave of any one
who shows him consideration. But none dare
openly love him, for that would be regarded as undue indulgence and therefore bad for the boy. So,
what with scolding and chiding, he becomes very
much like a stray dog that has lost his master.

 For a boy of fourteen his own home is the only
Paradise. To live in a strange house with strange
people is little short of torture, while the height of
bliss is to receive the kind looks of women and never
to be slighted by them.

 It was anguish to Phatik to be the unwelcome
guest in his aunt's house, despised by this elderly
woman and slighted on every occasion. If ever she
asked him to do anything for her, he would be so
overjoyed that he would overdo it; and then she
would tell him not to be so stupid, but to get on with
his lessons.

 The cramped of neglect oppressed
Phatik so much that he felt that he could hardly
breathe. He wanted to go out into the open country
and fill his lungs with fresh air. But there was no
open country to go to. Surrounded on all sides by
Calcutta houses and walls, he would dream night
after night of his village home and long to be back
there. He remembered the glorious meadow where
he used to fly his kite all day long; the broad river-banks
where he would wander about the live-long day
singing and shouting for joy; the narrow brook
where he could go and dive and swim at any time he liked. He thought of his band of boy companions
over whom he was despot; and, above all, the
memory of that tyrant mother of his, who had such
a prejudice against him, occupied him day and night.
A kind of physical love like that of animals, a longing
to be in the presence of the one who is loved, an
inexpressible during absence, a silent cry
of the inmost heart for the mother, like the lowing of
a calf in the twilight,—this love, which was almost
an animal instinct, agitated the shy, nervous, lean, uncouth
and ugly boy. No one could understand it, but
it preyed upon his mind continually.

 There was no more backward boy in the whole
school than Phatik. He gaped and remained silent
when the teacher asked him a question, and like an
overladen ass patiently suffered all the blows that
came down on his back. When other boys were out
at play, he stood wistfully by the window and gazed
at the roofs of the distant houses. And if by chance
he espied children playing on the open terrace of any
roof, his heart would ache with longing.

 One day he summoned up all his courage and asked
his uncle: "Uncle, when can I go home?"

 His uncle answered: "Wait till the come."

 But the holidays would not come till October and
there was a long time still to wait.  One day Phatik lost his lesson book. Even with
the help of books he had found it very difficult indeed
to prepare his lesson. Now it was impossible. Day
after day the teacher would cane him unmercifully.
His condition became so miserable that even
his cousins were ashamed to own him. They began
to jeer and insult him more than the other boys.
He went to his aunt at last and told her that he had
lost his book.

 His aunt pursed her lips in contempt and said:
"You great clumsy, country lout! How can I afford,
with all my family, to buy you new books five
times a month?"

 That night, on his way back from school, Phatik
had a bad headache with a fit of shivering. He felt
he was going to have an attack of malarial fever.
His one great fear was that he would be a nuisance
to his aunt.

 The next morning Phatik was nowhere to be seen.
All searches in the proved futile.
The rain had been pouring in torrents all night, and
those who went out in search of the boy got drenched
through to the skin. At last Bishamber asked help
from the police.

 At the end of the day a police van stopped at the
door before the house. It was still raining and the
streets were all flooded. Two constables brought out Phatik in their arms and placed him before
Bishamber. He was wet through from head to foot,
muddy all over, his face and eyes flushed red with
fever and his limbs trembling. Bishamber carried
him in his arms and took him into the inner apartments.
When his wife saw him she exclaimed:
"What a heap of trouble this boy has given us!
Hadn't you better send him home?"

 Phatik heard her words and sobbed out loud:
"Uncle, I was just going home; but they dragged
me back again."

 The fever rose very high, and all that night the
boy was delirious. Bishamber brought in a doctor.
Phatik opened his eyes, flushed with fever, and
looked up to the ceiling and said vacantly: "Uncle,
have the holidays come yet?"

 Bishamber wiped the tears from his own eyes and
took Phatik's lean and burning hands in his own and
sat by him through the night. The boy began again
to mutter. At last his voice became excited:
"Mother!" he cried, "don't beat me like that....
Mother! I am telling the truth!"

 The next day Phatik became conscious for a short
time. He turned his eyes about the room, as if
expecting some one to come. At last, with an air
of disappointment, his head sank back on the pillow.
He turned his face to the wall with a deep sigh.  Bishamber knew his thoughts and bending down
his head whispered: "Phatik, I have sent for your
mother."

 The day went by. The doctor said in a troubled
voice that the boy's condition was very critical.

 Phatik began to cry out: "By the mark—three
fathoms. By the mark—four fathoms. By the
mark——." He had heard the sailor on the river-steamer
calling out the mark on the plumb-line.
Now he was himself plumbing an unfathomable sea.

 Later in the day Phatik's mother burst into the
room, like a whirlwind, and began to toss from side
to side and moan and cry in a loud voice.

 Bishamber tried to calm her agitation, but she
flung herself on the bed, and cried: "Phatik, my
darling, my darling."

 Phatik stopped his restless movements for a moment.
His hands ceased beating up and down. He
said: "Eh?"

 The mother cried again: "Phatik, my darling,
my darling."

 Phatik very slowly turned his head and without
seeing anybody said: "Mother, the holidays have
come."

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . From the Latin word "ponere," to place.
Compare position , post , depose , impose , component , composition , repose .

  . From the Latin "unus," one, and "animus,"
mind. Compare magnanimous , pusillanimous .

 . From the Greek "philos," a friend, and
"sophia," wisdom. Compare philology , philanthropy , theosophy .

 . A French word which has found its home in
English. French is frequently giving to English new
words. Compare, in this story, manœuvre , discomfit , mischief .

 . From the Latin "jungere," to join. Compare junction , conjunction , subjunctive , adjunct .

 . From the negative "un," meaning "not,"
and the root "tract-," meaning to draw. Compare traction , tractor , attract , extract , subtract .

 . From the Greek word "atmos," the air, and
"sphaira," a "globe." Compare sphere , hemisphere , photosphere .

 . Probably from the English word "wish,"
wishfulness. Several, however, regard it as coming
from an old word "whist" or "wist," meaning silent.
The vernacular word "udās" has the same meaning.

 . From the Latin word "jacere," to throw.
Compare ad-jec-tive , subject , object , project , inject , reject .

 . From a Saxon word meaning near, nigh;
"hood" or "head" is a common addition to Saxon
words denoting the quality or character. Compare knighthood , manhood , boyhood , womanhood .

 . This word is made up of two words, "holy"
and "days." The religious days of the Church were
those on which no one worked and thus they got the
meaning of holidays as opposed to working days.

   ONCE THERE WAS A KING