THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

 May no ill dreams disturb my rest,
     Nor Powers of Darkness me molest.
             —Evening Hymn.

 ONE of the few advantages that India has over England is a great
      Knowability. After five years' service a man is directly or indirectly
      acquainted with the two or three hundred Civilians in his Province, all
      the Messes of ten or twelve Regiments and Batteries, and some fifteen
      hundred other people of the non-official caste. In ten years his knowledge
      should be doubled, and at the end of twenty he knows, or knows something
      about, every Englishman in the Empire, and may travel anywhere and
      everywhere without paying hotel-bills.

 Globe-trotters who expect entertainment as a right, have, even within my
      memory, blunted this open-heartedness, but none the less today, if you
      belong to the Inner Circle and are neither a Bear nor a Black Sheep, all
      houses are open to you, and our small world is very, very kind and
      helpful.

 Rickett of Kamartha stayed with Polder of Kumaon some fifteen years ago.
      He meant to stay two nights, but was knocked down by rheumatic fever, and
      for six weeks disorganized Polder's establishment, stopped Polder's work,
      and nearly died in Polder's bedroom. Polder behaves as though he had been
      placed under eternal obligation by Rickett, and yearly sends the little
      Ricketts a box of presents and toys. It is the same everywhere. The men
      who do not take the trouble to conceal from you their opinion that you are
      an incompetent ass, and the women who blacken your character and
      misunderstand your wife's amusements, will work themselves to the bone in
      your behalf if you fall sick or into serious trouble.

 Heatherlegh, the Doctor, kept, in addition to his regular practice, a
      hospital on his private account—an arrangement of loose boxes for
      Incurables, his friend called it—but it was really a sort of
      fitting-up shed for craft that had been damaged by stress of weather. The
      weather in India is often sultry, and since the tale of bricks is always a
      fixed quantity, and the only liberty allowed is permission to work
      overtime and get no thanks, men occasionally break down and become as
      mixed as the metaphors in this sentence.

 Heatherlegh is the dearest doctor that ever was, and his invariable
      prescription to all his patients is, “lie low, go slow, and keep cool.” He
      says that more men are killed by overwork than the importance of this
      world justifies. He maintains that overwork slew Pansay, who died under
      his hands about three years ago. He has, of course, the right to speak
      authoritatively, and he laughs at my theory that there was a crack in
      Pansay's head and a little bit of the Dark World came through and pressed
      him to death. “Pansay went off the handle,” says Heatherlegh, “after the
      stimulus of long leave at Home. He may or he may not have behaved like a
      blackguard to Mrs. Keith-Wessington. My notion is that the work of the
      Katabundi Settlement ran him off his legs, and that he took to brooding
      and making much of an ordinary P. & 0. flirtation. He certainly was
      engaged to Miss Mannering, and she certainly broke off the engagement.
      Then he took a feverish chill and all that nonsense about ghosts
      developed. Overwork started his illness, kept it alight, and killed him
      poor devil. Write him off to the System—one man to take the work of
      two and a half men.”

 I do not believe this. I used to sit up with Pansay sometimes when
      Heatherlegh was called out to patients, and I happened to be within claim.
      The man would make me most unhappy by describing in a low, even voice, the
      procession that was always passing at the bottom of his bed. He had a sick
      man's command of language.

 When he recovered I suggested that he should write out the whole affair
      from beginning to end, knowing that ink might assist him to ease his mind.
      When little boys have learned a new bad word they are never happy till
      they have chalked it up on a door. And this also is Literature.

 He was in a high fever while he was writing, and the blood-and-thunder
      Magazine diction he adopted did not calm him. Two months afterward he was
      reported fit for duty, but, in spite of the fact that he was urgently
      needed to help an undermanned Commission stagger through a deficit, he
      preferred to die; vowing at the last that he was hag-ridden. I got his
      manuscript before he died, and this is his version of the affair, dated
      1885:

 My doctor tells me that I need rest and change of air. It is not
      improbable that I shall get both ere long—rest that neither the
      red-coated messenger nor the midday gun can break, and change of air far
      beyond that which any homeward-bound steamer can give me. In the meantime
      I am resolved to stay where I am; and, in flat defiance of my doctor's
      orders, to take all the world into my confidence. You shall learn for
      yourselves the precise nature of my malady; and shall, too, judge for
      yourselves whether any man born of woman on this weary earth was ever so
      tormented as I.

 Speaking now as a condemned criminal might speak ere the drop-bolts are
      drawn, my story, wild and hideously improbable as it may appear, demands
      at least attention. That it will ever receive credence I utterly
      disbelieve. Two months ago I should have scouted as mad or drunk the man
      who had dared tell me the like. Two months ago I was the happiest man in
      India. Today, from Peshawur to the sea, there is no one more wretched. My
      doctor and I are the only two who know this. His explanation is, that my
      brain, digestion, and eyesight are all slightly affected; giving rise to
      my frequent and persistent “delusions.” Delusions, indeed! I call him a
      fool; but he attends me still with the same unwearied smile, the same
      bland professional manner, the same neatly trimmed red whiskers, till I
      begin to suspect that I am an ungrateful, evil-tempered invalid. But you
      shall judge for yourselves.

 Three years ago it was my fortune—my great misfortune—to sail
      from Gravesend to Bombay, on return from long leave, with one Agnes
      Keith-Wessington, wife of an officer on the Bombay side. It does not in
      the least concern you to know what manner of woman she was. Be content
      with the knowledge that, ere the voyage had ended, both she and I were
      desperately and unreasoningly in love with one another. Heaven knows that
      I can make the admission now without one particle of vanity. In matters of
      this sort there is always one who gives and another who accepts. From the
      first day of our ill-omened attachment, I was conscious that Agnes's
      passion was a stronger, a more dominant, and—if I may use the
      expression—a purer sentiment than mine. Whether she recognized the
      fact then, I do not know. Afterward it was bitterly plain to both of us.

 Arrived at Bombay in the spring of the year, we went our respective ways,
      to meet no more for the next three or four months, when my leave and her
      love took us both to Simla. There we spent the season together; and there
      my fire of straw burned itself out to a pitiful end with the closing year.
      I attempt no excuse. I make no apology. Mrs. Wessington had given up much
      for my sake, and was prepared to give up all. From my own lips, in August,
      1882, she learned that I was sick of her presence, tired of her company,
      and weary of the sound of her voice. Ninety-nine women out of a hundred
      would have wearied of me as I wearied of them; seventy-five of that number
      would have promptly avenged themselves by active and obtrusive flirtation
      with other men. Mrs. Wessington was the hundredth. On her neither my
      openly expressed aversion nor the cutting brutalities with which I
      garnished our interviews had the least effect. “Jack, darling!” was her
      one eternal cuckoo cry: “I'm sure it's all a mistake—a hideous
      mistake; and we'll be good friends again some day. Please forgive me,
      Jack, dear.”

 I was the offender, and I knew it. That knowledge transformed my pity into
      passive endurance, and, eventually, into blind hate—the same
      instinct, I suppose, which prompts a man to savagely stamp on the spider
      he has but half killed. And with this hate in my bosom the season of 1882
      came to an end.

 Next year we met again at Simla—she with her monotonous face and
      timid attempts at reconciliation, and I with loathing of her in every
      fibre of my frame. Several times I could not avoid meeting her alone; and
      on each occasion her words were identically the same. Still the
      unreasoning wail that it was all a “mistake”; and still the hope of
      eventually “making friends.” I might have seen had I cared to look, that
      that hope only was keeping her alive. She grew more wan and thin month by
      month. You will agree with me, at least, that such conduct would have
      driven any one to despair. It was uncalled for; childish; unwomanly. I
      maintain that she was much to blame. And again, sometimes, in the black,
      fever-stricken night-watches, I have begun to think that I might have been
      a little kinder to her. But that really is a “delusion.” I could not have
      continued pretending to love her when I didn't; could I? It would have
      been unfair to us both.

 Last year we met again—on the same terms as before. The same weary
      appeal, and the same curt answers from my lips. At least I would make her
      see how wholly wrong and hopeless were her attempts at resuming the old
      relationship. As the season wore on, we fell apart—that is to say,
      she found it difficult to meet me, for I had other and more absorbing
      interests to attend to. When I think it over quietly in my sick-room, the
      season of 1884 seems a confused nightmare wherein light and shade were
      fantastically intermingled—my courtship of little Kitty Mannering;
      my hopes, doubts, and fears; our long rides together; my trembling avowal
      of attachment; her reply; and now and again a vision of a white face
      flitting by in the 'rickshaw with the black and white liveries I once
      watched for so earnestly; the wave of Mrs. Wessington's gloved hand; and,
      when she met me alone, which was but seldom, the irksome monotony of her
      appeal. I loved Kitty Mannering; honestly, heartily loved her, and with my
      love for her grew my hatred for Agnes. In August Kitty and I were engaged.
      The next day I met those accursed “magpie” jhampanies at the back of
      Jakko, and, moved by some passing sentiment of pity, stopped to tell Mrs.
      Wessington everything. She knew it already.

 “So I hear you're engaged, Jack dear.” Then, without a moment's pause—“I'm
      sure it's all a mistake—a hideous mistake. We shall be as good
      friends some day, Jack, as we ever were.”

 My answer might have made even a man wince. It cut the dying woman before
      me like the blow of a whip. “Please forgive me, Jack; I didn't mean to
      make you angry; but it's true, it's true!”

 And Mrs. Wessington broke down completely. I turned away and left her to
      finish her journey in peace, feeling, but only for a moment or two, that I
      had been an unutterably mean hound. I looked back, and saw that she had
      turned her 'rickshaw with the idea, I suppose, of overtaking me.

 The scene and its surroundings were photographed on my memory.

 The rain-swept sky (we were at the end of the wet weather), the sodden,
      dingy pines, the muddy road, and the black powder-riven cliffs formed a
      gloomy background against which the black and white liveries of the
      jhampanies, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw and Mrs. Wessington's down-bowed
      golden head stood out clearly. She was holding her handkerchief in her
      left hand and was leaning back exhausted against the 'rickshaw cushions. I
      turned my horse up a bypath near the Sanjowlie Reservoir and literally ran
      away. Once I fancied I heard a faint call of “Jack!” This may have been
      imagination. I never stopped to verify it. Ten minutes later I came across
      Kitty on horseback; and, in the delight of a long ride with her, forgot
      all about the interview.

 A week later Mrs. Wessington died, and the inexpressible burden of her
      existence was removed from my life. I went Plainsward perfectly happy.
      Before three months were over I had forgotten all about her, except that
      at times the discovery of some of her old letters reminded me unpleasantly
      of our bygone relationship. By January I had disinterred what was left of
      our correspondence from among my scattered belongings and had burned it.
      At the beginning of April of this year, 1885, I was at Simla—semi-deserted
      Simla—once more, and was deep in lover's talks and walks with Kitty.
      It was decided that we should be married at the end of June. You will
      understand, therefore, that, loving Kitty as I did, I am not saying too
      much when I pronounce myself to have been, at that time, the happiest man
      in India.

 Fourteen delightful days passed almost before I noticed their flight.

 Then, aroused to the sense of what was proper among mortals circumstanced
      as we were, I pointed out to Kitty that an engagement ring was the outward
      and visible sign of her dignity as an engaged girl; and that she must
      forthwith come to Hamilton's to be measured for one. Up to that moment, I
      give you my word, we had completely forgotten so trivial a matter. To
      Hamilton's we accordingly went on the 15th of April, 1885. Remember that—whatever
      my doctor may say to the contrary—I was then in perfect health,
      enjoying a well-balanced mind and an absolute tranquil spirit. Kitty and I
      entered Hamilton's shop together, and there, regardless of the order of
      affairs, I measured Kitty for the ring in the presence of the amused
      assistant. The ring was a sapphire with two diamonds. We then rode out
      down the slope that leads to the Combermere Bridge and Peliti's shop.

 While my Waler was cautiously feeling his way over the loose shale, and
      Kitty was laughing and chattering at my side—while all Simla, that
      is to say as much of it as had then come from the Plains, was grouped
      round the Reading-room and Peliti's veranda,—I was aware that some
      one, apparently at a vast distance, was calling me by my Christian name.
      It struck me that I had heard the voice before, but when and where I could
      not at once determine. In the short space it took to cover the road
      between the path from Hamilton's shop and the first plank of the
      Combermere Bridge I had thought over half a dozen people who might have
      committed such a solecism, and had eventually decided that it must have
      been singing in my ears. Immediately opposite Peliti's shop my eye was
      arrested by the sight of four jharnpanies in “magpie” livery, pulling a
      yellow-paneled, cheap, bazar 'rickshaw. In a moment my mind flew back to
      the previous season and Mrs. Wessington with a sense of irritation and
      disgust. Was it not enough that the woman was dead and done with, without
      her black and white servitors reappearing to spoil the day's happiness?
      Whoever employed them now I thought I would call upon, and ask as a
      personal favor to change her jhampanies' livery. I would hire the men
      myself, and, if necessary, buy their coats from off their backs. It is
      impossible to say here what a flood of undesirable memories their presence
      evoked.

 “Kitty,” I cried, “there are poor Mrs. Wessington's jhampanies turned up
      again! I wonder who has them now?”

 Kitty had known Mrs. Wessington slightly last season, and had always been
      interested in the sickly woman. “What? Where?” she asked. “I can't see
      them anywhere.”

 Even as she spoke her horse, swerving from a laden mule, threw himself
      directly in front of the advancing 'rickshaw. I had scarcely time to utter
      a word of warning when, to my unutterable horror, horse and rider passed
      through men and carriage as if they had been thin air.

 “What's the matter?” cried Kitty; “what made you call out so foolishly,
      Jack? If I am engaged I don't want all creation to know about it. There
      was lots of space between the mule and the veranda; and, if you think I
      can't ride—

 “—There!”

 Whereupon wilful Kitty set off, her dainty little head in the air, at a
      hand-gallop in the direction of the Bandstand; fully expecting, as she
      herself afterward told me, that I should follow her. What was the matter?
      Nothing indeed. Either that I was mad or drunk, or that Simla was haunted
      with devils. I reined in my impatient cob, and turned round. The 'rickshaw
      had turned too, and now stood immediately facing me, near the left railing
      of the Combermere Bridge.

 “Jack! Jack, darling!” (There was no mistake about the words this time:
      they rang through my brain as if they had been shouted in my ear.) “It's
      some hideous mistake, I'm sure. Please forgive me, jack, and let's be
      friends again.”

 The 'rickshaw-hood had fallen back, and inside, as I hope and pray daily
      for the death I dread by night, sat Mrs. Keith-Wessington, handkerchief in
      hand, and golden head bowed on her breast.

 How long I stared motionless I do not know. Finally, I was aroused by my
      syce taking the Waler's bridle and asking whether I was ill. From the
      horrible to the commonplace is but a step. I tumbled off my horse and
      dashed, half fainting, into Peliti's for a glass of cherry-brandy. There
      two or three couples were gathered round the coffee-tables discussing the
      gossip of the day. Their trivialities were more comforting to me just then
      than the consolations of religion could have been. I plunged into the
      midst of the conversation at once; chatted, laughed, and jested with a
      face (when I caught a glimpse of it in a mirror) as white and drawn as
      that of a corpse. Three or four men noticed my condition; and, evidently
      setting it down to the results of over-many pegs, charitably endeavoured
      to draw me apart from the rest of the loungers. But I refused to be led
      away. I wanted the company of my kind—as a child rushes into the
      midst of the dinner-party after a fright in the dark. I must have talked
      for about ten minutes or so, though it seemed an eternity to me, when I
      heard Kitty's clear voice outside inquiring for me. In another minute she
      had entered the shop, prepared to roundly upbraid me for failing so
      signally in my duties. Something in my face stopped her.

 “Why, Jack,” she cried, “what have you been doing? What has happened? Are
      you ill?” Thus driven into a direct lie, I said that the sun had been a
      little too much for me. It was close upon five o'clock of a cloudy April
      afternoon, and the sun had been hidden all day. I saw my mistake as soon
      as the words were out of my mouth: attempted to recover it; blundered
      hopelessly and followed Kitty in a regal rage, out of doors, amid the
      smiles of my acquaintances. I made some excuse (I have forgotten what) on
      the score of my feeling faint; and cantered away to my hotel, leaving
      Kitty to finish the ride by herself.

 In my room I sat down and tried calmly to reason out the matter.

 Here was I, Theobald Jack Pansay, a well-educated Bengal Civilian in the
      year of grace, 1885, presumably sane, certainly healthy, driven in terror
      from my sweetheart's side by the apparition of a woman who had been dead
      and buried eight months ago. These were facts that I could not blink.
      Nothing was further from my thought than any memory of Mrs. Wessington
      when Kitty and I left Hamilton's shop. Nothing was more utterly
      commonplace than the stretch of wall opposite Peliti's. It was broad
      daylight. The road was full of people; and yet here, look you, in defiance
      of every law of probability, in direct outrage of Nature's ordinance,
      there had appeared to me a face from the grave.

 Kitty's Arab had gone through the 'rickshaw: so that my first hope that
      some woman marvelously like Mrs. Wessington had hired the carriage and the
      coolies with their old livery was lost. Again and again I went round this
      treadmill of thought; and again and again gave up baffled and in despair.
      The voice was as inexplicable as the apparition. I had originally some
      wild notion of confiding it all to Kitty; of begging her to marry me at
      once; and in her arms defying the ghostly occupant of the 'rickshaw.
      “After all,” I argued, “the presence of the 'rickshaw is in itself enough
      to prove the existence of a spectral illusion. One may see ghosts of men
      and women, but surely never of coolies and carriages. The whole thing is
      absurd. Fancy the ghost of a hill-man!”

 Next morning I sent a penitent note to Kitty, imploring her to overlook my
      strange conduct of the previous afternoon. My Divinity was still very
      wroth, and a personal apology was necessary. I explained, with a fluency
      born of night-long pondering over a falsehood, that I had been attacked
      with sudden palpitation of the heart—the result of indigestion. This
      eminently practical solution had its effect; and Kitty and I rode out that
      afternoon with the shadow of my first lie dividing us.

 Nothing would please her save a canter round Jakko. With my nerves still
      unstrung from the previous night I feebly protested against the notion,
      suggesting Observatory Hill, Jutogh, the Boileaugunge road—anything
      rather than the Jakko round. Kitty was angry and a little hurt: so I
      yielded from fear of provoking further misunderstanding, and we set out
      together toward Chota Simla. We walked a greater part of the way, and,
      according to our custom, cantered from a mile or so below the Convent to
      the stretch of level road by the Sanjowlie Reservoir. The wretched horses
      appeared to fly, and my heart beat quicker and quicker as we neared the
      crest of the ascent. My mind had been full of Mrs. Wessington all the
      afternoon; and every inch of the Jakko road bore witness to our oldtime
      walks and talks. The bowlders were full of it; the pines sang it aloud
      overhead; the rain-fed torrents giggled and chuckled unseen over the
      shameful story; and the wind in my ears chanted the iniquity aloud.

 As a fitting climax, in the middle of the level men call the Ladies' Mile
      the Horror was awaiting me. No other 'rickshaw was in sight—only the
      four black and white jhampanies, the yellow-paneled carriage, and the
      golden head of the woman within—all apparently just as I had left
      them eight months and one fortnight ago! For an instant I fancied that
      Kitty must see what I saw—we were so marvelously sympathetic in all
      things. Her next words undeceived me—“Not a soul in sight! Come
      along, Jack, and I'll race you to the Reservoir buildings!” Her wiry
      little Arab was off like a bird, my Waler following close behind, and in
      this order we dashed under the cliffs. Half a minute brought us within
      fifty yards of the 'rickshaw. I pulled my Waler and fell back a little.
      The 'rickshaw was directly in the middle of the road; and once more the
      Arab passed through it, my horse following. “Jack! Jack dear! Please
      forgive me,” rang with a wail in my ears, and, after an interval:—“It's
      a mistake, a hideous mistake!”

 I spurred my horse like a man possessed. When I turned my head at the
      Reservoir works, the black and white liveries were still waiting—patiently
      waiting—under the grey hillside, and the wind brought me a mocking
      echo of the words I had just heard. Kitty bantered me a good deal on my
      silence throughout the remainder of the ride. I had been talking up till
      then wildly and at random.

 To save my life I could not speak afterward naturally, and from Sanjowlie
      to the Church wisely held my tongue.

 I was to dine with the Mannerings that night, and had barely time to
      canter home to dress. On the road to Elysium Hill I overheard two men
      talking together in the dusk.—“It's a curious thing,” said one, “how
      completely all trace of it disappeared. You know my wife was insanely fond
      of the woman ('never could see anything in her myself), and wanted me to
      pick up her old 'rickshaw and coolies if they were to be got for love or
      money. Morbid sort of fancy I call it; but I've got to do what the
      Memsahib tells me.

 “Would you believe that the man she hired it from tells me that all four
      of the men—they were brothers—died of cholera on the way to
      Hardwar, poor devils, and the 'rickshaw has been broken up by the man
      himself. 'Told me he never used a dead Memsahib's 'rickshaw. 'Spoiled his
      luck.' Queer notion, wasn't it? Fancy poor little Mrs. Wessington spoiling
      any one's luck except her own!” I laughed aloud at this point; and my
      laugh jarred on me as I uttered it. So there were ghosts of 'rickshaws
      after all, and ghostly employments in the other world! How much did Mrs.
      Wessington give her men? What were their hours? Where did they go?

 And for visible answer to my last question I saw the infernal Thing
      blocking my path in the twilight. The dead travel fast, and by short cuts
      unknown to ordinary coolies. I laughed aloud a second time and checked my
      laughter suddenly, for I was afraid I was going mad. Mad to a certain
      extent I must have been, for I recollect that I reined in my horse at the
      head of the 'rickshaw, and politely wished Mrs. Wessington “Good evening.”
       Her answer was one I knew only too well. I listened to the end; and
      replied that I had heard it all before, but should be delighted if she had
      anything further to say. Some malignant devil stronger than I must have
      entered into me that evening, for I have a dim recollection of talking the
      commonplaces of the day for five minutes to the Thing in front of me.

 “Mad as a hatter, poor devil—or drunk. Max, try and get him to come
      home.”

 Surely that was not Mrs. Wessington's voice! The two men had overheard me
      speaking to the empty air, and had returned to look after me. They were
      very kind and considerate, and from their words evidently gathered that I
      was extremely drunk. I thanked them confusedly and cantered away to my
      hotel, there changed, and arrived at the Mannerings' ten minutes late. I
      pleaded the darkness of the night as an excuse; was rebuked by Kitty for
      my unlover-like tardiness; and sat down.

 The conversation had already become general; and under cover of it, I was
      addressing some tender small talk to my sweetheart when I was aware that
      at the further end of the table a short red-whiskered man was describing,
      with much broidery, his encounter with a mad unknown that evening.

 A few sentences convinced me that he was repeating the incident of half an
      hour ago. In the middle of the story he looked round for applause, as
      professional story-tellers do, caught my eye, and straightway collapsed.
      There was a moment's awkward silence, and the red-whiskered man muttered
      something to the effect that he had “forgotten the rest,” thereby
      sacrificing a reputation as a good story-teller which he had built up for
      six seasons past. I blessed him from the bottom of my heart, and—went
      on with my fish.

 In the fulness of time that dinner came to an end; and with genuine regret
      I tore myself away from Kitty—as certain as I was of my own
      existence that It would be waiting for me outside the door. The
      red-whiskered man, who had been introduced to me as Doctor Heatherlegh, of
      Simla, volunteered to bear me company as far as our roads lay together. I
      accepted his offer with gratitude.

 My instinct had not deceived me. It lay in readiness in the Mall, and, in
      what seemed devilish mockery of our ways, with a lighted head-lamp. The
      red-whiskered man went to the point at once, in a manner that showed he
      bad been thinking over it all dinner time.

 “I say, Pansay, what the deuce was the matter with you this evening on the
      Elysium road?” The suddenness of the question wrenched an answer from me
      before I was aware.

 “That!” said I, pointing to It.

 “That may be either D. T. or Eyes for aught I know. Now you don't liquor.
      I saw as much at dinner, so it can't be D. T. There's nothing whatever
      where you're pointing, though you're sweating and trembling with fright
      like a scared pony. Therefore, I conclude that it's Eyes. And I ought to
      understand all about them. Come along home with me. I'm on the Blessington
      lower road.”

 To my intense delight the 'rickshaw instead of waiting for us kept about
      twenty yards ahead—and this, too whether we walked, trotted, or
      cantered. In the course of that long night ride I had told my companion
      almost as much as I have told you here.

 “Well, you've spoiled one of the best tales I've ever laid tongue to,”
       said he, “but I'll forgive you for the sake of what you've gone through.
      Now come home and do what I tell you; and when I've cured you, young man,
      let this be a lesson to you to steer clear of women and indigestible food
      till the day of your death.”

 The 'rickshaw kept steady in front; and my red-whiskered friend seemed to
      derive great pleasure from my account of its exact whereabouts.

 “Eyes, Pansay—all Eyes, Brain, and Stomach. And the greatest of
      these three is Stomach. You've too much conceited Brain, too little
      Stomach, and thoroughly unhealthy Eyes. Get your Stomach straight and the
      rest follows. And all that's French for a liver pill.

 “I'll take sole medical charge of you from this hour! for you're too
      interesting a phenomenon to be passed over.”

 By this time we were deep in the shadow of the Blessington lower road and
      the 'rickshaw came to a dead stop under a pine-clad, over-hanging shale
      cliff. Instinctively I halted too, giving my reason. Heatherlegh rapped
      out an oath.

 “Now, if you think I'm going to spend a cold night on the hillside for the
      sake of a stomach-cum-Brain-cum-Eye illusion—Lord, ha' mercy! What's
      that?”

 There was a muffled report, a blinding smother of dust just in front of
      us, a crack, the noise of rent boughs, and about ten yards of the
      cliff-side—pines, undergrowth, and all—slid down into the road
      below, completely blocking it up. The uprooted trees swayed and tottered
      for a moment like drunken giants in the gloom, and then fell prone among
      their fellows with a thunderous crash. Our two horses stood motionless and
      sweating with fear. As soon as the rattle of falling earth and stone had
      subsided, my companion muttered:—“Man, if we'd gone forward we
      should have been ten feet deep in our graves by now. 'There are more
      things in heaven and earth...' Come home, Pansay, and thank God. I want a
      peg badly.”

 We retraced our way over the Church Ridge, and I arrived at Dr.
      Heatherlegh's house shortly after midnight.

 His attempts toward my cure commenced almost immediately, and for a week I
      never left his sight. Many a time in the course of that week did I bless
      the good fortune which had thrown me in contact with Simla's best and
      kindest doctor. Day by day my spirits grew lighter and more equable. Day
      by day, too, I became more and more inclined to fall in with Heatherlegh's
      “spectral illusion” theory, implicating eyes, brain, and stomach. I wrote
      to Kitty, telling her that a slight sprain caused by a fall from my horse
      kept me indoors for a few days; and that I should be recovered before she
      had time to regret my absence.

 Heatherlegh's treatment was simple to a degree. It consisted of liver
      pills, cold-water baths, and strong exercise, taken in the dusk or at
      early dawn—for, as he sagely observed:—“A man with a sprained
      ankle doesn't walk a dozen miles a day, and your young woman might be
      wondering if she saw you.”

 At the end of the week, after much examination of pupil and pulse, and
      strict injunction' as to diet and pedestrianism, Heatherlegh dismissed me
      as brusquely as he had taken charge of me. Here is his parting
      benediction:—“Man, I can certify to your mental cure, and that's as
      much as to say I've cured most of your bodily ailments. Now, get your
      traps out of this as soon as you can; and be off to make love to Miss
      Kitty.”

 I was endeavoring to express my thanks for his kindness. He cut me short.

 “Don't think I did this because I like you. I gather that you've behaved
      like a blackguard all through. But, all the same, you re a phenomenon, and
      as queer a phenomenon as you are a blackguard. No!”—checking me a
      second time—“not a rupee please. Go out and see if you can find the
      eyes-brain-and-stomach business again. I'll give you a lakh for each time
      you see it.”

 Half an hour later I was in the Mannerings' drawing-room with Kitty—drunk
      with the intoxication of present happiness and the fore-knowledge that I
      should never more be troubled with Its hideous presence. Strong in the
      sense of my new-found security, I proposed a ride at once; and, by
      preference, a canter round Jakko.

 Never had I felt so well, so overladen with vitality and mere animal
      spirits, as I did on the afternoon of the 30th of April. Kitty was
      delighted at the change in my appearance, and complimented me on it in her
      delightfully frank and outspoken manner. We left the Mannerings' house
      together, laughing and talking, and cantered along the Chota Simla road as
      of old.

 I was in haste to reach the Sanjowlie Reservoir and there make my
      assurance doubly sure. The horses did their best, but seemed all too slow
      to my impatient mind. Kitty was astonished at my boisterousness. “Why,
      Jack!” she cried at last, “you are behaving like a child. What are you
      doing?”

 We were just below the Convent, and from sheer wantonness I was making my
      Waler plunge and curvet across the road as I tickled it with the loop of
      my riding-whip.

 “Doing?” I answered; “nothing, dear. That's just it. If you'd been doing
      nothing for a week except lie up, you'd be as riotous as I.”

 “'Singing and murmuring in your feastful mirth, Joying to feel yourself
      alive; Lord over Nature, Lord of the visible Earth, Lord of the senses
      five.'”

 My quotation was hardly out of my lips before we had rounded the corner
      above the Convent; and a few yards further on could see across to
      Sanjowlie. In the centre of the level road stood the black and white
      liveries, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw, and Mrs. Keith-Wessington. I
      pulled up, looked, rubbed my eyes, and, I believe must have said
      something. The next thing I knew was that I was lying face downward on the
      road with Kitty kneeling above me in tears.

 “Has it gone, child?” I gasped. Kitty only wept more bitterly.

 “Has what gone, Jack dear? what does it all mean? There must be a mistake
      somewhere, Jack. A hideous mistake.” Her last words brought me to my feet—mad—raving
      for the time being.

 “Yes, there is a mistake somewhere,” I repeated, “a hideous mistake. Come
      and look at It.”

 I have an indistinct idea that I dragged Kitty by the wrist along the road
      up to where It stood, and implored her for pity's sake to speak to It; to
      tell It that we were betrothed; that neither Death nor Hell could break
      the tie between us; and Kitty only knows how much more to the same effect.
      Now and again I appealed passionately to the Terror in the 'rickshaw to
      bear witness to all I had said, and to release me from a torture that was
      killing me. As I talked I suppose I must have told Kitty of my old
      relations with Mrs. Wessington, for I saw her listen intently with white
      face and blazing eyes.

 “Thank you, Mr. Pansay,” she said, “that's quite enough. Syce ghora lao.”

 The syces, impassive as Orientals always are, had come up with the
      recaptured horses; and as Kitty sprang into her saddle I caught hold of
      the bridle, entreating her to hear me out and forgive. My answer was the
      cut of her riding-whip across my face from mouth to eye, and a word or two
      of farewell that even now I cannot write down. So I judged, and judged
      rightly, that Kitty knew all; and I staggered back to the side of the
      'rickshaw. My face was cut and bleeding, and the blow of the riding-whip
      had raised a livid blue wheal on it. I had no self-respect. Just then,
      Heatherlegh, who must have been following Kitty and me at a distance,
      cantered up.

 “Doctor,” I said, pointing to my face, “here's Miss Mannering's signature
      to my order of dismissal and—I'll thank you for that lakh as soon as
      convenient.”

 Heatherlegh's face, even in my abject misery, moved me to laughter.

 “I'll stake my professional reputation”—he began.

 “Don't be a fool,” I whispered. “I've lost my life's happiness and you'd
      better take me home.”

 As I spoke the 'rickshaw was gone. Then I lost all knowledge of what was
      passing. The crest of Jakko seemed to heave and roll like the crest of a
      cloud and fall in upon me.

 Seven days later (on the 7th of May, that is to say) I was aware that I
      was lying in Heatherlegh's room as weak as a little child. Heatherlegh was
      watching me intently from behind the papers on his writing-table. His
      first words were not encouraging; but I was too far spent to be much moved
      by them.

 “Here's Miss Kitty has sent back your letters. You corresponded a good
      deal, you young people. Here's a packet that looks like a ring, and a
      cheerful sort of a note from Mannering Papa, which I've taken the liberty
      of reading and burning. The old gentleman's not pleased with you.”

 “And Kitty?” I asked, dully.

 “Rather more drawn than her father from what she says. By the same token
      you must have been letting out any number of queer reminiscences just
      before I met you. 'Says that a man who would have behaved to a woman as
      you did to Mrs. Wessington ought to kill himself out of sheer pity for his
      kind. She's a hot-headed little virago, your mash. 'Will have it too that
      you were suffering from D. T. when that row on the Jakko road turned up.
      'Says she'll die before she ever speaks to you again.”

 I groaned and turned over to the other side.

 “Now you've got your choice, my friend. This engagement has to be broken
      off; and the Mannerings don't want to be too hard on you. Was it broken
      through D. T. or epileptic fits? Sorry I can't offer you a better exchange
      unless you'd prefer hereditary insanity. Say the word and I'll tell 'em
      it's fits. All Simla knows about that scene on the Ladies' Mile. Come!
      I'll give you five minutes to think over it.”

 During those five minutes I believe that I explored thoroughly the lowest
      circles of the Inferno which it is permitted man to tread on earth. And at
      the same time I myself was watching myself faltering through the dark
      labyrinths of doubt, misery, and utter despair. I wondered, as Heatherlegh
      in his chair might have wondered, which dreadful alternative I should
      adopt. Presently I heard myself answering in a voice that I hardly
      recognized, “—They're confoundedly particular about morality in
      these parts. Give 'em fits, Heatherlegh, and my love. Now let me sleep a
      bit longer.”

 Then my two selves joined, and it was only I (half crazed, devil-driven I)
      that tossed in my bed, tracing step by step the history of the past month.

 “But I am in Simla,” I kept repeating to myself. “I, Jack Pansay, am in
      Simla and there are no ghosts here. It's unreasonable of that woman to
      pretend there are. Why couldn't Agnes have left me alone? I never did her
      any harm. It might just as well have been me as Agnes. Only I'd never have
      come back on purpose to kill her. Why can't I be left alone—left
      alone and happy?”

 It was high noon when I first awoke, and the sun was low in the sky before
      I slept—slept as the tortured criminal sleeps on his rack, too worn
      to feel further pain.

 Next day I could not leave my bed. Heatherlegh told me in the morning that
      he had received an answer from Mr. Mannering, and that, thanks to his
      (Heatherlegh's) friendly offices, the story of my affliction had traveled
      through the length and breadth of Simla, where I was on all sides much
      pitied.

 “And that's rather more than you deserve,” he concluded, pleasantly,
      “though the Lord knows you've been going through a pretty severe mill.
      Never mind; we'll cure you yet, you perverse phenomenon.”

 I declined firmly to be cured. “You've been much too good to me already,
      old man,” said I; “but I don't think I need trouble you further.”

 In my heart I knew that nothing Heatherlegh could do would lighten the
      burden that had been laid upon me.

 With that knowledge came also a sense of hopeless, impotent rebellion
      against the unreasonableness of it all. There were scores of men no better
      than I whose punishments had at least been reserved for another world; and
      I felt that it was bitterly, cruelly unfair that I alone should have been
      singled out for so hideous a fate. This mood would in time give place to
      another where it seemed that the 'rickshaw and I were the only realities
      in a world of shadows; that Kitty was a ghost; that Mannering,
      Heatherlegh, and all the other men and women I knew were all ghosts; and
      the great, grey hills themselves but vain shadows devised to torture me.
      From mood to mood I tossed backward and forward for seven weary days; my
      body growing daily stronger and stronger, until the bedroom looking-glass
      told me that I had returned to everyday life, and was as other men once
      more. Curiously enough my face showed no signs of the struggle I had gone
      through. It was pale indeed, but as expressionless and commonplace as
      ever. I had expected some permanent alteration—visible evidence of
      the disease that was eating me away. I found nothing.

 On the 15th of May, I left Heatherlegh's house at eleven o'clock in the
      morning; and the instinct of the bachelor drove me to the Club. There I
      found that every man knew my story as told by Heatherlegh, and was, in
      clumsy fashion, abnormally kind and attentive. Nevertheless I recognized
      that for the rest of my natural life I should be among but not of my
      fellows; and I envied very bitterly indeed the laughing coolies on the
      Mall below. I lunched at the Club, and at four o'clock wandered aimlessly
      down the Mall in the vague hope of meeting Kitty. Close to the Band-stand
      the black and white liveries joined me; and I heard Mrs. Wessington's old
      appeal at my side. I had been expecting this ever since I came out; and
      was only surprised at her delay. The phantom 'rickshaw and I went side by
      side along the Chota Simla road in silence. Close to the bazar, Kitty and
      a man on horseback overtook and passed us. For any sign she gave I might
      have been a dog in the road. She did not even pay me the compliment of
      quickening her pace; though the rainy afternoon had served for an excuse.

 So Kitty and her companion, and I and my ghostly Light-o'-Love, crept
      round Jakko in couples. The road was streaming with water; the pines
      dripped like roof-pipes on the rocks below, and the air was full of fine,
      driving rain. Two or three times I found myself saying to myself almost
      aloud: “I'm Jack Pansay on leave at Simla—at Simla! Everyday,
      ordinary Simla. I mustn't forget that—I mustn't forget that.” Then I
      would try to recollect some of the gossip I had heard at the Club: the
      prices of So-and-So's horses—anything, in fact, that related to the
      workaday Anglo-Indian world I knew so well. I even repeated the
      multiplication-table rapidly to myself, to make quite sure that I was not
      taking leave of my senses. It gave me much comfort; and must have
      prevented my hearing Mrs. Wessington for a time.

 Once more I wearily climbed the Convent slope and entered the level road.
      Here Kitty and the man started off at a canter, and I was left alone with
      Mrs. Wessington. “Agnes,” said I, “will you put back your hood and tell me
      what it all means?” The hood dropped noiselessly, and I was face to face
      with my dead and buried mistress. She was wearing the dress in which I had
      last seen her alive; carried the same tiny handkerchief in her right hand;
      and the same cardcase in her left. (A woman eight months dead with a
      cardcase!) I had to pin myself down to the multiplication-table, and to
      set both hands on the stone parapet of the road, to assure myself that
      that at least was real.

 “Agnes,” I repeated, “for pity's sake tell me what it all means.” Mrs.
      Wessington leaned forward, with that odd, quick turn of the head I used to
      know so well, and spoke.

 If my story had not already so madly overleaped the hounds of all human
      belief I should apologize to you now. As I know that no one—no, not
      even Kitty, for whom it is written as some sort of justification of my
      conduct—will believe me, I will go on. Mrs. Wessington spoke and I
      walked with her from the Sanjowlie road to the turning below the
      Commander-in-Chief's house as I might walk by the side of any living
      woman's 'rickshaw, deep in conversation. The second and most tormenting of
      my moods of sickness had suddenly laid hold upon me, and like the Prince
      in Tennyson's poem, “I seemed to move amid a world of ghosts.” There had
      been a garden-party at the Commander-in-Chief's, and we two joined the
      crowd of homeward-bound folk. As I saw them then it seemed that they were
      the shadows—impalpable, fantastic shadows—that divided for
      Mrs. Wessington's 'rickshaw to pass through. What we said during the
      course of that weird interview I cannot—indeed, I dare not—tell.
      Heatherlegh's comment would have been a short laugh and a remark that I
      had been “mashing a brain-eye-and-stomach chimera.” It was a ghastly and
      yet in some indefinable way a marvelously dear experience. Could it be
      possible, I wondered, that I was in this life to woo a second time the
      woman I had killed by my own neglect and cruelty?

 I met Kitty on the homeward road—a shadow among shadows.

 If I were to describe all the incidents of the next fortnight in their
      order, my story would never come to an end; and your patience would Be
      exhausted. Morning after morning and evening after evening the ghostly
      'rickshaw and I used to wander through Simla together. Wherever I went
      there the four black and white liveries followed me and bore me company to
      and from my hotel. At the Theatre I found them amid the crowd of yelling
      jhampanies; outside the Club veranda, after a long evening of whist; at
      the Birthday Ball, waiting patiently for my reappearance; and in broad
      daylight when I went calling. Save that it cast no shadow, the 'rickshaw
      was in every respect as real to look upon as one of wood and iron. More
      than once, indeed, I have had to check myself from warning some
      hard-riding friend against cantering over it. More than once I have walked
      down the Mall deep in conversation with Mrs. Wessington to the unspeakable
      amazement of the passers-by.

 Before I had been out and about a week I learned that the “fit” theory had
      been discarded in favor of insanity. However, I made no change in my mode
      of life. I called, rode, and dined out as freely as ever. I had a passion
      for the society of my kind which I had never felt before; I hungered to be
      among the realities of life; and at the same time I felt vaguely unhappy
      when I had been separated too long from my ghostly companion. It would be
      almost impossible to describe my varying moods from the 15th of May up to
      today.

 The presence of the 'rickshaw filled me by turns with horror, blind fear,
      a dim sort of pleasure, and utter despair. I dared not leave Simla; and I
      knew that my stay there was killing me. I knew, moreover, that it was my
      destiny to die slowly and a little every day. My only anxiety was to get
      the penance over as quietly as might be. Alternately I hungered for a
      sight of Kitty and watched her outrageous flirtations with my successor—to
      speak more accurately, my successors—with amused interest. She was
      as much out of my life as I was out of hers. By day I wandered with Mrs.
      Wessington almost content. By night I implored Heaven to let me return to
      the world as I used to know it. Above all these varying moods lay the
      sensation of dull, numbing wonder that the Seen and the Unseen should
      mingle so strangely on this earth to hound one poor soul to its grave.

  August 27.—Heatherlegh has been indefatigable in his attendance on
      me; and only yesterday told me that I ought to send in an application for
      sick leave. An application to escape the company of a phantom! A request
      that the Government would graciously permit me to get rid of five ghosts
      and an airy 'rickshaw by going to England. Heatherlegh's proposition moved
      me to almost hysterical laughter. I told him that I should await the end
      quietly at Simla; and I am sure that the end is not far off. Believe me
      that I dread its advent more than any word can say; and I torture myself
      nightly with a thousand speculations as to the manner of my death.

 Shall I die in my bed decently and as an English gentleman should die; or,
      in one last walk on the Mall, will my soul be wrenched from me to take its
      place forever and ever by the side of that ghastly phantasm? Shall I
      return to my old lost allegiance in the next world, or shall I meet Agnes
      loathing her and bound to her side through all eternity? Shall we two
      hover over the scene of our lives till the end of Time? As the day of my
      death draws nearer, the intense horror that all living flesh feels toward
      escaped spirits from beyond the grave grows more and more powerful. It is
      an awful thing to go down quick among the dead with scarcely one-half of
      your life completed. It is a thousand times more awful to wait as I do in
      your midst, for I know not what unimaginable terror. Pity me, at least on
      the score of my “delusion,” for I know you will never believe what I have
      written here Yet as surely as ever a man was done to death by the Powers
      of Darkness I am that man.

 In justice, too, pity her. For as surely as ever woman was killed by man,
      I killed Mrs. Wessington. And the last portion of my punishment is ever
      now upon me.