THE RELIC
    

      “To the Abbe Louis d'Ennemare, at Soissons.
    

      “My Dear Abbe.
    

      “My marriage with your cousin is broken off in the most stupid way,
      all on account of an idiotic trick which I almost involuntarily played my
      intended. In my perplexity I turn to you, my old school chum, for you may
      be able to help me out of the difficulty. If you can, I shall be grateful
      to you until I die.
    

      “You know Gilberte, or, rather, you think you know her, but do we
      ever understand women? All their opinions, their ideas, their creeds, are
      a surprise to us. They are all full of twists and turns, cf the
      unforeseen, of unintelligible arguments, of defective logic and of
      obstinate ideas, which seem final, but which they alter because a little
      bird came and perched on the window ledge.
    

      “I need not tell you that your cousin is very religious, as she was
      brought up by the White (or was it the Black?) Ladies at Nancy. You know
      that better than I do, but what you perhaps do not know is, that she is
      just as excitable about other matters as she is about religion. Her head
      flies away, just as a leaf is whirled away by the wind; and she is a true
      woman, or, rather, girl, for she is moved or made angry in a moment,
      starting off at a gallop in affection, just as she does in hatred, and
      returning in the same manner; and she is pretty—as you know, and
      more charming than I can say—as you will never know.
    

      “Well, we became engaged, and I adored her, as I adore her still,
      and she appeared to love me.
    

      “One evening, I received a telegram summoning me to Cologne for a
      consultation, which might be followed by a serious and difficult
      operation, and as I had to start the next morning, I went to wish Gilberte
      good-by, and tell her why I could not dine with them on Wednesday, but
      would do so on Friday, the day of my return. Ah! Beware of Fridays, for I
      assure you they are unlucky!
    

      “When I told her that I had to go to Germany, I saw that her eyes
      filled with tears, but when I said I should be back very soon, she clapped
      her hands, and said:
    

      “'I am very glad you are going, then! You must bring me back
      something; a mere trifle, just a souvenir, but a souvenir that you have
      chosen for me. You must guess what I should like best, do you hear? And
      then I shall see whether you have any imagination.'
    

      “She thought for a few moments, and then added:
    

      “'I forbid you to spend more than twenty francs on it. I want it for
      the intention, and for a remembrance of your penetration, and not for its
      intrinsic value:
    

      “And then, after another moment's silence, she said, in a low voice,
      and with downcast eyes:
    

      “'If it costs you nothing in money, but is something very ingenious
      and pretty, I will—I will kiss you.'
    

      “The next day I was in Cologne. It was a case of a terrible
      accident, which had plunged a whole family into despair, and a difficult
      amputation was necessary. They lodged me in the house; I might say, they
      almost locked me up, and I saw nobody but people in tears, who almost
      deafened me with their lamentations; I operated on a man who appeared to
      be in a moribund state, and who nearly died under my hands, and with whom
      I remained two nights; and then, when I saw that there was a chance of his
      recovery, I drove to the station. I had, however, made a mistake in the
      trains, and I had an hour to wait, and so I wandered about the streets,
      still thinking of my poor patient, when a man accosted me. I do not know
      German, and he was totally ignorant of French, but at last I made out that
      he was offering me some relics. I thought of Gilberte, for I knew her
      fanatical devotion, and here was my present ready to hand, so I followed
      the man into a shop where religious objects were for sale, and I bought a
      small piece of a bone of one of the Eleven Thousand Virgins.
    

      “The pretended relic was inclosed in a charming old silver box, and
      that determined my choice, and, putting my purchase into my pocket, I went
      to the railway station, and so on to Paris.
    

      “As soon as I got home, I wished to examine my purchase again, and
      on taking hold of it, I found that the box was open, and the relic
      missing! I searched in vain in my pocket, and turned it inside out; the
      small bit of bone, which was no bigger than half a pin, had disappeared.
    

      “You know, my dear little Abbe, that my faith is not very fervent,
      but, as my friend, you are magnanimous enough to put up with my
      lukewarmness, and to leave me alone, and to wait for the future, so you
      say. But I absolutely disbelieve in the relics of secondhand dealers in
      piety, and you share my doubts in that respect. Therefore, the loss of
      that bit of sheep's carcass did not grieve me, and I easily procured a
      similar fragment, which I carefully fastened inside my jewel-box, and then
      I went to see my intended.
    

      “As soon as she saw me, she ran up to me, smiling and eager, and,
      said to me:
    

      “'What have you brought me?'
    

      “I pretended to have forgotten, but she did not believe me, and I
      made her beg, and even beseech me. But when I saw that she was devoured by
      curiosity, I gave her the sacred silver box. She appeared overjoyed.
    

      “'A relic! Oh! A relic!'
    

      “And she kissed the box passionately, so that I was ashamed of my
      deception. She was not quite satisfied, however, and her uneasiness soon
      turned to terrible fear, and looking straight into my eyes, she said:
    

      “'Are you sure-that it is genuine?'
    

      “'Absolutely certain.'
    

      “'How can you be so certain?'
    

      “I was trapped; for to say that I had bought it of a man in the
      streets would be my destruction. What was I to say? A wild idea struck me,
      and I said, in a low, mysterious voice:
    

      “'I stole it for you.'
    

      “She looked at me with astonishment and delight in her large eyes.
    

      “'Oh! You stole it? Where?'
    

      “'In the cathedral; in the very shrine of the Eleven Thousand
      Virgins.'
    

      “Her heart beat with pleasure, and she murmured:
    

      “'Oh! Did you really do that-for me? Tell me-all about it!'
    

      “That was the climax; I could not retract what I had said. I made up
      a fanciful story; with precise details: I had given the custodian of the
      building a hundred francs to be allowed to go about the building by
      myself; the shrine was being repaired, but I happened to be there at the
      breakfast hour of the workmen and clergy; by removing a small panel, I had
      been enabled to seize a small piece of bone (oh! so small), among a
      quantity of others (I said a quantity, as I thought of the amount that the
      remains of the skeletons of eleven thousand virgins must produce). Then I
      went to a goldsmith's and bought a casket worthy of the relic; and I was
      not sorry to let her know that the silver box cost me five hundred francs.
    

      “But she did not think of that; she listened to me, trembling, in an
      ecstasy, and whispering: 'How I love you!' she threw herself into my arms.
    

      “Just note this: I had committed sacrilege for her sake. I had
      committed a theft; I had violated a church; I had violated a shrine;
      violated and stolen holy relics, and for that she adored me, thought me
      perfect, tender, divine. Such is woman, my dear Abbe, every woman.
    

      “For two months I was the most admirable of lovers. In her room, she
      had made a kind of magnificent chapel in which to keep this bit of mutton
      chop, which, as she thought, had made me commit that divine love-crime,
      and she worked up her religious enthusiasm in front of it every morning
      and evening. I had asked her to keep the matter secret, for fear, as I
      said, that I might be arrested, condemned, and given over to Germany, and
      she kept her promise.
    

      “Well, at the beginning of the summer, she was seized with an
      irresistible desire to see the scene of my exploit, and she teased her
      father so persistently (without telling him her secret reason), that he
      took her to Cologne, but without telling me of their trip, according to
      his daughter's wish.
    

      “I need not tell you that I had not seen the interior of the
      cathedral. I do not know where the tomb (if there be a tomb) of the Eleven
      Thousand Virgins is; and then, it appears, it is unapproachable, alas!
    

      “A week afterward, I received ten lines, breaking off our
      engagement, and then an explanatory letter from her father, whom she had,
      somewhat late, taken into her confidence.
    

      “At the sight of the shrine, she had suddenly seen through my
      trickery and my lie, and at the same time discovered my real innocence of
      any crime. Having asked the keeper of the relics whether any robbery had
      been committed, the man began to laugh, and pointed out to them how
      impossible such a crime was. But, from the moment that I had not plunged
      my profane hand into venerable relics, I was no longer worthy of my
      fair-haired, sensitive betrothed.
    

      “I was forbidden the house; I begged and prayed in vain; nothing
      could move the fair devotee, and I became ill from grief. Well, last week,
      her cousin, Madame d'Arville, who is your cousin also, sent me word that
      she should like to see me, and when I called, she told me on what
      conditions I might obtain my pardon, and here they are. I must bring her a
      relic, a real, authentic relic of some virgin and martyr, certified to be
      such by our Holy Father, the Pope, and I am going mad from embarrassment
      and anxiety.
    

      “I will go to Rome, if needful, but I cannot call on the Pope
      unexpectedly, to tell him my stupid misadventure; and, besides, I doubt
      whether they allow private individuals to have relics. Could not you give
      me an introduction to some cardinal, or even to some French prelate who
      possesses some remains of a female saint? Or, perhaps, you may have the
      precious object she wants in your collection?
    

      “Help me out of my difficulty, my dear Abbe, and I promise you that
      I will be converted ten years sooner than I otherwise should be!
    

      “Madame d'Arville, who takes the matter seriously, said to me the
      other day:
    

      “'Poor Gilberte will never marry.'
    

      “My dear old schoolmate, will you allow your cousin to die the
      victim of a stupid piece of subterfuge on my part? Pray prevent her from
      being virgin eleven thousand and one.
    

      “Pardon me, I am unworthy, but I embrace you, and love you with all
      my heart.
    

“Your old friend,
               “HENRI FONTAL.”
 







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 4.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME IV.