THE STRANGE RIDE OF MORROWBIE JUKES
    

   Alive or dead-there is no other way.
               —Native Proverb.


      THERE is, as the conjurers say, no deception about this tale. Jukes by
      accident stumbled upon a village that is well known to exist, though he is
      the only Englishman who has been there. A somewhat similar institution
      used to flourish on the outskirts of Calcutta, and there is a story that
      if you go into the heart of Bikanir, which is in the heart of the Great
      Indian Desert, you shall come across not a village but a town where the
      Dead who did not die but may not live have established their headquarters.
      And, since it is perfectly true that in the same Desert is a wonderful
      city where all the rich money lenders retreat after they have made their
      fortunes (fortunes so vast that the owners cannot trust even the strong
      hand of the Government to protect them, but take refuge in the waterless
      sands), and drive sumptuous C-spring barouches, and buy beautiful girls
      and decorate their palaces with gold and ivory and Minton tiles and
      mother-of-pearl, I do not see why Jukes's tale should not be true. He is a
      Civil Engineer, with a head for plans and distances and things of that
      kind, and he certainly would not take the trouble to invent imaginary
      traps. He could earn more by doing his legitimate work. He never varies
      the tale in the telling, and grows very hot and indignant when he thinks
      of the disrespectful treatment he received. He wrote this quite
      straightforwardly at first, but he has since touched it up in places and
      introduced Moral Reflections, thus:
    

      In the beginning it all arose from a slight attack of fever. My work
      necessitated my being in camp for some months between Pakpattan and
      Muharakpur—a desolate sandy stretch of country as every one who has
      had the misfortune to go there may know. My coolies were neither more nor
      less exasperating than other gangs, and my work demanded sufficient
      attention to keep me from moping, had I been inclined to so unmanly a
      weakness.
    

      On the 23d December, 1884, I felt a little feverish. There was a full moon
      at the time, and, in consequence, every dog near my tent was baying it.
      The brutes assembled in twos and threes and drove me frantic. A few days
      previously I had shot one loud-mouthed singer and suspended his carcass in
      terrorem about fifty yards from my tent-door. But his friends fell upon,
      fought for, and ultimately devoured the body; and, as it seemed to me,
      sang their hymns of thanksgiving afterward with renewed energy.
    

      The light-heartedness which accompanies fever acts differently on
      different men. My irritation gave way, after a short time, to a fixed
      determination to slaughter one huge black and white beast who had been
      foremost in song and first in flight throughout the evening. Thanks to a
      shaking hand and a giddy head I had already missed him twice with both
      barrels of my shot-gun, when it struck me that my best plan would be to
      ride him down in the open and finish him off with a hog-spear. This, of
      course, was merely the semi-delirious notion of a fever patient; but I
      remember that it struck me at the time as being eminently practical and
      feasible.
    

      I therefore ordered my groom to saddle Pornic and bring him round quietly
      to the rear of my tent. When the pony was ready, I stood at his head
      prepared to mount and dash out as soon as the dog should again lift up his
      voice. Pornic, by the way, had not been out of his pickets for a couple of
      days; the night air was crisp and chilly; and I was armed with a specially
      long and sharp pair of persuaders with which I had been rousing a sluggish
      cob that afternoon. You will easily believe, then, that when he was let go
      he went quickly. In one moment, for the brute bolted as straight as a die,
      the tent was left far behind, and we were flying over the smooth sandy
      soil at racing speed.
    

      In another we had passed the wretched dog, and I had almost forgotten why
      it was that I had taken the horse and hogspear.
    

      The delirium of fever and the excitement of rapid motion through the air
      must have taken away the remnant of my senses. I have a faint recollection
      of standing upright in my stirrups, and of brandishing my hog-spear at the
      great white Moon that looked down so calmly on my mad gallop; and of
      shouting challenges to the camel-thorn bushes as they whizzed past. Once
      or twice I believe, I swayed forward on Pornic's neck, and literally hung
      on by my spurs—as the marks next morning showed.
    

      The wretched beast went forward like a thing possessed, over what seemed
      to be a limitless expanse of moonlit sand. Next, I remember, the ground
      rose suddenly in front of us, and as we topped the ascent I saw the waters
      of the Sutlej shining like a silver bar below. Then Pornic blundered
      heavily on his nose, and we rolled together down some unseen slope.
    

      I must have lost consciousness, for when I recovered I was lying on my
      stomach in a heap of soft white sand, and the dawn was beginning to break
      dimly over the edge of the slope down which I had fallen. As the light
      grew stronger I saw that I was at the bottom of a horse-shoe shaped crater
      of sand, opening on one side directly on to the shoals of the Sutlej. My
      fever had altogether left me, and, with the exception of a slight
      dizziness in the head, I felt no had effects from the fall over night.
    

      Pornic, who was standing a few yards away, was naturally a good deal
      exhausted, but had not hurt himself in the least. His saddle, a favorite
      polo one, was much knocked about, and had been twisted under his belly. It
      took me some time to put him to rights, and in the meantime I had ample
      opportunities of observing the spot into which I had so foolishly dropped.
    

      At the risk of being considered tedious, I must describe it at length:
      inasmuch as an accurate mental picture of its peculiarities will be of
      material assistance in enabling the reader to understand what follows.
    

      Imagine then, as I have said before, a horseshoe-shaped crater of sand
      with steeply graded sand walls about thirty-five feet high. (The slope, I
      fancy, must have been about 65 degrees.) This crater enclosed a level
      piece of ground about fifty yards long by thirty at its broadest part,
      with a crude well in the centre. Round the bottom of the crater, about
      three feet from the level of the ground proper, ran a series of
      eighty-three semi-circular ovoid, square, and multilateral holes, all
      about three feet at the mouth. Each hole on inspection showed that it was
      carefully shored internally with drift-wood and bamboos, and over the
      mouth a wooden drip-board projected, like the peak of a jockey's cap, for
      two feet. No sign of life was visible in these tunnels, but a most
      sickening stench pervaded the entire amphitheatre—a stench fouler
      than any which my wanderings in Indian villages have introduced me to.
    

      Having remounted Pornic, who was as anxious as I to get back to camp, I
      rode round the base of the horseshoe to find some place whence an exit
      would be practicable. The inhabitants, whoever they might be, had not
      thought fit to put in an appearance, so I was left to my own devices. My
      first attempt to “rush” Pornic up the steep sand-banks showed me that I
      had fallen into a trap exactly on the same model as that which the
      ant-lion sets for its prey. At each step the shifting sand poured down
      from above in tons, and rattled on the drip-boards of the holes like small
      shot. A couple of ineffectual charges sent us both rolling down to the
      bottom, half choked with the torrents of sand; and I was constrained to
      turn my attention to the river-bank.
    

      Here everything seemed easy enough. The sand hills ran down to the river
      edge, it is true, but there were plenty of shoals and shallows across
      which I could gallop Pornic, and find my way back to terra firma by
      turning sharply to the right or left. As I led Pornic over the sands I was
      startled by the faint pop of a rifle across the river; and at the same
      moment a bullet dropped with a sharp “whit” close to Pornic's head.
    

      There was no mistaking the nature of the missile-a regulation
      Martini-Henry “picket.” About five hundred yards away a country-boat was
      anchored in midstream; and a jet of smoke drifting away from its bows in
      the still morning air showed me whence the delicate attention had come.
      Was ever a respectable gentleman in such an impasse? The treacherous sand
      slope allowed no escape from a spot which I had visited most
      involuntarily, and a promenade on the river frontage was the signal for a
      bombardment from some insane native in a boat. I'm afraid that I lost my
      temper very much indeed.
    

      Another bullet reminded me that I had better save my breath to cool my
      porridge; and I retreated hastily up the sands and back to the horseshoe,
      where I saw that the noise of the rifle had drawn sixty-five human beings
      from the badger-holes which I had up till that point supposed to be
      untenanted. I found myself in the midst of a crowd of spectators—about
      forty men, twenty women, and one child who could not have been more than
      five years old. They were all scantily clothed in that salmon-colored
      cloth which one associates with Hindu mendicants, and, at first sight,
      gave me the impression of a band of loathsome fakirs. The filth and
      repulsiveness of the assembly were beyond all description, and I shuddered
      to think what their life in the badger-holes must be.
    

      Even in these days, when local self government has destroyed the greater
      part of a native's respect for a Sahib, I have been accustomed to a
      certain amount of civility from my inferiors, and on approaching the crowd
      naturally expected that there would be some recognition of my presence. As
      a matter of fact there was; but it was by no means what I had looked for.
    

      The ragged crew actually laughed at me—such laughter I hope I may
      never hear again. They cackled, yelled, whistled, and howled as I walked
      into their midst; some of them literally throwing themselves down on the
      ground in convulsions of unholy mirth. In a moment I had let go Pornic's
      head, and irritated beyond expression at the morning's adventure,
      commenced cuffing those nearest to me with all the force I could. The
      wretches dropped under my blows like nine-pins, and the laughter gave
      place to wails for mercy; while those yet untouched clasped me round the
      knees, imploring me in all sorts of uncouth tongues to spare them.
    

      In the tumult, and just when I was feeling very much ashamed of myself for
      having thus easily given way to my temper, a thin, high voice murmured in
      English from behind my shoulder: “—Sahib! Sahib! Do you not know me?
      Sahib, it is Gunga Dass, the telegraph-master.”
     

      I spun round quickly and faced the speaker.
    

      Gunga Dass, (I have, of course, no hesitation in mentioning the man's real
      name) I had known four years before as a Deccanee Brahmin loaned by the
      Punjab Government to one of the Khalsia States. He was in charge of a
      branch telegraph-office there, and when I had last met him was a jovial,
      full-stomached, portly Government servant with a marvelous capacity for
      making had puns in English—a peculiarity which made me remember him
      long after I had forgotten his services to me in his official capacity. It
      is seldom that a Hindu makes English puns.
    

      Now, however, the man was changed beyond all recognition. Caste-mark,
      stomach, slate-colored continuations, and unctuous speech were all gone. I
      looked at a withered skeleton, turban-less and almost naked, with long
      matted hair and deep-set codfish-eyes.
    

      But for a crescent-shaped scar on the left cheek—the result of an
      accident for which I was responsible I should never have known him. But it
      was indubitably Gunga Dass, and—for this I was thankful—an
      English-speaking native who might at least tell me the meaning of all that
      I had gone through that day.
    

      The crowd retreated to some distance as I turned toward the miserable
      figure, and ordered him to show me some method of escaping from the crate.
      He held a freshly plucked crow in his hand, and in reply to my question
      climbed slowly on a platform of sand which ran in front of the holes, and
      commenced lighting a fire there in silence. Dried bents, sand-poppies, and
      driftwood burn quickly; and I derived much consolation from the fact that
      he lit them with an ordinary sulphur-match. When they were in a bright
      glow, and the crow was neatly spitted in front thereof, Gunga Dass began
      without a word of preamble:
    

      “There are only two kinds of men, Sar. The alive and the dead. When you
      are dead you are dead, but when you are alive you live.” (Here the crow
      demanded his attention for an instant as it twirled before the fire in
      danger of being burned to a cinder.) “If you die at home and do not die
      when you come to the ghat to be burned you come here.”
     

      The nature of the reeking village was made plain now, and all that I had
      known or read of the grotesque and the horrible paled before the fact just
      communicated by the ex-Brahmin. Sixteen years ago, when I first landed in
      Bombay, I had been told by a wandering Armenian of the existence,
      somewhere in India, of a place to which such Hindus as had the misfortune
      to recover from trance or catalepsy were conveyed and kept, and I
      recollect laughing heartily at what I was then pleased to consider a
      traveler's tale.
    

      Sitting at the bottom of the sand-trap, the memory of Watson's Hotel, with
      its swinging punkahs, white-robed attendants, and the sallow-faced
      Armenian, rose up in my mind as vividly as a photograph, and I burst into
      a loud fit of laughter. The contrast was too absurd!
    

      Gunga Dass, as he bent over the unclean bird, watched me curiously. Hindus
      seldom laugh, and his surroundings were not such as to move Gunga Dass to
      any undue excess of hilarity. He removed the crow solemnly from the wooden
      spit and as solemnly devoured it. Then he continued his story, which I
      give in his own words:
    

      “In epidemics of the cholera you are carried to be burned almost before
      you are dead. When you come to the riverside the cold air, perhaps, makes
      you alive, and then, if you are only little alive, mud is put on your nose
      and mouth and you die conclusively. If you are rather more alive, more mud
      is put; but if you are too lively they let you go and take you away. I was
      too lively, and made protestation with anger against the indignities that
      they endeavored to press upon me. In those days I was Brahmin and proud
      man.
    

      “Now I am dead man and eat”—here he eyed the well-gnawed breast bone
      with the first sign of emotion that I had seen in him since we met—“crows,
      and other things. They took me from my sheets when they saw that I was too
      lively and gave me medicines for one week, and I survived successfully.
      Then they sent me by rail from my place to Okara Station, with a man to
      take care of me; and at Okara Station we met two other men, and they
      conducted we three on camels, in the night, from Okara Station to this
      place, and they propelled me from the top to the bottom, and the other two
      succeeded, and I have been here ever since two and a half years. Once I
      was Brahmin and proud man, and now I eat crows.”
     

      “There is no way of getting out?”
     

      “None of what kind at all. When I first came I made experiments frequently
      and all the others also, but we have always succumbed to the sand which is
      precipitated upon our heads.”
     

      “But surely,” I broke in at this point, “the river-front is open, and it
      is worth while dodging the bullets; while at night”—I had already
      matured a rough plan of escape which a natural instinct of selfishness
      forbade me sharing with Gunga Dass. He, however, divined my unspoken
      thought almost as soon as it was formed; and, to my intense astonishment,
      gave vent to a long low chuckle of derision—the laughter, be it
      understood, of a superior or at least of an equal.
    

      “You will not”—he had dropped the Sir completely after his opening
      sentence—“make any escape that way. But you can try. I have tried.
      Once only.”
     

      The sensation of nameless terror and abject fear which I had in vain
      attempted to strive against overmastered me completely. My long fast—it
      was now close upon ten o'clock, and I had eaten nothing since tiffin on
      the previous day—combined with the violent and unnatural agitation
      of the ride had exhausted me, and I verily believe that, for a few
      minutes, I acted as one mad. I hurled myself against the pitiless
      sand-slope. I ran round the base of the crater, blaspheming and praying by
      turns. I crawled out among the sedges of the river-front, only to be
      driven back each time in an agony of nervous dread by the rifle-bullets
      which cut up the sand round me—for I dared not face the death of a
      mad dog among that hideous crowd—and finally fell, spent and raving,
      at the curb of the well. No one had taken the slightest notion of an
      exhibition which makes me blush hotly even when I think of it now.
    

      Two or three men trod on my panting body as they drew water, but they were
      evidently used to this sort of thing, and had no time to waste upon me.
      The situation was humiliating. Gunga Dass, indeed, when he had banked the
      embers of his fire with sand, was at some pains to throw half a cupful of
      fetid water over my head, an attention for which I could have fallen on my
      knees and thanked him, but he was laughing all the while in the same
      mirthless, wheezy key that greeted me on my first attempt to force the
      shoals. And so, in a semi-comatose condition, I lay till noon.
    

      Then, being only a man after all, I felt hungry, and intimated as much to
      Gunga Dass, whom I had begun to regard as my natural protector. Following
      the impulse of the outer world when dealing with natives, I put my hand
      into my pocket and drew out four annas. The absurdity of the gift struck
      me at once, and I was about to replace the money.
    

      Gunga Dass, however, was of a different opinion. “Give me the money,” said
      he; “all you have, or I will get help, and we will kill you!” All this as
      if it were the most natural thing in the world!
    

      A Briton's first impulse, I believe, is to guard the contents of his
      pockets; but a moment's reflection convinced me of the futility of
      differing with the one man who had it in his power to make me comfortable;
      and with whose help it was possible that I might eventually escape from
      the crater. I gave him all the money in my possession, Rs. 9-8-5—nine
      rupees eight annas and five pie—for I always keep small change as
      bakshish when I am in camp. Gunga Dass clutched the coins, and hid them at
      once in his ragged loin cloth, his expression changing to something
      diabolical as he looked round to assure himself that no one had observed
      us.
    

      “Now I will give you something to eat,” said he.
    

      What pleasure the possession of my money could have afforded him I am
      unable to say; but inasmuch as it did give him evident delight I was not
      sorry that I had parted with it so readily, for I had no doubt that he
      would have had me killed if I had refused. One does not protest against
      the vagaries of a den of wild beasts; and my companions were lower than
      any beasts. While I devoured what Gunga Dass had provided, a coarse
      chapatti and a cupful of the foul well-water, the people showed not the
      faintest sign of curiosity—that curiosity which is so rampant, as a
      rule, in an Indian village.
    

      I could even fancy that they despised me. At all events they treated me
      with the most chilling indifference, and Gunga Dass was nearly as bad. I
      plied him with questions about the terrible village, and received
      extremely unsatisfactory answers. So far as I could gather, it had been in
      existence from time immemorial—whence I concluded that it was at
      least a century old—and during that time no one had ever been known
      to escape from it. [I had to control myself here with both hands, lest the
      blind terror should lay hold of me a second time and drive me raving round
      the crater.] Gunga Dass took a malicious pleasure in emphasizing this
      point and in watching me wince. Nothing that I could do would induce him
      to tell me who the mysterious “They” were.
    

      “It is so ordered,” he would reply, “and I do not yet know any one who has
      disobeyed the orders.”
     

      “Only wait till my servants find that I am missing,” I retorted, “and I
      promise you that this place shall be cleared off the face of the earth,
      and I'll give you a lesson in civility, too, my friend.”
     

      “Your servants would be torn in pieces before they came near this place;
      and, besides, you are dead, my dear friend. It is not your fault, of
      course, but none the less you are dead and buried.”
     

      At irregular intervals supplies of food, I was told, were dropped down
      from the land side into the amphitheatre, and the inhabitants fought for
      them like wild beasts. When a man felt his death coming on he retreated to
      his lair and died there. The body was sometimes dragged out of the hole
      and thrown on to the sand, or allowed to rot where it lay.
    

      The phrase “thrown on to the sand” caught my attention, and I asked Gunga
      Dass whether this sort of thing was not likely to breed a pestilence.
    

      “That,” said he, with another of his wheezy chuckles, “you may see for
      yourself subsequently. You will have much time to make observations.”
     

      Whereat, to his great delight, I winced once more and hastily continued
      the conversation:—“And how do you live here from day to day? What do
      you do?” The question elicited exactly the same answer as before coupled
      with the information that “this place is like your European heaven; there
      is neither marrying nor giving in marriage.”
     

      Gunga Dass had been educated at a Mission School, and, as he himself
      admitted, had he only changed his religion “like a wise man,” might have
      avoided the living grave which was now his portion. But as long as I was
      with him I fancy he was happy.
    

      Here was a Sahib, a representative of the dominant race, helpless as a
      child and completely at the mercy of his native neighbors. In a deliberate
      lazy way he set himself to torture me as a schoolboy would devote a
      rapturous half-hour to watching the agonies of an impaled beetle, or as a
      ferret in a blind burrow might glue himself comfortably to the neck of a
      rabbit. The burden of his conversation was that there was no escape “of no
      kind whatever,” and that I should stay here till I died and was “thrown on
      to the sand.” If it were possible to forejudge the conversation of the
      Damned on the advent of a new soul in their abode, I should say that they
      would speak as Gunga Dass did to me throughout that long afternoon. I was
      powerless to protest or answer; all my energies being devoted to a
      struggle against the inexplicable terror that threatened to overwhelm me
      again and again. I can compare the feeling to nothing except the struggles
      of a man against the overpowering nausea of the Channel passage—only
      my agony was of the spirit and infinitely more terrible.
    

      As the day wore on, the inhabitants began to appear in full strength to
      catch the rays of the afternoon sun, which were now sloping in at the
      mouth of the crater. They assembled in little knots, and talked among
      themselves without even throwing a glance in my direction. About four
      o'clock, as far as I could judge Gunga Dass rose and dived into his lair
      for a moment, emerging with a live crow in his hands. The wretched bird
      was in a most draggled and deplorable condition, but seemed to be in no
      way afraid of its master, Advancing cautiously to the river front, Gunga
      Dass stepped from tussock to tussock until he had reached a smooth patch
      of sand directly in the line of the boat's fire. The occupants of the boat
      took no notice. Here he stopped, and, with a couple of dexterous turns of
      the wrist, pegged the bird on its back with outstretched wings. As was
      only natural, the crow began to shriek at once and beat the air with its
      claws. In a few seconds the clamor had attracted the attention of a bevy
      of wild crows on a shoal a few hundred yards away, where they were
      discussing something that looked like a corpse. Half a dozen crows flew
      over at once to see what was going on, and also, as it proved, to attack
      the pinioned bird. Gunga Dass, who had lain down on a tussock, motioned to
      me to be quiet, though I fancy this was a needless precaution. In a
      moment, and before I could see how it happened, a wild crow, who had
      grappled with the shrieking and helpless bird, was entangled in the
      latter's claws, swiftly disengaged by Gunga Dass, and pegged down beside
      its companion in adversity. Curiosity, it seemed, overpowered the rest of
      the flock, and almost before Gunga Dass and I had time to withdraw to the
      tussock, two more captives were struggling in the upturned claws of the
      decoys. So the chase—if I can give it so dignified a name—continued
      until Gunga Dass had captured seven crows. Five of them he throttled at
      once, reserving two for further operations another day. I was a good deal
      impressed by this, to me, novel method of securing food, and complimented
      Gunga Dass on his skill.
    

      “It is nothing to do,” said he. “Tomorrow you must do it for me. You are
      stronger than I am.”
     

      This calm assumption of superiority Upset me not a little, and I answered
      peremptorily;—“Indeed, you old ruffian! What do you think I have
      given you money for?”
     

      “Very well,” was the unmoved reply. “Perhaps not tomorrow, nor the day
      after, nor subsequently; but in the end, and for many years, you will
      catch crows and eat crows, and you will thank your European God that you
      have crows to catch and eat.”
     

      I could have cheerfully strangled him for this; but judged it best under
      the circumstances to smother my resentment. An hour later I was eating one
      of the crows; and, as Gunga Dass had said, thanking my God that I had a
      crow to eat. Never as long as I live shall I forget that evening meal. The
      whole population were squatting on the hard sand platform opposite their
      dens, huddled over tiny fires of refuse and dried rushes. Death, having
      once laid his hand upon these men and forborne to strike, seemed to stand
      aloof from them now; for most of our company were old men, bent and worn
      and twisted with years, and women aged to all appearance as the Fates
      themselves. They sat together in knots and talked—God only knows
      what they found to discuss—in low equable tones, curiously in
      contrast to the strident babble with which natives are accustomed to make
      day hideous. Now and then an access of that sudden fury which had
      possessed me in the morning would lay hold on a man or woman; and with
      yells and imprecations the sufferer would attack the steep slope until,
      baffled and bleeding, he fell back on the platform incapable of moving a
      limb. The others would never even raise their eyes when this happened, as
      men too well aware of the futility of their fellows' attempts and wearied
      with their useless repetition. I saw four such outbursts in the course of
      the evening.
    

      Gunga Dass took an eminently business-like view of my situation, and while
      we were dining—I can afford to laugh at the recollection now, but it
      was painful enough at the time-propounded the terms on which he would
      consent to “do” for me. My nine rupees eight annas, he argued, at the rate
      of three annas a day, would provide me with food for fifty-one days, or
      about seven weeks; that is to say, he would be willing to cater for me for
      that length of time. At the end of it I was to look after myself. For a
      further consideration—videlicet my boots—he would be willing
      to allow me to occupy the den next to his own, and would supply me with as
      much dried grass for bedding as he could spare.
    

      “Very well, Gunga Dass,” I replied; “to the first terms I cheerfully
      agree, but, as there is nothing on earth to prevent my killing you as you
      sit here and taking everything that you have” (I thought of the two
      invaluable crows at the time), “I flatly refuse to give you my boots and
      shall take whichever den I please.”
     

      The stroke was a bold one, and I was glad when I saw that it had
      succeeded. Gunga Dass changed his tone immediately, and disavowed all
      intention of asking for my boots. At the time it did not strike me as at
      all strange that I, a Civil Engineer, a man of thirteen years' standing in
      the Service, and, I trust, an average Englishman, should thus calmly
      threaten murder and violence against the man who had, for a consideration
      it is true, taken me under his wing. I had left the world, it seemed, for
      centuries. I was as certain then as I am now of my own existence, that in
      the accursed settlement there was no law save that of the strongest; that
      the living dead men had thrown behind them every canon of the world which
      had cast them out; and that I had to depend for my own life on my strength
      and vigilance alone. The crew of the ill-fated Mignonette are the only men
      who would understand my frame of mind. “At present,” I argued to myself,
      “I am strong and a match for six of these wretches. It is imperatively
      necessary that I should, for my own sake, keep both health and strength
      until the hour of my release comes—if it ever does.”
     

      Fortified with these resolutions, I ate and drank as much as I could, and
      made Gunga Dass understand that I intended to be his master, and that the
      least sign of insubordination on his part would be visited with the only
      punishment I had it in my power to inflict—sudden and violent death.
      Shortly after this I went to bed.
    

      That is to say, Gunga Dass gave me a double armful of dried bents which I
      thrust down the mouth of the lair to the right of his, and followed
      myself, feet foremost; the hole running about nine feet into the sand with
      a slight downward inclination, and being neatly shored with timbers. From
      my den, which faced the river-front, I was able to watch the waters of the
      Sutlej flowing past under the light of a young moon and compose myself to
      sleep as best I might.
    

      The horrors of that night I shall never forget. My den was nearly as
      narrow as a coffin, and the sides had been worn smooth and greasy by the
      contact of innumerable naked bodies, added to which it smelled abominably.
      Sleep was altogether out of question to one in my excited frame of mind.
      As the night wore on, it seemed that the entire amphitheatre was filled
      with legions of unclean devils that, trooping up from the shoals below,
      mocked the unfortunates in their lairs.
    

      Personally I am not of an imaginative temperament,—very few
      Engineers are,—but on that occasion I was as completely prostrated
      with nervous terror as any woman. After half an hour or so, however, I was
      able once more to calmly review my chances of escape. Any exit by the
      steep sand walls was, of course, impracticable. I had been thoroughly
      convinced of this some time before. It was possible, just possible, that I
      might, in the uncertain moonlight, safely run the gauntlet of the rifle
      shots. The place was so full of terror for me that I was prepared to
      undergo any risk in leaving it. Imagine my delight, then, when after
      creeping stealthily to the river-front I found that the infernal boat was
      not there. My freedom lay before me in the next few steps!
    

      By walking out to the first shallow pool that lay at the foot of the
      projecting left horn of the horseshoe, I could wade across, turn the flank
      of the crater, and make my way inland. Without a moment's hesitation I
      marched briskly past the tussocks where Gunga Dass had snared the crows,
      and out in the direction of the smooth white sand beyond. My first step
      from the tufts of dried grass showed me how utterly futile was any hope of
      escape; for, as I put my foot down, I felt an indescribable drawing,
      sucking motion of the sand below. Another moment and my leg was swallowed
      up nearly to the knee. In the moonlight the whole surface of the sand
      seemed to be shaken with devilish delight at my disappointment. I
      struggled clear, sweating with terror and exertion, back to the tussocks
      behind me and fell on my face.
    

      My only means of escape from the semicircle was protected with a
      quicksand!
    

      How long I lay I have not the faintest idea; but I was roused at last by
      the malevolent chuckle of Gunga Dass at my ear. “I would advise you,
      Protector of the Poor” (the ruffian was speaking English) “to return to
      your house. It is unhealthy to lie down here. Moreover, when the boat
      returns, you will most certainly be rifled at.” He stood over me in the
      dim light of the dawn, chuckling and laughing to himself. Suppressing my
      first impulse to catch the man by the neck and throw him on to the
      quicksand, I rose sullenly and followed him to the platform below the
      burrows.
    

      Suddenly, and futilely as I thought while I spoke, I asked—“Gunga
      Dass, what is the good of the boat if I can't get out anyhow?” I recollect
      that even in my deepest trouble I had been speculating vaguely on the
      waste of ammunition in guarding an already well protected foreshore.
    

      Gunga Dass laughed again and made answer:—“They have the boat only
      in daytime. It is for the reason that there is a way. I hope we shall have
      the pleasure of your company for much longer time. It is a pleasant spot
      when you have been here some years and eaten roast crow long enough.”
     

      I staggered, numbed and helpless, toward the fetid burrow allotted to me,
      and fell asleep. An hour or so later I was awakened by a piercing scream—the
      shrill, high-pitched scream of a horse in pain. Those who have once heard
      that will never forget the sound. I found some little difficulty in
      scrambling out of the burrow. When I was in the open, I saw Pornic, my
      poor old Pornic, lying dead on the sandy soil. How they had killed him I
      cannot guess. Gunga Dass explained that horse was better than crow, and
      “greatest good of greatest number is political maxim. We are now Republic,
      Mister Jukes, and you are entitled to a fair share of the beast. If you
      like, we will pass a vote of thanks. Shall I propose?”
     

      Yes, we were a Republic indeed! A Republic of wild beasts penned at the
      bottom of a pit, to eat and fight and sleep till we died. I attempted no
      protest of any kind, but sat down and stared at the hideous sight in front
      of me. In less time almost than it takes me to write this, Pornic's body
      was divided, in some unclear way or other; the men and women had dragged
      the fragments on to the platform and were preparing their normal meal.
      Gunga Dass cooked mine. The almost irresistible impulse to fly at the sand
      walls until I was wearied laid hold of me afresh, and I had to struggle
      against it with all my might. Gunga Dass was offensively jocular till I
      told him that if he addressed another remark of any kind whatever to me I
      should strangle him where he sat. This silenced him till silence became
      insupportable, and I bade him say something.
    

      “You will live here till you die like the other Feringhi,” he said,
      coolly, watching me over the fragment of gristle that he was gnawing.
    

      “What other Sahib, you swine? Speak at once, and don't stop to tell me a
      lie.”
     

      “He is over there,” answered Gunga Dass, pointing to a burrow-mouth about
      four doors ta the left of my own. “You can see for yourself. He died in
      the burrow as you will die, and I will die, and as all these men and women
      and the one child will also die.”
     

      “For pity's sake tell me all you know about him. Who was he? When did he
      come, and when did he die?”
     

      This appeal was a weak step on my part. Gunga Dass only leered and
      replied:—“I will not—unless you give me something first.”
     

      Then I recollected where I was, and struck the man between the eyes,
      partially stunning him. He stepped down from the platform at once, and,
      cringing and fawning and weeping and attempting to embrace my feet, led me
      round to the burrow which he had indicated.
    

      “I know nothing whatever about the gentleman. Your God be my witness that
      I do not. He was as anxious to escape as you were, and he was shot from
      the boat, though we all did all things to prevent him from attempting. He
      was shot here.” Gunga Dass laid his hand on his lean stomach and bowed to
      the earth.
    

      “Well, and what then? Go on!”
     

      “And then—and then, Your Honor, we carried him in to his house and
      gave him water, and put wet cloths on the wound, and he laid down in his
      house and gave up the ghost.”
     

      “In how long? In how long?”
     

      “About half an hour, after he received his wound. I call Vishnu to
      witness,” yelled the wretched man, “that I did everything for him.
      Everything which was possible, that I did!”
     

      He threw himself down on the ground and clasped my ankles. But I had my
      doubts about Gunga Dass's benevolence, and kicked him off as he lay
      protesting.
    

      “I believe you robbed him of everything he had. But I can find out in a
      minute or two. How long was the Sahib here?”
     

      “Nearly a year and a half. I think he must have gone mad. But hear me
      swear, Protector of the Poor! Won't Your Honor hear me swear that I never
      touched an article that belonged to him? What is Your Worship going to
      do?”
     

      I had taken Gunga Dass by the waist and had hauled him on to the platform
      opposite the deserted burrow. As I did so I thought of my wretched
      fellow-prisoner's unspeakable misery among all these horrors for eighteen
      months, and the final agony of dying like a rat in a hole, with a
      bullet-wound in the stomach. Gunga Dass fancied I was going to kill him
      and howled pitifully. The rest of the population, in the plethora that
      follows a full flesh meal, watched us without stirring.
    

      “Go inside, Gunga Dass,” said I, “and fetch it out.”
     

      I was feeling sick and faint with horror now. Gunga Dass nearly rolled off
      the platform and howled aloud.
    

      “But I am Brahmin, Sahib—a high-caste Brahmin. By your soul, by your
      father's soul, do not make me do this thing!”
     

      “Brahmin or no Brahmin, by my soul and my father's soul, in you go!” I
      said, and, seizing him by the shoulders, I crammed his head into the mouth
      of the burrow, kicked the rest of him in, and, sitting down, covered my
      face with my hands.
    

      At the end of a few minutes I heard a rustle and a creak; then Gunga Dass
      in a sobbing, choking whisper speaking to himself; then a soft thud—and
      I uncovered my eyes.
    

      The dry sand had turned the corpse entrusted to its keeping into a
      yellow-brown mummy. I told Gunga Dass to stand off while I examined it.
    

      The body—clad in an olive-green hunting-suit much stained and worn,
      with leather pads on the shoulders—was that of a man between thirty
      and forty, above middle height, with light, sandy hair, long mustache, and
      a rough unkempt beard. The left canine of the upper jaw was missing, and a
      portion of the lobe of the right ear was gone. On the second finger of the
      left hand was a ring—a shield-shaped bloodstone set in gold, with a
      monogram that might have been either “B.K.” or “B.L.” On the third finger
      of the right hand was a silver ring in the shape of a coiled cobra, much
      worn and tarnished. Gunga Dass deposited a handful of trifles he had
      picked out of the burrow at my feet, and, covering the face of the body
      with my handkerchief, I turned to examine these. I give the full list in
      the hope that it may lead to the identification of the unfortunate man:
    

      1. Bowl of a briarwood pipe, serrated at the edge; much worn and
      blackened; bound with string at the crew.
    

      2. Two patent-lever keys; wards of both broken.
    

      3. Tortoise-shell-handled penknife, silver or nickel name-plate, marked
      with monogram “B.K.”
     

      4. Envelope, postmark Undecipherable, bearing a Victorian stamp, addressed
      to “Miss Mon-” (rest illegible) -“ham-'nt.”
     

      5. Imitation crocodile-skin notebook with pencil. First forty-five pages
      blank; four and a half illegible; fifteen others filled with private
      memoranda relating chiefly to three persons—a Mrs. L. Singleton,
      abbreviated several times to “Lot Single,” “Mrs. S. May,” and “Garmison,”
       referred to in places as “Jerry” or “Jack.”
     

      6. Handle of small-sized hunting-knife. Blade snapped short. Buck's horn,
      diamond cut, with swivel and ring on the butt; fragment of cotton cord
      attached.
    

      It must not be supposed that I inventoried all these things on the spot as
      fully as I have here written them down. The notebook first attracted my
      attention, and I put it in my pocket with a view of studying it later on.
    

      The rest of the articles I conveyed to my burrow for safety's sake, and
      there being a methodical man, I inventoried them. I then returned to the
      corpse and ordered Gunga Dass to help me to carry it out to the
      river-front. While we were engaged in this, the exploded shell of an old
      brown cartridge dropped out of one of the pockets and rolled at my feet.
      Gunga Dass had not seen it; and I fell to thinking that a man does not
      carry exploded cartridge-cases, especially “browns,” which will not bear
      loading twice, about with him when shooting. In other words, that
      cartridge-case had been fired inside the crater. Consequently there must
      be a gun somewhere. I was on the verge of asking Gunga Dass, but checked
      myself, knowing that he would lie. We laid the body down on the edge of
      the quicksand by the tussocks. It was my intention to push it out and let
      it be swallowed up—the only possible mode of burial that I could
      think of. I ordered Gunga Dass to go away.
    

      Then I gingerly put the corpse out on the quicksand. In doing so—it
      was lying face downward—I tore the frail and rotten khaki
      shooting-coat open, disclosing a hideous cavity in the back. I have
      already told you that the dry sand had, as it were, mummified the body. A
      moment's glance showed that the gaping hole had been caused by a gun-shot
      wound; the gun must have been fired with the muzzle almost touching the
      back. The shooting-coat, being intact, had been drawn over the body after
      death, which must have been instantaneous. The secret of the poor wretch's
      death was plain to me in a flash. Some one of the crater, presumably Gunga
      Dass, must have shot him with his own gun—the gun that fitted the
      brown cartridges. He had never attempted to escape in the face of the
      rifle-fire from the boat.
    

      I pushed the corpse out hastily, and saw it sink from sight literally in a
      few seconds. I shuddered as I watched. In a dazed, half-conscious way I
      turned to peruse the notebook. A stained and discolored slip of paper bad
      been inserted between the binding and the back, and dropped out as I
      opened the pages. This is what it contained:—“Four out from
      crow-clump: three left; nine out; two right; three back; two left;
      fourteen out; two left; seven out; one left; nine back; two right; six
      back; four right; seven back.” The paper had been burned and charred at
      the edges. What it meant I could not understand. I sat down on the dried
      bents turning it over and over between my fingers, until I was aware of
      Gunga Dass standing immediately behind me with glowing eyes and
      outstretched hands.
    

      “Have you got it?” he panted. “Will you not let me look at it also? I
      swear that I will return it.”
     

      “Got what? Return what?” asked.
    

      “That which you have in your hands. It will help us both.” He stretched
      out his long, bird-like talons, trembling with eagerness.
    

      “I could never find it,” he continued. “He had secreted it about his
      person. Therefore I shot him, but nevertheless I was unable to obtain it.”
     

      Gunga Dass had quite forgotten his little fiction about the rifle-bullet.
      I received the information perfectly calmly. Morality is blunted by
      consorting with the Dead who are alive.
    

      “What on earth are you raving about? What is it you want me to give you?”
     

      “The piece of paper in the notebook. It will help us both. Oh, you fool!
      You fool! Can you not see what it will do for us? We shall escape!”
     

      His voice rose almost to a scream, and he danced with excitement before
      me. I own I was moved at the chance of my getting away.
    

      “Don't skip! Explain yourself. Do you mean to say that this slip of paper
      will help us? What does it mean?”
     

      “Read it aloud! Read it aloud! I beg and I pray you to read it aloud.”
     

      I did so. Gunga Dass listened delightedly, and drew an irregular line in
      the sand with his fingers.
    

      “See now! It was the length of his gun-barrels without the stock. I have
      those barrels. Four gun-barrels out from the place where I caught crows
      straight out; do you follow me? Then three left—Ah! how well I
      remember when that man worked it out night after night Then nine out, and
      so on. Out is always straight before you across the quicksand. He told me
      so before I killed him.”
     

      “But if you knew all this why didn't you get out before?”
     

      “I did not know it. He told me that he was working it out a year and a
      half ago, and how he was working it out night after night when the boat
      had gone away, and he could get out near the quicksand safely. Then he
      said that we would get away together. But I was afraid that he would leave
      me behind one night when he had worked it all out, and so I shot him.
      Besides, it is not advisable that the men who once get in here should
      escape. Only I, and I am a Brahmin.”
     

      The prospect of escape had brought Gunga Dass's caste back to him. He
      stood up, walked about and gesticulated violently. Eventually I managed to
      make him talk soberly, and he told me how this Englishman had spent six
      months night after night in exploring, inch by inch, the passage across
      the quicksand; how he had declared it to be simplicity itself up to within
      about twenty yards of the river bank after turning the flank of the left
      horn of the horseshoe. This much he had evidently not completed when Gunga
      Dass shot him with his own gun.
    

      In my frenzy of delight at the possibilities of escape I recollect shaking
      hands effusively with Gunga Dass, after we had decided that we were to
      make an attempt to get away that very night. It was weary work waiting
      throughout the afternoon.
    

      About ten o'clock, as far as I could judge, when the Moon had just risen
      above the lip of the crater, Gunga Dass made a move for his burrow to
      bring out the gun-barrels whereby to measure our path. All the other
      wretched inhabitants had retired to their lairs long ago. The guardian
      boat drifted downstream some hours before, and we were utterly alone by
      the crow-clump. Gunga Dass, while carrying the gun-barrels, let slip the
      piece of paper which was to be our guide. I stooped down hastily to
      recover it, and, as I did so, I was aware that the diabolical Brahmin was
      aiming a violent blow at the back of my head with the gun-barrels. It was
      too late to turn round. I must have received the blow somewhere on the
      nape of my neck. A hundred thousand fiery stars danced before my eyes, and
      I fell forwards senseless at the edge of, the quicksand.
    

      When I recovered consciousness, the Moon was going down, and I was
      sensible of intolerable pain in the back of my head. Gunga Dass had
      disappeared and my mouth was full of blood. I lay down again and prayed
      that I might die without more ado. Then the unreasoning fury which I had
      before mentioned, laid hold upon me, and I staggered inland toward the
      walls of the crater. It seemed that some one was calling to me in a
      whisper—“Sahib! Sahib! Sahib!” exactly as my bearer used to call me
      in the morning I fancied that I was delirious until a handful of sand fell
      at my feet. Then I looked up and saw a head peering down into the
      amphitheatre—the head of Dunnoo, my dog-boy, who attended to my
      collies. As soon as he had attracted my attention, he held up his hand and
      showed a rope. I motioned, staggering to and fro for the while, that he
      should throw it down. It was a couple of leather punkah-ropes knotted
      together, with a loop at one end. I slipped the loop over my head and
      under my arms; heard Dunnoo urge something forward; was conscious that I
      was being dragged, face downward, up the steep sand slope, and the next
      instant found myself choked and half fainting on the sand hills
      overlooking the crater. Dunnoo, with his face ashy grey in the moonlight,
      implored me not to stay but to get back to my tent at once.
    

      It seems that he had tracked Pornic's footprints fourteen miles across the
      sands to the crater; had returned and told my servants, who flatly refused
      to meddle with any one, white or black, once fallen into the hideous
      Village of the Dead; whereupon Dunnoo had taken one of my ponies and a
      couple of punkah-ropes, returned to the crater, and hauled me out as I
      have described.
    

      To cut a long story short, Dunnoo is now my personal servant on a gold
      mohur a month—a sum which I still think far too little for the
      services he has rendered. Nothing on earth will induce me to go near that
      devilish spot again, or to reveal its whereabouts more clearly than I have
      done. Of Gunga Dass I have never found a trace, nor do I wish to do. My
      sole motive in giving this to be published is the hope that some one may
      possibly identify, from the details and the inventory which I have given
      above, the corpse of the man in the olive-green hunting-suit.