THE MAGIC COUCH

 The Seine flowed past my house, without a ripple on its surface, and
      gleaming in the bright morning sunlight. It was a beautiful, broad,
      indolent silver stream, with crimson lights here and there; and on the
      opposite side of the river were rows of tall trees that covered all the
      bank with an immense wall of verdure.

 The sensation of life which is renewed each day, of fresh, happy, loving
      life trembled in the leaves, palpitated in the air, was mirrored in the
      water.

 The postman had just brought my papers, which were handed to me, and I
      walked slowly to the river bank in order to read them.

 In the first paper I opened I noticed this headline, “Statistics of
      Suicides,” and I read that more than 8,500 persons had killed
      themselves in that year.

 In a moment I seemed to see them! I saw this voluntary and hideous
      massacre of the despairing who were weary of life. I saw men bleeding,
      their jaws fractured, their skulls cloven, their breasts pierced by a
      bullet, slowly dying, alone in a little room in a hotel, giving no thought
      to their wound, but thinking only of their misfortunes.

 I saw others seated before a tumbler in which some matches were soaking,
      or before a little bottle with a red label.

 They would look at it fixedly without moving; then they would drink and
      await the result; then a spasm would convulse their cheeks and draw their
      lips together; their eyes would grow wild with terror, for they did not
      know that the end would be preceded by so much suffering.

 They rose to their feet, paused, fell over and with their hands pressed to
      their stomachs they felt their internal organs on fire, their entrails
      devoured by the fiery liquid, before their minds began to grow dim.

 I saw others hanging from a nail in the wall, from the fastening of the
      window, from a hook in the ceiling, from a beam in the garret, from a
      branch of a tree amid the evening rain. And I surmised all that had
      happened before they hung there motionless, their tongues hanging out of
      their mouths. I imagined the anguish of their heart, their final
      hesitation, their attempts to fasten the rope, to determine that it was
      secure, then to pass the noose round their neck and to let themselves
      fall.

 I saw others lying on wretched beds, mothers with their little children,
      old men dying of hunger, young girls dying for love, all rigid,
      suffocated, asphyxiated, while in the center of the room the brasier still
      gave forth the fumes of charcoal.

 And I saw others walking at night along the deserted bridges. These were
      the most sinister. The water flowed under the arches with a low sound.
      They did not see it . . . they guessed at it from its cool breath! They
      longed for it and they feared it. They dared not do it! And yet, they
      must. A distant clock sounded the hour and, suddenly, in the vast silence
      of the night, there was heard the splash of a body falling into the river,
      a scream or two, the sound of hands beating the water, and all was still.
      Sometimes, even, there was only the sound of the falling body when they
      had tied their arms down or fastened a stone to their feet. Oh, the poor
      things, the poor things, the poor things, how I felt their anguish, how I
      died in their death! I went through all their wretchedness; I endured in
      one hour all their tortures. I knew all the sorrows that had led them to
      this, for I know the deceitful infamy of life, and no one has felt it more
      than I have.

 How I understood them, these who weak, harassed by misfortune, having lost
      those they loved, awakened from the dream of a tardy compensation, from
      the illusion of another existence where God will finally be just, after
      having been ferocious, and their minds disabused of the mirages of
      happiness, have given up the fight and desire to put an end to this
      ceaseless tragedy, or this shameful comedy.

 Suicide! Why, it is the strength of those whose strength is exhausted, the
      hope of those who no longer believe, the sublime courage of the conquered!
      Yes, there is at least one door to this life we can always open and pass
      through to the other side. Nature had an impulse of pity; she did not shut
      us up in prison. Mercy for the despairing!

 As for those who are simply disillusioned, let them march ahead with free
      soul and quiet heart. They have nothing to fear since they may take their
      leave; for behind them there is always this door that the gods of our
      illusions cannot even lock.

 I thought of this crowd of suicides: more than eight thousand five hundred
      in one year. And it seemed to me that they had combined to send to the
      world a prayer, to utter a cry of appeal, to demand something that should
      come into effect later when we understood things better. It seemed to me
      that all these victims, their throats cut, poisoned, hung, asphyxiated, or
      drowned, all came together, a frightful horde, like citizens to the polls,
      to say to society:

 “Grant us, at least, a gentle death! Help us to die, you who will
      not help us to live! See, we are numerous, we have the right to speak in
      these days of freedom, of philosophic independence and of popular
      suffrage. Give to those who renounce life the charity of a death that will
      not be repugnant nor terrible.”

 I began to dream, allowing my fancy to roam at will in weird and
      mysterious fashion on this subject.

 I seemed to be all at once in a beautiful city. It was Paris; but at what
      period? I walked about the streets, looking at the houses, the theaters,
      the public buildings, and presently found myself in a square where I
      remarked a large building; very handsome, dainty and attractive. I was
      surprised on reading on the facade this inscription in letters of gold,
      “Suicide Bureau.”

 Oh, the weirdness of waking dreams where the spirit soars into a world of
      unrealities and possibilities! Nothing astonishes one, nothing shocks one;
      and the unbridled fancy makes no distinction between the comic and the
      tragic.

 I approached the building where footmen in knee-breeches were seated in
      the vestibule in front of a cloak-room as they do at the entrance of a
      club.

 I entered out of curiosity. One of the men rose and said:

 “What does monsieur wish?”

 “I wish to know what building this is.”

 “Nothing more?”

 “Why, no.”

 “Then would monsieur like me to take him to the Secretary of the
      Bureau?”

 I hesitated, and asked:

 “But will not that disturb him?”

 “Oh, no, monsieur, he is here to receive those who desire
      information.”

 “Well, lead the way.”

 He took me through corridors where old gentlemen were chatting, and
      finally led me into a beautiful office, somewhat somber, furnished
      throughout in black wood. A stout young man with a corporation was writing
      a letter as he smoked a cigar, the fragrance of which gave evidence of its
      quality.

 He rose. We bowed to each other, and as soon as the footman had retired he
      asked:

 “What can I do for you?”

 “Monsieur,” I replied, “pardon my curiosity. I had never
      seen this establishment. The few words inscribed on the facade filled me
      with astonishment, and I wanted to know what was going on here.”

 He smiled before replying, then said in a low tone with a complacent air:

 “Mon Dieu, monsieur, we put to death in a cleanly and gentle—I
      do not venture to say agreeable manner those persons who desire to die.”

 I did not feel very shocked, for it really seemed to me natural and right.
      What particularly surprised me was that on this planet, with its low,
      utilitarian, humanitarian ideals, selfish and coercive of all true
      freedom, any one should venture on a similar enterprise, worthy of an
      emancipated humanity.

 “How did you get the idea?” I asked.

 “Monsieur,” he replied, “the number of suicides
      increased so enormously during the five years succeeding the world
      exposition of 1889 that some measures were urgently needed. People killed
      themselves in the streets, at fetes, in restaurants, at the theater, in
      railway carriages, at the receptions held by the President of the
      Republic, everywhere. It was not only a horrid sight for those who love
      life, as I do, but also a bad example for children. Hence it became
      necessary to centralize suicides.”

 “What caused this suicidal epidemic?”

 “I do not know. The fact is, I believe, the world is growing old.
      People begin to see things clearly and they are getting disgruntled. It is
      the same to-day with destiny as with the government, we have found out
      what it is; people find that they are swindled in every direction, and
      they just get out of it all. When one discovers that Providence lies,
      cheats, robs, deceives human beings just as a plain Deputy deceives his
      constituents, one gets angry, and as one cannot nominate a fresh
      Providence every three months as we do with our privileged
      representatives, one just gets out of the whole thing, which is decidedly
      bad.”

 “Really!”

 “Oh, as for me, I am not complaining.”

 “Will you inform me how you carry on this establishment?”

 “With pleasure. You may become a member when you please. It is a
      club.”

 “A club!”

 “Yes, monsieur, founded by the most eminent men in the country, by
      men of the highest intellect and brightest intelligence. And,” he
      added, laughing heartily, “I swear to you that every one gets a
      great deal of enjoyment out of it.”

 “In this place?”

 “Yes, in this place.”

 “You surprise me.”

 “Mon Dieu, they enjoy themselves because they have not that fear of
      death which is the great killjoy in all our earthly pleasures.”

 “But why should they be members of this club if they do not kill
      themselves?”

 “One may be a member of the club without being obliged for that
      reason to commit suicide.”

 “But then?”

 “I will explain. In view of the enormous increase in suicides, and
      of the hideous spectacle they presented, a purely benevolent society was
      formed for the protection of those in despair, which placed at their
      disposal the facilities for a peaceful, painless, if not unforeseen death.”

 “Who can have authorized such an institution?”

 “General Boulanger during his brief tenure of power. He could never
      refuse anything. However, that was the only good thing he did. Hence, a
      society was formed of clear-sighted, disillusioned skeptics who desired to
      erect in the heart of Paris a kind of temple dedicated to the contempt for
      death. This place was formerly a dreaded spot that no one ventured to
      approach. Then its founders, who met together here, gave a grand inaugural
      entertainment with Mmes. Sarah Bernhardt, Judic, Theo, Granier, and twenty
      others, and Mme. de Reske, Coquelin, Mounet-Sully, Paulus, etc., present,
      followed by concerts, the comedies of Dumas, of Meilhac, Halevy and
      Sardon. We had only one thing to mar it, one drama by Becque which seemed
      sad, but which subsequently had a great success at the Comedie-Francaise.
      In fact all Paris came. The enterprise was launched.”

 “In the midst of the festivities! What a funereal joke!”

 “Not at all. Death need not be sad, it should be a matter of
      indifference. We made death cheerful, crowned it with flowers, covered it
      with perfume, made it easy. One learns to aid others through example; one
      can see that it is nothing.”

 “I can well understand that they should come to the entertainments;
      but did they come to . . . Death?”

 “Not at first; they were afraid.”

 “And later?”

 “They came.”

 “Many of them?”

 “In crowds. We have had more than forty in a day. One finds hardly
      any more drowned bodies in the Seine.”

 “Who was the first?”

 “A club member.”

 “As a sacrifice to the cause?”

 “I don't think so. A man who was sick of everything, a 'down and
      out' who had lost heavily at baccarat for three months.”

 “Indeed?”

 “The second was an Englishman, an eccentric. We then advertised in
      the papers, we gave an account of our methods, we invented some attractive
      instances. But the great impetus was given by poor people.”

 “How do you go to work?”

 “Would you like to see? I can explain at the same time.”

 “Yes, indeed.”

 He took his hat, opened the door, allowed me to precede him, and we
      entered a card room, where men sat playing as they, play in all gambling
      places. They were chatting cheerfully, eagerly. I have seldom seen such a
      jolly, lively, mirthful club.

 As I seemed surprised, the secretary said:

 “Oh, the establishment has an unheard of prestige. All the smart
      people all over the world belong to it so as to appear as though they held
      death in scorn. Then, once they get here, they feel obliged to be cheerful
      that they may not appear to be afraid. So they joke and laugh and talk
      flippantly, they are witty and they become so. At present it is certainly
      the most frequented and the most entertaining place in Paris. The women
      are even thinking of building an annex for themselves.”

 “And, in spite of all this, you have many suicides in the house?”

 “As I said, about forty or fifty a day. Society people are rare, but
      poor devils abound. The middle class has also a large contingent.

 “And how . . . do they do?”

 “They are asphyxiated . . . very slowly.”

 “In what manner?”

 “A gas of our own invention. We have the patent. On the other side
      of the building are the public entrances—three little doors opening
      on small streets. When a man or a woman present themselves they are
      interrogated. Then they are offered assistance, aid, protection. If a
      client accepts, inquiries are made; and sometimes we have saved their
      lives.”

 “Where do you get your money?”

 “We have a great deal. There are a large number of shareholders.
      Besides it is fashionable to contribute to the establishment. The names of
      the donors are published in Figaro. Then the suicide of every rich man
      costs a thousand francs. And they look as if they were lying in state. It
      costs the poor nothing.”

 “How can you tell who is poor?”

 “Oh, oh, monsieur, we can guess! And, besides, they must bring a
      certificate of indigency from the commissary of police of their district.
      If you knew how distressing it is to see them come in! I visited their
      part of our building once only, and I will never go again. The place
      itself is almost as good as this part, almost as luxurious and
      comfortable; but they themselves . . . they themselves!!! If you could see
      them arriving, the old men in rags coming to die; persons who have been
      dying of misery for months, picking up their food at the edges of the
      curbstone like dogs in the street; women in rags, emaciated, sick,
      paralyzed, incapable of making a living, who say to us after they have
      told us their story: 'You see that things cannot go on like that, as I
      cannot work any longer or earn anything.' I saw one woman of eighty-seven
      who had lost all her children and grandchildren, and who for the last six
      weeks had been sleeping out of doors. It made me ill to hear of it. Then
      we have so many different cases, without counting those who say nothing,
      but simply ask: 'Where is it?' These are admitted at once and it is all
      over in a minute.”

 With a pang at my heart I repeated:

 “And . . . where is it?”

 “Here,” and he opened a door, adding:

 “Go in; this is the part specially reserved for club members, and
      the one least used. We have so far had only eleven annihilations here.”

 “Ah! You call that an . . . annihilation!”

 “Yes, monsieur. Go in.”

 I hesitated. At length I went in. It was a wide corridor, a sort of
      greenhouse in which panes of glass of pale blue, tender pink and delicate
      green gave the poetic charm of landscapes to the inclosing walls. In this
      pretty salon there were divans, magnificent palms, flowers, especially
      roses of balmy fragrance, books on the tables, the Revue des Deuxmondes,
      cigars in government boxes, and, what surprised me, Vichy pastilles in a
      bonbonniere.

 As I expressed my surprise, my guide said:

 “Oh, they often come here to chat.” He continued: “The
      public corridors are similar, but more simply furnished.”

 In reply to a question of mine, he pointed to a couch covered with creamy
      crepe de Chine with white embroidery, beneath a large shrub of unknown
      variety at the foot of which was a circular bed of mignonette.

 The secretary added in a lower tone:

 “We change the flower and the perfume at will, for our gas, which is
      quite imperceptible, gives death the fragrance of the suicide's favorite
      flower. It is volatilized with essences. Would you like to inhale it for a
      second?”

 “'No, thank you,” I said hastily, “not yet . . . .”

 He began to laugh.

 “Oh, monsieur, there is no danger. I have tried it myself several
      times.”

 I was afraid he would think me a coward, and I said:

 “Well, I'll try it.”

 “Stretch yourself out on the 'endormeuse.”'

 A little uneasy I seated myself on the low couch covered with crepe de
      Chine and stretched myself full length, and was at once bathed in a
      delicious odor of mignonette. I opened my mouth in order to breathe it in,
      for my mind had already become stupefied and forgetful of the past and was
      a prey, in the first stages of asphyxia, to the enchanting intoxication of
      a destroying and magic opium.

 Some one shook me by the arm.

 “Oh, oh, monsieur,” said the secretary, laughing, “it
      looks to me as if you were almost caught.”

 But a voice, a real voice, and no longer a dream voice, greeted me with
      the peasant intonation:

 “Good morning, m'sieu. How goes it?”

 My dream was over. I saw the Seine distinctly in the sunlight, and, coming
      along a path, the garde champetre of the district, who with his right hand
      touched his kepi braided in silver. I replied:

 “Good morning, Marinel. Where are you going?”

 “I am going to look at a drowned man whom they fished up near the
      Morillons. Another who has thrown himself into the soup. He even took off
      his trousers in order to tie his legs together with them.” his
      trousers in order to tie his legs together with them.”