The Lady’s Maid

  Eleven o’clock. A knock at the door. 

 ... I hope I haven’t disturbed you, madam. You weren’t
asleep—were you? But I’ve just given my lady her tea, and there was
such a nice cup over, I thought, perhaps....

 ... Not at all, madam. I always make a cup of tea last thing. She drinks it in
bed after her prayers to warm her up. I put the kettle on when she kneels down
and I say to it, “Now you needn’t be in too much of a hurry to say your prayers.” But it’s always boiling before my lady is
half through. You see, madam, we know such a lot of people, and they’ve
all got to be prayed for—every one. My lady keeps a list of the names in
a little red book. Oh dear! whenever some one new has been to see us and my
lady says afterwards, “Ellen, give me my little red book,” I feel
quite wild, I do. “There’s another,” I think, “keeping
her out of her bed in all weathers.” And she won’t have a cushion,
you know, madam; she kneels on the hard carpet. It fidgets me something
dreadful to see her, knowing her as I do. I’ve tried to cheat her;
I’ve spread out the eiderdown. But the first time I did it—oh, she
gave me such a look—holy it was, madam. “Did our Lord have an
eiderdown, Ellen?” she said. But—I was younger at the time—I
felt inclined to say, “No, but our Lord wasn’t your age, and he
didn’t know what it was to have your lumbago.”
Wicked—wasn’t it? But she’s too good, you know, madam.
When I tucked her up just now and seen—saw her lying back, her hands
outside and her head on the pillow—so pretty—I couldn’t help
thinking, “Now you look just like your dear mother when I laid her
out!”

 ... Yes, madam, it was all left to me. Oh, she did look sweet. I did her hair,
soft-like, round her forehead, all in dainty curls, and just to one side of her
neck I put a bunch of most beautiful purple pansies. Those pansies made a
picture of her, madam! I shall never forget them. I thought to-night, when I
looked at my lady, “Now, if only the pansies was there no one could tell
the difference.”

 ... Only the last year, madam. Only after she’d got a
little—well—feeble as you might say. Of course, she was never
dangerous; she was the sweetest old lady. But how it took her was—she
thought she’d lost something. She couldn’t keep still, she
couldn’t settle. All day long she’d be up and down, up and down;
you’d meet her everywhere,—on the stairs, in the porch, making for
the kitchen. And she’d look up at you, and she’d say—just
like a child, “I’ve lost it, I’ve lost it.” “Come
along,” I’d say, “come along, and I’ll lay out your
patience for you.” But she’d catch me by the hand—I was a
favourite of hers—and whisper, “Find it for me, Ellen. Find it for
me.” Sad, wasn’t it?

 ... No, she never recovered, madam. She had a stroke at the end. Last words she
ever said was—very slow, “Look
in—the—Look—in—” And then she was gone.

 ... No, madam, I can’t say I noticed it. Perhaps some girls. But you see,
it’s like this, I’ve got nobody but my lady. My mother died of
consumption when I was four, and I lived with my grandfather, who kept a
hair-dresser’s shop. I used to spend all my time in the shop under a
table dressing my doll’s hair—copying the assistants, I suppose.
They were ever so kind to me. Used to make me little wigs, all colours, the
latest fashions and all. And there I’d sit all day, quiet as
quiet—the customers never knew. Only now and again I’d take my peep
from under the table-cloth.

 ... But one day I managed to get a pair of scissors and—would you believe
it, madam? I cut off all my hair; snipped it off all in bits, like the little
monkey I was. Grandfather was furious ! He caught hold of the
tongs—I shall never forget it—grabbed me by the hand and shut my
fingers in them. “That’ll teach you!” he said. It was a
fearful burn. I’ve got the mark of it to-day.

 ... Well, you see, madam, he’d taken such pride in my hair. He used to
sit me up on the counter, before the customers came, and do it something
beautiful—big, soft curls and waved over the top. I remember the
assistants standing round, and me ever so solemn with the penny grandfather
gave me to hold while it was being done.... But he always took the penny back
afterwards. Poor grandfather! Wild, he was, at the fright I’d made of
myself. But he frightened me that time. Do you know what I did, madam? I ran
away. Yes, I did, round the corners, in and out, I don’t know how far I
didn’t run. Oh, dear, I must have looked a sight, with my hand rolled up
in my pinny and my hair sticking out. People must have laughed when they saw
me....

 ... No, madam, grandfather never got over it. He couldn’t bear the sight
of me after. Couldn’t eat his dinner, even, if I was there. So my aunt
took me. She was a cripple, an upholstress. Tiny! She had to stand on the sofas
when she wanted to cut out the backs. And it was helping her I met my lady....

 ... Not so very, madam. I was thirteen, turned. And I don’t remember ever
feeling—well—a child, as you might say. You see there was my
uniform, and one thing and another. My lady put me into collars and cuffs from
the first. Oh yes—once I did! That was—funny! It was like this. My
lady had her two little nieces staying with her—we were at Sheldon at the
time—and there was a fair on the common.

 “Now, Ellen,” she said, “I want you to take the two young
ladies for a ride on the donkeys.” Off we went; solemn little loves they
were; each had a hand. But when we came to the donkeys they were too shy to go
on. So we stood and watched instead. Beautiful those donkeys were! They were
the first I’d seen out of a cart—for pleasure as you might say.
They were a lovely silver-grey, with little red saddles and blue bridles and
bells jing-a-jingling on their ears. And quite big girls—older than me,
even—were riding them, ever so gay. Not at all common, I don’t
mean, madam, just enjoying themselves. And I don’t know what it was, but
the way the little feet went, and the eyes—so gentle—and the soft
ears—made me want to go on a donkey more than anything in the world!

 ... Of course, I couldn’t. I had my young ladies. And what would I have
looked like perched up there in my uniform? But all the rest of the day it was
donkeys—donkeys on the brain with me. I felt I should have burst if I
didn’t tell some one; and who was there to tell? But when I went to
bed—I was sleeping in Mrs. James’s bedroom, our cook that was, at
the time—as soon as the lights was out, there they were, my donkeys,
jingling along, with their neat little feet and sad eyes.... Well, madam, would
you believe it, I waited for a long time and pretended to be asleep, and then
suddenly I sat up and called out as loud as I could, “ I do want to go
on a donkey. I do want a donkey-ride! ” You see, I had to say it, and
I thought they wouldn’t laugh at me if they knew I was only dreaming.
Artful—wasn’t it? Just what a silly child would think....

 ... No, madam, never now. Of course, I did think of it at one time. But it
wasn’t to be. He had a little flower-shop just down the road and across
from where we was living. Funny—wasn’t it? And me such a one for
flowers. We were having a lot of company at the time, and I was in and out of
the shop more often than not, as the saying is. And Harry and I (his name was
Harry) got to quarrelling about how things ought to be arranged—and that
began it. Flowers! you wouldn’t believe it, madam, the flowers he used to
bring me. He’d stop at nothing. It was lilies-of-the-valley more than
once, and I’m not exaggerating! Well, of course, we were going to be
married and live over the shop, and it was all going to be just so, and I was
to have the window to arrange.... Oh, how I’ve done that window of a
Saturday! Not really, of course, madam, just dreaming, as you might say.
I’ve done it for Christmas—motto in holly, and all—and
I’ve had my Easter lilies with a gorgeous star all daffodils in the
middle. I’ve hung—well, that’s enough of that. The day came
he was to call for me to choose the furniture. Shall I ever forget it? It was a
Tuesday. My lady wasn’t quite herself that afternoon. Not that
she’d said anything, of course; she never does or will. But I knew by the
way that she kept wrapping herself up and asking me if it was cold—and
her little nose looked... pinched. I didn’t like leaving her; I knew
I’d be worrying all the time. At last I asked her if she’d rather I
put it off. “Oh no, Ellen,” she said, “you mustn’t mind
about me. You mustn’t disappoint your young man.” And so cheerful,
you know, madam, never thinking about herself. It made me feel worse than ever.
I began to wonder... then she dropped her handkerchief and began to stoop down
to pick it up herself—a thing she never did. “Whatever are you
doing!” I cried, running to stop her. “Well,” she said,
smiling, you know, madam, “I shall have to begin to practise.” Oh,
it was all I could do not to burst out crying. I went over to the
dressing-table and made believe to rub up the silver, and I couldn’t keep
myself in, and I asked her if she’d rather I... didn’t get married.
“No, Ellen,” she said—that was her voice, madam, like
I’m giving you—“No, Ellen, not for the wide
world !” But while she said it, madam—I was looking in her
glass; of course, she didn’t know I could see her—she put her
little hand on her heart just like her dear mother used to, and lifted her
eyes... Oh, madam !

 When Harry came I had his letters all ready, and the ring and a ducky little
brooch he’d given me—a silver bird it was, with a chain in its
beak, and on the end of the chain a heart with a dagger. Quite the thing! I
opened the door to him. I never gave him time for a word. “There you
are,” I said. “Take them all back,” I said, “it’s
all over. I’m not going to marry you,” I said, “I can’t
leave my lady.” White! he turned as white as a woman. I had to slam the
door, and there I stood, all of a tremble, till I knew he had gone. When I
opened the door—believe me or not, madam—that man was gone!
I ran out into the road just as I was, in my apron and my house-shoes, and
there I stayed in the middle of the road... staring. People must have laughed
if they saw me....

 ... Goodness gracious!—What’s that? It’s the clock striking!
And here I’ve been keeping you awake. Oh, madam, you ought to have
stopped me.... Can I tuck in your feet? I always tuck in my lady’s feet,
every night, just the same. And she says, “Good night, Ellen. Sleep sound
and wake early!” I don’t know what I should do if she didn’t
say that, now.

 ... Oh dear, I sometimes think... whatever should I do if anything were to....
But, there, thinking’s no good to anyone—is it, madam? Thinking
won’t help. Not that I do it often. And if ever I do I pull myself up
sharp, “Now, then, Ellen. At it again—you silly girl! If you
can’t find anything better to do than to start thinking!...”