THE TRIP OF LE HORLA

 On the morning of July 8th I received the following telegram: “Fine
      day. Always my predictions. Belgian frontier. Baggage and servants left at
      noon at the social session. Beginning of manoeuvres at three. So I will
      wait for you at the works from five o'clock on. Jovis.”

 At five o'clock sharp I entered the gas works of La Villette. It might
      have been mistaken for the colossal ruins of an old town inhabited by
      Cyclops. There were immense dark avenues separating heavy gasometers
      standing one behind another, like monstrous columns, unequally high and,
      undoubtedly, in the past the supports of some tremendous, some fearful
      iron edifice.

 The balloon was lying in the courtyard and had the appearance of a cake
      made of yellow cloth, flattened on the ground under a rope. That is called
      placing a balloon in a sweep-net, and, in fact, it appeared like an
      enormous fish.

 Two or three hundred people were looking at it, sitting or standing, and
      some were examining the basket, a nice little square basket for a human
      cargo, bearing on its side in gold letters on a mahogany plate the words:
      Le Horla.

 Suddenly the people began to stand back, for the gas was beginning to
      enter into the balloon through a long tube of yellow cloth, which lay on
      the soil, swelling and undulating like an enormous worm. But another
      thought, another picture occurs to every mind. It is thus that nature
      itself nourishes beings until their birth. The creature that will rise
      soon begins to move, and the attendants of Captain Jovis, as Le Horla grew
      larger, spread and put in place the net which covers it, so that the
      pressure will be regular and equally distributed at every point.

 The operation is very delicate and very important, for the resistance of
      the cotton cloth of which the balloon is made is figured not in proportion
      to the contact surface of this cloth with the net, but in proportion to
      the links of the basket.

 Le Horla, moreover, has been designed by M. Mallet, constructed under his
      own eyes and made by himself. Everything had been made in the shops of M.
      Jovis by his own working staff and nothing was made outside.

 We must add that everything was new in this balloon, from the varnish to
      the valve, those two essential parts of a balloon. Both must render the
      cloth gas-proof, as the sides of a ship are waterproof. The old varnishes,
      made with a base of linseed oil, sometimes fermented and thus burned the
      cloth, which in a short time would tear like a piece of paper.

 The valves were apt to close imperfectly after being opened and when the
      covering called “cataplasme” was injured. The fall of M.
      L'Hoste in the open sea during the night proved the imperfection of the
      old system.

 The two discoveries of Captain Jovis, the varnish principally, are of
      inestimable value in the art of ballooning.

 The crowd has begun to talk, and some men, who appear to be specialists,
      affirm with authority that we shall come down before reaching the
      fortifications. Several other things have been criticized in this novel
      type of balloon with which we are about to experiment with so much
      pleasure and success.

 It is growing slowly but surely. Some small holes and scratches made in
      transit have been discovered, and we cover them and plug them with a
      little piece of paper applied on the cloth while wet. This method of
      repairing alarms and mystifies the public.

 While Captain Jovis and his assistants are busy with the last details, the
      travellers go to dine in the canteen of the gas-works, according to the
      established custom.

 When we come out again the balloon is swaying, enormous and transparent, a
      prodigious golden fruit, a fantastic pear which is still ripening, covered
      by the last rays of the setting sun. Now the basket is attached, the
      barometers are brought, the siren, which we will blow to our hearts'
      content, is also brought, also the two trumpets, the eatables, the
      overcoats and raincoats, all the small articles that can go with the men
      in that flying basket.

 As the wind pushes the balloon against the gasometers, it is necessary to
      steady it now and then, to avoid an accident at the start.

 Captain Jovis is now ready and calls all the passengers.

 Lieutenant Mallet jumps aboard, climbing first on the aerial net between
      the basket and the balloon, from which he will watch during the night the
      movements of Le Horla across the skies, as the officer on watch, standing
      on starboard, watches the course of a ship.

 M. Etierine Beer gets in after him, then comes M. Paul Bessand, then M.
      Patrice Eyries and I get in last.

 But the basket is too heavy for the balloon, considering the long trip to
      be taken, and M. Eyries has to get out, not without great regret.

 M. Joliet, standing erect on the edge of the basket, begs the ladies, in
      very gallant terms, to stand aside a little, for he is afraid he might
      throw sand on their hats in rising. Then he commands:

 “Let it loose,” and, cutting with one stroke of his knife the
      ropes that hold the balloon to the ground, he gives Le Horla its liberty.

 In one second we fly skyward. Nothing can be heard; we float, we rise, we
      fly, we glide. Our friends shout with glee and applaud, but we hardly hear
      them, we hardly see them. We are already so far, so high! What? Are we
      really leaving these people down there? Is it possible? Paris spreads out
      beneath us, a dark bluish patch, cut by its streets, from which rise, here
      and there, domes, towers, steeples, then around it the plain, the country,
      traversed by long roads, thin and white, amidst green fields of a tender
      or dark green, and woods almost black.

 The Seine appears like a coiled snake, asleep, of which we see neither
      head nor tail; it crosses Paris, and the entire field resembles an immense
      basin of prairies and forests dotted here and there by mountains, hardly
      visible in the horizon.

 The sun, which we could no longer see down below, now reappears as though
      it were about to rise again, and our balloon seems to be lighted; it must
      appear like a star to the people who are looking up. M. Mallet every few
      seconds throws a cigarette paper intospace and says quietly: “We
      are rising, always rising,” while Captain Jovis, radiant with joy,
      rubs his hands together and repeats: “Eh? this varnish? Isn't it
      good?”

 In fact, we can see whether we are rising or sinking only by throwing a
      cigarette paper out of the basket now and then. If this paper appears to
      fall down like a stone, it means that the balloon is rising; if it appears
      to shoot skyward the balloon is descending.

 The two barometers mark about five hundred meters, and we gaze with
      enthusiastic admiration at the earth we are leaving and to which we are
      not attached in any way; it looks like a colored map, an immense plan of
      the country. All its noises, however, rise to our ears very distinctly,
      easily recognizable. We hear the sound of the wheels rolling in the
      streets, the snap of a whip, the cries of drivers, the rolling and
      whistling of trains and the laughter of small boys running after one
      another. Every time we pass over a village the noise of children's voices
      is heard above the rest and with the greatest distinctness. Some men are
      calling us; the locomotives whistle; we answer with the siren, which emits
      plaintive, fearfully shrill wails like the voice of a weird being
      wandering through the world.

 We perceive lights here and there, some isolated fire in the farms, and
      lines of gas in the towns. We are going toward the northwest, after
      roaming for some time over the little lake of Enghien. Now we see a river;
      it is the Oise, and we begin to argue about the exact spot we are passing.
      Is that town Creil or Pontoise—the one with so many lights? But if
      we were over Pontoise we could see the junction of the Seine and the Oise;
      and that enormous fire to the left, isn't it the blast furnaces of
      Montataire? So then we are above Creil. The view is superb; it is dark on
      the earth, but we are still in the light, and it is now past ten o'clock.
      Now we begin to hear slight country noises, the double cry of the quail in
      particular, then the mewing of cats and the barking of dogs. Surely the
      dogs have scented the balloon; they have seen it and have given the alarm.
      We can hear them barking all over the plain and making the identical noise
      they make when baying at the moon. The cows also seem to wake up in the
      barns, for we can hear them lowing; all the beasts are scared and moved
      before the aerial monster that is passing.

 The delicious odors of the soil rise toward us, the smell of hay, of
      flowers, of the moist, verdant earth, perfuming the air-a light air, in
      fact, so light, so sweet, so delightful that I realize I never was so
      fortunate as to breathe before. A profound sense of well-being, unknown to
      me heretofore, pervades me, a well-being of body and spirit, composed of
      supineness, of infinite rest, of forgetfulness, of indifference to
      everything and of this novel sensation of traversing space without any of
      the sensations that make motion unbearable, without noise, without shocks
      and without fear.

 At times we rise and then descend. Every few minutes Lieutenant Mallet,
      suspended in his cobweb of netting, says to Captain Jovis: “We are
      descending; throw down half a handful.” And the captain, who is
      talking and laughing with us, with a bag of ballast between his legs,
      takes a handful of sand out of the bag and throws it overboard.

 Nothing is more amusing, more delicate, more interesting than the
      manoeuvring of a balloon. It is an enormous toy, free and docile, which
      obeys with surprising sensitiveness, but it is also, and before all, the
      slave of the wind, which we cannot control. A pinch of sand, half a sheet
      of paper, one or two drops of water, the bones of a chicken which we had
      just eaten, thrown overboard, makes it go up quickly.

 A breath of cool, damp air rising from the river or the wood we are
      traversing makes the balloon descend two hundred metres. It does not vary
      when passing over fields of ripe grain, and it rises when it passes over
      towns.

 The earth sleeps now, or, rather, men sleep on the earth, for the beasts
      awakened by the sight of our balloon announce our approach everywhere. Now
      and then the rolling of a train or the whistling of a locomotive is
      plainly distinguishable. We sound our siren as we pass over inhabited
      places; and the peasants, terrified in their beds, must surely tremble and
      ask themselves if the Angel Gabriel is not passing by.

 A strong and continuous odor of gas can be plainly observed. We must have
      encountered a current of warm air, and the balloon expands, losing its
      invisible blood by the escape-valve, which is called the appendix, and
      which closes of itself as soon as the expansion ceases.

 We are rising. The earth no longer gives back the echo of our trumpets; we
      have risen almost two thousand feet. It is not light enough for us to
      consult the instruments; we only know that the rice paper falls from us
      like dead butterflies, that we are rising, always rising. We can no longer
      see the earth; a light mist separates us from it; and above our head
      twinkles a world of stars.

 A silvery light appears before us and makes the sky turn pale, and
      suddenly, as if it were rising from unknown depths behind the horizon
      below us rises the moon on the edge of a cloud. It seems to be coming from
      below, while we are looking down upon it from a great height, leaning on
      the edge of our basket like an audience on a balcony. Clear and round, it
      emerges from the clouds and slowly rises in the sky.

 The earth no longer seems to exist, it is buried in milky vapors that
      resemble a sea. We are now alone in space with the moon, which looks like
      another balloon travelling opposite us; and our balloon, which shines in
      the air, appears like another, larger moon, a world wandering in the sky
      amid the stars, through infinity. We no longer speak, think nor live; we
      float along through space in delicious inertia. The air which is bearing
      us up has made of us all beings which resemble itself, silent, joyous,
      irresponsible beings, intoxicated by this stupendous flight, peculiarly
      alert, although motionless. One is no longer conscious of one's flesh or
      one's bones; one's heart seems to have ceased beating; we have become
      something indescribable, birds who do not even have to flap their wings.

 All memory has disappeared from our minds, all trouble from our thoughts;
      we have no more regrets, plans nor hopes. We look, we feel, we wildly
      enjoy this fantastic journey; nothing in the sky but the moon and
      ourselves! We are a wandering, travelling world, like our sisters, the
      planets; and this little world carries five men who have left the earth
      and who have almost forgotten it. We can now see as plainly as in
      daylight; we look at each other, surprised at this brightness, for we have
      nothing to look at but ourselves and a few silvery clouds floating below
      us. The barometers mark twelve hundred metres, then thirteen, fourteen,
      fifteen hundred; and the little rice papers still fall about us.

 Captain Jovis claims that the moon has often made balloons act thus, and
      that the upward journey will continue.

 We are now at two thousand metres; we go up to two thousand three hundred
      and fifty; then the balloon stops: We blow the siren and are surprised
      that no one answers us from the stars.

 We are now going down rapidly. M. Mallet keeps crying: “Throw out
      more ballast! throw out more ballast!” And the sand and stones that
      we throw over come back into our faces, as if they were going up, thrown
      from below toward the stars, so rapid is our descent.

 Here is the earth! Where are we? It is now past midnight, and we are
      crossing a broad, dry, well-cultivated country, with many roads and well
      populated.

 To the right is a large city and farther away to the left is another. But
      suddenly from the earth appears a bright fairy light; it disappears,
      reappears and once more disappears. Jovis, intoxicated by space, exclaims:
      “Look, look at this phenomenon of the moon in the water. One can see
      nothing more beautiful at night!”

 Nothing indeed can give one an idea of the wonderful brightness of these
      spots of light which are not fire, which do not look like reflections,
      which appear quickly here or there and immediately go out again. These
      shining lights appear on the winding rivers at every turn, but one hardly
      has time to see them as the balloon passes as quickly as the wind.

 We are now quite near the earth, and Beer exclaims:—“Look at
      that! What is that running over there in the fields? Isn't it a dog?”
      Indeed, something is running along the ground with great speed, and this
      something seems to jump over ditches, roads, trees with such ease that we
      could not understand what it might be. The captain laughed: “It is
      the shadow of our balloon. It will grow as we descend.”

 I distinctly hear a great noise of foundries in the distance. And,
      according to the polar star, which we have been observing all night, 'and
      which I have so often watched and consulted from the bridge of my little
      yacht on the Mediterranean, we are heading straight for Belgium.

 Our siren and our two horns are continually calling. A few cries from some
      truck driver or belated reveler answer us. We bellow: “Where are we?”
      But the balloon is going so rapidly that the bewildered man has not even
      time to answer us. The growing shadow of Le Horla, as large as a child's
      ball, is fleeing before us over the fields, roads and woods. It goes along
      steadily, preceding us by about a quarter of a mile; and now I am leaning
      out of the basket, listening to the roaring of the wind in the trees and
      across the harvest fields. I say to Captain Jovis: “How the wind
      blows!”

 He answers: “No, those are probably waterfalls.” I insist,
      sure of my ear that knows the sound of the wind, from hearing it so often
      whistle through the rigging. Then Jovis nudges me; he fears to frighten
      his happy, quiet passengers, for he knows full well that a storm is
      pursuing us.

 At last a man manages to understand us; he answers: “Nord!” We
      get the same reply from another.

 Suddenly the lights of a town, which seems to be of considerable size,
      appear before us. Perhaps it is Lille. As we approach it, such a wonderful
      flow of fire appears below us that I think myself transported into some
      fairyland where precious stones are manufactured for giants.

 It seems that it is a brick factory. Here are others, two, three. The
      fusing material bubbles, sparkles, throws out blue, red, yellow, green
      sparks, reflections from giant diamonds, rubies, emeralds, turquoises,
      sapphires, topazes. And near by are great foundries roaring like
      apocalyptic lions; high chimneys belch forth their clouds of smoke and
      flame, and we can hear the noise of metal striking against metal.

 “Where are we?”

 The voice of some joker or of a crazy person answers: “In a balloon!”

 “Where are we?”

 “At Lille!”

 We were not mistaken. We are already out of sight of the town, and we see
      Roubaix to the right, then some well-cultivated, rectangular fields, of
      different colors according to the crops, some yellow, some gray or brown.
      But the clouds are gathering behind us, hiding the moon, whereas toward
      the east the sky is growing lighter, becoming a clear blue tinged with
      red. It is dawn. It grows rapidly, now showing us all the little details
      of the earth, the trains, the brooks, the cows, the goats. And all this
      passes beneath us with surprising speed. One hardly has time to notice
      that other fields, other meadows, other houses have already disappeared.
      Cocks are crowing, but the voice of ducks drowns everything. One might
      think the world to be peopled, covered with them, they make so much noise.

 The early rising peasants are waving their arms and crying to us: “Let
      yourselves drop!” But we go along steadily, neither rising nor
      falling, leaning over the edge of the basket and watching the world
      fleeing under our feet.

 Jovis sights another city far off in the distance. It approaches;
      everywhere are old church spires. They are delightful, seen thus from
      above. Where are we? Is this Courtrai? Is it Ghent?

 We are already very near it, and we see that it is surrounded by water and
      crossed in every direction by canals. One might think it a Venice of the
      north. Just as we are passing so near to a church tower that our long
      guy-rope almost touches it, the chimes begin to ring three o'clock. The
      sweet, clear sounds rise to us from this frail roof which we have almost
      touched in our wandering course. It is a charming greeting, a friendly
      welcome from Holland. We answer with our siren, whose raucous voice echoes
      throughout the streets.

 It was Bruges. But we have hardly lost sight of it when my neighbor, Paul
      Bessand, asks me: “Don't you see something over there, to the right,
      in front of us? It looks like a river.”

 And, indeed, far ahead of us stretches a bright highway, in the light of
      the dawning day. Yes, it looks like a river, an immense river full of
      islands.

 “Get ready for the descent,” cried the captain. He makes M.
      Mallet leave his net and return to the basket; then we pack the barometers
      and everything that could be injured by possible shocks. M. Bessand
      exclaims: “Look at the masts over there to the left! We are at the
      sea!”

 Fogs had hidden it from us until then. The sea was everywhere, to the left
      and opposite us, while to our right the Scheldt, which had joined the
      Moselle, extended as far as the sea, its mouths vaster than a lake.

 It was necessary to descend within a minute or two. The rope to the
      escape-valve, which had been religiously enclosed in a little white bag
      and placed in sight of all so that no one would touch it, is unrolled, and
      M. Mallet holds it in his hand while Captain Jovis looks for a favorable
      landing.

 Behind us the thunder was rumbling and not a single bird followed our mad
      flight.

 “Pull!” cried Jovis.

 We were passing over a canal. The basket trembled and tipped over
      slightly. The guy-rope touched the tall trees on both banks. But our speed
      is so great that the long rope now trailing does not seem to slow down,
      and we pass with frightful rapidity over a large farm, from which the
      bewildered chickens, pigeons and ducks fly away, while the cows, cats and
      dogs run, terrified, toward the house.

 Just one-half bag of ballast is left. Jovis throws it overboard, and Le
      Horla flies lightly across the roof.

 The captain once more cries: “The escape-valve!”

 M. Mallet reaches for the rope and hangs to it, and we drop like an arrow.
      With a slash of a knife the cord which retains the anchor is cut, and we
      drag this grapple behind us, through a field of beets. Here are the trees.

 “Take care! Hold fast! Look out for your heads!”

 We pass over them. Then a strong shock shakes us. The anchor has taken
      hold.

 “Look out! Take a good hold! Raise yourselves by your wrists. We are
      going to touch ground.”

 The basket does indeed strike the earth. Then it flies up again. Once more
      it falls and bounds upward again, and at last it settles on the ground,
      while the balloon struggles madly, like a wounded beast.

 Peasants run toward us, but they do not dare approach. They were a long
      time before they decided to come and deliver us, for one cannot set foot
      on the ground until the bag is almost completely deflated.

 Then, almost at the same time as the bewildered men, some of whom showed
      their astonishment by jumping, with the wild gestures of savages, all the
      cows that were grazing along the coast came toward us, surrounding our
      balloon with a strange and comical circle of horns, big eyes and blowing
      nostrils.

 With the help of the accommodating and hospitable Belgian peasants, we
      were able in a short time to pack up all our material and carry it to the
      station at Heyst, where at twenty minutes past eight we took the train for
      Paris.

 The descent occurred at three-fifteen in the morning, preceding by only a
      few seconds the torrent of rain and the blinding lightning of the storm
      which had been chasing us before it.

 Thanks to Captain Jovis, of whom I had heard much from my colleague, Paul
      Ginisty—for both of them had fallen together and voluntarily into
      the sea opposite Mentone—thanks to this brave man, we were able to
      see, in a single night, from far up in the sky, the setting of the sun,
      the rising of the moon and the dawn of day and to go from Paris to the
      mouth of the Scheldt through the skies.

 [This story appeared in “Figaro” on July 16, 1887, under the title:
   “From Paris to Heyst.”]