THE HUNDRED

 Mrs. Darling was dining from home,
and every heart in her little establishment
rejoiced over the circumstance, for it meant
less work for everybody, with an opportunity
to enjoy Christmas Eve on his own account.

 Mrs. Bonnet, the lady's-maid, with the
plans she had in mind for the evening, was
scarcely annoyed at all when her mistress
scolded because the corset-lace had got itself
in a knot.

 The chamber was full of a delicate odor of
iris. The gas-globes at the ends of their
jointed gold arms looked like splendid yellow
pearls; on the dressing-table under them
glittered a quantity of highly embossed silverware,
out of all reasonable proportion with
the little person owning it, who sat before the mirror beautifying her finger-nails while
Mrs. Bonnet did her hair.

 "Mind what you are about," the mistress
murmured, diligently polishing.

 Mrs. Bonnet instantly removed the hot
tongs from the tress she was twisting, and
caught it again with greater precaution.

 "Mind what you are about," warned Mrs.
Darling, somewhat louder, a beginning of
acid in her voice.

 Mrs. Bonnet again disengaged the hair
from the tongs, and after a little pause, during
which to make firm her nerve, with infinite
solicitude took hold again of the golden
strand, and would have waved it, but—

 "Mind what you are about!" almost
screamed little Mrs. Darling. "Didn't I tell you to be careful? You have been pulling
right along at the same hair! Do consider
that it is a human scalp, and not a wig you
are dealing with! Bonny, you are not a bad
woman, but you will wear me out. Come,
go on with it; it is getting late."

 Before the hair-dressing was accomplished
Mrs. Darling rolled up her eyes—her blue eyes, round and angelic as they could sometimes
be—at the reflection of Mrs. Bonnet's
face in the mirror, and said, meekly: "Bonny,
do you think that black moir of mine
would make over nicely for you? I am going
to give it to you. No, don't thank me—it
makes me look old. Now my slippers."

 While Bonnet was forcing the shoe on her
fat little foot, Mrs. Darling's glance rested,
perhaps by chance, on a photograph that
leaned against the clock over the mantelpiece.
It was that of a still young, well-looking
man, whose face wore an unmistakable
look of goodness, of the kind that
made it what one expected to read under it
in print—the Rev. Dorel Goodhue. There
was another more conspicuous man-photograph
in the room, on the dressing-table, in
a massive frame that matched the toilet accessories.
It stood there always, airing a
photographic smile among the brushes and
hand-glasses and pin-boxes.

 "I suppose," said Mrs. Darling, while she
braced herself against Bonnet to help get
the small shoe on—"I suppose I have a very bad temper!" and she laughed in such a sensible,
natural, good-natured way any one
must have felt that her exhibition of a moment
before had been a sort of joke. "Tell
the truth, Bonny: if every mistress had to
have a certificate from her maid, you would
give me a pretty bad one, wouldn't you?
But I was abominably brought up. I used
to slap my governesses. And I have had
all sorts of illnesses; trouble, too. And I
mostly don't mean anything by it. It is just
nerves. Poor Bonny! I treat you shamefully,
don't I?"

 "Oh, ma'am," said the lady's-maid, expanding
in the light of this uncommon familiarity,
"I would give you a character as
would make it no difficulty in you getting a
first-class situation right away; you may depend
upon it, ma'am, I would. Don't this
shoe seem a bit tight, ma'am?"

 "Not at all. It is a whole size larger than
I wear. If you would just be so good as
to hold the shoe-horn properly. There, that
is it."

 She stood before the bed, on which were spread two long evening dresses. A little
King Charles spaniel had made himself comfortable
in the softest of one. His mistress
pounced on him with a cry, first cuffed, then
kissed and put him down. "Which shall I
wear?" she asked.

 Bonnet drew back for a critical view, but
dared not suggest unprompted.

 "The black and white is more becoming,
but the violet crape is prettier. Oh, Bonny,
decide quickly for me, like a tossed-up penny!"

 "Well, I think now I should say the violet,
ma'am."

 "Should you?" Mrs. Darling mused, with
a finger against her lip. "But I look less
well in it. Surely I had rather look pretty
myself than have my dress look pretty,
hadn't I? Give me the black and white,
and hurry. Mr. Goodhue will be here in a
second. Bonnet!" she burst forth, in quite
another tone. "You trying creature! Didn't
I tell you to put a draw-string through that
lace? Didn't I tell you? Where are your
ears? Where are your senses? What on  earth do you spend your time thinking
about, I should like to know, anyway? I
wouldn't wear that thing as it is , not for—not
for—Oh, I am tired of living surrounded
by fools! Take it away—take it
away! Bring the violet!"

 At last she was encased in the fluffy violet
crape, and at sight of the sweet picture she
made in the mirror her brow cleared a little;
she looked baby-eyed and angelic again, with
her wavy hair meekly parted in the middle.
While she looked at herself she let Bonnet
have one of her arms to button the long
glove.

 "Ouch! Go softly; you pinch!" she murmured.

 Bonnet changed her method with the silver
hook, adjusted it anew, and pulled at it
ever so softly.

 "Ouch! You pinch me!" said Mrs. Darling,
a little louder.

 Bonnet stopped short, and looked helplessly
at the glove, that could not be made
to meet without strain over the plump
white wrist. After a breathing-while, with stealthy gentleness, again she fitted the silver
loop over the button, and, with a devout
inward appeal to Heaven, tried to induce it
through the button-hole. She had almost
succeeded when Mrs. Darling screamed,
"Ouch, ouch, ouch! You pinch like anything !
I am black and blue!" And tearing
her arm from the quaking servant, began
fidgeting with the button herself, soon pulling
it off.

   "SHE LET BONNET HAVE ONE OF HER ARMS"



 "Bonnet, how many times must I tell you
to sew the buttons fast on my gloves before
you give them me to put on?" she asked,
severely. "No, they were not!" she stormed,
and peeled off the glove, throwing it far
from her, inside out.

 There was a knock, and a respectful voice
saying, outside the door, "Mr. Goodhue is
below, ma'am."

 "Get a needle," Mrs. Darling said, humbly,
like a child reminded of its promise to
behave, and waited patiently while the button
was sewed on, and held out her arm
again, letting Bonnet pinch without a murmur.

 A final bunch of violets was tucked in the
bosom of her gown, and she was leaving the
bedroom, when, as if at a sudden thought,
she turned back, went to the door of a little
room leading from it, and stood looking in.

 "Aren't they lovely, the hundred of them?"
she gushed. "Did you ever see such a sight?
One prettier than the other! I almost wish
I were one of the little girls myself!"

 "Them that gets them will be made happy,
sure, ma'am. I suppose it's for some
Christmas-tree?"

 "They are for my cousin Dorel's orphans.
Pick up, Bonny. Open the windows. Mind
you keep Jetty with you. Don't let him go
into the kitchen. I am sure they feed him. I
shall not be very late—not later than twelve."

 Mrs. Darling went down the stairs, followed
by Bonnet with her mantle and fan,
and Jetty, who leaped and yapped in the delusion
that he was going to be taken for a
walk.

 The gentleman waiting below came forward
to take Mrs. Darling's hand.

 Mrs. Bonnet listened to the exchange of polite expressions between them with no
small degree of impatience; it seemed to
her they might just as well have made these
communications later, in the carriage.

 At last and at last they were gone.
With the clap of the door behind them the
whole atmosphere of the house changed as
by enchantment. A door slammed somewhere;
a voice burst out singing below-stairs;
the man in livery who had held the
door for Mrs. Darling and her reverend cousin
leaned over the banisters and shouted, heartily,
"Catherine! I say, Catherine!" Mrs.
Bonnet fairly scampered up-stairs, with the
mistaken Jetty, who thought this was the
beginning of a romp, hard after her, trying
to catch her by the heels.

 She entered Mrs. Darling's room with no
affectation of soft-stepping, threw up the
window—the sharp outer air cut into the
scented warmth like a silver axe—and began
pushing things briskly into their places. She
digressed from her labors a moment to get
from the closet a black moir, which she examined,
then replaced.

 Now came a rap at the door, and a voice
only a shade less respectful than before, saying,
"Miss Pittock is waiting below, ma'am."

 "Very well, I will be down directly," said
Mrs. Bonnet. "Come here, Jetty!"

 Jetty, instead of coming, ran round and
round among the chair legs, waving his tail
in a graceful circle, eluding Mrs. Bonnet's
hand not by swiftness, but craft.

 "Come here, you little fool," muttered
Bonnet; and as her bidding, however severe,
availed nothing, she cast Mrs. Darling's
wrapper over the little beast, and got him
entangled like a black-and-tan butterfly in a
pocket-handkerchief. She snatched him up
squirming a little, tucked him tightly under
her arm, and ran up-stairs to her own chamber
on the third floor. There she dropped
him; and when she had donned her black
coat and bonnet, gloves and galoshes, during
which preparations Jetty was leaping and
yapping like crazy, in the supposition again
that they were going for a walk together,
she turned out the light and shut the door
against his wet, black nose. His reproach ful
barks followed her down the passage.
"It's good for 'is lungs," she said, grimly,
hurrying over the stairs.

   "AT LAST THEY WERE GONE"



 And here at the foot was Miss Pittock,
looking quite more than the lady in her mistress's
last year's cape.

 "I hope I haven't kept you waiting, Miss
Pittock."

 "Quite the contrary; don't mention it,
Mrs. Bonnet. Oh, the shops is a sight to
behold, Mrs. Bonnet! I never seen anything
like this year. It do seem as if people
made more to-do than they used about
Christmas, don't it? Are we ready, Mrs.
Bonnet?"

 "I am if you are, Miss Pittock."

 "Now, what kind of shops do you fancy
most, so we'll go and look into their show-windows
first?"

 "I'm sure I don't know. What do you
prefer yourself, Miss Pittock? We've time
to see most everything of any account, anyhow.
She's not coming home before twelve."

 "No more is mine. Suppose we go first
to the Grand Bazar. They've always got the most amazing show there. That you,
Mr. Jackson? A merry Christmas to you,
Mr. Jackson, and a happy New Year!"

 For just as they reached the door they
found the butler letting himself out too.
He did not sleep in the house, and was taking
the opportunity to-night to leave early.
For a second he could not return Miss Pittock's
salutation, his mouth being crowded
with a last bite snatched in haste. When he
had swallowed, he grinned and excused his
hurry, holding the door for the ladies.

 "Sorry I ain't going your way, ladies," he
said, amiably, and the door closed behind the
three.

 In the kitchen the cook, with a face like a
pleasant copper saucepan, rosy and shining
and round, was moving about leisurely, giving
this and that a final unhurried wipe.
She wore a face of contentment; it was her
legitimate night out; with a good conscience
presently she was going up to make a change,
and off to her family.

 A young woman in a light gingham and
frilled cap sat watching her sulkily, her hands idle on her embroidered muslin apron.
A girl of perhaps eighteen, capless, in a dark
calico that made not the first pretension to
elegance, was washing her face at one of the
shiny copper faucets. She vanished a moment,
and came back with her damp hair
streaked all over by the comb. The cook
was gone.

 "You going, too, I suppose?" said the sullen
parlor-maid.

 "Why, yes. 'Ain't I done everything?
There's no need of my staying, is there?"
The kitchen-maid went home for the night,
too.

 "No, I don't suppose there is. I just
thought you might happen to be, that's all."

 The kitchen-maid sat down a minute, in a
tired, ungirt position, and looked over at the
parlor-maid with good-natured young eyes
grown a trifle speculative. The latter let
her glance wander over the day's newspaper,
brought down-stairs until inquired for.

 "Tell you what I'd like to do!" exclaimed
the kitchen-maid.

 "What'd you like to do, Sally?"

  "That's to come back again after I've
been home for just a minute."

 The parlor-maid looked up, unable altogether
to conceal her interest. The house
was very quiet. Through the clock-ticks,
at perfectly regular intervals, came the muffled
sound of Jetty's disconsolate yaps. Neither
of the girls appeared to hear them.

 "You don't mean just to oblige, do you,
Sally?"

 "Well, I'd do it in a minute for nothing
else beside, but that ain't quite all I was
thinking of just this once. Miss Catherine"—she
hesitated, then, enthusiastically—"have
you seen 'em up-stairs? the whole hundred
of 'em laid out off Mrs. Darling's bedroom?
I saw 'em when Mrs. Bonnet she sent me up
for the lamps to clean. Law! Wouldn't
any child like to see a sight like that!
There's a little girl in my tenement, she'd
just go crazy. Do you think there'd be any
harm in it if I was to bring her over and let
her get one peep? She's as clean a child as
ever you saw. She comes of dreadful poor
folks, but just as respectable! She never seen anything like it in her life. Law, what
would I have done when I was a young one
if I'd seen that? I'd thought I was dead
and gone to heaven. I say, Miss Catherine,
d' you think any one would mind?"

 "How'll they know?" said Miss Catherine,
callously. "Look here, Sally; you go along
just as fast as you can and fetch your young
one. And when you've got back, perhaps
I'll step out a minute, two or three doors up
street, and you can answer the bell while I'm
gone. Now hurry into your things. I'll give
you your car fare."

 "Miss Catherine, you're just as good as
you can be, and I'll do something to oblige
you, too, some time," said Sally, her face
aglow with delight; and having hurried into
her jacket and tied up her head in a worsted
muffler, was off.

 She almost ran over the packed snow
down the street. She had soon left the
quiet rows of private dwelling-houses and
come where hundreds of lights glittered
across the rose-tinged snow. At every few
rods a street band tootled and blared, cov ering
the scraping of snow-shovels and jingle
of bells. "How gay it is!" she thought;
"won't it be a treat!"

 She plunged into a mean, small street,
leading off a mean but tawdry larger one,
where things hung outside the shops with
their prices, written large, pinned on them,
and had soon come to the house where her
family lived.

 She went in like a great gust of fresh air.
In less than five minutes she came out, leading
by the hand a little girl who, from being
very much bundled up about the shoulders,
and having brief petticoats above thin black
legs, looked top-heavy. She was obliged to
nearly run to keep up with Sally, and was
trying to get out words through the breathlessness
occasioned by hurrying and laughing
and coming so suddenly into the frosty
air.

 "Oh, lemme guess, Sal, and tell me when
I'm hot. Is it made of sugar?"

 "No, it ain't."

 "But you said it was a treat, didn't you,
Sally?"

  "I did that. But ain't there all sorts of
treats? There's going to the circus, for instance.
That hasn't any sugar."

 "Is it a circus, Sally? Is it a circus?"

 "No, it ain't a circus, but it's every bit as
nice."

 "Is it freaks, Sally? oh, tell me if it's
freaks? It isn't? Are you sure I shall like
it very much? It's nothing to eat, and it's
nothing I can have to keep, and it's not a
circus. What color is it? You'll answer
straight, won't you?"

 "Oh, it's every color in the world, and
striped and polka-dotted and crinkled and
smooth. There's a hundred of it."

 The child would have stopped short on the
sidewalk the better to centre her mind on
guessing, but Sally dragged her briskly along.
At the top of the street they came to a standstill.

 "What is it?" asked the child.

 "We're going to take the car," said Sally,
grandly.

 "O—h!" breathed the child.

 "I guess you never stepped on to one of these before. This, Tibbie, is nothing but
the beginning. Hi! Hi!"

 The swiftly gliding, fiery, formidable car
stopped, and the hoarse buzz died out in a
grinding of brakes; the light was dimmed a
minute, then flared out again, as if the monster
had winked. Sally and Tibbie climbed on; it
moved, banging and whirring on its farther
way. They had to stand, of course, but
what of that? Tibbie looked all about with
her shining, intelligent brown eyes, and felt
a flush of gratified pride to see Sally, when
the conductor had squeezed himself near,
pay like the others; it had seemed impossible
that some compromise should not have
to be made with him. She slipped her hand
in Sally's, and was too occupied with the
people and the colored advertisements to
talk.

 "Did you get anything for Christmas yet,
Tibbie?"

 She moved her head up and down, bestowing
all her attention on a parcel-laden
woman bound to drop something the next
time she stirred.

  "What did you get?"

 "A doll's flat-iron and a muslin bag of
candy. I put the iron on to heat, and it
melted. I gave what was left to Jimmy."

 "Who gave them to you?"

 "Off the Sunday-school tree. But there
were no lights on it, because it was daytime.
Sally, I know something that has a hundred—"

 "What's that? Let's see if you've got it
now?"

 Tibbie looked a little shamefaced, then
said, "A dollar—is a hundred cents."

 "Well, and would I be bringing you so far
just to show you a dollar? This is worth as
much as a dollar, every individual one of
them. Tibbie, it's just the grandest sight
you ever seen—pink and blue and yellow
and striped—"

 Tibbie, who was looking Sally fixedly in
the face, as if to see if her secret anywhere
transpired, now almost shouted, "It's marbles!"

 "Aw, but you're downright stupid, Tibbie.
I don't mind telling you I'm disap pointed.
You're just a common, every-day
sort of young one, with no idear of grandness
in your idears at all. And you don't
seem to keep a hold on more than one notion
at a time. First it's a dollar. Is that
pink and blue? And next it's marbles. Is
marbles worth a dollar apiece? Now tell me
what's the grandest, prettiest thing that ever
you saw—"

 "... Angels."

 "D' you ever see any?"

 "In the church window, painted."

 "Well, this is as handsome as a hundred
angels, less than a foot tall, all in new
clothes, with little hats on."

 "Sally, I think I know now. Only it
couldn't be that. There couldn't likely be
a hundred of them all together, for, oh, Sally,
it isn't a store we are going to! You didn't
tell me it was a store."

 "No more it is. We're going straight to
Mrs. Darling's house, and no place but there.
Here's where we get off."

 The big girl, with the small one, alighted
and turned into the quieter streets, Tibbie, as before, almost running to keep up with
her long-legged friend.

 They went into Mrs. Darling's by the
back door. In the kitchen stood Miss Catherine
in a coat with jet spangles and a hat
with nodding plumes, pulling on a pair of
tight kid gloves.

 Tibbie at sight of her hung back, murmuring
to Sally, "You didn't tell me! You
didn't tell me!"

 "Now, you'll be sure she don't touch anything,
Sally," said Miss Catherine, looking
Tibbie over.

 "Naw! She won't hurt anything. I've
told her I'll skin her if she does."

 "Are her hands clean? You'd better give
them a wash, anyhow."

 Tibbie dropped her eyes, a little mortified.

 "All right! I'll wash 'em," said Sally.

 "She'd better scrape her boots thoroughly
on the mat, too, before going up."

 "I'll look after all that, Miss Catherine.
Just you go long with an easy mind."

 "Well, I'm off. I won't be long. Why
don't you give her a piece of that cake? It's cut. But make her eat it down here. Good-night,
little girl. I guess you never was in a
house like this before. Good-night, Sal. Is
my hat on straight?"

 She was gone, and the whole house now
belonged to Sally and Tibbie. They looked
at each other in silence a moment; the glee
they felt came shining to the surface of their
faces and made them grin broadly at each
other.

 "She's particular, ain't she?" said Sally.

 "I just as soon wash them again, but
they're clean. I thought you said she was
gone off to a party and going to be gone till
real late."

 "Law!" roared Sally, and plumped down
to contort herself in comfort. "She thought
it was Mrs. Darling herself! Law! law!"

 Tibbie laughed, too, but not so heartily,
and the great time began.

 Sally went for the cake-box, and Tibbie
made a thoughtful selection; and "Who'll
ever find a few crumbs?" said Sally. "Come
along!"

 The great child and the little, full of a sense of play, went up the stairs hand in
hand. Tibbie could scarcely take account
of what was happening to her, such was the
pure delight of the adventure.

 "This is the dining-room; this is the sitting-room;
this is the receiving-room; this,
now prepare—this is Mrs. Darling's own
room!"

 Up went the light; the rose-paper walls,
the rose-chintz dumpy chairs, the silver-laden
dressing-table, the pink and white draped
bed, leaped into sight. Tibbie stood still,
open-lipped.

 "Ain't it handsome?" asked Sally, with
the pride of indirectly belonging to such
things. "Come along, I'm going to wash
your hands in Mrs. Darling's basin."

 She drew Tibbie, who gazed backward
over her shoulder, into the little alcove where
the marble wash-stand was, and turned on
stiff jets of hot and cold water together. At
the sweet odor of the soap tablet pushed
under her nose, Tibbie's attention was won
to the operations of washing and wiping.

 "But where is there a hundred of any thing?"
she asked, faintly, looking all
about.

 "Oh, this ain't it yet! This is only like
the outside entry. Now, Miss Tibbs, what
kind of scent will you have on your hands?"

 "Oh, Sal!"

 "Shall it be Violet, or Russian Empress,
or—what's this other—Lilass Blank? or the
anatomizer played over them like the garden-hose?"

 They unstopped the bottles in turn, and
drew up out of them great, noisy, luxurious
breaths. "This, Sally, this," said Tibbie at
the one with the double name like a person.
Sally poured a drop in her little rough, red
hands, and she danced as she rubbed them
together.

 "Why are the little scissors crooked?" she
asked, busily picking up and putting down
things one after the other. "What for is
the fluting-irons? What for is the butter in
the little chiny jar? What's the flour for in
the silver box? Oh, what's this? Oh, Sal,
what's that?"

 Sally picked up the powder-puff and gave her little friend, who drew back startled and
coughing, a dusty dab with it on each cheek.
"It's to make you pale," she said. "It ain't
fashionable to be red." She applied the puff
to her own cheeks as well. The two stood
gazing in silent interest at themselves in the
mirror, and gradually broke into smiles at
the incongruous reflection. Sally suddenly
bent one cheek, hitched up one shoulder, and
brushed half her face clean; then did the
same by the other cheek with her other
shoulder. Tibbie, who had watched her,
aped her movement faithfully. They looked
at themselves again, and Tibbie remarked,
"But I ain't red, anyhow."

 "Law! that you ain't! When are you
going to begin to get some fat on your
bones, Tibbie, or to grow?"

 "I don't know. Who's the gentleman,
Sal, in the pretty frame?"

 "That's Mrs.'s husband. He ain't been
living some time."

 "Oh, he isn't living. Listen, listen, Sally!
What's that noise I keep hearing? I've
heard it ever since we came."

  Sally listened. "That? That's Jetty. It's
a little bit of a dog, up at the top of the
house."

 "Oh, a little bit of a dog! Why does he
bark all the time?"

 "I guess Mrs. Bonnet shut him up there
alone in the dark till she came back from
gadding with Miss Pittock."

 "Couldn't we get him, Sally? I hate to
hear him. I want to see him awfully."

 "All right. You wait here. But don't
you hurt anything, or I'll skin you, sure, like
I told Miss Catherine. And whatever you
do, don't you go into the little room till I
come back."

 "Is the hundred there?"

 "Yes, it's there."

 Tibbie, left alone, looked at the half-open
door a minute, then turned away from it: all
was so interesting, anyhow, she could wait
with grace. With the palm of her hand,
which she frequently stopped to smell, she
stroked the fine linen pillows on the bed,
and the white bear rugs on the floor, and the
curtains: everything felt so soft. She ex amined
the features of the Rev. Dorel Goodhue
with approbation, proposing to ask Sally
whether she knew him.

 The bark came nearer and nearer; when
the door opened, in tumbled a small silky
ball of black dog, who almost turned himself
inside out in his delight at being in
human company again. He ran floppily
about and about the floor, in his conscious,
cringing, graceful way, waving his tail round
and round, tossing back his long silk ears to
bark and bark.

 At last the girls between them had him
caught. He was squeezed tight in Tibbie's
arms, where he wriggled and twitched, covering
her cheeks and ears with rapid dog-kisses,
interspersed still with rapturous
barks. "Oh, oh!" cried Tibbie, trying vainly
to hold him still long enough to get a
good kiss at him. "Isn't he soft? Isn't
he sweet? And he has a yellow ribbon.
Oh, do keep quiet, doggie dear—you
tickle!"

 "I don't think we will bother any more
about seeing the hundred," said Sally, a feigned coldness in her tone, and stood aloof
watching child and dog.

 "I had forgotten, honest, Sally."

 "Put him down and come on, then."

 "Mayn't I hold him and come too?"

 "No; for when you see 'em, you'll drop
him so quick you'll like as not break his
legs."

 "All right. Down, Jetty! Down, sir!
Come along, Jetty; come right along, dear!"

 "Wait a minute. I'll go in first and turn
up the light. When I sing out, you come
on."

 She went ahead, and Jetty precipitated
himself at her heels. Tibbie stooped with
anxious inducing noises, and "Come back,
sir! Come back!"

 "Ready!" shouted Sally.

 Tibbie made a bound for the door, but at
a step's distance was overcome by a curious
timidity, and instead of bolting in, pulled
the door towards her tremulously, and pushed
aside the lace hanging with a cold hand.

 There lay the hundred, all on a couch under
the gas-light, arranged as in a show -window,
propped by means of silk cushions
so as to form a solid sloping bank—the
hundred beautiful dolls.

 "Well, ma'am?" asked Sally, expectantly.

 Tibbie said nothing, but looked at them
vaguely, full of constraint.

 "Well, I never!" said Sally. "Don't you
like 'em? What on earth did you expect,
child? Well, I never! Well, if it don't beat
all! Why, when I was a young one—Why,
Tibbie girl—don't you think they are lovely ?"

 "Yes," she whispered, moving her head
slowly up and down, then letting it hang.

 "Aw, come out of that," said Sally, understanding.
"Come, let's look at 'em one by
one, taking all our time. Come to Sally,
darling, and don't feel bad. We'll have lots
of fun."

 She took the not unwilling Tibbie by the
hand, and led her nearer the banked splendor.

 The dolls were all of a size, and, undressed,
would with difficulty have been told apart,
except, perhaps, by their little mothers. All were very blond and wide-eyed and bow-lipped;
all, though dressed like little ladies,
had the chubby hands of infants; and their
boots were painted trimly on with black,
and their garters with blue. But how to
render the coquettish fashionableness with
which these wax-complexioned darlings were
tricked out! all equally in silks and satins
and velvets and lace, so that there could be
no jealousies; all with hats of like beauty
and stylishness.

 Sally seated herself on the floor beside the
low couch, and pulled Tibbie down into her
lap, who drew up Jetty into hers. Tibbie
had recovered the power to speak, but was
still unduly sober and husky.

 "I had almost guessed it, you know," she
said, "when you said like angels with hats
on. But I couldn't think there would be a
hundred unless it was a store. What has
the lady so many for?"

 "Bless your heart! They ain't for herself!
They are for orphans in a school that
a minister-cousin of hers is superintendent
of. She has been over a month making these clothes. Every Wednesday she would
give a tea party, and a lot of ladies come
and sit stitching and snipping and buzzing
over the dolls' clothes the blessed afternoon.
And I washed the tea things after
them all!"

 "They are for the orphans. Are there a
hundred orphans?"

 "I guess likely."

 "Suppose, Sally—suppose there were only
ninety-nine, and some girl got two!"

 "Well, we two have got a hundred for to-night,
Tibbie, so let's play, and glad enough
we've got our mothers. Look, this is the
way you must hold them to be sure of not
crumpling anything."

 She slipped her hand deftly under a doll's
petticoats, and they peeped discreetly at the
dainty under-clothes, crisp and snowy, more
lace than linen.

 "My soul and body! Did you ever see
the like!" exclaimed Sally, spurring on Tibbie's
enthusiasm by the tone of her voice,
making the wonder more, to fill her little
friend's soul to intoxication. Tibbie easily responded. She fairly rocked herself to and
fro with delight.

 "And not a pin among 'em," sighed Sally.
"All pearl buttons and silk tying-strings and
silver hooks and eyes; and, mercy on my
soul! a little bit of a pocket in every dress,
with its little bit of a lace pocket-handkerchief
inside. D'you see that, Tibbie? And
not two alike!"

 "Oh, but there are some 'most alike!" said
the quick-eyed Tibbie; "only, scattered far
apart. There are three with the little rose-bud
silk, and here's more than one with the
speckled muslin. Perhaps those will be given
to sisters."

 "Come on, Tibbie; let's choose the one
we would choose to get, if we was to get
one given us. Now, I would like that one
in red velvet. It's just so dressy, ain't it,
with the gold braid sewed down in a pattern
round the bottom. Which would you
take?"

 "I should like the one all in white. She
must be a bride; see, she has a wreath and
veil and necklace. I should like her the very best. But right after that, if I could
have two, I should like this other in the
shade-hat with the forget-me-nots, and
forget-me-nots dotted all over her dress.
And, see! the sky-blue hair-ribbon. If I
could just have three of them, then I would
take this one too, with the black lace shawl
over her head fastened with roses instead of a
hat. She has such a lovely face! And after
her I would choose this one in green—or
this one in pink; no, this one here, Sally,
just look—this one in green and pink. And
you, if you could have more than one, which
would you choose, after the red one?"

 "Well, I guess I'd choose this one in
white."

 "Oh no, Sally; don't you remember?
That is the bride, the one I said the very
first. You can have all the others, Sally
dear, except the bride. But let's see, perhaps
there are two brides. Yes!—no!—that
is just a little girl in white, without a wreath.
Should you like her as well? I was the first
to say the bride, you know."

 "Law! I wouldn't have wanted her if I had known she was a bride! I take this
one, Tibbie—this one with the feathers in
her hat. Ain't she the gay girl, in red and
green plaid! And this purple silk one, and
this red and white stripe, and this—"

 "Wait! That's enough, Sally; that makes
four for you. It's my turn now. If I could
have five, I should take one of the rose-bud
ones—no, two of them, so's to play I had
twins. Say, Sally, let's choose one apiece—first
you one, then me one, till we've chosen
them all up, and got fifty apiece. Your turn."

 They chose and chose, pointing each time,
and detailing the costume of the chosen one
aloud with the greatest enjoyment.

 Jetty had laid himself down beside them,
stretched his silky length, his nose between
his paws. He was very tired. Perhaps
among the things his great moist eyes were
wondering about was the reason of this fatigue
in his vocal chords.

 "For my forty-fifth one," said Sally, placing
her forefinger pensively against the side
of her nose, "I choose her—her with the little
black velvets run all through."

  "Taken already," said Tibbie, promptly.

 "Then her over there, with the short puffy
sleeves."

 "Taken!"

 "She taken too? Well, then, her in the
pink Mother Hubbard with the little knitting-bag
on her arm."

 "Taken, Sally! Can't you remember anything?
Those belong to me; I chose them
long ago. These are the only not taken
ones; here and here and here and here and
here and here and—"

 "Aw, you're a great girl!" cried Sally,
suddenly throwing her arms around Tibbie
and casting herself backward on the floor
with her, where they tumbled and rolled,
laughing, Jetty jumping about on top of
them, barking hoarsely in a frenzy of fun.

 "Oh, Tibbie, ain't we having a time of it?"

 And Tibbie almost shouted, "Yes!—ain't
we having a time of it!"

 "Ain't this a night?"

 "Oh yes!—ain't it a night!"

 Sally tickled and poked her affectionately;
and she tried to tickle Sally, and laughed till she was almost hysterical, and never remembered
who she was, or thought of anything
outside this little room, but was filled with a
sense of the crazy deliciousness of the moment.

 At last, weak with laughter, she disentangled
herself from the still panting and
laughing Sally on the floor, and insisted on
returning to the business of the distribution.
She felt in the mood to be very funny. She
jerked herself up and down and all about in
a senseless sort of way.

 "Here, Sally, now stop laughing and let's
finish. It was your turn. You'd best take
that one; she looks more as if she might be
a little girl of yours, her cheeks are so red—red
as a great big cabbage!" This remark
seemed to Tibbie so inexpressibly humorous
that she laughed again till she nearly cried.

 "Well, it's sure none of 'em has legs to
make 'em look like children of yours," retorted
Sally; and that seemed a greater joke
still. With a foal's action, Tibbie flung out
the thin black legs with the awkward boots
at the ends of them, and dropped to the floor squirming and laughing. Sally caught
her suddenly again, and cast herself backward
with her as before, in a gale of mirth.

 There they were frolicking, when the peal
of a bell rang brightly across their giggles.

 Sally sat up instantly, and all in Mrs.
Darling's house was for a long moment still
as the very grave, for Sally had instinctively
clapped her hand over Jetty's ready
muzzle.

 "Murder!" whispered Sally, solemnly, at
last.

 "What is it?" breathed Tibbie in her ear.

 "Was it the front door or the back door?"
asked Sally.

 "I dun'no', Sally."

 Sally had picked herself up, and was stroking
down her things.

 Tibbie stood beside her, looking up in her
face, her own a trifle pale.

 Sally's irresolution lasted only a second.
She cast an eye on the dolls, saw that they
were very nearly as she had found them,
and turned down the light. She looked
about Mrs. Darling's room to see that all was as usual, and turned down the lights
there too, after glancing at the clock.

 "It ain't late," she murmured. "It ain't
a bit later than I supposed. It can't be her!
It might be Mrs. Bonnet, though, getting
home before Catherine, who's got the key.
I shouldn't want her to catch you here for
the whole world. Look here, Tibbie. You
stand in here till I find out who it is, and if
it's Mrs. Bonnet, you'll have to stay hidden
till I find a good chance to come and smuggle
you down."

 Tibbie waited in the farthest corner of the
hall closet, holding her breath, conscious of
nothing at first but excitement and fear of
she did not know quite what. After a little,
the thought drifted across her fervent hope
for present safety, that though she got well
out of this scrape, she would probably never
see those radiant dollies again, her own half
or Sally's.

 She heard a whiffling and scratching at
the closet door. Here was Jetty, dear Jetty,
whose actions would surely betray her to
Mrs. Bonnet when she came that way. Tib bie
whispered: "Go right away, Jetty.
There's no one in this closet; go right
away!" and pressed backward to the wall,
among the water-proofs, feeling like a little
criminal with the police on her track.

 "Tibbie!" came Sally's voice from the
foot of the stairs: it sounded perfectly calm,
and pleasant with a sort of company pleasantness.
"It's all right. It's just a friend
dropped in for a moment. You can go in
again and play a little longer. Turn up the
light carefully. But remember what I told
you."

 Tibbie instantly forgot all her fears. She
came out and picked up Jetty; she kissed
him, explaining why she had told him to
go away. The doggie seemed to bear no
malice.

 Tibbie tiptoed into the doll-room, and established
herself on her knees before the
dolls, happier than before, with a profounder
happiness, in a stiller, almost devotional
mood. It was so different being alone with
them, having them quite to herself, to play
with in her own way. She took up the bride with a reverent hand, and after long
contemplating her, very seriously, tenderly
kissed her. Then, touching them as if they
had been snow-flakes almost, she moved the
impressive little persons about, until her
fifty were on one side and Sally's on the
other.

 "I can't play they're a family," she reflected;
"they are too many all the same
age, and all girls. I will play they are a
hundred girls in an orphan asylum—a very
rich orphan asylum—and that I am the superintendent.
To-morrow I am going to give
each a beautiful doll for a Christmas present.
This little girl's name is Rosa. That
one is Nelly. That one is Katy. That one
is Sue." She named every one, passing
through the list of such names as Golden-locks,
Cherrylips, Diamondeyes, to end with
such invented ones as Kirry, Mirry, Dirry,
Birry. They seemed so much completer with
names. Tibbie would say, "Miss Snowdrop!"
And Miss Snowdrop, with Tibbie's assistance,
would rise, answering, "Yes, ma'am."
"Spell knot." "N—O—T!" "Not at all, my dear. Sit down again, my dear. Miss
Lily; stand up, miss, and see if you can do
any better this morning."

 Suddenly, after having taken the asylum
through a day's exercises, Tibbie tired of
being the superintendent. She craved a relation
more intimate, more affectionate, with
the dollies. She did not believe a superintendent
would have kissed and fondled them
as she longed to do. She selected a dozen
or so, to play they were her children. She
gave them their supper; she washed them
and made them say their prayers. She told
them it was bedtime, and she would now
rock them to sleep. She turned down the
light, to make all very real, and drawing out
a low rocking-chair that seemed made for
her purpose, seated herself in it with two
dolls on each arm, the rest made as comfortable
as possible on her lap; for not one
of them, after being included in the family,
could, of course, be left out of the rocking.
She rocked gently, now hushing, now
singing "Bye-low-low-baby," her maternal
heart swollen very large. In time, one of the daughters became fractious and restless;
she had to have medicine, and the rocking
for her sake had to become almost violent.
Nothing would soothe her but that the chair
should rock backward and forward to the
very tip ends of its rockers. This had its
good effect at last; all the dolls were fast
asleep, and the mother, her duty done, composed
herself to take a well-earned rest too.
This thought was no doubt suggested to
Tibbie by the fact that she was really getting
sleepy. It was long past her bedtime.

 She was not far from napping when she
became aware of Sally saying: "Lively, Tibbie!
Miss Catherine has got back. We
must be packing off home. I declare I lost
sight of the time. There's just no one like a
fireman to be entertaining, I declare. Mrs.
Bonnet won't be long coming now."

 She turned up the light, and saw the dolls
so disarranged.

 Tibbie was rubbing her eyes.

 "Law!" said Sally, a little blankly. "Do
you suppose we can get them to look as
they did? I hope t' Heaven she didn't know which went next to which. Do you remember,
Tibbie, where each belonged?"

 "Yes. The bride went here. The rose-buds
here. The purple and gray here. I
can put them all back, every one."

 "Oh, we're all right!" said Sally, cheerfully
again. "No one'll ever know in the
world they've been disturbed."

 She had drawn off to get the general effect,
and compare it with the earlier image
in her brain, when she made a dive for one
of the dolls, the last one, that the sleepy
Tibbie had handed her up off the floor.

 "Tibbie!" she said, in a ghastly whisper,
"look at its head!"

 Something had happened to it, certainly.
Its pink-and-white face was pushed in; it
looked very much as if a chair-rocker had
gone over it. Tibbie looked at it, not understanding
at all.

 "Oh, Tibbie!" groaned Sally, "now what'll
we do!"

 "I didn't do it," said Tibbie, lifting a pale
face with perfectly truthful eyes. "I was
just as careful! She was one of my daugh ters;
I had her in my lap rocking her to
sleep with the others; she must have slipped
off my lap—there were too many for one
lap, I guess—but I didn't step on her.
Sure, Sally—sure as I live, I didn't step on
her!"

 "Oh, law! You must have rocked on
her. Oh, Tibbie, what'll I do!"

 She picked up the doll to examine it, but
saw at once that the little face could not be
made right again.

 Tibbie watched her without a word; her
voice seemed to have sunk far below reach.

 Sally moved the dolls about tentatively,
so that ninety-nine should cover the same
space as a hundred. Certainly at first
glance the one she held would never be
missed. "But what's the good?" she said,
throwing it down. "They'll count them,
and there'll be the mischief of a fuss. Oh,
Tibbie"—and she had reached the end of
her good-nature—"why did I ever think of
bringing you here? Now look at all the
trouble you've brought on me, when I thought
you'd be so careful! And I told you and told you till I was hoarse. And here you've
ruined all!"

 Tibbie's eyes could not bear to meet Sally's.
She stood with her hands behind her,
speechless and motionless, in the middle of
the floor.

 "I declare I don't know what to do!" Sally
exclaimed, dropping her arms and sitting
down before the wreck. "I wish I'd never
seen 'em! I wish there'd never been any
Christmas! Oh, it's a great job, this! Tibbie,
you've done for me this time!"

 At this moment Miss Catherine came in
to hurry them.

 "She's broken one of them!" blurted out
Sally.

 "You don't mean it!"

 "Yes, she has!"

 "Let me see it. Oh, you wicked child!
She's smashed its face right in! Now who
ever heard of such naughtiness?"

 Tibbie twisted about ever so little, to get
her back turned towards the two.

 "She didn't do it out of naughtiness at
all, Miss Catherine. She's as good a child as ever lived!" At that Tibbie's shoulders gave
a little convulsive heave. "It was an accident
entirely. But that's just as bad for
me. I suppose I shall have to say it was
me did it."

 "And then they'll say what was I doing
while the kitchen help was poking about in
the Mrs.'s chamber. No; you don't get me
into trouble, Sally Bean! You'd much better
say how it was—how that you asked me
if you just might bring a little girl to look,
and I said you might, out of pure good-nature,
being Christmas is rightly for children,
and I've a softness for them. And
while we was both in the kitchen, she slipped
away from us and came here and done it
before we knew. And the child herself will
say that it was so. You'll be packed off
dead sure out of this place if you let on you
meddled with them yourself. She won't
have her things meddled with—There
goes the bell. There comes that old cat
Bonnet."

 She hurried off to open.

 "What's the matter?" said Mrs. Bonnet, elevating her eyebrows as she appeared at
the door and looked into the room she had
expected to find dark and still. She held a
paper bag; she spoke with an impediment
and a breath of peppermint. Her cheek-bones
and the end of her nose were brilliant
pink with the cold. "What child is that?"

 Miss Catherine was behind Mrs. Bonnet.
"It happened this way, Mrs. Bonnet," she
began, and told the story with a little tactful
adaptation to the intelligence of her audience,
ending, "And now, Mrs. Bonnet, what's
to be done?"

 "Oh, you wicked little brat!" said Mrs.
Bonnet. "I just want to get hold of you
and shake you!"

 She made a snatch at Tibbie, who instinctively
got beyond her clutch, and turning
scared eyes towards Sally, said, just audibly,
"I want to go home; I want to go
home."

 "It don't seem possible," said Mrs. Bonnet,
bitterly, "that I can't run out a minute
just to do an errand for Mrs. Darling herself—to
get a spool of feather-stitching silk—but things like this has to happen. Catherine,
I thought you, at least, was a responsible
person, and here you has to go and—"

 "Mrs. Bonnet," Catherine interrupted, "you
just let that alone! Don't you try none of
that with me! I went out of an errand
every bit as much as you did. I went out
to make sure the ice-cream would be sent
in good season for Christmas dinner, I did.
Now I don't get dragged into this mess one
bit more than you do!"

 Mrs. Bonnet looked at her with a poison-green
eye. She seemed to be repressing
what was a trifle difficult to keep the upper
hand of.

 "Well," she exclaimed at last, "Mrs. Darling
will be here in a minute, and then we
shall all see what we shall see. Lord, ain't
that woman been cross to-day, and fussy!
'Tain't as if she was like other people—a
little bit sensible, and could take some little
few things into consideration, and remember
we are all human flesh and blood. Not
much! She don't consider nothing, nor nobody,
nor feelings, nor circumstances! She just makes things fly! Things has to go her
way, every time!"

 "I want to go home," cried Tibbie, pathetically,
and looked towards Sally now
with a trembling face.

 "No, you sha'n't go home," said Bonnet,
uglily. "You shall stay right here and take
the blame you deserve, after spoiling the
face of that handsome doll. What do you
mean by it, you little brat, you little gutter
imp?"

 "You let her alone, Mrs. Bonnet," said
Sally, with a boldness that had never before
characterized her relations with that lady.
"Don't you talk to her like that! Any one
can see she's as sorry as sorry can be for
what she's done, and all the trouble she's
got us into—"

 "And what does that help, I'd like to
know? The doll is broke, ain't it? And
some one of us is going to catch it, however
things go. You're a lucky girl, I say, if you
don't lose your place. Some one of us is
going to, I can easy foretell."

 "I ain't going to lose my place," said Miss Catherine, firmly; and with a lifted chin was
leaving to lay off her things, when the cook's
nice copper-saucepan face was pushed a little
inside the door.

 "What's the matter?" she asked, cheerily,
and stepped in. Her high-colored shawl
was pinned on her breast with a big brooch;
her bonnet-strings were nearly lost in her
fat chin. "What's it all about? Whose
nice little girl is this?"

 Gradually she got the whole story, and
going straight to Tibbie lifted her miserable
little face, saying: "Don't you feel bad one
bit, darlin'! It was all an accident, and it's
no good crying over spilt milk. And if Mrs.
Darling gets mad at you, she ain't the real
lady I take her for. Why, I gave my Clary
a new doll to-night, and it's ready for a
new head this minute. And did I stop
to rear and tear about it? Not a bit of it.
Why, bless you, she didn't go for to do it!
What child smashes a doll a purpose? You're
a pretty set, the whole gang of you, to pitch
into a mite like this!"

 Tibbie by this time was freely weeping, and Sally and the cook together were trying
to comfort and silence her.

 "I've a great mind to stay here myself and
stand up for her, yer pack of old maids, the
lot of yer!" said the cook, looking hard at
Mrs. Bonnet, who had reappeared without
her hat and coat.

 "You will oblige me, Mrs. MacGrath, by
doing nothing of the sort," said Mrs. Bonnet.
"We've no need to have a whole scene
from the drama. You've no business on this
floor anyhow, and I must insist on your keeping
yourself in your own quarters."

 "And I'll take my own time, yer born
Britisher," said Mrs. MacGrath. Then putting
her arm around Tibbie: "Well, Tibbie
dear, you can be sure of this: however
bad this seems, it'll soon be over. And if
Mrs. Darling does scold, it'll soon be over
too. It'll all be looking different to you in
the morning. However things goes, you'll
soon be forgetting all about it. And to-morrow
is Christmas Day, that our own dear
Lord was born on, and I'll bake you a little
cake and send it to you by Sally."

  "But Sally's going to be sent away,"
sobbed Tibbie.

 "So she might be, but I feel it in my little
toe that she ain't going to be."

 "Well, and if I am, I am, and there an
end," said Sally, bravely. "But I don't see
why she can't take the price of the doll out
of my wages and let me stay."

 "I think you'll find," said Mrs. Bonnet,
"that it ain't most particularly the cost of
the doll gets you into trouble—There she
comes this minute!"

 The door-bell had rung. Profound silence
reigned above, while all listened. Tibbie
stopped crying.

 "Good-night," came Mrs. Darling's sweet
voice, presently, floating up from the foot of
the stairs.

 "Good-night," came the Rev. Dorel Goodhue's.

 There was a rustle of silken skirts.

 "Oh, Cousin Cynthia!"

 "Yes?"

 "At ten, did you say—or half past?"

 "I said ten— or half past. Good-night."

  More rustling of skirts; then,

 "Oh, Cousin Dorel—"

 "Yes?" from the foot of the stairs.

 "It doesn't matter—what we spoke about,
you know, unless perfectly convenient."

 "Oh, but it will be convenient, perfectly.
Good-night. Sleep well."

 "You too. Pleasant dreams. Good-night."

 "Good-night."

 The rustling drew nearer, and Mrs. Darling
stood in the doorway, looking with a sort
of absent-minded astonishment at the assemblage
in her room.

 The violets were quite dead on her white
bosom; her hair was beginning to come
loose, and stood out in golden wisps about
her flushed face. She looked very sweet
and soft and shiny-eyed and pleasant altogether.

 "What is it?" she asked; and as Jetty
was evoluting and clamoring about her feet
she picked him up and kissed him like a
mother. "Has anything happened? What
is everybody doing up here? Whose little girl is this sitting up so late? They used to
tell me I should never grow, my dear, if I
sat up so late—"

 "This is what it is, ma'am," began Mrs.
Bonnet; and she told her arrangement of
the story, uttering her words as a mowing-machine
cuts weeds.

 Mrs. Darling abstractedly took the rocking-chair;
as she listened, the pleasant, happy
look forsook her face.

 "Oh, cut it short!" she interrupted, sharply.
"What you have to tell is that the
child there has broken one of the dolls, isn't
it?"

 There was an assenting mutter from Mrs.
Bonnet.

 "And you've kept her here, when she
ought to have been in bed these hours, to
bear the first beauty of my displeasure—"

 Mrs. Darling had said so much in a hard
voice, with an appearance of cold anger;
here her voice suddenly died, and she burst
out crying like a vexed, injured child. "I declare it is too bad!" she sobbed, quite
reckless of making a spectacle of herself, while all looked on and listened in consternation—"I
declare it is too bad! It's no use!
It doesn't matter what I do—it is always
the same! It is always taken for granted I
will conduct myself like a beast. Who can
wonder, after that, if I do? Here I find
them, pale as sheets, the five of them, shaking
in their boots because a forlorn little
child has broken a miserable doll. And what is it supposed I shall do about it? Didn't I
dress the hundred of them for children, and
little poor children too? And I must have
known they would get broken, of course. Why did I dress them? What did I spend
months dressing them for? Solely for show ,
they think—not for any charity, any kindness,
any love of children, or anything in the world but to make an effect on an occasion,
I suppose—to make myself a merit with the
parson, perhaps!" Here her crying seemed
to become less of anger and nervousness, and
more of sorrow; one would have thought
her heart-broken. "Oh, it is too bad! One
would imagine I never said a decent thing,
or did a kind act, to any one. And Heaven knows it is not for lack of trying to change.
But no one sees the difference! I am treated
like a vixen and a terror. All the people
about me hate and fear and deceive me! A
proof of it to-night! Oh, the lesson ! Oh, I
wasn't meant for this! I wasn't meant for
it! When I remember last Sunday's sermon,
and how straight to my heart it went—oh,
I am a fool to cry! Come here to me,
dear child. What is your name? What?
A little louder! What did you say? Tibbie!
Oh, what a nice, funny name!" Mrs.
Darling smiled through her tears, pathetically
hiccoughing and sighing while she spoke.
" You didn't think I was going to scold you,
did you, dear? Of course not! It was an
accident; I understand all about it. I used
to break my dolls' heads frequently, I remember
very well—"

 Mrs. Darling had put her arm endearingly
around Tibbie, and tried to make the
child's head easy on her shoulder. But poor
Tibbie's muscles could not relax; her stiff
little face rested uncomfortably, without
pressing, upon its warm alabaster prop. "Let us see, dear, now, what we can do to make
us both feel happier. I dressed all those
dolls for little children I am not acquainted
with at all. Which of them should you like
the very best? Which should you like for
your very own?"

 Tibbie could neither make herself move
nor speak; but the tail of her eye travelled
towards the dolls.

 "The bride!" Sally took the liberty of
saying, beaming as she came to Tibbie's
aid.

 "The bride? Which one is that? That
one? Of course!" Mrs. Darling reached
for the resplendent favorite and placed her
in Tibbie's hands. "There, my dear."

 Tibbie took the doll loosely, without
breath of thanks; but while Mrs. Darling reviewed
the dolls, her hand went out involuntarily
towards the broken one. Mrs. Darling
saw it. "Of course," she said—"of
course, you would want that poor dollie to
nurse back to health. Now, dear, isn't there one more you would like?"

 At this Tibbie's confusion seemed likely to overwhelm and swamp her. "I'll choose
one for you," said Mrs. Darling, "and you
shall call her Cynthia, after me. How would
you like that? Suppose we say this one,
with the forget-me-nots? She looks a little
like me, doesn't she, with her hair parted in
the middle? Her frock is made of a piece of
one of my own, and that blue is my favorite
color. There, Tibbie, now you have two
whole dollies and part of another. You
must run right home to bed. A Merry
Christmas to you, dear child. I am very
happy to have made your acquaintance."

 The exuberant Sally talked like a clock
gone mad all the way home through the
clear wintry night; and since she felt inclined
to conversation, it was well she could
keep one up alone, for Tibbie, who trotted
beside her, holding fast her dolls, did not utter
a single word.