THE CRIPPLE

 The following adventure happened to me about 1882. I had just taken the
      train and settled down in a corner, hoping that I should be left alone,
      when the door suddenly opened again and I heard a voice say: “Take
      care, monsieur, we are just at a crossing; the step is very high.”

 Another voice answered: “That's all right, Laurent, I have a firm
      hold on the handle.”

 Then a head appeared, and two hands seized the leather straps hanging on
      either side of the door and slowly pulled up an enormous body, whose feet
      striking on the step, sounded like two canes. When the man had hoisted his
      torso into the compartment I noticed, at the loose edge of his trousers,
      the end of a wooden leg, which was soon followed by its mate. A head
      appeared behind this traveller and asked; “Are you all right,
      monsieur?”

 “Yes, my boy.”

 “Then here are your packages and crutches.”

 And a servant, who looked like an old soldier, climbed in, carrying in his
      arms a stack of bundles wrapped in black and yellow papers and carefully
      tied; he placed one after the other in the net over his master's head.
      Then he said: “There, monsieur, that is all. There are five of them—the
      candy, the doll the drum, the gun, and the pate de foies gras.”

 “Very well, my boy.”

 “Thank you, Laurent; good health!”

 The man closed the door and walked away, and I looked at my neighbor. He
      was about thirty-five, although his hair was almost white; he wore the
      ribbon of the Legion of Honor; he had a heavy mustache and was quite
      stout, with the stoutness of a strong and active man who is kept
      motionless on account of some infirmity. He wiped his brow, sighed, and,
      looking me full in the face, he asked: “Does smoking annoy you,
      monsieur?”

 “No, monsieur.”

 Surely I knew that eye, that voice, that face. But when and where had I
      seen them? I had certainly met that man, spoken to him, shaken his hand.
      That was a long, long time ago. It was lost in the haze wherein the mind
      seems to feel around blindly for memories and pursues them like fleeing
      phantoms without being able to seize them. He, too, was observing me,
      staring me out of countenance, with the persistence of a man who remembers
      slightly but not completely. Our eyes, embarrassed by this persistent
      contact, turned away; then, after a few minutes, drawn together again by
      the obscure and tenacious will of working memory, they met once more, and
      I said: “Monsieur, instead of staring at each other for an hour or
      so, would it not be better to try to discover where we have known each
      other?”

 My neighbor answered graciously: “You are quite right, monsieur.”

 I named myself: “I am Henri Bonclair, a magistrate.”

 He hesitated for a few minutes; then, with the vague look and voice which
      accompany great mental tension, he said: “Oh, I remember perfectly.
      I met you twelve years ago, before the war, at the Poincels!”

 “Yes, monsieur. Ah! Ah! You are Lieutenant Revaliere?”

 “Yes. I was Captain Revaliere even up to the time when I lost my
      feet —both of them together from one cannon ball.”

 Now that we knew each other's identity we looked at each other again. I
      remembered perfectly the handsome, slender youth who led the cotillons
      with such frenzied agility and gracefulness that he had been nicknamed
      “the fury.” Going back into the dim, distant past, I recalled
      a story which I had heard and forgotten, one of those stories to which one
      listens but forgets, and which leave but a faint impression upon the
      memory.

 There was something about love in it. Little by little the shadows cleared
      up, and the face of a young girl appeared before my eyes. Then her name
      struck me with the force of an explosion: Mademoiselle de Mandel. I
      remembered everything now. It was indeed a love story, but quite
      commonplace. The young girl loved this young man, and when I had met them
      there was already talk of the approaching wedding. The youth seemed to be
      very much in love, very happy.

 I raised my eye to the net, where all the packages which had been brought
      in by the servant were trembling from the motion of the train, and the
      voice of the servant came back to me, as if he had just finished speaking.
      He had said: “There, monsieur, that is all. There are five of them:
      the candy, the doll, the drum, the gun, and the pate de foies gras.”

 Then, in a second, a whole romance unfolded itself in my head. It was like
      all those which I had already read, where the young lady married
      notwithstanding the catastrophe, whether physical or financial; therefore,
      this officer who had been maimed in the war had returned, after the
      campaign, to the young girl who had given him her promise, and she had
      kept her word.

 I considered that very beautiful, but simple, just as one, considers
      simple all devotions and climaxes in books or in plays. It always seems,
      when one reads or listens to these stories of magnanimity, that one could
      sacrifice one's self with enthusiastic pleasure and overwhelming joy. But
      the following day, when an unfortunate friend comes to borrow some money,
      there is a strange revulsion of feeling.

 But, suddenly, another supposition, less poetic and more realistic,
      replaced the first one. Perhaps he had married before the war, before this
      frightful accident, and she, in despair and resignation, had been forced
      to receive, care for, cheer, and support this husband, who had departed, a
      handsome man, and had returned without his feet, a frightful wreck, forced
      into immobility, powerless anger, and fatal obesity.

 Was he happy or in torture? I was seized with an irresistible desire to
      know his story, or, at least, the principal points, which would permit me
      to guess that which he could not or would not tell me. Still thinking the
      matter over, I began talking to him. We had exchanged a few commonplace
      words; and I raised my eyes to the net, and thought: “He must have
      three children: the bonbons are for his wife, the doll for his little
      girl, the drum and the gun for his sons, and this pate de foies gras for
      himself.”

 Suddenly I asked him: “Are you a father, monsieur?”

 He answered: “No, monsieur.”

 I suddenly felt confused, as if I had been guilty of some breach of
      etiquette, and I continued: “I beg your pardon. I had thought that
      you were when I heard your servant speaking about the toys. One listens
      and draws conclusions unconsciously.”

 He smiled and then murmured: “No, I am not even married. I am still
      at the preliminary stage.”

 I pretended suddenly to remember, and said:

 “Oh! that's true! When I knew you, you were engaged to Mademoiselle
      de Mandel, I believe.”

 “Yes, monsieur, your memory is excellent.”

 I grew very bold and added: “I also seem to remember hearing that
      Mademoiselle de Mandel married Monsieur—Monsieur—”

 He calmly mentioned the name: “Monsieur de Fleurel.”

 “Yes, that's it! I remember it was on that occasion that I heard of
      your wound.”

 I looked him full in the face, and he blushed. His full face, which was
      already red from the oversupply of blood, turned crimson. He answered
      quickly, with a sudden ardor of a man who is pleading a cause which is
      lost in his mind and in his heart, but which he does not wish to admit.

 “It is wrong, monsieur, to couple my name with that of Madame de
      Fleurel. When I returned from the war-without my feet, alas! I never would
      have permitted her to become my wife. Was it possible? When one marries,
      monsieur, it is not in order to parade one's generosity; it is in order to
      live every day, every hour, every minute, every second beside a man; and
      if this man is disfigured, as I am, it is a death sentence to marry him!
      Oh, I understand, I admire all sacrifices and devotions when they have a
      limit, but I do not admit that a woman should give up her whole life, all
      joy, all her dreams, in order to satisfy the admiration of the gallery.
      When I hear, on the floor of my room, the tapping of my wooden legs and of
      my crutches, I grow angry enough to strangle my servant. Do you think that
      I would permit a woman to do what I myself am unable to tolerate? And,
      then, do you think that my stumps are pretty?”

 He was silent. What could I say? He certainly was right. Could I blame
      her, hold her in contempt, even say that she was wrong? No. However, the
      end which conformed to the rule, to the truth, did not satisfy my poetic
      appetite. These heroic deeds demand a beautiful sacrifice, which seemed to
      be lacking, and I felt a certain disappointment. I suddenly asked: “Has
      Madame de Fleurel any children?”

 “Yes, one girl and two boys. It is for them that I am bringing these
      toys. She and her husband are very kind to me.”

 The train was going up the incline to Saint-Germain. It passed through the
      tunnels, entered the station, and stopped. I was about to offer my arm to
      the wounded officer, in order to help him descend, when two hands were
      stretched up to him through the open door.

 “Hello! my dear Revaliere!”

 “Ah! Hello, Fleurel!”

 Standing behind the man, the woman, still beautiful, was smiling and
      waving her hands to him. A little girl, standing beside her, was jumping
      for joy, and two young boys were eagerly watching the drum and the gun,
      which were passing from the car into their father's hands.

 When the cripple was on the ground, all the children kissed him. Then they
      set off, the little girl holding in her hand the small varnished rung of a
      crutch, just as she might walk beside her big friend and hold his thumb.