A large

level meadow bit squarely into the edge of the woodland. The
centre of the space enclosed on three sides by trees as by a wall was
an empty stretch of turf, browned by much traffic and littered with
scraps of paper which are the inevitable deposit of any congregation
of human beings. The left-hand side was occupied by a neat row of
slate-grey motor-lorries. The right showed an equally neat array of
tents and sheds over which hung a faint film of wood-smoke. At regular
intervals along the third side a series of placards was affixed to the
tree-trunks, each exhibiting a conspicuous number like stands at a
cattle-show. The stands, however, were vacant. In front of the sheds
on the right stood a little group of men in khaki, and near them two
men in shirt and trousers were busy at a portable forge whence issued
the film of smoke. The hammer-strokes of those men were visible and
evidently delivered with force, yet, curiously enough, at a little
distance they appeared to fall in silence.

 [This description must not be taken as representing the vastly
developed organization of the flying services to-day (1917). The
incident is, of course, quite imaginary. The story was written some
time before the war.]

 A vast noise that came from beyond the wood swallowed all other sounds.
The drowsy air of the hot noon trembled with concussions so rapid that
they merged into one deep-throated, deafening roar. The field was the
aeroplane depot of the Army. The roar was the roar of the battle which
that Army was fighting.

 Despite the apparent nearness of the strife, there was little of
military spectacle about the depot. At the corner of the wood a
squadron of dismounted troopers stood by their horses. A little further
back, along the rough lane which led into the field, a gun mounted on
a motor-lorry stuck its nose perpendicularly into the air. Three or
four men sat on the lorry in easy attitudes and one stood up, glasses
to his eyes, scanning the blue sky. The group of khaki-clad men paid no
more attention to them than they did to the battle-din which swelled
over the woodland. They were absorbed in contemplation of a large
curious-looking bush which stood a few yards in front of them.

 A closer look at that bush revealed that it was artificial. It was,
in fact, a largish shed whose walls and roof were composed of green
boughs. Men were busy within it and a shaft of sunlight that penetrated
the leaves fell in a patch of gold upon some yellow fabric. The object
thus illuminated was the wing of a small, single-seater monoplane.

 A little apart from the other members of the group a slightly-built
young fellow, garbed for the ascent, stood in earnest colloquy with
a tall, lean staff-officer. Behind them the others conversed in
tones just loud enough to be heard in the incessant roar. They were
discussing the disaster of the dawn.

  The blow of the enemy had been terrible. The Army had been smitten in
its eyes. It was now only a blind giant striking at an adversary whose
vision was unimpaired. The entire air-squadron of the force, rising
from its harbourage at the break of day, had been suddenly assailed by
a superior fleet that dropped out of the clouds upon them. Watchers
from below had seen short lightning flashes stabbing the grey mist, had
heard a sharp outbreak of firing, had seen phantom aeroplanes rising,
circling, swooping, colliding in thin cloud, had seen the machines
one after another tumble and dive, lapped by flames, in a sickening
rush to earth. Not theirs alone now lay, crumpled and contorted masses
of scrap-iron, over the countryside, but of theirs none had escaped.
The rear of their battle-line was a picture that his scouts could
report upon at leisure. What lay at the rear of his? None knew, but
the vehemence of his fire told that he was pressing his advantage. The
presentiment of defeat lay heavy on the little group as they disputed
on the blame to be allotted for the catastrophe.

 The staff-officer tugged impatiently at his little grey moustache.
His teeth champed at a bit of grass that was no longer there. In his
anxiety he had not noticed that it had fallen from his mouth.

 "I wish those chaps would be quick," he said. "The General is most
anxious to have that flank cleared up."

 "They are being quick, sir," replied the aviator, with a smile. His
keen, thoughtful face showed that he was not indifferent to the urgency
of the situation, but his calm mouth told of nerves that nothing
could shake. Within that green bower lay the one hope of the Army—its
lightest and swiftest monoplane, damaged in landing the day before, now
being repaired as fast as skilled hands could do the work.

 "You quite understand, don't you?" said the staff-officer, repeating
himself for the tenth time. "The General thinks that a movement is in
progress against our right flank. A screen is extending there which
he cannot penetrate. If they are moving a large force round us he can
detach the Sixth Division to hold them, and with a massed attack he'll
crumple up their left centre which they must have weakened. He'll
repeat Salamanca, that's what he said—I don't know what happened at
Salamanca," he concluded irritably, "but anyway he daren't move a man
till he's sure. I wish your chaps would get finished." He looked up
into the air above him with a circling glance. "How many have they got
now?"

 "Four, I make it," replied the aviator equably. "They had ten
yesterday. Five were smashed up this morning. One got winged an hour
ago."

 At that moment a dirty and perspiring man came out of the bower and,
approaching them, saluted.

 "Ready, sir," he said.

 "Right. Get her out, then," said the aviator. "No! Wait!" His gaze had
gone up to the sky. "There he comes again."

 "D—n!" said the staff-officer, staring upwards also.

 High in the air an aeroplane was coming towards them, parallel with
their own battle-line. In the swollen roar of the conflict, the hum of
its engine was inaudible. It seemed to drift onward leisurely enough,
sinking slightly as it approached but well above effective gun-fire.
Tiny white dots of smoke that sprang into the air below it were a proof
of that. Slowly, as though making a careful examination, it passed
overhead. Suddenly it turned and dropped still lower, coming back
towards them. Something had awakened suspicion in the men up there.
The reason for that artificial bush became apparent. The staff-officer
gazed at the aeroplane, now rapidly enlarging itself in his vision, as
though mesmerised. Anxiety for that precious machine under the leaves
paralysed him.

 The aviator had turned to look at the gun on the motor-lorry. The group
about it sat in quiet expectation. Its muzzle moved gently, came a
little out of the perpendicular. The aviator looked up again at the
machine drifting overhead. He heard a sudden heavy detonation on his
left and almost simultaneously he saw a bright flash appear in the
dark body of the aeroplane. The machine lurched, toppled, dived, and,
falling rapidly, turned bottom up in the air. A couple of dark figures
fell out, raced it in its rush to the ground. A long minute later it
struck the centre of the field. Flames burst out of a shapeless wreck.
The aviator did not heed it. He ran towards the bower.

 "Quick!" he cried. "Get her out!"

 Torn down by twenty pairs of eager hands, the bower fell apart. The
little monoplane was run out, lay like a dragon-fly resting lightly on
the earth.

  The aviator climbed into his seat between the wings, sent a glance from
the compass to the map held open in its frame, saw that the message
bags were ready to his hand, tested the strap of the field-glasses
hanging from his neck with a sharp tug. He was ready. In front of him
two soldier mechanics stood holding the long blades of the tractor
screw. Over there, beyond the wood, the uproar of the battle mounted
in violent paroxysms each of which surpassed its predecessor. The tall
staff-officer approached and held out his hand.

 "Good-bye—and good luck," he said, "and for Heaven's sake let us
know what's happening on that flank. Don't wait to get back—drop the
message." He looked at his watch. "It's now twelve—if we don't know
something within an hour it's all over with our chance. Can you manage
it?"

 "I'll try, sir," said the aviator, checking the hour with a glance at
his own clock.

 The staff-officer turned an anxious pair of eyes upward for a swift
look into the sky, seemed about to make a remark and then obviously
refrained. "Good luck!" was all he could trust himself to say.

 The aviator smiled and nodded cheerfully. Then he ejaculated a sharp
order to the mechanics. They flung the blades of the tractor into
revolution. The machine, emitting a series of riflelike reports,
commenced to run across the field. The tractor became a blur.

 The woodland appeared to rush towards him and then suddenly dropped
away in a diagonal underneath. His eyes on the dial of the barograph,
the aviator warped the machine round and set the planes to an acute
angle of elevation. Confident in the power of his engine he mounted
steeply in a spiral. The record on the dial rose with every second—100
feet—200—400. In two and a half minutes he had risen 1000 feet. He
cast a swift look below him. He was still over the field, had a glimpse
of a group of tiny figures clustered in front of the sheds. The rim of
the horizon came up, the earth fell into a great concavity. It was like
looking down into a vast bowl containing woods and fields and flattened
hills. From the bowl clouds of yellow-grey dust arose like smoke and
out of the dust came a multiplicity of heavy crashes that detached
themselves from a background of unceasing clatter mingled with one long
rolling thunderous roar.

 It was but a hasty glance the aviator threw below him. Still mounting,
his eyes searched the blue air on a level with himself, above him. The
enemy's three machines where were they? Far off to his left a dark
speck hung in the sky. He watched it intently as his machine climbed.
It was a biplane. It appeared to be drifting away from him, engaged in
a reconnaissance of their left flank, he decided. At any rate as yet
they seemed not to have perceived him. The others were not visible. He
shot a glance at the barograph—3000 feet. He had been climbing for
five and a half minutes. Almost immediately he saw a trail of smoke
ascending with incredible velocity in the air a little below him to his
right. The trail finished abruptly in a vivid flash, a burst of white
smoke and a violent detonation. The monoplane rocked from side to side
in the sudden disturbance of the air but continued to climb. A second
later a similar trial ended in an explosion at a level with him on his
left. He saw a gash appear suddenly in the fabric of one of his planes,
and the needle of the barograph switch back 50 feet with a jerk. Then
the altitude record mounted again steadily—3250—3500—4000. The noise
of the battle diminished as he rose, dropped to a point where it was
all but obscured by the roar of his own engine. Below him the smoke
trails leaped up at him and burst viciously in vain.

 Four thousand five hundred—he glanced at the hostile biplane to his
left and saw that it hung larger in the sky. Even in the moment for
which he watched it it dilated. It was approaching at top speed. He was
discovered, pursued. Instantly he turned off to his right and raced
across the battlefield in the direction of the threatening flank. As he
did so, he perceived another aeroplane rising from the enemy's lines.
It climbed swiftly in bold swoops and then shot off towards him in a
great upward slant. Two! Where was the third? He failed to discover it
and held on his course.

 His direction was at an angle across the battlefield which took
him towards the enemy's left flank rather than to their own right.
As he sped over it, he looked down upon a broad miles-long belt of
yellow-grey dust that rose raggedly into the air, and was spotted with
an innumerable multitude of white puffs that renewed themselves as fast
as they were dissipated. In many places these puffs congregated thickly
and, as they broke, linked themselves with others until they floated
like little narrow clouds in the air below him. As he looked down into
the great concavity of the earth he seemed to be over some enormous
smoking fissure in a crater whose circumference was the horizon. The
rumble and roar which ascended from it assisted the illusion. Tiny
sparks of flame darted and flickered in the fumes of that inferno, and
here and there flashed a number of glittering points, the reflection of
the sun from advancing bayonets. To distinguish men was impossible, but
in occasional rifts in the dust curtain he could make out brown patches
of varying size, and, over to his left, on the enemy's side, similar
though darker patches.

 He could permit himself no sustained scrutiny of the scene below him
for the management of the machine began to claim all his attention.
Even at that great height above the battle, the air on that windless
day, shaken and riven by the unceasing concussions of the massed
artillery of two armies, was full of flaws. The needle of the barograph
flickered, oscillated violently in leaps to and fro. The monoplane,
tilted dangerously, now on one side, now on the other, in eddies of the
tortured atmosphere, slid downward dizzily ere it could be brought up
to climb a bank of air. It needed strong arms at the controls, a quick
brain and nerves of perfect tone to keep her upon the appointed course.
Glancing back, the aviator saw that the flight of the nearer of the two
hostile machines, the one which had risen from the enemy's lines and
was now approaching him on his left, was similarly erratic.

  An overpowering heat, as from a vast open furnace, arose from the
battlefield below. It was the heat from thousands of explosions,
renewed incessantly and sustained over many hours. Stifling gusts
blew on to the aviator's face, carrying with them a peculiar smell of
burning cloth. With these gusts the roar of the battle seemed to leap
up to him. The air was oppressive despite the speed at which he clove
it, highly charged with electricity, heavy with the menace of a storm.
Yet no cloud broke the monotony of the blue sky. The machine raced
onward, was now crossing the battle lines of the enemy's left flank.

 Suddenly he heard a faint rattle behind him. The hostile aeroplane,
realising that it had failed to head him off, was firing furiously.
He felt the machine shiver under a quick succession of hard raps.
Instinctively, he pressed upon his accelerator, and, with a touch on
the warping lever, the machine shot forward at terrific speed. The raps
ceased. He turned his head and saw his enemy rapidly diminish in size
behind him, saw that the other aeroplane, the one he had seen first,
had fallen far in rear. A confident smile came on the tight lips of the
aviator. He could outpace them both.

 He was now above the enemy's left flank—a little to the right of the
spot that the Commander-in-Chief had designated as the object of his
possible attack. The scout switched off his engine and commenced to
drop along a slant towards the centre of the enemy's position. With the
sudden silencing of his engine the roar of the battle came up at him
in a crash and stayed there. He glanced at the time—12.13—and gave
himself a limit of two minutes in which to reconnoitre. For the moment
he ignored his adversaries in the air. As he gazed down through the
transparent panel between his feet, his glasses to his eyes, the ground
that slid away under him appeared to be subjected to a constantly
increasing magnification. Fields, houses, roads grew momentarily more
distinct. Without taking his gaze from the scene below the aviator
checked the drop of his machine and drove forward. Quickly his trained
eye took in the details of the ground, the position and approximate
numbers of the men that he saw massed in dark patches here and there.
Over a long stretch of the position the enemy's line was obviously
thinner. The country behind it was empty of troops. The General's
intuition was correct. The enemy had weakened his left centre. Point
Number One was settled. Now what had he done with the troops he had
withdrawn?

 As the aviator turned his machine to reconnoitre in the new direction,
he was surprised to see the hostile aeroplane between him and his
objective. Absorbed in his scrutiny of the ground, he had all but
forgotten it. It was slightly higher than himself and about half a mile
distant. He could not carry out his reconnaissance without coming into
fatal proximity to its machine-gun, and he could not return directly
over the battle lines without passing between the crossed fires of this
and the other machine now drawing close. Even as the realisation of his
position flashed on him, a narrow slit appeared in one of his planes.
The nearer of his foes was already firing.

  Quicker than thought he turned and raced off into the country behind
the battle. A plan, the only one with a possible chance of success,
had sprung into his mind. He had no intention of failing in this
all-important mission of his. But first he must get out of the range
of that deadly machine-gun. He dared not rise across it at barely
half a mile range. At full speed he raced away, inclining his machine
downwards. The hostile aeroplane followed, depressing her course
likewise, to get him into the zone of her fire or to force him to the
ground. The scout's speedometer registered 100 miles an hour. Beneath
his feet he had glimpses of trees and houses and fields flitting past
in a stream where salient features prolonged themselves into long
blurred lines. They looked oddly large after the altitude at which he
had been contemplating them. He threw a glance over his shoulder at his
pursuers. The nearer was now rather more than a mile away. The other
had apparently given up the chase. The clock showed 12.15; in less
than two minutes he distanced his adversary by nearly a mile—he had
therefore a superiority in speed of about twenty-five miles per hour.
He did not consciously deduce this result. His trained mind working
with incomputable swiftness under the stimulant of imminent danger
gave the result like an intuition. His plan presented itself to him
completely formed. At this distance he could risk the danger zone of
the machine-gun for the few moments he would be in it. He swerved his
machine upward and climbed steeply. In a minute the other aeroplane was
level with him; beneath him. The scout rose along a slant, slowing
down his engine until his pace was almost equal to that of the machine
below. Both rose steadily.

 The battle din ceased altogether behind him. He flew in the seeming
silence of the roar of his own engine and the deeper bass of the
other machine, just audible, below. He bent forward over his map and
picked out his approximate position. Then he noted a village some
twenty miles in rear of the battle, and drew an imaginary line from it
south-westward to the enemy's left flank. That village was to serve
as turning-point. He should reach it, he calculated, at 12.27. The
barograph indicated 3000 feet and still rising.

 12.25—the scout bent his eyes on the ground. A couple of minutes later
a handful of white cottages flitted past as he looked down between his
feet. His enemy could not be seen. The body of the monoplane hid him as
he flew below and slightly in rear, but the roar of his engine, louder
than the scout's own, could just be heard.

 Now was the time—the scout turned off abruptly at a tangent along the
line he had marked out for himself and drove his engine at its fastest.
The speedometer needle oscillated over 101 miles an hour. He calculated
that he had approximately twenty miles to go ere he reached the patch
of country he wished to explore. He should reach the commencement of
the enemy's left flank at 12.39, and be able to spend six minutes in
flying over five miles of ground and then have a couple of minutes in
hand. To the trained intellect behind his keen eyes six minutes were
amply sufficient. Having run along the left flank it was simplicity
itself to turn to the right and glide down into his own lines. There
seemed nothing to stop him. The pursuing machine was being quickly left
behind. The slow biplane now far off to his right could not possibly
arrive in time. The sky in front was clear of any menace.

 Again he began to draw close to the great belt of dust-cloud which
stretched out to his right and again the din of battle began to
overpower the roar of his engine. Directly ahead was a dark mass of
woodland. It was from thence that the enemy's screen around the right
flank of the scout's army commenced. He swerved slightly to the left,
behind it. The hour was a second or two over 12.38.

 Below him was a network of country roads, and from four strands of that
network which ran in an approximately parallel direction, coincident
with his own course, arose long dense clouds of dust. It was the dust
of marching columns. The scout shot a glance back at his pursuer,
assured himself that it was five or six miles in rear, and slowed down
his engine as he entered upon a long, gradual descent over the route of
those marching columns.

 For mile after mile on those four roads the dust cloud continued.
The scout checked off the distances by villages on his map. Adding
the length of the four roads together he estimated that about twenty
miles of road was occupied by the marching force. It was a whole army
corps, then, that was endeavouring to turn their flank. In the open
fields between the roads he could distinguish small bodies of cavalry
advancing in the same direction. The mass on the roads was certainly
infantry, broken here and there by long columns of artillery. The low
dense clouds of dust kicked up by the tramp of thousands of feet were
cut into short sections where the guns and wagons of the batteries
rolled onward. From a rough calculation of those intersected clouds
he decided that four brigades of artillery were on the march. He had
descended now to 2000 feet, and he kept at that height as he roared
over the plodding columns. Behind him his pursuer had lessened the
distance between them, was getting dangerously close. The biplane on
his right was also approaching. Nevertheless, the scout held on his way
comfortably. There was nothing to prevent him carrying out his plan.

 He was already well beyond the prolongation of his own army's line of
battle when he reached the head of the marching infantry. Contrary to
his expectation, however, they were not wheeling to the right. They
continued straight on, marching away from the battle, it seemed. The
scout was puzzled for a moment. He searched the ground in front of him
for more troops. It was apparently empty. Then, from a fold in the
landscape considerably ahead, he saw another, smaller dust cloud arise.
At his highest speed he raced towards it, overtook it in less than
a minute. Below him a cavalry brigade, accompanied by two batteries
of horse artillery, was trotting sharply forward. What was their
objective? He scanned the country in front of them intently. Some three
miles ahead of the cavalry was a wooded hill. He picked it out on the
map, saw instantly that it commanded the main avenue of retreat of his
army. The enemy's plan was clear. He would occupy it with the cavalry
and the two batteries until the infantry got up. The threatened army,
then attacked in flank and rear, would find its retreat cut off. If
the scout's commander was aiming to repeat Salamanca, the enemy was
endeavouring to repeat Jackson's march at Chancellorsville. The danger
was pressing. The scout reckoned that within half an hour the hostile
cavalry would be in possession of that hill. In an hour the infantry
would begin to come up in support. Where was the Sixth Division that he
had been told would check the flank movement of the enemy? He searched
for it, saw a brown mass about two miles from the wooded hill. Its
cavalry might get there in a quarter of an hour by a rapid dash. He had
then a quarter of an hour to deliver his message and get the division
set in motion. The hour was 12.46.

 He wheeled towards his own line and commenced a downward glide at a
gentle angle. Then, taking his hands from the controls, he rapidly
wrote down a clear concise statement of the case in his report book.
Even if he did not reach earth, his message might. He glanced up to
see that his indefatigable pursuer was now swooping down to cut him
off. Moments were precious. He ripped out the page, thrust it into the
weighted message bag and tied it up. Then he started his engine again,
aiming for the brown mass of the Sixth Division.

 Something made him look to his left. He was startled to see a large
biplane rushing up at him from the direction of the wooded hill. It
had evidently descended to effect some repairs and had lain hidden
far behind his own line. He recognised it at once. It was by far the
swiftest and most powerful machine possessed by either army. On his
present course a few seconds would bring him within range of its
machine-gun. To his right the other machine was rapidly growing larger.
In front, the slow biplane had sailed over the battle lines, was
heading straight for him. The three machines were converging on him.
The scout saw that he would either be forced away from the battle or
destroyed, his message undelivered in either case.

 He swerved his machine and climbed. If only he could get above the
Sixth Division for an instant, he would throw over the message-bag,
chance its being picked up. To do that it was necessary to get higher.
On his present or a lower level he would be riddled with machine-gun
bullets. His adversaries on either hand rose also, but he got the lead
of them.

 As they rose in circles he watched for his opportunity when both should
be turned away from him. The moment came. He seized it and dived,
with his engine running at full speed. The earth rushed upwards, its
features enlarging themselves as though they swelled to burst. The
brown mass of the Sixth Division spaced itself out into battalions,
squadrons, below him, in front. They were exactly underneath. He flung
out the message-bag, with something like a prayer in his heart. On
either hand his adversaries were swooping down upon him. He thought
he heard the rattle of their machine-guns, but in the roar of his own
engine he could not be sure.

 Down and still down the three machines rushed. Suddenly he noticed the
slow biplane in front—on an even lower level than himself. It was very
close. He saw the pale dot of the face of the man behind the gun. If
he swerved he would be under its fire in a moment. If he kept on his
course he must crash into it. His decision was instant, instinctive. He
held on. One thought dominated him as he dived straight at it. Had his
message been picked up? If not——? He saw the gleaming backs of the
outstretched plane almost under him. He set his teeth for the impact. A
second more—the wide stretch of yellow canvas suddenly jerked to the
left and crumpled in a blinding flash. He had not touched. He swerved
to the right with all his force in the tiniest fraction of a second and
shot past something that fell, flaming.... A shell from below had hit
the biplane at the moment almost of collision.

 He had a confused sense of other shells exploding in the air. A battery
was seizing its chance to get the enemy's aircraft in a cluster,
regardless of the danger to him. He continued his rush downward,
feeling rather than knowing that the other two machines were in close
pursuit. If he could only be certain that his message had been picked
up!

 He flung a glance back over his shoulder. The powerful biplane that had
risen from behind the wooded hill was close upon him. Why did they not
fire? He felt himself a target, was surprised not to see the gash of
bullets on his machine. The explana tion flashed on him. The gun had
jammed. The biplane came at him as though it were itself a projectile.
Its crew had desperately resolved to ram him, to sacrifice themselves
rather than to allow him to bring his precious information to the
ground. They were almost upon him. He swerved and dodged. The biplane
shot past.

 Immediately he saw the other machine close upon him, saw a spurt of
fire from the muzzle of its gun. He dived. A belt of trees rushed
up at him, fearfully close. Their dark foliage seemed to break into
puffs of black smoke over his eyes. He swerved instinctively, saw a
meadow burst through the dark smoke, fly skyward in a mist of blood.
With a last desperate effort he banked. His hands slid from the
controls—everything swam. He was vaguely conscious of a heavy impact
from underneath——

 Something was burning his throat—he opened his eyes, gazed into a
man's face close to his. Consciousness came back in a rush. He pushed
away the brandy flask that was being pressed against his teeth and
struggled to his feet. Strong arms supported him. Several men were
round him, looking at him. He was close to a road, and along that road
he thought he saw batteries of artillery galloping at full speed.
He was not certain of their reality. They passed like phantoms in
his vision, wavering up and down. He wanted to do something—to ask
something—what was it? He all but fixed the elusive thought—and lost
it. His hand felt for the duplicate report-book in his pocket—his
desire was connected with that. The report-book had gone. Then a fragment of his intangible preoccupation floated, visible as it were,
in his brain. He clutched at it.

 "What—what guns are those?" he asked thickly.

 "Divisional artillery—Sixth Division," came the reply. "All right. We
got your message."

 The scout put his hand to his brow and then, dropping it, stared at it
stupidly. It was red.

 "All right," said the voice. "You're hit—but not seriously. Lie down."

 The scout collected all his faculties in an attempt to bring out one
more thought from the obscurity which filled his brain.

 "What—what time—now?" he asked.

 "Just one o'clock." The voice appeared to recede to an enormous
distance, although he felt the speaker's face close to his. "They're in
time—don't worry. Lie down. The ambulances are coming in a minute or
two."

 The scout stood obstinately.

 "The—the other—machines?"

 "Bagged 'em both. You came down beautifully—like a kite." The voice
sounded from worlds away.

 The aviator put his hand to his head.

 "In time!" He breathed the words rather than spoke them. They came like
the sigh of a man utterly spent.

 The man who had been supporting him turned round with a jump and
focussed his binoculars on the wooded hill. A crowd of white puffs was
breaking out in the air above it.

 The scout, left unattended, swayed with hands stretched out like a
blind man. The field whirled round and round suddenly with a fearful
rapidity and then rushed up and struck him.

 The man with the binoculars ignored his prone body.

 "Beat 'em on the post!" he shouted in joyous excitement. "By the Lord!
Beat 'em on the post!"