THE BEGGAR
    

      He had seen better days, despite his present misery and infirmities.
    

      At the age of fifteen both his legs had been crushed by a carriage on the
      Varville highway. From that time forth he begged, dragging himself along
      the roads and through the farmyards, supported by crutches which forced
      his shoulders up to his ears. His head looked as if it were squeezed in
      between two mountains.
    

      A foundling, picked up out of a ditch by the priest of Les Billettes on
      the eve of All Saints' Day and baptized, for that reason, Nicholas
      Toussaint, reared by charity, utterly without education, crippled in
      consequence of having drunk several glasses of brandy given him by the
      baker (such a funny story!) and a vagabond all his life afterward—the
      only thing he knew how to do was to hold out his hand for alms.
    

      At one time the Baroness d'Avary allowed him to sleep in a kind of recess
      spread with straw, close to the poultry yard in the farm adjoining the
      chateau, and if he was in great need he was sure of getting a glass of
      cider and a crust of bread in the kitchen. Moreover, the old lady often
      threw him a few pennies from her window. But she was dead now.
    

      In the villages people gave him scarcely anything—he was too well
      known. Everybody had grown tired of seeing him, day after day for forty
      years, dragging his deformed and tattered person from door to door on his
      wooden crutches. But he could not make up his mind to go elsewhere,
      because he knew no place on earth but this particular corner of the
      country, these three or four villages where he had spent the whole of his
      miserable existence. He had limited his begging operations and would not
      for worlds have passed his accustomed bounds.
    

      He did not even know whether the world extended for any distance beyond
      the trees which had always bounded his vision. He did not ask himself the
      question. And when the peasants, tired of constantly meeting him in their
      fields or along their lanes, exclaimed: “Why don't you go to other
      villages instead of always limping about here?” he did not answer,
      but slunk away, possessed with a vague dread of the unknown—the
      dread of a poor wretch who fears confusedly a thousand things—new
      faces, taunts, insults, the suspicious glances of people who do not know
      him and the policemen walking in couples on the roads. These last he
      always instinctively avoided, taking refuge in the bushes or behind heaps
      of stones when he saw them coming.
    

      When he perceived them in the distance, 'With uniforms gleaming in the
      sun, he was suddenly possessed with unwonted agility—the agility of
      a wild animal seeking its lair. He threw aside his crutches, fell to the
      ground like a limp rag, made himself as small as possible and crouched
      like a hare under cover, his tattered vestments blending in hue with the
      earth on which he cowered.
    

      He had never had any trouble with the police, but the instinct to avoid
      them was in his blood. He seemed to have inherited it from the parents he
      had never known.
    

      He had no refuge, no roof for his head, no shelter of any kind. In summer
      he slept out of doors and in winter he showed remarkable skill in slipping
      unperceived into barns and stables. He always decamped before his presence
      could be discovered. He knew all the holes through which one could creep
      into farm buildings, and the handling of his crutches having made his arms
      surprisingly muscular he often hauled himself up through sheer strength of
      wrist into hay-lofts, where he sometimes remained for four or five days at
      a time, provided he had collected a sufficient store of food beforehand.
    

      He lived like the beasts of the field. He was in the midst of men, yet
      knew no one, loved no one, exciting in the breasts of the peasants only a
      sort of careless contempt and smoldering hostility. They nicknamed him
      “Bell,” because he hung between his two crutches like a church
      bell between its supports.
    

      For two days he had eaten nothing. No one gave him anything now. Every
      one's patience was exhausted. Women shouted to him from their doorsteps
      when they saw him coming:
    

      “Be off with you, you good-for-nothing vagabond! Why, I gave you a
      piece of bread only three days ago!”
    

      And he turned on his crutches to the next house, where he was received in
      the same fashion.
    

      The women declared to one another as they stood at their doors:
    

      “We can't feed that lazy brute all the year round!”
    

      And yet the “lazy brute” needed food every day.
    

      He had exhausted Saint-Hilaire, Varville and Les Billettes without getting
      a single copper or so much as a dry crust. His only hope was in
      Tournolles, but to reach this place he would have to walk five miles along
      the highroad, and he felt so weary that he could hardly drag himself
      another yard. His stomach and his pocket were equally empty, but he
      started on his way.
    

      It was December and a cold wind blew over the fields and whistled through
      the bare branches of the trees; the clouds careered madly across the
      black, threatening sky. The cripple dragged himself slowly along, raising
      one crutch after the other with a painful effort, propping himself on the
      one distorted leg which remained to him.
    

      Now and then he sat down beside a ditch for a few moments' rest. Hunger
      was gnawing his vitals, and in his confused, slow-working mind he had only
      one idea-to eat-but how this was to be accomplished he did not know. For
      three hours he continued his painful journey. Then at last the sight of
      the trees of the village inspired him with new energy.
    

      The first peasant he met, and of whom he asked alms, replied:
    

      “So it's you again, is it, you old scamp? Shall I never be rid of
      you?”
    

      And “Bell” went on his way. At every door he got nothing but
      hard words. He made the round of the whole village, but received not a
      halfpenny for his pains.
    

      Then he visited the neighboring farms, toiling through the muddy land, so
      exhausted that he could hardly raise his crutches from the ground. He met
      with the same reception everywhere. It was one of those cold, bleak days,
      when the heart is frozen and the temper irritable, and hands do not open
      either to give money or food.
    

      When he had visited all the houses he knew, “Bell” sank down
      in the corner of a ditch running across Chiquet's farmyard. Letting his
      crutches slip to the ground, he remained motionless, tortured by hunger,
      but hardly intelligent enough to realize to the full his unutterable
      misery.
    

      He awaited he knew not what, possessed with that vague hope which persists
      in the human heart in spite of everything. He awaited in the corner of the
      farmyard in the biting December wind, some mysterious aid from Heaven or
      from men, without the least idea whence it was to arrive. A number of
      black hens ran hither and thither, seeking their food in the earth which
      supports all living things. Ever now and then they snapped up in their
      beaks a grain of corn or a tiny insect; then they continued their slow,
      sure search for nutriment.
    

      “Bell” watched them at first without thinking of anything.
      Then a thought occurred rather to his stomach than to his mind—the
      thought that one of those fowls would be good to eat if it were cooked
      over a fire of dead wood.
    

      He did not reflect that he was going to commit a theft. He took up a stone
      which lay within reach, and, being of skillful aim, killed at the first
      shot the fowl nearest to him. The bird fell on its side, flapping its
      wings. The others fled wildly hither and thither, and “Bell,”
      picking up his crutches, limped across to where his victim lay.
    

      Just as he reached the little black body with its crimsoned head he
      received a violent blow in his back which made him let go his hold of his
      crutches and sent him flying ten paces distant. And Farmer Chiquet, beside
      himself with rage, cuffed and kicked the marauder with all the fury of a
      plundered peasant as “Bell” lay defenceless before him.
    

      The farm hands came up also and joined their master in cuffing the lame
      beggar. Then when they were tired of beating him they carried him off and
      shut him up in the woodshed, while they went to fetch the police.
    

      “Bell,” half dead, bleeding and perishing with hunger, lay on
      the floor. Evening came—then night—then dawn. And still he had
      not eaten.
    

      About midday the police arrived. They opened the door of the woodshed with
      the utmost precaution, fearing resistance on the beggar's part, for Farmer
      Chiquet asserted that he had been attacked by him and had had great,
      difficulty in defending himself.
    

      The sergeant cried:
    

      “Come, get up!”
    

      But “Bell” could not move. He did his best to raise himself on
      his crutches, but without success. The police, thinking his weakness
      feigned, pulled him up by main force and set him between the crutches.
    

      Fear seized him—his native fear of a uniform, the fear of the game
      in presence of the sportsman, the fear of a mouse for a cat-and by the
      exercise of almost superhuman effort he succeeded in remaining upright.
    

      “Forward!” said the sergeant. He walked. All the inmates of
      the farm watched his departure. The women shook their fists at him the men
      scoffed at and insulted him. He was taken at last! Good riddance! He went
      off between his two guards. He mustered sufficient energy—the energy
      of despair—to drag himself along until the evening, too dazed to
      know what was happening to him, too frightened to understand.
    

      People whom he met on the road stopped to watch him go by and peasants
      muttered:
    

      “It's some thief or other.”
    

      Toward evening he reached the country town. He had never been so far
      before. He did not realize in the least what he was there for or what was
      to become of him. All the terrible and unexpected events of the last two
      days, all these unfamiliar faces and houses struck dismay into his heart.
    

      He said not a word, having nothing to say because he understood nothing.
      Besides, he had spoken to no one for so many years past that he had almost
      lost the use of his tongue, and his thoughts were too indeterminate to be
      put into words.
    

      He was shut up in the town jail. It did not occur to the police that he
      might need food, and he was left alone until the following day. But when
      in the early morning they came to examine him he was found dead on the
      floor. Such an astonishing thing!