THE FATHER

 I

 He was a clerk in the Bureau of Public Education and lived at Batignolles.
      He took the omnibus to Paris every morning and always sat opposite a girl,
      with whom he fell in love.

 She was employed in a shop and went in at the same time every day. She was
      a little brunette, one of those girls whose eyes are so dark that they
      look like black spots, on a complexion like ivory. He always saw her
      coming at the corner of the same street, and she generally had to run to
      catch the heavy vehicle, and sprang upon the steps before the horses had
      quite stopped. Then she got inside, out of breath, and, sitting down,
      looked round her.

 The first time that he saw her, Francois Tessier liked the face. One
      sometimes meets a woman whom one longs to clasp in one's arms without even
      knowing her. That girl seemed to respond to some chord in his being, to
      that sort of ideal of love which one cherishes in the depths of the heart,
      without knowing it.

 He looked at her intently, not meaning to be rude, and she became
      embarrassed and blushed. He noticed it, and tried to turn away his eyes;
      but he involuntarily fixed them upon her again every moment, although he
      tried to look in another direction; and, in a few days, they seemed to
      know each other without having spoken. He gave up his place to her when
      the omnibus was full, and got outside, though he was very sorry to do it.
      By this time she had got so far as to greet him with a little smile; and,
      although she always dropped her eyes under his looks, which she felt were
      too ardent, yet she did not appear offended at being looked at in such a
      manner.

 They ended by speaking. A kind of rapid friendship had become established
      between them, a daily freemasonry of half an hour, and that was certainly
      one of the most charming half hours in his life to him. He thought of her
      all the rest of the day, saw her image continually during the long office
      hours. He was haunted and bewitched by that floating and yet tenacious
      recollection which the form of a beloved woman leaves in us, and it seemed
      to him that if he could win that little person it would be maddening
      happiness to him, almost above human realization.

 Every morning she now shook hands with him, and he preserved the sense of
      that touch and the recollection of the gentle pressure of her little
      fingers until the next day, and he almost fancied that he preserved the
      imprint on his palm. He anxiously waited for this short omnibus ride,
      while Sundays seemed to him heartbreaking days. However, there was no
      doubt that she loved him, for one Saturday, in spring, she promised to go
      and lunch with him at Maisons-Laffitte the next day.

 II

 She was at the railway station first, which surprised him, but she said:
      “Before going, I want to speak to you. We have twenty minutes, and
      that is more than I shall take for what I have to say.”

 She trembled as she hung on his arm, and looked down, her cheeks pale, as
      she continued: “I do not want you to be deceived in me, and I shall
      not go there with you, unless you promise, unless you swear—not to
      do—not to do anything—that is at all improper.”

 She had suddenly become as red as a poppy, and said no more. He did not
      know what to reply, for he was happy and disappointed at the same time. He
      should love her less, certainly, if he knew that her conduct was light,
      but then it would be so charming, so delicious to have a little
      flirtation.

 As he did not say anything, she began to speak again in an agitated voice
      and with tears in her eyes. “If you do not promise to respect me
      altogether, I shall return home.” And so he squeezed her arm
      tenderly and replied: “I promise, you shall only do what you like.”
      She appeared relieved in mind, and asked, with a smile: “Do you
      really mean it?” And he looked into her eyes and replied: “I
      swear it” “Now you may take the tickets,” she said.

 During the journey they could hardly speak, as the carriage was full, and
      when they reached Maisons-Laffite they went toward the Seine. The sun,
      which shone full on the river, on the leaves and the grass, seemed to be
      reflected in their hearts, and they went, hand in hand, along the bank,
      looking at the shoals of little fish swimming near the bank, and they
      walked on, brimming over with happiness, as if they were walking on air.

 At last she said: “How foolish you must think me!”

 “Why?” he asked. “To come out like this, all alone with
      you.”

 “Certainly not; it is quite natural.” “No, no; it is not
      natural for me —because I do not wish to commit a fault, and yet
      this is how girls fall. But if you only knew how wretched it is, every day
      the same thing, every day in the month and every month in the year. I live
      quite alone with mamma, and as she has had a great deal of trouble, she is
      not very cheerful. I do the best I can, and try to laugh in spite of
      everything, but I do not always succeed. But, all the same, it was wrong
      in me to come, though you, at any rate, will not be sorry.”

 By way of an answer, he kissed her ardently on the ear that was nearest
      him, but she moved from him with an abrupt movement, and, getting suddenly
      angry, exclaimed: “Oh! Monsieur Francois, after what you swore to
      me!” And they went back to Maisons-Laffitte.

 They had lunch at the Petit-Havre, a low house, buried under four enormous
      poplar trees, by the side of the river. The air, the heat, the weak white
      wine and the sensation of being so close together made them silent; their
      faces were flushed and they had a feeling of oppression; but, after the
      coffee, they regained their high spirits, and, having crossed the Seine,
      started off along the bank, toward the village of La Frette. Suddenly he
      asked: “What-is your name?”

 “Louise.”

 “Louise,” he repeated and said nothing more.

 The girl picked daisies and made them into a great bunch, while he sang
      vigorously, as unrestrained as a colt that has been turned into a meadow.
      On their left a vine-covered slope followed the river. Francois stopped
      motionless with astonishment: “Oh, look there!” he said.

 The vines had come to an end, and the whole slope was covered with lilac
      bushes in flower. It was a purple wood! A kind of great carpet of flowers
      stretched over the earth, reaching as far as the village, more than two
      miles off. She also stood, surprised and delighted, and murmured: “Oh!
      how pretty!” And, crossing a meadow, they ran toward that curious
      low hill, which, every year, furnishes all the lilac that is drawn through
      Paris on the carts of the flower venders.

 There was a narrow path beneath the trees, so they took it, and when they
      came to a small clearing, sat down.

 Swarms of flies were buzzing around them and making a continuous, gentle
      sound, and the sun, the bright sun of a perfectly still day, shone over
      the bright slopes and from that forest of blossoms a powerful fragrance
      was borne toward them, a breath of perfume, the breath of the flowers.

 A church clock struck in the distance, and they embraced gently, then,
      without the knowledge of anything but that kiss, lay down on the grass.
      But she soon came to herself with the feeling of a great misfortune, and
      began to cry and sob with grief, with her face buried in her hands.

 He tried to console her, but she wanted to start to return and to go home
      immediately; and she kept saying, as she walked along quickly: “Good
      heavens! good heavens!”

 He said to her: “Louise! Louise! Please let us stop here.” But
      now her cheeks were red and her eyes hollow, and, as soon as they got to
      the railway station in Paris, she left him without even saying good-by.
      III

 When he met her in the omnibus, next day, she appeared to him to be
      changed and thinner, and she said to him: “I want to speak to you;
      we will get down at the Boulevard.”

 As soon as they were on the pavement, she said:

 “We must bid each other good-by; I cannot meet you again.”
      “But why?” he asked. “Because I cannot; I have been
      culpable, and I will not be so again.”

 Then he implored her, tortured by his love, but she replied firmly:
      “No, I cannot, I cannot.” He, however, only grew all the more
      excited and promised to marry her, but she said again: “No,”
      and left him.

 For a week he did not see her. He could not manage to meet her, and, as he
      did not know her address, he thought that he had lost her altogether. On
      the ninth day, however, there was a ring at his bell, and when he opened
      the door, she was there. She threw herself into his arms and did not
      resist any longer, and for three months they were close friends. He was
      beginning to grow tired of her, when she whispered something to him, and
      then he had one idea and wish: to break with her at any price. As,
      however, he could not do that, not knowing how to begin, or what to say,
      full of anxiety through fear of the consequences of his rash indiscretion,
      he took a decisive step: one night he changed his lodgings and
      disappeared.

 The blow was so heavy that she did not look, for the man who had abandoned
      her, but threw herself at her mother's knees and confessed her misfortune,
      and, some months after, gave birth to a boy. IV

 Years passed, and Francois Tessier grew old, without there having been any
      alteration in his life. He led the dull, monotonous life of an office
      clerk, without hope and without expectation. Every day he got up at the
      same time, went through the same streets, went through the same door, past
      the same porter, went into the same office, sat in the same chair, and did
      the same work. He was alone in the world, alone during the day in the
      midst of his different colleagues, and alone at night in his bachelor's
      lodgings, and he laid by a hundred francs a month against old age.

 Every Sunday he went to the Champs-Elysees, to watch the elegant people,
      the carriages and the pretty women, and the next day he used to say to one
      of his colleagues: “The return of the carriages from the Bois du
      Boulogne was very brilliant yesterday.” One fine Sunday morning,
      however, he went into the Parc Monceau, where the mothers and nurses,
      sitting on the sides of the walks, watched the children playing, and
      suddenly Francois Tessier started. A woman passed by, holding two children
      by the hand, a little boy of about ten and a little girl of four. It was
      she!

 He walked another hundred yards anti then fell into a chair, choking with
      emotion. She had not recognized him, and so he came back, wishing to see
      her again. She was sitting down now, and the boy was standing by her side
      very quietly, while the little girl was making sand castles. It was she,
      it was certainly she, but she had the reserved appearance of a lady, was
      dressed simply, and looked self-possessed and dignified. He looked at her
      from a distance, for he did not venture to go near; but the little boy
      raised his head, and Francois Tessier felt himself tremble. It was his own
      son, there could be no doubt of that. And, as he looked at him, he thought
      he could recognize himself as he appeared in an old photograph taken years
      ago. He remained hidden behind a tree, waiting for her to go that he might
      follow her.

 He did not sleep that night. The idea of the child especially tormented
      him. His son! Oh, if he could only have known, have been sure! But what
      could he have done? However, he went to the house where she lived and
      asked about her. He was told that a neighbor, an honorable man of strict
      morals, had been touched by her distress and had married her; he knew the
      fault she had committed and had married her, and had even recognized the
      child, his, Francois Tessier's child, as his own.

 He returned to the Parc Monceau every Sunday, for then he always saw her,
      and each time he was seized with a mad, an irresistible longing to take
      his son into his arms, to cover him with kisses and to steal him, to carry
      him off.

 He suffered horribly in his wretched isolation as an old bachelor, with
      nobody to care for him, and he also suffered atrocious mental torture,
      torn by paternal tenderness springing from remorse, longing and jealousy
      and from that need of loving one's own children which nature has implanted
      in all. At last he determined to make a despairing attempt, and, going up
      to her, as she entered the park, he said, standing in the middle of the
      path, pale and with trembling lips: “You do not recognize me.”
      She raised her eyes, looked at him, uttered an exclamation of horror, of
      terror, and, taking the two children by the hand, she rushed away,
      dragging them after her, while he went home and wept inconsolably.

 Months passed without his seeing her again, but he suffered, day and
      night, for he was a prey to his paternal love. He would gladly have died,
      if he could only have kissed his son; he would have committed murder,
      performed any task, braved any danger, ventured anything. He wrote to her,
      but she did not reply, and, after writing her some twenty letters, he saw
      that there was no hope of altering her determination, and then he formed
      the desperate resolution of writing to her husband, being quite prepared
      to receive a bullet from a revolver, if need be. His letter only consisted
      of a few lines, as follows:

 “Monsieur: You must have a perfect horror of my name, but I am so
      wretched, so overcome by misery that my only hope is in you, and,
      therefore, I venture to request you to grant me an interview of only five
      minutes.

 “I have the honor, etc.”

 The next day he received the reply:

 “Monsieur: I shall expect you to-morrow, Tuesday, at five o'clock.”

 As he went up the staircase, Francois Tessier's heart beat so violently
      that he had to stop several times. There was a dull and violent thumping
      noise in his breast, as of some animal galloping; and he could breathe
      only with difficulty, and had to hold on to the banisters, in order not to
      fall.

 He rang the bell on the third floor, and when a maid servant had opened
      the door, he asked: “Does Monsieur Flamel live here?” “Yes,
      monsieur. Kindly come in.”

 He was shown into the drawing-room; he was alone, and waited, feeling
      bewildered, as in the midst of a catastrophe, until a door opened, and a
      man came in. He was tall, serious and rather stout, and wore a black frock
      coat, and pointed to a chair with his hand. Francois Tessier sat down, and
      then said, with choking breath: “Monsieur—monsieur—I do
      not know whether you know my name—whether you know——”

 Monsieur Flamel interrupted him. “You need not tell it me, monsieur,
      I know it. My wife has spoken to me about you.” He spoke in the
      dignified tone of voice of a good man who wishes to be severe, and with
      the commonplace stateliness of an honorable man, and Francois Tessier
      continued:

 “Well, monsieur, I want to say this: I am dying of grief, of
      remorse, of shame, and I would like once, only once to kiss the child.”

 Monsieur Flamel got up and rang the bell, and when the servant came in, he
      said: “Will you bring Louis here?” When she had gone out, they
      remained face to face, without speaking, as they had nothing more to say
      to one another, and waited. Then, suddenly, a little boy of ten rushed
      into the room and ran up to the man whom he believed to be his father, but
      he stopped when he saw the stranger, and Monsieur Flamel kissed him and
      said: “Now, go and kiss that gentleman, my dear.” And the
      child went up to the stranger and looked at him.

 Francois Tessier had risen. He let his hat fall, and was ready to fall
      himself as he looked at his son, while Monsieur Flamel had turned away,
      from a feeling of delicacy, and was looking out of the window.

 The child waited in surprise; but he picked up the hat and gave it to the
      stranger. Then Francois, taking the child up in his arms, began to kiss
      him wildly all over his face; on his eyes, his cheeks, his mouth, his
      hair; and the youngster, frightened at the shower of kisses, tried to
      avoid them, turned away his head, and pushed away the man's face with his
      little hands. But suddenly Francois Tessier put him down and cried:
      “Good-by! good-by!” And he rushed out of the room as if he had
      been a thief.