THE PENGUINS' ROCK
    

      This is the season for penguins.
    

      From April to the end of May, before the Parisian visitors arrive, one
      sees, all at once, on the little beach at Etretat several old gentlemen,
      booted and belted in shooting costume. They spend four or five days at the
      Hotel Hauville, disappear, and return again three weeks later. Then, after
      a fresh sojourn, they go away altogether.
    

      One sees them again the following spring.
    

      These are the last penguin hunters, what remain of the old set. There were
      about twenty enthusiasts thirty or forty years ago; now there are only a
      few of the enthusiastic sportsmen.
    

      The penguin is a very rare bird of passage, with peculiar habits. It lives
      the greater part of the year in the latitude of Newfoundland and the
      islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon. But in the breeding season a flight of
      emigrants crosses the ocean and comes every year to the same spot to lay
      their eggs, to the Penguins' Rock near Etretat. They are found nowhere
      else, only there. They have always come there, have always been chased
      away, but return again, and will always return. As soon as the young birds
      are grown they all fly away, and disappear for a year.
    

      Why do they not go elsewhere? Why not choose some other spot on the long
      white, unending cliff that extends from the Pas-de-Calais to Havre? What
      force, what invincible instinct, what custom of centuries impels these
      birds to come back to this place? What first migration, what tempest,
      possibly, once cast their ancestors on this rock? And why do the children,
      the grandchildren, all the descendants of the first parents always return
      here?
    

      There are not many of them, a hundred at most, as if one single family,
      maintaining the tradition, made this annual pilgrimage.
    

      And each spring, as soon as the little wandering tribe has taken up its
      abode an the rock, the same sportsmen also reappear in the village. One
      knew them formerly when they were young; now they are old, but constant to
      the regular appointment which they have kept for thirty or forty years.
      They would not miss it for anything in the world.
    

      It was an April evening in one of the later years. Three of the old
      sportsmen had arrived; one was missing—M. d'Arnelles.
    

      He had written to no one, given no account of himself. But he was not
      dead, like so many of the rest; they would have heard of it. At length,
      tired of waiting for him, the other three sat down to table. Dinner was
      almost over when a carriage drove into the yard of the hotel, and the late
      corner presently entered the dining room.
    

      He sat down, in a good humor, rubbing his hands, and ate with zest. When
      one of his comrades remarked with surprise at his being in a frock-coat,
      he replied quietly:
    

      “Yes, I had no time to change my clothes.”
    

      They retired on leaving the table, for they had to set out before daybreak
      in order to take the birds unawares.
    

      There is nothing so pretty as this sport, this early morning expedition.
    

      At three o'clock in the morning the sailors awoke the sportsmen by
      throwing sand against the windows. They were ready in a few minutes and
      went down to the beach. Although it was still dark, the stars had paled a
      little. The sea ground the shingle on the beach. There was such a fresh
      breeze that it made one shiver slightly in spite of one's heavy clothing.
    

      Presently two boats were pushed down the beach, by the sailors, with a
      sound as of tearing cloth, and were floated on the nearest waves. The
      brown sail was hoisted, swelled a little, fluttered, hesitated and
      swelling out again as round as a paunch, carried the boats towards the
      large arched entrance that could be faintly distinguished in the darkness.
    

      The sky became clearer, the shadows seemed to melt away. The coast still
      seemed veiled, the great white coast, perpendicular as a wall.
    

      They passed through the Manne-Porte, an enormous arch beneath which a ship
      could sail; they doubled the promontory of La Courtine, passed the little
      valley of Antifer and the cape of the same name; and suddenly caught sight
      of a beach on which some hundreds of seagulls were perched.
    

      That was the Penguins' Rock. It was just a little protuberance of the
      cliff, and on the narrow ledges of rock the birds' heads might be seen
      watching the boats.
    

      They remained there, motionless, not venturing to fly off as yet. Some of
      them perched on the edges, seated upright, looked almost like bottles, for
      their little legs are so short that when they walk they glide along as if
      they were on rollers. When they start to fly they cannot make a spring and
      let themselves fall like stones almost down to the very men who are
      watching them.
    

      They know their limitation and the danger to which it subjects them, and
      cannot make up their minds to fly away.
    

      But the boatmen begin to shout, beating the sides of the boat with the
      wooden boat pins, and the birds, in affright, fly one by one into space
      until they reach the level of the waves. Then, moving their wings rapidly,
      they scud, scud along until they reach the open sea; if a shower of lead
      does not knock them into the water.
    

      For an hour the firing is kept up, obliging them to give up, one after
      another. Sometimes the mother birds will not leave their nests, and are
      riddled with shot, causing drops of blood to spurt out on the white cliff,
      and the animal dies without having deserted her eggs.
    

      The first day M. d'Arnelles fired at the birds with his habitual zeal; but
      when the party returned toward ten o'clock, beneath a brilliant sun, which
      cast great triangles of light on the white cliffs along the coast he
      appeared a little worried, and absentminded, contrary to his accustomed
      manner.
    

      As soon as they got on shore a kind of servant dressed in black came up to
      him and said something in a low tone. He seemed to reflect, hesitate, and
      then replied:
    

      “No, to-morrow.”
    

      The following day they set out again. This time M, d'Arnelles frequently
      missed his aim, although the birds were close by. His friends teased him,
      asked him if he were in love, if some secret sorrow was troubling his mind
      and heart. At length he confessed.
    

      “Yes, indeed, I have to leave soon, and that annoys me.”
    

      “What, you must leave? And why?”
    

      “Oh, I have some business that calls me back. I cannot stay any
      longer.”
    

      They then talked of other matters.
    

      As soon as breakfast was over the valet in black appeared. M. d'Arnelles
      ordered his carriage, and the man was leaving the room when the three
      sportsmen interfered, insisting, begging, and praying their friend to
      stay. One of them at last said:
    

      “Come now, this cannot be a matter of such importance, for you have
      already waited two days.”
    

      M. d'Arnelles, altogether perplexed, began to think, evidently baffled,
      divided between pleasure and duty, unhappy and disturbed.
    

      After reflecting for some time he stammered:
    

      “The fact is—the fact is—I am not alone here. I have my
      son-in-law.”
    

      There were exclamations and shouts of “Your son-in-law! Where is he?”
    

      He suddenly appeared confused and his face grew red.
    

      “What! do you not know? Why—why—he is in the coach
      house. He is dead.”
    

      They were all silent in amazement.
    

      M. d'Arnelles continued, more and more disturbed:
    

      “I had the misfortune to lose him; and as I was taking the body to
      my house, in Briseville, I came round this way so as not to miss our
      appointment. But you can see that I cannot wait any longer.”
    

      Then one of the sportsmen, bolder than the rest said:
    

      “Well, but—since he is dead—it seems to me that he can
      wait a day longer.”
    

      The others chimed in:
    

      “That cannot be denied.”
    

      M. d'Arnelles appeared to be relieved of a great weight, but a little
      uneasy, nevertheless, he asked:
    

      “But, frankly—do you think—”
    

      The three others, as one man, replied:
    

      “Parbleu! my dear boy, two days more or less can make no difference
      in his present condition.”
    

      And, perfectly calmly, the father-in-law turned to the undertaker's
      assistant, and said:
    

      “Well, then, my friend, it will be the day after tomorrow.”
    







      A FAMILY
    

      I was to see my old friend, Simon Radevin, of whom I had lost sight for
      fifteen years. At one time he was my most intimate friend, the friend who
      knows one's thoughts, with whom one passes long, quiet, happy evenings, to
      whom one tells one's secret love affairs, and who seems to draw out those
      rare, ingenious, delicate thoughts born of that sympathy that gives a
      sense of repose.
    

      For years we had scarcely been separated; we had lived, travelled, thought
      and dreamed together; had liked the same things, had admired the same
      books, understood the same authors, trembled with the same sensations, and
      very often laughed at the same individuals, whom we understood completely
      by merely exchanging a glance.
    

      Then he married. He married, quite suddenly, a little girl from the
      provinces, who had come to Paris in search of a husband. How in the world
      could that little thin, insipidly fair girl, with her weak hands, her
      light, vacant eyes, and her clear, silly voice, who was exactly like a
      hundred thousand marriageable dolls, have picked up that intelligent,
      clever young fellow? Can any one understand these things? No doubt he had
      hoped for happiness, simple, quiet and long-enduring happiness, in the
      arms of a good, tender and faithful woman; he had seen all that in the
      transparent looks of that schoolgirl with light hair.
    

      He had not dreamed of the fact that an active, living and vibrating man
      grows weary of everything as soon as he understands the stupid reality,
      unless, indeed, he becomes so brutalized that he understands nothing
      whatever.
    

      What would he be like when I met him again? Still lively, witty,
      light-hearted and enthusiastic, or in a state of mental torpor induced by
      provincial life? A man may change greatly in the course of fifteen years!
    

      The train stopped at a small station, and as I got out of the carriage, a
      stout, a very stout man with red cheeks and a big stomach rushed up to me
      with open arms, exclaiming: “George!” I embraced him, but I
      had not recognized him, and then I said, in astonishment: “By Jove!
      You have not grown thin!” And he replied with a laugh:
    

      “What did you expect? Good living, a good table and good nights!
      Eating and sleeping, that is my existence!”
    

      I looked at him closely, trying to discover in that broad face the
      features I held so dear. His eyes alone had not changed, but I no longer
      saw the same expression in them, and I said to myself: “If the
      expression be the reflection of the mind, the thoughts in that head are
      not what they used to be formerly; those thoughts which I knew so well.”
    

      Yet his eyes were bright, full of happiness and friendship, but they had
      not that clear, intelligent expression which shows as much as words the
      brightness of the intellect. Suddenly he said:
    

      “Here are my two eldest children.” A girl of fourteen, who was
      almost a woman, and a boy of thirteen, in the dress of a boy from a Lycee,
      came forward in a hesitating and awkward manner, and I said in a low
      voice: “Are they yours?” “Of course they are,” he
      replied, laughing. “How many have you?” “Five! There are
      three more at home.”
    

      He said this in a proud, self-satisfied, almost triumphant manner, and I
      felt profound pity, mingled with a feeling of vague contempt, for this
      vainglorious and simple reproducer of his species.
    

      I got into a carriage which he drove himself, and we set off through the
      town, a dull, sleepy, gloomy town where nothing was moving in the streets
      except a few dogs and two or three maidservants. Here and there a
      shopkeeper, standing at his door, took off his hat, and Simon returned his
      salute and told me the man's name; no doubt to show me that he knew all
      the inhabitants personally, and the thought struck me that he was thinking
      of becoming a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies, that dream of all
      those who bury themselves in the provinces.
    

      We were soon out of the town, and the carriage turned into a garden that
      was an imitation of a park, and stopped in front of a turreted house,
      which tried to look like a chateau.
    

      “That is my den,” said Simon, so that I might compliment him
      on it. “It is charming,” I replied.
    

      A lady appeared on the steps, dressed for company, and with company
      phrases all ready prepared. She was no longer the light-haired, insipid
      girl I had seen in church fifteen years previously, but a stout lady in
      curls and flounces, one of those ladies of uncertain age, without
      intellect, without any of those things that go to make a woman. In short,
      she was a mother, a stout, commonplace mother, a human breeding machine
      which procreates without any other preoccupation but her children and her
      cook-book.
    

      She welcomed me, and I went into the hall, where three children, ranged
      according to their height, seemed set out for review, like firemen before
      a mayor, and I said: “Ah! ah! so there are the others?” Simon,
      radiant with pleasure, introduced them: “Jean, Sophie and Gontran.”
    

      The door of the drawing-room was open. I went in, and in the depths of an
      easy-chair, I saw something trembling, a man, an old, paralyzed man.
      Madame Radevin came forward and said: “This is my grandfather,
      monsieur; he is eighty-seven.” And then she shouted into the shaking
      old man's ears: “This is a friend of Simon's, papa.” The old
      gentleman tried to say “good-day” to me, and he muttered:
      “Oua, oua, oua,” and waved his hand, and I took a seat saying:
      “You are very kind, monsieur.”
    

      Simon had just come in, and he said with a laugh: “So! You have made
      grandpapa's acquaintance. He is a treasure, that old man; he is the
      delight of the children. But he is so greedy that he almost kills himself
      at every meal; you have no idea what he would eat if he were allowed to do
      as he pleased. But you will see, you will see. He looks at all the sweets
      as if they were so many girls. You never saw anything so funny; you will
      see presently.”
    

      I was then shown to my room, to change my dress for dinner, and hearing a
      great clatter behind me on the stairs, I turned round and saw that all the
      children were following me behind their father; to do me honor, no doubt.
    

      My windows looked out across a dreary, interminable plain, an ocean of
      grass, of wheat and of oats, without a clump of trees or any rising
      ground, a striking and melancholy picture of the life which they must be
      leading in that house.
    

      A bell rang; it was for dinner, and I went downstairs. Madame Radevin took
      my arm in a ceremonious manner, and we passed into the dining-room. A
      footman wheeled in the old man in his armchair. He gave a greedy and
      curious look at the dessert, as he turned his shaking head with difficulty
      from one dish to the other.
    

      Simon rubbed his hands: “You will be amused,” he said; and all
      the children understanding that I was going to be indulged with the sight
      of their greedy grandfather, began to laugh, while their mother merely
      smiled and shrugged her shoulders, and Simon, making a speaking trumpet of
      his hands, shouted at the old man: “This evening there is sweet
      creamed rice!” The wrinkled face of the grandfather brightened, and
      he trembled more violently, from head to foot, showing that he had
      understood and was very pleased. The dinner began.
    

      “Just look!” Simon whispered. The old man did not like the
      soup, and refused to eat it; but he was obliged to do it for the good of
      his health, and the footman forced the spoon into his mouth, while the old
      man blew so energetically, so as not to swallow the soup, that it was
      scattered like a spray all over the table and over his neighbors. The
      children writhed with laughter at the spectacle, while their father, who
      was also amused, said: “Is not the old man comical?”
    

      During the whole meal they were taken up solely with him. He devoured the
      dishes on the table with his eyes, and tried to seize them and pull them
      over to him with his trembling hands. They put them almost within his
      reach, to see his useless efforts, his trembling clutches at them, the
      piteous appeal of his whole nature, of his eyes, of his mouth and of his
      nose as he smelt them, and he slobbered on his table napkin with
      eagerness, while uttering inarticulate grunts. And the whole family was
      highly amused at this horrible and grotesque scene.
    

      Then they put a tiny morsel on his plate, and he ate with feverish
      gluttony, in order to get something more as soon as possible, and when the
      sweetened rice was brought in, he nearly had a fit, and groaned with
      greediness, and Gontran called out to him:
    

      “You have eaten too much already; you can have no more.” And
      they pretended not to give him any. Then he began to cry; he cried and
      trembled more violently than ever, while all the children laughed. At
      last, however, they gave him his helping, a very small piece; and as he
      ate the first mouthful, he made a comical noise in his throat, and a
      movement with his neck as ducks do when they swallow too large a morsel,
      and when he had swallowed it, he began to stamp his feet, so as to get
      more.
    

      I was seized with pity for this saddening and ridiculous Tantalus, and
      interposed on his behalf:
    

      “Come, give him a little more rice!” But Simon replied:
      “Oh! no, my dear fellow, if he were to eat too much, it would harm
      him, at his age.”
    

      I held my tongue, and thought over those words. Oh, ethics! Oh, logic! Oh,
      wisdom! At his age! So they deprived him of his only remaining pleasure
      out of regard for his health! His health! What would he do with it, inert
      and trembling wreck that he was? They were taking care of his life, so
      they said. His life? How many days? Ten, twenty, fifty, or a hundred? Why?
      For his own sake? Or to preserve for some time longer the spectacle of his
      impotent greediness in the family.
    

      There was nothing left for him to do in this life, nothing whatever. He
      had one single wish left, one sole pleasure; why not grant him that last
      solace until he died?
    

      After we had played cards for a long time, I went up to my room and to
      bed; I was low-spirited and sad, sad, sad! and I sat at my window. Not a
      sound could be heard outside but the beautiful warbling of a bird in a
      tree, somewhere in the distance. No doubt the bird was singing in a low
      voice during the night, to lull his mate, who was asleep on her eggs. And
      I thought of my poor friend's five children, and pictured him to myself,
      snoring by the side of his ugly wife.
    







      SUICIDES
    

      To Georges Legrand.
    

      Hardly a day goes by without our reading a news item like the following in
      some newspaper:
    

      “On Wednesday night the people living in No. 40 Rue de——-,
      were awakened by two successive shots. The explosions seemed to come from
      the apartment occupied by M. X——. The door was broken in and
      the man was found bathed in his blood, still holding in one hand the
      revolver with which he had taken his life.
    

      “M. X——was fifty-seven years of age, enjoying a
      comfortable income, and had everything necessary to make him happy. No
      cause can be found for his action.”
    

      What terrible grief, what unknown suffering, hidden despair, secret wounds
      drive these presumably happy persons to suicide? We search, we imagine
      tragedies of love, we suspect financial troubles, and, as we never find
      anything definite, we apply to these deaths the word “mystery.”
    

      A letter found on the desk of one of these “suicides without cause,”
      and written during his last night, beside his loaded revolver, has come
      into our hands. We deem it rather interesting. It reveals none of those
      great catastrophes which we always expect to find behind these acts of
      despair; but it shows us the slow succession of the little vexations of
      life, the disintegration of a lonely existence, whose dreams have
      disappeared; it gives the reason for these tragic ends, which only nervous
      and high-strung people can understand.
    

      Here it is:
    

      “It is midnight. When I have finished this letter I shall kill
      myself. Why? I shall attempt to give the reasons, not for those who may
      read these lines, but for myself, to kindle my waning courage, to impress
      upon myself the fatal necessity of this act which can, at best, be only
      deferred.
    

      “I was brought up by simple-minded parents who were unquestioning
      believers. And I believed as they did.
    

      “My dream lasted a long time. The last veil has just been torn from
      my eyes.
    

      “During the last few years a strange change has been taking place
      within me. All the events of Life, which formerly had to me the glow of a
      beautiful sunset, are now fading away. The true meaning of things has
      appeared to me in its brutal reality; and the true reason for love has
      bred in me disgust even for this poetic sentiment: 'We are the eternal
      toys of foolish and charming illusions, which are always being renewed.'
    

      “On growing older, I had become partly reconciled to the awful
      mystery of life, to the uselessness of effort; when the emptiness of
      everything appeared to me in a new light, this evening, after dinner.
    

      “Formerly, I was happy! Everything pleased me: the passing women,
      the appearance of the streets, the place where I lived; and I even took an
      interest in the cut of my clothes. But the repetition of the same sights
      has had the result of filling my heart with weariness and disgust, just as
      one would feel were one to go every night to the same theatre.
    

      “For the last thirty years I have been rising at the same hour; and,
      at the same restaurant, for thirty years, I have been eating at the same
      hours the same dishes brought me by different waiters.
    

      “I have tried travel. The loneliness which one feels in strange
      places terrified me. I felt so alone, so small on the earth that I quickly
      started on my homeward journey.
    

      “But here the unchanging expression of my furniture, which has stood
      for thirty years in the same place, the smell of my apartments (for, with
      time, each dwelling takes on a particular odor) each night, these and
      other things disgust me and make me sick of living thus.
    

      “Everything repeats itself endlessly. The way in which I put my key
      in the lock, the place where I always find my matches, the first object
      which meets my eye when I enter the room, make me feel like jumping out of
      the window and putting an end to those monotonous events from which we can
      never escape.
    

      “Each day, when I shave, I feel an inordinate desire to cut my
      throat; and my face, which I see in the little mirror, always the same,
      with soap on my cheeks, has several times made me weak from sadness.
    

      “Now I even hate to be with people whom I used to meet with
      pleasure; I know them so well, I can tell just what they are going to say
      and what I am going to answer. Each brain is like a circus, where the same
      horse keeps circling around eternally. We must circle round always, around
      the same ideas, the same joys, the same pleasures, the same habits, the
      same beliefs, the same sensations of disgust.
    

      “The fog was terrible this evening. It enfolded the boulevard, where
      the street lights were dimmed and looked like smoking candles. A heavier
      weight than usual oppressed me. Perhaps my digestion was bad.
    

      “For good digestion is everything in life. It gives the inspiration
      to the artist, amorous desires to young people, clear ideas to thinkers,
      the joy of life to everybody, and it also allows one to eat heartily
      (which is one of the greatest pleasures). A sick stomach induces
      scepticism unbelief, nightmares and the desire for death. I have often
      noticed this fact. Perhaps I would not kill myself, if my digestion had
      been good this evening.
    

      “When I sat down in the arm-chair where I have been sitting every
      day for thirty years, I glanced around me, and just then I was seized by
      such a terrible distress that I thought I must go mad.
    

      “I tried to think of what I could do to run away from myself. Every
      occupation struck me as being worse even than inaction. Then I bethought
      me of putting my papers in order.
    

      “For a long time I have been thinking of clearing out my drawers;
      for, for the last thirty years, I have been throwing my letters and bills
      pell-mell into the same desk, and this confusion has often caused me
      considerable trouble. But I feel such moral and physical laziness at the
      sole idea of putting anything in order that I have never had the courage
      to begin this tedious business.
    

      “I therefore opened my desk, intending to choose among my old papers
      and destroy the majority of them.
    

      “At first I was bewildered by this array of documents, yellowed by
      age, then I chose one.
    

      “Oh! if you cherish life, never disturb the burial place of old
      letters!
    

      “And if, perchance, you should, take the contents by the handful,
      close your eyes that you may not read a word, so that you may not
      recognize some forgotten handwriting which may plunge you suddenly into a
      sea of memories; carry these papers to the fire; and when they are in
      ashes, crush them to an invisible powder, or otherwise you are lost—just
      as I have been lost for an hour.
    

      “The first letters which I read did not interest me greatly. They
      were recent, and came from living men whom I still meet quite often, and
      whose presence does not move me to any great extent. But all at once one
      envelope made me start. My name was traced on it in a large, bold
      handwriting; and suddenly tears came to my eyes. That letter was from my
      dearest friend, the companion of my youth, the confidant of my hopes; and
      he appeared before me so clearly, with his pleasant smile and his hand
      outstretched, that a cold shiver ran down my back. Yes, yes, the dead come
      back, for I saw him! Our memory is a more perfect world than the universe:
      it gives back life to those who no longer exist.
    

      “With trembling hand and dimmed eyes I reread everything that he
      told me, and in my poor sobbing heart I felt a wound so painful that I
      began to groan as a man whose bones are slowly being crushed.
    

      “Then I travelled over my whole life, just as one travels along a
      river. I recognized people, so long forgotten that I no longer knew their
      names. Their faces alone lived in me. In my mother's letters I saw again
      the old servants, the shape of our house and the little insignificant odds
      and ends which cling to our minds.
    

      “Yes, I suddenly saw again all my mother's old gowns, the different
      styles which she adopted and the several ways in which she dressed her
      hair. She haunted me especially in a silk dress, trimmed with old lace;
      and I remembered something she said one day when she was wearing this
      dress. She said: 'Robert, my child, if you do not stand up straight you
      will be round-shouldered all your life.'
    

      “Then, opening another drawer, I found myself face to face with
      memories of tender passions: a dancing-pump, a torn handkerchief, even a
      garter, locks of hair and dried flowers. Then the sweet romances of my
      life, whose living heroines are now white-haired, plunged me into the deep
      melancholy of things. Oh, the young brows where blond locks curl, the
      caress of the hands, the glance which speaks, the hearts which beat, that
      smile which promises the lips, those lips which promise the embrace! And
      the first kiss-that endless kiss which makes you close your eyes, which
      drowns all thought in the immeasurable joy of approaching possession!
    

      “Taking these old pledges of former love in both my hands, I covered
      them with furious caresses, and in my soul, torn by these memories, I saw
      them each again at the hour of surrender; and I suffered a torture more
      cruel than all the tortures invented in all the fables about hell.
    

      “One last letter remained. It was written by me and dictated fifty
      years ago by my writing teacher. Here it is:
    

   “'MY DEAR LITTLE MAMMA:

   “'I am seven years old to-day. It is the age of reason. I take
   advantage of it to thank you for having brought me into this world.

   “'Your little son, who loves you

                    “'ROBERT.'


      “It is all over. I had gone back to the beginning, and suddenly I
      turned my glance on what remained to me of life. I saw hideous and lonely
      old age, and approaching infirmities, and everything over and gone. And
      nobody near me!
    

      “My revolver is here, on the table. I am loading it . . . . Never
      reread your old letters!”
    

      And that is how many men come to kill themselves; and we search in vain to
      discover some great sorrow in their lives.
    







      AN ARTIFICE
    

      The old doctor sat by the fireside, talking to his fair patient who was
      lying on the lounge. There was nothing much the matter with her, except
      that she had one of those little feminine ailments from which pretty women
      frequently suffer—slight anaemia, a nervous attack, etc.
    

      “No, doctor,” she said; “I shall never be able to
      understand a woman deceiving her husband. Even allowing that she does not
      love him, that she pays no heed to her vows and promises, how can she give
      herself to another man? How can she conceal the intrigue from other
      people's eyes? How can it be possible to love amid lies and treason?”
    

      The doctor smiled, and replied: “It is perfectly easy, and I can
      assure you that a woman does not think of all those little subtle details
      when she has made up her mind to go astray.
    

      “As for dissimulation, all women have plenty of it on hand for such
      occasions, and the simplest of them are wonderful, and extricate
      themselves from the greatest dilemmas in a remarkable manner.”
    

      The young woman, however, seemed incredulous.
    

      “No, doctor,” she said; “one never thinks until after it
      has happened of what one ought to have done in a critical situation, and
      women are certainly more liable than men to lose their head on such
      occasions:”
    

      The doctor raised his hands. “After it has happened, you say! Now I
      will tell you something that happened to one of my female patients, whom I
      always considered an immaculate woman.
    

      “It happened in a provincial town, and one night when I was asleep,
      in that deep first sleep from which it is so difficult to rouse us, it
      seemed to me, in my dreams, as if the bells in the town were sounding a
      fire alarm, and I woke up with a start. It was my own bell, which was
      ringing wildly, and as my footman did not seem to be answering the door,
      I, in turn, pulled the bell at the head of my bed, and soon I heard a
      banging, and steps in the silent house, and Jean came into my room, and
      handed me a letter which said: 'Madame Lelievre begs Dr. Simeon to come to
      her immediately.'
    

      “I thought for a few moments, and then I said to myself: 'A nervous
      attack, vapors; nonsense, I am too tired.' And so I replied: 'As Dr.
      Simeon is not at all well, he must beg Madame Lelievre to be kind enough
      to call in his colleague, Monsieur Bonnet.' I put the note into an
      envelope and went to sleep again, but about half an hour later the street
      bell rang again, and Jean came to me and said: 'There is somebody
      downstairs; I do not quite know whether it is a man or a woman, as the
      individual is so wrapped up, but they wish to speak to you immediately.
      They say it is a matter of life and death for two people.' Whereupon I sat
      up in bed and told him to show the person in.
    

      “A kind of black phantom appeared and raised her veil as soon as
      Jean had left the room. It was Madame Berthe Lelievre, quite a young
      woman, who had been married for three years to a large merchant in the
      town, who was said to have married the prettiest girl in the neighborhood.
    

      “She was terribly pale, her face was contracted as the faces of
      insane people are, occasionally, and her hands trembled violently. Twice
      she tried to speak without being able to utter a sound, but at last she
      stammered out: 'Come—quick—quick, doctor. Come—my—friend
      has just died in my bedroom.' She stopped, half suffocated with emotion,
      and then went on: 'My husband will be coming home from the club very
      soon.'
    

      “I jumped out of bed without even considering that I was only in my
      nightshirt, and dressed myself in a few moments, and then I said: 'Did you
      come a short time ago?' 'No,' she said, standing like a statue petrified
      with horror. 'It was my servant—she knows.' And then, after a short
      silence, she went on: 'I was there—by his side.' And she uttered a
      sort of cry of horror, and after a fit of choking, which made her gasp,
      she wept violently, and shook with spasmodic sobs for a minute: or two.
      Then her tears suddenly ceased, as if by an internal fire, and with an air
      of tragic calmness, she said: 'Let us make haste.'
    

      “I was ready, but exclaimed: 'I quite forgot to order my carriage.'
      'I have one,' she said; 'it is his, which was waiting for him!' She
      wrapped herself up, so as to completely conceal her face, and we started.
    

      “When she was by my side in the carriage she suddenly seized my
      hand, and crushing it in her delicate fingers, she said, with a shaking
      voice, that proceeded from a distracted heart: 'Oh! if you only knew, if
      you only knew what I am suffering! I loved him, I have loved him
      distractedly, like a madwoman, for the last six months.' 'Is anyone up in
      your house?' I asked. 'No, nobody except those, who knows everything.'
    

      “We stopped at the door, and evidently everybody was asleep. We went
      in without making any noise, by means of her latch-key, and walked
      upstairs on tiptoe. The frightened servant was sitting on the top of the
      stairs with a lighted candle by her side, as she was afraid to remain with
      the dead man, and I went into the room, which was in great disorder. Wet
      towels, with which they had bathed the young man's temples, were lying on
      the floor, by the side of a washbasin and a glass, while a strong smell of
      vinegar pervaded the room.
    

      “The dead man's body was lying at full length in the middle of the
      room, and I went up to it, looked at it, and touched it. I opened the eyes
      and felt the hands, and then, turning to the two women, who were shaking
      as if they were freezing, I said to them: 'Help me to lift him on to the
      bed.' When we had laid him gently on it, I listened to his heart and put a
      looking-glass to his lips, and then said: 'It is all over.' It was a
      terrible sight!
    

      “I looked at the man, and said: 'You ought to arrange his hair a
      little.' The girl went and brought her mistress' comb and brush, but as
      she was trembling, and pulling out his long, matted hair in doing it,
      Madame Lelievre took the comb out of her hand, and arranged his hair as if
      she were caressing him. She parted it, brushed his beard, rolled his
      mustaches gently round her fingers, then, suddenly, letting go of his
      hair, she took the dead man's inert head in her hands and looked for a
      long time in despair at the dead face, which no longer could smile at her,
      and then, throwing herself on him, she clasped him in her arms and kissed
      him ardently. Her kisses fell like blows on his closed mouth and eyes, his
      forehead and temples; and then, putting her lips to his ear, as if he
      could still hear her, and as if she were about to whisper something to
      him, she said several times, in a heartrending voice:
    

      “'Good-by, my darling!'
    

      “Just then the clock struck twelve, and I started up. 'Twelve
      o'clock!' I exclaimed. 'That is the time when the club closes. Come,
      madame, we have not a moment to lose!' She started up, and I said:
    

      “'We must carry him into the drawing-room.' And when we had done
      this, I placed him on a sofa, and lit the chandeliers, and just then the
      front door was opened and shut noisily. 'Rose, bring me the basin and the
      towels, and make the room look tidy. Make haste, for Heaven's sake!
      Monsieur Lelievre is coming in.'
    

      “I heard his steps on the stairs, and then his hands feeling along
      the walls. 'Come here, my dear fellow,' I said; 'we have had an accident.'
    

      “And the astonished husband appeared in the door with a cigar in his
      mouth, and said: 'What is the matter? What is the meaning of this?' 'My
      dear friend,' I said, going up to him, 'you find us in great
      embarrassment. I had remained late, chatting with your wife and our
      friend, who had brought me in his carriage, when he suddenly fainted, and
      in spite of all we have done, he has remained unconscious for two hours. I
      did not like to call in strangers, and if you will now help me downstairs
      with him, I shall be able to attend to him better at his own house.'
    

      “The husband, who was surprised, but quite unsuspicious, took off
      his hat, and then he took his rival, who would be quite inoffensive for
      the future, under the arms. I got between his two legs, as if I had been a
      horse between the shafts, and we went downstairs, while his wife held a
      light for us. When we got outside I stood the body up, so as to deceive
      the coachman, and said: 'Come, my friend; it is nothing; you feel better
      already I expect. Pluck up your courage, and make an effort. It will soon
      be over.' But as I felt that he was slipping out of my hands, I gave him a
      slap on the shoulder, which sent him forward and made him fall into the
      carriage, and then I got in after him. Monsieur Lelievre, who was rather
      alarmed, said to me: 'Do you think it is anything serious?' To which I
      replied: 'No,' with a smile, as I looked at his wife, who had put her arm
      into that of her husband, and was trying to see into the carriage.
    

      “I shook hands with them and told my coachman to start, and during
      the whole drive the dead man kept falling against me. When we got to his
      house I said that he had become unconscious on the way home, and helped to
      carry him upstairs, where I certified that he was dead, and acted another
      comedy to his distracted family, and at last I got back to bed, not
      without swearing at lovers.”
    

      The doctor ceased, though he was still smiling, and the young woman, who
      was in a very nervous state, said: “Why have you told me that
      terrible story?”
    

      He gave her a gallant bow, and replied:
    

      “So that I may offer you my services if they should be needed.”
    







      DREAMS
    

      They had just dined together, five old friends, a writer, a doctor and
      three rich bachelors without any profession.
    

      They had talked about everything, and a feeling of lassitude came over
      them, that feeling which precedes and leads to the departure of guests
      after festive gatherings. One of those present, who had for the last five
      minutes been gazing silently at the surging boulevard dotted with
      gas-lamps, with its rattling vehicles, said suddenly:
    

      “When you've nothing to do from morning till night, the days are
      long.”
    

      “And the nights too,” assented the guest who sat next to him.
      “I sleep very little; pleasures fatigue me; conversation is
      monotonous. Never do I come across a new idea, and I feel, before talking
      to any one, a violent longing to say nothing and to listen to nothing. I
      don't know what to do with my evenings.”
    

      The third idler remarked:
    

      “I would pay a great deal for anything that would help me to pass
      just two pleasant hours every day.”
    

      The writer, who had just thrown his overcoat across his arm, turned round
      to them, and said:
    

      “The man who could discover a new vice and introduce it among his
      fellow creatures, even if it were to shorten their lives, would render a
      greater service to humanity than the man who found the means of securing
      to them eternal salvation and eternal youth.”
    

      The doctor burst out laughing, and, while he chewed his cigar, he said:
    

      “Yes, but it is not so easy to discover it. Men have however
      crudely, been seeking for—and working for the object you refer to
      since the beginning of the world. The men who came first reached
      perfection at once in this way. We are hardly equal to them.”
    

      One of the three idlers murmured:
    

      “What a pity!”
    

      Then, after a minute's pause, he added:
    

      “If we could only sleep, sleep well, without feeling hot or cold,
      sleep with that perfect unconsciousness we experience on nights when we
      are thoroughly fatigued, sleep without dreams.”
    

      “Why without dreams?” asked the guest sitting next to him.
    

      The other replied:
    

      “Because dreams are not always pleasant; they are always fantastic,
      improbable, disconnected; and because when we are asleep we cannot have
      the sort of dreams we like. We ought to dream waking.”
    

      “And what's to prevent you?” asked the writer.
    

      The doctor flung away the end of his cigar.
    

      “My dear fellow, in order to dream when you are awake, you need
      great power and great exercise of will, and when you try to do it, great
      weariness is the result. Now, real dreaming, that journey of our thoughts
      through delightful visions, is assuredly the sweetest experience in the
      world; but it must come naturally, it must not be provoked in a painful,
      manner, and must be accompanied by absolute bodily comfort. This power of
      dreaming I can give you, provided you promise that you will not abuse it.”
    

      The writer shrugged his shoulders:
    

      “Ah! yes, I know—hasheesh, opium, green tea—artificial
      paradises. I have read Baudelaire, and I even tasted the famous drug,
      which made me very sick.”
    

      But the doctor, without stirring from his seat, said:
    

      “No; ether, nothing but ether; and I would suggest that you literary
      men should use it sometimes.”
    

      The three rich bachelors drew closer to the doctor.
    

      One of them said:
    

      “Explain to us the effects of it.”
    

      And the doctor replied:
    

      “Let us put aside big words, shall we not? I am not talking of
      medicine or morality; I am talking of pleasure. You give yourselves up
      every day to excesses which consume your lives. I want to indicate to you
      a new sensation, possible only to intelligent men—let us say even
      very intelligent men—dangerous, like everything else that
      overexcites our organs, but exquisite. I might add that you would require
      a certain preparation, that is to say, practice, to feel in all their
      completeness the singular effects of ether.
    

      “They are different from the effects of hasheesh, of opium, or
      morphia, and they cease as soon as the absorption of the drug is
      interrupted, while the other generators of day dreams continue their
      action for hours.
    

      “I am now going to try to analyze these feelings as clearly as
      possible. But the thing is not easy, so facile, so delicate, so almost
      imperceptible, are these sensations.
    

      “It was when I was attacked by violent neuralgia that I made use of
      this remedy, which since then I have, perhaps, slightly abused.
    

      “I had acute pains in my head and neck, and an intolerable heat of
      the skin, a feverish restlessness. I took up a large bottle of ether, and,
      lying down, I began to inhale it slowly.
    

      “At the end of some minutes I thought I heard a vague murmur, which
      ere long became a sort of humming, and it seemed to me that all the
      interior of my body had become light, light as air, that it was dissolving
      into vapor.
    

      “Then came a sort of torpor, a sleepy sensation of comfort, in spite
      of the pains which still continued, but which had ceased to make
      themselves felt. It was one of those sensations which we are willing to
      endure and not any of those frightful wrenches against which our tortured
      body protests.
    

      “Soon the strange and delightful sense of emptiness which I felt in
      my chest extended to my limbs, which, in their turn, became light, as
      light as if the flesh and the bones had been melted and the skin only were
      left, the skin necessary to enable me to realize the sweetness of living,
      of bathing in this sensation of well-being. Then I perceived that I was no
      longer suffering. The pain had gone, melted away, evaporated. And I heard
      voices, four voices, two dialogues, without understanding what was said.
      At one time there were only indistinct sounds, at another time a word
      reached my ear. But I recognized that this was only the humming I had
      heard before, but emphasized. I was not asleep; I was not awake; I
      comprehended, I felt, I reasoned with the utmost clearness and depth, with
      extraordinary energy and intellectual pleasure, with a singular
      intoxication arising from this separation of my mental faculties.
    

      “It was not like the dreams caused by hasheesh or the somewhat
      sickly visions that come from opium; it was an amazing acuteness of
      reasoning, a new way of seeing, judging and appreciating the things of
      life, and with the certainty, the absolute consciousness that this was the
      true way.
    

      “And the old image of the Scriptures suddenly came back to my mind.
      It seemed to me that I had tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, that all the
      mysteries were unveiled, so much did I find myself under the sway of a
      new, strange and irrefutable logic. And arguments, reasonings, proofs rose
      up in a heap before my brain only to be immediately displaced by some
      stronger proof, reasoning, argument. My head had, in fact, become a
      battleground of ideas. I was a superior being, armed with invincible
      intelligence, and I experienced a huge delight at the manifestation of my
      power.
    

      “It lasted a long, long time. I still kept inhaling the ether from
      my flagon. Suddenly I perceived that it was empty.”
    

      The four men exclaimed at the same time:
    

      “Doctor, a prescription at once for a liter of ether!”
    

      But the doctor, putting on his hat, replied:
    

      “As to that, certainly not; go and let some one else poison you!”
    

      And he left them.
    

      Ladies and gentlemen, what is your opinion on the subject?
    







      SIMON'S PAPA
    

      Noon had just struck. The school door opened and the youngsters darted
      out, jostling each other in their haste to get out quickly. But instead of
      promptly dispersing and going home to dinner as usual, they stopped a few
      paces off, broke up into knots, and began whispering.
    

      The fact was that, that morning, Simon, the son of La Blanchotte, had, for
      the first time, attended school.
    

      They had all of them in their families heard talk of La Blanchotte; and,
      although in public she was welcome enough, the mothers among themselves
      treated her with a somewhat disdainful compassion, which the children had
      imitated without in the least knowing why.
    

      As for Simon himself, they did not know him, for he never went out, and
      did not run about with them in the streets of the village, or along the
      banks of the river. And they did not care for him; so it was with a
      certain delight, mingled with considerable astonishment, that they met and
      repeated to each other what had been said by a lad of fourteen or fifteen
      who appeared to know all about it, so sagaciously did he wink. “You
      know—Simon—well, he has no papa.”
    

      Just then La Blanchotte's son appeared in the doorway of the school.
    

      He was seven or eight years old, rather pale, very neat, with a timid and
      almost awkward manner.
    

      He was starting home to his mother's house when the groups of his
      schoolmates, whispering and watching him with the mischievous and
      heartless eyes of children bent upon playing a nasty trick, gradually
      closed in around him and ended by surrounding him altogether. There he
      stood in their midst, surprised and embarrassed, not understanding what
      they were going to do with him. But the lad who had brought the news,
      puffed up with the success he had met with already, demanded:
    

      “What is your name, you?”
    

      He answered: “Simon.”
    

      “Simon what?” retorted the other.
    

      The child, altogether bewildered, repeated: “Simon.”
    

      The lad shouted at him: “One is named Simon something—that is
      not a name—Simon indeed.”
    

      The child, on the brink of tears, replied for the third time:
    

      “My name is Simon.”
    

      The urchins began to laugh. The triumphant tormentor cried: “You can
      see plainly that he has no papa.”
    

      A deep silence ensued. The children were dumfounded by this extraordinary,
      impossible, monstrous thing—a boy who had not a papa; they looked
      upon him as a phenomenon, an unnatural being, and they felt that hitherto
      inexplicable contempt of their mothers for La Blanchotte growing upon
      them. As for Simon, he had leaned against a tree to avoid falling, and he
      remained as if prostrated by an irreparable disaster. He sought to
      explain, but could think of nothing-to say to refute this horrible charge
      that he had no papa. At last he shouted at them quite recklessly: “Yes,
      I have one.”
    

      “Where is he?” demanded the boy.
    

      Simon was silent, he did not know. The children roared, tremendously
      excited; and those country boys, little more than animals, experienced
      that cruel craving which prompts the fowls of a farmyard to destroy one of
      their number as soon as it is wounded. Simon suddenly espied a little
      neighbor, the son of a widow, whom he had seen, as he himself was to be
      seen, always alone with his mother.
    

      “And no more have you,” he said; “no more have you a
      papa.”
    

      “Yes,” replied the other, “I have one.”
    

      “Where is he?” rejoined Simon.
    

      “He is dead,” declared the brat, with superb dignity; “he
      is in the cemetery, is my papa.”
    

      A murmur of approval rose among the little wretches as if this fact of
      possessing a papa dead in a cemetery had caused their comrade to grow big
      enough to crush the other one who had no papa at all. And these boys,
      whose fathers were for the most part bad men, drunkards, thieves, and who
      beat their wives, jostled each other to press closer and closer, as though
      they, the legitimate ones, would smother by their pressure one who was
      illegitimate.
    

      The boy who chanced to be next Simon suddenly put his tongue out at him
      with a mocking air and shouted at him:
    

      “No papa! No papa!”
    

      Simon seized him by the hair with both hands and set to work to disable
      his legs with kicks, while he bit his cheek ferociously. A tremendous
      struggle ensued between the two combatants, and Simon found himself
      beaten, torn, bruised, rolled on the ground in the midst of the ring of
      applauding schoolboys. As he arose, mechanically brushing with his hand
      his little blouse all covered with dust, some one shouted at him:
    

      “Go and tell your papa.”
    

      Then he felt a great sinking at his heart. They were stronger than he was,
      they had beaten him, and he had no answer to give them, for he knew well
      that it was true that he had no papa. Full of pride, he attempted for some
      moments to struggle against the tears which were choking him. He had a
      feeling of suffocation, and then without any sound he commenced to weep,
      with great shaking sobs. A ferocious joy broke out among his enemies, and,
      with one accord, just like savages in their fearful festivals, they took
      each other by the hand and danced round him in a circle, repeating as a
      refrain:
    

      “No papa! No papa!”
    

      But suddenly Simon ceased sobbing. He became ferocious. There were stones
      under his feet; he picked them up and with all his strength hurled them at
      his tormentors. Two or three were struck and rushed off yelling, and so
      formidable did he appear that the rest became panic-stricken. Cowards, as
      the mob always is in presence of an exasperated man, they broke up and
      fled. Left alone, the little fellow without a father set off running
      toward the fields, for a recollection had been awakened in him which
      determined his soul to a great resolve. He made up his mind to drown
      himself in the river.
    

      He remembered, in fact, that eight days before, a poor devil who begged
      for his livelihood had thrown himself into the water because he had no
      more money. Simon had been there when they fished him out again; and the
      wretched man, who usually seemed to him so miserable, and ugly, had then
      struck him as being so peaceful with his pale cheeks, his long drenched
      beard, and his open eyes full of calm. The bystanders had said:
    

      “He is dead.”
    

      And some one had said:
    

      “He is quite happy now.”
    

      And Simon wished to drown himself also, because he had no father, just
      like the wretched being who had no money.
    

      He reached the water and watched it flowing. Some fish were sporting
      briskly in the clear stream and occasionally made a little bound and
      caught the flies flying on the surface. He stopped crying in order to
      watch them, for their maneuvers interested him greatly. But, at intervals,
      as in a tempest intervals of calm alternate suddenly with tremendous gusts
      of wind, which snap off the trees and then lose themselves in the horizon,
      this thought would return to him with intense pain:
    

      “I am going to drown myself because I have no papa.”
    

      It was very warm, fine weather. The pleasant sunshine warmed the grass.
      The water shone like a mirror. And Simon enjoyed some minutes of
      happiness, of that languor which follows weeping, and felt inclined to
      fall asleep there upon the grass in the warm sunshine.
    

      A little green frog leaped from under his feet. He endeavored to catch it.
      It escaped him. He followed it and lost it three times in succession. At
      last he caught it by one of its hind legs and began to laugh as he saw the
      efforts the creature made to escape. It gathered itself up on its hind
      legs and then with a violent spring suddenly stretched them out as stiff
      as two bars; while it beat the air with its front legs as though they were
      hands, its round eyes staring in their circle of yellow. It reminded him
      of a toy made of straight slips of wood nailed zigzag one on the other;
      which by a similar movement regulated the movements of the little soldiers
      fastened thereon. Then he thought of his home, and then of his mother,
      and, overcome by sorrow, he again began to weep. A shiver passed over him.
      He knelt down and said his prayers as before going to bed. But he was
      unable to finish them, for tumultuous, violent sobs shook his whole frame.
      He no longer thought, he no longer saw anything around him, and was wholly
      absorbed in crying.
    

      Suddenly a heavy hand was placed upon his shoulder, and a rough voice
      asked him:
    

      “What is it that causes you so much grief, my little man?”
    

      Simon turned round. A tall workman with a beard and black curly hair was
      staring at him good-naturedly. He answered with his eyes and throat full
      of tears:
    

      “They beat me—because—I—I have no—papa—no
      papa.”
    

      “What!” said the man, smiling; “why, everybody has one.”
    

      The child answered painfully amid his spasms of grief:
    

      “But I—I—I have none.”
    

      Then the workman became serious. He had recognized La Blanchotte's son,
      and, although himself a new arrival in the neighborhood, he had a vague
      idea of her history.
    

      “Well,” said he, “console yourself, my boy, and come
      with me home to your mother. They will give you—a papa.”
    

      And so they started on the way, the big fellow holding the little fellow
      by the hand, and the man smiled, for he was not sorry to see this
      Blanchotte, who was, it was said, one of the prettiest girls of the
      countryside, and, perhaps, he was saying to himself, at the bottom of his
      heart, that a lass who had erred might very well err again.
    

      They arrived in front of a very neat little white house.
    

      “There it is,” exclaimed the child, and he cried, “Mamma!”
    

      A woman appeared, and the workman instantly left off smiling, for he saw
      at once that there was no fooling to be done with the tall pale girl who
      stood austerely at her door as though to defend from one man the threshold
      of that house where she had already been betrayed by another. Intimidated,
      his cap in his hand, he stammered out:
    

      “See, madame, I have brought you back your little boy who had lost
      himself near the river.”
    

      But Simon flung his arms about his mother's neck and told her, as he again
      began to cry:
    

      “No, mamma, I wished to drown myself, because the others had beaten
      me —had beaten me—because I have no papa.”
    

      A burning redness covered the young woman's cheeks; and, hurt to the
      quick, she embraced her child passionately, while the tears coursed down
      her face. The man, much moved, stood there, not knowing how to get away.
    

      But Simon suddenly ran to him and said:
    

      “Will you be my papa?”
    

      A deep silence ensued. La Blanchotte, dumb and tortured with shame, leaned
      herself against the wall, both her hands upon her heart. The child, seeing
      that no answer was made him, replied:
    

      “If you will not, I shall go back and drown myself.”
    

      The workman took the matter as a jest and answered, laughing:
    

      “Why, yes, certainly I will.”
    

      “What is your name,” went on the child, “so that I may
      tell the others when they wish to know your name?”
    

      “Philip,” answered the man:
    

      Simon was silent a moment so that he might get the name well into his
      head; then he stretched out his arms, quite consoled, as he said:
    

      “Well, then, Philip, you are my papa.”
    

      The workman, lifting him from the ground, kissed him hastily on both
      cheeks, and then walked away very quickly with great strides. When the
      child returned to school next day he was received with a spiteful laugh,
      and at the end of school, when the lads were on the point of recommencing,
      Simon threw these words at their heads as he would have done a stone:
      “He is named Philip, my papa.”
    

      Yells of delight burst out from all sides.
    

      “Philip who? Philip what? What on earth is Philip? Where did you
      pick up your Philip?”
    

      Simon answered nothing; and, immovable in his faith, he defied them with
      his eye, ready to be martyred rather than fly before them. The school
      master came to his rescue and he returned home to his mother.
    

      During three months, the tall workman, Philip, frequently passed by La
      Blanchotte's house, and sometimes he made bold to speak to her when he saw
      her sewing near the window. She answered him civilly, always sedately,
      never joking with him, nor permitting him to enter her house.
      Notwithstanding, being, like all men, a bit of a coxcomb, he imagined that
      she was often rosier than usual when she chatted with him.
    

      But a lost reputation is so difficult to regain and always remains so
      fragile that, in spite of the shy reserve of La Blanchotte, they already
      gossiped in the neighborhood.
    

      As for Simon he loved his new papa very much, and walked with him nearly
      every evening when the day's work was done. He went regularly to school,
      and mixed with great dignity with his schoolfellows without ever answering
      them back.
    

      One day, however, the lad who had first attacked him said to him:
    

      “You have lied. You have not a papa named Philip.”
    

      “Why do you say that?” demanded Simon, much disturbed.
    

      The youth rubbed his hands. He replied:
    

      “Because if you had one he would be your mamma's husband.”
    

      Simon was confused by the truth of this reasoning; nevertheless, he
      retorted:
    

      “He is my papa, all the same.”
    

      “That can very well be,” exclaimed the urchin with a sneer,
      “but that is not being your papa altogether.”
    

      La Blanchotte's little one bowed his head and went off dreaming in the
      direction of the forge belonging to old Loizon, where Philip worked. This
      forge was as though buried beneath trees. It was very dark there; the red
      glare of a formidable furnace alone lit up with great flashes five
      blacksmiths; who hammered upon their anvils with a terrible din. They were
      standing enveloped in flame, like demons, their eyes fixed on the red-hot
      iron they were pounding; and their dull ideas rose and fell with their
      hammers.
    

      Simon entered without being noticed, and went quietly to pluck his friend
      by the sleeve. The latter turned round. All at once the work came to a
      standstill, and all the men looked on, very attentive. Then, in the midst
      of this unaccustomed silence, rose the slender pipe of Simon:
    

      “Say, Philip, the Michaude boy told me just now that you were not
      altogether my papa.”
    

      “Why not?” asked the blacksmith,
    

      The child replied with all innocence:
    

      “Because you are not my mamma's husband.”
    

      No one laughed. Philip remained standing, leaning his forehead upon the
      back of his great hands, which supported the handle of his hammer standing
      upright upon the anvil. He mused. His four companions watched him, and
      Simon, a tiny mite among these giants, anxiously waited. Suddenly, one of
      the smiths, answering to the sentiment of all, said to Philip:
    

      “La Blanchotte is a good, honest girl, and upright and steady in
      spite of her misfortune, and would make a worthy wife for an honest man.”
    

      “That is true,” remarked the three others.
    

      The smith continued:
    

      “Is it the girl's fault if she went wrong? She had been promised
      marriage; and I know more than one who is much respected to-day, and who
      sinned every bit as much.”
    

      “That is true,” responded the three men in chorus.
    

      He resumed:
    

      “How hard she has toiled, poor thing, to bring up her child all
      alone, and how she has wept all these years she has never gone out except
      to church, God only knows.”
    

      “This is also true,” said the others.
    

      Then nothing was heard but the bellows which fanned the fire of the
      furnace. Philip hastily bent himself down to Simon:
    

      “Go and tell your mother that I am coming to speak to her this
      evening.” Then he pushed the child out by the shoulders. He returned
      to his work, and with a single blow the five hammers again fell upon their
      anvils. Thus they wrought the iron until nightfall, strong, powerful,
      happy, like contented hammers. But just as the great bell of a cathedral
      resounds upon feast days above the jingling of the other bells, so
      Philip's hammer, sounding above the rest, clanged second after second with
      a deafening uproar. And he stood amid the flying sparks plying his trade
      vigorously.
    

      The sky was full of stars as he knocked at La Blanchotte's door. He had on
      his Sunday blouse, a clean shirt, and his beard was trimmed. The young
      woman showed herself upon the threshold, and said in a grieved tone:
    

      “It is ill to come thus when night has fallen, Mr. Philip.”
    

      He wished to answer, but stammered and stood confused before her.
    

      She resumed:
    

      “You understand, do you not, that it will not do for me to be talked
      about again.”
    

      “What does that matter to me, if you will be my wife!”
    

      No voice replied to him, but he believed that he heard in the shadow of
      the room the sound of a falling body. He entered quickly; and Simon, who
      had gone to bed, distinguished the sound of a kiss and some words that his
      mother murmured softly. Then, all at once, he found himself lifted up by
      the hands of his friend, who, holding him at the length of his herculean
      arms, exclaimed:
    

      “You will tell them, your schoolmates, that your papa is Philip
      Remy, the blacksmith, and that he will pull the ears of all who do you any
      harm.”
    

      On the morrow, when the school was full and lessons were about to begin,
      little Simon stood up, quite pale with trembling lips:
    

      “My papa,” said he in a clear voice, “is Philip Remy,
      the blacksmith, and he has promised to pull the ears of all who does me
      any harm.”
    

      This time no one laughed, for he was very well known, was Philip Remy, the
      blacksmith, and was a papa of whom any one in the world would have been
      proud.
    







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 12.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME XII.
    







      THE CHILD
    

      Lemonnier had remained a widower with one child. He had loved his wife
      devotedly, with a tender and exalted love, without a slip, during their
      entire married life. He was a good, honest man, perfectly simple, sincere,
      without suspicion or malice.
    

      He fell in love with a poor neighbor, proposed and was accepted. He was
      making a very comfortable living out of the wholesale cloth business, and
      he did not for a minute suspect that the young girl might have accepted
      him for anything else but himself.
    

      She made him happy. She was everything to him; he only thought of her,
      looked at her continually, with worshiping eyes. During meals he would
      make any number of blunders, in order not to have to take his eyes from
      the beloved face; he would pour the wine in his plate and the water in the
      salt-cellar, then he would laugh like a child, repeating:
    

      “You see, I love you too much; that makes me crazy.”
    

      She would smile with a calm and resigned look; then she would look away,
      as though embarrassed by the adoration of her husband, and try to make him
      talk about something else; but he would take her hand under the table and
      he would hold it in his, whispering:
    

      “My little Jeanne, my darling little Jeanne!”
    

      She sometimes lost patience and said:
    

      “Come, come, be reasonable; eat and let me eat.”
    

      He would sigh and break off a mouthful of bread, which he would then chew
      slowly.
    

      For five years they had no children. Then suddenly she announced to him
      that this state of affairs would soon cease. He was wild with joy. He no
      longer left her for a minute, until his old nurse, who had brought him up
      and who often ruled the house, would push him out and close the door
      behind him, in order to compel him to go out in the fresh air.
    

      He had grown very intimate with a young man who had known his wife since
      childhood, and who was one of the prefect's secretaries. M. Duretour would
      dine three times a week with the Lemonniers, bringing flowers to madame,
      and sometimes a box at the theater; and often, at the end of the dinner,
      Lemonnier, growing tender, turning towards his wife, would explain:
      “With a companion like you and a friend like him, a man is
      completely happy on earth.”
    

      She died in childbirth. The shock almost killed him. But the sight of the
      child, a poor, moaning little creature, gave him courage.
    

      He loved it with a passionate and sorrowful love, with a morbid love in
      which stuck the memory of death, but in which lived something of his
      worship for the dead mother. It was the flesh of his wife, her being
      continued, a sort of quintessence of herself. This child was her very life
      transferred to another body; she had disappeared that it might exist, and
      the father would smother it in with kisses. But also, this child had
      killed her; he had stolen this beloved creature, his life was at the cost
      of hers. And M. Lemonnier would place his son in the cradle and would sit
      down and watch him. He would sit this way by the hour, looking at him,
      dreaming of thousands of things, sweet or sad. Then, when the little one
      was asleep, he would bend over him and sob.
    

      The child grew. The father could no longer spend an hour away from him; he
      would stay near him, take him out for walks, and himself dress him, wash
      him, make him eat. His friend, M. Duretour, also seemed to love the boy;
      he would kiss him wildly, in those frenzies of tenderness which are
      characteristic of parents. He would toss him in his arms, he would trot
      him on his knees, by the hour, and M. Lemonnier, delighted, would mutter:
    

      “Isn't he a darling? Isn't he a darling?”
    

      And M. Duretour would hug the child in his arms and tickle his neck with
      his mustache.
    

      Celeste, the old nurse, alone, seemed to have no tenderness for the little
      one. She would grow angry at his pranks, and seemed impatient at the
      caresses of the two men. She would exclaim:
    

      “How can you expect to bring a child up like that? You'll make a
      perfect monkey out of him.”
    

      Years went by, and Jean was nine years old. He hardly knew how to read; he
      had been so spoiled, and only did as he saw fit. He was willful, stubborn
      and quick-tempered. The father always gave in to him and let him have his
      own way. M. Duretour would always buy him all the toys he wished, and he
      fed him on cake and candies. Then Celeste would grow angry and exclaim:
    

      “It's a shame, monsieur, a shame. You are spoiling this child. But
      it will have to stop; yes, sir, I tell you it will have to stop, and
      before long, too.”
    

      M. Lemonnier would answer, smiling:
    

      “What can you expect? I love him too much, I can't resist him; you
      must get used to it.”
    

      Jean was delicate, rather. The doctor said that he was anaemic, prescribed
      iron, rare meat and broth.
    

      But the little fellow loved only cake and refused all other nourishment;
      and the father, in despair, stuffed him with cream-puffs and chocolate
      eclairs.
    

      One evening, as they were sitting down to supper, Celeste brought on the
      soup with an air of authority and an assurance which she did not usually
      have. She took off the cover and, dipping the ladle into the dish, she
      declared:
    

      “Here is some broth such as I have never made; the young one will
      have to take some this time.”
    

      M. Lemonnier, frightened, bent his head. He saw a storm brewing.
    

      Celeste took his plate, filled it herself and placed it in front of him.
    

      He tasted the soup and said:
    

      “It is, indeed, excellent.”
    

      The servant took the boy's plate and poured a spoonful of soup in it. Then
      she retreated a few steps and waited.
    

      Jean smelled the food and pushed his plate away with an expression of
      disgust. Celeste, suddenly pale, quickly stepped forward and forcibly
      poured a spoonful down the child's open mouth.
    

      He choked, coughed, sneezed, spat; howling, he seized his glass and threw
      it at his nurse. She received it full in the stomach. Then, exasperated,
      she took the young shaver's head under her arm and began pouring spoonful
      after spoonful of soup down his throat. He grew as red as a beet, and he
      would cough it up, stamping, twisting, choking, beating the air with his
      hands.
    

      At first the father was so surprised that he could not move. Then,
      suddenly, he rushed forward, wild with rage, seized the servant by the
      throat and threw her up against the wall stammering:
    

      “Out! Out! Out! you brute!”
    

      But she shook him off, and, her hair streaming down her back, her eyes
      snapping, she cried out:
    

      “What's gettin' hold of you? You're trying to thrash me because I am
      making this child eat soup when you are filling him with sweet stuff!”
    

      He kept repeating, trembling from head to foot:
    

      “Out! Get out-get out, you brute!”
    

      Then, wild, she turned to him and, pushing her face up against his, her
      voice trembling:
    

      “Ah!—you think-you think that you can treat me like that? Oh!
      no. And for whom?—for that brat who is not even yours. No, not
      yours! No, not yours—not yours! Everybody knows it, except yourself!
      Ask the grocer, the butcher, the baker, all of them, any one of them!”
    

      She was growling and mumbling, choked with passion; then she stopped and
      looked at him.
    

      He was motionless livid, his arms hanging by his sides. After a short
      pause, he murmured in a faint, shaky voice, instinct with deep feeling:
    

      “You say? you say? What do you say?”
    

      She remained silent, frightened by his appearance. Once more he stepped
      forward, repeating:
    

      “You say—what do you say?”
    

      Then in a calm voice, she answered:
    

      “I say what I know, what everybody knows.”
    

      He seized her and, with the fury of a beast, he tried to throw her down.
      But, although old, she was strong and nimble. She slipped under his arm,
      and running around the table once more furious, she screamed:
    

      “Look at him, just look at him, fool that you are! Isn't he the
      living image of M. Durefour? just look at his nose and his eyes! Are yours
      like that? And his hair! Is it like his mother's? I tell you that everyone
      knows it, everyone except yourself! It's the joke of the town! Look at
      him!”
    

      She went to the door, opened it, and disappeared.
    

      Jean, frightened, sat motionless before his plate of soup.
    

      At the end of an hour, she returned gently, to see how matters stood. The
      child, after doing away with all the cakes and a pitcher full of cream and
      one of syrup, was now emptying the jam-pot with his soup-spoon.
    

      The father had gone out.
    

      Celeste took the child, kissed him, and gently carried him to his room and
      put him to bed. She came back to the dining-room, cleared the table, put
      everything in place, feeling very uneasy all the time.
    

      Not a single sound could be heard throughout the house. She put her ear
      against her master's door. He seemed to be perfectly still. She put her
      eye to the keyhole. He was writing, and seemed very calm.
    

      Then she returned to the kitchen and sat down, ready for any emergency.
      She slept on a chair and awoke at daylight.
    

      She did the rooms as she had been accustomed to every morning; she swept
      and dusted, and, towards eight o'clock, prepared M. Lemonnier's breakfast.
    

      But she did not dare bring it to her master, knowing too well how she
      would be received; she waited for him to ring. But he did not ring. Nine
      o'clock, then ten o'clock went by.
    

      Celeste, not knowing what to think, prepared her tray and started up with
      it, her heart beating fast.
    

      She stopped before the door and listened. Everything was still. She
      knocked; no answer. Then, gathering up all her courage, she opened the
      door and entered. With a wild shriek, she dropped the breakfast tray which
      she had been holding in her hand.
    

      In the middle of the room, M. Lemonnier was hanging by a rope from a ring
      in the ceiling. His tongue was sticking out horribly. His right slipper
      was lying on the ground, his left one still on his foot. An upturned chair
      had rolled over to the bed.
    

      Celeste, dazed, ran away shrieking. All the neighbors crowded together.
      The physician declared that he had died at about midnight.
    

      A letter addressed to M. Duretdur was found on the table of the suicide.
      It contained these words:
    

      “I leave and entrust the child to you!”
    







      A COUNTRY EXCURSION
    

      For five months they had been talking of going to take luncheon in one of
      the country suburbs of Paris on Madame Dufour's birthday, and as they were
      looking forward very impatiently to the outing, they rose very early that
      morning. Monsieur Dufour had borrowed the milkman's wagon and drove
      himself. It was a very tidy, two-wheeled conveyance, with a cover
      supported by four iron rods, with curtains that had been drawn up, except
      the one at the back, which floated out like a sail. Madame Dufour,
      resplendent in a wonderful, cherry colored silk dress, sat by the side of
      her husband.
    

      The old grandmother and a girl sat behind them on two chairs, and a boy
      with yellow hair was lying at the bottom of the wagon, with nothing to be
      seen of him except his head.
    

      When they reached the bridge of Neuilly, Monsieur Dufour said: “Here
      we are in the country at last!” and at that signal his wife grew
      sentimental about the beauties of nature. When they got to the crossroads
      at Courbevoie they were seized with admiration for the distant landscape.
      On the right was Argenteuil with its bell tower, and above it rose the
      hills of Sannois and the mill of Orgemont, while on the left the aqueduct
      of Marly stood out against the clear morning sky, and in the distance they
      could see the terrace of Saint-Germain; and opposite them, at the end of a
      low chain of hills, the new fort of Cormeilles. Quite in the distance; a
      very long way off, beyond the plains and village, one could see the sombre
      green of the forests.
    

      The sun was beginning to burn their faces, the dust got into their eyes,
      and on either side of the road there stretched an interminable tract of
      bare, ugly country with an unpleasant odor. One might have thought that it
      had been ravaged by a pestilence, which had even attacked the buildings,
      for skeletons of dilapidated and deserted houses, or small cottages, which
      were left in an unfinished state, because the contractors had not been
      paid, reared their four roofless walls on each side.
    

      Here and there tall factory chimneys rose up from the barren soil. The
      only vegetation on that putrid land, where the spring breezes wafted an
      odor of petroleum and slate, blended with another odor that was even less
      agreeable. At last, however, they crossed the Seine a second time, and the
      bridge was a delight. The river sparkled in the sun, and they had a
      feeling of quiet enjoyment, felt refreshed as they drank in the purer air
      that was not impregnated by the black smoke of factories nor by the miasma
      from the deposits of night soil. A man whom they met told them that the
      name of the place was Bezons. Monsieur Dufour pulled up and read the
      attractive announcement outside an eating house: Restaurant Poulin,
      matelottes and fried fish, private rooms, arbors, and swings.
    

      “Well, Madame Dufour, will this suit you? Will you make up your mind
      at last?”
    

      She read the announcement in her turn and then looked at the house for
      some time.
    

      It was a white country inn, built by the roadside, and through the open
      door she could see the bright zinc of the counter, at which sat two
      workmen in their Sunday clothes. At last she made up her mind and said:
    

      “Yes, this will do; and, besides, there is a view.”
    

      They drove into a large field behind the inn, separated from the river by
      the towing path, and dismounted. The husband sprang out first and then
      held out his arms for his wife, and as the step was very high Madame
      Dufour, in order to reach him, had to show the lower part of her limbs,
      whose former slenderness had disappeared in fat, and Monsieur Dufour, who
      was already getting excited by the country air, pinched her calf, and
      then, taking her in his arms, he set her on the ground, as if she had been
      some enormous bundle. She shook the dust out of the silk dress and then
      looked round to see in what sort of a place she was.
    

      She was a stout woman, of about thirty-six, full-blown, and delightful to
      look at. She could hardly breathe, as her corsets were laced too tightly,
      and their pressure forced her superabundant bosom up to her double chin.
      Next the girl placed her hand on her father's shoulder and jumped down
      lightly. The boy with the yellow hair had got down by stepping on the
      wheel, and he helped Monsieur Dufour to lift his grandmother out. Then
      they unharnessed the horse, which they had tied to a tree, and the
      carriage fell back, with both shafts in the air. The men took off their
      coats and washed their hands in a pail of water and then went and joined
      the ladies, who had already taken possession of the swings.
    

      Mademoiselle Dufour was trying to swing herself standing up, but she could
      not succeed in getting a start. She was a pretty girl of about eighteen,
      one of those women who suddenly excite your desire when you meet them in
      the street and who leave you with a vague feeling of uneasiness and of
      excited senses. She was tall, had a small waist and large hips, with a
      dark skin, very large eyes and very black hair. Her dress clearly marked
      the outlines of her firm, full figure, which was accentuated by the motion
      of her hips as she tried to swing herself higher. Her arms were stretched
      upward to hold the rope, so that her bosom rose at every movement she
      made. Her hat, which a gust of wind had blown off, was hanging behind her,
      and as the swing gradually rose higher and higher, she showed her delicate
      limbs up to the knees each time, and the breeze from her flying skirts,
      which was more heady than the fumes of wine, blew into the faces of the
      two men, who were looking at her and smiling.
    

      Sitting in the other swing, Madame Dufour kept saying in a monotonous
      voice:
    

      “Cyprian, come and swing me; do come and swing me, Cyprian!”
    

      At last he went, and turning up his shirt sleeves, as if undertaking a
      hard piece of work, with much difficulty he set his wife in motion. She
      clutched the two ropes and held her legs out straight, so as not to touch
      the ground. She enjoyed feeling dizzy at the motion of the swing, and her
      whole figure shook like a jelly on a dish, but as she went higher and
      higher; she became too giddy and was frightened. Each time the swing came
      down she uttered a piercing scream, which made all the little urchins in
      the neighborhood come round, and down below, beneath the garden hedge, she
      vaguely saw a row of mischievous heads making various grimaces as they
      laughed.
    

      When a servant girl came out they ordered luncheon.
    

      “Some fried fish, a rabbit saute, salad and dessert,” Madame
      Dufour said, with an important air.
    

      “Bring two quarts of beer and a bottle of claret,” her husband
      said.
    

      “We will have lunch on the grass,” the girl added.
    

      The grandmother, who had an affection for cats, had been running after one
      that belonged to the house, trying to coax it to come to her for the last
      ten minutes. The animal, who was no doubt secretly flattered by her
      attentions, kept close to the good woman, but just out of reach of her
      hand, and quietly walked round the trees, against which she rubbed
      herself, with her tail up, purring with pleasure.
    

      “Hello!” suddenly exclaimed the young man with the yellow
      hair, who was wandering about. “Here are two swell boats!”
      They all went to look at them and saw two beautiful canoes in a wooden
      shed; they were as beautifully finished as if they had been ornamental
      furniture. They hung side by side, like two tall, slender girls, in their
      narrow shining length, and made one wish to float in them on warm summer
      mornings and evenings along the flower-covered banks of the river, where
      the trees dip their branches into the water, where the rushes are
      continually rustling in the breeze and where the swift kingfishers dart
      about like flashes of blue lightning.
    

      The whole family looked at them with great respect.
    

      “Oh, they are indeed swell boats!” Monsieur Dufour repeated
      gravely, as he examined them like a connoiseur. He had been in the habit
      of rowing in his younger days, he said, and when he had spat in his hands—and
      he went through the action of pulling the oars—he did not care a fig
      for anybody. He had beaten more than one Englishman formerly at the
      Joinville regattas. He grew quite excited at last and offered to make a
      bet that in a boat like that he could row six leagues an hour without
      exerting himself.
    

      “Luncheon is ready,” the waitress said, appearing at the
      entrance to the boathouse, and they all hurried off. But two young men had
      taken the very seats that Madame Dufour had selected and were eating their
      luncheon. No doubt they were the owners of the sculls, for they were in
      boating costume. They were stretched out, almost lying on the chairs; they
      were sun-browned and their thin cotton jerseys, with short sleeves, showed
      their bare arms, which were as strong as a blacksmith's. They were two
      strong, athletic fellows, who showed in all their movements that
      elasticity and grace of limb which can only be acquired by exercise and
      which is so different to the deformity with which monotonous heavy work
      stamps the mechanic.
    

      They exchanged a rapid smile when they saw the mother and then a glance on
      seeing the daughter.
    

      “Let us give up our place,” one of them said; “it will
      make us acquainted with them.”
    

      The other got up immediately, and holding his black and red boating cap in
      his hand, he politely offered the ladies the only shady place in the
      garden. With many excuses they accepted, and that it might be more rural,
      they sat on the grass, without either tables or chairs.
    

      The two young men took their plates, knives, forks, etc., to a table a
      little way off and began to eat again, and their bare arms, which they
      showed continually, rather embarrassed the girl. She even pretended to
      turn her head aside and not to see them, while Madame Dufour, who was
      rather bolder, tempted by feminine curiosity, looked at them every moment,
      and, no doubt, compared them with the secret unsightliness of her husband.
      She had squatted herself on ground, with her legs tucked under her, after
      the manner of tailors, and she kept moving about restlessly, saying that
      ants were crawling about her somewhere. Monsieur Dufour, annoyed at the
      presence of the polite strangers, was trying to find a comfortable
      position which he did not, however, succeed in doing, and the young man
      with the yellow hair was eating as silently as an ogre.
    

      “It is lovely weather, monsieur,” the stout lady said to one
      of the boating men. She wished to be friendly because they had given up
      their place.
    

      “It is, indeed, madame,” he replied. “Do you often go
      into the country?”
    

      “Oh, only once or twice a year to get a little fresh air. And you,
      monsieur?”
    

      “I come and sleep here every night.”
    

      “Oh, that must be very nice!”
    

      “Certainly it is, madame.” And he gave them such a practical
      account of his daily life that it awakened afresh in the hearts of these
      shopkeepers who were deprived of the meadows and who longed for country
      walks, to that foolish love of nature which they all feel so strongly the
      whole year round behind the counter in their shop.
    

      The girl raised her eyes and looked at the oarsman with emotion and
      Monsieur Dufour spoke for the first time.
    

      “It is indeed a happy life,” he said. And then he added:
      “A little more rabbit, my dear?”
    

      “No, thank you,” she replied, and turning to the young men
      again, and pointing to their arms, asked: “Do you never feel cold
      like that?”
    

      They both began to laugh, and they astonished the family with an account
      of the enormous fatigue they could endure, of their bathing while in a
      state of tremendous perspiration, of their rowing in the fog at night; and
      they struck their chests violently to show how hollow they sounded.
    

      “Ah! You look very strong,” said the husband, who did not talk
      any more of the time when he used to beat the English. The girl was
      looking at them sideways now, and the young fellow with the yellow hair,
      who had swallowed some wine the wrong way, was coughing violently and
      bespattering Madame Dufour's cherry-colored silk dress. She got angry and
      sent for some water to wash the spots.
    

      Meanwhile it had grown unbearably hot, the sparkling river looked like a
      blaze of fire and the fumes of the wine were getting into their heads.
      Monsieur Dufour, who had a violent hiccough, had unbuttoned his waistcoat
      and the top button of his trousers, while his wife, who felt choking, was
      gradually unfastening her dress. The apprentice was shaking his yellow wig
      in a happy frame of mind, and kept helping himself to wine, and the old
      grandmother, feeling the effects of the wine, was very stiff and
      dignified. As for the girl, one noticed only a peculiar brightness in her
      eyes, while the brown cheeks became more rosy.
    

      The coffee finished, they suggested singing, and each of them sang or
      repeated a couplet, which the others applauded frantically. Then they got
      up with some difficulty, and while the two women, who were rather dizzy,
      were trying to get a breath of air, the two men, who were altogether
      drunk, were attempting gymnastics. Heavy, limp and with scarlet faces they
      hung or, awkwardly to the iron rings, without being able to raise
      themselves.
    

      Meanwhile the two boating men had got their boats into the water, and they
      came back and politely asked the ladies whether they would like a row.
    

      “Would you like one, Monsieur Dufour?” his wife exclaimed.
      “Please come!”
    

      He merely gave her a drunken nod, without understanding what she said.
      Then one of the rowers came up with two fishing rods in his hands, and the
      hope of catching a gudgeon, that great vision of the Parisian shopkeeper,
      made Dufour's dull eyes gleam, and he politely allowed them to do whatever
      they liked, while he sat in the shade under the bridge, with his feet
      dangling over the river, by the side of the young man with the yellow
      hair, who was sleeping soundly.
    

      One of the boating men made a martyr of himself and took the mother.
    

      “Let us go to the little wood on the Ile aux Anglais!” he
      called out as he rowed off. The other boat went more slowly, for the rower
      was looking at his companion so intently that he thought of nothing else,
      and his emotion seemed to paralyze his strength, while the girl, who was
      sitting in the bow, gave herself up to the enjoyment of being on the
      water. She felt a disinclination to think, a lassitude in her limbs and a
      total enervation, as if she were intoxicated, and her face was flushed and
      her breathing quickened. The effects of the wine, which were increased by
      the extreme heat, made all the trees on the bank seem to bow as she
      passed. A vague wish for enjoyment and a fermentation of her blood seemed
      to pervade her whole body, which was excited by the heat of the day, and
      she was also disturbed at this tete-a-tete on the water, in a place which
      seemed depopulated by the heat, with this young man who thought her
      pretty, whose ardent looks seemed to caress her skin and were as
      penetrating and pervading as the sun's rays.
    

      Their inability to speak increased their emotion, and they looked about
      them. At last, however, he made an effort and asked her name.
    

      “Henriette,” she said.
    

      “Why, my name is Henri,” he replied. The sound of their voices
      had calmed them, and they looked at the banks. The other boat had passed
      them and seemed to be waiting for them, and the rower called out:
    

      “We will meet you in the wood; we are going as far as Robinson's,
      because Madame Dufour is thirsty.” Then he bent over his oars again
      and rowed off so quickly that he was soon out of sight.
    

      Meanwhile a continual roar, which they had heard for some time, came
      nearer, and the river itself seemed to shiver, as if the dull noise were
      rising from its depths.
    

      “What is that noise?” she asked. It was the noise of the weir
      which cut the river in two at the island, and he was explaining it to her,
      when, above the noise of the waterfall, they heard the song of a bird,
      which seemed a long way off.
    

      “Listen!” he said; “the nightingales are singing during
      the day, so the female birds must be sitting.”
    

      A nightingale! She had never heard one before, and the idea of listening
      to one roused visions of poetic tenderness in her heart. A nightingale!
      That is to say, the invisible witness of her love trysts which Juliet
      invoked on her balcony; that celestial music which it attuned to human
      kisses, that eternal inspirer of all those languorous romances which open
      an ideal sky to all the poor little tender hearts of sensitive girls!
    

      She was going to hear a nightingale.
    

      “We must not make a noise,” her companion said, “and
      then we can go into the wood, and sit down close beside it.”
    

      The boat seemed to glide. They saw the trees on the island, the banks of
      which were so low that they could look into the depths of the thickets.
      They stopped, he made the boat fast, Henriette took hold of Henri's arm,
      and they went beneath the trees.
    

      “Stoop,” he said, so she stooped down, and they went into an
      inextricable thicket of creepers, leaves and reed grass, which formed an
      undiscoverable retreat, and which the young man laughingly called “his
      private room.”
    

      Just above their heads, perched in one of the trees which hid them, the
      bird was still singing. He uttered trills and roulades, and then loud,
      vibrating notes that filled the air and seemed to lose themselves on the
      horizon, across the level country, through that burning silence which
      weighed upon the whole landscape. They did not speak for fear of
      frightening it away. They were sitting close together, and, slowly,
      Henri's arm stole round the girl's waist and squeezed it gently. She took
      that daring hand without any anger, and kept removing it whenever he put
      it round her; without, however, feeling at all embarrassed by this caress,
      just as if it had been something quite natural, which she was resisting
      just as naturally.
    

      She was listening to the bird in ecstasy. She felt an infinite longing for
      happiness, for some sudden demonstration of tenderness, for the revelation
      of superhuman poetry, and she felt such a softening at her heart, and
      relaxation of her nerves, that she began to cry, without knowing why. The
      young man was now straining her close to him, yet she did not remove his
      arm; she did not think of it. Suddenly the nightingale stopped, and a
      voice called out in the distance:
    

      “Henriette!”
    

      “Do not reply,” he said in a low voice; “you will drive
      the bird away.”
    

      But she had no idea of doing so, and they remained in the same position
      for some time. Madame Dufour had sat down somewhere or other, for from
      time to time they heard the stout lady break out into little bursts of
      laughter.
    

      The girl was still crying; she was filled with strange sensations. Henri's
      head was on her shoulder, and suddenly he kissed her on the lips. She was
      surprised and angry, and, to avoid him, she stood up.
    

      They were both very pale when they left their grassy retreat. The blue sky
      appeared to them clouded and the ardent sun darkened; and they felt the
      solitude and the silence. They walked rapidly, side by side, without
      speaking or touching each other, for they seemed to have become
      irreconcilable enemies, as if disgust and hatred had arisen between them,
      and from time to time Henriette called out: “Mamma!”
    

      By and by they heard a noise behind a bush, and the stout lady appeared,
      looking rather confused, and her companion's face was wrinkled with smiles
      which he could not check.
    

      Madame Dufour took his arm, and they returned to the boats, and Henri, who
      was ahead, walked in silence beside the young girl. At last they got back
      to Bezons. Monsieur Dufour, who was now sober, was waiting for them very
      impatiently, while the young man with the yellow hair was having a
      mouthful of something to eat before leaving the inn. The carriage was
      waiting in the yard, and the grandmother, who had already got in, was very
      frightened at the thought of being overtaken by night before they reached
      Paris, as the outskirts were not safe.
    

      They all shook bands, and the Dufour family drove off.
    

      “Good-by, until we meet again!” the oarsmen cried, and the
      answer they got was a sigh and a tear.
    

      Two months later, as Henri was going along the Rue des Martyrs, he saw
      Dufour, Ironmonger, over a door, and so he went in, and saw the stout lady
      sitting at the counter. They recognized each other immediately, and after
      an interchange of polite greetings, he asked after them all.
    

      “And how is Mademoiselle Henriette?” he inquired specially.
    

      “Very well, thank you; she is married.”
    

      “Ah!” He felt a certain emotion, but said: “Whom did she
      marry?”
    

      “That young man who accompanied us, you know; he has joined us in
      business.”
    

      “I remember him perfectly.”
    

      He was going out, feeling very unhappy, though scarcely knowing why, when
      madame called him back.
    

      “And how is your friend?” she asked rather shyly.
    

      “He is very well, thank you.”
    

      “Please give him our compliments, and beg him to come and call, when
      he is in the neighborhood.”
    

      She then added: “Tell him it will give me great pleasure.”
    

      “I will be sure to do so. Adieu!”
    

      “Do not say that; come again very soon.”
    

      The next year, one very hot Sunday, all the details of that adventure,
      which Henri had never forgotten, suddenly came back to him so clearly that
      he returned alone to their room in the wood, and was overwhelmed with
      astonishment when he went in. She was sitting on the grass, looking very
      sad, while by her side, still in his shirt sleeves, the young man with the
      yellow hair was sleeping soundly, like some animal.
    

      She grew so pale when she saw Henri that at first he thought she was going
      to faint; then, however, they began to talk quite naturally. But when he
      told her that he was very fond of that spot, and went there frequently on
      Sundays to indulge in memories, she looked into his eyes for a long time.
    

      “I too, think of it,” she replied.
    

      “Come, my dear,” her husband said, with a yawn. “I think
      it is time for us to be going.”
    







      ROSE
    

      The two young women appear to be buried under a blanket of flowers. They
      are alone in the immense landau, which is filled with flowers like a giant
      basket. On the front seat are two small hampers of white satin filled with
      violets, and on the bearskin by which their knees are covered there is a
      mass of roses, mimosas, pinks, daisies, tuberoses and orange blossoms,
      interwoven with silk ribbons; the two frail bodies seem buried under this
      beautiful perfumed bed, which hides everything but the shoulders and arms
      and a little of the dainty waists.
    

      The coachman's whip is wound with a garland of anemones, the horses'
      traces are dotted with carnations, the spokes of the wheels are clothed in
      mignonette, and where the lanterns ought to be are two enormous round
      bouquets which look as though they were the eyes of this strange, rolling,
      flower-bedecked creature.
    

      The landau drives rapidly along the road, through the Rue d'Antibes,
      preceded, followed, accompanied, by a crowd of other carriages covered
      with flowers, full of women almost hidden by a sea of violets. It is the
      flower carnival at Cannes.
    

      The carriage reaches the Boulevard de la Fonciere, where the battle is
      waged. All along the immense avenue a double row of flower-bedecked
      vehicles are going and coming like an endless ribbon. Flowers are thrown
      from one to the other. They pass through the air like balls, striking
      fresh faces, bouncing and falling into the dust, where an army of
      youngsters pick them up.
    

      A thick crowd is standing on the sidewalks looking on and held in check by
      the mounted police, who pass brutally along pushing back the curious
      pedestrians as though to prevent the common people from mingling with the
      rich.
    

      In the carriages, people call to each other, recognize each other and
      bombard each other with roses. A chariot full of pretty women, dressed in
      red, like devils, attracts the eyes of all. A gentleman, who looks like
      the portraits of Henry IV., is throwing an immense bouquet which is held
      back by an elastic. Fearing the shock, the women hide their eyes and the
      men lower their heads, but the graceful, rapid and obedient missile
      describes a curve and returns to its master, who immediately throws it at
      some new face.
    

      The two young women begin to throw their stock of flowers by handfuls, and
      receive a perfect hail of bouquets; then, after an hour of warfare, a
      little tired, they tell the coachman to drive along the road which follows
      the seashore.
    

      The sun disappears behind Esterel, outlining the dark, rugged mountain
      against the sunset sky. The clear blue sea, as calm as a mill-pond,
      stretches out as far as the horizon, where it blends with the sky; and the
      fleet, anchored in the middle of the bay, looks like a herd of enormous
      beasts, motionless on the water, apocalyptic animals, armored and
      hump-backed, their frail masts looking like feathers, and with eyes which
      light up when evening approaches.
    

      The two young women, leaning back under the heavy robes, look out lazily
      over the blue expanse of water. At last one of them says:
    

      “How delightful the evenings are! How good everything seems! Don't
      you think so, Margot?”
    

      “Yes, it is good. But there is always something lacking.”
    

      “What is lacking? I feel perfectly happy. I don't need anything
      else.”
    

      “Yes, you do. You are not thinking of it. No matter how contented we
      may be, physically, we always long for something more—for the heart.”
    

      The other asked with a smile:
    

      “A little love?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      They stopped talking, their eyes fastened on the distant horizon, then the
      one called Marguerite murmured: “Life without that seems to me
      unbearable. I need to be loved, if only by a dog. But we are all alike, no
      matter what you may say, Simone.”
    

      “Not at all, my dear. I had rather not be loved at all than to be
      loved by the first comer. Do you think, for instance, that it would be
      pleasant to be loved by—by—”
    

      She was thinking by whom she might possibly be loved, glancing across the
      wide landscape. Her eyes, after traveling around the horizon, fell on the
      two bright buttons which were shining on the back of the coachman's
      livery, and she continued, laughing: “by my coachman?”
    

      Madame Margot barely smiled, and said in a low tone of voice:
    

      “I assure you that it is very amusing to be loved by a servant. It
      has happened to me two or three times. They roll their eyes in such a
      funny manner—it's enough to make you die laughing! Naturally, the
      more in love they are, the more severe one must be with them, and then,
      some day, for some reason, you dismiss them, because, if anyone should
      notice it, you would appear so ridiculous.”
    

      Madame Simone was listening, staring straight ahead of her, then she
      remarked:
    

      “No, I'm afraid that my footman's heart would not satisfy me. Tell
      me how you noticed that they loved you.”
    

      “I noticed it the same way that I do with other men—when they
      get stupid.”
    

      “The others don't seem stupid to me, when they love me.”
    

      “They are idiots, my dear, unable to talk, to answer, to understand
      anything.”
    

      “But how did you feel when you were loved by a servant? Were you—moved—flattered?”
    

      “Moved? no, flattered—yes a little. One is always flattered to
      be loved by a man, no matter who he may be.”
    

      “Oh, Margot!”
    

      “Yes, indeed, my dear! For instance, I will tell you of a peculiar
      incident which happened to me. You will see how curious and complex our
      emotions are, in such cases.
    

      “About four years ago I happened to be without a maid. I had tried
      five or six, one right after the other, and I was about ready to give up
      in despair, when I saw an advertisement in a newspaper of a young girl
      knowing how to cook, embroider, dress hair, who was looking for a position
      and who could furnish the best of references. Besides all these
      accomplishments, she could speak English.
    

      “I wrote to the given address, and the next day the person in
      question presented herself. She was tall, slender, pale, shy-looking. She
      had beautiful black eyes and a charming complexion; she pleased me
      immediately. I asked for her certificates; she gave me one in English, for
      she came, as she said, from Lady Rymwell's, where she had been for ten
      years.
    

      “The certificate showed that the young girl had left of her own free
      will, in order to return to France, and the only thing which they had had
      to find fault in her during her long period of service was a little French
      coquettishness.
    

      “This prudish English phrase even made me smile, and I immediately
      engaged this maid.
    

      “She came to me the same day. Her name was Rose.
    

      “At the end of a month I would have been helpless without her. She
      was a treasure, a pearl, a phenomenon.
    

      “She could dress my hair with infinite taste; she could trim a hat
      better than most milliners, and she could even make my dresses.
    

      “I was astonished at her accomplishments. I had never before been
      waited on in such a manner.
    

      “She dressed me rapidly and with a surprisingly light touch. I never
      felt her fingers on my skin, and nothing is so disagreeable to me as
      contact with a servant's hand. I soon became excessively lazy; it was so
      pleasant to be dressed from head to foot, and from lingerie to gloves, by
      this tall, timid girl, always blushing a little, and never saying a word.
      After my bath she would rub and massage me while I dozed a little on my
      couch; I almost considered her more of a friend than a servant.
    

      “One morning the janitor asked, mysteriously, to speak to me. I was
      surprised, and told him to come in. He was a good, faithful man, an old
      soldier, one of my husband's former orderlies.
    

      “He seemed to be embarrassed by what he had to say to me. At last he
      managed to mumble:
    

      “'Madame, the superintendent of police is downstairs.'
    

      “I asked quickly:
    

      “'What does he wish?'
    

      “'He wishes to search the house.'
    

      “Of course the police are useful, but I hate them. I do not think
      that it is a noble profession. I answered, angered and hurt:
    

      “'Why this search? For what reason? He shall not come in.'
    

      “The janitor continued:
    

      “'He says that there is a criminal hidden in the house.'
    

      “This time I was frightened and I told him to bring the inspector to
      me, so that I might get some explanation. He was a man with good manners
      and decorated with the Legion of Honor. He begged my pardon for disturbing
      me, and then informed me that I had, among my domestics, a convict.
    

      “I was shocked; and I answered that I could guarantee every servant
      in the house, and I began to enumerate them.
    

      “'The janitor, Pierre Courtin, an old soldier.'
    

      “'It's not he.'
    

      “'A stable-boy, son of farmers whom I know, and a groom whom you
      have just seen.'
    

      “'It's not he.'
    

      “'Then, monsieur, you see that you must be mistaken.'
    

      “'Excuse me, madame, but I am positive that I am not making a
      mistake.
    

      “As the conviction of a notable criminal is at stake, would you be
      so kind as to send for all your servants?”
    

      “At first I refused, but I finally gave in, and sent downstairs for
      everybody, men and women.
    

      “The inspector glanced at them and then declared:
    

      “'This isn't all.'
    

      “'Excuse me, monsieur, there is no one left but my maid, a young
      girl whom you could not possibly mistake for a convict.'
    

      “He asked:
    

      “'May I also see her?'
    

      “'Certainly.'
    

      “I rang for Rose, who immediately appeared. She had hardly entered
      the room, when the inspector made a motion, and two men whom I had not
      seen, hidden behind the door, sprang forward, seized her and tied her
      hands behind her back.
    

      “I cried out in anger and tried to rush forward to defend her. The
      inspector stopped me:
    

      “'This girl, madame, is a man whose name is Jean Nicolas Lecapet,
      condemned to death in 1879 for assaulting a woman and injuring her so that
      death resulted. His sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life. He
      escaped four months ago. We have been looking for him ever since.'
    

      “I was terrified, bewildered. I did not believe him. The
      commissioner continued, laughing:
    

      “'I can prove it to you. His right arm is tattooed.'
    

      “'The sleeve was rolled up. It was true. The inspector added, with
      bad taste:
    

      “'You can trust us for the other proofs.'
    

      “And they led my maid away!
    

      “Well, would you believe me, the thing that moved me most was not
      anger at having thus been played upon, deceived and made ridiculous, it
      was not the shame of having thus been dressed and undressed, handled and
      touched by this man—but a deep humiliation—a woman's
      humiliation. Do you understand?”
    

      “I am afraid I don't.”
    

      “Just think—this man had been condemned for—for
      assaulting a woman. Well! I thought of the one whom he had assaulted—and—and
      I felt humiliated—There! Do you understand now?”
    

      Madame Margot did not answer. She was looking straight ahead, her eyes
      fastened on the two shining buttons of the livery, with that sphinx-like
      smile which women sometimes have.
    







      ROSALIE PRUDENT
    

      There was a real mystery in this affair which neither the jury, nor the
      president, nor the public prosecutor himself could understand.
    

      The girl Prudent (Rosalie), servant at the Varambots', of Nantes, having
      become enceinte without the knowledge of her masters, had, during the
      night, killed and buried her child in the garden.
    

      It was the usual story of the infanticides committed by servant girls. But
      there was one inexplicable circumstance about this one. When the police
      searched the girl Prudent's room they discovered a complete infant's
      outfit, made by Rosalie herself, who had spent her nights for the last
      three months in cutting and sewing it. The grocer from whom she had bought
      her candles, out of her own wages, for this long piece of work had come to
      testify. It came out, moreover, that the sage-femme of the district,
      informed by Rosalie of her condition, had given her all necessary
      instructions and counsel in case the event should happen at a time when it
      might not be possible to get help. She had also procured a place at Poissy
      for the girl Prudent, who foresaw that her present employers would
      discharge her, for the Varambot couple did not trifle with morality.
    

      There were present at the trial both the man and the woman, a middle-class
      pair from the provinces, living on their income. They were so exasperated
      against this girl, who had sullied their house, that they would have liked
      to see her guillotined on the spot without a trial. The spiteful
      depositions they made against her became accusations in their mouths.
    

      The defendant, a large, handsome girl of Lower Normandy, well educated for
      her station in life, wept continuously and would not answer to anything.
    

      The court and the spectators were forced to the opinion that she had
      committed this barbarous act in a moment of despair and madness, since
      there was every indication that she had expected to keep and bring up her
      child.
    

      The president tried for the last time to make her speak, to get some
      confession, and, having urged her with much gentleness, he finally made
      her understand that all these men gathered here to pass judgment upon her
      were not anxious for her death and might even have pity on her.
    

      Then she made up her mind to speak.
    

      “Come, now, tell us, first, who is the father of this child?”
      he asked.
    

      Until then she had obstinately refused to give his name.
    

      But she replied suddenly, looking at her masters who had so cruelly
      calumniated her:
    

      “It is Monsieur Joseph, Monsieur Varambot's nephew.”
    

      The couple started in their seats and cried with one voice—“That's
      not true! She lies! This is infamous!”
    

      The president had them silenced and continued, “Go on, please, and
      tell us how it all happened.”
    

      Then she suddenly began to talk freely, relieving her pent-up heart, that
      poor, solitary, crushed heart—laying bare her sorrow, her whole
      sorrow, before those severe men whom she had until now taken for enemies
      and inflexible judges.
    

      “Yes, it was Monsieur Joseph Varambot, when he came on leave last
      year.”
    

      “What does Mr. Joseph Varambot do?”
    

      “He is a non-commissioned officer in the artillery, monsieur. Well,
      he stayed two months at the house, two months of the summer. I thought
      nothing about it when he began to look at me, and then flatter me, and
      make love to me all day long. And I let myself be taken in, monsieur. He
      kept saying to me that I was a handsome girl, that I was good company,
      that I just suited him—and I, I liked him well enough. What could I
      do? One listens to these things when one is alone—all alone—as
      I was. I am alone in the world, monsieur. I have no one to talk to—no
      one to tell my troubles to. I have no father, no mother, no brother, no
      sister, nobody. And when he began to talk to me it was as if I had a
      brother who had come back. And then he asked me to go with him to the
      river one evening, so that we might talk without disturbing any one. I
      went—I don't know—I don't know how it happened. He had his arm
      around me. Really I didn't want to—no—no—I could not—I
      felt like crying, the air was so soft —the moon was shining. No, I
      swear to you—I could not—he did what he wanted. That went on
      three weeks, as long as he stayed. I could have followed him to the ends
      of the world. He went away. I did not know that I was enceinte. I did not
      know it until the month after—”
    

      She began to cry so bitterly that they had to give her time to collect
      herself.
    

      Then the president resumed with the tone of a priest at the confessional:
      “Come, now, go on.”
    

      She began to talk again: “When I realized my condition I went to see
      Madame Boudin, who is there to tell you, and I asked her how it would be,
      in case it should come if she were not there. Then I made the outfit,
      sewing night after night, every evening until one o'clock in the morning;
      and then I looked for another place, for I knew very well that I should be
      sent away, but I wanted to stay in the house until the very last, so as to
      save my pennies, for I have not got very much and I should need my money
      for the little one.”
    

      “Then you did not intend to kill him?”
    

      “Oh, certainly not, monsieur!”
    

      “Why did you kill him, then?”
    

      “It happened this way. It came sooner than I expected. It came upon
      me in the kitchen, while I was doing the dishes. Monsieur and Madame
      Varambot were already asleep, so I went up, not without difficulty,
      dragging myself up by the banister, and I lay down on the bare floor. It
      lasted perhaps one hour, or two, or three; I don't know, I had such pain;
      and then I pushed him out with all my strength. I felt that he came out
      and I picked him up.
    

      “Ah! but I was glad, I assure you! I did all that Madame Boudin told
      me to do. And then I laid him on my bed. And then such a pain griped me
      again that I thought I should die. If you knew what it meant, you there,
      you would not do so much of this. I fell on my knees, and then toppled
      over backward on the floor; and it griped me again, perhaps one hour,
      perhaps two. I lay there all alone—and then another one comes—another
      little one—two, yes, two, like this. I took him up as I did the
      first one, and then I put him on the bed, the two side by side. Is it
      possible, tell me, two children, and I who get only twenty francs a month?
      Say, is it possible? One, yes, that can be managed by going without
      things, but not two. That turned my head. What do I know about it? Had I
      any choice, tell me?
    

      “What could I do? I felt as if my last hour had come. I put the
      pillow over them, without knowing why. I could not keep them both; and
      then I threw myself down, and I lay there, rolling over and over and
      crying until I saw the daylight come into the window. Both of them were
      quite dead under the pillow. Then I took them under my arms and went down
      the stairs out in the vegetable garden. I took the gardener's spade and I
      buried them under the earth, digging as deep a hole as I could, one here
      and the other one there, not together, so that they might not talk of
      their mother if these little dead bodies can talk. What do I know about
      it?
    

      “And then, back in my bed, I felt so sick that I could not get up.
      They sent for the doctor and he understood it all. I'm telling you the
      truth, Your Honor. Do what you like with me; I'm ready.”
    

      Half of the jury were blowing their noses violently to keep from crying.
      The women in the courtroom were sobbing.
    

      The president asked her:
    

      “Where did you bury the other one?”
    

      “The one that you have?” she asked.
    

      “Why, this one—this one was in the artichokes.”
    

      “Oh, then the other one is among the strawberries, by the well.”
    

      And she began to sob so piteously that no one could hear her unmoved.
    

      The girl Rosalie Prudent was acquitted.
    







      REGRET
    

      Monsieur Saval, who was called in Mantes “Father Saval,” had
      just risen from bed. He was weeping. It was a dull autumn day; the leaves
      were falling. They fell slowly in the rain, like a heavier and slower
      rain. M. Saval was not in good spirits. He walked from the fireplace to
      the window, and from the window to the fireplace. Life has its sombre
      days. It would no longer have any but sombre days for him, for he had
      reached the age of sixty-two. He is alone, an old bachelor, with nobody
      about him. How sad it is to die alone, all alone, without any one who is
      devoted to you!
    

      He pondered over his life, so barren, so empty. He recalled former days,
      the days of his childhood, the home, the house of his parents; his college
      days, his follies; the time he studied law in Paris, his father's illness,
      his death. He then returned to live with his mother. They lived together
      very quietly, and desired nothing more. At last the mother died. How sad
      life is! He lived alone since then, and now, in his turn, he, too, will
      soon be dead. He will disappear, and that will be the end. There will be
      no more of Paul Saval upon the earth. What a frightful thing! Other people
      will love, will laugh. Yes, people will go on amusing themselves, and he
      will no longer exist! Is it not strange that people can laugh, amuse
      themselves, be joyful under that eternal certainty of death? If this death
      were only probable, one could then have hope; but no, it is inevitable, as
      inevitable as that night follows the day.
    

      If, however, his life had been full! If he had done something; if he had
      had adventures, great pleasures, success, satisfaction of some kind or
      another. But no, nothing. He had done nothing, nothing but rise from bed,
      eat, at the same hours, and go to bed again. And he had gone on like that
      to the age of sixty-two years. He had not even taken unto himself a wife,
      as other men do. Why? Yes, why was it that he had not married? He might
      have done so, for he possessed considerable means. Had he lacked an
      opportunity? Perhaps! But one can create opportunities. He was
      indifferent; that was all. Indifference had been his greatest drawback,
      his defect, his vice. How many men wreck their lives through indifference!
      It is so difficult for some natures to get out of bed, to move about, to
      take long walks, to speak, to study any question.
    

      He had not even been loved. No woman had reposed on his bosom, in a
      complete abandon of love. He knew nothing of the delicious anguish of
      expectation, the divine vibration of a hand in yours, of the ecstasy of
      triumphant passion.
    

      What superhuman happiness must overflow your heart, when lips encounter
      lips for the first time, when the grasp of four arms makes one being of
      you, a being unutterably happy, two beings infatuated with one another.
    

      M. Saval was sitting before the fire, his feet on the fender, in his
      dressing gown. Assuredly his life had been spoiled, completely spoiled. He
      had, however, loved. He had loved secretly, sadly, and indifferently, in a
      manner characteristic of him in everything. Yes, he had loved his old
      friend, Madame Sandres, the wife of his old companion, Sandres. Ah! if he
      had known her as a young girl! But he had met her too late; she was
      already married. Unquestionably, he would have asked her hand! How he had
      loved her, nevertheless, without respite, since the first day he set eyes
      on her!
    

      He recalled his emotion every time he saw her, his grief on leaving her,
      the many nights that he could not sleep, because he was thinking of her.
    

      On rising in the morning he was somewhat more rational than on the
      previous evening.
    

      Why?
    

      How pretty she was formerly, so dainty, with fair curly hair, and always
      laughing. Sandres was not the man she should have chosen. She was now
      fifty-two years of age. She seemed happy. Ah! if she had only loved him in
      days gone by; yes, if she had only loved him! And why should she not have
      loved him, he, Saval, seeing that he loved her so much, yes, she, Madame
      Sandres!
    

      If only she could have guessed. Had she not guessed anything, seen
      anything, comprehended anything? What would she have thought? If he had
      spoken, what would she have answered?
    

      And Saval asked himself a thousand other things. He reviewed his whole
      life, seeking to recall a multitude of details.
    

      He recalled all the long evenings spent at the house of Sandres, when the
      latter's wife was young, and so charming.
    

      He recalled many things that she had said to him, the intonations of her
      voice, the little significant smiles that meant so much.
    

      He recalled their walks, the three of them together, along the banks of
      the Seine, their luncheon on the grass on Sundays, for Sandres was
      employed at the sub-prefecture. And all at once the distinct recollection
      came to him of an afternoon spent with her in a little wood on the banks
      of the river.
    

      They had set out in the morning, carrying their provisions in baskets. It
      was a bright spring morning, one of those days which intoxicate one.
      Everything smells fresh, everything seems happy. The voices of the birds
      sound more joyous, and they fly more swiftly. They had luncheon on the
      grass, under the willow trees, quite close to the water, which glittered
      in the sun's rays. The air was balmy, charged with the odors of fresh
      vegetation; they drank it in with delight. How pleasant everything was on
      that day!
    

      After lunch, Sandres went to sleep on the broad of his back. “The
      best nap he had in his life,” said he, when he woke up.
    

      Madame Sandres had taken the arm of Saval, and they started to walk along
      the river bank.
    

      She leaned tenderly on his arm. She laughed and said to him: “I am
      intoxicated, my friend, I am quite intoxicated.” He looked at her,
      his heart going pit-a-pat. He felt himself grow pale, fearful that he
      might have looked too boldly at her, and that the trembling of his hand
      had revealed his passion.
    

      She had made a wreath of wild flowers and water-lilies, and she asked him:
      “Do I look pretty like that?”
    

      As he did not answer—for he could find nothing to say, he would have
      liked to go down on his knees—she burst out laughing, a sort of
      annoyed, displeased laugh, as she said: “Great goose, what ails you?
      You might at least say something.”
    

      He felt like crying, but could not even yet find a word to say.
    

      All these things came back to him now, as vividly as on the day when they
      took place. Why had she said this to him, “Great goose, what ails
      you? You might at least say something!”
    

      And he recalled how tenderly she had leaned on his arm. And in passing
      under a shady tree he had felt her ear brushing his cheek, and he had
      moved his head abruptly, lest she should suppose he was too familiar.
    

      When he had said to her: “Is it not time to return?” she
      darted a singular look at him. “Certainly,” she said, “certainly,”
      regarding him at the same time in a curious manner. He had not thought of
      it at the time, but now the whole thing appeared to him quite plain.
    

      “Just as you like, my friend. If you are tired let us go back.”
    

      And he had answered: “I am not fatigued; but Sandres may be awake
      now.”
    

      And she had said: “If you are afraid of my husband's being awake,
      that is another thing. Let us return.”
    

      On their way back she remained silent, and leaned no longer on his arm.
      Why?
    

      At that time it had never occurred to him, to ask himself “why.”
      Now he seemed to apprehend something that he had not then understood.
    

      Could it?
    

      M. Saval felt himself blush, and he got up at a bound, as if he were
      thirty years younger and had heard Madame Sandres say, “I love you.”
    

      Was it possible? That idea which had just entered his mind tortured him.
      Was it possible that he had not seen, had not guessed?
    

      Oh! if that were true, if he had let this opportunity of happiness pass
      without taking advantage of it!
    

      He said to himself: “I must know. I cannot remain in this state of
      doubt. I must know!” He thought: “I am sixty-two years of age,
      she is fifty-eight; I may ask her that now without giving offense.”
    

      He started out.
    

      The Sandres' house was situated on the other side of the street, almost
      directly opposite his own. He went across and knocked at the door, and a
      little servant opened it.
    

      “You here at this hour, Saval! Has some accident happened to you?”
    

      “No, my girl,” he replied; “but go and tell your
      mistress that I want to speak to her at once.”
    

      “The fact is madame is preserving pears for the winter, and she is
      in the preserving room. She is not dressed, you understand.”
    

      “Yes, but go and tell her that I wish to see her on a very important
      matter.”
    

      The little servant went away, and Saval began to walk, with long, nervous
      strides, up and down the drawing-room. He did not feel in the least
      embarrassed, however. Oh! he was merely going to ask her something, as he
      would have asked her about some cooking recipe. He was sixty-two years of
      age!
    

      The door opened and madame appeared. She was now a large woman, fat and
      round, with full cheeks and a sonorous laugh. She walked with her arms
      away from her sides and her sleeves tucked up, her bare arms all covered
      with fruit juice. She asked anxiously:
    

      “What is the matter with you, my friend? You are not ill, are you?”
    

      “No, my dear friend; but I wish to ask you one thing, which to me is
      of the first importance, something which is torturing my heart, and I want
      you to promise that you will answer me frankly.”
    

      She laughed, “I am always frank. Say on.”
    

      “Well, then. I have loved you from the first day I ever saw you. Can
      you have any doubt of this?”
    

      She responded, laughing, with something of her former tone of voice.
    

      “Great goose! what ails you? I knew it from the very first day!”
    

      Saval began to tremble. He stammered out: “You knew it? Then . . .”
    

      He stopped.
    

      She asked:
    

      “Then?”
    

      He answered:
    

      “Then—what did you think? What—what—what would you
      have answered?”
    

      She broke into a peal of laughter. Some of the juice ran off the tips of
      her fingers on to the carpet.
    

      “What?”
    

      “I? Why, you did not ask me anything. It was not for me to declare
      myself!”
    

      He then advanced a step toward her.
    

      “Tell me—tell me . . . . You remember the day when Sandres
      went to sleep on the grass after lunch . . . when we had walked together
      as far as the bend of the river, below . . .”
    

      He waited, expectantly. She had ceased to laugh, and looked at him,
      straight in the eyes.
    

      “Yes, certainly, I remember it.”
    

      He answered, trembling all over:
    

      “Well—that day—if I had been—if I had been—venturesome—what
      would you have done?”
    

      She began to laugh as only a happy woman can laugh, who has nothing to
      regret, and responded frankly, in a clear voice tinged with irony:
    

      “I would have yielded, my friend.”
    

      She then turned on her heels and went back to her jam-making.
    

      Saval rushed into the street, cast down, as though he had met with some
      disaster. He walked with giant strides through the rain, straight on,
      until he reached the river bank, without thinking where he was going. He
      then turned to the right and followed the river. He walked a long time, as
      if urged on by some instinct. His clothes were running with water, his hat
      was out of shape, as soft as a rag, and dripping like a roof. He walked
      on, straight in front of him. At last, he came to the place where they had
      lunched on that day so long ago, the recollection of which tortured his
      heart. He sat down under the leafless trees, and wept.
    







      A SISTER'S CONFESSION
    

      Marguerite de Therelles was dying. Although she was only fifty-six years
      old she looked at least seventy-five. She gasped for breath, her face
      whiter than the sheets, and had spasms of violent shivering, with her face
      convulsed and her eyes haggard as though she saw a frightful vision.
    

      Her elder sister, Suzanne, six years older than herself, was sobbing on
      her knees beside the bed. A small table close to the dying woman's couch
      bore, on a white cloth, two lighted candles, for the priest was expected
      at any moment to administer extreme unction and the last communion.
    

      The apartment wore that melancholy aspect common to death chambers; a look
      of despairing farewell. Medicine bottles littered the furniture; linen lay
      in the corners into which it had been kicked or swept. The very chairs
      looked, in their disarray, as if they were terrified and had run in all
      directions. Death—terrible Death—was in the room, hidden,
      awaiting his prey.
    

      This history of the two sisters was an affecting one. It was spoken of far
      and wide; it had drawn tears from many eyes.
    

      Suzanne, the elder, had once been passionately loved by a young man, whose
      affection she returned. They were engaged to be married, and the wedding
      day was at hand, when Henry de Sampierre suddenly died.
    

      The young girl's despair was terrible, and she took an oath never to
      marry. She faithfully kept her vow and adopted widow's weeds for the
      remainder of her life.
    

      But one morning her sister, her little sister Marguerite, then only twelve
      years old, threw herself into Suzanne's arms, sobbing: “Sister, I
      don't want you to be unhappy. I don't want you to mourn all your life.
      I'll never leave you—never, never, never! I shall never marry,
      either. I'll stay with you always—always!”
    

      Suzanne kissed her, touched by the child's devotion, though not putting
      any faith in her promise.
    

      But the little one kept her word, and, despite her parents' remonstrances,
      despite her elder sister's prayers, never married. She was remarkably
      pretty and refused many offers. She never left her sister.
    

      They spent their whole life together, without a single day's separation.
      They went everywhere together and were inseparable. But Marguerite was
      pensive, melancholy, sadder than her sister, as if her sublime sacrifice
      had undermined her spirits. She grew older more quickly; her hair was
      white at thirty; and she was often ill, apparently stricken with some
      unknown, wasting malady.
    

      And now she would be the first to die.
    

      She had not spoken for twenty-four hours, except to whisper at daybreak:
    

      “Send at once for the priest.”
    

      And she had since remained lying on her back, convulsed with agony, her
      lips moving as if unable to utter the dreadful words that rose in her
      heart, her face expressive of a terror distressing to witness.
    

      Suzanne, distracted with grief, her brow pressed against the bed, wept
      bitterly, repeating over and over again the words:
    

      “Margot, my poor Margot, my little one!”
    

      She had always called her “my little one,” while Marguerite's
      name for the elder was invariably “sister.”
    

      A footstep sounded on the stairs. The door opened. An acolyte appeared,
      followed by the aged priest in his surplice. As soon as she saw him the
      dying woman sat up suddenly in bed, opened her lips, stammered a few words
      and began to scratch the bed-clothes, as if she would have made hole in
      them.
    

      Father Simon approached, took her hand, kissed her on the forehead and
      said in a gentle voice:
    

      “May God pardon your sins, my daughter. Be of good courage. Now is
      the moment to confess them—speak!”
    

      Then Marguerite, shuddering from head to foot, so that the very bed shook
      with her nervous movements, gasped:
    

      “Sit down, sister, and listen.”
    

      The priest stooped toward the prostrate Suzanne, raised her to her feet,
      placed her in a chair, and, taking a hand of each of the sisters,
      pronounced:
    

      “Lord God! Send them strength! Shed Thy mercy upon them.”
    

      And Marguerite began to speak. The words issued from her lips one by one—hoarse,
      jerky, tremulous.
    

      “Pardon, pardon, sister! pardon me! Oh, if only you knew how I have
      dreaded this moment all my life!”
    

      Suzanne faltered through her tears:
    

      “But what have I to pardon, little one? You have given me
      everything, sacrificed all to me. You are an angel.”
    

      But Marguerite interrupted her:
    

      “Be silent, be silent! Let me speak! Don't stop me! It is terrible.
      Let me tell all, to the very end, without interruption. Listen. You
      remember—you remember—Henry—”
    

      Suzanne trembled and looked at her sister. The younger one went on:
    

      “In order to understand you must hear everything. I was twelve years
      old—only twelve—you remember, don't you? And I was spoilt; I
      did just as I pleased. You remember how everybody spoilt me? Listen. The
      first time he came he had on his riding boots; he dismounted, saying that
      he had a message for father. You remember, don't you? Don't speak. Listen.
      When I saw him I was struck with admiration. I thought him so handsome,
      and I stayed in a corner of the drawing-room all the time he was talking.
      Children are strange—and terrible. Yes, indeed, I dreamt of him.
    

      “He came again—many times. I looked at him with all my eyes,
      all my heart. I was large for my age and much more precocious than—any
      one suspected. He came often. I thought only of him. I often whispered to
      myself:
    

      “'Henry-Henry de Sampierre!'
    

      “Then I was told that he was going to marry you. That was a blow!
      Oh, sister, a terrible blow—terrible! I wept all through three
      sleepless nights.
    

      “He came every afternoon after lunch. You remember, don't you? Don't
      answer. Listen. You used to make cakes that he was very fond of—with
      flour, butter and milk. Oh, I know how to make them. I could make them
      still, if necessary. He would swallow them at one mouthful and wash them
      down with a glass of wine, saying: 'Delicious!' Do you remember the way he
      said it?
    

      “I was jealous—jealous! Your wedding day was drawing near. It
      was only a fortnight distant. I was distracted. I said to myself: 'He
      shall not marry Suzanne—no, he shall not! He shall marry me when I
      am old enough! I shall never love any one half so much.' But one evening,
      ten days before the wedding, you went for a stroll with him in the
      moonlight before the house—and yonder—under the pine tree, the
      big pine tree—he kissed you—kissed you—and held you in
      his arms so long—so long! You remember, don't you? It was probably
      the first time. You were so pale when you came back to the drawing-room!
    

      “I saw you. I was there in the shrubbery. I was mad with rage! I
      would have killed you both if I could!
    

      “I said to myself: 'He shall never marry Suzanne—never! He
      shall marry no one! I could not bear it.' And all at once I began to hate
      him intensely.
    

      “Then do you know what I did? Listen. I had seen the gardener
      prepare pellets for killing stray dogs. He would crush a bottle into small
      pieces with a stone and put the ground glass into a ball of meat.
    

      “I stole a small medicine bottle from mother's room. I ground it
      fine with a hammer and hid the glass in my pocket. It was a glistening
      powder. The next day, when you had made your little cakes; I opened them
      with a knife and inserted the glass. He ate three. I ate one myself. I
      threw the six others into the pond. The two swans died three days later.
      You remember? Oh, don't speak! Listen, listen. I, I alone did not die. But
      I have always been ill. Listen—he died—you know—listen—that
      was not the worst. It was afterward, later—always—the most
      terrible—listen.
    

      “My life, all my life—such torture! I said to myself: 'I will
      never leave my sister. And on my deathbed I will tell her all.' And now I
      have told. And I have always thought of this moment—the moment when
      all would be told. Now it has come. It is terrible—oh!—sister—
    

      “I have always thought, morning and evening, day and night: 'I shall
      have to tell her some day!' I waited. The horror of it! It is done. Say
      nothing. Now I am afraid—I am afraid! Oh! Supposing I should see him
      again, by and by, when I am dead! See him again! Only to think of it! I
      dare not—yet I must. I am going to die. I want you to forgive me. I
      insist on it. I cannot meet him without your forgiveness. Oh, tell her to
      forgive me, Father! Tell her. I implore you! I cannot die without it.”
    

      She was silent and lay back, gasping for breath, still plucking at the
      sheets with her fingers.
    

      Suzanne had hidden her face in her hands and did not move. She was
      thinking of him whom she had loved so long. What a life of happiness they
      might have had together! She saw him again in the dim and distant
      past-that past forever lost. Beloved dead! how the thought of them rends
      the heart! Oh! that kiss, his only kiss! She had retained the memory of it
      in her soul. And, after that, nothing, nothing more throughout her whole
      existence!
    

      The priest rose suddenly and in a firm, compelling voice said:
    

      “Mademoiselle Suzanne, your sister is dying!”
    

      Then Suzanne, raising her tear-stained face, put her arms round her
      sister, and kissing her fervently, exclaimed:
    

      “I forgive you, I forgive you, little one!”
    







      COCO
    

      Throughout the whole countryside the Lucas farn, was known as “the
      Manor.” No one knew why. The peasants doubtless attached to this
      word, “Manor,” a meaning of wealth and of splendor, for this
      farm was undoubtedly the largest, richest and the best managed in the
      whole neighborhood.
    

      The immense court, surrounded by five rows of magnificent trees, which
      sheltered the delicate apple trees from the harsh wind of the plain,
      inclosed in its confines long brick buildings used for storing fodder and
      grain, beautiful stables built of hard stone and made to accommodate
      thirty horses, and a red brick residence which looked like a little
      chateau.
    

      Thanks for the good care taken, the manure heaps were as little offensive
      as such things can be; the watch-dogs lived in kennels, and countless
      poultry paraded through the tall grass.
    

      Every day, at noon, fifteen persons, masters, farmhands and the women
      folks, seated themselves around the long kitchen table where the soup was
      brought in steaming in a large, blue-flowered bowl.
    

      The beasts-horses, cows, pigs and sheep-were fat, well fed and clean.
      Maitre Lucas, a tall man who was getting stout, would go round three times
      a day, overseeing everything and thinking of everything.
    

      A very old white horse, which the mistress wished to keep until its
      natural death, because she had brought it up and had always used it, and
      also because it recalled many happy memories, was housed, through sheer
      kindness of heart, at the end of the stable.
    

      A young scamp about fifteen years old, Isidore Duval by name, and called,
      for convenience, Zidore, took care of this pensioner, gave him his measure
      of oats and fodder in winter, and in summer was supposed to change his
      pasturing place four times a day, so that he might have plenty of fresh
      grass.
    

      The animal, almost crippled, lifted with difficulty his legs, large at the
      knees and swollen above the hoofs. His coat, which was no longer curried,
      looked like white hair, and his long eyelashes gave to his eyes a sad
      expression.
    

      When Zidore took the animal to pasture, he had to pull on the rope with
      all his might, because it walked so slowly; and the youth, bent over and
      out of breath, would swear at it, exasperated at having to care for this
      old nag.
    

      The farmhands, noticing the young rascal's anger against Coco, were amused
      and would continually talk of the horse to Zidore, in order to exasperate
      him. His comrades would make sport with him. In the village he was called
      Coco-Zidore.
    

      The boy would fume, feeling an unholy desire to revenge himself on the
      horse. He was a thin, long-legged, dirty child, with thick, coarse,
      bristly red hair. He seemed only half-witted, and stuttered as though
      ideas were unable to form in his thick, brute-like mind.
    

      For a long time he had been unable to understand why Coco should be kept,
      indignant at seeing things wasted on this useless beast. Since the horse
      could no longer work, it seemed to him unjust that he should be fed; he
      revolted at the idea of wasting oats, oats which were so expensive, on
      this paralyzed old plug. And often, in spite of the orders of Maitre
      Lucas, he would economize on the nag's food, only giving him half measure.
      Hatred grew in his confused, childlike mind, the hatred of a stingy, mean,
      fierce, brutal and cowardly peasant.
    

      When summer came he had to move the animal about in the pasture. It was
      some distance away. The rascal, angrier every morning, would start, with
      his dragging step, across the wheat fields. The men working in the fields
      would shout to him, jokingly:
    

      “Hey, Zidore, remember me to Coco.”
    

      He would not answer; but on the way he would break off a switch, and, as
      soon as he had moved the old horse, he would let it begin grazing; then,
      treacherously sneaking up behind it, he would slash its legs. The animal
      would try to escape, to kick, to get away from the blows, and run around
      in a circle about its rope, as though it had been inclosed in a circus
      ring. And the boy would slash away furiously, running along behind, his
      teeth clenched in anger.
    

      Then he would go away slowly, without turning round, while the horse
      watched him disappear, his ribs sticking out, panting as a result of his
      unusual exertions. Not until the blue blouse of the young peasant was out
      of sight would he lower his thin white head to the grass.
    

      As the nights were now warm, Coco was allowed to sleep out of doors, in
      the field behind the little wood. Zidore alone went to see him. The boy
      threw stones at him to amuse himself. He would sit down on an embankment
      about ten feet away and would stay there about half an hour, from time to
      time throwing a sharp stone at the old horse, which remained standing tied
      before his enemy, watching him continually and not daring to eat before he
      was gone.
    

      This one thought persisted in the mind of the young scamp: “Why feed
      this horse, which is no longer good for anything?” It seemed to him
      that this old nag was stealing the food of the others, the goods of man
      and God, that he was even robbing him, Zidore, who was working.
    

      Then, little by little, each day, the boy began to shorten the length of
      rope which allowed the horse to graze.
    

      The hungry animal was growing thinner, and starving. Too feeble to break
      his bonds, he would stretch his head out toward the tall, green, tempting
      grass, so near that he could smell, and yet so far that he could not touch
      it.
    

      But one morning Zidore had an idea: it was, not to move Coco any more. He
      was tired of walking so far for that old skeleton. He came, however, in
      order to enjoy his vengeance. The beast watched him anxiously. He did not
      beat him that day. He walked around him with his hands in his pockets. He
      even pretended to change his place, but he sank the stake in exactly the
      same hole, and went away overjoyed with his invention.
    

      The horse, seeing him leave, neighed to call him back; but the rascal
      began to run, leaving him alone, entirely alone in his field, well tied
      down and without a blade of grass within reach.
    

      Starving, he tried to reach the grass which he could touch with the end of
      his nose. He got on his knees, stretching out his neck and his long,
      drooling lips. All in vain. The old animal spent the whole day in useless,
      terrible efforts. The sight of all that green food, which stretched out on
      all sides of him, served to increase the gnawing pangs of hunger.
    

      The scamp did not return that day. He wandered through the woods in search
      of nests.
    

      The next day he appeared upon the scene again. Coco, exhausted, had lain
      down. When he saw the boy, he got up, expecting at last to have his place
      changed.
    

      But the little peasant did not even touch the mallet, which was lying on
      the ground. He came nearer, looked at the animal, threw at his head a
      clump of earth which flattened out against the white hair, and he started
      off again, whistling.
    

      The horse remained standing as long as he could see him; then, knowing
      that his attempts to reach the near-by grass would be hopeless, he once
      more lay down on his side and closed his eyes.
    

      The following day Zidore did not come.
    

      When he did come at last, he found Coco still stretched out; he saw that
      he was dead.
    

      Then he remained standing, looking at him, pleased with what he had done,
      surprised that it should already be all over. He touched him with his
      foot, lifted one of his legs and then let it drop, sat on him and remained
      there, his eyes fixed on the grass, thinking of nothing. He returned to
      the farm, but did not mention the accident, because he wished to wander
      about at the hours when he used to change the horse's pasture. He went to
      see him the next day. At his approach some crows flew away. Countless
      flies were walking over the body and were buzzing around it. When he
      returned home, he announced the event. The animal was so old that nobody
      was surprised. The master said to two of the men:
    

      “Take your shovels and dig a hole right where he is.”
    

      The men buried the horse at the place where he had died of hunger. And the
      grass grew thick, green and vigorous, fed by the poor body.
    







      DEAD WOMAN'S SECRET
    

      The woman had died without pain, quietly, as a woman should whose life had
      been blameless. Now she was resting in her bed, lying on her back, her
      eyes closed, her features calm, her long white hair carefully arranged as
      though she had done it up ten minutes before dying. The whole pale
      countenance of the dead woman was so collected, so calm, so resigned that
      one could feel what a sweet soul had lived in that body, what a quiet
      existence this old soul had led, how easy and pure the death of this
      parent had been.
    

      Kneeling beside the bed, her son, a magistrate with inflexible principles,
      and her daughter, Marguerite, known as Sister Eulalie, were weeping as
      though their hearts would break. She had, from childhood up, armed them
      with a strict moral code, teaching them religion, without weakness, and
      duty, without compromise. He, the man, had become a judge and handled the
      law as a weapon with which he smote the weak ones without pity. She, the
      girl, influenced by the virtue which had bathed her in this austere
      family, had become the bride of the Church through her loathing for man.
    

      They had hardly known their father, knowing only that he had made their
      mother most unhappy, without being told any other details.
    

      The nun was wildly-kissing the dead woman's hand, an ivory hand as white
      as the large crucifix lying across the bed. On the other side of the long
      body the other hand seemed still to be holding the sheet in the death
      grasp; and the sheet had preserved the little creases as a memory of those
      last movements which precede eternal immobility.
    

      A few light taps on the door caused the two sobbing heads to look up, and
      the priest, who had just come from dinner, returned. He was red and out of
      breath from his interrupted digestion, for he had made himself a strong
      mixture of coffee and brandy in order to combat the fatigue of the last
      few nights and of the wake which was beginning.
    

      He looked sad, with that assumed sadness of the priest for whom death is a
      bread winner. He crossed himself and approaching with his professional
      gesture: “Well, my poor children! I have come to help you pass these
      last sad hours.” But Sister Eulalie suddenly arose. “Thank
      you, father, but my brother and I prefer to remain alone with her. This is
      our last chance to see her, and we wish to be together, all three of us,
      as we—we—used to be when we were small and our poor mo—mother——”
    

      Grief and tears stopped her; she could not continue.
    

      Once more serene, the priest bowed, thinking of his bed. “As you
      wish, my children.” He kneeled, crossed himself, prayed, arose and
      went out quietly, murmuring: “She was a saint!”
    

      They remained alone, the dead woman and her children. The ticking of the
      clock, hidden in the shadow, could be heard distinctly, and through the
      open window drifted in the sweet smell of hay and of woods, together with
      the soft moonlight. No other noise could be heard over the land except the
      occasional croaking of the frog or the chirping of some belated insect. An
      infinite peace, a divine melancholy, a silent serenity surrounded this
      dead woman, seemed to be breathed out from her and to appease nature
      itself.
    

      Then the judge, still kneeling, his head buried in the bed clothes, cried
      in a voice altered by grief and deadened by the sheets and blankets:
      “Mamma, mamma, mamma!” And his sister, frantically striking
      her forehead against the woodwork, convulsed, twitching and trembling as
      in an epileptic fit, moaned: “Jesus, Jesus, mamma, Jesus!” And
      both of them, shaken by a storm of grief, gasped and choked.
    

      The crisis slowly calmed down and they began to weep quietly, just as on
      the sea when a calm follows a squall.
    

      A rather long time passed and they arose and looked at their dead. And the
      memories, those distant memories, yesterday so dear, to-day so torturing,
      came to their minds with all the little forgotten details, those little
      intimate familiar details which bring back to life the one who has left.
      They recalled to each other circumstances, words, smiles, intonations of
      the mother who was no longer to speak to them. They saw her again happy
      and calm. They remembered things which she had said, and a little motion
      of the hand, like beating time, which she often used when emphasizing
      something important.
    

      And they loved her as they never had loved her before. They measured the
      depth of their grief, and thus they discovered how lonely they would find
      themselves.
    

      It was their prop, their guide, their whole youth, all the best part of
      their lives which was disappearing. It was their bond with life, their
      mother, their mamma, the connecting link with their forefathers which they
      would thenceforth miss. They now became solitary, lonely beings; they
      could no longer look back.
    

      The nun said to her brother: “You remember how mamma used always to
      read her old letters; they are all there in that drawer. Let us, in turn,
      read them; let us live her whole life through tonight beside her! It would
      be like a road to the cross, like making the acquaintance of her mother,
      of our grandparents, whom we never knew, but whose letters are there and
      of whom she so often spoke, do you remember?”
    

      Out of the drawer they took about ten little packages of yellow paper,
      tied with care and arranged one beside the other. They threw these relics
      on the bed and chose one of them on which the word “Father”
      was written. They opened and read it.
    

      It was one of those old-fashioned letters which one finds in old family
      desk drawers, those epistles which smell of another century. The first one
      started: “My dear,” another one: “My beautiful little
      girl,” others: “My dear child,” or: “My dear
      (laughter).” And suddenly the nun began to read aloud, to read over
      to the dead woman her whole history, all her tender memories. The judge,
      resting his elbow on the bed, was listening with his eyes fastened on his
      mother. The motionless body seemed happy.
    

      Sister Eulalie, interrupting herself, said suddenly:
    

      “These ought to be put in the grave with her; they ought to be used
      as a shroud and she ought to be buried in it.” She took another
      package, on which no name was written. She began to read in a firm voice:
      “My adored one, I love you wildly. Since yesterday I have been
      suffering the tortures of the damned, haunted by our memory. I feel your
      lips against mine, your eyes in mine, your breast against mine. I love
      you, I love you! You have driven me mad. My arms open, I gasp, moved by a
      wild desire to hold you again. My whole soul and body cries out for you,
      wants you. I have kept in my mouth the taste of your kisses—”
    

      The judge had straightened himself up. The nun stopped reading. He
      snatched the letter from her and looked for the signature. There was none,
      but only under the words, “The man who adores you,” the name
      “Henry.” Their father's name was Rene. Therefore this was not
      from him. The son then quickly rummaged through the package of letters,
      took one out and read: “I can no longer live without your caresses.”
      Standing erect, severe as when sitting on the bench, he looked unmoved at
      the dead woman. The nun, straight as a statue, tears trembling in the
      corners of her eyes, was watching her brother, waiting. Then he crossed
      the room slowly, went to the window and stood there, gazing out into the
      dark night.
    

      When he turned around again Sister Eulalie, her eyes dry now, was still
      standing near the bed, her head bent down.
    

      He stepped forward, quickly picked up the letters and threw them pell-mell
      back into the drawer. Then he closed the curtains of the bed.
    

      When daylight made the candles on the table turn pale the son slowly left
      his armchair, and without looking again at the mother upon whom he had
      passed sentence, severing the tie that united her to son and daughter, he
      said slowly: “Let us now retire, sister.”
    







      A HUMBLE DRAMA
    

      Meetings that are unexpected constitute the charm of traveling. Who has
      not experienced the joy of suddenly coming across a Parisian, a college
      friend, or a neighbor, five hundred miles from home? Who has not passed a
      night awake in one of those small, rattling country stage-coaches, in
      regions where steam is still a thing unknown, beside a strange young
      woman, of whom one has caught only a glimpse in the dim light of the
      lantern, as she entered the carriage in front of a white house in some
      small country town?
    

      And the next morning, when one's head and ears feel numb with the
      continuous tinkling of the bells and the loud rattling of the windows,
      what a charming sensation it is to see your pretty neighbor open her eyes,
      startled, glance around her, arrange her rebellious hair with her slender
      fingers, adjust her hat, feel with sure hand whether her corset is still
      in place, her waist straight, and her skirt not too wrinkled.
    

      She glances at you coldly and curiously. Then she leans back and no longer
      seems interested in anything but the country.
    

      In spite of yourself, you watch her; and in spite of yourself you keep on
      thinking of her. Who is she? Whence does she come? Where is she going? In
      spite of yourself you spin a little romance around her. She is pretty; she
      seems charming! Happy he who . . . Life might be delightful with her. Who
      knows? She is perhaps the woman of our dreams, the one suited to our
      disposition, the one for whom our heart calls.
    

      And how delicious even the disappointment at seeing her get out at the
      gate of a country house! A man stands there, who is awaiting her, with two
      children and two maids. He takes her in his arms and kisses as he lifts
      her out. Then she stoops over the little ones, who hold up their hands to
      her; she kisses them tenderly; and then they all go away together, down a
      path, while the maids catch the packages which the driver throws down to
      them from the coach.
    

      Adieu! It is all over. You never will see her again! Adieu to the young
      woman who has passed the night by your side. You know her no more, you
      have not spoken to her; all the same, you feel a little sad to see her go.
      Adieu!
    

      I have had many of these souvenirs of travel, some joyous and some sad.
    

      Once I was in Auvergne, tramping through those delightful French
      mountains, that are not too high, not too steep, but friendly and
      familiar. I had climbed the Sancy, and entered a little inn, near a
      pilgrim's chapel called Notre-Dame de Vassiviere, when I saw a queer,
      ridiculous-looking old woman breakfasting alone at the end table.
    

      She was at least seventy years old, tall, skinny, and angular, and her
      white hair was puffed around her temples in the old-fashioned style. She
      was dressed like a traveling Englishwoman, in awkward, queer clothing,
      like a person who is indifferent to dress. She was eating an omelet and
      drinking water.
    

      Her face was peculiar, with restless eyes and the expression of one with
      whom fate has dealt unkindly. I watched her, in spite of myself, thinking:
      “Who is she? What is the life of this woman? Why is she wandering
      alone through these mountains?”
    

      She paid and rose to leave, drawing up over her shoulders an astonishing
      little shawl, the two ends of which hung over her arms. From a corner of
      the room she took an alpenstock, which was covered with names traced with
      a hot iron; then she went out, straight, erect, with the long steps of a
      letter-carrier who is setting out on his route.
    

      A guide was waiting for her at the door, and both went away. I watched
      them go down the valley, along the road marked by a line of high wooden
      crosses. She was taller than her companion, and seemed to walk faster than
      he.
    

      Two hours later I was climbing the edge of the deep funnel that incloses
      Lake Pavin in a marvelous and enormous basin of verdure, full of trees,
      bushes, rocks, and flowers. This lake is so round that it seems as if the
      outline had been drawn with a pair of compasses, so clear and blue that
      one might deem it a flood of azure come down from the sky, so charming
      that one would like to live in a hut on the wooded slope which dominates
      this crater, where the cold, still water is sleeping. The Englishwoman was
      standing there like a statue, gazing upon the transparent sheet down in
      the dead volcano. She was straining her eyes to penetrate below the
      surface down to the unknown depths, where monstrous trout which have
      devoured all the other fish are said to live. As I was passing close by
      her, it seemed to me that two big tears were brimming her eyes. But she
      departed at a great pace, to rejoin her guide, who had stayed behind in an
      inn at the foot of the path leading to the lake.
    

      I did not see her again that day.
    

      The next day, at nightfall, I came to the chateau of Murol. The old
      fortress, an enormous tower standing on a peak in the midst of a large
      valley, where three valleys intersect, rears its brown, uneven, cracked
      surface into the sky; it is round, from its large circular base to the
      crumbling turrets on its pinnacles.
    

      It astonishes the eye more than any other ruin by its simple mass, its
      majesty, its grave and imposing air of antiquity. It stands there, alone,
      high as a mountain, a dead queen, but still the queen of the valleys
      stretched out beneath it. You go up by a slope planted with firs, then you
      enter a narrow gate, and stop at the foot of the walls, in the first
      inclosure, in full view of the entire country.
    

      Inside there are ruined halls, crumbling stairways, unknown cavities,
      dungeons, walls cut through in the middle, vaulted roofs held up one knows
      not how, and a mass of stones and crevices, overgrown with grass, where
      animals glide in and out.
    

      I was exploring this ruin alone.
    

      Suddenly I perceived behind a bit of wall a being, a kind of phantom, like
      the spirit of this ancient and crumbling habitation.
    

      I was taken aback with surprise, almost with fear, when I recognized the
      old lady whom I had seen twice.
    

      She was weeping, with big tears in her eyes, and held her handkerchief in
      her hand.
    

      I turned around to go away, when she spoke to me, apparently ashamed to
      have been surprised in her grief.
    

      “Yes, monsieur, I am crying. That does not happen often to me.”
    

      “Pardon me, madame, for having disturbed you,” I stammered,
      confused, not knowing what to say. “Some misfortune has doubtless
      come to you.”
    

      “Yes. No—I am like a lost dog,” she murmured, and began
      to sob, with her handkerchief over her eyes.
    

      Moved by these contagious tears, I took her hand, trying to calm her. Then
      brusquely she told me her history, as if no longer ably to bear her grief
      alone.
    

      “Oh! Oh! Monsieur—if you knew—the sorrow in which I live—in
      what sorrow.
    

      “Once I was happy. I have a house down there—a home. I cannot
      go back to it any more; I shall never go back to it again, it is too hard
      to bear.
    

      “I have a son. It is he! it is he! Children don't know. Oh, one has
      such a short time to live! If I should see him now I should perhaps not
      recognize him. How I loved him? How I loved him! Even before he was born,
      when I felt him move. And after that! How I have kissed and caressed and
      cherished him! If you knew how many nights I have passed in watching him
      sleep, and how many in thinking of him. I was crazy about him. When he was
      eight years old his father sent him to boarding-school. That was the end.
      He no longer belonged to me. Oh, heavens! He came to see me every Sunday.
      That was all!
    

      “He went to college in Paris. Then he came only four times a year,
      and every time I was astonished to see how he had changed, to find him
      taller without having seen him grow. They stole his childhood from me, his
      confidence, and his love which otherwise would not have gone away from me;
      they stole my joy in seeing him grow, in seeing him become a little man.
    

      “I saw him four times a year. Think of it! And at every one of his
      visits his body, his eye, his movements, his voice his laugh, were no
      longer the same, were no longer mine. All these things change so quickly
      in a child; and it is so sad if one is not there to see them change; one
      no longer recognizes him.
    

      “One year he came with down on his cheek! He! my son! I was
      dumfounded —would you believe it? I hardly dared to kiss him. Was it
      really he, my little, little curly head of old, my dear; dear child, whom
      I had held in his diapers or my knee, and who had nursed at my breast with
      his little greedy lips—was it he, this tall, brown boy, who no
      longer knew how to kiss me, who seemed to love me as a matter of duty, who
      called me 'mother' for the sake of politeness, and who kissed me on the
      forehead, when I felt like crushing him in my arms?
    

      “My husband died. Then my parents, and then my two sisters. When
      Death enters a house it seems as if he were hurrying to do his utmost, so
      as not to have to return for a long time after that. He spares only one or
      two to mourn the others.
    

      “I remained alone. My tall son was then studying law. I was hoping
      to live and die near him, and I went to him so that we could live
      together. But he had fallen into the ways of young men, and he gave me to
      understand that I was in his way. So I left. I was wrong in doing so, but
      I suffered too much in feeling myself in his way, I, his mother! And I
      came back home.
    

      “I hardly ever saw him again.
    

      “He married. What a joy! At last we should be together for good. I
      should have grandchildren. His wife was an Englishwoman, who took a
      dislike to me. Why? Perhaps she thought that I loved him too much.
    

      “Again I was obliged to go away. And I was alone. Yes, monsieur.
    

      “Then he went to England, to live with them, with his wife's
      parents. Do you understand? They have him—they have my son for
      themselves. They have stolen him from me. He writes to me once a month. At
      first he came to see me. But now he no longer comes.
    

      “It is now four years since I saw him last. His face then was
      wrinkled and his hair white. Was that possible? This man, my son, almost
      an old man? My little rosy child of old? No doubt I shall never see him
      again.
    

      “And so I travel about all the year. I go east and west, as you see,
      with no companion.
    

      “I am like a lost dog. Adieu, monsieur! don't stay here with me for
      it hurts me to have told you all this.”
    

      I went down the hill, and on turning round to glance back, I saw the old
      woman standing on a broken wall, looking out upon the mountains, the long
      valley and Lake Chambon in the distance.
    

      And her skirt and the queer little shawl which she wore around her thin
      shoulders were fluttering tike a flag in the wind.
    







      MADEMOISELLE COCOTTE
    

      We were just leaving the asylum when I saw a tall, thin man in a corner of
      the court who kept on calling an imaginary dog. He was crying in a soft,
      tender voice: “Cocotte! Come here, Cocotte, my beauty!” and
      slapping his thigh as one does when calling an animal. I asked the
      physician, “Who is that man?” He answered: “Oh! he is
      not at all interesting. He is a coachman named Francois, who became insane
      after drowning his dog.”
    

      I insisted: “Tell me his story. The most simple and humble things
      are sometimes those which touch our hearts most deeply.”
    

      Here is this man's adventure, which was obtained from a friend of his, a
      groom:
    

      There was a family of rich bourgeois who lived in a suburb of Paris. They
      had a villa in the middle of a park, at the edge of the Seine. Their
      coachman was this Francois, a country fellow, somewhat dull, kind-hearted,
      simple and easy to deceive.
    

      One evening, as he was returning home, a dog began to follow him. At first
      he paid no attention to it, but the creature's obstinacy at last made him
      turn round. He looked to see if he knew this dog. No, he had never seen
      it. It was a female dog and frightfully thin. She was trotting behind him
      with a mournful and famished look, her tail between her legs, her ears
      flattened against her head and stopping and starting whenever he did.
    

      He tried to chase this skeleton away and cried:
    

      “Run along! Get out! Kss! kss!” She retreated a few steps,
      then sat down and waited. And when the coachman started to walk again she
      followed along behind him.
    

      He pretended to pick up some stones. The animal ran a little farther away,
      but came back again as soon as the man's back was turned.
    

      Then the coachman Francois took pity on the beast and called her. The dog
      approached timidly. The man patted her protruding ribs, moved by the
      beast's misery, and he cried: “Come! come here!” Immediately
      she began to wag her tail, and, feeling herself taken in, adopted, she
      began to run along ahead of her new master.
    

      He made her a bed on the straw in the stable, then he ran to the kitchen
      for some bread. When she had eaten all she could she curled up and went to
      sleep.
    

      When his employers heard of this the next day they allowed the coachman to
      keep the animal. It was a good beast, caressing and faithful, intelligent
      and gentle.
    

      Nevertheless Francois adored Cocotte, and he kept repeating: “That
      beast is human. She only lacks speech.”
    

      He had a magnificent red leather collar made for her which bore these
      words engraved on a copper plate: “Mademoiselle Cocotte, belonging
      to the coachman Francois.”
    

      She was remarkably prolific and four times a year would give birth to a
      batch of little animals belonging to every variety of the canine race.
      Francois would pick out one which he would leave her and then he would
      unmercifully throw the others into the river. But soon the cook joined her
      complaints to those of the gardener. She would find dogs under the stove,
      in the ice box, in the coal bin, and they would steal everything they came
      across.
    

      Finally the master, tired of complaints, impatiently ordered Francois to
      get rid of Cocotte. In despair the man tried to give her away. Nobody
      wanted her. Then he decided to lose her, and he gave her to a teamster,
      who was to drop her on the other side of Paris, near Joinville-le-Pont.
    

      Cocotte returned the same day. Some decision had to be taken. Five francs
      was given to a train conductor to take her to Havre. He was to drop her
      there.
    

      Three days later she returned to the stable, thin, footsore and tired out.
    

      The master took pity on her and let her stay. But other dogs were
      attracted as before, and one evening, when a big dinner party was on, a
      stuffed turkey was carried away by one of them right under the cook's
      nose, and she did not dare to stop him.
    

      This time the master completely lost his temper and said angrily to
      Francois: “If you don't throw this beast into the water before—to-morrow
      morning, I'll put you out, do you hear?”
    

      The man was dumbfounded, and he returned to his room to pack his trunk,
      preferring to leave the place. Then he bethought himself that he could
      find no other situation as long as he dragged this animal about with him.
      He thought of his good position, where he was well paid and well fed, and
      he decided that a dog was really not worth all that. At last he decided to
      rid himself of Cocotte at daybreak.
    

      He slept badly. He rose at dawn, and taking a strong rope, went to get the
      dog. She stood up slowly, shook herself, stretched and came to welcome her
      master.
    

      Then his courage forsook him, and he began to pet her affectionately,
      stroking her long ears, kissing her muzzle and calling her tender names.
    

      But a neighboring clock struck six. He could no longer hesitate. He opened
      the door, calling: “Come!” The beast wagged her tail,
      understanding that she was to be taken out.
    

      They reached the beach, and he chose a place where the water seemed deep.
      Then he knotted the rope round the leather collar and tied a heavy stone
      to the other end. He seized Cocotte in his arms and kissed her madly, as
      though he were taking leave of some human being. He held her to his
      breast, rocked her and called her “my dear little Cocotte, my sweet
      little Cocotte,” and she grunted with pleasure.
    

      Ten times he tried to throw her into the water and each time he lost
      courage.
    

      But suddenly he made up his mind and threw her as far from him as he
      could. At first she tried to swim, as she did when he gave her a bath, but
      her head, dragged down by the stone, kept going under, and she looked at
      her master with wild, human glances as she struggled like a drowning
      person. Then the front part of her body sank, while her hind legs waved
      wildly out of the water. Finally those also disappeared.
    

      Then, for five minutes, bubbles rose to the surface as though the river
      were boiling, and Francois, haggard, his heart beating, thought that he
      saw Cocotte struggling in the mud, and, with the simplicity of a peasant,
      he kept saying to himself: “What does the poor beast think of me
      now?”
    

      He almost lost his mind. He was ill for a month and every night he dreamed
      of his dog. He could feel her licking his hands and hear her barking. It
      was necessary to call in a physician. At last he recovered, and toward the
      2nd of June his employers took him to their estate at Biesard, near Rouen.
    

      There again he was near the Seine. He began to take baths. Each morning he
      would go down with the groom and they would swim across the river.
    

      One day, as they were disporting themselves in the water, Francois
      suddenly cried to his companion: “Look what's coming! I'm going to
      give you a chop!”
    

      It was an enormous, swollen corpse that was floating down with its feet
      sticking straight up in the air.
    

      Francois swam up to it, still joking: “Whew! it's not fresh. What a
      catch, old man! It isn't thin, either!” He kept swimming about at a
      distance from the animal that was in a state of decomposition. Then,
      suddenly, he was silent and looked at it: attentively. This time he came
      near enough to touch, it. He looked fixedly at the collar, then he
      stretched out his arm, seized the neck, swung the corpse round and drew it
      up close to him and read on the copper which had turned green and which
      still stuck to the discolored leather: “Mademoiselle Cocotte,
      belonging to the coachman Francois.”
    

      The dead dog had come more than a hundred miles to find its master.
    

      He let out a frightful shriek and began to swim for the beach with all his
      might, still howling; and as soon as he touched land he ran away wildly,
      stark naked, through the country. He was insane!
    







      THE CORSICAN BANDIT
    

      The road ascended gently through the forest of Aitone. The large pines
      formed a solemn dome above our heads, and that mysterious sound made by
      the wind in the trees sounded like the notes of an organ.
    

      After walking for three hours, there was a clearing, and then at intervals
      an enormous pine umbrella, and then we suddenly came to the edge of the
      forest, some hundred meters below, the pass leading to the wild valley of
      Niolo.
    

      On the two projecting heights which commanded a view of this pass, some
      old trees, grotesquely twisted, seemed to have mounted with painful
      efforts, like scouts sent in advance of the multitude in the rear. When we
      turned round, we saw the entire forest stretched beneath our feet, like a
      gigantic basin of verdure, inclosed by bare rocks whose summits seemed to
      reach the sky.
    

      We resumed our walk, and, ten minutes later, found ourselves in the pass.
    

      Then I beheld a remarkable landscape. Beyond another forest stretched a
      valley, but a valley such as I had never seen before; a solitude of stone,
      ten leagues long, hollowed out between two high mountains, without a field
      or a tree to be seen. This was the Niolo valley, the fatherland of
      Corsican liberty, the inaccessible citadel, from which the invaders had
      never been able to drive out the mountaineers.
    

      My companion said to me: “This is where all our bandits have taken
      refuge?”
    

      Ere long we were at the further end of this gorge, so wild, so
      inconceivably beautiful.
    

      Not a blade of grass, not a plant-nothing but granite. As far as our eyes
      could reach, we saw in front of us a desert of glittering stone, heated
      like an oven by a burning sun, which seemed to hang for that very purpose
      right above the gorge. When we raised our eyes towards the crests, we
      stood dazzled and stupefied by what we saw. They looked like a festoon of
      coral; all the summits are of porphyry; and the sky overhead was violet,
      purple, tinged with the coloring of these strange mountains. Lower down,
      the granite was of scintillating gray, and seemed ground to powder beneath
      our feet. At our right, along a long and irregular course, roared a
      tumultuous torrent. And we staggered along under this heat, in this light,
      in this burning, arid, desolate valley cut by this torrent of turbulent
      water which seemed to be ever hurrying onward, without fertilizing the
      rocks, lost in this furnace which greedily drank it up without being
      saturated or refreshed by it.
    

      But, suddenly, there was visible at our right a little wooden cross sunk
      in a little heap of stones. A man had been killed there; and I said to my
      companion.
    

      “Tell me about your bandits.”
    

      He replied:
    

      “I knew the most celebrated of them, the terrible St. Lucia. I will
      tell you his history.
    

      “His father was killed in a quarrel by a young man of the district,
      it is said; and St. Lucia was left alone with his sister. He was a weak,
      timid youth, small, often ill, without any energy. He did not proclaim
      vengeance against the assassin of his father. All his relatives came to
      see him, and implored of him to avenge his death; he remained deaf to
      their menaces and their supplications.
    

      “Then, following the old Corsican custom, his sister, in her
      indignation carried away his black clothes, in order that he might not
      wear mourning for a dead man who had not been avenged. He was insensible
      to even this affront, and rather than take down from the rack his father's
      gun, which was still loaded, he shut himself up, not daring to brave the
      looks of the young men of the district.
    

      “He seemed to have even forgotten the crime, and lived with his
      sister in the seclusion of their dwelling.
    

      “But, one day, the man who was suspected of having committed the
      murder, was about to get married. St. Lucia did not appear to be moved by
      this news, but, out of sheer bravado, doubtless, the bridegroom, on his
      way to the church, passed before the house of the two orphans.
    

      “The brother and the sister, at their window, were eating frijoles,
      when the young man saw the bridal procession going by. Suddenly he began
      to tremble, rose to his feet without uttering a word, made the sign of the
      cross, took the gun which was hanging over the fireplace, and went out.
    

      “When he spoke of this later on, he said: 'I don't know what was the
      matter with me; it was like fire in my blood; I felt that I must do it,
      that, in spite of everything, I could not resist, and I concealed the gun
      in a cave on the road to Corte.
    

      “An hour later, he came back, with nothing in his hand, and with his
      habitual air of sad weariness. His sister believed that there was nothing
      further in his thoughts.
    

      “But when night fell he disappeared.
    

      “His enemy had, the same evening, to repair to Corte on foot,
      accompanied by his two groomsmen.
    

      “He was walking along, singing as he went, when St. Lucia stood
      before him, and looking straight in the murderer's face, exclaimed: 'Now
      is the time!' and shot him point-blank in the chest.
    

      “One of the men fled; the other stared at, the young man, saying:
    

      “'What have you done, St. Lucia?' and he was about to hasten to
      Corte for help, when St. Lucia said in a stern tone:
    

      “'If you move another step, I'll shoot you in the leg.'
    

      “The other, aware of his timidity hitherto, replied: 'You would not
      dare to do it!' and was hurrying off when he fell instantaneously, his
      thigh shattered by a bullet.
    

      “And St. Lucia, coming over to where he lay, said:
    

      “'I am going to look at your wound; if it is not serious, I'll leave
      you there; if it is mortal I'll finish you off.”
    

      “He inspected the wound, considered it mortal, and slowly reloading
      his gun, told the wounded man to say a prayer, and shot him through the
      head.
    

      “Next day he was in the mountains.
    

      “And do you know what this St. Lucia did after this?
    

      “All his family were arrested by the gendarmes. His uncle, the cure,
      who was suspected of having incited him to this deed of vengeance, was
      himself put in prison, and accused by the dead man's relatives. But he
      escaped, took a gun in his turn, and went to join his nephew in the brush.
    

      “Next, St. Lucia killed, one after the other, his uncle's accusers,
      and tore out their eyes to teach the others never to state what they had
      seen with their eyes.
    

      “He killed all the relatives, all the connections of his enemy's
      family. He slew during his life fourteen gendarmes, burned down the houses
      of his adversaries, and was, up to the day of his death, the most terrible
      of all the bandits whose memory we have preserved.”
    

      The sun disappeared behind Monte Cinto and the tall shadow of the granite
      mountain went to sleep on the granite of the valley. We quickened our pace
      in order to reach before night the little village of Albertaccio, nothing
      but a pile of stones welded into the stone flanks of a wild gorge. And I
      said as I thought of the bandit:
    

      “What a terrible custom your vendetta is!”
    

      My companion answered with an air of resignation:
    

      “What would you have? A man must do his duty!”
    







      THE GRAVE
    

      The seventeenth of July, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-three, at
      half-past two in the morning, the watchman in the cemetery of Besiers, who
      lived in a small cottage on the edge of this field of the dead, was
      awakened by the barking of his dog, which was shut up in the kitchen.
    

      Going down quickly, he saw the animal sniffing at the crack of the door
      and barking furiously, as if some tramp had been sneaking about the house.
      The keeper, Vincent, therefore took his gun and went out.
    

      His dog, preceding him, at once ran in the direction of the Avenue General
      Bonnet, stopping short at the monument of Madame Tomoiseau.
    

      The keeper, advancing cautiously, soon saw a faint light on the side of
      the Avenue Malenvers, and stealing in among the graves, he came upon a
      horrible act of profanation.
    

      A man had dug up the coffin of a young woman who had been buried the
      evening before and was dragging the corpse out of it.
    

      A small dark lantern, standing on a pile of earth, lighted up this hideous
      scene.
    

      Vincent sprang upon the wretch, threw him to the ground, bound his hands
      and took him to the police station.
    

      It was a young, wealthy and respected lawyer in town, named Courbataille.
    

      He was brought into court. The public prosecutor opened the case by
      referring to the monstrous deeds of the Sergeant Bertrand.
    

      A wave of indignation swept over the courtroom. When the magistrate sat
      down the crowd assembled cried: “Death! death!” With
      difficulty the presiding judge established silence.
    

      Then he said gravely:
    

      “Defendant, what have you to say in your defense?”
    

      Courbataille, who had refused counsel, rose. He was a handsome fellow,
      tall, brown, with a frank face, energetic manner and a fearless eye.
    

      Paying no attention to the whistlings in the room, he began to speak in a
      voice that was low and veiled at first, but that grew more firm as he
      proceeded.
    

      “Monsieur le President, gentlemen of the jury: I have very little to
      say. The woman whose grave I violated was my sweetheart. I loved her.
    

      “I loved her, not with a sensual love and not with mere tenderness
      of heart and soul, but with an absolute, complete love, with an
      overpowering passion.
    

      “Hear me:
    

      “When I met her for the first time I felt a strange sensation. It
      was not astonishment nor admiration, nor yet that which is called love at
      first sight, but a feeling of delicious well-being, as if I had been
      plunged into a warm bath. Her gestures seduced me, her voice enchanted me,
      and it was with infinite pleasure that I looked upon her person. It seemed
      to me as if I had seen her before and as if I had known her a long time.
      She had within her something of my spirit.
    

      “She seemed to me like an answer to a cry uttered by my soul, to
      that vague and unceasing cry with which we call upon Hope during our whole
      life.
    

      “When I knew her a little better, the mere thought of seeing her
      again filled me with exquisite and profound uneasiness; the touch of her
      hand in mine was more delightful to me than anything that I had imagined;
      her smile filled me with a mad joy, with the desire to run, to dance, to
      fling myself upon the ground.
    

      “So we became lovers.
    

      “Yes, more than that: she was my very life. I looked for nothing
      further on earth, and had no further desires. I longed for nothing
      further.
    

      “One evening, when we had gone on a somewhat long walk by the river,
      we were overtaken by the rain, and she caught cold. It developed into
      pneumonia the next day, and a week later she was dead.
    

      “During the hours of her suffering astonishment and consternation
      prevented my understanding and reflecting upon it, but when she was dead I
      was so overwhelmed by blank despair that I had no thoughts left. I wept.
    

      “During all the horrible details of the interment my keen and wild
      grief was like a madness, a kind of sensual, physical grief.
    

      “Then when she was gone, when she was under the earth, my mind at
      once found itself again, and I passed through a series of moral sufferings
      so terrible that even the love she had vouchsafed to me was dear at that
      price.
    

      “Then the fixed idea came to me: I shall not see her again.
    

      “When one dwells on this thought for a whole day one feels as if he
      were going mad. Just think of it! There is a woman whom you adore, a
      unique woman, for in the whole universe there is not a second one like
      her. This woman has given herself to you and has created with you the
      mysterious union that is called Love. Her eye seems to you more vast than
      space, more charming than the world, that clear eye smiling with her
      tenderness. This woman loves you. When she speaks to you her voice floods
      you with joy.
    

      “And suddenly she disappears! Think of it! She disappears, not only
      for you, but forever. She is dead. Do you understand what that means?
      Never, never, never, not anywhere will she exist any more. Nevermore will
      that eye look upon anything again; nevermore will that voice, nor any
      voice like it, utter a word in the same way as she uttered it.
    

      “Nevermore will a face be born that is like hers. Never, never! The
      molds of statues are kept; casts are kept by which one can make objects
      with the same outlines and forms. But that one body and that one face will
      never more be born again upon the earth. And yet millions and millions of
      creatures will be born, and more than that, and this one woman will not
      reappear among all the women of the future. Is it possible? It drives one
      mad to think of it.
    

      “She lived for twenty years, not more, and she has disappeared
      forever, forever, forever! She thought, she smiled, she loved me. And now
      nothing! The flies that die in the autumn are as much as we are in this
      world. And now nothing! And I thought that her body, her fresh body, so
      warm, so sweet, so white, so lovely, would rot down there in that box
      under the earth. And her soul, her thought, her love—where is it?
    

      “Not to see her again! The idea of this decomposing body, that I
      might yet recognize, haunted me. I wanted to look at it once more.
    

      “I went out with a spade, a lantern and a hammer; I jumped over the
      cemetery wall and I found the grave, which had not yet been closed
      entirely; I uncovered the coffin and took up a board. An abominable odor,
      the stench of putrefaction, greeted my nostrils. Oh, her bed perfumed with
      orris!
    

      “Yet I opened the coffin, and, holding my lighted lantern down into
      it I saw her. Her face was blue, swollen, frightful. A black liquid had
      oozed out of her mouth.
    

      “She! That was she! Horror seized me. But I stretched out my arm to
      draw this monstrous face toward me. And then I was caught.
    

      “All night I have retained the foul odor of this putrid body, the
      odor of my well beloved, as one retains the perfume of a woman after a
      love embrace.
    

      “Do with me what you will.”
    

      A strange silence seemed to oppress the room. They seemed to be waiting
      for something more. The jury retired to deliberate.
    

      When they came back a few minutes later the accused showed no fear and did
      not even seem to think.
    

      The president announced with the usual formalities that his judges
      declared him to be not guilty.
    

      He did not move and the room applauded.
    

   The Grave appeared in Gil Blas, July 29, 1883, under the signature
   of “Maufrigneuse.”
 







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 13.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME XIII.
    







      OLD JUDAS
    

      This entire stretch of country was amazing; it was characterized by a
      grandeur that was almost religious, and yet it had an air of sinister
      desolation.
    

      A great, wild lake, filled with stagnant, black water, in which thousands
      of reeds were waving to and fro, lay in the midst of a vast circle of
      naked hills, where nothing grew but broom, or here and there an oak
      curiously twisted by the wind.
    

      Just one house stood on the banks of that dark lake, a small, low house
      inhabited by Uncle Joseph, an old boatman, who lived on what he could make
      by his fishing. Once a week he carried the fish he caught into the
      surrounding villages, returning with the few provisions that he needed for
      his sustenance.
    

      I went to see this old hermit, who offered to take me with him to his
      nets, and I accepted.
    

      His boat was old, worm-eaten and clumsy, and the skinny old man rowed with
      a gentle and monotonous stroke that was soothing to the soul, already
      oppressed by the sadness of the land round about.
    

      It seemed to me as if I were transported to olden times, in the midst of
      that ancient country, in that primitive boat, which was propelled by a man
      of another age.
    

      He took up his nets and threw the fish into the bottom of the boat, as the
      fishermen of the Bible might have done. Then he took me down to the end of
      the lake, where I suddenly perceived a ruin on the other side of the bank
      a dilapidated hut, with an enormous red cross on the wall that looked as
      if it might have been traced with blood, as it gleamed in the last rays of
      the setting sun.
    

      “What is that?” I asked.
    

      “That is where Judas died,” the man replied, crossing himself.
    

      I was not surprised, being almost prepared for this strange answer.
    

      Still I asked:
    

      “Judas? What Judas?”
    

      “The Wandering Jew, monsieur,” he added.
    

      I asked him to tell me this legend.
    

      But it was better than a legend, being a true story, and quite a recent
      one, since Uncle Joseph had known the man.
    

      This hut had formerly been occupied by a large woman, a kind of beggar,
      who lived on public charity.
    

      Uncle Joseph did not remember from whom she had this hut. One evening an
      old man with a white beard, who seemed to be at least two hundred years
      old, and who could hardly drag himself along, asked alms of this forlorn
      woman, as he passed her dwelling.
    

      “Sit down, father,” she replied; “everything here
      belongs to all the world, since it comes from all the world.”
    

      He sat down on a stone before the door. He shared the woman's bread, her
      bed of leaves, and her house.
    

      He did not leave her again, for he had come to the end of his travels.
    

      “It was Our Lady the Virgin who permitted this, monsieur,”
      Joseph added, “it being a woman who had opened her door to a Judas,
      for this old vagabond was the Wandering Jew. It was not known at first in
      the country, but the people suspected it very soon, because he was always
      walking; it had become a sort of second nature to him.”
    

      And suspicion had been aroused by still another thing. This woman, who
      kept that stranger with her, was thought to be a Jewess, for no one had
      ever seen her at church. For ten miles around no one ever called her
      anything else but the Jewess.
    

      When the little country children saw her come to beg they cried out:
      “Mamma, mamma, here is the Jewess!”
    

      The old man and she began to go out together into the neighboring
      districts, holding out their hands at all the doors, stammering
      supplications into the ears of all the passers. They could be seen at all
      hours of the day, on by-paths, in the villages, or again eating bread,
      sitting in the noon heat under the shadow of some solitary tree. And the
      country people began to call the beggar Old Judas.
    

      One day he brought home in his sack two little live pigs, which a farmer
      had given him after he had cured the farmer of some sickness.
    

      Soon he stopped begging, and devoted himself entirely to his pigs. He took
      them out to feed by the lake, or under isolated oaks, or in the near-by
      valleys. The woman, however, went about all day begging, but she always
      came back to him in the evening.
    

      He also did not go to church, and no one ever had seen him cross himself
      before the wayside crucifixes. All this gave rise to much gossip:
    

      One night his companion was attacked by a fever and began to tremble like
      a leaf in the wind. He went to the nearest town to get some medicine, and
      then he shut himself up with her, and was not seen for six days.
    

      The priest, having heard that the “Jewess” was about to die,
      came to offer the consolation of his religion and administer the last
      sacrament. Was she a Jewess? He did not know. But in any case, he wished
      to try to save her soul.
    

      Hardly had he knocked at the door when old Judas appeared on the
      threshold, breathing hard, his eyes aflame, his long beard agitated, like
      rippling water, and he hurled blasphemies in an unknown language,
      extending his skinny arms in order to prevent the priest from entering.
    

      The priest attempted to speak, offered his purse and his aid, but the old
      man kept on abusing him, making gestures with his hands as if throwing;
      stones at him.
    

      Then the priest retired, followed by the curses of the beggar.
    

      The companion of old Judas died the following day. He buried her himself,
      in front of her door. They were people of so little account that no one
      took any interest in them.
    

      Then they saw the man take his pigs out again to the lake and up the
      hillsides. And he also began begging again to get food. But the people
      gave him hardly anything, as there was so much gossip about him. Every one
      knew, moreover, how he had treated the priest.
    

      Then he disappeared. That was during Holy Week, but no one paid any
      attention to him.
    

      But on Easter Sunday the boys and girls who had gone walking out to the
      lake heard a great noise in the hut. The door was locked; but the boys
      broke it in, and the two pigs ran out, jumping like gnats. No one ever saw
      them again.
    

      The whole crowd went in; they saw some old rags on the floor, the beggar's
      hat, some bones, clots of dried blood and bits of flesh in the hollows of
      the skull.
    

      His pigs had devoured him.
    

      “This happened on Good Friday, monsieur.” Joseph concluded his
      story, “three hours after noon.”
    

      “How do you know that?” I asked him.
    

      “There is no doubt about that,” he replied.
    

      I did not attempt to make him understand that it could easily happen that
      the famished animals had eaten their master, after he had died suddenly in
      his hut.
    

      As for the cross on the wall, it had appeared one morning, and no one knew
      what hand traced it in that strange color.
    

      Since then no one doubted any longer that the Wandering Jew had died on
      this spot.
    

      I myself believed it for one hour.
    







      THE LITTLE CASK
    

      He was a tall man of forty or thereabout, this Jules Chicot, the innkeeper
      of Spreville, with a red face and a round stomach, and said by those who
      knew him to be a smart business man. He stopped his buggy in front of
      Mother Magloire's farmhouse, and, hitching the horse to the gatepost, went
      in at the gate.
    

      Chicot owned some land adjoining that of the old woman, which he had been
      coveting for a long while, and had tried in vain to buy a score of times,
      but she had always obstinately refused to part with it.
    

      “I was born here, and here I mean to die,” was all she said.
    

      He found her peeling potatoes outside the farmhouse door. She was a woman
      of about seventy-two, very thin, shriveled and wrinkled, almost dried up
      in fact and much bent but as active and untiring as a girl. Chicot patted
      her on the back in a friendly fashion and then sat down by her on a stool.
    

      “Well mother, you are always pretty well and hearty, I am glad to
      see.”
    

      “Nothing to complain of, considering, thank you. And how are you,
      Monsieur Chicot?”
    

      “Oh, pretty well, thank you, except a few rheumatic pains
      occasionally; otherwise I have nothing to complain of.”
    

      “So much the better.”
    

      And she said no more, while Chicot watched her going on with her work. Her
      crooked, knotted fingers, hard as a lobster's claws, seized the tubers,
      which were lying in a pail, as if they had been a pair of pincers, and she
      peeled them rapidly, cutting off long strips of skin with an old knife
      which she held in the other hand, throwing the potatoes into the water as
      they were done. Three daring fowls jumped one after the other into her
      lap, seized a bit of peel and then ran away as fast as their legs would
      carry them with it in their beak.
    

      Chicot seemed embarrassed, anxious, with something on the tip of his
      tongue which he could not say. At last he said hurriedly:
    

      “Listen, Mother Magloire—”
    

      “Well, what is it?”
    

      “You are quite sure that you do not want to sell your land?”
    

      “Certainly not; you may make up your mind to that. What I have said
      I have said, so don't refer to it again.”
    

      “Very well; only I think I know of an arrangement that might suit us
      both very well.”
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “Just this. You shall sell it to me and keep it all the same. You
      don't understand? Very well, then follow me in what I am going to say.”
    

      The old woman left off peeling potatoes and looked at the innkeeper
      attentively from under her heavy eyebrows, and he went on:
    

      “Let me explain myself. Every month I will give you a hundred and
      fifty francs. You understand me! suppose! Every month I will come and
      bring you thirty crowns, and it will not make the slightest difference in
      your life—not the very slightest. You will have your own home just
      as you have now, need not trouble yourself about me, and will owe me
      nothing; all you will have to do will be to take my money. Will that
      arrangement suit you?”
    

      He looked at her good-humoredly, one might almost have said benevolently,
      and the old woman returned his looks distrustfully, as if she suspected a
      trap, and said:
    

      “It seems all right as far as I am concerned, but it will not give
      you the farm.”
    

      “Never mind about that,” he said; “you may remain here
      as long as it pleases God Almighty to let you live; it will be your home.
      Only you will sign a deed before a lawyer making it over to me; after your
      death. You have no children, only nephews and nieces for whom you don't
      care a straw. Will that suit you? You will keep everything during your
      life, and I will give you the thirty crowns a month. It is pure gain as
      far as you are concerned.”
    

      The old woman was surprised, rather uneasy, but, nevertheless, very much
      tempted to agree, and answered:
    

      “I don't say that I will not agree to it, but I must think about it.
      Come back in a week, and we will talk it over again, and I will then give
      you my definite answer.”
    

      And Chicot went off as happy as a king who had conquered an empire.
    

      Mother Magloire was thoughtful, and did not sleep at all that night; in
      fact, for four days she was in a fever of hesitation. She suspected that
      there was something underneath the offer which was not to her advantage;
      but then the thought of thirty crowns a month, of all those coins clinking
      in her apron, falling to her, as it were, from the skies, without her
      doing anything for it, aroused her covetousness.
    

      She went to the notary and told him about it. He advised her to accept
      Chicot's offer, but said she ought to ask for an annuity of fifty instead
      of thirty, as her farm was worth sixty thousand francs at the lowest
      calculation.
    

      “If you live for fifteen years longer,” he said, “even
      then he will only have paid forty-five thousand francs for it.”
    

      The old woman trembled with joy at this prospect of getting fifty crowns a
      month, but she was still suspicious, fearing some trick, and she remained
      a long time with the lawyer asking questions without being able to make up
      her mind to go. At last she gave him instructions to draw up the deed and
      returned home with her head in a whirl, just as if she had drunk four jugs
      of new cider.
    

      When Chicot came again to receive her answer she declared, after a lot of
      persuading, that she could not make up her mind to agree to his proposal,
      though she was all the time trembling lest he should not consent to give
      the fifty crowns, but at last, when he grew urgent, she told him what she
      expected for her farm.
    

      He looked surprised and disappointed and refused.
    

      Then, in order to convince him, she began to talk about the probable
      duration of her life.
    

      “I am certainly not likely to live more than five or six years
      longer. I am nearly seventy-three, and far from strong, even considering
      my age. The other evening I thought I was going to die, and could hardly
      manage to crawl into bed.”
    

      But Chicot was not going to be taken in.
    

      “Come, come, old lady, you are as strong as the church tower, and
      will live till you are a hundred at least; you will no doubt see me put
      under ground first.”
    

      The whole day was spent in discussing the money, and as the old woman
      would not give in, the innkeeper consented to give the fifty crowns, and
      she insisted upon having ten crowns over and above to strike the bargain.
    

      Three years passed and the old dame did not seem to have grown a day
      older. Chicot was in despair, and it seemed to him as if he had been
      paying that annuity for fifty years, that he had been taken in, done,
      ruined. From time to time he went to see the old lady, just as one goes in
      July to see when the harvest is likely to begin. She always met him with a
      cunning look, and one might have supposed that she was congratulating
      herself on the trick she had played him. Seeing how well and hearty she
      seemed he very soon got into his buggy again, growling to himself:
    

      “Will you never die, you old hag?”
    

      He did not know what to do, and he felt inclined to strangle her when he
      saw her. He hated her with a ferocious, cunning hatred, the hatred of a
      peasant who has been robbed, and began to cast about for some means of
      getting rid of her.
    

      One day he came to see her again, rubbing his hands as he did the first
      time he proposed the bargain, and, after having chatted for a few minutes,
      he said:
    

      “Why do you never come and have a bit of dinner at my place when you
      are in Spreville? The people are talking about it, and saying we are not
      on friendly terms, and that pains me. You know it will cost you nothing if
      you come, for I don't look at the price of a dinner. Come whenever you
      feel inclined; I shall be very glad to see you.”
    

      Old Mother Magloire did not need to be asked twice, and the next day but
      one, as she had to go to the town in any case, it being market day, she
      let her man drive her to Chicot's place, where the buggy was put in the
      barn while she went into the house to get her dinner.
    

      The innkeeper was delighted and treated her like a lady, giving her roast
      fowl, black pudding, leg of mutton and bacon and cabbage. But she ate next
      to nothing. She had always been a small eater, and had generally lived on
      a little soup and a crust of bread and butter.
    

      Chicot was disappointed and pressed her to eat more, but she refused, and
      she would drink little, and declined coffee, so he asked her:
    

      “But surely you will take a little drop of brandy or liqueur?”
    

      “Well, as to that, I don't know that I will refuse.” Whereupon
      he shouted out:
    

      “Rosalie, bring the superfine brandy—the special—you
      know.”
    

      The servant appeared, carrying a long bottle ornamented with a paper
      vine-leaf, and he filled two liqueur glasses.
    

      “Just try that; you will find it first rate.”
    

      The good woman drank it slowly in sips, so as to make the pleasure last
      all the longer, and when she had finished her glass, she said:
    

      “Yes, that is first rate!”
    

      Almost before she had said it Chicot had poured her out another glassful.
      She wished to refuse, but it was too late, and she drank it very slowly,
      as she had done the first, and he asked her to have a third. She objected,
      but he persisted.
    

      “It is as mild as milk, you know; I can drink ten or a dozen glasses
      without any ill effects; it goes down like sugar and does not go to the
      head; one would think that it evaporated on the tongue: It is the most
      wholesome thing you can drink.”
    

      She took it, for she really enjoyed it, but she left half the glass.
    

      Then Chicot, in an excess of generosity, said:
    

      “Look here, as it is so much to your taste, I will give you a small
      keg of it, just to show that you and I are still excellent friends.”
      So she took one away with her, feeling slightly overcome by the effects of
      what she had drunk.
    

      The next day the innkeeper drove into her yard and took a little
      iron-hooped keg out of his gig. He insisted on her tasting the contents,
      to make sure it was the same delicious article, and, when they had each of
      them drunk three more glasses, he said as he was going away:
    

      “Well, you know when it is all gone there is more left; don't be
      modest, for I shall not mind. The sooner it is finished the better pleased
      I shall be.”
    

      Four days later he came again. The old woman was outside her door cutting
      up the bread for her soup.
    

      He went up to her and put his face close to hers, so that he might smell
      her breath; and when he smelt the alcohol he felt pleased.
    

      “I suppose you will give me a glass of the Special?” he said.
      And they had three glasses each.
    

      Soon, however, it began to be whispered abroad that Mother Magloire was in
      the habit of getting drunk all by herself. She was picked up in her
      kitchen, then in her yard, then in the roads in the neighborhood, and she
      was often brought home like a log.
    

      The innkeeper did not go near her any more, and, when people spoke to him
      about her, he used to say, putting on a distressed look:
    

      “It is a great pity that she should have taken to drink at her age,
      but when people get old there is no remedy. It will be the death of her in
      the long run.”
    

      And it certainly was the death of her. She died the next winter. About
      Christmas time she fell down, unconscious, in the snow, and was found dead
      the next morning.
    

      And when Chicot came in for the farm, he said:
    

      “It was very stupid of her; if she had not taken to drink she would
      probably have lived ten years longer.”
    







      BOITELLE
    

      Father Boitelle (Antoine) made a specialty of undertaking dirty jobs all
      through the countryside. Whenever there was a ditch or a cesspool to be
      cleaned out, a dunghill removed, a sewer cleansed, or any dirt hole
      whatever, he way always employed to do it.
    

      He would come with the instruments of his trade, his sabots covered with
      dirt, and set to work, complaining incessantly about his occupation. When
      people asked him then why he did this loathsome work, he would reply
      resignedly:
    

      “Faith, 'tis for my children, whom I must support. This brings me in
      more than anything else.”
    

      He had, indeed, fourteen children. If any one asked him what had become of
      them, he would say with an air of indifference:
    

      “There are only eight of them left in the house. One is out at
      service and five are married.”
    

      When the questioner wanted to know whether they were well married, he
      replied vivaciously:
    

      “I did not oppose them. I opposed them in nothing. They married just
      as they pleased. We shouldn't go against people's likings, it turns out
      badly. I am a night scavenger because my parents went against my likings.
      But for that I would have become a workman like the others.”
    

      Here is the way his parents had thwarted him in his likings:
    

      He was at the time a soldier stationed at Havre, not more stupid than
      another, or sharper either, a rather simple fellow, however. When he was
      not on duty, his greatest pleasure was to walk along the quay, where the
      bird dealers congregate. Sometimes alone, sometimes with a soldier from
      his own part of the country, he would slowly saunter along by cages
      containing parrots with green backs and yellow heads from the banks of the
      Amazon, or parrots with gray backs and red heads from Senegal, or enormous
      macaws, which look like birds reared in hot-houses, with their flower-like
      feathers, their plumes and their tufts. Parrots of every size, who seem
      painted with minute care by the miniaturist, God Almighty, and the little
      birds, all the smaller birds hopped about, yellow, blue and variegated,
      mingling their cries with the noise of the quay; and adding to the din
      caused by unloading the vessels, as well as by passengers and vehicles, a
      violent clamor, loud, shrill and deafening, as if from some distant forest
      of monsters.
    

      Boitelle would pause, with wondering eyes, wide-open mouth, laughing and
      enraptured, showing his teeth to the captive cockatoos, who kept nodding
      their white or yellow topknots toward the glaring red of his breeches and
      the copper buckle of his belt. When he found a bird that could talk he put
      questions to it, and if it happened at the time to be disposed to reply
      and to hold a conversation with him he would carry away enough amusement
      to last him till evening. He also found heaps of amusement in looking at
      the monkeys, and could conceive no greater luxury for a rich man than to
      own these animals as one owns cats and dogs. This kind of taste for the
      exotic he had in his blood, as people have a taste for the chase, or for
      medicine, or for the priesthood. He could not help returning to the quay
      every time the gates of the barracks opened, drawn toward it by an
      irresistible longing.
    

      On one occasion, having stopped almost in ecstasy before an enormous
      macaw, which was swelling out its plumes, bending forward and bridling up
      again as if making the court curtseys of parrot-land, he saw the door of a
      little cafe adjoining the bird dealer's shop open, and a young negress
      appeared, wearing on her head a red silk handkerchief. She was sweeping
      into the street the corks and sand of the establishment.
    

      Boitelle's attention was soon divided between the bird and the woman, and
      he really could not tell which of these two beings he contemplated with
      the greater astonishment and delight.
    

      The negress, having swept the rubbish into the street, raised her eyes,
      and, in her turn, was dazzled by the soldier's uniform. There she stood
      facing him with her broom in her hands as if she were bringing him a
      rifle, while the macaw continued bowing. But at the end of a few seconds
      the soldier began to feel embarrassed at this attention, and he walked
      away quietly so as not to look as if he were beating a retreat.
    

      But he came back. Almost every day he passed before the Cafe des Colonies,
      and often he could distinguish through the window the figure of the little
      black-skinned maid serving “bocks” or glasses of brandy to the
      sailors of the port. Frequently, too, she would come out to the door on
      seeing him; soon, without even having exchanged a word, they smiled at one
      another like acquaintances; and Boitelle felt his heart touched when he
      suddenly saw, glittering between the dark lips of the girl, a shining row
      of white teeth. At length, one day he ventured to enter, and was quite
      surprised to find that she could speak French like every one else. The
      bottle of lemonade, of which she was good enough to accept a glassful,
      remained in the soldier's recollection memorably delicious, and it became
      a custom with him to come and absorb in this little tavern on the quay all
      the agreeable drinks which he could afford.
    

      For him it was a treat, a happiness, on which his thoughts dwelt
      constantly, to watch the black hand of the little maid pouring something
      into his glass while her teeth laughed more than her eyes. At the end of
      two months they became fast friends, and Boitelle, after his first
      astonishment at discovering that this negress had as good principles as
      honest French girls, that she exhibited a regard for economy, industry,
      religion and good conduct, loved her more on that account, and was so
      charmed with her that he wanted to marry her.
    

      He told her his intentions, which made her dance with joy. She had also a
      little money, left her by a female oyster dealer, who had picked her up
      when she had been left on the quay at Havre by an American captain. This
      captain had found her, when she was only about six years old, lying on
      bales of cotton in the hold of his ship, some hours after his departure
      from New York. On his arrival in Havre he abandoned to the care of this
      compassionate oyster dealer the little black creature, who had been hidden
      on board his vessel, he knew not why or by whom.
    

      The oyster woman having died, the young negress became a servant at the
      Colonial Tavern.
    

      Antoine Boitelle added: “This will be all right if my parents don't
      oppose it. I will never go against them, you understand, never! I'm going
      to say a word or two to them the first time I go back to the country.”
    

      On the following week, in fact, having obtained twenty-four hours' leave,
      he went to see his family, who cultivated a little farm at Tourteville,
      near Yvetot.
    

      He waited till the meal was finished, the hour when the coffee baptized
      with brandy makes people more open-hearted, before informing his parents
      that he had found a girl who satisfied his tastes, all his tastes, so
      completely that there could not exist any other in all the world so
      perfectly suited to him.
    

      The old people, on hearing this, immediately assumed a cautious manner and
      wanted explanations. He had concealed nothing from them except the color
      of her skin.
    

      She was a servant, without much means, but strong, thrifty, clean,
      well-conducted and sensible. All these things were better than money would
      be in the hands of a bad housewife. Moreover, she had a few sous, left her
      by a woman who had reared her, a good number of sous, almost a little
      dowry, fifteen hundred francs in the savings bank. The old people,
      persuaded by his talk, and relying also on their own judgment, were
      gradually weakening, when he came to the delicate point. Laughing in
      rather a constrained fashion, he said:
    

      “There's only one thing you may not like. She is not a white slip.”
    

      They did not understand, and he had to explain at some length and very
      cautiously, to avoid shocking them, that she belonged to the dusky race of
      which they had only seen samples in pictures at Epinal. Then they became
      restless, perplexed, alarmed, as if he had proposed a union with the
      devil.
    

      The mother said: “Black? How much of her is black? Is the whole of
      her?”
    

      He replied: “Certainly. Everywhere, just as you are white
      everywhere.”
    

      The father interposed: “Black? Is it as black as the pot?”
    

      The son answered: “Perhaps a little less than that. She is black,
      but not disgustingly black. The cure's cassock is black, but it is not
      uglier than a surplice which is white.”
    

      The father said: “Are there more black people besides her in her
      country?”
    

      And the son, with an air of conviction, exclaimed: “Certainly!”
    

      But the old man shook his head.
    

      “That must be unpleasant.”
    

      And the son:
    

      “It isn't more disagreeable than anything else when you get
      accustomed to it.”
    

      The mother asked:
    

      “It doesn't soil the underwear more than other skins, this black
      skin?”
    

      “Not more than your own, as it is her proper color.”
    

      Then, after many other questions, it was agreed that the parents should
      see this girl before coming; to any decision, and that the young fellow,
      whose, term of military service would be over in a month, should bring her
      to the house in order that they might examine her and decide by talking
      the matter over whether or not she was too dark to enter the Boitelle
      family.
    

      Antoine accordingly announced that on Sunday, the 22d of May, the day of
      his discharge, he would start for Tourteville with his sweetheart.
    

      She had put on, for this journey to the house of her lover's parents, her
      most beautiful and most gaudy clothes, in which yellow, red and blue were
      the prevailing colors, so that she looked as if she were adorned for a
      national festival.
    

      At the terminus, as they were leaving Havre, people stared at her, and
      Boitelle was proud of giving his arm to a person who commanded so much
      attention. Then, in the third-class carriage, in which she took a seat by
      his side, she aroused so much astonishment among the country folks that
      the people in the adjoining compartments stood up on their benches to look
      at her over the wooden partition which divides the compartments. A child,
      at sight of her, began to cry with terror, another concealed his face in
      his mother's apron. Everything went off well, however, up to their arrival
      at their destination. But when the train slackened its rate of motion as
      they drew near Yvetot, Antoine felt ill at ease, as he would have done at
      a review when; he did not know his drill practice. Then, as he; leaned his
      head out, he recognized in the distance: his father, holding the bridle of
      the horse harnessed to a carryall, and his mother, who had come forward to
      the grating, behind which stood those who were expecting friends.
    

      He alighted first, gave his hand to his sweetheart, and holding himself
      erect, as if he were escorting a general, he went to meet his family.
    

      The mother, on seeing this black lady in variegated costume in her son's
      company, remained so stupefied that she could not open her mouth; and the
      father found it hard to hold the horse, which the engine or the negress
      caused to rear continuously. But Antoine, suddenly filled with unmixed joy
      at seeing once more the old people, rushed forward with open arms,
      embraced his mother, embraced his father, in spite of the nag's fright,
      and then turning toward his companion, at whom the passengers on the
      platform stopped to stare with amazement, he proceeded to explain:
    

      “Here she is! I told you that, at first sight, she is not
      attractive; but as soon as you know her, I can assure you there's not a
      better sort in the whole world. Say good-morning to her so that she may
      not feel badly.”
    

      Thereupon Mere Boitelle, almost frightened out of her wits, made a sort of
      curtsy, while the father took off his cap, murmuring:
    

      “I wish you good luck!”
    

      Then, without further delay, they climbed into the carryall, the two women
      at the back, on seats which made them jump up and down as the vehicle went
      jolting along the road, and the two men in front on the front seat.
    

      Nobody spoke. Antoine, ill at ease, whistled a barrack-room air; his
      father whipped the nag; and his mother, from where she sat in the corner,
      kept casting sly glances at the negress, whose forehead and cheekbones
      shone in the sunlight like well-polished shoes.
    

      Wishing to break the ice, Antoine turned round.
    

      “Well,” said he, “we don't seem inclined to talk.”
    

      “We must have time,” replied the old woman.
    

      He went on:
    

      “Come! Tell us the little story about that hen of yours that laid
      eight eggs.”
    

      It was a funny anecdote of long standing in the family. But, as his mother
      still remained silent, paralyzed by her emotion, he undertook himself to
      tell the story, laughing as he did so at the memorable incident. The
      father, who knew it by heart brightened at the opening words of the
      narrative; his wife soon followed his example; and the negress herself,
      when he reached the drollest part of it, suddenly gave vent to a laugh,
      such a loud, rolling torrent of laughter that the horse, becoming excited,
      broke into a gallop for a while.
    

      This served to cement their acquaintance. They all began to chat.
    

      They had scarcely reached the house and had all alighted, when Antoine
      conducted his sweetheart to a room, so that she might take off her dress,
      to avoid staining it, as she was going to prepare a nice dish, intended to
      win the old people's affections through their stomachs. He drew his
      parents outside the house, and, with beating heart, asked:
    

      “Well, what do you say now?”
    

      The father said nothing. The mother, less timid, exclaimed:
    

      “She is too black. No, indeed, this is too much for me. It turns my
      blood.”
    

      “You will get used to it,” said Antoine.
    

      “Perhaps so, but not at first.”
    

      They went into the house, where the good woman was somewhat affected at
      the spectacle of the negress engaged in cooking. She at once proceeded to
      assist her, with petticoats tucked up, active in spite of her age.
    

      The meal was an excellent one, very long, very enjoyable. When they were
      taking a turn after dinner, Antoine took his father aside.
    

      “Well, dad, what do you say about it?”
    

      The peasant took care never to compromise himself.
    

      “I have no opinion about it. Ask your mother.”
    

      So Antoine went back to his mother, and, detaining her behind the rest,
      said:
    

      “Well, mother, what do you think of her?”
    

      “My poor lad, she is really too black. If she were only a little
      less black, I would not go against you, but this is too much. One would
      think it was Satan!”
    

      He did not press her, knowing how obstinate the old woman had always been,
      but he felt a tempest of disappointment sweeping over his heart. He was
      turning over in his mind what he ought to do, what plan he could devise,
      surprised, moreover, that she had not conquered them already as she had
      captivated himself. And they, all four, walked along through the wheat
      fields, having gradually relapsed into silence. Whenever they passed a
      fence they saw a countryman sitting on the stile, and a group of brats
      climbed up to stare at them, and every one rushed out into the road to see
      the “black” whore young Boitelle had brought home with him. At
      a distance they noticed people scampering across the fields just as when
      the drum beats to draw public attention to some living phenomenon. Pere
      and Mere Boitelle, alarmed at this curiosity, which was exhibited
      everywhere through the country at their approach, quickened their pace,
      walking side by side, and leaving their son far behind. His dark companion
      asked what his parents thought of her.
    

      He hesitatingly replied that they had not yet made up their minds.
    

      But on the village green people rushed out of all the houses in a flutter
      of excitement; and, at the sight of the gathering crowd, old Boitelle took
      to his heels, and regained his abode, while Antoine; swelling with rage,
      his sweetheart on his arm, advanced majestically under the staring eyes,
      which opened wide in amazement.
    

      He understood that it was at an end, and there was no hope for him, that
      he could not marry his negress. She also understood it; and as they drew
      near the farmhouse they both began to weep. As soon as they had got back
      to the house, she once more took off her dress to aid the mother in the
      household duties, and followed her everywhere, to the dairy, to the
      stable, to the hen house, taking on herself the hardest part of the work,
      repeating always: “Let me do it, Madame Boitelle,” so that,
      when night came on, the old woman, touched but inexorable, said to her
      son: “She is a good girl, all the same. It's a pity she is so black;
      but indeed she is too black. I could not get used to it. She must go back
      again. She is too, too black!”
    

      And young Boitelle said to his sweetheart:
    

      “She will not consent. She thinks you are too black. You must go
      back again. I will go with you to the train. No matter—don't fret. I
      am going to talk to them after you have started.”
    

      He then took her to the railway station, still cheering her with hope,
      and, when he had kissed her, he put her into the train, which he watched
      as it passed out of sight, his eyes swollen with tears.
    

      In vain did he appeal to the old people. They would never give their
      consent.
    

      And when he had told this story, which was known all over the country,
      Antoine Boitelle would always add:
    

      “From that time forward I have had no heart for anything—for
      anything at all. No trade suited me any longer, and so I became what I am—a
      night scavenger.”
    

      People would say to him:
    

      “Yet you got married.”
    

      “Yes, and I can't say that my wife didn't please me, seeing that I
      have fourteen children; but she is not the other one, oh, no—certainly
      not! The other one, mark you, my negress, she had only to give me one
      glance, and I felt as if I were in Heaven.”
    







      A WIDOW
    

      This story was told during the hunting season at the Chateau Baneville.
      The autumn had been rainy and sad. The red leaves, instead of rustling
      under the feet, were rotting under the heavy downfalls.
    

      The forest was as damp as it could be. From it came an odor of must, of
      rain, of soaked grass and wet earth; and the sportsmen, their backs
      hunched under the downpour, mournful dogs, with tails between their legs
      and hairs sticking to their sides, and the young women, with their clothes
      drenched, returned every evening, tired in body and in mind.
    

      After dinner, in the large drawing-room, everybody played lotto, without
      enjoyment, while the wind whistled madly around the house. Then they tried
      telling stories like those they read in books, but no one was able to
      invent anything amusing. The hunters told tales of wonderful shots and of
      the butchery of rabbits; and the women racked their brains for ideas
      without revealing the imagination of Scheherezade. They were about to give
      up this diversion when a young woman, who was idly caressing the hand of
      an old maiden aunt, noticed a little ring made of blond hair, which she
      had often seen, without paying any attention to it.
    

      She fingered it gently and asked, “Auntie, what is this ring? It
      looks as if it were made from the hair of a child.”
    

      The old lady blushed, grew pale, then answered in a trembling voice:
      “It is sad, so sad that I never wish to speak of it. All the
      unhappiness of my life comes from that. I was very young then, and the
      memory has remained so painful that I weep every time I think of it.”
    

      Immediately everybody wished to know the story, but the old lady refused
      to tell it. Finally, after they had coaxed her for a long time, she
      yielded. Here is the story:
    

      “You have often heard me speak of the Santeze family, now extinct. I
      knew the last three male members of this family. They all died in the same
      manner; this hair belongs to the last one. He was thirteen when he killed
      himself for me. That seems strange to you, doesn't it?
    

      “Oh! it was a strange family—mad, if you will, but a charming
      madness, the madness of love. From father to son, all had violent passions
      which filled their whole being, which impelled them to do wild things,
      drove them to frantic enthusiasm, even to crime. This was born in them,
      just as burning devotion is in certain souls. Trappers have not the same
      nature as minions of the drawing-room. There was a saying: 'As passionate
      as a Santeze.' This could be noticed by looking at them. They all had wavy
      hair, falling over their brows, curly beards and large eyes whose glance
      pierced and moved one, though one could not say why.
    

      “The grandfather of the owner of this hair, of whom it is the last
      souvenir, after many adventures, duels and elopements, at about sixty-five
      fell madly in love with his farmer's daughter. I knew them both. She was
      blond, pale, distinguished-looking, with a slow manner of talking, a quiet
      voice and a look so gentle that one might have taken her for a Madonna.
      The old nobleman took her to his home and was soon so captivated with her
      that he could not live without her for a minute. His daughter and
      daughter-in-law, who lived in the chateau, found this perfectly natural,
      love was such a tradition in the family. Nothing in regard to a passion
      surprised them, and if one spoke before them of parted lovers, even of
      vengeance after treachery, both said in the same sad tone: 'Oh, how he
      must have suffered to come to that point!' That was all. They grew sad
      over tragedies of love, but never indignant, even when they were criminal.
    

      “Now, one day a young man named Monsieur de Gradelle, who had been
      invited for the shooting, eloped with the young girl.
    

      “Monsieur de Santeze remained calm as if nothing had happened, but
      one morning he was found hanging in the kennels, among his dogs.
    

      “His son died in the same manner in a hotel in Paris during a
      journey which he made there in 1841, after being deceived by a singer from
      the opera.
    

      “He left a twelve-year-old child and a widow, my mother's sister.
      She came to my father's house with the boy, while we were living at
      Bertillon. I was then seventeen.
    

      “You have no idea how wonderful and precocious this Santeze child
      was. One might have thought that all the tenderness and exaltation of the
      whole race had been stored up in this last one. He was always dreaming and
      walking about alone in a great alley of elms leading from the chateau to
      the forest. I watched from my window this sentimental boy, who walked with
      thoughtful steps, his hands behind his back, his head bent, and at times
      stopping to raise his eyes as if he could see and understand things that
      were not comprehensible at his age.
    

      “Often, after dinner on clear evenings, he would say to me: 'Let us
      go outside and dream, cousin.' And we would go outside together in the
      park. He would stop quickly before a clearing where the white vapor of the
      moon lights the woods, and he would press my hand, saying: 'Look! look!
      but you don't understand me; I feel it. If you understood me, we should be
      happy. One must love to know! I would laugh and then kiss this child, who
      loved me madly.
    

      “Often, after dinner, he would sit on my mother's knees. 'Come,
      auntie,' he would say, 'tell me some love-stories.' And my mother, as a
      joke, would tell him all the old legends of the family, all the passionate
      adventures of his forefathers, for thousands of them were current, some
      true and some false. It was their reputation for love and gallantry which
      was the ruin of every one of these men; they gloried in it and then
      thought that they had to live up to the renown of their house.
    

      “The little fellow became exalted by these tender or terrible
      stories, and at times he would clap his hands, crying: 'I, too, I, too,
      know how to love, better than all of them!'
    

      “Then, he began to court me in a timid and tender manner, at which
      every one laughed, it was, so amusing. Every morning I had some flowers
      picked by him, and every evening before going to his room he would kiss my
      hand and murmur: 'I love you!'
    

      “I was guilty, very guilty, and I grieved continually about it, and
      I have been doing penance all my life; I have remained an old maid—or,
      rather, I have lived as a widowed fiancee, his widow.
    

      “I was amused at this childish tenderness, and I even encouraged
      him. I was coquettish, as charming as with a man, alternately caressing
      and severe. I maddened this child. It was a game for me and a joyous
      diversion for his mother and mine. He was twelve! think of it! Who would
      have taken this atom's passion seriously? I kissed him as often as he
      wished; I even wrote him little notes, which were read by our respective
      mothers; and he answered me by passionate letters, which I have kept.
      Judging himself as a man, he thought that our loving intimacy was secret.
      We had forgotten that he was a Santeze.
    

      “This lasted for about a year. One evening in the park he fell at my
      feet and, as he madly kissed the hem of my dress, he kept repeating: 'I
      love you! I love you! I love you! If ever you deceive me, if ever you
      leave me for another, I'll do as my father did.' And he added in a hoarse
      voice, which gave me a shiver: 'You know what he did!'
    

      “I stood there astonished. He arose, and standing on the tips of his
      toes in order to reach my ear, for I was taller than he, he pronounced my
      first name: 'Genevieve!' in such a gentle, sweet, tender tone that I
      trembled all over. I stammered: 'Let us return! let us return!' He said no
      more and followed me; but as we were going up the steps of the porch, he
      stopped me, saying: 'You know, if ever you leave me, I'll kill myself.'
    

      “This time I understood that I had gone too far, and I became quite
      reserved. One day, as he was reproaching me for this, I answered: 'You are
      now too old for jesting and too young for serious love. I'll wait.'
    

      “I thought that this would end the matter. In the autumn he was sent
      to a boarding-school. When he returned the following summer I was engaged
      to be married. He understood immediately, and for a week he became so
      pensive that I was quite anxious.
    

      “On the morning of the ninth day I saw a little paper under my door
      as I got up. I seized it, opened it and read: 'You have deserted me and
      you know what I said. It is death to which you have condemned me. As I do
      not wish to be found by another than you, come to the park just where I
      told you last year that I loved you and look in the air.'
    

      “I thought that I should go mad. I dressed as quickly as I could and
      ran wildly to the place that he had mentioned. His little cap was on the
      ground in the mud. It had been raining all night. I raised my eyes and saw
      something swinging among the leaves, for the wind was blowing a gale.
    

      “I don't know what I did after that. I must have screamed at first,
      then fainted and fallen, and finally have run to the chateau. The next
      thing that I remember I was in bed, with my mother sitting beside me.
    

      “I thought that I had dreamed all this in a frightful nightmare. I
      stammered: 'And what of him, what of him, Gontran?' There was no answer.
      It was true!
    

      “I did not dare see him again, but I asked for a lock of his blond
      hair. Here—here it is!”
    

      And the old maid stretched out her trembling hand in a despairing gesture.
      Then she blew her nose several times, wiped her eyes and continued:
    

      “I broke off my marriage—without saying why. And I—I
      always have remained the—the widow of this thirteen-year-old boy.”
      Then her head fell on her breast and she wept for a long time.
    

      As the guests were retiring for the night a large man, whose quiet she had
      disturbed, whispered in his neighbor's ear: “Isn't it unfortunate
      to, be so sentimental?”
    







      THE ENGLISHMAN OF ETRETAT
    

      A great English poet has just crossed over to France in order to greet
      Victor Hugo. All the newspapers are full of his name and he is the great
      topic of conversation in all drawing-rooms. Fifteen years ago I had
      occasion several times to meet Algernon Charles Swinburne. I will attempt
      to show him just as I saw him and to give an idea of the strange
      impression he made on me, which will remain with me throughout time.
    

      I believe it was in 1867 or in 1868 that an unknown young Englishman came
      to Etretat and bought a little hut hidden under great trees. It was said
      that he lived there, always alone, in a strange manner; and he aroused the
      inimical surprise of the natives, for the inhabitants were sullen and
      foolishly malicious, as they always are in little towns.
    

      They declared that this whimsical Englishman ate nothing but boiled,
      roasted or stewed monkey; that he would see no one; that he talked to
      himself hours at a time and many other surprising things that made people
      think that he was different from other men. They were surprised that he
      should live alone with a monkey. Had it been a cat or a dog they would
      have said nothing. But a monkey! Was that not frightful? What savage
      tastes the man must have!
    

      I knew this young man only from seeing him in the streets. He was short,
      plump, without being fat, mild-looking, and he wore a little blond
      mustache, which was almost invisible.
    

      Chance brought us together. This savage had amiable and pleasing manners,
      but he was one of those strange Englishmen that one meets here and there
      throughout the world.
    

      Endowed with remarkable intelligence, he seemed to live in a fantastic
      dream, as Edgar Poe must have lived. He had translated into English a
      volume of strange Icelandic legends, which I ardently desired to see
      translated into French. He loved the supernatural, the dismal and
      grewsome, but he spoke of the most marvellous things with a calmness that
      was typically English, to which his gentle and quiet voice gave a
      semblance of reality that was maddening.
    

      Full of a haughty disdain for the world, with its conventions, prejudices
      and code of morality, he had nailed to his house a name that was boldly
      impudent. The keeper of a lonely inn who should write on his door: “Travellers
      murdered here!” could not make a more sinister jest. I never had
      entered his dwelling, when one day I received an invitation to luncheon,
      following an accident that had occurred to one of his friends, who had
      been almost drowned and whom I had attempted to rescue.
    

      Although I was unable to reach the man until he had already been rescued,
      I received the hearty thanks of the two Englishmen, and the following day
      I called upon them.
    

      The friend was a man about thirty years old. He bore an enormous head on a
      child's body—a body without chest or shoulders. An immense forehead,
      which seemed to have engulfed the rest of the man, expanded like a dome
      above a thin face which ended in a little pointed beard. Two sharp eyes
      and a peculiar mouth gave one the impression of the head of a reptile,
      while the magnificent brow suggested a genius.
    

      A nervous twitching shook this peculiar being, who walked, moved, acted by
      jerks like a broken spring.
    

      This was Algernon Charles Swinburne, son of an English admiral and
      grandson, on the maternal side, of the Earl of Ashburnham.
    

      He strange countenance was transfigured when he spoke. I have seldom seen
      a man more impressive, more eloquent, incisive or charming in
      conversation. His rapid, clear, piercing and fantastic imagination seemed
      to creep into his voice and to lend life to his words. His brusque
      gestures enlivened his speech, which penetrated one like a dagger, and he
      had bursts of thought, just as lighthouses throw out flashes of fire,
      great, genial lights that seemed to illuminate a whole world of ideas.
    

      The home of the two friends was pretty and by no means commonplace.
      Everywhere were paintings, some superb, some strange, representing
      different conceptions of insanity. Unless I am mistaken, there was a
      water-color which represented the head of a dead man floating in a
      rose-colored shell on a boundless ocean, under a moon with a human face.
    

      Here and there I came across bones. I clearly remember a flayed hand on
      which was hanging some dried skin and black muscles, and on the snow-white
      bones could be seen the traces of dried blood.
    

      The food was a riddle which I could not solve. Was it good? Was it bad? I
      could not say. Some roast monkey took away all desire to make a steady
      diet of this animal, and the great monkey who roamed about among us at
      large and playfully pushed his head into my glass when I wished to drink
      cured me of any desire I might have to take one of his brothers as a
      companion for the rest of my days.
    

      As for the two men, they gave me the impression of two strange, original,
      remarkable minds, belonging to that peculiar race of talented madmen from
      among whom have arisen Poe, Hoffmann and many others.
    

      If genius is, as is commonly believed, a sort of aberration of great
      minds, then Algernon Charles Swinburne is undoubtedly a genius.
    

      Great minds that are healthy are never considered geniuses, while this
      sublime qualification is lavished on brains that are often inferior but
      are slightly touched by madness.
    

      At any rate, this poet remains one of the first of his time, through his
      originality and polished form. He is an exalted lyrical singer who seldom
      bothers about the good and humble truth, which French poets are now
      seeking so persistently and patiently. He strives to set down dreams,
      subtle thoughts, sometimes great, sometimes visibly forced, but sometimes
      magnificent.
    

      Two years later I found the house closed and its tenants gone. The
      furniture was being sold. In memory of them I bought the hideous flayed
      hand. On the grass an enormous square block of granite bore this simple
      word: “Nip.” Above this a hollow stone offered water to the
      birds. It was the grave of the monkey, who had been hanged by a young,
      vindictive negro servant. It was said that this violent domestic had been
      forced to flee at the point of his exasperated master's revolver. After
      wandering about without home or food for several days, he returned and
      began to peddle barley-sugar in the streets. He was expelled from the
      country after he had almost strangled a displeased customer.
    

      The world would be gayer if one could often meet homes like that.
    

   This story appeared in the “Gaulois,” November 29, 1882. It was the
   original sketch for the introductory study of Swinburne, written by
   Maupassant for the French translation by Gabriel Mourey of “Poems
   and Ballads.”
 







      MAGNETISM
    

      It was a men's dinner party, and they were sitting over their cigars and
      brandy and discussing magnetism. Donato's tricks and Charcot's
      experiments. Presently, the sceptical, easy-going men, who cared nothing
      for religion of any sort, began telling stories of strange occurrences,
      incredible things which, nevertheless, had really occurred, so they said,
      falling back into superstitious beliefs, clinging to these last remnants
      of the marvellous, becoming devotees of this mystery of magnetism,
      defending it in the name of science. There was only one person who smiled,
      a vigorous young fellow, a great ladies' man who was so incredulous that
      he would not even enter upon a discussion of such matters.
    

      He repeated with a sneer:
    

      “Humbug! humbug! humbug! We need not discuss Donato, who is merely a
      very smart juggler. As for M. Charcot, who is said to be a remarkable man
      of science, he produces on me the effect of those story-tellers of the
      school of Edgar Poe, who end by going mad through constantly reflecting on
      queer cases of insanity. He has authenticated some cases of unexplained
      and inexplicable nervous phenomena; he makes his way into that unknown
      region which men are exploring every day, and unable always to understand
      what he sees, he recalls, perhaps, the ecclesiastical interpretation of
      these mysteries. I should like to hear what he says himself.”
    

      The words of the unbeliever were listened to with a kind of pity, as if he
      had blasphemed in an assembly of monks.
    

      One of these gentlemen exclaimed:
    

      “And yet miracles were performed in olden times.”
    

      “I deny it,” replied the other: “Why cannot they be
      performed now?”
    

      Then, each mentioned some fact, some fantastic presentiment some instance
      of souls communicating with each other across space, or some case of the
      secret influence of one being over another. They asserted and maintained
      that these things had actually occurred, while the sceptic angrily
      repeated:
    

      “Humbug! humbug! humbug!”
    

      At last he rose, threw away his cigar, and with his hands in his pockets,
      said: “Well, I also have two stories to tell you, which I will
      afterwards explain. Here they are:
    

      “In the little village of Etretat, the men, who are all seafaring
      folk, go every year to Newfoundland to fish for cod. One night the little
      son of one of these fishermen woke up with a start, crying out that his
      father was dead. The child was quieted, and again he woke up exclaiming
      that his father was drowned. A month later the news came that his father
      had, in fact, been swept off the deck of his smack by a billow. The widow
      then remembered how her son had woke up and spoken of his father's death.
      Everyone said it was a miracle, and the affair caused a great sensation.
      The dates were compared, and it was found that the accident and the dream
      were almost coincident, whence they concluded that they had happened on
      the same night and at the same hour. And there is a mystery of magnetism.”
    

      The story-teller stopped suddenly.
    

      Thereupon, one of those who had heard him, much affected by the narrative,
      asked:
    

      “And can you explain this?”
    

      “Perfectly, monsieur. I have discovered the secret. The circumstance
      surprised me and even perplexed me very much; but you see, I do not
      believe on principle. Just as others begin by believing, I begin by
      doubting; and when I cannot understand, I continue to deny that there can
      be any telepathic communication between souls; certain that my own
      intelligence will be able to explain it. Well, I kept on inquiring into
      the matter, and by dint of questioning all the wives of the absent seamen,
      I was convinced that not a week passed without one of them, or one of
      their children dreaming and declaring when they woke up that the father
      was drowned. The horrible and continual fear of this accident makes them
      always talk about it. Now, if one of these frequent predictions coincides,
      by a very simple chance, with the death of the person referred to, people
      at once declare it to be a miracle; for they suddenly lose sight of all
      the other predictions of misfortune that have remained unfulfilled. I have
      myself known fifty cases where the persons who made the prediction forgot
      all about it a week afterwards. But, if, then one happens to die, then
      the recollection of the thing is immediately revived, and people are ready
      to believe in the intervention of God, according to some, and magnetism,
      according to others.”
    

      One of the smokers remarked:
    

      “What you say is right enough; but what about your second story?”
    

      “Oh! my second story is a very delicate matter to relate. It
      happened to myself, and so I don't place any great value on my own view of
      the matter. An interested party can never give an impartial opinion.
      However, here it is:
    

      “Among my acquaintances was a young woman on whom I had never
      bestowed a thought, whom I had never even looked at attentively, never
      taken any notice of.
    

      “I classed her among the women of no importance, though she was not
      bad-looking; she appeared, in fact, to possess eyes, a nose, a mouth, some
      sort of hair—just a colorless type of countenance. She was one of
      those beings who awaken only a chance, passing thought, but no special
      interest, no desire.
    

      “Well, one night, as I was writing some letters by my fireside
      before going to bed, I was conscious, in the midst of that train of
      sensuous visions that sometimes pass through one's brain in moments of
      idle reverie, of a kind of slight influence, passing over me, a little
      flutter of the heart, and immediately, without any cause, without any
      logical connection of thought, I saw distinctly, as if I were touching
      her, saw from head to foot, and disrobed, this young woman to whom I had
      never given more than three seconds' thought at a time. I suddenly
      discovered in her a number of qualities which I had never before observed,
      a sweet charm, a languorous fascination; she awakened in me that sort of
      restless emotion that causes one to pursue a woman. But I did not think of
      her long. I went to bed and was soon asleep. And I dreamed.
    

      “You have all had these strange dreams which make you overcome the
      impossible, which open to you double-locked doors, unexpected joys,
      tightly folded arms?
    

      “Which of us in these troubled, excising, breathless slumbers, has
      not held, clasped, embraced with rapture, the woman who occupied his
      thoughts? And have you ever noticed what superhuman delight these happy
      dreams give us? Into what mad intoxication they cast you! with what
      passionate spasms they shake you! and with what infinite, caressing,
      penetrating tenderness they fill your heart for her whom you hold clasped
      in your arms in that adorable illusion that is so like reality!
    

      “All this I felt with unforgettable violence. This woman was mine,
      so much mine that the pleasant warmth of her skin remained in my fingers,
      the odor of her skin, in my brain, the taste of her kisses, on my lips,
      the sound of her voice lingered in my ears, the touch of her clasp still
      clung to me, and the burning charm of her tenderness still gratified my
      senses long after the delight but disillusion of my awakening.
    

      “And three times that night I had the same dream.
    

      “When the day dawned she haunted me, possessed me, filled my senses
      to such an extent that I was not one second without thinking of her.
    

      “At last, not knowing what to do, I dressed myself and went to call
      on her. As I went upstairs to her apartment, I was so overcome by emotion
      that I trembled, and my heart beat rapidly.
    

      “I entered the apartment. She rose the moment she heard my name
      mentioned; and suddenly our eyes met in a peculiar fixed gaze.
    

      “I sat down. I stammered out some commonplaces which she seemed not
      to hear. I did not know what to say or do. Then, abruptly, clasping my
      arms round her, my dream was realized so suddenly that I began to doubt
      whether I was really awake. We were friends after this for two years.”
    

      “What conclusion do you draw from it?” said a voice.
    

      The story-teller seemed to hesitate.
    

      “The conclusion I draw from it—well, by Jove, the conclusion
      is that it was just a coincidence! And then—who can tell? Perhaps it
      was some glance of hers which I had not noticed and which came back that
      night to me through one of those mysterious and unconscious —recollections
      that often bring before us things ignored by our own consciousness,
      unperceived by our minds!”
    

      “Call it whatever you like,” said one of his table companions,
      when the story was finished; “but if you don't believe in magnetism
      after that, my dear boy, you are an ungrateful fellow!”
    







      A FATHER'S CONFESSION
    

      All Veziers-le-Rethel had followed the funeral procession of M.
      Badon-Leremince to the grave, and the last words of the funeral oration
      pronounced by the delegate of the district remained in the minds of all:
      “He was an honest man, at least!”
    

      An honest man he had been in all the known acts of his life, in his words,
      in his examples, his attitude, his behavior, his enterprises, in the cut
      of his beard and the shape of his hats. He never had said a word that did
      not set an example, never had given an alms without adding a word of
      advice, never had extended his hand without appearing to bestow a
      benediction.
    

      He left two children, a boy and a girl. His son was counselor general, and
      his daughter, having married a lawyer, M. Poirel de la Voulte, moved in
      the best society of Veziers.
    

      They were inconsolable at the death of their father, for they loved him
      sincerely.
    

      As soon as the ceremony was over, the son, daughter and son-in-law
      returned to the house of mourning, and, shutting themselves in the
      library, they opened the will, the seals of which were to be broken by
      them alone and only after the coffin had been placed in the ground. This
      wish was expressed by a notice on the envelope.
    

      M. Poirel de la Voulte tore open the envelope, in his character of a
      lawyer used to such operations, and having adjusted his spectacles, he
      read in a monotonous voice, made for reading the details of contracts:
    

   My children, my dear children, I could not sleep the eternal sleep
   in peace if I did not make to you from the tomb a confession, the
   confession of a crime, remorse for which has ruined my life. Yes,
   I committed a crime, a frightful, abominable crime.

   I was twenty-six years old, and I had just been called to the bar in
   Paris, and was living the life off young men from the provinces who
   are stranded in this town without acquaintances, relatives, or
   friends.

   I took a sweetheart. There are beings who cannot live alone. I was
   one of those. Solitude fills me with horrible anguish, the solitude
   of my room beside my fire in the evening. I feel then as if I were
   alone on earth, alone, but surrounded by vague dangers, unknown and
   terrible things; and the partition that separates me from my
   neighbor, my neighbor whom I do not know, keeps me at as great a
   distance from him as the stars that I see through my window. A sort
   of fever pervades me, a fever of impatience and of fear, and the
   silence of the walls terrifies me. The silence of a room where one
   lives alone is so intense and so melancholy. It is not only a silence
   of the mind; when a piece of furniture cracks a shudder goes through
   you for you expect no noise in this melancholy abode.

   How many times, nervous and timid from this motionless silence, I
   have begun to talk, to repeat words without rhyme or reason, only to
   make some sound. My voice at those times sounds so strange that I
   am afraid of that, too. Is there anything more dreadful than
   talking to one's self in an empty house? One's voice sounds like
   that of another, an unknown voice talking aimlessly, to no one, into
   the empty air, with no ear to listen to it, for one knows before
   they escape into the solitude of the room exactly what words will be
   uttered. And when they resound lugubriously in the silence, they
   seem no more than an echo, the peculiar echo of words whispered by
   ones thought.

   My sweetheart was a young girl like other young girls who live in
   Paris on wages that are insufficient to keep them. She was gentle,
   good, simple. Her parents lived at Poissy. She went to spend
   several days with them from time to time.

   For a year I lived quietly with her, fully decided to leave her when
   I should find some one whom I liked well enough to marry. I would
   make a little provision for this one, for it is an understood thing
   in our social set that a woman's love should be paid for, in money
   if she is poor, in presents if she is rich.

   But one day she told me she was enceinte. I was thunderstruck, and
   saw in a second that my life would be ruined. I saw the fetter that
   I should wear until my death, everywhere, in my future family life,
   in my old age, forever; the fetter of a woman bound to my life
   through a child; the fetter of the child whom I must bring up, watch
   over, protect, while keeping myself unknown to him, and keeping him
   hidden from the world.

   I was greatly disturbed at this news, and a confused longing, a
   criminal desire, surged through my mind; I did not formulate it, but
   I felt it in my heart, ready to come to the surface, as if some one
   hidden behind a portiere should await the signal to come out. If
   some accident might only happen! So many of these little beings die
   before they are born!

   Oh! I did not wish my sweetheart to die! The poor girl, I loved
   her very much! But I wished, possibly, that the child might die
   before I saw it.

   He was born. I set up housekeeping in my little bachelor apartment,
   an imitation home, with a horrible child. He looked like all
   children; I did not care for him. Fathers, you see, do not show
   affection until later. They have not the instinctive and passionate
   tenderness of mothers; their affection has to be awakened gradually,
   their mind must become attached by bonds formed each day between
   beings that live in each other's society.

   A year passed. I now avoided my home, which was too small, where
   soiled linen, baby-clothes and stockings the size of gloves were
   lying round, where a thousand articles of all descriptions lay on
   the furniture, on the arm of an easy-chair, everywhere. I went out
   chiefly that I might not hear the child cry, for he cried on the
   slightest pretext, when he was bathed, when he was touched, when he
   was put to bed, when he was taken up in the morning, incessantly.

   I had made a few acquaintances, and I met at a reception the woman
   who was to be your mother. I fell in love with her and became
   desirous to marry her. I courted her; I asked her parents' consent
   to our marriage and it was granted.

   I found myself in this dilemma: I must either marry this young girl
   whom I adored, having a child already, or else tell the truth and
   renounce her, and happiness, my future, everything; for her parents,
   who were people of rigid principles, would not give her to me if
   they knew.

   I passed a month of horrible anguish, of mortal torture, a month
   haunted by a thousand frightful thoughts; and I felt developing in
   me a hatred toward my son, toward that little morsel of living,
   screaming flesh, who blocked my path, interrupted my life, condemned
   me to an existence without hope, without all those vague
   expectations that make the charm of youth.

   But just then my companion's mother became ill, and I was left alone
   with the child.

   It was in December, and the weather was terribly cold. What a
   night!

   My companion had just left. I had dined alone in my little
   dining-room and I went gently into the room where the little one was
   asleep.

   I sat down in an armchair before the fire. The wind was blowing,
   making the windows rattle, a dry, frosty wind; and I saw trough the
   window the stars shining with that piercing brightness that they
   have on frosty nights.

   Then the idea that had obsessed me for a month rose again to the
   surface. As soon as I was quiet it came to me and harassed me. It
   ate into my mind like a fixed idea, just as cancers must eat into
   the flesh. It was there, in my head, in my heart, in my whole body,
   it seemed to me; and it swallowed me up as a wild beast might have.
   I endeavored to drive it away, to repulse it, to open my mind to
   other thoughts, as one opens a window to the fresh morning breeze to
   drive out the vitiated air; but I could not drive it from my brain,
   not even for a second. I do not know how to express this torture.
   It gnawed at my soul, and I felt a frightful pain, a real physical
   and moral pain.

   My life was ruined! How could I escape from this situation? How
   could I draw back, and how could I confess?

   And I loved the one who was to become your mother with a mad
   passion, which this insurmountable obstacle only aggravated.

   A terrible rage was taking possession of me, choking me, a rage that
   verged on madness! Surely I was crazy that evening!

   The child was sleeping. I got up and looked at it as it slept. It
   was he, this abortion, this spawn, this nothing, that condemned me
   to irremediable unhappiness!

   He was asleep, his mouth open, wrapped in his bed-clothes in a crib
   beside my bed, where I could not sleep.

   How did I ever do what I did? How do I know? What force urged me
   on? What malevolent power took possession of me? Oh! the
   temptation to crime came to me without any forewarning. All I
   recall is that my heart beat tumultuously. It beat so hard that I
   could hear it, as one hears the strokes of a hammer behind a
   partition. That is all I can recall—the beating of my heart!
   In my head there was a strange confusion, a tumult, a senseless
   disorder, a lack of presence of mind. It was one of those hours of
   bewilderment and hallucination when a man is neither conscious of
   his actions nor able to guide his will.

   I gently raised the coverings from the body of the child; I turned
   them down to the foot of the crib, and he lay there uncovered and
   naked.

   He did not wake. Then I went toward the window, softly, quite
   softly, and I opened it.

   A breath of icy air glided in like an assassin; it was so cold that
   I drew aside, and the two candles flickered. I remained standing
   near the window, not daring to turn round, as if for fear of seeing
   what was doing on behind me, and feeling the icy air continually
   across my forehead, my cheeks, my hands, the deadly air which kept
   streaming in. I stood there a long time.

   I was not thinking, I was not reflecting. All at once a little
   cough caused me to shudder frightfully from head to foot, a shudder
   that I feel still to the roots of my hair. And with a frantic
   movement I abruptly closed both sides of the window and, turning
   round, ran over to the crib.

   He was still asleep, his mouth open, quite naked. I touched his
   legs; they were icy cold and I covered them up.

   My heart was suddenly touched, grieved, filled with pity,
   tenderness, love for this poor innocent being that I had wished to
   kill. I kissed his fine, soft hair long and tenderly; then I went
   and sat down before the fire.

   I reflected with amazement with horror on what I had done, asking
   myself whence come those tempests of the soul in which a man loses
   all perspective of things, all command over himself and acts as in a
   condition of mad intoxication, not knowing whither he is
   going—like a vessel in a hurricane.

   The child coughed again, and it gave my heart a wrench. Suppose it
   should die! O God! O God! What would become of me?

   I rose from my chair to go and look at him, and with a candle in my
   hand I leaned over him. Seeing him breathing quietly I felt
   reassured, when he coughed a third time. It gave me such a shock
   tat I started backward, just as one does at sight of something
   horrible, and let my candle fall.

   As I stood erect after picking it up, I noticed that my temples were
   bathed in perspiration, that cold sweat which is the result of
   anguish of soul. And I remained until daylight bending over my son,
   becoming calm when he remained quiet for some time, and filled with
   atrocious pain when a weak cough came from his mouth.

   He awoke with his eyes red, his throat choked, and with an air of
   suffering.

   When the woman came in to arrange my room I sent her at once for a
   doctor. He came at the end of an hour, and said, after examining
   the child:

   “Did he not catch cold?”

   I began to tremble like a person with palsy, and I faltered:

   “No, I do not think so.”

   And then I said:

   “What is the matter? Is it serious?”

   “I do not know yet,” he replied. “I will come again this evening.”

   He came that evening. My son had remained almost all day in a
   condition of drowsiness, coughing from time to time. During the
   night inflammation of the lungs set in.

   That lasted ten days. I cannot express what I suffered in those
   interminable hours that divide morning from night, right from
   morning.

   He died.

   And since—since that moment, I have not passed one hour, not a
   single hour, without the frightful burning recollection, a gnawing
   recollection, a memory that seems to wring my heart, awaking in me
   like a savage beast imprisoned in the depth of my soul.

   Oh! if I could have gone mad!


      M. Poirel de la Voulte raised his spectacles with a motion that was
      peculiar to him whenever he finished reading a contract; and the three
      heirs of the defunct looked at one another without speaking, pale and
      motionless.
    

      At the end of a minute the lawyer resumed:
    

      “That must be destroyed.”
    

      The other two bent their heads in sign of assent. He lighted a candle,
      carefully separated the pages containing the damaging confession from
      those relating to the disposition of money, then he held them over the
      candle and threw them into the fireplace.
    

      And they watched the white sheets as they burned, till they were presently
      reduced to little crumbling black heaps. And as some words were still
      visible in white tracing, the daughter, with little strokes of the toe of
      her shoe, crushed the burning paper, mixing it with the old ashes in the
      fireplace.
    

      Then all three stood there watching it for some time, as if they feared
      that the destroyed secret might escape from the fireplace.
    







      A MOTHER OF MONSTERS
    

      I recalled this horrible story, the events of which occurred long ago, and
      this horrible woman, the other day at a fashionable seaside resort, where
      I saw on the beach a well-known young, elegant and charming Parisienne,
      adored and respected by everyone.
    

      I had been invited by a friend to pay him a visit in a little provincial
      town. He took me about in all directions to do the honors of the place,
      showed me noted scenes, chateaux, industries, ruins. He pointed out
      monuments, churches, old carved doorways, enormous or distorted trees, the
      oak of St. Andrew, and the yew tree of Roqueboise.
    

      When I had exhausted my admiration and enthusiasm over all the sights, my
      friend said with a distressed expression on his face, that there was
      nothing left to look at. I breathed freely. I would now be able to rest
      under the shade of the trees. But, all at once, he uttered an exclamation:
    

      “Oh, yes! We have the 'Mother of Monsters'; I must take you to see
      her.”
    

      “Who is that, the 'Mother of Monsters'?” I asked.
    

      “She is an abominable woman,” he replied, “a regular
      demon, a being who voluntarily brings into the world deformed, hideous,
      frightful children, monstrosities, in fact, and then sells them to showmen
      who exhibit such things.
    

      “These exploiters of freaks come from time to time to find out if
      she has any fresh monstrosity, and if it meets with their approval they
      carry it away with them, paying the mother a compensation.
    

      “She has eleven of this description. She is rich.
    

      “You think I am joking, romancing, exaggerating. No, my friend; I am
      telling you the truth, the exact truth.
    

      “Let us go and see this woman. Then I will tell you her history.”
    

      He took me into one of the suburbs. The woman lived in a pretty little
      house by the side of the road. It was attractive and well kept. The garden
      was filled with fragrant flowers. One might have supposed it to be the
      residence of a retired lawyer.
    

      A maid ushered us into a sort of little country parlor, and the wretch
      appeared. She was about forty. She was a tall, big woman with hard
      features, but well formed, vigorous and healthy, the true type of a robust
      peasant woman, half animal, and half woman.
    

      She was aware of her reputation and received everyone with a humility that
      smacked of hatred.
    

      “What do the gentlemen wish?” she asked.
    

      “They tell me that your last child is just like an ordinary child,
      that he does not resemble his brothers at all,” replied my friend.
      “I wanted to be sure of that. Is it true?”
    

      She cast on us a malicious and furious look as she said:
    

      “Oh, no, oh, no, my poor sir! He is perhaps even uglier than the
      rest. I have no luck, no luck!
    

      “They are all like that, it is heartbreaking! How can the good God
      be so hard on a poor woman who is all alone in the world, how can He?”
      She spoke hurriedly, her eyes cast down, with a deprecating air as of a
      wild beast who is afraid. Her harsh voice became soft, and it seemed
      strange to hear those tearful falsetto tones issuing from that big, bony
      frame, of unusual strength and with coarse outlines, which seemed fitted
      for violent action, and made to utter howls like a wolf.
    

      “We should like to see your little one,” said my friend.
    

      I fancied she colored up. I may have been deceived. After a few moments of
      silence, she said in a louder tone:
    

      “What good will that do you?”
    

      “Why do you not wish to show it to us?” replied my friend.
      “There are many people to whom you will show it; you know whom I
      mean.”
    

      She gave a start, and resuming her natural voice, and giving free play to
      her anger, she screamed:
    

      “Was that why you came here? To insult me? Because my children are
      like animals, tell me? You shall not see him, no, no, you shall not see
      him! Go away, go away! I do not know why you all try to torment me like
      that.”
    

      She walked over toward us, her hands on her hips. At the brutal tone of
      her voice, a sort of moaning, or rather a mewing, the lamentable cry of an
      idiot, came from the adjoining room. I shivered to the marrow of my bones.
      We retreated before her.
    

      “Take care, Devil” (they called her the Devil); said my
      friend, “take care; some day you will get yourself into trouble
      through this.”
    

      She began to tremble, beside herself with fury, shaking her fist and
      roaring:
    

      “Be off with you! What will get me into trouble? Be off with you,
      miscreants!”
    

      She was about to attack us, but we fled, saddened at what we had seen.
      When we got outside, my friend said:
    

      “Well, you have seen her, what do you think of her?”
    

      “Tell me the story of this brute,” I replied.
    

      And this is what he told me as we walked along the white high road, with
      ripe crops on either side of it which rippled like the sea in the light
      breeze that passed over them.
    

      “This woman was once a servant on a farm. She was an honest girl,
      steady and economical. She was never known to have an admirer, and never
      suspected of any frailty. But she went astray, as so many do.
    

      “She soon found herself in trouble, and was tortured with fear and
      shame. Wishing to conceal her misfortune, she bound her body tightly with
      a corset of her own invention, made of boards and cord. The more she
      developed, the more she bound herself with this instrument of torture,
      suffering martyrdom, but brave in her sorrow, not allowing anyone to see,
      or suspect, anything. She maimed the little unborn being, cramping it with
      that frightful corset, and made a monster of it. Its head was squeezed and
      elongated to a point, and its large eyes seemed popping out of its head.
      Its limbs, exaggeratedly long, and twisted like the stalk of a vine,
      terminated in fingers like the claws of a spider. Its trunk was tiny, and
      round as a nut.
    

      “The child was born in an open field, and when the weeders saw it,
      they fled away, screaming, and the report spread that she had given birth
      to a demon. From that time on, she was called 'the Devil.'
    

      “She was driven from the farm, and lived on charity, under a cloud.
      She brought up the monster, whom she hated with a savage hatred, and would
      have strangled, perhaps, if the priest had not threatened her with arrest.
    

      “One day some travelling showmen heard about the frightful creature,
      and asked to see it, so that if it pleased them they might take it away.
      They were pleased, and counted out five hundred francs to the mother. At
      first, she had refused to let them see the little animal, as she was
      ashamed; but when she discovered it had a money value, and that these
      people were anxious to get it, she began to haggle with them, raising her
      price with all a peasant's persistence.
    

      “She made them draw up a paper, in which they promised to pay her
      four hundred francs a year besides, as though they had taken this
      deformity into their employ.
    

      “Incited by the greed of gain, she continued to produce these
      phenomena, so as to have an assured income like a bourgeoise.
    

      “Some of them were long, some short, some like crabs-all
      bodies-others like lizards. Several died, and she was heartbroken.
    

      “The law tried to interfere, but as they had no proof they let her
      continue to produce her freaks.
    

      “She has at this moment eleven alive, and they bring in, on an
      average, counting good and bad years, from five to six thousand francs a
      year. One, alone, is not placed, the one she was unwilling to show us. But
      she will not keep it long, for she is known to all the showmen in the
      world, who come from time to time to see if she has anything new.
    

      “She even gets bids from them when the monster is valuable.”
    

      My friend was silent. A profound disgust stirred my heart, and a feeling
      of rage, of regret, to think that I had not strangled this brute when I
      had the opportunity.
    

      I had forgotten this story, when I saw on the beach of a fashionable
      resort the other day, an elegant, charming, dainty woman, surrounded by
      men who paid her respect as well as admiration.
    

      I was walking along the beach, arm in arm with a friend, the resident
      physician. Ten minutes later, I saw a nursemaid with three children, who
      were rolling in the sand. A pair of little crutches lay on the ground, and
      touched my sympathy. I then noticed that these three children were all
      deformed, humpbacked, or crooked; and hideous.
    

      “Those are the offspring of that charming woman you saw just now,”
      said the doctor.
    

      I was filled with pity for her, as well as for them, and exclaimed:
      “Oh, the poor mother! How can she ever laugh!”
    

      “Do not pity her, my friend. Pity the poor children,” replied
      the doctor. “This is the consequence of preserving a slender figure
      up to the last. These little deformities were made by the corset. She
      knows very well that she is risking her life at this game. But what does
      she care, as long as he can be beautiful and have admirers!”
    

      And then I recalled that other woman, the peasant, the “Devil,”
      who sold her children, her monsters.
    







      AN UNCOMFORTABLE BED
    

      One autumn I went to spend the hunting season with some friends in a
      chateau in Picardy.
    

      My friends were fond of practical jokes. I do not care to know people who
      are not.
    

      When I arrived, they gave me a princely reception, which at once awakened
      suspicion in my mind. They fired off rifles, embraced me, made much of me,
      as if they expected to have great fun at my expense.
    

      I said to myself:
    

      “Look out, old ferret! They have something in store for you.”
    

      During the dinner the mirth was excessive, exaggerated, in fact. I
      thought: “Here are people who have more than their share of
      amusement, and apparently without reason. They must have planned some good
      joke. Assuredly I am to be the victim of the joke. Attention!”
    

      During the entire evening every one laughed in an exaggerated fashion. I
      scented a practical joke in the air, as a dog scents game. But what was
      it? I was watchful, restless. I did not let a word, or a meaning, or a
      gesture escape me. Every one seemed to me an object of suspicion, and I
      even looked distrustfully at the faces of the servants.
    

      The hour struck for retiring; and the whole household came to escort me to
      my room. Why?
    

      They called to me: “Good-night.” I entered the apartment, shut
      the door, and remained standing, without moving a single step, holding the
      wax candle in my hand.
    

      I heard laughter and whispering in the corridor. Without doubt they were
      spying on me. I cast a glance round the walls, the furniture, the ceiling,
      the hangings, the floor. I saw nothing to justify suspicion. I heard
      persons moving about outside my door. I had no doubt they were looking
      through the keyhole.
    

      An idea came into my head: “My candle may suddenly go out and leave
      me in darkness.”
    

      Then I went across to the mantelpiece and lighted all the wax candles that
      were on it. After that I cast another glance around me without discovering
      anything. I advanced with short steps, carefully examining the apartment.
      Nothing. I inspected every article, one after the other. Still nothing. I
      went over to the window. The shutters, large wooden shutters, were open. I
      shut them with great care, and then drew the curtains, enormous velvet
      curtains, and placed a chair in front of them, so as to have nothing to
      fear from outside.
    

      Then I cautiously sat down. The armchair was solid. I did not venture to
      get into the bed. However, the night was advancing; and I ended by coming
      to the conclusion that I was foolish. If they were spying on me, as I
      supposed, they must, while waiting for the success of the joke they had
      been preparing for me, have been laughing immoderately at my terror. So I
      made up my mind to go to bed. But the bed was particularly
      suspicious-looking. I pulled at the curtains. They seemed to be secure.
    

      All the same, there was danger. I was going perhaps to receive a cold
      shower both from overhead, or perhaps, the moment I stretched myself out,
      to find myself sinking to the floor with my mattress. I searched in my
      memory for all the practical jokes of which I ever had experience. And I
      did not want to be caught. Ah! certainly not! certainly not! Then I
      suddenly bethought myself of a precaution which I considered insured
      safety. I caught hold of the side of the mattress gingerly, and very
      slowly drew it toward me. It came away, followed by the sheet and the rest
      of the bedclothes. I dragged all these objects into the very middle of the
      room, facing the entrance door. I made my bed over again as best I could
      at some distance from the suspected bedstead and the corner which had
      filled me with such anxiety. Then I extinguished all the candles, and,
      groping my way, I slipped under the bed clothes.
    

      For at least another hour I remained awake, starting at the slightest
      sound. Everything seemed quiet in the chateau. I fell asleep.
    

      I must have been in a deep sleep for a long time, but all of a sudden I
      was awakened with a start by the fall of a heavy body tumbling right on
      top of my own, and, at the same time, I received on my face, on my neck,
      and on my chest a burning liquid which made me utter a howl of pain. And a
      dreadful noise, as if a sideboard laden with plates and dishes had fallen
      down, almost deafened me.
    

      I was smothering beneath the weight that was crushing me and preventing me
      from moving. I stretched out my hand to find out what was the nature of
      this object. I felt a face, a nose, and whiskers. Then, with all my
      strength, I launched out a blow at this face. But I immediately received a
      hail of cuffings which made me jump straight out of the soaked sheets, and
      rush in my nightshirt into the corridor, the door of which I found open.
    

      Oh, heavens! it was broad daylight. The noise brought my friends hurrying
      into my apartment, and we found, sprawling over my improvised bed, the
      dismayed valet, who, while bringing me my morning cup of tea, had tripped
      over this obstacle in the middle of the floor and fallen on his stomach,
      spilling my breakfast over my face in spite of himself.
    

      The precautions I had taken in closing the shutters and going to sleep in
      the middle of the room had only brought about the practical joke I had
      been trying to avoid.
    

      Oh, how they all laughed that day!
    







      A PORTRAIT
    

      “Hello! there's Milial!” said somebody near me. I looked at
      the man who had been pointed out as I had been wishing for a long time to
      meet this Don Juan.
    

      He was no longer young. His gray hair looked a little like those fur
      bonnets worn by certain Northern peoples, and his long beard, which fell
      down over his chest, had also somewhat the appearance of fur. He was
      talking to a lady, leaning toward her, speaking in a low voice and looking
      at her with an expression full of respect and tenderness.
    

      I knew his life, or at least as much as was known of it. He had loved
      madly several times, and there had been certain tragedies with which his
      name had been connected. When I spoke to women who were the loudest in his
      praise, and asked them whence came this power, they always answered, after
      thinking for a while: “I don't know—he has a certain charm
      about him.”
    

      He was certainly not handsome. He had none of the elegance that we ascribe
      to conquerors of feminine hearts. I wondered what might be his hidden
      charm. Was it mental? I never had heard of a clever saying of his. In his
      glance? Perhaps. Or in his voice? The voices of some beings have a certain
      irresistible attraction, almost suggesting the flavor of things good to
      eat. One is hungry for them, and the sound of their words penetrates us
      like a dainty morsel. A friend was passing. I asked him: “Do you
      know Monsieur Milial?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Introduce us.”
    

      A minute later we were shaking hands and talking in the doorway. What he
      said was correct, agreeable to hear; it contained no irritable thought.
      The voice was sweet, soft, caressing, musical; but I had heard others much
      more attractive, much more moving. One listened to him with pleasure, just
      as one would look at a pretty little brook. No tension of the mind was
      necessary in order to follow him, no hidden meaning aroused curiosity, no
      expectation awoke interest. His conversation was rather restful, but it
      did not awaken in one either a desire to answer, to contradict or to
      approve, and it was as easy to answer him as it was to listen to him. The
      response came to the lips of its own accord, as soon as he had finished
      talking, and phrases turned toward him as if he had naturally aroused
      them.
    

      One thought soon struck me. I had known him for a quarter of an hour, and
      it seemed as if he were already one of my old friends, that I had known
      all about him for a long time; his face, his gestures, his voice, his
      ideas. Suddenly, after a few minutes of conversation, he seemed already to
      be installed in my intimacy. All constraint disappeared between us, and,
      had he so desired, I might have confided in him as one confides only in
      old friends.
    

      Certainly there was some mystery about him. Those barriers that are closed
      between most people and that are lowered with time when sympathy, similar
      tastes, equal intellectual culture and constant intercourse remove
      constraint—those barriers seemed not to exist between him and me,
      and no doubt this was the case between him and all people, both men and
      women, whom fate threw in his path.
    

      After half an hour we parted, promising to see each other often, and he
      gave me his address after inviting me to take luncheon with him in two
      days.
    

      I forgot what hour he had stated, and I arrived too soon; he was not yet
      home. A correct and silent domestic showed me into a beautiful, quiet,
      softly lighted parlor. I felt comfortable there, at home. How often I have
      noticed the influence of apartments on the character and on the mind!
      There are some which make one feel foolish; in others, on the contrary,
      one always feels lively. Some make us sad, although well lighted and
      decorated in light-colored furniture; others cheer us up, although hung
      with sombre material. Our eye, like our heart, has its likes and dislikes,
      of which it does not inform us, and which it secretly imposes on our
      temperament. The harmony of furniture, walls, the style of an ensemble,
      act immediately on our mental state, just as the air from the woods, the
      sea or the mountains modifies our physical natures.
    

      I sat down on a cushion-covered divan and felt myself suddenly carried and
      supported by these little silk bags of feathers, as if the outline of my
      body had been marked out beforehand on this couch.
    

      Then I looked about. There was nothing striking about the room;
      every-where were beautiful and modest things, simple and rare furniture,
      Oriental curtains which did not seem to come from a department store but
      from the interior of a harem; and exactly opposite me hung the portrait of
      a woman. It was a portrait of medium size, showing the head and the upper
      part of the body, and the hands, which were holding a book. She was young,
      bareheaded; ribbons were woven in her hair; she was smiling sadly. Was it
      because she was bareheaded, was it merely her natural expression? I never
      have seen a portrait of a lady which seemed so much in its place as that
      one in that dwelling. Of all those I knew I have seen nothing like that
      one. All those that I know are on exhibition, whether the lady be dressed
      in her gaudiest gown, with an attractive headdress and a look which shows
      that she is posing first of all before the artist and then before those
      who will look at her or whether they have taken a comfortable attitude in
      an ordinary gown. Some are standing majestically in all their beauty,
      which is not at all natural to them in life. All of them have something, a
      flower or, a jewel, a crease in the dress or a curve of the lip, which one
      feels to have been placed there for effect by the artist. Whether they
      wear a hat or merely their hair one can immediately notice that they are
      not entirely natural. Why? One cannot say without knowing them, but the
      effect is there. They seem to be calling somewhere, on people whom they
      wish to please and to whom they wish to appear at their best advantage;
      and they have studied their attitudes, sometimes modest, Sometimes
      haughty.
    

      What could one say about this one? She was at home and alone. Yes, she was
      alone, for she was smiling as one smiles when thinking in solitude of
      something sad or sweet, and not as one smiles when one is being watched.
      She seemed so much alone and so much at home that she made the whole large
      apartment seem absolutely empty. She alone lived in it, filled it, gave it
      life. Many people might come in and converse, laugh, even sing; she would
      still be alone with a solitary smile, and she alone would give it life
      with her pictured gaze.
    

      That look also was unique. It fell directly on me, fixed and caressing,
      without seeing me. All portraits know that they are being watched, and
      they answer with their eyes, which see, think, follow us without leaving
      us, from the very moment we enter the apartment they inhabit. This one did
      not see me; it saw nothing, although its look was fixed directly on me. I
      remembered the surprising verse of Baudelaire:
    

      And your eyes, attractive as those of a portrait.
    

      They did indeed attract me in an irresistible manner; those painted eyes
      which had lived, or which were perhaps still living, threw over me a
      strange, powerful spell. Oh, what an infinite and tender charm, like a
      passing breeze, like a dying sunset of lilac rose and blue, a little sad
      like the approaching night, which comes behind the sombre frame and out of
      those impenetrable eyes! Those eyes, created by a few strokes from a
      brush, hide behind them the mystery of that which seems to be and which
      does not exist, which can appear in the eyes of a woman, which can make
      love blossom within us.
    

      The door opened and M. Milial entered. He excused himself for being late.
      I excused myself for being ahead of time. Then I said: “Might I ask
      you who is this lady?”
    

      He answered: “That is my mother. She died very young.”
    

      Then I understood whence came the inexplicable attraction of this man.
    







      THE DRUNKARD
    

      The north wind was blowing a hurricane, driving through the sky big,
      black, heavy clouds from which the rain poured down on the earth with
      terrific violence.
    

      A high sea was raging and dashing its huge, slow, foamy waves along the
      coast with the rumbling sound of thunder. The waves followed each other
      close, rolling in as high as mountains, scattering the foam as they broke.
    

      The storm engulfed itself in the little valley of Yport, whistling and
      moaning, tearing the shingles from the roofs, smashing the shutters,
      knocking down the chimneys, rushing through the narrow streets in such
      gusts that one could walk only by holding on to the walls, and children
      would have been lifted up like leaves and carried over the houses into the
      fields.
    

      The fishing smacks had been hauled high up on land, because at high tide
      the sea would sweep the beach. Several sailors, sheltered behind the
      curved bottoms of their boats, were watching this battle of the sky and
      the sea.
    

      Then, one by one, they went away, for night was falling on the storm,
      wrapping in shadows the raging ocean and all the battling elements.
    

      Just two men remained, their hands plunged deep into their pockets,
      bending their backs beneath the squall, their woolen caps pulled down over
      their ears; two big Normandy fishermen, bearded, their skin tanned through
      exposure, with the piercing black eyes of the sailor who looks over the
      horizon like a bird of prey.
    

      One of them was saying:
    

      “Come on, Jeremie, let's go play dominoes. It's my treat.”
    

      The other hesitated a while, tempted on one hand by the game and the
      thought of brandy, knowing well that, if he went to Paumelle's, he would
      return home drunk; held back, on the other hand, by the idea of his wife
      remaining alone in the house.
    

      He asked:
    

      “Any one might think that you had made a bet to get me drunk every
      night. Say, what good is it doing you, since it's always you that's
      treating?”
    

      Nevertheless he was smiling at the idea of all this brandy drunk at the
      expense of another. He was smiling the contented smirk of an avaricious
      Norman.
    

      Mathurin, his friend, kept pulling him by the sleeve.
    

      “Come on, Jeremie. This isn't the kind of a night to go home without
      anything to warm you up. What are you afraid of? Isn't your wife going to
      warm your bed for you?”
    

      Jeremie answered:
    

      “The other night I couldn't find the door—I had to be fished
      out of the ditch in front of the house!”
    

      He was still laughing at this drunkard's recollection, and he was
      unconsciously going toward Paumelle's Cafe, where a light was shining in
      the window; he was going, pulled by Mathurin and pushed by the wind,
      unable to resist these combined forces.
    

      The low room was full of sailors, smoke and noise. All these men, clad in
      woolens, their elbows on the tables, were shouting to make themselves
      heard. The more people came in, the more one had to shout in order to
      overcome the noise of voices and the rattling of dominoes on the marble
      tables.
    

      Jeremie and Mathurin sat down in a corner and began a game, and the
      glasses were emptied in rapid succession into their thirsty throats.
    

      Then they played more games and drank more glasses. Mathurin kept pouring
      and winking to the saloon keeper, a big, red-faced man, who chuckled as
      though at the thought of some fine joke; and Jeremie kept absorbing
      alcohol and wagging his head, giving vent to a roar of laughter and
      looking at his comrade with a stupid and contented expression.
    

      All the customers were going away. Every time that one of them would open
      the door to leave a gust of wind would blow into the cafe, making the
      tobacco smoke swirl around, swinging the lamps at the end of their chains
      and making their flames flicker, and suddenly one could hear the deep
      booming of a breaking wave and the moaning of the wind.
    

      Jeremie, his collar unbuttoned, was taking drunkard's poses, one leg
      outstretched, one arm hanging down and in the other hand holding a domino.
    

      They were alone now with the owner, who had come up to them, interested.
    

      He asked:
    

      “Well, Jeremie, how goes it inside? Feel less thirsty after wetting
      your throat?”
    

      Jeremie muttered:
    

      “The more I wet it, the drier it gets inside.”
    

      The innkeeper cast a sly glance at Mathurin. He said:
    

      “And your brother, Mathurin, where's he now?”
    

      The sailor laughed silently:
    

      “Don't worry; he's warm, all right.”
    

      And both of them looked toward Jeremie, who was triumphantly putting down
      the double six and announcing:
    

      “Game!”
    

      Then the owner declared:
    

      “Well, boys, I'm goin' to bed. I will leave you the lamp and the
      bottle; there's twenty cents' worth in it. Lock the door when you go,
      Mathurin, and slip the key under the mat the way you did the other night.”
    

      Mathurin answered:
    

      “Don't worry; it'll be all right.”
    

      Paumelle shook hands with his two customers and slowly went up the wooden
      stairs. For several minutes his heavy step echoed through the little
      house. Then a loud creaking announced that he had got into bed.
    

      The two men continued to play. From time to time a more violent gust of
      wind would shake the whole house, and the two drinkers would look up, as
      though some one were about to enter. Then Mathurin would take the bottle
      and fill Jeremie's glass. But suddenly the clock over the bar struck
      twelve. Its hoarse clang sounded like the rattling of saucepans. Then
      Mathurin got up like a sailor whose watch is over.
    

      “Come on, Jeremie, we've got to get out.”
    

      The other man rose to his feet with difficulty, got his balance by leaning
      on the table, reached the door and opened it while his companion was
      putting out the light.
    

      As soon as they were in the street Mathurin locked the door and then said:
    

      “Well, so long. See you to-morrow night!”
    

      And he disappeared in the darkness.
    

      Jeremie took a few steps, staggered, stretched out his hands, met a wall
      which supported him and began to stumble along. From time to time a gust
      of wind would sweep through the street, pushing him forward, making him
      run for a few steps; then, when the wind would die down, he would stop
      short, having lost his impetus, and once more he would begin to stagger on
      his unsteady drunkard's legs.
    

      He went instinctively toward his home, just as birds go to their nests.
      Finally he recognized his door, and began to feel about for the keyhole
      and tried to put the key in it. Not finding the hole, he began to swear.
      Then he began to beat on the door with his fists, calling for his wife to
      come and help him:
    

      “Melina! Oh, Melina!”
    

      As he leaned against the door for support, it gave way and opened, and
      Jeremie, losing his prop, fell inside, rolling on his face into the middle
      of his room, and he felt something heavy pass over him and escape in the
      night.
    

      He was no longer moving, dazed by fright, bewildered, fearing the devil,
      ghosts, all the mysterious beings of darkness, and he waited a long time
      without daring to move. But when he found out that nothing else was
      moving, a little reason returned to him, the reason of a drunkard.
    

      Gently he sat up. Again he waited a long time, and at last, growing
      bolder, he called:
    

      “Melina!”
    

      His wife did not answer.
    

      Then, suddenly, a suspicion crossed his darkened mind, an indistinct,
      vague suspicion. He was not moving; he was sitting there in the dark,
      trying to gather together his scattered wits, his mind stumbling over
      incomplete ideas, just as his feet stumbled along.
    

      Once more he asked:
    

      “Who was it, Melina? Tell me who it was. I won't hurt you!”
    

      He waited, no voice was raised in the darkness. He was now reasoning with
      himself out loud.
    

      “I'm drunk, all right! I'm drunk! And he filled me up, the dog; he
      did it, to stop my goin' home. I'm drunk!”
    

      And he would continue:
    

      “Tell me who it was, Melina, or somethin'll happen to you.”
    

      After having waited again, he went on with the slow and obstinate logic of
      a drunkard:
    

      “He's been keeping me at that loafer Paumelle's place every night,
      so as to stop my going home. It's some trick. Oh, you damned carrion!”
    

      Slowly he got on his knees. A blind fury was gaining possession of him,
      mingling with the fumes of alcohol.
    

      He continued:
    

      “Tell me who it was, Melina, or you'll get a licking—I warn
      you!”
    

      He was now standing, trembling with a wild fury, as though the alcohol had
      set his blood on fire. He took a step, knocked against a chair, seized it,
      went on, reached the bed, ran his hands over it and felt the warm body of
      his wife.
    

      Then, maddened, he roared:
    

      “So! You were there, you piece of dirt, and you wouldn't answer!”
    

      And, lifting the chair, which he was holding in his strong sailor's grip,
      he swung it down before him with an exasperated fury. A cry burst from the
      bed, an agonizing, piercing cry. Then he began to thrash around like a
      thresher in a barn. And soon nothing more moved. The chair was broken to
      pieces, but he still held one leg and beat away with it, panting.
    

      At last he stopped to ask:
    

      “Well, are you ready to tell me who it was?”
    

      Melina did not answer.
    

      Then tired out, stupefied from his exertion, he stretched himself out on
      the ground and slept.
    

      When day came a neighbor, seeing the door open, entered. He saw Jeremie
      snoring on the floor, amid the broken pieces of a chair, and on the bed a
      pulp of flesh and blood.
    







      THE WARDROBE
    

      As we sat chatting after dinner, a party of men, the conversation turned
      on women, for lack of something else.
    

      One of us said:
    

      “Here's a funny thing that happened to me on, that very subject.”
      And he told us the following story:
    

      One evening last winter I suddenly felt overcome by that overpowering
      sense of misery and languor that takes possession of one from time to
      time. I was in my own apartment, all alone, and I was convinced that if I
      gave in to my feelings I should have a terrible attack of melancholia, one
      of those attacks that lead to suicide when they recur too often.
    

      I put on my overcoat and went out without the slightest idea of what I was
      going to do. Having gone as far as the boulevards, I began to wander along
      by the almost empty cafes. It was raining, a fine rain that affects your
      mind as it does your clothing, not one of those good downpours which come
      down in torrents, driving breathless passers-by into doorways, but a rain
      without drops that deposits on your clothing an imperceptible spray and
      soon covers you with a sort of iced foam that chills you through.
    

      What should I do? I walked in one direction and then came back, looking
      for some place where I could spend two hours, and discovering for the
      first time that there is no place of amusement in Paris in the evening. At
      last I decided to go to the Folies-Bergere, that entertaining resort for
      gay women.
    

      There were very few people in the main hall. In the long horseshoe curve
      there were only a few ordinary looking people, whose plebeian origin was
      apparent in their manners, their clothes, the cut of their hair and beard,
      their hats, their complexion. It was rarely that one saw from time to time
      a man whom you suspected of having washed himself thoroughly, and his
      whole make-up seemed to match. As for the women, they were always the
      same, those frightful women you all know, ugly, tired looking, drooping,
      and walking along in their lackadaisical manner, with that air of foolish
      superciliousness which they assume, I do not know why.
    

      I thought to myself that, in truth, not one of those languid creatures,
      greasy rather than fat, puffed out here and thin there, with the contour
      of a monk and the lower extremities of a bow-legged snipe, was worth the
      louis that they would get with great difficulty after asking five.
    

      But all at once I saw a little creature whom I thought attractive, not in
      her first youth, but fresh, comical and tantalizing. I stopped her, and
      stupidly, without thinking, I made an appointment with her for that night.
      I did not want to go back to my own home alone, all alone; I preferred the
      company and the caresses of this hussy.
    

      And I followed her. She lived in a great big house in the Rue des Martyrs.
      The gas was already extinguished on the stairway. I ascended the steps
      slowly, lighting a candle match every few seconds, stubbing my foot
      against the steps, stumbling and angry as I followed the rustle of the
      skirt ahead of me.
    

      She stopped on the fourth floor, and having closed the outer door she
      said:
    

      “Then you will stay till to-morrow?”
    

      “Why, yes. You know that that was the agreement.”
    

      “All right, my dear, I just wanted to know. Wait for me here a
      minute, I will be right back.”
    

      And she left me in the darkness. I heard her shutting two doors and then I
      thought I heard her talking. I was surprised and uneasy. The thought that
      she had a protector staggered me. But I have good fists and a solid back.
      “We shall see,” I said to myself.
    

      I listened attentively with ear and mind. Some one was stirring about,
      walking quietly and very carefully. Then another door was opened and I
      thought I again heard some one talking, but in a very low tone.
    

      She came back carrying a lighted candle.
    

      “You may come in,” she said.
    

      She said “thou” in speaking to me, which was an indication of
      possession. I went in and after passing through a dining room in which it
      was very evident that no one ever ate, I entered a typical room of all
      these women, a furnished room with red curtains and a soiled eiderdown bed
      covering.
    

      “Make yourself at home, 'mon chat',” she said.
    

      I gave a suspicious glance at the room, but there seemed no reason for
      uneasiness.
    

      As she took off her wraps she began to laugh.
    

      “Well, what ails you? Are you changed into a pillar of salt? Come,
      hurry up.”
    

      I did as she suggested.
    

      Five minutes later I longed to put on my things and get away. But this
      terrible languor that had overcome me at home took possession of me again,
      and deprived me of energy enough to move and I stayed in spite of the
      disgust that I felt for this association. The unusual attractiveness that
      I supposed I had discovered in this creature over there under the
      chandeliers of the theater had altogether vanished on closer acquaintance,
      and she was nothing more to me now than a common woman, like all the
      others, whose indifferent and complaisant kiss smacked of garlic.
    

      I thought I would say something.
    

      “Have you lived here long?” I asked.
    

      “Over six months on the fifteenth of January.”
    

      “Where were you before that?”
    

      “In the Rue Clauzel. But the janitor made me very uncomfortable and
      I left.”
    

      And she began to tell me an interminable story of a janitor who had talked
      scandal about her.
    

      But, suddenly, I heard something moving quite close to us. First there was
      a sigh, then a slight, but distinct, sound as if some one had turned round
      on a chair.
    

      I sat up abruptly and asked.
    

      “What was that noise?”
    

      She answered quietly and confidently:
    

      “Do not be uneasy, my dear boy, it is my neighbor. The partition is
      so thin that one can hear everything as if it were in the room. These are
      wretched rooms, just like pasteboard.”
    

      I felt so lazy that I paid no further attention to it. We resumed our
      conversation. Driven by the stupid curiosity that prompts all men to
      question these creatures about their first experiences, to attempt to lift
      the veil of their first folly, as though to find in them a trace of
      pristine innocence, to love them, possibly, in a fleeting memory of their
      candor and modesty of former days, evoked by a word, I insistently asked
      her about her earlier lovers.
    

      I knew she was telling me lies. What did it matter? Among all these lies I
      might, perhaps, discover something sincere and pathetic.
    

      “Come,” said I, “tell me who he was.”
    

      “He was a boating man, my dear.”
    

      “Ah! Tell me about it. Where were you?”
    

      “I was at Argenteuil.”
    

      “What were you doing?”
    

      “I was waitress in a restaurant.”
    

      “What restaurant?”
    

      “'The Freshwater Sailor.' Do you know it?”
    

      “I should say so, kept by Bonanfan.”
    

      “Yes, that's it.”
    

      “And how did he make love to you, this boating man?”
    

      “While I was doing his room. He took advantage of me.”
    

      But I suddenly recalled the theory of a friend of mine, an observant and
      philosophical physician whom constant attendance in hospitals has brought
      into daily contact with girl-mothers and prostitutes, with all the shame
      and all the misery of women, of those poor women who have become the
      frightful prey of the wandering male with money in his pocket.
    

      “A woman,” he said, “is always debauched by a man of her
      own class and position. I have volumes of statistics on that subject. We
      accuse the rich of plucking the flower of innocence among the girls of the
      people. This is not correct. The rich pay for what they want. They may
      gather some, but never for the first time.”
    

      Then, turning to my companion, I began to laugh.
    

      “You know that I am aware of your history. The boating man was not
      the first.”
    

      “Oh, yes, my dear, I swear it:”
    

      “You are lying, my dear.”
    

      “Oh, no, I assure you.”
    

      “You are lying; come, tell me all.”
    

      She seemed to hesitate in astonishment. I continued:
    

      “I am a sorcerer, my dear girl, I am a clairvoyant. If you do not
      tell me the truth, I will go into a trance sleep and then I can find out.”
    

      She was afraid, being as stupid as all her kind. She faltered:
    

      “How did you guess?”
    

      “Come, go on telling me,” I said.
    

      “Oh, the first time didn't amount to anything.
    

      “There was a festival in the country. They had sent for a special
      chef, M. Alexandre. As soon as he came he did just as he pleased in the
      house. He bossed every one, even the proprietor and his wife, as if he had
      been a king. He was a big handsome man, who did not seem fitted to stand
      beside a kitchen range. He was always calling out, 'Come, some butter
      —some eggs—some Madeira!' And it had to be brought to him at
      once in a hurry, or he would get cross and say things that would make us
      blush all over.
    

      “When the day was over he would smoke a pipe outside the door. And
      as I was passing by him with a pile of plates he said to me, like that:
      'Come, girlie, come down to the water with me and show me the country.' I
      went with him like a fool, and we had hardly got down to the bank of the
      river when he took advantage of me so suddenly that I did not even know
      what he was doing. And then he went away on the nine o'clock train. I
      never saw him again.”
    

      “Is that all?” I asked.
    

      She hesitated.
    

      “Oh, I think Florentin belongs to him.”
    

      “Who is Florentin?”
    

      “My little boy.”
    

      “Oh! Well, then, you made the boating man believe that he was the
      father, did you not?”
    

      “You bet!”
    

      “Did he have any money, this boating man?”
    

      “Yes, he left me an income of three hundred francs, settled on
      Florentin.”
    

      I was beginning to be amused and resumed:
    

      “All right, my girl, all right. You are all of you less stupid than
      one would imagine, all the same. And how old is he now, Florentin?”
    

      She replied:
    

      “He is now twelve. He will make his first communion in the spring.”
    

      “That is splendid. And since then you have carried on your business
      conscientiously?”
    

      She sighed in a resigned manner.
    

      “I must do what I can.”
    

      But a loud noise just then coming from the room itself made me start up
      with a bound. It sounded like some one falling and picking themselves up
      again by feeling along the wall with their hands.
    

      I had seized the candle and was looking about me, terrified and furious.
      She had risen also and was trying to hold me back to stop me, murmuring:
    

      “That's nothing, my dear, I assure you it's nothing.”
    

      But I had discovered what direction the strange noise came from. I walked
      straight towards a door hidden at the head of the bed and I opened it
      abruptly and saw before me, trembling, his bright, terrified eyes opened
      wide at sight of me, a little pale, thin boy seated beside a large wicker
      chair off which he had fallen.
    

      As soon as he saw me he began to cry. Stretching out his arms to his
      mother, he cried:
    

      “It was not my fault, mamma, it was not my fault. I was asleep, and
      I fell off. Do not scold me, it was not my fault.”
    

      I turned to the woman and said:
    

      “What does this mean?”
    

      She seemed confused and worried, and said in a broken voice:
    

      “What do you want me to do? I do not earn enough to put him to
      school! I have to keep him with me, and I cannot afford to pay for another
      room, by heavens! He sleeps with me when I am alone. If any one comes for
      one hour or two he can stay in the wardrobe; he keeps quiet, he
      understands it. But when people stay all night, as you have done, it tires
      the poor child to sleep on a chair.
    

      “It is not his fault. I should like to see you sleep all night on a
      chair—you would have something to say.”
    

      She was getting angry and excited and was talking loud.
    

      The child was still crying. A poor delicate timid little fellow, a
      veritable child of the wardrobe, of the cold, dark closet, a child who
      from time to time was allowed to get a little warmth in the bed if it
      chanced to be unoccupied.
    

      I also felt inclined to cry.
    

      And I went home to my own bed.
    







      THE MOUNTAIN POOL
    

                  Saint Agnes, May 6.
MY DEAR FRIEND:
You asked me to write to you often and to tell you in particular about
the things I might see. You also begged me to rummage among my
recollections of travels for some of those little anecdotes gathered from
a chance peasant, from an innkeeper, from some strange traveling
acquaintance, which remain as landmarks in the memory. With a landscape
depicted in a few lines, and a little story told in a few sentences you
think one can give the true characteristics of a country, make it living,
visible, dramatic. I will try to do as you wish. I will, therefore,
send you from time to time letters in which I will mention neither you
nor myself, but only the landscape and the people who move about in it.
And now I will begin.


      Spring is a season in which one ought, it seems to me, to drink and eat
      the landscape. It is the season of chills, just as autumn is the season of
      reflection. In spring the country rouses the physical senses, in autumn it
      enters into the soul.
    

      I desired this year to breathe the odor of orange blossoms and I set out
      for the South of France just at the time that every one else was returning
      home. I visited Monaco, the shrine of pilgrims, rival of Mecca and
      Jerusalem, without leaving any gold in any one else's pockets, and I
      climbed the high mountain beneath a covering of lemon, orange and olive
      branches.
    

      Have you ever slept, my friend, in a grove of orange trees in flower? The
      air that one inhales with delight is a quintessence of perfumes. The
      strong yet sweet odor, delicious as some dainty, seems to blend with our
      being, to saturate us, to intoxicate us, to enervate us, to plunge us into
      a sleepy, dreamy torpor. As though it were an opium prepared by the hands
      of fairies and not by those of druggists.
    

      This is a country of ravines. The surface of the mountains is cleft,
      hollowed out in all directions, and in these sinuous crevices grow
      veritable forests of lemon trees. Here and there where the steep gorge is
      interrupted by a sort of step, a kind of reservoir has been built which
      holds the water of the rain storms.
    

      They are large holes with slippery walls with nothing for any one to grasp
      hold of should they fall in.
    

      I was walking slowly in one of these ascending valleys or gorges, glancing
      through the foliage at the vivid-hued fruit that remained on the branches.
      The narrow gorge made the heavy odor of the flowers still more
      penetrating; the air seemed to be dense with it. A feeling of lassitude
      came over me and I looked for a place to sit down. A few drops of water
      glistened in the grass. I thought that there was a spring near by and I
      climbed a little further to look for it. But I only reached the edge of
      one of these large, deep reservoirs.
    

      I sat down tailor fashion, with my legs crossed under me, and remained
      there in a reverie before this hole, which looked as if it were filled
      with ink, so black and stagnant was the liquid it contained. Down yonder,
      through the branches, I saw, like patches, bits of the Mediterranean
      gleaming so that they fairly dazzled my eyes. But my glance always
      returned to the immense somber well that appeared to be inhabited by no
      aquatic animals, so motionless was its surface. Suddenly a voice made me
      tremble. An old gentleman who was picking flowers—this country is
      the richest in Europe for herbalists—asked me:
    

      “Are you a relation of those poor children, monsieur?”
    

      I looked at him in astonishment.
    

      “What children, monsieur?”
    

      He seemed embarrassed and answered with a bow:
    

      “I beg your pardon. On seeing you sitting thus absorbed in front of
      this reservoir I thought you were recalling the frightful tragedy that
      occurred here.”
    

      Now I wanted to know about it, and I begged him to tell me the story.
    

      It is very dismal and very heart-rending, my dear friend, and very trivial
      at the same time. It is a simple news item. I do not know whether to
      attribute my emotion to the dramatic manner in which the story was told to
      me, to the setting of the mountains, to the contrast between the joy of
      the sunlight and the flowers and this black, murderous hole, but my heart
      was wrung, all my nerves unstrung by this tale which, perhaps, may not
      appear so terribly harrowing to you as you read it in your room without
      having the scene of the tragedy before your eyes.
    

      It was one spring in recent years. Two little boys frequently came to play
      on the edge of this cistern while their tutor lay under a tree reading a
      book. One warm afternoon a piercing cry awoke the tutor who was dozing and
      the sound of splashing caused by something falling into the water made him
      jump to his feet abruptly. The younger of the children, eight years of
      age, was shouting, as he stood beside the reservoir, the surface of which
      was stirred and eddying at the spot where the older boy had fallen in as
      he ran along the stone coping.
    

      Distracted, without waiting or stopping to think what was best to do, the
      tutor jumped into the black water and did not rise again, having struck
      his head at the bottom of the cistern.
    

      At the same moment the young boy who had risen to the surface was waving
      his stretched-out arms toward his brother. The little fellow on land lay
      down full length, while the other tried to swim, to approach the wall, and
      presently the four little hands clasped each other, tightened in each
      other's grasp, contracted as though they were fastened together. They both
      felt the intense joy of an escape from death, a shudder at the danger
      past.
    

      The older boy tried to climb up to the edge, but could not manage it, as
      the wall was perpendicular, and his brother, who was too weak, was sliding
      slowly towards the hole.
    

      Then they remained motionless, filled anew with terror. And they waited.
    

      The little fellow squeezed his brother's hands with all his might and wept
      from nervousness as he repeated: “I cannot drag you out, I cannot
      drag you out.” And all at once he began to shout, “Help! Help!”
      But his light voice scarcely penetrated beyond the dome of foliage above
      their heads.
    

      They remained thus a long time, hours and hours, facing each other, these
      two children, with one thought, one anguish of heart and the horrible
      dread that one of them, exhausted, might let go the hands of the other.
      And they kept on calling, but all in vain.
    

      At length the older boy, who was shivering with cold, said to the little
      one: “I cannot hold out any longer. I am going to fall. Good-by,
      little brother.” And the other, gasping, replied: “Not yet,
      not yet, wait.”
    

      Evening came on, the still evening with its stars mirrored in the water.
      The older lad, his endurance giving out, said: “Let go my hand, I am
      going to give you my watch.” He had received it as a present a few
      days before, and ever since it had been his chief amusement. He was able
      to get hold of it, and held it out to the little fellow who was sobbing
      and who laid it down on the grass beside him.
    

      It was night now. The two unhappy beings, exhausted, had almost loosened
      their grasp. The elder, at last, feeling that he was lost, murmured once
      more: “Good-by, little brother, kiss mamma and papa.” And his
      numbed fingers relaxed their hold. He sank and did not rise again . . . .
      The little fellow, left alone, began to shout wildly: “Paul! Paul!”
      But the other did not come to the surface.
    

      Then he darted across the mountain, falling among the stones, overcome by
      the most frightful anguish that can wring a child's heart, and with a face
      like death reached the sitting-room, where his parents were waiting. He
      became bewildered again as he led them to the gloomy reservoir. He could
      not find his way. At last he reached the spot. “It is there; yes, it
      is there!”
    

      But the cistern had to be emptied, and the proprietor would not permit it
      as he needed the water for his lemon trees.
    

      The two bodies were found, however, but not until the next day.
    

      You see, my dear friend, that this is a simple news item. But if you had
      seen the hole itself your heart would have been wrung, as mine was, at the
      thought of the agony of that child hanging to his brother's hands, of the
      long suspense of those little chaps who were accustomed only to laugh and
      to play, and at the simple incident of the giving of the watch.
    

      I said to myself: “May Fate preserve me from ever receiving a
      similar relic!” I know of nothing more terrible than such a
      recollection connected with a familiar object that one cannot dispose of.
      Only think of it; each time that he handles this sacred watch the survivor
      will picture once more the horrible scene; the pool, the wall, the still
      water, and the distracted face of his brother-alive, and yet as lost as
      though he were already dead. And all through his life, at any moment, the
      vision will be there, awakened the instant even the tip of his finger
      touches his watch pocket.
    

      And I was sad until evening. I left the spot and kept on climbing, leaving
      the region of orange trees for the region of olive trees, and the region
      of olive trees for the region of pines; then I came to a valley of stones,
      and finally reached the ruins of an ancient castle, built, they say, in
      the tenth century by a Saracen chief, a good man, who was baptized a
      Christian through love for a young girl. Everywhere around me were
      mountains, and before me the sea, the sea with an almost imperceptible
      patch on it: Corsica, or, rather, the shadow of Corsica. But on the
      mountain summits, blood-red in the glow of the sunset, in the boundless
      sky and on the sea, in all this superb landscape that I had come here to
      admire I saw only two poor children, one lying prone on the edge of a hole
      filled with black water, the other submerged to his neck, their hands
      intertwined, weeping opposite each other, in despair. And it seemed as
      though I continually heard a weak, exhausted voice saying: “Good-by,
      little brother, I am going to give you my watch.”
    

      This letter may seem rather melancholy, dear friend. I will try to be more
      cheerful some other day.
    







      A CREMATION
    

      Last Monday an Indian prince died at Etretat, Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay,
      a relation of His Highness, the Maharajah Gaikwar, prince of Baroda, in
      the province of Guzerat, Presidency of Bombay.
    

      For about three weeks there had been seen walking in the streets about ten
      young East Indians, small, lithe, with dark skins, dressed all in gray and
      wearing on their heads caps such as English grooms wear. They were men of
      high rank who had come to Europe to study the military institutions of the
      principal Western nations. The little band consisted of three princes, a
      nobleman, an interpreter and three servants.
    

      The head of the commission had just died, an old man of forty-two and
      father-in-law of Sampatro Kashivao Gaikwar, brother of His Highness, the
      Gaikwar of Baroda.
    

      The son-in-law accompanied his father-in-law.
    

      The other East Indians were called Ganpatrao Shravanrao Gaikwar, cousin of
      His Highness Khasherao Gadhav; Vasudev Madhav Samarth, interpreter and
      secretary; the slaves: Ramchandra Bajaji, Ganu bin Pukiram Kokate,
      Rhambhaji bin Fabji.
    

      On leaving his native land the one who died recently was overcome with
      terrible grief, and feeling convinced that he would never return he wished
      to give up the journey, but he had to obey the wishes of his noble
      relative, the Prince of Baroda, and he set out.
    

      They came to spend the latter part of the summer at Etretat, and people
      would go out of curiosity every morning to see them taking their bath at
      the Etablissment des Roches-Blanches.
    

      Five or six days ago Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay was taken with pains in
      his gums; then the inflammation spread to the throat and became
      ulceration. Gangrene set in and, on Monday, the doctors told his young
      friends that their relative was dying. The final struggle was already
      beginning, and the breath had almost left the unfortunate man's body when
      his friends seized him, snatched him from his bed and laid him on the
      stone floor of the room, so that, stretched out on the earth, our mother,
      he should yield up his soul, according to the command of Brahma.
    

      They then sent to ask the mayor, M. Boissaye, for a permit to burn the
      body that very day so as to fulfill the prescribed ceremonial of the
      Hindoo religion. The mayor hesitated, telegraphed to the prefecture to
      demand instructions, at the same time sending word that a failure to reply
      would be considered by him tantamount to a consent. As he had received no
      reply at 9 o'clock that evening, he decided, in view of the infectious
      character of the disease of which the East Indian had died, that the
      cremation of the body should take place that very night, beneath the
      cliff, on the beach, at ebb tide.
    

      The mayor is being criticized now for this decision, though he acted as an
      intelligent, liberal and determined man, and was upheld and advised by the
      three physicians who had watched the case and reported the death.
    

      They were dancing at the Casino that evening. It was an early autumn
      evening, rather chilly. A pretty strong wind was blowing from the ocean,
      although as yet there was no sea on, and swift, light, ragged clouds were
      driving across the sky. They came from the edge of the horizon, looking
      dark against the background of the sky, but as they approached the moon
      they grew whiter and passed hurriedly across her face, veiling it for a
      few seconds without completely hiding it.
    

      The tall straight cliffs that inclose the rounded beach of Etretat and
      terminate in two celebrated arches, called “the Gates,” lay in
      shadow, and made two great black patches in the softly lighted landscape.
    

      It had rained all day.
    

      The Casino orchestra was playing waltzes, polkas and quadrilles. A rumor
      was presently circulated among the groups of dancers. It was said that an
      East Indian prince had just died at the Hotel des Bains and that the
      ministry had been approached for permission to burn the body. No one
      believed it, or at least no one supposed that such a thing could occur so
      foreign was the custom as yet to our customs, and as the night was far
      advanced every one went home.
    

      At midnight, the lamplighter, running from street to street, extinguished,
      one after another, the yellow jets of flame that lighted up the sleeping
      houses, the mud and the puddles of water. We waited, watching for the hour
      when the little town should be quiet and deserted.
    

      Ever since noon a carpenter had been cutting up wood and asking himself
      with amazement what was going to be done with all these planks sawn up
      into little bits, and why one should destroy so much good merchandise.
      This wood was piled up in a cart which went along through side streets as
      far as the beach, without arousing the suspicion of belated persons who
      might meet it. It went along on the shingle at the foot of the cliff, and
      having dumped its contents on the beach the three Indian servants began to
      build a funeral pile, a little longer than it was wide. They worked alone,
      for no profane hand must aid in this solemn duty.
    

      It was one o'clock in the morning when the relations of the deceased were
      informed that they might accomplish their part of the work.
    

      The door of the little house they occupied was open, and we perceived,
      lying on a stretcher in the small, dimly lighted vestibule the corpse
      covered with white silk. We could see him plainly as he lay stretched out
      on his back, his outline clearly defined beneath this white veil.
    

      The East Indians, standing at his feet, remained motionless, while one of
      them performed the prescribed rites, murmuring unfamiliar words in a low,
      monotonous tone. He walked round and round the corpse; touching it
      occasionally, then, taking an urn suspended from three slender chains, he
      sprinkled it for some time with the sacred water of the Ganges, that East
      Indians must always carry with them wherever they go.
    

      Then the stretcher was lifted by four of them who started off at a slow
      march. The moon had gone down, leaving the muddy, deserted streets in
      darkness, but the body on the stretcher appeared to be luminous, so
      dazzlingly white was the silk, and it was a weird sight to see, passing
      along through the night, the semi-luminous form of this corpse, borne by
      those men, the dusky skin of whose faces and hands could scarcely be
      distinguished from their clothing in the darkness.
    

      Behind the corpse came three Indians, and then, a full head taller than
      themselves and wrapped in an ample traveling coat of a soft gray color,
      appeared the outline of an Englishman, a kind and superior man, a friend
      of theirs, who was their guide and counselor in their European travels.
    

      Beneath the cold, misty sky of this little northern beach I felt as if I
      were taking part in a sort of symbolical drama. It seemed to me that they
      were carrying there, before me, the conquered genius of India, followed,
      as in a funeral procession, by the victorious genius of England robed in a
      gray ulster.
    

      On the shingly beach the four bearers halted a few moments to take breath,
      and then proceeded on their way. They now walked quickly, bending beneath
      the weight of their burden. At length they reached the funeral pile. It
      was erected in an indentation, at the very foot of the cliff, which rose
      above it perpendicularly a hundred meters high, perfectly white but
      looking gray in the night.
    

      The funeral pile was about three and a half feet high. The corpse was
      placed on it and then one of the Indians asked to have the pole star
      pointed out to him. This was done, and the dead Rajah was laid with his
      feet turned towards his native country. Then twelve bottles of kerosene
      were poured over him and he was covered completely with thin slabs of pine
      wood. For almost another hour the relations and servants kept piling up
      the funeral pyre which looked like one of those piles of wood that
      carpenters keep in their yards. Then on top of this was poured the
      contents of twenty bottles of oil, and on top of all they emptied a bag of
      fine shavings. A few steps further on, a flame was glimmering in a little
      bronze brazier, which had remained lighted since the arrival of the
      corpse.
    

      The moment had arrived. The relations went to fetch the fire. As it was
      barely alight, some oil was poured on it, and suddenly a flame arose
      lighting up the great wall of rock from summit to base. An Indian who was
      leaning over the brazier rose upright, his two hands in the air, his
      elbows bent, and all at once we saw arising, all black on the immense
      white cliff, a colossal shadow, the shadow of Buddha in his hieratic
      posture. And the little pointed toque that the man wore on his head even
      looked like the head-dress of the god.
    

      The effect was so striking and unexpected that I felt my heart beat as
      though some supernatural apparition had risen up before me.
    

      That was just what it was—the ancient and sacred image, come from
      the heart of the East to the ends of Europe, and watching over its son
      whom they were going to cremate there.
    

      It vanished. They brought fire. The shavings on top of the pyre were
      lighted and then the wood caught fire and a brilliant light illumined the
      cliff, the shingle and the foam of the waves as they broke on the beach.
    

      It grew brighter from second to second, lighting up on the sea in the
      distance the dancing crest of the waves.
    

      The breeze from the ocean blew in gusts, increasing the heat of the flame
      which flattened down, twisted, then shot up again, throwing out millions
      of sparks. They mounted with wild rapidity along the cliff and were lost
      in the sky, mingling with the stars, increasing their number. Some sea
      birds who had awakened uttered their plaintive cry, and, describing long
      curves, flew, with their white wings extended, through the gleam from the
      funeral pyre and then disappeared in the night.
    

      Before long the pile of wood was nothing but a mass of flame, not red but
      yellow, a blinding yellow, a furnace lashed by the wind. And, suddenly,
      beneath a stronger gust, it tottered, partially crumbling as it leaned
      towards the sea, and the corpse came to view, full length, blackened on
      his couch of flame and burning with long blue flames:
    

      The pile of wood having crumbled further on the right the corpse turned
      over as a man does in bed. They immediately covered him with fresh wood
      and the fire started up again more furiously than ever.
    

      The East Indians, seated in a semi-circle on the shingle, looked out with
      sad, serious faces. And the rest of us, as it was very cold, had drawn
      nearer to the fire until the smoke and sparks came in our faces. There was
      no odor save that of burning pine and petroleum.
    

      Hours passed; day began to break. Toward five o'clock in the morning
      nothing remained but a heap of ashes. The relations gathered them up, cast
      some of them to the winds, some in the sea, and kept some in a brass vase
      that they had brought from India. They then retired to their home to give
      utterance to lamentations.
    

      These young princes and their servants, by the employment of the most
      inadequate appliances succeeded in carrying out the cremation of their
      relation in the most perfect manner, with singular skill and remarkable
      dignity. Everything was done according to ritual, according to the rigid
      ordinances of their religion. Their dead one rests in peace.
    

      The following morning at daybreak there was an indescribable commotion in
      Etretat. Some insisted that they had burned a man alive, others that they
      were trying to hide a crime, some that the mayor would be put in jail,
      others that the Indian prince had succumbed to an attack of cholera.
    

      The men were amazed, the women indignant. A crowd of people spent the day
      on the site of the funeral pile, looking for fragments of bone in the
      shingle that was still warm. They found enough bones to reconstruct ten
      skeletons, for the farmers on shore frequently throw their dead sheep into
      the sea. The finders carefully placed these various fragments in their
      pocketbooks. But not one of them possesses a true particle of the Indian
      prince.
    

      That very night a deputy sent by the government came to hold an inquest.
      He, however, formed an estimate of this singular case like a man of
      intelligence and good sense. But what should he say in his report?
    

      The East Indians declared that if they had been prevented in France from
      cremating their dead they would have taken him to a freer country where
      they could have carried out their customs.
    

      Thus, I have seen a man cremated on a funeral pile, and it has given me a
      wish to disappear in the same manner.
    

      In this way everything ends at once. Man expedites the slow work of
      nature, instead of delaying it by the hideous coffin in which one
      decomposes for months. The flesh is dead, the spirit has fled. Fire which
      purifies disperses in a few hours all that was a human being; it casts it
      to the winds, converting it into air and ashes, and not into ignominious
      corruption.
    

      This is clean and hygienic. Putrefaction beneath the ground in a closed
      box where the body becomes like pap, a blackened, stinking pap, has about
      it something repugnant and disgusting. The sight of the coffin as it
      descends into this muddy hole wrings one's heart with anguish. But the
      funeral pyre which flames up beneath the sky has about it something grand,
      beautiful and solemn.
    







      MISTI
    

      I was very much interested at that time in a droll little woman. She was
      married, of course, as I have a horror of unmarried flirts. What enjoyment
      is there in making love to a woman who belongs to nobody and yet belongs
      to any one? And, besides, morality aside, I do not understand love as a
      trade. That disgusts me somewhat.
    

      The especial attraction in a married woman to a bachelor is that she gives
      him a home, a sweet, pleasant home where every one takes care of you and
      spoils you, from the husband to the servants. One finds everything
      combined there, love, friendship, even fatherly interest, bed and board,
      all, in fact, that constitutes the happiness of life, with this
      incalculable advantage, that one can change one's family from time to
      time, take up one's abode in all kinds of society in turn: in summer, in
      the country with the workman who rents you a room in his house; in winter
      with the townsfolk, or even with the nobility, if one is ambitious.
    

      I have another weakness; it is that I become attached to the husband as
      well as the wife. I acknowledge even that some husbands, ordinary or
      coarse as they may be, give me a feeling of disgust for their wives,
      however charming they may be. But when the husband is intellectual or
      charming I invariably become very much attached to him. I am careful if I
      quarrel with the wife not to quarrel with the husband. In this way I have
      made some of my best friends, and have also proved in many cases the
      incontestable superiority of the male over the female in the human
      species. The latter makes all sorts of trouble-scenes, reproaches, etc.;
      while the former, who has just as good a right to complain, treats you, on
      the contrary, as though you were the special Providence of his hearth.
    

      Well, my friend was a quaint little woman, a brunette, fanciful,
      capricious, pious, superstitious, credulous as a monk, but charming. She
      had a way of kissing one that I never saw in any one else—but that
      was not the attraction—and such a soft skin! It gave me intense
      delight merely to hold her hands. And an eye—her glance was like a
      slow caress, delicious and unending. Sometimes I would lean my head on her
      knee and we would remain motionless, she leaning over me with that subtle,
      enigmatic, disturbing smile that women have, while my eyes would be raised
      to hers, drinking sweetly and deliciously into my heart, like a form of
      intoxication, the glance of her limpid blue eyes, limpid as though they
      were full of thoughts of love, and blue as though they were a heaven of
      delights.
    

      Her husband, inspector of some large public works, was frequently away
      from home and left us our evenings free. Sometimes I spent them with her
      lounging on the divan with my forehead on one of her knees; while on the
      other lay an enormous black cat called “Misti,” whom she
      adored. Our fingers would meet on the cat's back and would intertwine in
      her soft silky fur. I felt its warm body against my cheek, trembling with
      its eternal purring, and occasionally a paw would reach out and place on
      my mouth, or my eyelid, five unsheathed claws which would prick my
      eyelids, and then be immediately withdrawn.
    

      Sometimes we would go out on what we called our escapades. They were very
      innocent, however. They consisted in taking supper at some inn in the
      suburbs, or else, after dining at her house or at mine, in making the
      round of the cheap cafes, like students out for a lark.
    

      We would go into the common drinking places and take our seats at the end
      of the smoky den on two rickety chairs, at an old wooden table. A cloud of
      pungent smoke, with which blended an odor of fried fish from dinner,
      filled the room. Men in smocks were talking in loud tones as they drank
      their petits verres, and the astonished waiter placed before us two cherry
      brandies.
    

      She, trembling, charmingly afraid, would raise her double black veil as
      far as her nose, and then take up her glass with the enjoyment that one
      feels at doing something delightfully naughty. Each cherry she swallowed
      made her feel as if she had done something wrong, each swallow of the
      burning liquor had on her the affect of a delicate and forbidden
      enjoyment.
    

      Then she would say to me in a low tone: “Let us go.” And we
      would leave, she walking quickly with lowered head between the drinkers
      who watched her going by with a look of displeasure. And as soon as we got
      into the street she would give a great sigh of relief, as if we had
      escaped some terrible danger.
    

      Sometimes she would ask me with a shudder:
    

      “Suppose they, should say something rude to me in those places, what
      would you do?” “Why, I would defend you, parbleu!” I
      would reply in a resolute manner. And she would squeeze my arm for
      happiness, perhaps with a vague wish that she might be insulted and
      protected, that she might see men fight on her account, even those men,
      with me!
    

      One evening as we sat at a table in a tavern at Montmartre, we saw an old
      woman in tattered garments come in, holding in her hand a pack of dirty
      cards. Perceiving a lady, the old woman at once approached us and offered
      to tell my friend's fortune. Emma, who in her heart believed in
      everything, was trembling with longing and anxiety, and she made a place
      beside her for the old woman.
    

      The latter, old, wrinkled, her eyes with red inflamed rings round them,
      and her mouth without a single tooth in it, began to deal her dirty cards
      on the table. She dealt them in piles, then gathered them up, and then
      dealt them out again, murmuring indistinguishable words. Emma, turning
      pale, listened with bated breath, gasping with anxiety and curiosity.
    

      The fortune-teller broke silence. She predicted vague happenings:
      happiness and children, a fair young man, a voyage, money, a lawsuit, a
      dark man, the return of some one, success, a death. The mention of this
      death attracted the younger woman's attention. “Whose death? When?
      In what manner?”
    

      The old woman replied: “Oh, as to that, these cards are not certain
      enough. You must come to my place to-morrow; I will tell you about it with
      coffee grounds which never make a mistake.”
    

      Emma turned anxiously to me:
    

      “Say, let us go there to-morrow. Oh, please say yes. If not, you
      cannot imagine how worried I shall be.”
    

      I began to laugh.
    

      “We will go if you wish it, dearie.”
    

      The old woman gave us her address. She lived on the sixth floor, in a
      wretched house behind the Buttes-Chaumont. We went there the following
      day.
    

      Her room, an attic containing two chairs and a bed, was filled with
      strange objects, bunches of herbs hanging from nails, skins of animals,
      flasks and phials containing liquids of various colors. On the table a
      stuffed black cat looked out of eyes of glass. He seemed like the demon of
      this sinister dwelling.
    

      Emma, almost fainting with emotion, sat down on a chair and exclaimed:
    

      “Oh, dear, look at that cat; how like it is to Misti.”
    

      And she explained to the old woman that she had a cat “exactly like
      that, exactly like that!”
    

      The old woman replied gravely:
    

      “If you are in love with a man, you must not keep it.”
    

      Emma, suddenly filled with fear, asked:
    

      “Why not?”
    

      The old woman sat down familiarly beside her and took her hand.
    

      “It was the undoing of my life,” she said.
    

      My friend wanted to hear about it. She leaned against the old woman,
      questioned her, begged her to tell. At length the woman agreed to do so.
    

      “I loved that cat,” she said, “as one would love a
      brother. I was young then and all alone, a seamstress. I had only him,
      Mouton. One of the tenants had given it to me. He was as intelligent as a
      child, and gentle as well, and he worshiped me, my dear lady, he worshiped
      me more than one does a fetish. All day long he would sit on my lap
      purring, and all night long on my pillow; I could feel his heart beating,
      in fact.
    

      “Well, I happened to make an acquaintance, a fine young man who was
      working in a white-goods house. That went on for about three months on a
      footing of mere friendship. But you know one is liable to weaken, it may
      happen to any one, and, besides, I had really begun to love him. He was so
      nice, so nice, and so good. He wanted us to live together, for economy's
      sake. I finally allowed him to come and see me one evening. I had not made
      up my mind to anything definite; oh, no! But I was pleased at the idea
      that we should spend an hour together.
    

      “At first he behaved very well, said nice things to me that made my
      heart go pit-a-pat. And then he kissed me, madame, kissed me as one does
      when they love. I remained motionless, my eyes closed, in a paroxysm of
      happiness. But, suddenly, I felt him start violently and he gave a scream,
      a scream that I shall never forget. I opened my eyes and saw that Mouton
      had sprung at his face and was tearing the skin with his claws as if it
      had been a linen rag. And the blood was streaming down like rain, madame.
    

      “I tried to take the cat away, but he held on tight, scratching all
      the time; and he bit me, he was so crazy. I finally got him and threw him
      out of the window, which was open, for it was summer.
    

      “When I began to bathe my poor friend's face, I noticed that his
      eyes were destroyed, both his eyes!
    

      “He had to go to the hospital. He died of grief at the end of a
      year. I wanted to keep him with me and provide for him, but he would not
      agree to it. One would have supposed that he hated me after the
      occurrence.
    

      “As for Mouton, his back was broken by the fall, The janitor picked
      up his body. I had him stuffed, for in spite of all I was fond of him. If
      he acted as he did it was because he loved me, was it not?”
    

      The old woman was silent and began to stroke the lifeless animal whose
      body trembled on its iron framework.
    

      Emma, with sorrowful heart, had forgotten about the predicted death—or,
      at least, she did not allude to it again, and she left, giving the woman
      five francs.
    

      As her husband was to return the following day, I did not go to the house
      for several days. When I did go I was surprised at not seeing Misti. I
      asked where he was.
    

      She blushed and replied:
    

      “I gave him away. I was uneasy.”
    

      I was astonished.
    

      “Uneasy? Uneasy? What about?”
    

      She gave me a long kiss and said in a low tone:
    

      “I was uneasy about your eyes, my dear.”
    

   Misti appeared in. Gil Blas of January 22, 1884, over the signature
   of “MAUFRIGNEUSE.”
 







      MADAME HERMET
    

      Crazy people attract me. They live in a mysterious land of weird dreams,
      in that impenetrable cloud of dementia where all that they have witnessed
      in their previous life, all they have loved, is reproduced for them in an
      imaginary existence, outside of all laws that govern the things of this
      life and control human thought.
    

      For them there is no such thing as the impossible, nothing is improbable;
      fairyland is a constant quantity and the supernatural quite familiar. The
      old rampart, logic; the old wall, reason; the old main stay of thought,
      good sense, break down, fall and crumble before their imagination, set
      free and escaped into the limitless realm of fancy, and advancing with
      fabulous bounds, and nothing can check it. For them everything happens,
      and anything may happen. They make no effort to conquer events, to
      overcome resistance, to overturn obstacles. By a sudden caprice of their
      flighty imagination they become princes, emperors, or gods, are possessed
      of all the wealth of the world, all the delightful things of life, enjoy
      all pleasures, are always strong, always beautiful, always young, always
      beloved! They, alone, can be happy in this world; for, as far as they are
      concerned, reality does not exist. I love to look into their wandering
      intelligence as one leans over an abyss at the bottom of which seethes a
      foaming torrent whose source and destination are both unknown.
    

      But it is in vain that we lean over these abysses, for we shall never
      discover the source nor the destination of this water. After all, it is
      only water, just like what is flowing in the sunlight, and we shall learn
      nothing by looking at it.
    

      It is likewise of no use to ponder over the intelligence of crazy people,
      for their most weird notions are, in fact, only ideas that are already
      known, which appear strange simply because they are no longer under the
      restraint of reason. Their whimsical source surprises us because we do not
      see it bubbling up. Doubtless the dropping of a little stone into the
      current was sufficient to cause these ebullitions. Nevertheless crazy
      people attract me and I always return to them, drawn in spite of myself by
      this trivial mystery of dementia.
    

      One day as I was visiting one of the asylums the physician who was my
      guide said:
    

      “Come, I will show you an interesting case.”
    

      And he opened the door of a cell where a woman of about forty, still
      handsome, was seated in a large armchair, looking persistently at her face
      in a little hand mirror.
    

      As soon as she saw us she rose to her feet, ran to the other end of the
      room, picked up a veil that lay on a chair, wrapped it carefully round her
      face, then came back, nodding her head in reply to our greeting.
    

      “Well,” said the doctor, “how are you this morning?”
    

      She gave a deep sigh.
    

      “Oh, ill, monsieur, very ill. The marks are increasing every day.”
    

      He replied in a tone of conviction:
    

      “Oh, no; oh, no; I assure you that you are mistaken.”
    

      She drew near to him and murmured:
    

      “No. I am certain of it. I counted ten pittings more this morning,
      three on the right cheek, four on the left cheek, and three on the
      forehead. It is frightful, frightful! I shall never dare to let any one
      see me, not even my son; no, not even him! I am lost, I am disfigured
      forever.”
    

      She fell back in her armchair and began to sob.
    

      The doctor took a chair, sat down beside her, and said soothingly in a
      gentle tone:
    

      “Come, let me see; I assure you it is nothing. With a slight
      cauterization I will make it all disappear.”
    

      She shook her head in denial, without speaking. He tried to touch her
      veil, but she seized it with both hands so violently that her fingers went
      through it.
    

      He continued to reason with her and reassure her.
    

      “Come, you know very well that I remove those horrid pits every time
      and that there is no trace of them after I have treated them. If you do
      not let me see them I cannot cure you.”
    

      “I do not mind your seeing them,” she murmured, “but I
      do not know that gentleman who is with you.”
    

      “He is a doctor also, who can give you better care than I can.”
    

      She then allowed her face to be uncovered, but her dread, her emotion, her
      shame at being seen brought a rosy flush to her face and her neck, down to
      the collar of her dress. She cast down her eyes, turned her face aside,
      first to the right; then to the left, to avoid our gaze and stammered out:
    

      “Oh, it is torture to me to let myself be seen like this! It is
      horrible, is it not? Is it not horrible?”
    

      I looked at her in much surprise, for there was nothing on her face, not a
      mark, not a spot, not a sign of one, nor a scar.
    

      She turned towards me, her eyes still lowered, and said:
    

      “It was while taking care of my son that I caught this fearful
      disease, monsieur. I saved him, but I am disfigured. I sacrificed my
      beauty to him, to my poor child. However, I did my duty, my conscience is
      at rest. If I suffer it is known only to God.”
    

      The doctor had drawn from his coat pocket a fine water-color paint brush.
    

      “Let me attend to it,” he said, “I will put it all
      right.”
    

      She held out her right cheek, and he began by touching it lightly with the
      brush here and there, as though he were putting little points of paint on
      it. He did the same with the left cheek, then with the chin, and the
      forehead, and then exclaimed:
    

      “See, there is nothing there now, nothing at all!”
    

      She took up the mirror, gazed at her reflection with profound, eager
      attention, with a strong mental effort to discover something, then she
      sighed:
    

      “No. It hardly shows at all. I am infinitely obliged to you.”
    

      The doctor had risen. He bowed to her, ushered me out and followed me,
      and, as soon as he had locked the door, said:
    

      “Here is the history of this unhappy woman.”
    

      Her name is Mme. Hermet. She was once very beautiful, a great coquette,
      very much beloved and very much in-love with life.
    

      She was one of those women who have nothing but their beauty and their
      love of admiration to sustain, guide or comfort them in this life. The
      constant anxiety to retain her freshness, the care of her complexion, of
      her hands, her teeth, of every portion of body that was visible, occupied
      all her time and all her attention.
    

      She became a widow, with one son. The boy was brought up as are all
      children of society beauties. She was, however, very fond of him.
    

      He grew up, and she grew older. Whether she saw the fatal crisis
      approaching, I cannot say. Did she, like so many others, gaze for hours
      and hours at her skin, once so fine, so transparent and free from blemish,
      now beginning to shrivel slightly, to be crossed with a thousand little
      lines, as yet imperceptible, that will grow deeper day by day, month by
      month? Did she also see slowly, but surely, increasing traces of those
      long wrinkles on the forehead, those slender serpents that nothing can
      check? Did she suffer the torture, the abominable torture of the mirror,
      the little mirror with the silver handle which one cannot make up one's
      mind to lay down on the table, but then throws down in disgust only to
      take it up again in order to look more closely, and still more closely at
      the hateful and insidious approaches of old age? Did she shut herself up
      ten times, twenty times a day, leaving her friends chatting in the
      drawing-room, and go up to her room where, under the protection of bolts
      and bars, she would again contemplate the work of time on her ripe beauty,
      now beginning to wither, and recognize with despair the gradual progress
      of the process which no one else had as yet seemed to perceive, but of
      which she, herself, was well aware. She knows where to seek the most
      serious, the gravest traces of age. And the mirror, the little round
      hand-glass in its carved silver frame, tells her horrible things; for it
      speaks, it seems to laugh, it jeers and tells her all that is going to
      occur, all the physical discomforts and the atrocious mental anguish she
      will suffer until the day of her death, which will be the day of her
      deliverance.
    

      Did she weep, distractedly, on her knees, her forehead to the ground, and
      pray, pray, pray to Him who thus slays his creatures and gives them youth
      only that he may render old age more unendurable, and lends them beauty
      only that he may withdraw it almost immediately? Did she pray to Him,
      imploring Him to do for her what He has never yet done for any one, to let
      her retain until her last day her charm, her freshness and her
      gracefulness? Then, finding that she was imploring in vain an inflexible
      Unknown who drives on the years, one after another, did she roll on the
      carpet in her room, knocking her head against the furniture and stifling
      in her throat shrieks of despair?
    

      Doubtless she suffered these tortures, for this is what occurred:
    

      One day (she was then thirty-five) her son aged fifteen, fell ill.
    

      He took to his bed without any one being able to determine the cause or
      nature of his illness.
    

      His tutor, a priest, watched beside him and hardly ever left him, while
      Mme. Hermet came morning and evening to inquire how he was.
    

      She would come into the room in the morning in her night wrapper, smiling,
      all powdered and perfumed, and would ask as she entered the door:
    

      “Well, George, are you better?”
    

      The big boy, his face red, swollen and showing the ravages of fever, would
      reply:
    

      “Yes, little mother, a little better.”
    

      She would stay in the room a few seconds, look at the bottles of medicine,
      and purse her lips as if she were saying “phew,” and then
      would suddenly exclaim: “Oh, I forgot something very important,”
      and would run out of the room leaving behind her a fragrance of choice
      toilet perfumes.
    

      In the evening she would appear in a decollete dress, in a still greater
      hurry, for she was always late, and she had just time to inquire:
    

      “Well, what does the doctor say?”
    

      The priest would reply:
    

      “He has not yet given an opinion, madame.”
    

      But one evening the abbe replied: “Madame, your son has got the
      small-pox.”
    

      She uttered a scream of terror and fled from the room.
    

      When her maid came to her room the following morning she noticed at once a
      strong odor of burnt sugar, and she found her mistress, with wide-open
      eyes, her face pale from lack of sleep, and shivering with terror in her
      bed.
    

      As soon as the shutters were opened Mme. Herrnet asked:
    

      “How is George?”
    

      “Oh, not at all well to-day, madame.”
    

      She did not rise until noon, when she ate two eggs with a cup of tea, as
      if she herself had been ill, and then she went out to a druggist's to
      inquire about prophylactic measures against the contagion of small-pox.
    

      She did not come home until dinner time, laden with medicine bottles, and
      shut herself up at once in her room, where she saturated herself with
      disinfectants.
    

      The priest was waiting for her in the dining-room. As soon as she saw him
      she exclaimed in a voice full of emotion:
    

      “Well?”
    

      “No improvement. The doctor is very anxious:”
    

      She began to cry and could eat nothing, she was so worried.
    

      The next day, as soon as it was light, she sent to inquire for her son,
      but there was no improvement and she spent the whole day in her room,
      where little braziers were giving out pungent odors. Her maid said also
      that you could hear her sighing all the evening.
    

      She spent a whole week in this manner, only going out for an hour or two
      during the afternoon to breathe the air.
    

      She now sent to make inquiries every hour, and would sob when the reports
      were unfavorable.
    

      On the morning of the eleventh day the priest, having been announced,
      entered her room, his face grave and pale, and said, without taking the
      chair she offered him:
    

      “Madame, your son is very ill and wishes to see you.”
    

      She fell on her knees, exclaiming:
    

      “Oh, my God! Oh, my God! I would never dare! My God! My God! Help
      me!”
    

      The priest continued:
    

      “The doctor holds out little hope, madame, and George is expecting
      you!”
    

      And he left the room.
    

      Two hours later as the young lad, feeling himself dying, again asked for
      his mother, the abbe went to her again and found her still on her knees,
      still weeping and repeating:
    

      “I will not . . . . I will not. . . . I am too much afraid . . . . I
      will not. . . .”
    

      He tried to persuade her, to strengthen her, to lead her. He only
      succeeded in bringing on an attack of “nerves” that lasted
      some time and caused her to shriek.
    

      The doctor when he came in the evening was told of this cowardice and
      declared that he would bring her in himself, of her own volition, or by
      force. But after trying all manner of argument and just as he seized her
      round the waist to carry her into her son's room, she caught hold of the
      door and clung to it so firmly that they could not drag her away. Then
      when they let go of her she fell at the feet of the doctor, begging his
      forgiveness and acknowledging that she was a wretched creature. And then
      she exclaimed: “Oh, he is not going to die; tell me that he is not
      going to die, I beg of you; tell him that I love him, that I worship him.
      . .”
    

      The young lad was dying. Feeling that he had only a few moments more to
      live, he entreated that his mother be persuaded to come and bid him a last
      farewell. With that sort of presentiment that the dying sometimes have, he
      had understood, had guessed all, and he said: “If she is afraid to
      come into the room, beg her just to come on the balcony as far as my
      window so that I may see her, at least, so that I may take a farewell look
      at her, as I cannot kiss her.”
    

      The doctor and the abbe, once more, went together to this woman and
      assured her: “You will run no risk, for there will be a pane of
      glass between you and him.”
    

      She consented, covered up her head, and took with her a bottle of smelling
      salts. She took three steps on the balcony; then, all at once, hiding her
      face in her hands, she moaned: “No . . . no . . . I would never dare
      to look at him . . . never. . . . I am too much ashamed . . . too much
      afraid . . . . No . . . I cannot.”
    

      They endeavored to drag her along, but she held on with both hands to the
      railings and uttered such plaints that the passers-by in the street raised
      their heads. And the dying boy waited, his eyes turned towards that
      window, waited to die until he could see for the last time the sweet,
      beloved face, the worshiped face of his mother.
    

      He waited long, and night came on. Then he turned over with his face to
      the wall and was silent.
    

      When day broke he was dead. The day following she was crazy.
    







      THE MAGIC COUCH
    

      The Seine flowed past my house, without a ripple on its surface, and
      gleaming in the bright morning sunlight. It was a beautiful, broad,
      indolent silver stream, with crimson lights here and there; and on the
      opposite side of the river were rows of tall trees that covered all the
      bank with an immense wall of verdure.
    

      The sensation of life which is renewed each day, of fresh, happy, loving
      life trembled in the leaves, palpitated in the air, was mirrored in the
      water.
    

      The postman had just brought my papers, which were handed to me, and I
      walked slowly to the river bank in order to read them.
    

      In the first paper I opened I noticed this headline, “Statistics of
      Suicides,” and I read that more than 8,500 persons had killed
      themselves in that year.
    

      In a moment I seemed to see them! I saw this voluntary and hideous
      massacre of the despairing who were weary of life. I saw men bleeding,
      their jaws fractured, their skulls cloven, their breasts pierced by a
      bullet, slowly dying, alone in a little room in a hotel, giving no thought
      to their wound, but thinking only of their misfortunes.
    

      I saw others seated before a tumbler in which some matches were soaking,
      or before a little bottle with a red label.
    

      They would look at it fixedly without moving; then they would drink and
      await the result; then a spasm would convulse their cheeks and draw their
      lips together; their eyes would grow wild with terror, for they did not
      know that the end would be preceded by so much suffering.
    

      They rose to their feet, paused, fell over and with their hands pressed to
      their stomachs they felt their internal organs on fire, their entrails
      devoured by the fiery liquid, before their minds began to grow dim.
    

      I saw others hanging from a nail in the wall, from the fastening of the
      window, from a hook in the ceiling, from a beam in the garret, from a
      branch of a tree amid the evening rain. And I surmised all that had
      happened before they hung there motionless, their tongues hanging out of
      their mouths. I imagined the anguish of their heart, their final
      hesitation, their attempts to fasten the rope, to determine that it was
      secure, then to pass the noose round their neck and to let themselves
      fall.
    

      I saw others lying on wretched beds, mothers with their little children,
      old men dying of hunger, young girls dying for love, all rigid,
      suffocated, asphyxiated, while in the center of the room the brasier still
      gave forth the fumes of charcoal.
    

      And I saw others walking at night along the deserted bridges. These were
      the most sinister. The water flowed under the arches with a low sound.
      They did not see it . . . they guessed at it from its cool breath! They
      longed for it and they feared it. They dared not do it! And yet, they
      must. A distant clock sounded the hour and, suddenly, in the vast silence
      of the night, there was heard the splash of a body falling into the river,
      a scream or two, the sound of hands beating the water, and all was still.
      Sometimes, even, there was only the sound of the falling body when they
      had tied their arms down or fastened a stone to their feet. Oh, the poor
      things, the poor things, the poor things, how I felt their anguish, how I
      died in their death! I went through all their wretchedness; I endured in
      one hour all their tortures. I knew all the sorrows that had led them to
      this, for I know the deceitful infamy of life, and no one has felt it more
      than I have.
    

      How I understood them, these who weak, harassed by misfortune, having lost
      those they loved, awakened from the dream of a tardy compensation, from
      the illusion of another existence where God will finally be just, after
      having been ferocious, and their minds disabused of the mirages of
      happiness, have given up the fight and desire to put an end to this
      ceaseless tragedy, or this shameful comedy.
    

      Suicide! Why, it is the strength of those whose strength is exhausted, the
      hope of those who no longer believe, the sublime courage of the conquered!
      Yes, there is at least one door to this life we can always open and pass
      through to the other side. Nature had an impulse of pity; she did not shut
      us up in prison. Mercy for the despairing!
    

      As for those who are simply disillusioned, let them march ahead with free
      soul and quiet heart. They have nothing to fear since they may take their
      leave; for behind them there is always this door that the gods of our
      illusions cannot even lock.
    

      I thought of this crowd of suicides: more than eight thousand five hundred
      in one year. And it seemed to me that they had combined to send to the
      world a prayer, to utter a cry of appeal, to demand something that should
      come into effect later when we understood things better. It seemed to me
      that all these victims, their throats cut, poisoned, hung, asphyxiated, or
      drowned, all came together, a frightful horde, like citizens to the polls,
      to say to society:
    

      “Grant us, at least, a gentle death! Help us to die, you who will
      not help us to live! See, we are numerous, we have the right to speak in
      these days of freedom, of philosophic independence and of popular
      suffrage. Give to those who renounce life the charity of a death that will
      not be repugnant nor terrible.”
    

      I began to dream, allowing my fancy to roam at will in weird and
      mysterious fashion on this subject.
    

      I seemed to be all at once in a beautiful city. It was Paris; but at what
      period? I walked about the streets, looking at the houses, the theaters,
      the public buildings, and presently found myself in a square where I
      remarked a large building; very handsome, dainty and attractive. I was
      surprised on reading on the facade this inscription in letters of gold,
      “Suicide Bureau.”
    

      Oh, the weirdness of waking dreams where the spirit soars into a world of
      unrealities and possibilities! Nothing astonishes one, nothing shocks one;
      and the unbridled fancy makes no distinction between the comic and the
      tragic.
    

      I approached the building where footmen in knee-breeches were seated in
      the vestibule in front of a cloak-room as they do at the entrance of a
      club.
    

      I entered out of curiosity. One of the men rose and said:
    

      “What does monsieur wish?”
    

      “I wish to know what building this is.”
    

      “Nothing more?”
    

      “Why, no.”
    

      “Then would monsieur like me to take him to the Secretary of the
      Bureau?”
    

      I hesitated, and asked:
    

      “But will not that disturb him?”
    

      “Oh, no, monsieur, he is here to receive those who desire
      information.”
    

      “Well, lead the way.”
    

      He took me through corridors where old gentlemen were chatting, and
      finally led me into a beautiful office, somewhat somber, furnished
      throughout in black wood. A stout young man with a corporation was writing
      a letter as he smoked a cigar, the fragrance of which gave evidence of its
      quality.
    

      He rose. We bowed to each other, and as soon as the footman had retired he
      asked:
    

      “What can I do for you?”
    

      “Monsieur,” I replied, “pardon my curiosity. I had never
      seen this establishment. The few words inscribed on the facade filled me
      with astonishment, and I wanted to know what was going on here.”
    

      He smiled before replying, then said in a low tone with a complacent air:
    

      “Mon Dieu, monsieur, we put to death in a cleanly and gentle—I
      do not venture to say agreeable manner those persons who desire to die.”
    

      I did not feel very shocked, for it really seemed to me natural and right.
      What particularly surprised me was that on this planet, with its low,
      utilitarian, humanitarian ideals, selfish and coercive of all true
      freedom, any one should venture on a similar enterprise, worthy of an
      emancipated humanity.
    

      “How did you get the idea?” I asked.
    

      “Monsieur,” he replied, “the number of suicides
      increased so enormously during the five years succeeding the world
      exposition of 1889 that some measures were urgently needed. People killed
      themselves in the streets, at fetes, in restaurants, at the theater, in
      railway carriages, at the receptions held by the President of the
      Republic, everywhere. It was not only a horrid sight for those who love
      life, as I do, but also a bad example for children. Hence it became
      necessary to centralize suicides.”
    

      “What caused this suicidal epidemic?”
    

      “I do not know. The fact is, I believe, the world is growing old.
      People begin to see things clearly and they are getting disgruntled. It is
      the same to-day with destiny as with the government, we have found out
      what it is; people find that they are swindled in every direction, and
      they just get out of it all. When one discovers that Providence lies,
      cheats, robs, deceives human beings just as a plain Deputy deceives his
      constituents, one gets angry, and as one cannot nominate a fresh
      Providence every three months as we do with our privileged
      representatives, one just gets out of the whole thing, which is decidedly
      bad.”
    

      “Really!”
    

      “Oh, as for me, I am not complaining.”
    

      “Will you inform me how you carry on this establishment?”
    

      “With pleasure. You may become a member when you please. It is a
      club.”
    

      “A club!”
    

      “Yes, monsieur, founded by the most eminent men in the country, by
      men of the highest intellect and brightest intelligence. And,” he
      added, laughing heartily, “I swear to you that every one gets a
      great deal of enjoyment out of it.”
    

      “In this place?”
    

      “Yes, in this place.”
    

      “You surprise me.”
    

      “Mon Dieu, they enjoy themselves because they have not that fear of
      death which is the great killjoy in all our earthly pleasures.”
    

      “But why should they be members of this club if they do not kill
      themselves?”
    

      “One may be a member of the club without being obliged for that
      reason to commit suicide.”
    

      “But then?”
    

      “I will explain. In view of the enormous increase in suicides, and
      of the hideous spectacle they presented, a purely benevolent society was
      formed for the protection of those in despair, which placed at their
      disposal the facilities for a peaceful, painless, if not unforeseen death.”
    

      “Who can have authorized such an institution?”
    

      “General Boulanger during his brief tenure of power. He could never
      refuse anything. However, that was the only good thing he did. Hence, a
      society was formed of clear-sighted, disillusioned skeptics who desired to
      erect in the heart of Paris a kind of temple dedicated to the contempt for
      death. This place was formerly a dreaded spot that no one ventured to
      approach. Then its founders, who met together here, gave a grand inaugural
      entertainment with Mmes. Sarah Bernhardt, Judic, Theo, Granier, and twenty
      others, and Mme. de Reske, Coquelin, Mounet-Sully, Paulus, etc., present,
      followed by concerts, the comedies of Dumas, of Meilhac, Halevy and
      Sardon. We had only one thing to mar it, one drama by Becque which seemed
      sad, but which subsequently had a great success at the Comedie-Francaise.
      In fact all Paris came. The enterprise was launched.”
    

      “In the midst of the festivities! What a funereal joke!”
    

      “Not at all. Death need not be sad, it should be a matter of
      indifference. We made death cheerful, crowned it with flowers, covered it
      with perfume, made it easy. One learns to aid others through example; one
      can see that it is nothing.”
    

      “I can well understand that they should come to the entertainments;
      but did they come to . . . Death?”
    

      “Not at first; they were afraid.”
    

      “And later?”
    

      “They came.”
    

      “Many of them?”
    

      “In crowds. We have had more than forty in a day. One finds hardly
      any more drowned bodies in the Seine.”
    

      “Who was the first?”
    

      “A club member.”
    

      “As a sacrifice to the cause?”
    

      “I don't think so. A man who was sick of everything, a 'down and
      out' who had lost heavily at baccarat for three months.”
    

      “Indeed?”
    

      “The second was an Englishman, an eccentric. We then advertised in
      the papers, we gave an account of our methods, we invented some attractive
      instances. But the great impetus was given by poor people.”
    

      “How do you go to work?”
    

      “Would you like to see? I can explain at the same time.”
    

      “Yes, indeed.”
    

      He took his hat, opened the door, allowed me to precede him, and we
      entered a card room, where men sat playing as they, play in all gambling
      places. They were chatting cheerfully, eagerly. I have seldom seen such a
      jolly, lively, mirthful club.
    

      As I seemed surprised, the secretary said:
    

      “Oh, the establishment has an unheard of prestige. All the smart
      people all over the world belong to it so as to appear as though they held
      death in scorn. Then, once they get here, they feel obliged to be cheerful
      that they may not appear to be afraid. So they joke and laugh and talk
      flippantly, they are witty and they become so. At present it is certainly
      the most frequented and the most entertaining place in Paris. The women
      are even thinking of building an annex for themselves.”
    

      “And, in spite of all this, you have many suicides in the house?”
    

      “As I said, about forty or fifty a day. Society people are rare, but
      poor devils abound. The middle class has also a large contingent.
    

      “And how . . . do they do?”
    

      “They are asphyxiated . . . very slowly.”
    

      “In what manner?”
    

      “A gas of our own invention. We have the patent. On the other side
      of the building are the public entrances—three little doors opening
      on small streets. When a man or a woman present themselves they are
      interrogated. Then they are offered assistance, aid, protection. If a
      client accepts, inquiries are made; and sometimes we have saved their
      lives.”
    

      “Where do you get your money?”
    

      “We have a great deal. There are a large number of shareholders.
      Besides it is fashionable to contribute to the establishment. The names of
      the donors are published in Figaro. Then the suicide of every rich man
      costs a thousand francs. And they look as if they were lying in state. It
      costs the poor nothing.”
    

      “How can you tell who is poor?”
    

      “Oh, oh, monsieur, we can guess! And, besides, they must bring a
      certificate of indigency from the commissary of police of their district.
      If you knew how distressing it is to see them come in! I visited their
      part of our building once only, and I will never go again. The place
      itself is almost as good as this part, almost as luxurious and
      comfortable; but they themselves . . . they themselves!!! If you could see
      them arriving, the old men in rags coming to die; persons who have been
      dying of misery for months, picking up their food at the edges of the
      curbstone like dogs in the street; women in rags, emaciated, sick,
      paralyzed, incapable of making a living, who say to us after they have
      told us their story: 'You see that things cannot go on like that, as I
      cannot work any longer or earn anything.' I saw one woman of eighty-seven
      who had lost all her children and grandchildren, and who for the last six
      weeks had been sleeping out of doors. It made me ill to hear of it. Then
      we have so many different cases, without counting those who say nothing,
      but simply ask: 'Where is it?' These are admitted at once and it is all
      over in a minute.”
    

      With a pang at my heart I repeated:
    

      “And . . . where is it?”
    

      “Here,” and he opened a door, adding:
    

      “Go in; this is the part specially reserved for club members, and
      the one least used. We have so far had only eleven annihilations here.”
    

      “Ah! You call that an . . . annihilation!”
    

      “Yes, monsieur. Go in.”
    

      I hesitated. At length I went in. It was a wide corridor, a sort of
      greenhouse in which panes of glass of pale blue, tender pink and delicate
      green gave the poetic charm of landscapes to the inclosing walls. In this
      pretty salon there were divans, magnificent palms, flowers, especially
      roses of balmy fragrance, books on the tables, the Revue des Deuxmondes,
      cigars in government boxes, and, what surprised me, Vichy pastilles in a
      bonbonniere.
    

      As I expressed my surprise, my guide said:
    

      “Oh, they often come here to chat.” He continued: “The
      public corridors are similar, but more simply furnished.”
    

      In reply to a question of mine, he pointed to a couch covered with creamy
      crepe de Chine with white embroidery, beneath a large shrub of unknown
      variety at the foot of which was a circular bed of mignonette.
    

      The secretary added in a lower tone:
    

      “We change the flower and the perfume at will, for our gas, which is
      quite imperceptible, gives death the fragrance of the suicide's favorite
      flower. It is volatilized with essences. Would you like to inhale it for a
      second?”
    

      “'No, thank you,” I said hastily, “not yet . . . .”
    

      He began to laugh.
    

      “Oh, monsieur, there is no danger. I have tried it myself several
      times.”
    

      I was afraid he would think me a coward, and I said:
    

      “Well, I'll try it.”
    

      “Stretch yourself out on the 'endormeuse.”'
    

      A little uneasy I seated myself on the low couch covered with crepe de
      Chine and stretched myself full length, and was at once bathed in a
      delicious odor of mignonette. I opened my mouth in order to breathe it in,
      for my mind had already become stupefied and forgetful of the past and was
      a prey, in the first stages of asphyxia, to the enchanting intoxication of
      a destroying and magic opium.
    

      Some one shook me by the arm.
    

      “Oh, oh, monsieur,” said the secretary, laughing, “it
      looks to me as if you were almost caught.”
    

      But a voice, a real voice, and no longer a dream voice, greeted me with
      the peasant intonation:
    

      “Good morning, m'sieu. How goes it?”
    

      My dream was over. I saw the Seine distinctly in the sunlight, and, coming
      along a path, the garde champetre of the district, who with his right hand
      touched his kepi braided in silver. I replied:
    

      “Good morning, Marinel. Where are you going?”
    

      “I am going to look at a drowned man whom they fished up near the
      Morillons. Another who has thrown himself into the soup. He even took off
      his trousers in order to tie his legs together with them.” his
      trousers in order to tie his legs together with them.”