The Daughters of the Late Colonel

 I

 The week after was one of the busiest weeks of their lives. Even when they went
to bed it was only their bodies that lay down and rested; their minds went on,
thinking things out, talking things over, wondering, deciding, trying to
remember where....

 Constantia lay like a statue, her hands by her sides, her feet just overlapping
each other, the sheet up to her chin. She stared at the ceiling.

 “Do you think father would mind if we gave his top-hat to the
porter?”

 “The porter?” snapped Josephine. “Why ever the porter? What a
very extraordinary idea!”

 “Because,” said Constantia slowly, “he must often have to go
to funerals. And I noticed at—at the cemetery that he only had a
bowler.” She paused. “I thought then how very much he’d
appreciate a top-hat. We ought to give him a present, too. He was always very
nice to father.”

 “But,” cried Josephine, flouncing on her pillow and staring across
the dark at Constantia, “father’s head!” And suddenly, for
one awful moment, she nearly giggled. Not, of course, that she felt in the
least like giggling. It must have been habit. Years ago, when they had stayed
awake at night talking, their beds had simply heaved. And now the
porter’s head, disappearing, popped out, like a candle, under
father’s hat.... The giggle mounted, mounted; she clenched her hands; she
fought it down; she frowned fiercely at the dark and said
“Remember” terribly sternly.

 “We can decide to-morrow,” she said.

 Constantia had noticed nothing; she sighed.

 “Do you think we ought to have our dressing-gowns dyed as well?”

 “Black?” almost shrieked Josephine.

 “Well, what else?” said Constantia. “I was thinking—it
doesn’t seem quite sincere, in a way, to wear black out of doors and when
we’re fully dressed, and then when we’re at home—”

 “But nobody sees us,” said Josephine. She gave the bedclothes such
a twitch that both her feet became uncovered, and she had to creep up the
pillows to get them well under again.

 “Kate does,” said Constantia. “And the postman very well
might.”

 Josephine thought of her dark-red slippers, which matched her dressing-gown,
and of Constantia’s favourite indefinite green ones which went with hers.
Black! Two black dressing-gowns and two pairs of black woolly slippers,
creeping off to the bathroom like black cats.

 “I don’t think it’s absolutely necessary,” said she.

 Silence. Then Constantia said, “We shall have to post the papers with the
notice in them to-morrow to catch the Ceylon mail.... How many letters have we
had up till now?”

 “Twenty-three.”

 Josephine had replied to them all, and twenty-three times when she came to
“We miss our dear father so much” she had broken down and had to
use her handkerchief, and on some of them even to soak up a very light-blue
tear with an edge of blotting-paper. Strange! She couldn’t have put it
on—but twenty-three times. Even now, though, when she said over to
herself sadly “We miss our dear father so much,” she could
have cried if she’d wanted to.

 “Have you got enough stamps?” came from Constantia.

 “Oh, how can I tell?” said Josephine crossly. “What’s
the good of asking me that now?”

 “I was just wondering,” said Constantia mildly.

 Silence again. There came a little rustle, a scurry, a hop.

 “A mouse,” said Constantia.

 “It can’t be a mouse because there aren’t any crumbs,”
said Josephine.

 “But it doesn’t know there aren’t,” said Constantia.

 A spasm of pity squeezed her heart. Poor little thing! She wished she’d
left a tiny piece of biscuit on the dressing-table. It was awful to think of it
not finding anything. What would it do?

 “I can’t think how they manage to live at all,” she said
slowly.

 “Who?” demanded Josephine.

 And Constantia said more loudly than she meant to, “Mice.”

 Josephine was furious. “Oh, what nonsense, Con!” she said.
“What have mice got to do with it? You’re asleep.”

 “I don’t think I am,” said Constantia. She shut her eyes to
make sure. She was.

 Josephine arched her spine, pulled up her knees, folded her arms so that her
fists came under her ears, and pressed her cheek hard against the pillow.

 II

 Another thing which complicated matters was they had Nurse Andrews staying on
with them that week. It was their own fault; they had asked her. It was
Josephine’s idea. On the morning—well, on the last morning, when
the doctor had gone, Josephine had said to Constantia, “Don’t you
think it would be rather nice if we asked Nurse Andrews to stay on for a week
as our guest?”

 “Very nice,” said Constantia.

 “I thought,” went on Josephine quickly, “I should just say
this afternoon, after I’ve paid her, ‘My sister and I would be very
pleased, after all you’ve done for us, Nurse Andrews, if you would stay
on for a week as our guest.’ I’d have to put that in about being
our guest in case—”

 “Oh, but she could hardly expect to be paid!” cried Constantia.

 “One never knows,” said Josephine sagely.

 Nurse Andrews had, of course, jumped at the idea. But it was a bother. It meant
they had to have regular sit-down meals at the proper times, whereas if
they’d been alone they could just have asked Kate if she wouldn’t
have minded bringing them a tray wherever they were. And meal-times now that
the strain was over were rather a trial.

 Nurse Andrews was simply fearful about butter. Really they couldn’t help
feeling that about butter, at least, she took advantage of their kindness. And
she had that maddening habit of asking for just an inch more of bread to finish
what she had on her plate, and then, at the last mouthful,
absent-mindedly—of course it wasn’t absent-mindedly—taking
another helping. Josephine got very red when this happened, and she fastened
her small, bead-like eyes on the tablecloth as if she saw a minute strange
insect creeping through the web of it. But Constantia’s long, pale face
lengthened and set, and she gazed away—away—far over the desert, to
where that line of camels unwound like a thread of wool....

 “When I was with Lady Tukes,” said Nurse Andrews, “she had
such a dainty little contrayvance for the buttah. It was a silvah Cupid
balanced on the—on the bordah of a glass dish, holding a tayny fork. And
when you wanted some buttah you simply pressed his foot and he bent down and
speared you a piece. It was quite a gayme.”

 Josephine could hardly bear that. But “I think those things are very
extravagant” was all she said.

 “But whey?” asked Nurse Andrews, beaming through her eyeglasses.
“No one, surely, would take more buttah than one wanted—would
one?”

 “Ring, Con,” cried Josephine. She couldn’t trust herself to
reply.

 And proud young Kate, the enchanted princess, came in to see what the old
tabbies wanted now. She snatched away their plates of mock something or other
and slapped down a white, terrified blancmange.

 “Jam, please, Kate,” said Josephine kindly.

 Kate knelt and burst open the sideboard, lifted the lid of the jam-pot, saw it
was empty, put it on the table, and stalked off.

 “I’m afraid,” said Nurse Andrews a moment later, “there
isn’t any.”

 “Oh, what a bother!” said Josephine. She bit her lip. “What
had we better do?”

 Constantia looked dubious. “We can’t disturb Kate again,” she
said softly.

 Nurse Andrews waited, smiling at them both. Her eyes wandered, spying at
everything behind her eyeglasses. Constantia in despair went back to her
camels. Josephine frowned heavily—concentrated. If it hadn’t been
for this idiotic woman she and Con would, of course, have eaten their
blancmange without. Suddenly the idea came.

 “I know,” she said. “Marmalade. There’s some marmalade
in the sideboard. Get it, Con.”

 “I hope,” laughed Nurse Andrews—and her laugh was like a
spoon tinkling against a medicine-glass—“I hope it’s not very
bittah marmalayde.”

 III

 But, after all, it was not long now, and then she’d be gone for good. And
there was no getting over the fact that she had been very kind to father. She
had nursed him day and night at the end. Indeed, both Constantia and Josephine
felt privately she had rather overdone the not leaving him at the very last.
For when they had gone in to say good-bye Nurse Andrews had sat beside his bed
the whole time, holding his wrist and pretending to look at her watch. It
couldn’t have been necessary. It was so tactless, too. Supposing father
had wanted to say something—something private to them. Not that he had.
Oh, far from it! He lay there, purple, a dark, angry purple in the face, and
never even looked at them when they came in. Then, as they were standing there,
wondering what to do, he had suddenly opened one eye. Oh, what a difference it
would have made, what a difference to their memory of him, how much easier to
tell people about it, if he had only opened both! But no—one eye only. It
glared at them a moment and then... went out.

 IV

 It had made it very awkward for them when Mr. Farolles, of St. John’s,
called the same afternoon.

 “The end was quite peaceful, I trust?” were the first words he said
as he glided towards them through the dark drawing-room.

 “Quite,” said Josephine faintly. They both hung their heads. Both
of them felt certain that eye wasn’t at all a peaceful eye.

 “Won’t you sit down?” said Josephine.

 “Thank you, Miss Pinner,” said Mr. Farolles gratefully. He folded
his coat-tails and began to lower himself into father’s arm-chair, but
just as he touched it he almost sprang up and slid into the next chair instead.

 He coughed. Josephine clasped her hands; Constantia looked vague.

 “I want you to feel, Miss Pinner,” said Mr. Farolles, “and
you, Miss Constantia, that I’m trying to be helpful. I want to be helpful
to you both, if you will let me. These are the times,” said Mr Farolles,
very simply and earnestly, “when God means us to be helpful to one
another.”

 “Thank you very much, Mr. Farolles,” said Josephine and Constantia.

 “Not at all,” said Mr. Farolles gently. He drew his kid gloves
through his fingers and leaned forward. “And if either of you would like
a little Communion, either or both of you, here and now, you have only
to tell me. A little Communion is often very help—a great comfort,”
he added tenderly.

 But the idea of a little Communion terrified them. What! In the drawing-room by
themselves—with no—no altar or anything! The piano would be much
too high, thought Constantia, and Mr. Farolles could not possibly lean over it
with the chalice. And Kate would be sure to come bursting in and interrupt
them, thought Josephine. And supposing the bell rang in the middle? It might be
somebody important—about their mourning. Would they get up reverently and
go out, or would they have to wait... in torture?

 “Perhaps you will send round a note by your good Kate if you would care
for it later,” said Mr. Farolles.

 “Oh yes, thank you very much!” they both said.

 Mr. Farolles got up and took his black straw hat from the round table.

 “And about the funeral,” he said softly. “I may arrange
that—as your dear father’s old friend and yours, Miss
Pinner—and Miss Constantia?”

 Josephine and Constantia got up too.

 “I should like it to be quite simple,” said Josephine firmly,
“and not too expensive. At the same time, I should like—”

 “A good one that will last,” thought dreamy Constantia, as if
Josephine were buying a nightgown. But, of course, Josephine didn’t say
that. “One suitable to our father’s position.” She was very
nervous.

 “I’ll run round to our good friend Mr. Knight,” said Mr.
Farolles soothingly. “I will ask him to come and see you. I am sure you
will find him very helpful indeed.”

 V

 Well, at any rate, all that part of it was over, though neither of them could
possibly believe that father was never coming back. Josephine had had a moment
of absolute terror at the cemetery, while the coffin was lowered, to think that
she and Constantia had done this thing without asking his permission. What
would father say when he found out? For he was bound to find out sooner or
later. He always did. “Buried. You two girls had me buried !”
She heard his stick thumping. Oh, what would they say? What possible excuse
could they make? It sounded such an appallingly heartless thing to do. Such a
wicked advantage to take of a person because he happened to be helpless at the
moment. The other people seemed to treat it all as a matter of course. They
were strangers; they couldn’t be expected to understand that father was
the very last person for such a thing to happen to. No, the entire blame for it
all would fall on her and Constantia. And the expense, she thought, stepping
into the tight-buttoned cab. When she had to show him the bills. What would he
say then?

 She heard him absolutely roaring. “And do you expect me to pay for this
gimcrack excursion of yours?”

 “Oh,” groaned poor Josephine aloud, “we shouldn’t have
done it, Con!”

 And Constantia, pale as a lemon in all that blackness, said in a frightened
whisper, “Done what, Jug?”

 “Let them bu-bury father like that,” said Josephine, breaking down
and crying into her new, queer-smelling mourning handkerchief.

 “But what else could we have done?” asked Constantia wonderingly.
“We couldn’t have kept him, Jug—we couldn’t have kept
him unburied. At any rate, not in a flat that size.”

 Josephine blew her nose; the cab was dreadfully stuffy.

 “I don’t know,” she said forlornly. “It is all so
dreadful. I feel we ought to have tried to, just for a time at least. To make
perfectly sure. One thing’s certain”—and her tears sprang out
again—“father will never forgive us for this—never!”

 VI

 Father would never forgive them. That was what they felt more than ever when,
two mornings later, they went into his room to go through his things. They had
discussed it quite calmly. It was even down on Josephine’s list of things
to be done. “ Go through father’s things and settle about
them. ” But that was a very different matter from saying after
breakfast:

 “Well, are you ready, Con?”

 “Yes, Jug—when you are.”

 “Then I think we’d better get it over.”

 It was dark in the hall. It had been a rule for years never to disturb father
in the morning, whatever happened. And now they were going to open the door
without knocking even.... Constantia’s eyes were enormous at the idea;
Josephine felt weak in the knees.

 “You—you go first,” she gasped, pushing Constantia.

 But Constantia said, as she always had said on those occasions, “No, Jug,
that’s not fair. You’re the eldest.”

 Josephine was just going to say—what at other times she wouldn’t
have owned to for the world—what she kept for her very last weapon,
“But you’re the tallest,” when they noticed that the kitchen
door was open, and there stood Kate....

 “Very stiff,” said Josephine, grasping the doorhandle and doing her
best to turn it. As if anything ever deceived Kate!

 It couldn’t be helped. That girl was.... Then the door was shut behind
them, but—but they weren’t in father’s room at all. They
might have suddenly walked through the wall by mistake into a different flat
altogether. Was the door just behind them? They were too frightened to look.
Josephine knew that if it was it was holding itself tight shut; Constantia felt
that, like the doors in dreams, it hadn’t any handle at all. It was the
coldness which made it so awful. Or the whiteness—which? Everything was
covered. The blinds were down, a cloth hung over the mirror, a sheet hid the
bed; a huge fan of white paper filled the fireplace. Constantia timidly put out
her hand; she almost expected a snowflake to fall. Josephine felt a queer
tingling in her nose, as if her nose was freezing. Then a cab klop-klopped over
the cobbles below, and the quiet seemed to shake into little pieces.

 “I had better pull up a blind,” said Josephine bravely.

 “Yes, it might be a good idea,” whispered Constantia.

 They only gave the blind a touch, but it flew up and the cord flew after,
rolling round the blind-stick, and the little tassel tapped as if trying to get
free. That was too much for Constantia.

 “Don’t you think—don’t you think we might put it off
for another day?” she whispered.

 “Why?” snapped Josephine, feeling, as usual, much better now that
she knew for certain that Constantia was terrified. “It’s got to be
done. But I do wish you wouldn’t whisper, Con.”

 “I didn’t know I was whispering,” whispered Constantia.

 “And why do you keep staring at the bed?” said Josephine, raising
her voice almost defiantly. “There’s nothing on the
bed.”

 “Oh, Jug, don’t say so!” said poor Connie. “At any
rate, not so loudly.”

 Josephine felt herself that she had gone too far. She took a wide swerve over
to the chest of drawers, put out her hand, but quickly drew it back again.

 “Connie!” she gasped, and she wheeled round and leaned with her
back against the chest of drawers.

 “Oh, Jug—what?”

 Josephine could only glare. She had the most extraordinary feeling that she had
just escaped something simply awful. But how could she explain to Constantia
that father was in the chest of drawers? He was in the top drawer with his
handkerchiefs and neckties, or in the next with his shirts and pyjamas, or in
the lowest of all with his suits. He was watching there, hidden away—just
behind the door-handle—ready to spring.

 She pulled a funny old-fashioned face at Constantia, just as she used to in the
old days when she was going to cry.

 “I can’t open,” she nearly wailed.

 “No, don’t, Jug,” whispered Constantia earnestly.
“It’s much better not to. Don’t let’s open anything. At
any rate, not for a long time.”

 “But—but it seems so weak,” said Josephine, breaking down.

 “But why not be weak for once, Jug?” argued Constantia, whispering
quite fiercely. “If it is weak.” And her pale stare flew from the
locked writing-table—so safe—to the huge glittering wardrobe, and
she began to breathe in a queer, panting away. “Why shouldn’t we be
weak for once in our lives, Jug? It’s quite excusable. Let’s be
weak—be weak, Jug. It’s much nicer to be weak than to be
strong.”

 And then she did one of those amazingly bold things that she’d done about
twice before in their lives: she marched over to the wardrobe, turned the key,
and took it out of the lock. Took it out of the lock and held it up to
Josephine, showing Josephine by her extraordinary smile that she knew what
she’d done—she’d risked deliberately father being in there
among his overcoats.

 If the huge wardrobe had lurched forward, had crashed down on Constantia,
Josephine wouldn’t have been surprised. On the contrary, she would have
thought it the only suitable thing to happen. But nothing happened. Only the
room seemed quieter than ever, and the bigger flakes of cold air fell on
Josephine’s shoulders and knees. She began to shiver.

 “Come, Jug,” said Constantia, still with that awful callous smile,
and Josephine followed just as she had that last time, when Constantia had
pushed Benny into the round pond.

 VII

 But the strain told on them when they were back in the dining-room. They sat
down, very shaky, and looked at each other.

 “I don’t feel I can settle to anything,” said Josephine,
“until I’ve had something. Do you think we could ask Kate for two
cups of hot water?”

 “I really don’t see why we shouldn’t,” said Constantia
carefully. She was quite normal again. “I won’t ring. I’ll go
to the kitchen door and ask her.”

 “Yes, do,” said Josephine, sinking down into a chair. “Tell
her, just two cups, Con, nothing else—on a tray.”

 “She needn’t even put the jug on, need she?” said Constantia,
as though Kate might very well complain if the jug had been there.

 “Oh no, certainly not! The jug’s not at all necessary. She can pour
it direct out of the kettle,” cried Josephine, feeling that would be a
labour-saving indeed.

 Their cold lips quivered at the greenish brims. Josephine curved her small red
hands round the cup; Constantia sat up and blew on the wavy steam, making it
flutter from one side to the other.

 “Speaking of Benny,” said Josephine.

 And though Benny hadn’t been mentioned Constantia immediately looked as
though he had.

 “He’ll expect us to send him something of father’s, of
course. But it’s so difficult to know what to send to Ceylon.”

 “You mean things get unstuck so on the voyage,” murmured
Constantia.

 “No, lost,” said Josephine sharply. “You know there’s
no post. Only runners.”

 Both paused to watch a black man in white linen drawers running through the
pale fields for dear life, with a large brown-paper parcel in his hands.
Josephine’s black man was tiny; he scurried along glistening like an ant.
But there was something blind and tireless about Constantia’s tall, thin
fellow, which made him, she decided, a very unpleasant person indeed.... On the
veranda, dressed all in white and wearing a cork helmet, stood Benny. His right
hand shook up and down, as father’s did when he was impatient. And behind
him, not in the least interested, sat Hilda, the unknown sister-in-law. She
swung in a cane rocker and flicked over the leaves of the Tatler .

 “I think his watch would be the most suitable present,” said
Josephine.

 Constantia looked up; she seemed surprised.

 “Oh, would you trust a gold watch to a native?”

 “But of course, I’d disguise it,” said Josephine. “No
one would know it was a watch.” She liked the idea of having to make a
parcel such a curious shape that no one could possibly guess what it was. She
even thought for a moment of hiding the watch in a narrow cardboard corset-box
that she’d kept by her for a long time, waiting for it to come in for
something. It was such beautiful, firm cardboard. But, no, it wouldn’t be
appropriate for this occasion. It had lettering on it: Medium
Women’s 28. Extra Firm Busks. It would be almost too much of a
surprise for Benny to open that and find father’s watch inside.

 “And of course it isn’t as though it would be going—ticking,
I mean,” said Constantia, who was still thinking of the native love of
jewellery. “At least,” she added, “it would be very strange
if after all that time it was.”

 VIII

 Josephine made no reply. She had flown off on one of her tangents. She had
suddenly thought of Cyril. Wasn’t it more usual for the only grandson to
have the watch? And then dear Cyril was so appreciative, and a gold watch meant
so much to a young man. Benny, in all probability, had quite got out of the
habit of watches; men so seldom wore waistcoats in those hot climates. Whereas
Cyril in London wore them from year’s end to year’s end. And it
would be so nice for her and Constantia, when he came to tea, to know it was
there. “I see you’ve got on grandfather’s watch,
Cyril.” It would be somehow so satisfactory.

 Dear boy! What a blow his sweet, sympathetic little note had been! Of course
they quite understood; but it was most unfortunate.

 “It would have been such a point, having him,” said Josephine.

 “And he would have enjoyed it so,” said Constantia, not thinking
what she was saying.

 However, as soon as he got back he was coming to tea with his aunties. Cyril to
tea was one of their rare treats.

 “Now, Cyril, you mustn’t be frightened of our cakes. Your Auntie
Con and I bought them at Buszard’s this morning. We know what a
man’s appetite is. So don’t be ashamed of making a good tea.”

 Josephine cut recklessly into the rich dark cake that stood for her winter
gloves or the soling and heeling of Constantia’s only respectable shoes.
But Cyril was most unmanlike in appetite.

 “I say, Aunt Josephine, I simply can’t. I’ve only just had
lunch, you know.”

 “Oh, Cyril, that can’t be true! It’s after four,” cried
Josephine. Constantia sat with her knife poised over the chocolate-roll.

 “It is, all the same,” said Cyril. “I had to meet a man at
Victoria, and he kept me hanging about till... there was only time to get lunch
and to come on here. And he gave me—phew”—Cyril put his hand
to his forehead—“a terrific blow-out,” he said.

 It was disappointing—to-day of all days. But still he couldn’t be
expected to know.

 “But you’ll have a meringue, won’t you, Cyril?” said
Aunt Josephine. “These meringues were bought specially for you. Your dear
father was so fond of them. We were sure you are, too.”

 “I am , Aunt Josephine,” cried Cyril ardently. “Do you
mind if I take half to begin with?”

 “Not at all, dear boy; but we mustn’t let you off with that.”

 “Is your dear father still so fond of meringues?” asked Auntie Con
gently. She winced faintly as she broke through the shell of hers.

 “Well, I don’t quite know, Auntie Con,” said Cyril breezily.

 At that they both looked up.

 “Don’t know?” almost snapped Josephine. “Don’t
know a thing like that about your own father, Cyril?”

 “Surely,” said Auntie Con softly.

 Cyril tried to laugh it off. “Oh, well,” he said, “it’s
such a long time since—” He faltered. He stopped. Their faces were
too much for him.

 “Even so ,” said Josephine.

 And Auntie Con looked.

 Cyril put down his teacup. “Wait a bit,” he cried. “Wait a
bit, Aunt Josephine. What am I thinking of?”

 He looked up. They were beginning to brighten. Cyril slapped his knee.

 “Of course,” he said, “it was meringues. How could I have
forgotten? Yes, Aunt Josephine, you’re perfectly right. Father’s
most frightfully keen on meringues.”

 They didn’t only beam. Aunt Josephine went scarlet with pleasure; Auntie
Con gave a deep, deep sigh.

 “And now, Cyril, you must come and see father,” said Josephine.
“He knows you were coming to-day.”

 “Right,” said Cyril, very firmly and heartily. He got up from his
chair; suddenly he glanced at the clock.

 “I say, Auntie Con, isn’t your clock a bit slow? I’ve got to
meet a man at—at Paddington just after five. I’m afraid I
shan’t be able to stay very long with grandfather.”

 “Oh, he won’t expect you to stay very long!” said Aunt
Josephine.

 Constantia was still gazing at the clock. She couldn’t make up her mind
if it was fast or slow. It was one or the other, she felt almost certain of
that. At any rate, it had been.

 Cyril still lingered. “Aren’t you coming along, Auntie Con?”

 “Of course,” said Josephine, “we shall all go. Come on,
Con.”

 IX

 They knocked at the door, and Cyril followed his aunts into grandfather’s
hot, sweetish room.

 “Come on,” said Grandfather Pinner. “Don’t hang about.
What is it? What’ve you been up to?”

 He was sitting in front of a roaring fire, clasping his stick. He had a thick
rug over his knees. On his lap there lay a beautiful pale yellow silk
handkerchief.

 “It’s Cyril, father,” said Josephine shyly. And she took
Cyril’s hand and led him forward.

 “Good afternoon, grandfather,” said Cyril, trying to take his hand
out of Aunt Josephine’s. Grandfather Pinner shot his eyes at Cyril in the
way he was famous for. Where was Auntie Con? She stood on the other side of
Aunt Josephine; her long arms hung down in front of her; her hands were
clasped. She never took her eyes off grandfather.

 “Well,” said Grandfather Pinner, beginning to thump, “what
have you got to tell me?”

 What had he, what had he got to tell him? Cyril felt himself smiling like a
perfect imbecile. The room was stifling, too.

 But Aunt Josephine came to his rescue. She cried brightly, “Cyril says
his father is still very fond of meringues, father dear.”

 “Eh?” said Grandfather Pinner, curving his hand like a purple
meringue-shell over one ear.

 Josephine repeated, “Cyril says his father is still very fond of
meringues.”

 “Can’t hear,” said old Colonel Pinner. And he waved Josephine
away with his stick, then pointed with his stick to Cyril. “Tell me what
she’s trying to say,” he said.

 (My God!) “Must I?” said Cyril, blushing and staring at Aunt
Josephine.

 “Do, dear,” she smiled. “It will please him so much.”

 “Come on, out with it!” cried Colonel Pinner testily, beginning to
thump again.

 And Cyril leaned forward and yelled, “Father’s still very fond of
meringues.”

 At that Grandfather Pinner jumped as though he had been shot.

 “Don’t shout!” he cried. “What’s the matter with
the boy? Meringues! What about ’em?”

 “Oh, Aunt Josephine, must we go on?” groaned Cyril desperately.

 “It’s quite all right, dear boy,” said Aunt Josephine, as
though he and she were at the dentist’s together. “He’ll
understand in a minute.” And she whispered to Cyril, “He’s
getting a bit deaf, you know.” Then she leaned forward and really bawled
at Grandfather Pinner, “Cyril only wanted to tell you, father dear, that his father is still very fond of meringues.”

 Colonel Pinner heard that time, heard and brooded, looking Cyril up and down.

 “What an esstrordinary thing!” said old Grandfather Pinner.
“What an esstrordinary thing to come all this way here to tell me!”

 And Cyril felt it was . 





 “Yes, I shall send Cyril the watch,” said Josephine.

 “That would be very nice,” said Constantia. “I seem to
remember last time he came there was some little trouble about the time.”

 X

 They were interrupted by Kate bursting through the door in her usual fashion,
as though she had discovered some secret panel in the wall.

 “Fried or boiled?” asked the bold voice.

 Fried or boiled? Josephine and Constantia were quite bewildered for the moment.
They could hardly take it in.

 “Fried or boiled what, Kate?” asked Josephine, trying to begin to
concentrate.

 Kate gave a loud sniff. “Fish.”

 “Well, why didn’t you say so immediately?” Josephine
reproached her gently. “How could you expect us to understand, Kate?
There are a great many things in this world you know, which are fried or
boiled.” And after such a display of courage she said quite brightly to
Constantia, “Which do you prefer, Con?”

 “I think it might be nice to have it fried,” said Constantia.
“On the other hand, of course, boiled fish is very nice. I think I prefer
both equally well.... Unless you.... In that case—”

 “I shall fry it,” said Kate, and she bounced back, leaving their
door open and slamming the door of her kitchen.

 Josephine gazed at Constantia; she raised her pale eyebrows until they rippled
away into her pale hair. She got up. She said in a very lofty, imposing way,
“Do you mind following me into the drawing-room, Constantia? I’ve
got something of great importance to discuss with you.”

 For it was always to the drawing-room they retired when they wanted to talk
over Kate.

 Josephine closed the door meaningly. “Sit down, Constantia,” she
said, still very grand. She might have been receiving Constantia for the first
time. And Con looked round vaguely for a chair, as though she felt indeed quite
a stranger.

 “Now the question is,” said Josephine, bending forward,
“whether we shall keep her or not.”

 “That is the question,” agreed Constantia.

 “And this time,” said Josephine firmly, “we must come to a
definite decision.”

 Constantia looked for a moment as though she might begin going over all the
other times, but she pulled herself together and said, “Yes, Jug.”

 “You see, Con,” explained Josephine, “everything is so
changed now.” Constantia looked up quickly. “I mean,” went on
Josephine, “we’re not dependent on Kate as we were.” And she
blushed faintly. “There’s not father to cook for.”

 “That is perfectly true,” agreed Constantia. “Father
certainly doesn’t want any cooking now, whatever else—”

 Josephine broke in sharply, “You’re not sleepy, are you,
Con?”

 “Sleepy, Jug?” Constantia was wide-eyed.

 “Well, concentrate more,” said Josephine sharply, and she returned
to the subject. “What it comes to is, if we did”—and this she
barely breathed, glancing at the door—“give Kate
notice”—she raised her voice again—“we could manage our
own food.”

 “Why not?” cried Constantia. She couldn’t help smiling. The
idea was so exciting. She clasped her hands. “What should we live on,
Jug?”

 “Oh, eggs in various forms!” said Jug, lofty again. “And,
besides, there are all the cooked foods.”

 “But I’ve always heard,” said Constantia, “they are
considered so very expensive.”

 “Not if one buys them in moderation,” said Josephine. But she tore
herself away from this fascinating bypath and dragged Constantia after her.

 “What we’ve got to decide now, however, is whether we really do
trust Kate or not.”

 Constantia leaned back. Her flat little laugh flew from her lips.

 “Isn’t it curious, Jug,” said she, “that just on this
one subject I’ve never been able to quite make up my mind?”

 XI

 She never had. The whole difficulty was to prove anything. How did one prove
things, how could one? Suppose Kate had stood in front of her and deliberately
made a face. Mightn’t she very well have been in pain? Wasn’t it
impossible, at any rate, to ask Kate if she was making a face at her? If Kate
answered “No”—and, of course, she would say
“No”—what a position! How undignified! Then again Constantia
suspected, she was almost certain that Kate went to her chest of drawers when
she and Josephine were out, not to take things but to spy. Many times she had
come back to find her amethyst cross in the most unlikely places, under her
lace ties or on top of her evening Bertha. More than once she had laid a trap
for Kate. She had arranged things in a special order and then called Josephine
to witness.

 “You see, Jug?”

 “Quite, Con.”

 “Now we shall be able to tell.”

 But, oh dear, when she did go to look, she was as far off from a proof as ever!
If anything was displaced, it might so very well have happened as she closed
the drawer; a jolt might have done it so easily.

 “You come, Jug, and decide. I really can’t. It’s too
difficult.”

 But after a pause and a long glare Josephine would sigh, “Now
you’ve put the doubt into my mind, Con, I’m sure I can’t tell
myself.” 





 “Well, we can’t postpone it again,” said Josephine. “If
we postpone it this time—”

 XII

 But at that moment in the street below a barrel-organ struck up. Josephine and
Constantia sprang to their feet together.

 “Run, Con,” said Josephine. “Run quickly. There’s
sixpence on the—”

 Then they remembered. It didn’t matter. They would never have to stop the
organ-grinder again. Never again would she and Constantia be told to make that
monkey take his noise somewhere else. Never would sound that loud, strange
bellow when father thought they were not hurrying enough. The organ-grinder
might play there all day and the stick would not thump.

 It never will thump again, 

It never will thump again,

 played the barrel-organ.

 What was Constantia thinking? She had such a strange smile; she looked
different. She couldn’t be going to cry.

 “Jug, Jug,” said Constantia softly, pressing her hands together.
“Do you know what day it is? It’s Saturday. It’s a week
to-day, a whole week.”

 A week since father died, 

A week since father died,

 cried the barrel-organ. And Josephine, too, forgot to be practical and
sensible; she smiled faintly, strangely. On the Indian carpet there fell a
square of sunlight, pale red; it came and went and came—and stayed,
deepened—until it shone almost golden.

 “The sun’s out,” said Josephine, as though it really
mattered.

 A perfect fountain of bubbling notes shook from the barrel-organ, round, bright
notes, carelessly scattered.

 Constantia lifted her big, cold hands as if to catch them, and then her hands
fell again. She walked over to the mantelpiece to her favourite Buddha. And the
stone and gilt image, whose smile always gave her such a queer feeling, almost
a pain and yet a pleasant pain, seemed to-day to be more than smiling. He knew
something; he had a secret. “I know something that you don’t
know,” said her Buddha. Oh, what was it, what could it be? And yet she
had always felt there was... something.

 The sunlight pressed through the windows, thieved its way in, flashed its light
over the furniture and the photographs. Josephine watched it. When it came to
mother’s photograph, the enlargement over the piano, it lingered as
though puzzled to find so little remained of mother, except the earrings shaped
like tiny pagodas and a black feather boa. Why did the photographs of dead
people always fade so? wondered Josephine. As soon as a person was dead their
photograph died too. But, of course, this one of mother was very old. It was
thirty-five years old. Josephine remembered standing on a chair and pointing
out that feather boa to Constantia and telling her that it was a snake that had
killed their mother in Ceylon.... Would everything have been different if
mother hadn’t died? She didn’t see why. Aunt Florence had lived
with them until they had left school, and they had moved three times and had
their yearly holiday and... and there’d been changes of servants, of
course.

 Some little sparrows, young sparrows they sounded, chirped on the window-ledge. Yeep—eyeep—yeep. But Josephine felt they were not sparrows,
not on the window-ledge. It was inside her, that queer little crying noise. Yeep—eyeep—yeep. Ah, what was it crying, so weak and forlorn?

 If mother had lived, might they have married? But there had been nobody for
them to marry. There had been father’s Anglo-Indian friends before he
quarrelled with them. But after that she and Constantia never met a single man
except clergymen. How did one meet men? Or even if they’d met them, how
could they have got to know men well enough to be more than strangers? One read
of people having adventures, being followed, and so on. But nobody had ever
followed Constantia and her. Oh yes, there had been one year at Eastbourne a
mysterious man at their boarding-house who had put a note on the jug of hot
water outside their bedroom door! But by the time Connie had found it the steam
had made the writing too faint to read; they couldn’t even make out to
which of them it was addressed. And he had left next day. And that was all. The
rest had been looking after father, and at the same time keeping out of
father’s way. But now? But now? The thieving sun touched Josephine
gently. She lifted her face. She was drawn over to the window by gentle
beams....

 Until the barrel-organ stopped playing Constantia stayed before the Buddha,
wondering, but not as usual, not vaguely. This time her wonder was like
longing. She remembered the times she had come in here, crept out of bed in her
nightgown when the moon was full, and lain on the floor with her arms
outstretched, as though she was crucified. Why? The big, pale moon had made her
do it. The horrible dancing figures on the carved screen had leered at her and
she hadn’t minded. She remembered too how, whenever they were at the
seaside, she had gone off by herself and got as close to the sea as she could,
and sung something, something she had made up, while she gazed all over that
restless water. There had been this other life, running out, bringing things
home in bags, getting things on approval, discussing them with Jug, and taking
them back to get more things on approval, and arranging father’s trays
and trying not to annoy father. But it all seemed to have happened in a kind of
tunnel. It wasn’t real. It was only when she came out of the tunnel into
the moonlight or by the sea or into a thunderstorm that she really felt
herself. What did it mean? What was it she was always wanting? What did it all
lead to? Now? Now?

 She turned away from the Buddha with one of her vague gestures. She went over
to where Josephine was standing. She wanted to say something to Josephine,
something frightfully important, about—about the future and what....

 “Don’t you think perhaps—” she began.

 But Josephine interrupted her. “I was wondering if now—” she
murmured. They stopped; they waited for each other.

 “Go on, Con,” said Josephine.

 “No, no, Jug; after you,” said Constantia.

 “No, say what you were going to say. You began,” said Josephine.

 “I... I’d rather hear what you were going to say first,” said
Constantia.

 “Don’t be absurd, Con.”

 “Really, Jug.”

 “Connie!”

 “Oh, Jug !”

 A pause. Then Constantia said faintly, “I can’t say what I was
going to say, Jug, because I’ve forgotten what it was... that I was going
to say.”

 Josephine was silent for a moment. She stared at a big cloud where the sun had
been. Then she replied shortly, “I’ve forgotten too.”