“THE FINEST STORY IN THE WORLD”
     

  “O' ever the knightly years were gone
  With the old world to the grave,
  I was a king in Babylon
  And you were a Christian slave.”
                 —W. E. Henley.


      His name was Charlie Mears; he was the only son of his mother who was a
      widow, and he lived in the north of London, coming into the City every day
      to work in a bank. He was twenty years old and suffered from aspirations.
      I met him in a public billiard-saloon where the marker called him by his
      given name, and he called the marker “Bulls-eyes.” Charley explained, a
      little nervously, that he had only come to the place to look on, and since
      looking on at games of skill is not a cheap amusement for the young, I
      suggested that Charlie should go back to his mother.
    

      That was our first step toward better acquaintance. He would call on me
      sometimes in the evenings instead of running about London with his
      fellow-clerks; and before long, speaking of himself as a young man must,
      he told me of his aspirations, which were all literary. He desired to make
      himself an undying name chiefly through verse, though he was not above
      sending stories of love and death to the drop-a-penny-in-the-slot
      journals. It was my fate to sit still while Charlie read me poems of many
      hundred lines, and bulky fragments of plays that would surely shake the
      world. My reward was his unreserved confidence, and the self-revelations
      and troubles of a young man are almost as holy as those of a maiden.
    

      Charlie had never fallen in love, but was anxious to do so on the first
      opportunity; he believed in all things good and all things honorable, but,
      at the same time, was curiously careful to let me see that he knew his way
      about the world as befitted a bank clerk on twenty-five shillings a week.
      He rhymed “dove” with “love” and “moon” with “June,” and devoutly believed
      that they had never so been rhymed before. The long lame gaps in his plays
      he filled up with hasty words of apology and description and swept on,
      seeing all that he intended to do so clearly that he esteemed it already
      done, and turned to me for applause.
    

      I fancy that his mother did not encourage his aspirations, and I know that
      his writing-table at home was the edge of his washstand. This he told me
      almost at the outset of our acquaintance; when he was ravaging my
      bookshelves, and a little before I was implored to speak the truth as to
      his chances of “writing something really great, you know.” Maybe I
      encouraged him too much, for, one night, he called on me, his eyes flaming
      with excitement, and said breathlessly:
    

      “Do you mind—can you let me stay here and write all this evening? I
      won't interrupt you, I won't really. There's no place for me to write in
      at my mother's.”
     

      “What's the trouble?” I said, knowing well what that trouble was.
    

      “I've a notion in my head that would make the most splendid story that was
      ever written. Do let me write it out here. It's such a notion!”
     

      There was no resisting the appeal. I set him a table; he hardly thanked
      me, but plunged into the work at once. For half an hour the pen scratched
      without stopping. Then Charlie sighed and tugged his hair. The scratching
      grew slower, there were more erasures, and at last ceased. The finest
      story in the world would not come forth.
    

      “It looks such awful rot now” he said, mournfully. “And yet it seemed so
      good when I was thinking about it. What's wrong?”
     

      I could not dishearten him by saying the truth. So I answered: “Perhaps
      you don't feel in the mood for writing.”
     

      “Yes I do—except when I look at this stuff. Ugh!”
     

      “Read me what you've done,” I said. He read, and it was wondrous bad and
      he paused at all the specially turgid sentences, expecting a little
      approval; for he was proud of those sentences, as I knew he would be.
    

      “It needs compression,” I suggested, cautiously.
    

      “I hate cutting my things down. I don't think you could alter a word here
      without spoiling the sense. It reads better aloud than when I was writing
      it.”
     

      “Charlie, you're suffering from an alarming disease afflicting a numerous
      class. Put the thing by, and tackle it again in a week.”
     

      “I want to do it at once. What do you think of it?”
     

      “How can I judge from a half-written tale? Tell me the story as it lies in
      your head.”
     

      Charlie told, and in the telling there was everything that his ignorance
      had so carefully prevented from escaping into the written word. I looked
      at him, and wondering whether it were possible, that he did not know the
      originality, the power of the notion that had come in his way? It was
      distinctly a Notion among notions. Men had been puffed up with pride by
      notions not a tithe as excellent and practicable. But Charlie babbled on
      serenely, interrupting the current of pure fancy with samples of horrible
      sentences that he purposed to use. I heard him out to the end. It would be
      folly to allow his idea to remain in his own inept hands, when I could do
      so much with it. Not all that could be done indeed; but, oh so much!
    

      “What do you think?” he said, at last. “I fancy I shall call it 'The Story
      of a Ship.'”
     

      “I think the idea's pretty good; but you won't Be able to handle it for
      ever so long. Now I—”
     

      “Would it be of any use to you? Would you care to take it? I should be
      proud,” said Charlie, promptly.
    

      There are few things sweeter in this world than the guileless, hot-headed,
      intemperate, open admiration of a junior. Even a woman in her blindest
      devotion does not fall into the gait of the man she adores, tilt her
      bonnet to the angle at which he wears his hat, or interlard her speech
      with his pet oaths. And Charlie did all these things. Still it was
      necessary to salve my conscience before I possessed myself of Charlie's
      thoughts.
    

      “Let's make a bargain. I'll give you a fiver for the notion,” I said.
    

      Charlie became a bank-clerk at once.
    

      “Oh, that's impossible. Between two pals, you know, if I may call you so,
      and speaking as a man of the world, I couldn't. Take the notion if it's
      any use to you. I've heaps more.”
     

      He had—none knew this better than I—but they were the notions
      of other men.
    

      “Look at it as a matter of business—between men of the world,” I
      returned. “Five pounds will buy you any number of poetry-books. Business
      is business, and you may be sure I shouldn't give that price unless—”
     

      “Oh, if you put it that way,” said Charlie, visibly moved by the thought
      of the books. The bargain was clinched with an agreement that he should at
      unstated intervals come to me with all the notions that he possessed,
      should have a table of his own to write at, and unquestioned right to
      inflict upon me all his poems and fragments of poems. Then I said, “Now
      tell me how you came by this idea.”
     

      “It came by itself.” Charlie's eyes opened a little.
    

      “Yes, but you told me a great deal about the hero that you must have read
      before somewhere.”
     

      “I haven't any time for reading, except when you let me sit here, and on
      Sundays I'm on my bicycle or down the river all day. There's nothing wrong
      about the hero, is there?”
     

      “Tell me again and I shall understand clearly. You say that your hero went
      pirating. How did he live?”
     

      “He was on the lower deck of this ship-thing that I was telling you
      about.”
     

      “What sort of ship?”
     

      “It was the kind rowed with oars, and the sea spurts through the oar-holes
      and the men row sitting up to their knees in water. Then there's a bench
      running down between the two lines of oars and an overseer with a whip
      walks up and down the bench to make the men work.”
     

      “How do you know that?”
     

      “It's in the table. There's a rope running overhead, looped to the upper
      deck, for the overseer to catch hold of when the ship rolls. When the
      overseer misses the rope once and falls among the rowers, remember the
      hero laughs at him and gets licked for it. He's chained to his oar of
      course—the hero.”
     

      “How is he chained?”
     

      “With an iron band round his waist fixed to the bench he sits on, and a
      sort of handcuff on his left wrist chaining him to the oar. He's on the
      lower deck where the worst men are sent, and the only light comes from the
      hatchways and through the oar-holes. Can't you imagine the sunlight just
      squeezing through between the handle and the hole and wobbling about as
      the ship moves?”
     

      “I can, but I can't imagine your imagining it.”
     

      “How could it be any other way? Now you listen to me. The long oars on the
      upper deck are managed by four men to each bench, the lower ones by three,
      and the lowest of all by two. Remember it's quite dark on the lowest deck
      and all the men there go mad. When a man dies at his oar on that deck he
      isn't thrown overboard, but cut up in his chains and stuffed through the
      oar-hole in little pieces.”
     

      “Why?” I demanded, amazed, not so much at the information as the tone of
      command in which it was flung out.
    

      “To save trouble and to frighten the others. It needs two overseers to
      drag a man's body up to the top deck; and if the men at the lower deck
      oars were left alone, of course they'd stop rowing and try to pull up the
      benches by all standing up together in their chains.”
     

      “You've a most provident imagination. Where have you been reading about
      galleys and galley-slaves?”
     

      “Nowhere that I remember. I row a little when I get the chance. But,
      perhaps, if you say so, I may have read something.”
     

      He went away shortly afterward to deal with booksellers, and I wondered
      how a bank clerk aged twenty could put into my hands with a profligate
      abundance of detail, all given with absolute assurance, the story of
      extravagant and bloodthirsty adventure, riot, piracy, and death in unnamed
      seas. He had led his hero a desperate dance through revolt against the
      overseas, to command of a ship of his own, and ultimate establishment of a
      kingdom on an island “somewhere in the sea, you know”; and, delighted with
      my paltry five pounds, had gone out to buy the notions of other men, that
      these might teach him how to write. I had the consolation of knowing that
      this notion was mine by right of purchase, and I thought that I could make
      something of it.
    

      When next he came to me he was drunk—royally drunk on many poets for
      the first time revealed to him. His pupils were dilated, his words tumbled
      over each other, and he wrapped himself in quotations. Most of all was he
      drunk with Longfellow.
    

      “Isn't it splendid? Isn't it superb?” he cried, after hasty greetings.
    

      “Listen to this—
    

      “'Wouldst thou,' so the helmsman answered, 'Know the secret of the sea?
      Only those who brave its dangers Comprehend its mystery.'
    

      “By gum!
    

      “'Only those who brave its dangers Comprehend its mystery.'” he repeated
      twenty times, walking up and down the room and forgetting me. “But I can
      understand it too,” he said to himself. “I don't know how to thank you for
      that fiver. And this; listen—
    

      “'I remember the black wharves and the ships And the sea-tides tossing
      free, And the Spanish sailors with bearded lips, And the beauty and
      mystery of the ships, And the magic of the sea.'
    

      “I haven't braved any dangers, but I feel as if I knew all about it.”
     

      “You certainly seem to have a grip of the sea. Have you ever seen it?”
     

      “When I was a little chap I went to Brighton once; we used to live in
      Coventry, though, before we came to London. I never saw it.
    

      “'When descends on the Atlantic The gigantic Storm-wind of the Equinox.'”
     

      He shook me by the shoulder to make me understand the passion that was
      shaking himself.
    

      “When that storm comes,” he continued, “I think that all the oars in the
      ship that I was talking about get broken, and the rowers have their chests
      smashed in by the bucking oar-heads. By the way, have you done anything
      with that notion of mine yet?”
     

      “No. I was waiting to hear more of it from you. Tell me how in the world
      you're so certain about the fittings of the ship. You know nothing of
      ships.”
     

      “I don't know. It's as real as anything to me until I try to write it
      down. I was thinking about it only last night in bed, after you had loaned
      me 'Treasure Island'; and I made up a whole lot of new things to go into
      the story.”
     

      “What sort of things?”
     

      “About the food the men ate; rotten figs and black beans and wine in a
      skin bag, passed from bench to bench.”
     

      “Was the ship built so long ago as that?”
     

      “As what? I don't know whether it was long ago or not. It's only a notion,
      but sometimes it seems just as real as if it was true. Do I bother you
      with talking about it?”
     

      “Not in the least. Did you make up anything else?”
     

      “Yes, but it's nonsense.” Charlie flushed a little.
    

      “Never mind; let's hear about it.”
     

      “Well, I was thinking over the story, and after awhile I got out of bed
      and wrote down on a piece of paper the sort of stuff the men might be
      supposed to scratch on their oars with the edges of their handcuffs. It
      seemed to make the thing more lifelike. It is so real to me, y'know.”
     

      “Have you the paper on you?”
     

      “Ye-es, but what's the use of showing it? It's only a lot of scratches.
      All the same, we might have 'em reproduced in the book on the front page.”
     

      “I'll attend to those details. Show me what your men wrote.”
     

      He pulled out of his pocket a sheet of note-paper, with a single line of
      scratches upon it, and I put this carefully away.
    

      “What is it supposed to mean in English?” I said.
    

      “Oh, I don't know. Perhaps it means 'I'm beastly tired.' It's great
      nonsense,” he repeated, “but all those men in the ship seem as real people
      to me. Do do something to the notion soon; I should like to see it written
      and printed.”
     

      “But all you've told me would make a long book.”
     

      “Make it then. You've only to sit down and write it out.”
     

      “Give me a little time. Have you any more notions?”
     

      “Not just now. I'm reading all the books I've bought. They're splendid.”
     

      When he had left I looked at the sheet of note-paper with the inscription
      upon it. Then I took my head tenderly between both hands, to make certain
      that it was not coming off or turning round.
    

      Then—but there seemed to be no interval between quitting my rooms
      and finding myself arguing with a policeman outside a door marked Private
      in a corridor of the British Museum. All I demanded, as politely as
      possible, was “the Greek antiquity man.” The policeman knew nothing except
      the rules of the Museum, and it became necessary to forage through all the
      houses and offices inside the gates. An elderly gentleman called away from
      his lunch put an end to my search by holding the note-paper between finger
      and thumb and sniffing at it scornfully.
    

      “What does this mean? H'mm,” said he. “So far as I can ascertain it is an
      attempt to write extremely corrupt Greek on the part”—here he glared
      at me with intention—“of an extremely illiterate—ah—person.”
       He read slowly from the paper, “Pollock, Erckman, Tauchnitz, Henniker”—four
      names familiar to me.
    

      “Can you tell me what the corruption is supposed to mean—the gist of
      the thing?” I asked.
    

      “'I have been—many times—overcome with weariness in this
      particular employment. That is the meaning.'” He returned me the paper,
      and I fled without a word of thanks, explanation, or apology.
    

      I might have been excused for forgetting much. To me of all men had been
      given the chance to write the most marvelous tale in the world, nothing
      less than the story of a Greek galley-slave, as told by himself. Small
      wonder that his dreaming had seemed real to Charlie. The Fates that are so
      careful to shut the doors of each successive life behind us had, in this
      case, been neglectful, and Charlie was looking, though that he did not
      know, where never man had been permitted to look with full knowledge since
      Time began. Above all he was absolutely ignorant of the knowledge sold to
      me for five pounds; and he would retain that ignorance, for bank-clerks do
      not understand metempsychosis, and a sound commercial education does not
      include Greek. He would supply me—here I capered among the dumb gods
      of Egypt and laughed in their battered faces—with material to make
      my tale sure—so sure that the world would hail it as an impudent and
      vamped fiction. And I—I alone would know that it was absolutely and
      literally true. I alone held this jewel to my hand for the cutting and
      polishing.
    

      Therefore I danced again among the gods till a policeman saw me and took
      steps in my direction.
    

      It remained now only to encourage Charlie to talk, and here there was no
      difficulty. But I had forgotten those accursed books of poetry. He came to
      me time after time, as useless as a surcharged phonograph—drunk on
      Byron, Shelley, or Keats. Knowing now what the boy had been in his past
      lives, and desperately anxious not to lose one word of his babble, I could
      not hide from him my respect and interest. He misconstrued both into
      respect for the present soul of Charlie Mears, to whom life was as new as
      it was to Adam, and interest in his readings; and stretched my patience to
      breaking point by reciting poetry—not his own now, but that of
      others. I wished every English poet blotted out of the memory of mankind.
      I blasphemed the mightiest names of song because they had drawn Charlie
      from the path of direct narrative, and would, later, spur him to imitate
      them; but I choked down my impatience until the first flood of enthusiasm
      should have spent itself and the boy returned to his dreams.
    

      “What's the use of my telling you what I think, when these chaps wrote
      things for the angels to read?” he growled, one evening. “Why don't you
      write something like theirs?”
     

      “I don't think you're treating me quite fairly,” I said, speaking under
      strong restraint.
    

      “I've given you the story,” he said, shortly replunging into “Lara.”
     

      “But I want the details.”
     

      “The things I make up about that damned ship that you call a galley?
      They're quite easy. You can just make 'em up yourself. Turn up the gas a
      little, I want to go on reading.”
     

      I could have broken the gas globe over his head for his amazing stupidity.
      I could indeed make up things for myself did I only know what Charlie did
      not know that he knew. But since the doors were shut behind me I could
      only wait his youthful pleasure and strive to keep him in good temper. One
      minute's want of guard might spoil a priceless revelation: now and again
      he would toss his books aside—he kept them in my rooms, for his
      mother would have been shocked at the waste of good money had she seen
      them—and launched into his sea dreams. Again I cursed all the poets
      of England. The plastic mind of the bank-clerk had been overlaid, colored
      and distorted by that which he had read, and the result as delivered was a
      confused tangle of other voices most like the muttered song through a City
      telephone in the busiest part of the day.
    

      He talked of the galley—his own galley had he but known it—with
      illustrations borrowed from the “Bride of Abydos.” He pointed the
      experiences of his hero with quotations from “The Corsair,” and threw in
      deep and desperate moral reflections from “Cain” and “Manfred,” expecting
      me to use them all. Only when the talk turned on Longfellow were the
      jarring cross-currents dumb, and I knew that Charlie was speaking the
      truth as he remembered it.
    

      “What do you think of this?” I said one evening, as soon as I understood
      the medium in which his memory worked best, and, before he could
      expostulate read him the whole of “The Saga of King Olaf!”
     

      He listened open-mouthed, flushed his hands drumming on the back of the
      sofa where he lay, till I came to the Songs of Emar Tamberskelver and the
      verse:
    

      “Emar then, the arrow taking From the loosened string, Answered: 'That was
      Norway breaking 'Neath thy hand, O King.'”
     

      He gasped with pure delight of sound.
    

      “That's better than Byron, a little,” I ventured.
    

      “Better? Why it's true! How could he have known?”
     

      I went back and repeated:
    

    “'What was that?' said Olaf, standing
    On the quarter-deck,
    'Something heard I like the stranding
    Of a shattered wreck.'”
 

      “How could he have known how the ships crash and the oars rip out and go
      z-zzp all along the line? Why only the other night—But go back
      please and read 'The Skerry of Shrieks' again.”
     

      “No, I'm tired. Let's talk. What happened the other night?”
     

      “I had an awful nightmare about that galley of ours. I dreamed I was
      drowned in a fight. You see we ran alongside another ship in harbor. The
      water was dead still except where our oars whipped it up. You know where I
      always sit in the galley?” He spoke haltingly at first, under a fine
      English fear of being laughed at.
    

      “No. That's news to me,” I answered, meekly, my heart beginning to beat.
    

      “On the fourth oar from the bow on the right side on the upper deck. There
      were four of us at the oar, all chained. I remember watching the water and
      trying to get my handcuffs off before the row began. Then we closed up on
      the other ship, and all their fighting men jumped over our bulwarks, and
      my bench broke and I was pinned down with the three other fellows on top
      of me, and the big oar jammed across our backs.”
     

      “Well?” Charlie's eyes were alive and alight. He was looking at the wall
      behind my chair.
    

      “I don't know how we fought. The men were trampling all over my back, and
      I lay low. Then our rowers on the left side—tied to their oars, you
      know—began to yell and back water. I could hear the water sizzle,
      and we spun round like a cockchafer and I knew, lying where I was, that
      there was a galley coming up bow-on, to ram us on the left side. I could
      just lift up my head and see her sail over the bulwarks. We wanted to meet
      her bow to bow, but it was too late. We could only turn a little bit
      because the galley on our right had hooked herself on to us and stopped
      our moving. Then, by gum! there was a crash! Our left oars began to break
      as the other galley, the moving one y'know, stuck her nose into them. Then
      the lower-deck oars shot up through the deck-planking, butt first, and one
      of them jumped clean up into the air and came down again close to my
      head.”
     

      “How was that managed?”
     

      “The moving galley's bow was plunking them back through their own
      oarholes, and I could hear the devil of a shindy in the decks below. Then
      her nose caught us nearly in the middle, and we tilted sideways, and the
      fellows in the right-hand galley unhitched their hooks and ropes, and
      threw things on to our upper deck—arrows, and hot pitch or something
      that stung, and we went up and up and up on the left side, and the right
      side dipped, and I twisted my head round and saw the water stand still as
      it topped the right bulwarks, and then it curled over and crashed down on
      the whole lot of us on the right side, and I felt it hit my back, and I
      woke.”
     

      “One minute, Charlie. When the sea topped the bulwarks, what did it look
      like?” I had my reasons for asking. A man of my acquaintance had once gone
      down with a leaking ship in a still sea, and had seen the water-level
      pause for an instant ere it fell on the deck.
    

      “It looked just like a banjo-string drawn tight, and it seemed to stay
      there for years,” said Charlie.
    

      Exactly! The other man had said: “It looked like a silver wire laid down
      along the bulwarks, and I thought it was never going to break.” He had
      paid everything except the bare life for this little valueless piece of
      knowledge, and I had traveled ten thousand weary miles to meet him and
      take his knowledge at second hand. But Charlie, the bank-clerk, on
      twenty-five shillings a week, he who had never been out of sight of a
      London omnibus, knew it all. It was no consolation to me that once in his
      lives he had been forced to die for his gains. I also must have died
      scores of times, but behind me, because I could have used my knowledge,
      the doors were shut.
    

      “And then?” I said, trying to put away the devil of envy.
    

      “The funny thing was, though, in all the mess I didn't feel a bit
      astonished or frightened. It seemed as if I'd been in a good many fights,
      because I told my next man so when the row began. But that cad of an
      overseer on my deck wouldn't unloose our chains and give us a chance. He
      always said that we'd all Be set free after a battle, but we never were;
      We never were.” Charlie shook his head mournfully.
    

      “What a scoundrel!”
     

      “I should say he was. He never gave us enough to eat, and sometimes we
      were so thirsty that we used to drink salt-water. I can taste that
      salt-water still.''
    

      “Now tell me something about the harbor where the fight was fought.”
     

      “I didn't dream about that. I know it was a harbor, though; because we
      were tied up to a ring on a white wall and all the face of the stone under
      water was covered with wood to prevent our ram getting chipped when the
      tide made us rock.”
     

      “That's curious. Our hero commanded the galley? Didn't he?”
     

      “Didn't he just! He stood by the bows and shouted like a good 'un. He was
      the man who killed the overseer.”
     

      “But you were all drowned together, Charlie, weren't you?”
     

      “I can't make that fit quite,” he said with a puzzled look. “The galley
      must have gone down with all hands and yet I fancy that the hero went on
      living afterward. Perhaps he climbed into the attacking ship. I wouldn't
      see that, of course. I was dead, you know.”
     

      He shivered slightly and protested that he could remember no more.
    

      I did not press him further, but to satisfy myself that he lay in
      ignorance of the workings of his own mind, deliberately introduced him to
      Mortimer Collins's “Transmigration,” and gave him a sketch of the plot
      before he opened the pages.
    

      “What rot it all is!” he said, frankly, at the end of an hour. “I don't
      understand his nonsense about the Red Planet Mars and the King, and the
      rest of it. Chuck me the Longfellow again.”
     

      I handed him the book and wrote out as much as I could remember of his
      description of the sea-fight, appealing to him from time to time for
      confirmation of fact or detail. He would answer without raising his eyes
      from the book, as assuredly as though all his knowledge lay before flint
      on the printed page. I spoke under the normal key of my voice that the
      current might not be broken, and I know that he was not aware of what he
      was saying, for his thoughts were out on the sea with Longfellow.
    

      “Charlie,” I asked, “when the rowers on the galleys mutinied how did they
      kill their overseers?”
     

      “Tore up the benches and brained 'em. That happened when a heavy sea was
      running. An overseer on the lower deck slipped from the centre plank and
      fell among the rowers. They choked him to death against the side of the
      ship with their chained hands quite quietly, and it was too dark for the
      other overseer to see what had happened. When he asked, he was pulled down
      too and choked, and the lower deck fought their way up deck by deck, with
      the pieces of the broken benches banging behind 'em. How they howled!”
     

      “And what happened after that?”
     

      “I don't know. The hero went away—red hair and red beard and all.
      That was after he had captured our galley, I think.”
     

      The sound of my voice irritated him, and he motioned slightly with his
      left hand as a man does when interruption jars.
    

      “You never told me he was redheaded before, or that he captured your
      galley,” I said, after a discreet interval.
    

      Charlie did not raise his eyes.
    

      “He was as red as a red bear,” said he, abstractedly. “He came from the
      north; they said so in the galley when he looked for rowers—not
      slaves, but free men. Afterward—years and years afterward—news
      came from another ship, or else he came back”—His lips moved in
      silence. He was rapturously retasting some poem before him.
    

      “Where had he been, then?” I was almost whispering that the sentence might
      come gentle to whichever section of Charlie's brain was working on my
      behalf.
    

      “To the Beaches—the Long and Wonderful Beaches!” was the reply,
      after a minute of silence.
    

      “To Furdurstrandi?” I asked, tingling from head to foot.
    

      “Yes, to Furdurstrandi,” he pronounced the word in a new fashion “And I
      too saw”—The voice failed.
    

      “Do you know what you have said?” I shouted, incautiously.
    

      He lifted his eyes, fully roused now. “No!” he snapped. “I wish you'd let
      a chap go on reading. Hark to this:
    

      “'But Othere, the old sea captain, He neither paused nor stirred Till the
      king listened, and then
    

   Once more took up his pen
   And wrote down every word.

   “'And to the King of the Saxons
   In witness of the truth,
   Raising his noble head,
   He stretched his brown hand and said,
   “Behold this walrus tooth.”
 

      “By Jove, what chaps those must have been, to go sailing all over the shop
      never knowing where they'd fetch the land! Hah!”
     

      “Charlie,” I pleaded, “if you'll only be sensible for a minute or two I'll
      make our hero in our tale every inch as good as Othere.”
     

      “Umph! Longfellow wrote that poem. I don't care about writing things any
      more. I want to read.” He was thoroughly out of tune now, and raging over
      my own ill-luck, I left him.
    

      Conceive yourself at the door of the world's treasure-house guarded by a
      child—an idle irresponsible child playing knuckle-bones—on
      whose favor depends the gift of the key, and you will imagine one-half my
      torment. Till that evening Charlie had spoken nothing that might not lie
      within the experiences of a Greek galley-slave. But now, or there was no
      virtue in books, he had talked of some desperate adventure of the Vikings,
      of Thorfin Karlsefne's sailing to Wineland, which is America, in the ninth
      or tenth century. The battle in the harbor he had seen; and his own death
      he had described. But this was a much more startling plunge into the past.
      Was it possible that he had skipped half a dozen lives and was then dimly
      remembering some episode of a thousand years later? It was a maddening
      jumble, and the worst of it was that Charlie Mears in his normal condition
      was the last person in the world to clear it up. I could only wait and
      watch, but I went to bed that night full of the wildest imaginings. There
      was nothing that was not possible if Charlie's detestable memory only held
      good.
    

      I might rewrite the Saga of Thorfin Karlsefne as it had never been written
      before, might tell the story of the first discovery of America, myself the
      discoverer. But I was entirely at Charlie's mercy, and so long as there
      was a three-and-six-penny Bohn volume within his reach Charlie would not
      tell. I dared not curse him openly; I hardly dared jog his memory, for I
      was dealing with the experiences of a thousand years ago, told through the
      mouth of a boy of today; and a boy of today is affected by every change of
      tone and gust of opinion, so that he lies even when he desires to speak
      the truth.
    

      I saw no more of him for nearly a week. When next I met him it was in
      Gracechurch Street with a billbook chained to his waist.
    

      Business took him over London Bridge and I accompanied him. He was very
      full of the importance of that book and magnified it.
    

      As we passed over the Thames we paused to look at a steamer unloading
      great slabs of white and brown marble. A barge drifted under the steamer's
      stern and a lonely cow in that barge bellowed.
    

      Charlie's face changed from the face of the bank-clerk to that of an
      unknown and—though he would not have believed this—a much
      shrewder man. He flung out his arm across the parapet of the bridge, and
      laughing very loudly, said: “When they heard our bulls bellow the
      Skroelings ran away!”
     

      I waited only for an instant, but the barge and the cow had disappeared
      under the bows of the steamer before I answered.
    

      “Charlie, what do you suppose are Skroelings?”
     

      “Never heard of 'em before. They sound like a new kind of seagull. What a
      chap you are for asking questions!” he replied. “I have to go to the
      cashier of the Omnibus Company yonder. Will you wait for me and we can
      lunch somewhere together? I've a notion for a poem.”
     

      “No, thanks. I'm off. You're sure you know nothing about Skroelings?”
     

      “Not unless he's been entered for the Liverpool Handicap.” He nodded and
      disappeared in the crowd.
    

      Now it is written in the Saga of Eric the Red or that of Thorfin
      Karlsefne, that nine hundred years ago when Karlsefne's galleys came to
      Leif's booths, which Leif had erected in the unknown land called Markland,
      which may or may not have been Rhode Island, the Skroelings—and the
      Lord He knows who these may or may not have been—came to trade with
      the Vikings, and ran away because they were frightened at the bellowing of
      the cattle which Thorfin had brought with him in the ships. But what in
      the world could a Greek slave know of that affair? I wandered up and down
      among the streets trying to unravel the mystery, and the more I considered
      it, the more baffling it grew. One thing only seemed certain and that
      certainty took away my breath for the moment. If I came to full knowledge
      of anything at all, it would not be one life of the soul in Charlie
      Mears's body, but half a dozen—half a dozen several and separate
      existences spent on blue water in the morning of the world!
    

      Then I walked round the situation.
    

      Obviously if I used my knowledge I should stand alone and unapproachable
      until all men were as wise as myself. That would be something, but manlike
      I was ungrateful. It seemed bitterly unfair that Charlie's memory should
      fail me when I needed it most.
    

      Great Powers above—I looked up at them through the fog smoke—did
      the Lords of Life and Death know what this meant to me? Nothing less than
      eternal fame of the best kind; that comes from One, and is shared by one
      alone. I would be content—remembering Clive, I stood astounded at my
      own moderation,—with the mere right to tell one story, to work out
      one little contribution to the light literature of the day. If Charlie
      were permitted full recollection for one hour—for sixty short
      minutes—of existences that had extended over a thousand years—I
      would forego all profit and honor from all that I should make of his
      speech. I would take no share in the commotion that would follow
      throughout the particular corner of the earth that calls itself “the
      world.” The thing should be put forth anonymously. Nay, I would make other
      men believe that they had written it. They would hire bull-hided
      self-advertising Englishmen to bellow it abroad. Preachers would found a
      fresh conduct of life upon it, swearing that it was new and that they had
      lifted the fear of death from all mankind. Every Orientalist in Europe
      would patronize it discursively with Sanskrit and Pali texts. Terrible
      women would invent unclean variants of the men's belief for the elevation
      of their sisters. Churches and religions would war over it. Between the
      hailing and re-starting of an omnibus I foresaw the scuffles that would
      arise among half a dozen denominations all professing “the doctrine of the
      True Metempsychosis as applied to the world and the New Era”; and saw,
      too, the respectable English newspapers shying, like frightened kine, over
      the beautiful simplicity of the tale. The mind leaped forward a hundred—two
      hundred—a thousand years. I saw with sorrow that men would mutilate
      and garble the story; that rival creeds would turn it upside down till, at
      last, the western world which clings to the dread of death more closely
      than the hope of life, would set it aside as an interesting superstition
      and stampede after some faith so long forgotten that it seemed altogether
      new. Upon this I changed the terms of the bargain that I would make with
      the Lords of Life and Death. Only let me know, let me write, the story
      with sure knowledge that I wrote the truth, and I would burn the
      manuscript as a solemn sacrifice. Five minutes after the last line was
      written I would destroy it all. But I must be allowed to write it with
      absolute certainty.
    

      There was no answer. The flaming colors of an Aquarium poster caught my
      eye and I wondered whether it would be wise or prudent to lure Charlie
      into the hands of the professional mesmerist, and whether, if he were
      under his power, he would speak of his past lives. If he did, and if
      people believed him—but Charlie would be frightened and flustered,
      or made conceited by the interviews. In either case he would begin to lie,
      through fear or vanity. He was safest in my own hands.
    

      “They are very funny fools, your English,” said a voice at my elbow, and
      turning round I recognized a casual acquaintance, a young Bengali law
      student, called Grish Chunder, whose father had sent him to England to
      become civilized. The old man was a retired native official, and on an
      income of five pounds a month contrived to allow his son two hundred
      pounds a year, and the run of his teeth in a city where he could pretend
      to be the cadet of a royal house, and tell stories of the brutal Indian
      bureaucrats who ground the faces of the poor.
    

      Grish Chunder was a young, fat, full-bodied Bengali dressed with
      scrupulous care in frock coat, tall hat, light trousers and tan gloves.
      But I had known him in the days when the brutal Indian Government paid for
      his university education, and he contributed cheap sedition to Sachi
      Durpan, and intrigued with the wives of his schoolmates.
    

      “That is very funny and very foolish,” he said, nodding at the poster. “I
      am going down to the Northbrook Club. Will you come too?”
     

      I walked with him for some time. “You are not well,” he said. “What is
      there in your mind? You do not talk.”
     

      “Grish Chunder, you've been too well educated to believe in a God, haven't
      you?”
     

      “Oah, yes, here! But when I go home I must conciliate popular
      superstition, and make ceremonies of purification, and my women will
      anoint idols.”
     

      “And bang up tulsi and feast the purohit, and take you back into caste
      again and make a good khuttri of you again, you advanced social
      Free-thinker. And you'll eat desi food, and like it all, from the smell in
      the courtyard to the mustard oil over you.”
     

      “I shall very much like it,” said Grish Chunder, unguardedly. “Once a
      Hindu—always a Hindu. But I like to know what the English think they
      know.”
     

      “I'll tell you something that one Englishman knows. It's an old tale to
      you.”
     

      I began to tell the story of Charlie in English, but Grish Chunder put a
      question in the vernacular, and the history went forward naturally in the
      tongue best suited for its telling. After all it could never have been
      told in English. Grish Chunder heard me, nodding from time to time, and
      then came up to my rooms where I finished the tale.
    

      “Beshak,” he said, philosophically. “Lekin darwaza band hai. (Without
      doubt, but the door is shut.) I have heard of this remembering of previous
      existences among my people. It is of course an old tale with us, but, to
      happen to an Englishman—a cow-fed Malechk—an outcast. By Jove,
      that is most peculiar!”
     

      “Outcast yourself, Grish Chunder! You eat cow-beef every day. Let's think
      the thing over. The boy remembers his incarnations.”
     

      “Does he know that?” said Grish Chunder, quietly, swinging his legs as he
      sat on my table. He was speaking in English now.
    

      “He does not know anything. Would I speak to you if he did? Go on!”
     

      “There is no going on at all. If you tell that to your friends they will
      say you are mad and put it in the papers. Suppose, now, you prosecute for
      libel.”
     

      “Let's leave that out of the question entirely. Is there any chance of his
      being made to speak?”
     

      “There is a chance. Oah, yess! But if he spoke it would mean that all this
      world would end now—instanto—fall down on your head. These
      things are not allowed, you know. As I said, the door is shut.”
     

      “Not a ghost of a chance?”
     

      “How can there be? You are a Christian, and it is forbidden to eat, in
      your books, of the Tree of Life, or else you would never die. How shall
      you all fear death if you all know what your friend does not know that he
      knows? I am afraid to be kicked, but I am not afraid to die, because I
      know what I know. You are not afraid to be kicked, but you are afraid to
      die. If you were not, by God! you English would be all over the shop in an
      hour, upsetting the balances of power, and making commotions. It would not
      be good. But no fear. He will remember a little and a little less, and he
      will call it dreams. Then he will forget altogether. When I passed my
      First Arts Examination in Calcutta that was all in the cram-book on
      Wordsworth. Trailing clouds of glory, you know.”
     

      “This seems to be an exception to the rule.”
     

      “There are no exceptions to rules. Some are not so hard-looking as others,
      but they are all the same when you touch. If this friend of yours said
      so-and-so and so-and-so, indicating that he remembered all his lost lives,
      or one piece of a lost life, he would not be in the bank another hour. He
      would be what you called sack because he was mad, and they would send him
      to an asylum for lunatics. You can see that, my friend.”
     

      “Of course I can, but I wasn't thinking of him. His name need never appear
      in the story.”
     

      “Ah! I see. That story will never be written. You can try.”
     

      “I am going to.”
     

      “For your own credit and for the sake of money, of course?”
     

      “No. For the sake of writing the story. On my honor that will be all.”
     

      “Even then there is no chance. You cannot play with the Gods. It is a very
      pretty story now. As they say, Let it go on that—I mean at that. Be
      quick; he will not last long.”
     

      “How do you mean?”
     

      “What I say. He has never, so far, thought about a woman.”
     

      “Hasn't he though!” I remembered some of Charlie's confidences.
    

      “I mean no woman has thought about him. When that comes; bushogya—all
      up' I know. There are millions of women here. Housemaids, for instance.”
     

      I winced at the thought of my story being ruined by a housemaid.
    

      And yet nothing was more probable.
    

      Grish Chunder grinned.
    

      “Yes—also pretty girls—cousins of his house, and perhaps not
      of his house. One kiss that he gives back again and remembers will cure
      all this nonsense or else”—
    

      “Or else what? Remember he does not know that he knows.”
     

      “I know that. Or else, if nothing happens he will become immersed in the
      trade and the financial speculations like the rest. It must be so. You can
      see that it must be so. But the woman will come first, I think.”
     

      There was a rap at the door, and Charlie charged in impetuously. He had
      been released from office, and by the look in his eyes I could see that he
      had come over for a long talk; most probably with poems in his pockets.
      Charlie's poems were very wearying, but sometimes they led him to talk
      about the galley.
    

      Grish Chunder looked at him keenly for a minute.
    

      “I beg your pardon,” Charlie said, uneasily; “I didn't know you had any
      one with you.”
     

      “I am going,” said Grish Chunder.
    

      He drew me into the lobby as he departed.
    

      “That is your man,” he said, quickly. “I tell you he will never speak all
      you wish. That is rot—bosh. But he would be most good to make to see
      things. Suppose now we pretend that it was only play”—I had never
      seen Grish Chunder so excited—“and pour the ink-pool into his hand.
      Eh, what do you think? I tell you that he could see anything that a man
      could see. Let me get the ink and the camphor. He is a seer and he will
      tell us very many things.”
     

      “He may be all you say, but I'm not going to trust him to your Gods and
      devils.”
     

      “It will not hurt him. He will only feel a little stupid and dull when he
      wakes up. You have seen boys look into the ink-pool before.”
     

      “That is the reason why I am not going to see it any more. You'd better
      go, Grish Chunder.”
     

      He went, declaring far down the staircase that it was throwing away my
      only chance of looking into the future.
    

      This left me unmoved, for I was concerned for the past, and no peering of
      hypnotized boys into mirrors and ink-pools would help me do that. But I
      recognized Grish Chunder's point of view and sympathized with it.
    

      “What a big black brute that was!” said Charlie, when I returned to him.
      “Well, look here, I've just done a poem; dil it instead of playing
      dominoes after lunch. May I read it?”
     

      “Let me read it to myself.”
     

      “Then you miss the proper expression. Besides, you always make my things
      sound as if the rhymes were all wrong.”
     

      “Read it aloud, then. You're like the rest of 'em.”
     

      Charlie mouthed me his poem, and it was not much worse than the average of
      his verses. He had been reading his book faithfully, but he was not
      pleased when I told him that I preferred my Longfellow undiluted with
      Charlie.
    

      Then we began to go through the MS. line by line; Charlie parrying every
      objection and correction with: “Yes, that may be better, but you don't
      catch what I'm driving at.”
     

      Charlie was, in one way at least, very like one kind of poet.
    

      There was a pencil scrawl at the back of the paper and “What's that?” I
      said.
    

      “Oh that's not poetry 't all. It's some rot I wrote last night before I
      went to bed and it was too much bother to hunt for rhymes; so I made it a
      sort of a blank verse instead.”
     

      Here is Charlie's “blank verse”:
    

      “We pulled for you when the wind was against us and the sails were low.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “We ate bread and onions when you took towns or ran aboard quickly when
      you were beaten back by the foe,
    

      “The captains walked up and down the deck in fair weather singing songs,
      but we were below,
    

      “We fainted with our chins on the oars and you did not see that we were
      idle for we still swung to and fro.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “The salt made the oar handles like sharkskin; our knees were cut to the
      bone with salt cracks; our hair was stuck to our foreheads; and our lips
      were cut to our gums and you whipped us because we could not row.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “But in a little time we shall run out of the portholes as the water runs
      along the oarblade, and though you tell the others to row after us you
      will never catch us till you catch the oar-thresh and tie up the winds in
      the belly of the sail. Aho! “Will you never let us go?”
     

      “H'm. What's oar-thresh, Charlie?”
     

      “The water washed up by the oars. That's the sort of song they might sing
      in the galley, y'know. Aren't you ever going to finish that story and give
      me some of the profits?”
     

      “It depends on yourself. If you had only told me more about your hero in
      the first instance it might have been finished by now. You're so hazy in
      your notions.”
     

      “I only want to give you the general notion of it—the knocking about
      from place to place and the fighting and all that. Can't you fill in the
      rest yourself? Make the hero save a girl on a pirate-galley and marry her
      or do something.”
     

      “You're a really helpful collaborator. I suppose the hero went through
      some few adventures before he married.”
     

      “Well then, make him a very artful card—a low sort of man—a
      sort of political man who went about making treaties and breaking them—a
      black-haired chap who hid behind the mast when the fighting began.”
     

      “But you said the other day that he was red-haired.”
     

      “I couldn't have. Make him black-haired of course. You've no imagination.”
     

      Seeing that I had just discovered the entire principles upon which the
      half-memory falsely called imagination is based, I felt entitled to laugh,
      but forbore, for the sake of the tale.
    

      “You're right. You're the man with imagination. A black-haired chap in a
      decked ship,” I said.
    

      “No, an open ship—like a big boat.”
     

      This was maddening.
    

      “Your ship has been built and designed, closed and decked in; you said so
      yourself,” I protested.
    

      “No, no, not that ship. That was open, or half decked because—By
      Jove you're right. You made me think of the hero as a red-haired chap. Of
      course if he were red, the ship would be an open one with painted sails.”
     

      Surely, I thought he would remember now that he had served in two galleys
      at least—in a three-decked Greek one under the black-haired
      “political man,” and again in a Viking's open sea-serpent under the man
      “red as a red bear” who went to Markland. The devil prompted me to speak.
    

      “Why, 'of course,' Charlie?” said I. “I don't know. Are you making fun of
      me?”
     

      The current was broken for the time being. I took up a notebook and
      pretended to make many entries in it.
    

      “It's a pleasure to work with an imaginative chap like yourself,” I said
      after a pause. “The way that you've brought out the character of the hero
      is simply wonderful.”
     

      “Do you think so?” he answered, with a pleased flush. “I often tell myself
      that there's more in me than my—than people think.”
     

      “There's an enormous amount in you.”
     

      “Then, won't you let me send an essay on The Ways of Bank Clerks to
      Tit-Bits, and get the guinea prize?”
     

      “That wasn't exactly what I meant, old fellow: perhaps it would be better
      to wait a little and go ahead with the galley-story.”
     

      “Ah, but I sha'n't get the credit of that. Tit-Bits would publish my name
      and address if I win. What are you grinning at? They would.”
     

      “I know it. Suppose you go for a walk. I want to look through my notes
      about our story.”
     

      Now this reprehensible youth who left me, a little hurt and put back,
      might for aught he or I knew have been one of the crew of the Argo—had
      been certainly slave or comrade to Thorfin Karlsefne. Therefore he was
      deeply interested in guinea competitions. Remembering what Grish Chunder
      had said I laughed aloud. The Lords of Life and Death would never allow
      Charlie Mears to speak with full knowledge of his pasts, and I must even
      piece out what he had told me with my own poor inventions while Charlie
      wrote of the ways of bank-clerks.
    

      I got together and placed on one file all my notes; and the net result was
      not cheering. I read them a second time. There was nothing that might not
      have been compiled at second-hand from other people's books—except,
      perhaps, the story of the fight in the harbor. The adventures of a Viking
      bad been written many times before; the history of a Greek galley-slave
      was no new thing, and though I wrote both, who could challenge or confirm
      the accuracy of my details? I might as well tell a tale of two thousand
      years hence. The Lords of Life and Death were as cunning as Grish Chunder
      had hinted. They would allow nothing to escape that might trouble or make
      easy the minds of men. Though I was convinced of this, yet I could not
      leave the tale alone. Exaltation followed reaction, not once, but twenty
      times in the next few weeks. My moods varied with the March sunlight and
      flying clouds. By night or in the beauty of a spring morning I perceived
      that I could write that tale and shift continents thereby. In the wet,
      windy afternoons, I saw that the tale might indeed be written, but would
      be nothing more than a faked, false-varnished, sham-rusted piece of
      Wardour Street work at the end. Then I blessed Charlie in many ways—though
      it was no fault of his. He seemed to be busy with prize competitions, and
      I saw less and less of him as the weeks went by and the earth cracked and
      grew ripe to spring, and the buds swelled in their sheaths. He did not
      care to read or talk of what he had read, and there was a new ring of
      self-assertion in his voice. I hardly cared to remind him of the galley
      when we met; but Charlie alluded to it on every occasion, always as a
      story from which money was to be made.
    

      “I think I deserve twenty-five per cent., don't I, at least,” he said,
      with beautiful frankness. “I supplied all the ideas, didn't I?”
     

      This greediness for silver was a new side in his nature. I assumed that it
      had been developed in the City, where Charlie was picking up the curious
      nasal drawl of the underbred City man.
    

      “When the thing's done we'll talk about it. I can't make anything of it at
      present. Red-haired or black-haired hero are equally difficult.”
     

      He was sitting by the fire staring at the red coals. “I can't understand
      what you find so difficult. It's all as clean as mud to me,” he replied. A
      jet of gas puffed out between the bars, took light and whistled softly.
      “Suppose we take the red-haired hero's adventures first, from the time
      that he came south to my galley and captured it and sailed to the
      Beaches.”
     

      I knew better now than to interrupt Charlie. I was out of reach of pen and
      paper, and dared not move to get them lest I should break the current. The
      gas-jet puffed and whinnied, Charlie's voice dropped almost to a whisper,
      and he told a tale of the sailing of an open galley to Furdurstrandi, of
      sunsets on the open sea, seen under the curve of the one sail evening
      after evening when the galley's beak was notched into the centre of the
      sinking disc, and “we sailed by that for we had no other guide,” quoth
      Charlie. He spoke of a landing on an island and explorations in its woods,
      where the crew killed three men whom they found asleep under the pines.
      Their ghosts, Charlie said, followed the galley, swimming and choking in
      the water, and the crew cast lots and threw one of their number overboard
      as a sacrifice to the strange gods whom they had offended. Then they ate
      sea-weed when their provisions failed, and their legs swelled, and their
      leader, the red-haired man, killed two rowers who mutinied, and after a
      year spent among the woods they set sail for their own country, and a wind
      that never failed carried them back so safely that they all slept at
      night. This and much more Charlie told. Sometimes the voice fell so low
      that I could not catch the words, though every nerve was on the strain. He
      spoke of their leader, the red-haired man, as a pagan speaks of his God;
      for it was he who cheered them and slew them impartially as he thought
      best for their needs; and it was he who steered them for three days among
      floating ice, each floe crowded with strange beasts that “tried to sail
      with us,” said Charlie, “and we beat them back with the handles of the
      oars.”
     

      The gas-jet went out, a burned coal gave way, and the fire settled down
      with a tiny crash to the bottom of the grate. Charlie ceased speaking, and
      I said no word.
    

      “By Jove!” he said, at last, shaking his head. “I've been staring at the
      fire till I'm dizzy. What was I going to say?”
     

      “Something about the galley.”
     

      “I remember now. It's 25 per cent. of the profits, isn't it?”
     

      “It's anything you like when I've done the tale.”
     

      “I wanted to be sure of that. I must go now. I've, I've an appointment.”
       And he left me.
    

      Had my eyes not been held I might have known that that broken muttering
      over the fire was the swan-song of Charlie Mears. But I thought it the
      prelude to fuller revelation. At last and at last I should cheat the Lords
      of Life and Death!
    

      When next Charlie came to me I received him with rapture. He was nervous
      and embarrassed, but his eyes were very full of light, and his lips a
      little parted.
    

      “I've done a poem,” he said; and then quickly: “it's the best I've ever
      done. Read it.” He thrust it into my hand and retreated to the window.
    

      I groaned inwardly. It would be the work of half an hour to criticise—that
      is to say praise—the poem sufficiently to please Charlie. Then I had
      good reason to groan, for Charlie, discarding his favorite centipede
      metres, had launched into shorter and choppier verse, and verse with a
      motive at the back of it. This is what I read:
    

    “The day is most fair, the cheery wind
    Halloos behind the hill,
    Where bends the wood as seemeth good,

    And the sapling to his will!
    Riot O wind; there is that in my blood
    That would not have thee still!

    “She gave me herself, O Earth, O Sky:
    Grey sea, she is mine alone—I
    Let the sullen boulders hear my cry,
    And rejoice tho' they be but stone!

    'Mine! I have won her O good brown earth,
    Make merry! 'Tis bard on Spring;
    Make merry; my love is doubly worth
    All worship your fields can bring!
    Let the hind that tills you feel my mirth
    At the early harrowing.”
 

      “Yes, it's the early harrowing, past a doubt,” I said, with a dread at my
      heart. Charlie smiled, but did not answer.
    

   “Red cloud of the sunset, tell it abroad; I am victor.
    Greet me O Sun, Dominant master and absolute lord
    Over the soul of one!”
 

      “Well?” said Charlie, looking over my shoulder.
    

      I thought it far from well, and very evil indeed, when he silently laid a
      photograph on the paper—the photograph of a girl with a curly head,
      and a foolish slack mouth.
    

      “Isn't it—isn't it wonderful?” he whispered, pink to the tips of his
      ears, wrapped in the rosy mystery of first love. “I didn't know; I didn't
      think—it came like a thunderclap.”
     

      “Yes. It comes like a thunderclap. Are you very happy, Charlie?”
     

      “My God—she—she loves me!” He sat down repeating the last
      words to himself. I looked at the hairless face, the narrow shoulders
      already bowed by desk-work, and wondered when, where, and bow he had loved
      in his past lives.
    

      “What will your mother say?” I asked, cheerfully.
    

      “I don't care a damn what she says.”
     

      At twenty the things for which one does not care a damn should, properly,
      be many, but one must not include mothers in the list. I told him this
      gently; and he described Her, even as Adam must have described to the
      newly named beasts the glory and tenderness and beauty of Eve.
      Incidentally I learned that She was a tobacconist's assistant with a
      weakness for pretty dress, and had told him four or five times already
      that She had never been kissed by a man before.
    

      Charlie spoke on, and on, and on; while I, separated from him by thousands
      of years, was considering the beginnings of things. Now I understood why
      the Lords of Life and Death shut the doors so carefully behind us. It is
      that we may not remember our first wooings. Were it not so, our world
      would be without inhabitants in a hundred years.
    

      “Now, about that galley-story,” I said, still more cheerfully, in a pause
      in the rush of the speech.
    

      Charlie looked up as though he had been hit. “The galley—what
      galley? Good heavens, don't joke, man! This is serious! You don't know how
      serious it is!”
     

      Grish Chunder was right. Charlie had tasted the love of woman that kills
      remembrance, and the “finest story” in the world would never be written.
    








      VOLUME IV UNDER THE DEODARS