THE LIGHT THAT FAILED
    







      CHAPTER I
    

  So we settled it all when the storm was done
  As comf'y as comf'y could be;
  And I was to wait in the barn, my dears,
  Because I was only three;
  And Teddy would run to the rainbow's foot,
  Because he was five and a man;
  And that's how it all began, my dears,
  And that's how it all began.
              —Big Barn Stories.


      “WHAT do you think she'd do if she caught us? We oughtn't to have it, you
      know,” said Maisie.
    

      “Beat me, and lock you up in your bedroom,” Dick answered, without
      hesitation. “Have you got the cartridges?”
     

      “Yes; they're in my pocket, but they are joggling horribly. Do pin-fire
      cartridges go off of their own accord?”
     

      “Don't know. Take the revolver, if you are afraid, and let me carry them.”
     

      “I'm not afraid.” Maisie strode forward swiftly, a hand in her pocket and
      her chin in the air. Dick followed with a small pin-fire revolver.
    

      The children had discovered that their lives would be unendurable without
      pistol-practice. After much forethought and self-denial, Dick had saved
      seven shillings and sixpence, the price of a badly constructed Belgian
      revolver. Maisie could only contribute half a crown to the syndicate for
      the purchase of a hundred cartridges. “You can save better than I can,
      Dick,” she explained; “I like nice things to eat, and it doesn't matter to
      you. Besides, boys ought to do these things.”
     

      Dick grumbled a little at the arrangement, but went out and made the
      purchase, which the children were then on their way to test. Revolvers did
      not lie in the scheme of their daily life as decreed for them by the
      guardian who was incorrectly supposed to stand in the place of a mother to
      these two orphans. Dick had been under her care for six years, during
      which time she had made her profit of the allowances supposed to be
      expended on his clothes, and, partly through thoughtlessness, partly
      through a natural desire to pain,—she was a widow of some years
      anxious to marry again,—had made his days burdensome on his young
      shoulders.
    

      Where he had looked for love, she gave him first aversion and then hate.
    

      Where he growing older had sought a little sympathy, she gave him
      ridicule. The many hours that she could spare from the ordering of her
      small house she devoted to what she called the home-training of Dick
      Heldar. Her religion, manufactured in the main by her own intelligence and
      a keen study of the Scriptures, was an aid to her in this matter. At such
      times as she herself was not personally displeased with Dick, she left him
      to understand that he had a heavy account to settle with his Creator;
      wherefore Dick learned to loathe his God as intensely as he loathed Mrs.
      Jennett; and this is not a wholesome frame of mind for the young. Since
      she chose to regard him as a hopeless liar, when dread of pain drove him
      to his first untruth he naturally developed into a liar, but an economical
      and self-contained one, never throwing away the least unnecessary fib, and
      never hesitating at the blackest, were it only plausible, that might make
      his life a little easier. The treatment taught him at least the power of
      living alone,—a power that was of service to him when he went to a
      public school and the boys laughed at his clothes, which were poor in
      quality and much mended. In the holidays he returned to the teachings of
      Mrs. Jennett, and, that the chain of discipline might not be weakened by
      association with the world, was generally beaten, on one account or
      another, before he had been twelve hours under her roof.
    

      The autumn of one year brought him a companion in bondage, a long-haired,
      gray-eyed little atom, as self-contained as himself, who moved about the
      house silently and for the first few weeks spoke only to the goat that was
      her chiefest friend on earth and lived in the back-garden. Mrs. Jennett
      objected to the goat on the grounds that he was un-Christian,—which
      he certainly was. “Then,” said the atom, choosing her words very
      deliberately, “I shall write to my lawyer-peoples and tell them that you
      are a very bad woman. Amomma is mine, mine, mine!” Mrs. Jennett made a
      movement to the hall, where certain umbrellas and canes stood in a rack.
      The atom understood as clearly as Dick what this meant. “I have been
      beaten before,” she said, still in the same passionless voice; “I have
      been beaten worse than you can ever beat me. If you beat me I shall write
      to my lawyer-peoples and tell them that you do not give me enough to eat.
      I am not afraid of you.” Mrs. Jennett did not go into the hall, and the
      atom, after a pause to assure herself that all danger of war was past,
      went out, to weep bitterly on Amomma's neck.
    

      Dick learned to know her as Maisie, and at first mistrusted her
      profoundly, for he feared that she might interfere with the small liberty
      of action left to him. She did not, however; and she volunteered no
      friendliness until Dick had taken the first steps. Long before the
      holidays were over, the stress of punishment shared in common drove the
      children together, if it were only to play into each other's hands as they
      prepared lies for Mrs. Jennett's use. When Dick returned to school, Maisie
      whispered, “Now I shall be all alone to take care of myself; but,” and she
      nodded her head bravely, “I can do it. You promised to send Amomma a grass
      collar. Send it soon.” A week later she asked for that collar by return of
      post, and was not pleased when she learned that it took time to make. When
      at last Dick forwarded the gift, she forgot to thank him for it.
    

      Many holidays had come and gone since that day, and Dick had grown into a
      lanky hobbledehoy more than ever conscious of his bad clothes. Not for a
      moment had Mrs. Jennett relaxed her tender care of him, but the average
      canings of a public school—Dick fell under punishment about three
      times a month—filled him with contempt for her powers. “She doesn't
      hurt,” he explained to Maisie, who urged him to rebellion, “and she is
      kinder to you after she has whacked me.” Dick shambled through the days
      unkempt in body and savage in soul, as the smaller boys of the school
      learned to know, for when the spirit moved him he would hit them,
      cunningly and with science. The same spirit made him more than once try to
      tease Maisie, but the girl refused to be made unhappy. “We are both
      miserable as it is,” said she. “What is the use of trying to make things
      worse? Let's find things to do, and forget things.”
     

      The pistol was the outcome of that search. It could only be used on the
      muddiest foreshore of the beach, far away from the bathing-machines and
      pierheads, below the grassy slopes of Fort Keeling. The tide ran out
      nearly two miles on that coast, and the many-coloured mud-banks, touched
      by the sun, sent up a lamentable smell of dead weed. It was late in the
      afternoon when Dick and Maisie arrived on their ground, Amomma trotting
      patiently behind them.
    

      “Mf!” said Maisie, sniffing the air. “I wonder what makes the sea so
      smelly? I don'tlike it!”
     

      “You never like anything that isn't made just for you,” said Dick bluntly.
      “Give me the cartridges, and I'll try first shot. How far does one of
      these little revolvers carry?”
     

      “Oh, half a mile,” said Maisie, promptly. “At least it makes an awful
      noise. Be careful with the cartridges; I don't like those jagged stick-up
      things on the rim. Dick, do be careful.”
     

      “All right. I know how to load. I'll fire at the breakwater out there.”
     

      He fired, and Amomma ran away bleating. The bullet threw up a spurt of mud
      to the right of the wood-wreathed piles.
    

      “Throws high and to the right. You try, Maisie. Mind, it's loaded all
      round.”
     

      Maisie took the pistol and stepped delicately to the verge of the mud, her
      hand firmly closed on the butt, her mouth and left eye screwed up.
    

      Dick sat down on a tuft of bank and laughed. Amomma returned very
      cautiously. He was accustomed to strange experiences in his afternoon
      walks, and, finding the cartridge-box unguarded, made investigations with
      his nose. Maisie fired, but could not see where the bullet went.
    

      “I think it hit the post,” she said, shading her eyes and looking out
      across the sailless sea.
    

      “I know it has gone out to the Marazion Bell-buoy,” said Dick, with a
      chuckle. “Fire low and to the left; then perhaps you'll get it. Oh, look
      at Amomma!—he's eating the cartridges!”
     

      Maisie turned, the revolver in her hand, just in time to see Amomma
      scampering away from the pebbles Dick threw after him. Nothing is sacred
      to a billy-goat. Being well fed and the adored of his mistress, Amomma had
      naturally swallowed two loaded pin-fire cartridges. Maisie hurried up to
      assure herself that Dick had not miscounted the tale.
    

      “Yes, he's eaten two.”
     

      “Horrid little beast! Then they'll joggle about inside him and blow up,
      and serve him right.... Oh, Dick! have I killed you?”
     

      Revolvers are tricky things for young hands to deal with. Maisie could not
      explain how it had happened, but a veil of reeking smoke separated her
      from Dick, and she was quite certain that the pistol had gone off in his
      face. Then she heard him sputter, and dropped on her knees beside him,
      crying, “Dick, you aren't hurt, are you? I didn't mean it.”
     

      “Of course you didn't,” said Dick, coming out of the smoke and wiping his
      cheek. “But you nearly blinded me. That powder stuff stings awfully.” A
      neat little splash of gray led on a stone showed where the bullet had
      gone. Maisie began to whimper.
    

      “Don't,” said Dick, jumping to his feet and shaking himself. “I'm not a
      bit hurt.”
     

      “No, but I might have killed you,” protested Maisie, the corners of her
      mouth drooping. “What should I have done then?”
     

      “Gone home and told Mrs. Jennett.” Dick grinned at the thought; then,
      softening, “Please don't worry about it. Besides, we are wasting time.
      We've got to get back to tea. I'll take the revolver for a bit.”
     

      Maisie would have wept on the least encouragement, but Dick's
      indifference, albeit his hand was shaking as he picked up the pistol,
      restrained her. She lay panting on the beach while Dick methodically
      bombarded the breakwater. “Got it at last!” he exclaimed, as a lock of
      weed flew from the wood.
    

      “Let me try,” said Maisie, imperiously. “I'm all right now.”
     

      They fired in turns till the rickety little revolver nearly shook itself
      to pieces, and Amomma the outcast—because he might blow up at any
      moment—browsed in the background and wondered why stones were thrown
      at him. Then they found a balk of timber floating in a pool which was
      commanded by the seaward slope of Fort Keeling, and they sat down together
      before this new target.
    

      “Next holidays,” said Dick, as the now thoroughly fouled revolver kicked
      wildly in his hand, “we'll get another pistol,—central fire,—that
      will carry farther.”
     

      “There won't be any next holidays for me,” said Maisie. “I'm going away.”
     

      “Where to?”
     

      “I don't know. My lawyers have written to Mrs. Jennett, and I've got to be
      educated somewhere,—in France, perhaps,—I don'tknow where; but
      I shall be glad to go away.”
     

      “I shan't like it a bit. I suppose I shall be left. Look here, Maisie, is
      it really true you're going? Then these holidays will be the last I shall
      see anything of you; and I go back to school next week. I wish——”
     

      The young blood turned his cheeks scarlet. Maisie was picking grass-tufts
      and throwing them down the slope at a yellow sea-poppy nodding all by
      itself to the illimitable levels of the mud-flats and the milk-white sea
      beyond.
    

      “I wish,” she said, after a pause, “that I could see you again sometime.
      You wish that, too?”
     

      “Yes, but it would have been better if—if—you had—shot
      straight over there—down by the breakwater.”
     

      Maisie looked with large eyes for a moment. And this was the boy who only
      ten days before had decorated Amomma's horns with cut-paper ham-frills and
      turned him out, a bearded derision, among the public ways! Then she
      dropped her eyes: this was not the boy.
    

      “Don't be stupid,” she said reprovingly, and with swift instinct attacked
      the side-issue. “How selfish you are! Just think what I should have felt
      if that horrid thing had killed you! I'm quite miserable enough already.”
     

      “Why? Because you're going away from Mrs. Jennett?”
     

      “No.”
     

      “From me, then?”
     

      No answer for a long time. Dick dared not look at her. He felt, though he
      did not know, all that the past four years had been to him, and this the
      more acutely since he had no knowledge to put his feelings in words.
    

      “I don't know,” she said. “I suppose it is.”
     

      “Maisie, you must know. I'm not supposing.”
     

      “Let's go home,” said Maisie, weakly.
    

      But Dick was not minded to retreat.
    

      “I can't say things,” he pleaded, “and I'm awfully sorry for teasing you
      about Amomma the other day. It's all different now, Maisie, can't you see?
      And you might have told me that you were going, instead of leaving me to
      find out.”
     

      “You didn't. I did tell. Oh, Dick, what's the use of worrying?”
     

      “There isn't any; but we've been together years and years, and I didn't
      know how much I cared.”
     

      “I don't believe you ever did care.”
     

      “No, I didn't; but I do,—I care awfully now, Maisie,” he gulped,—“Maisie,
      darling, say you care too, please.”
     

      “I do, indeed I do; but it won't be any use.”
     

      “Why?”
     

      “Because I am going away.”
     

      “Yes, but if you promise before you go. Only say—will you?” A second
      “darling” came to his lips more easily than the first. There were few
      endearments in Dick's home or school life; he had to find them by
      instinct. Dick caught the little hand blackened with the escaped gas of
      the revolver.
    

      “I promise,” she said solemnly; “but if I care there is no need for
      promising.”
     

      “And do you care?” For the first time in the past few minutes their eyes
      met and spoke for them who had no skill in speech....
    

      “Oh, Dick, don't! Please don't! It was all right when we said
      good-morning; but now it's all different!” Amomma looked on from afar.
    

      He had seen his property quarrel frequently, but he had never seen kisses
      exchanged before. The yellow sea-poppy was wiser, and nodded its head
      approvingly. Considered as a kiss, that was a failure, but since it was
      the first, other than those demanded by duty, in all the world that either
      had ever given or taken, it opened to them new worlds, and every one of
      them glorious, so that they were lifted above the consideration of any
      worlds at all, especially those in which tea is necessary, and sat still,
      holding each other's hands and saying not a word.
    

      “You can't forget now,” said Dick, at last. There was that on his cheek
      that stung more than gunpowder.
    

      “I shouldn't have forgotten anyhow,” said Maisie, and they looked at each
      other and saw that each was changed from the companion of an hour ago to a
      wonder and a mystery they could not understand. The sun began to set, and
      a night-wind thrashed along the bents of the foreshore.
    

      “We shall be awfully late for tea,” said Maisie. “Let's go home.”
     

      “Let's use the rest of the cartridges first,” said Dick; and he helped
      Maisie down the slope of the fort to the sea,—a descent that she was
      quite capable of covering at full speed. Equally gravely Maisie took the
      grimy hand. Dick bent forward clumsily; Maisie drew the hand away, and
      Dick blushed.
    

      “It's very pretty,” he said.
    

      “Pooh!” said Maisie, with a little laugh of gratified vanity. She stood
      close to Dick as he loaded the revolver for the last time and fired over
      the sea with a vague notion at the back of his head that he was protecting
      Maisie from all the evils in the world. A puddle far across the mud caught
      the last rays of the sun and turned into a wrathful red disc. The light
      held Dick's attention for a moment, and as he raised his revolver there
      fell upon him a renewed sense of the miraculous, in that he was standing
      by Maisie who had promised to care for him for an indefinite length of
      time till such date as——A gust of the growing wind drove the
      girl's long black hair across his face as she stood with her hand on his
      shoulder calling Amomma “a little beast,” and for a moment he was in the
      dark,—a darkness that stung. The bullet went singing out to the
      empty sea.
    

      “Spoilt my aim,” said he, shaking his head. “There aren't any more
      cartridges; we shall have to run home.” But they did not run. They walked
      very slowly, arm in arm. And it was a matter of indifference to them
      whether the neglected Amomma with two pin-fire cartridges in his inside
      blew up or trotted beside them; for they had come into a golden heritage
      and were disposing of it with all the wisdom of all their years.
    

      “And I shall be——” quoth Dick, valiantly. Then he checked
      himself: “I don't know what I shall be. I don't seem to be able to pass
      any exams, but I can make awful caricatures of the masters. Ho! Ho!”
     

      “Be an artist, then,” said Maisie. “You're always laughing at my trying to
      draw; and it will do you good.”
     

      “I'll never laugh at anything you do,” he answered. “I'll be an artist,
      and I'll do things.”
     

      “Artists always want money, don'tthey?”
     

      “I've got a hundred and twenty pounds a year of my own. My guardians tell
      me I'm to have it when I come of age. That will be enough to begin with.”
     

      “Ah, I'm rich,” said Maisie. “I've got three hundred a year all my own
      when I'm twenty-one. That's why Mrs. Jennett is kinder to me than she is
      to you. I wish, though, that I had somebody that belonged to me,—just
      a father or a mother.”
     

      “You belong to me,” said Dick, “for ever and ever.”
     

      “Yes, we belong—for ever. It's very nice.” She squeezed his arm. The
      kindly darkness hid them both, and, emboldened because he could only just
      see the profile of Maisie's cheek with the long lashes veiling the gray
      eyes, Dick at the front door delivered himself of the words he had been
      boggling over for the last two hours.
    

      “And I—love you, Maisie,” he said, in a whisper that seemed to him
      to ring across the world,—the world that he would tomorrow or the
      next day set out to conquer.
    

      There was a scene, not, for the sake of discipline, to be reported, when
      Mrs. Jennett would have fallen upon him, first for disgraceful
      unpunctuality, and secondly for nearly killing himself with a forbidden
      weapon.
    

      “I was playing with it, and it went off by itself,” said Dick, when the
      powder-pocked cheek could no longer be hidden, “but if you think you're
      going to lick me you're wrong. You are never going to touch me again. Sit
      down and give me my tea. You can't cheat us out of that, anyhow.”
     

      Mrs. Jennett gasped and became livid. Maisie said nothing, but encouraged
      Dick with her eyes, and he behaved abominably all that evening. Mrs.
      Jennett prophesied an immediate judgment of Providence and a descent into
      Tophet later, but Dick walked in Paradise and would not hear. Only when he
      was going to bed Mrs. Jennett recovered and asserted herself. He had
      bidden Maisie good night with down-dropped eyes and from a distance.
    

      “If you aren't a gentleman you might try to behave like one,” said Mrs.
      Jennett, spitefully. “You've been quarrelling with Maisie again.”
     

      This meant that the usual good-night kiss had been omitted. Maisie, white
      to the lips, thrust her cheek forward with a fine air of indifference, and
      was duly pecked by Dick, who tramped out of the room red as fire. That
      night he dreamed a wild dream. He had won all the world and brought it to
      Maisie in a cartridge-box, but she turned it over with her foot, and,
      instead of saying “Thank you,” cried—“Where is the grass collar you
      promised for Amomma? Oh, how selfish you are!”
     







      CHAPTER II
    

   Then we brought the lances down, then the bugles blew,
   When we went to Kandahar, ridin' two an” two,
     Ridin', ridin', ridin', two an” two,
   Ta-ra-ra-ra-ra-ra-ra,
   All the way to Kandahar, ridin' two an” two.
            —Barrack-Room Ballad.


      “I'M NOT angry with the British public, but I wish we had a few thousand
      of them scattered among these rooks. They wouldn't be in such a hurry to
      get at their morning papers then. Can't you imagine the regulation
      householder—Lover of Justice, Constant Reader, Paterfamilias, and
      all that lot—frizzling on hot gravel?”
     

      “With a blue veil over his head, and his clothes in strips. Has any man
      here a needle? I've got a piece of sugar-sack.”
     

      “I'll lend you a packing-needle for six square inches of it then. Both my
      knees are worn through.”
     

      “Why not six square acres, while you're about it? But lend me the needle,
      and I'll see what I can do with the selvage. I don't think there's enough
      to protect my royal body from the cold blast as it is. What are you doing
      with that everlasting sketch-book of yours, Dick?”
     

      “Study of our Special Correspondent repairing his wardrobe,” said Dick,
      gravely, as the other man kicked off a pair of sorely worn riding-breeches
      and began to fit a square of coarse canvas over the most obvious open
      space. He grunted disconsolately as the vastness of the void developed
      itself.
    

      “Sugar-bags, indeed! Hi! you pilot man there! lend me all the sails for
      that whale-boat.”
     

      A fez-crowned head bobbed up in the stern-sheets, divided itself into
      exact halves with one flashing grin, and bobbed down again. The man of the
      tattered breeches, clad only in a Norfolk jacket and a gray flannel shirt,
      went on with his clumsy sewing, while Dick chuckled over the sketch.
    

      Some twenty whale-boats were nuzzling a sand-bank which was dotted with
      English soldiery of half a dozen corps, bathing or washing their clothes.
      A heap of boat-rollers, commissariat-boxes, sugar-bags, and flour—and
      small-arm-ammunition-cases showed where one of the whale-boats had been
      compelled to unload hastily; and a regimental carpenter was swearing aloud
      as he tried, on a wholly insufficient allowance of white lead, to plaster
      up the sun-parched gaping seams of the boat herself.
    

      “First the bloomin' rudder snaps,” said he to the world in general; “then
      the mast goes; an' then, s' help me, when she can't do nothin' else, she
      opens 'erself out like a cock-eyed Chinese lotus.”
     

      “Exactly the case with my breeches, whoever you are,” said the tailor,
      without looking up. “Dick, I wonder when I shall see a decent shop again.”
     

      There was no answer, save the incessant angry murmur of the Nile as it
      raced round a basalt-walled bend and foamed across a rock-ridge half a
      mile upstream. It was as though the brown weight of the river would drive
      the white men back to their own country. The indescribable scent of Nile
      mud in the air told that the stream was falling and the next few miles
      would be no light thing for the whale-boats to overpass. The desert ran
      down almost to the banks, where, among gray, red, and black hillocks, a
      camel-corps was encamped. No man dared even for a day lose touch of the
      slow-moving boats; there had been no fighting for weeks past, and
      throughout all that time the Nile had never spared them. Rapid had
      followed rapid, rock rock, and island-group island-group, till the rank
      and file had long since lost all count of direction and very nearly of
      time. They were moving somewhere, they did not know why, to do something,
      they did not know what. Before them lay the Nile, and at the other end of
      it was one Gordon, fighting for the dear life, in a town called Khartoum.
      There were columns of British troops in the desert, or in one of the many
      deserts; there were yet more columns waiting to embark on the river; there
      were fresh drafts waiting at Assioot and Assuan; there were lies and
      rumours running over the face of the hopeless land from Suakin to the
      Sixth Cataract, and men supposed generally that there must be some one in
      authority to direct the general scheme of the many movements. The duty of
      that particular river-column was to keep the whale-boats afloat in the
      water, to avoid trampling on the villagers' crops when the gangs “tracked”
       the boats with lines thrown from midstream, to get as much sleep and food
      as was possible, and, above all, to press on without delay in the teeth of
      the churning Nile.
    

      With the soldiers sweated and toiled the correspondents of the newspapers,
      and they were almost as ignorant as their companions. But it was above all
      things necessary that England at breakfast should be amused and thrilled
      and interested, whether Gordon lived or died, or half the British army
      went to pieces in the sands. The Soudan campaign was a picturesque one,
      and lent itself to vivid word-painting. Now and again a “Special” managed
      to get slain,—which was not altogether a disadvantage to the paper
      that employed him,—and more often the hand-to-hand nature of the
      fighting allowed of miraculous escapes which were worth telegraphing home
      at eighteenpence the word. There were many correspondents with many corps
      and columns,—from the veterans who had followed on the heels of the
      cavalry that occupied Cairo in '82, what time Arabi Pasha called himself
      king, who had seen the first miserable work round Suakin when the sentries
      were cut up nightly and the scrub swarmed with spears, to youngsters
      jerked into the business at the end of a telegraph-wire to take the places
      of their betters killed or invalided.
    

      Among the seniors—those who knew every shift and change in the
      perplexing postal arrangements, the value of the seediest, weediest
      Egyptian garron offered for sale in Cairo or Alexandria, who could talk a
      telegraph-clerk into amiability and soothe the ruffled vanity of a newly
      appointed staff-officer when press regulations became burdensome—was
      the man in the flannel shirt, the black-browed Torpenhow. He represented
      the Central Southern Syndicate in the campaign, as he had represented it
      in the Egyptian war, and elsewhere. The syndicate did not concern itself
      greatly with criticisms of attack and the like. It supplied the masses,
      and all it demanded was picturesqueness and abundance of detail; for there
      is more joy in England over a soldier who insubordinately steps out of
      square to rescue a comrade than over twenty generals slaving even to
      baldness at the gross details of transport and commissariat.
    

      He had met at Suakin a young man, sitting on the edge of a recently
      abandoned redoubt about the size of a hat-box, sketching a clump of
      shell-torn bodies on the gravel plain.
    

      “What are you for?” said Torpenhow. The greeting of the correspondent is
      that of the commercial traveller on the road.
    

      “My own hand,” said the young man, without looking up. “Have you any
      tobacco?”
     

      Torpenhow waited till the sketch was finished, and when he had looked at
      it said, “What's your business here?”
     

      “Nothing; there was a row, so I came. I'm supposed to be doing something
      down at the painting-slips among the boats, or else I'm in charge of the
      condenser on one of the water-ships. I've forgotten which.”
     

      “You've cheek enough to build a redoubt with,” said Torpenhow, and took
      stock of the new acquaintance. “Do you always draw like that?”
     

      The young man produced more sketches. “Row on a Chinese pig-boat,” said
      he, sententiously, showing them one after another.—“Chief mate
      dirked by a comprador.—Junk ashore off Hakodate.—Somali
      muleteer being flogged.—Star-shell bursting over camp at Berbera.—Slave-dhow
      being chased round Tajurrah Bah.—Soldier lying dead in the moonlight
      outside Suakin.—throat cut by Fuzzies.”
     

      “H'm!” said Torpenhow, “can'tsay I care for Verestchagin-and-water myself,
      but there's no accounting for tastes. Doing anything now, are you?”
     

      “No. I'm amusing myself here.”
     

      Torpenhow looked at the sketches again, and nodded. “Yes, you're right to
      take your first chance when you can get it.”
     

      He rode away swiftly through the Gate of the Two War-Ships, rattled across
      the causeway into the town, and wired to his syndicate, “Got man here,
      picture-work. Good and cheap. Shall I arrange? Will do letterpress with
      sketches.”
     

      The man on the redoubt sat swinging his legs and murmuring, “I knew the
      chance would come, sooner or later. By Gad, they'll have to sweat for it
      if I come through this business alive!”
     

      In the evening Torpenhow was able to announce to his friend that the
      Central Southern Agency was willing to take him on trial, paying expenses
      for three months. “And, by the way, what's your name?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Heldar. Do they give me a free hand?”
     

      “They've taken you on chance. You must justify the choice. You'd better
      stick to me. I'm going up-country with a column, and I'll do what I can
      for you. Give me some of your sketches taken here, and I'll send 'em
      along.” To himself he said, “That's the best bargain the Central Southern
      has ever made; and they got me cheaply enough.”
     

      So it came to pass that, after some purchase of horse-flesh and
      arrangements financial and political, Dick was made free of the New and
      Honourable Fraternity of war correspondents, who all possess the
      inalienable right of doing as much work as they can and getting as much
      for it as Providence and their owners shall please. To these things are
      added in time, if the brother be worthy, the power of glib speech that
      neither man nor woman can resist when a meal or a bed is in question, the
      eye of a horse-cope, the skill of a cook, the constitution of a bullock,
      the digestion of an ostrich, and an infinite adaptability to all
      circumstances. But many die before they attain to this degree, and the
      past-masters in the craft appear for the most part in dress-clothes when
      they are in England, and thus their glory is hidden from the multitude.
    

      Dick followed Torpenhow wherever the latter's fancy chose to lead him, and
      between the two they managed to accomplish some work that almost satisfied
      themselves. It was not an easy life in any way, and under its influence
      the two were drawn very closely together, for they ate from the same dish,
      they shared the same water-bottle, and, most binding tie of all, their
      mails went off together. It was Dick who managed to make gloriously drunk
      a telegraph-clerk in a palm hut far beyond the Second Cataract, and, while
      the man lay in bliss on the floor, possessed himself of some laboriously
      acquired exclusive information, forwarded by a confiding correspondent of
      an opposition syndicate, made a careful duplicate of the matter, and
      brought the result to Torpenhow, who said that all was fair in love or war
      correspondence, and built an excellent descriptive article from his
      rival's riotous waste of words. It was Torpenhow who—but the tale of
      their adventures, together and apart, from Philae to the waste wilderness
      of Herawi and Muella, would fill many books. They had been penned into a
      square side by side, in deadly fear of being shot by over-excited
      soldiers; they had fought with baggage-camels in the chill dawn; they had
      jogged along in silence under blinding sun on indefatigable little
      Egyptian horses; and they had floundered on the shallows of the Nile when
      the whale-boat in which they had found a berth chose to hit a hidden rock
      and rip out half her bottom-planks.
    

      Now they were sitting on the sand-bank, and the whale-boats were bringing
      up the remainder of the column.
    

      “Yes,” said Torpenhow, as he put the last rude stitches into his
      over-long-neglected gear, “it has been a beautiful business.”
     

      “The patch or the campaign?” said Dick. “Don't think much of either,
      myself.”
     

      “You want the Euryalus brought up above the Third Cataract, don't you? and
      eighty-one-ton guns at Jakdul? Now, I'm quite satisfied with my breeches.”
       He turned round gravely to exhibit himself, after the manner of a clown.
    

      “It's very pretty. Specially the lettering on the sack. G.B.T. Government
      Bullock Train. That's a sack from India.”
     

      “It's my initials,—Gilbert Belling Torpenhow. I stole the cloth on
      purpose. What the mischief are the camel-corps doing yonder?” Torpenhow
      shaded his eyes and looked across the scrub-strewn gravel.
    

      A bugle blew furiously, and the men on the bank hurried to their arms and
      accoutrements.
    

      “'Pisan soldiery surprised while bathing,'” remarked Dick, calmly.
    

      “D'you remember the picture? It's by Michael Angelo; all beginners copy
      it. That scrub's alive with enemy.”
     

      The camel-corps on the bank yelled to the infantry to come to them, and a
      hoarse shouting down the river showed that the remainder of the column had
      wind of the trouble and was hastening to take share in it. As swiftly as a
      reach of still water is crisped by the wind, the rock-strewn ridges and
      scrub-topped hills were troubled and alive with armed men.
    

      Mercifully, it occurred to these to stand far off for a time, to shout and
      gesticulate joyously. One man even delivered himself of a long story. The
      camel-corps did not fire. They were only too glad of a little
      breathing-space, until some sort of square could be formed. The men on the
      sand-bank ran to their side; and the whale-boats, as they toiled up within
      shouting distance, were thrust into the nearest bank and emptied of all
      save the sick and a few men to guard them. The Arab orator ceased his
      outcries, and his friends howled.
    

      “They look like the Mahdi's men,” said Torpenhow, elbowing himself into
      the crush of the square; “but what thousands of 'em there are! The tribes
      hereabout aren't against us, I know.”
     

      “Then the Mahdi's taken another town,” said Dick, “and set all these
      yelping devils free to show us up. Lend us your glass.”
     

      “Our scouts should have told us of this. We've been trapped,” said a
      subaltern. “Aren't the camel guns ever going to begin? Hurry up, you men!”
     

      There was no need of any order. The men flung themselves panting against
      the sides of the square, for they had good reason to know that whoso was
      left outside when the fighting began would very probably die in an
      extremely unpleasant fashion. The little hundred-and-fifty-pound
      camel-guns posted at one corner of the square opened the ball as the
      square moved forward by its right to get possession of a knoll of rising
      ground. All had fought in this manner many times before, and there was no
      novelty in the entertainment; always the same hot and stifling formation,
      the smell of dust and leather, the same boltlike rush of the enemy, the
      same pressure on the weakest side, the few minutes of hand-to-hand
      scuffle, and then the silence of the desert, broken only by the yells of
      those whom their handful of cavalry attempted to purse. They had become
      careless. The camel-guns spoke at intervals, and the square slouched
      forward amid the protesting of the camels. Then came the attack of three
      thousand men who had not learned from books that it is impossible for
      troops in close order to attack against breech-loading fire.
    

      A few dropping shots heralded their approach, and a few horsemen led, but
      the bulk of the force was naked humanity, mad with rage, and armed with
      the spear and the sword. The instinct of the desert, where there is always
      much war, told them that the right flank of the square was the weakest,
      for they swung clear of the front. The camel-guns shelled them as they
      passed and opened for an instant lanes through their midst, most like
      those quick-closing vistas in a Kentish hop-garden seen when the train
      races by at full speed; and the infantry fire, held till the opportune
      moment, dropped them in close-packing hundreds. No civilised troops in the
      world could have endured the hell through which they came, the living
      leaping high to avoid the dying who clutched at their heels, the wounded
      cursing and staggering forward, till they fell—a torrent black as
      the sliding water above a mill-dam—full on the right flank of the
      square.
    

      Then the line of the dusty troops and the faint blue desert sky overhead
      went out in rolling smoke, and the little stones on the heated ground and
      the tinder-dry clumps of scrub became matters of surpassing interest, for
      men measured their agonised retreat and recovery by these things, counting
      mechanically and hewing their way back to chosen pebble and branch. There
      was no semblance of any concerted fighting. For aught the men knew, the
      enemy might be attempting all four sides of the square at once. Their
      business was to destroy what lay in front of them, to bayonet in the back
      those who passed over them, and, dying, to drag down the slayer till he
      could be knocked on the head by some avenging gun-butt.
    

      Dick waited with Torpenhow and a young doctor till the stress grew
      unendurable. It was hopeless to attend to the wounded till the attack was
      repulsed, so the three moved forward gingerly towards the weakest side of
      the square. There was a rush from without, the short hough-hough of the
      stabbing spears, and a man on a horse, followed by thirty or forty others,
      dashed through, yelling and hacking. The right flank of the square sucked
      in after them, and the other sides sent help. The wounded, who knew that
      they had but a few hours more to live, caught at the enemy's feet and
      brought them down, or, staggering into a discarded rifle, fired blindly
      into the scuffle that raged in the centre of the square.
    

      Dick was conscious that somebody had cut him violently across his helmet,
      that he had fired his revolver into a black, foam-flecked face which
      forthwith ceased to bear any resemblance to a face, and that Torpenhow had
      gone down under an Arab whom he had tried to “collar low,” and was turning
      over and over with his captive, feeling for the man's eyes. The doctor
      jabbed at a venture with a bayonet, and a helmetless soldier fired over
      Dick's shoulder: the flying grains of powder stung his cheek. It was to
      Torpenhow that Dick turned by instinct. The representative of the Central
      Southern Syndicate had shaken himself clear of his enemy, and rose, wiping
      his thumb on his trousers. The Arab, both hands to his forehead, screamed
      aloud, then snatched up his spear and rushed at Torpenhow, who was panting
      under shelter of Dick's revolver. Dick fired twice, and the man dropped
      limply. His upturned face lacked one eye. The musketry-fire redoubled, but
      cheers mingled with it. The rush had failed and the enemy were flying. If
      the heart of the square were shambles, the ground beyond was a butcher's
      shop. Dick thrust his way forward between the maddened men. The remnant of
      the enemy were retiring, as the few—the very few—English
      cavalry rode down the laggards.
    

      Beyond the lines of the dead, a broad blood-stained Arab spear cast aside
      in the retreat lay across a stump of scrub, and beyond this again the
      illimitable dark levels of the desert. The sun caught the steel and turned
      it into a red disc. Some one behind him was saying, “Ah, get away, you
      brute!” Dick raised his revolver and pointed towards the desert. His eye
      was held by the red splash in the distance, and the clamour about him
      seemed to die down to a very far-away whisper, like the whisper of a level
      sea. There was the revolver and the red light. ... and the voice of some
      one scaring something away, exactly as had fallen somewhere before,—a
      darkness that stung. He fired at random, and the bullet went out across
      the desert as he muttered, “Spoilt my aim. There aren't any more
      cartridges. We shall have to run home.” He put his hand to his head and
      brought it away covered with blood.
    

      “Old man, you're cut rather badly,” said Torpenhow. “I owe you something
      for this business. Thanks. Stand up! I say, you can't be ill here.”
     

      Throughout the night, when the troops were encamped by the whale-boats, a
      black figure danced in the strong moonlight on the sand-bar and shouted
      that Khartoum the accursed one was dead,—was dead,—was dead,—that
      two steamers were rock-staked on the Nile outside the city, and that of
      all their crews there remained not one; and Khartoum was dead,—was
      dead,—was dead! But Torpenhow took no heed. He was watching Dick,
      who called aloud to the restless Nile for Maisie,—and again Maisie!
      “Behold a phenomenon,” said Torpenhow, rearranging the blanket. “Here is a
      man, presumably human, who mentions the name of one woman only. And I've
      seen a good deal of delirium, too.—Dick, here's some fizzy drink.”
     

      “Thank you, Maisie,” said Dick.
    







      CHAPTER III
    

   So he thinks he shall take to the sea again
   For one more cruise with his buccaneers,
   To singe the beard of the King of Spain,
   And capture another Dean of Jaen
   And sell him in Algiers.
                       —Dutch Picture. Longfellow


      THE SOUDAN campaign and Dick's broken head had been some months ended and
      mended, and the Central Southern Syndicate had paid Dick a certain sum on
      account for work done, which work they were careful to assure him was not
      altogether up to their standard. Dick heaved the letter into the Nile at
      Cairo, cashed the draft in the same town, and bade a warm farewell to
      Torpenhow at the station.
    

      “I am going to lie up for a while and rest,” said Torpenhow. “I don't know
      where I shall live in London, but if God brings us to meet, we shall meet.
      Are you staying here on the off-chance of another row? There will be none
      till the Southern Soudan is reoccupied by our troops. Mark that. Goodbye;
      bless you; come back when your money's spent; and give me your address.”
     

      Dick loitered in Cairo, Alexandria, Ismailia, and Port Said,—especially
      Port Said. There is iniquity in many parts of the world, and vice in all,
      but the concentrated essence of all the iniquities and all the vices in
      all the continents finds itself at Port Said. And through the heart of
      that sand-bordered hell, where the mirage flickers day long above the
      Bitter Lake, move, if you will only wait, most of the men and women you
      have known in this life. Dick established himself in quarters more riotous
      than respectable. He spent his evenings on the quay, and boarded many
      ships, and saw very many friends,—gracious Englishwomen with whom he
      had talked not too wisely in the veranda of Shepherd's Hotel, hurrying war
      correspondents, skippers of the contract troop-ships employed in the
      campaign, army officers by the score, and others of less reputable trades.
    

      He had choice of all the races of the East and West for studies, and the
      advantage of seeing his subjects under the influence of strong excitement,
      at the gaming-tables, saloons, dancing-hells, and elsewhere. For
      recreation there was the straight vista of the Canal, the blazing sands,
      the procession of shipping, and the white hospitals where the English
      soldiers lay. He strove to set down in black and white and colour all that
      Providence sent him, and when that supply was ended sought about for fresh
      material. It was a fascinating employment, but it ran away with his money,
      and he had drawn in advance the hundred and twenty pounds to which he was
      entitled yearly. “Now I shall have to work and starve!” thought he, and
      was addressing himself to this new fate when a mysterious telegram arrived
      from Torpenhow in England, which said, “Come back, quick; you have caught
      on. Come.”
     

      A large smile overspread his face. “So soon! that's a good hearing,” said
      he to himself. “There will be an orgy tonight. I'll stand or fall by my
      luck. Faith, it's time it came!” He deposited half of his funds in the
      hands of his well-known friends Monsieur and Madame Binat, and ordered
      himself a Zanzibar dance of the finest. Monsieur Binat was shaking with
      drink, but Madame smiles sympathetically—“Monsieur needs a chair, of
      course, and of course Monsieur will sketch; Monsieur amuses himself
      strangely.”
     

      Binat raised a blue-white face from a cot in the inner room. “I
      understand,” he quavered. “We all know Monsieur. Monsieur is an artist, as
      I have been.” Dick nodded. “In the end,” said Binat, with gravity,
      “Monsieur will descend alive into hell, as I have descended.” And he
      laughed.
    

      “You must come to the dance, too,” said Dick; “I shall want you.”
     

      “For my face? I knew it would be so. For my face? My God! and for my
      degradation so tremendous! I will not. Take him away. He is a devil. Or at
      least do thou, Celeste, demand of him more.” The excellent Binat began to
      kick and scream.
    

      “All things are for sale in Port Said,” said Madame. “If my husband comes
      it will be so much more. Eh, how you call 'alf a sovereign.”
     

      The money was paid, and the mad dance was held at night in a walled
      courtyard at the back of Madame Binat's house. The lady herself, in faded
      mauve silk always about to slide from her yellow shoulders, played the
      piano, and to the tin-pot music of a Western waltz the naked Zanzibari
      girls danced furiously by the light of kerosene lamps. Binat sat upon a
      chair and stared with eyes that saw nothing, till the whirl of the dance
      and the clang of the rattling piano stole into the drink that took the
      place of blood in his veins, and his face glistened. Dick took him by the
      chin brutally and turned that face to the light. Madame Binat looked over
      her shoulder and smiled with many teeth. Dick leaned against the wall and
      sketched for an hour, till the kerosene lamps began to smell, and the
      girls threw themselves panting on the hard-beaten ground. Then he shut his
      book with a snap and moved away, Binat plucking feebly at his elbow. “Show
      me,” he whimpered. “I too was once an artist, even I!” Dick showed him the
      rough sketch. “Am I that?” he screamed. “Will you take that away with you
      and show all the world that it is I,—Binat?” He moaned and wept.
    

      “Monsieur has paid for all,” said Madame. “To the pleasure of seeing
      Monsieur again.”
     

      The courtyard gate shut, and Dick hurried up the sandy street to the
      nearest gambling-hell, where he was well known. “If the luck holds, it's
      an omen; if I lose, I must stay here.” He placed his money picturesquely
      about the board, hardly daring to look at what he did. The luck held.
    

      Three turns of the wheel left him richer by twenty pounds, and he went
      down to the shipping to make friends with the captain of a decayed
      cargo-steamer, who landed him in London with fewer pounds in his pocket
      than he cared to think about.
    

      A thin gray fog hung over the city, and the streets were very cold; for
      summer was in England.
    

      “It's a cheerful wilderness, and it hasn't the knack of altering much,”
       Dick thought, as he tramped from the Docks westward. “Now, what must I
      do?”
     

      The packed houses gave no answer. Dick looked down the long lightless
      streets and at the appalling rush of traffic. “Oh, you rabbit-hutches!”
       said he, addressing a row of highly respectable semi-detached residences.
      “Do you know what you've got to do later on? You have to supply me with
      men-servants and maid-servants,”—here he smacked his lips,—“and
      the peculiar treasure of kings. Meantime I'll clothes and boots, and
      presently I will return and trample on you.” He stepped forward
      energetically; he saw that one of his shoes was burst at the side. As he
      stooped to make investigations, a man jostled him into the gutter. “All
      right,” he said. “That's another nick in the score. I'll jostle you later
      on.”
     

      Good clothes and boots are not cheap, and Dick left his last shop with the
      certainty that he would be respectably arrayed for a time, but with only
      fifty shillings in his pocket. He returned to streets by the Docks, and
      lodged himself in one room, where the sheets on the bed were almost
      audibly marked in case of theft, and where nobody seemed to go to bed at
      all. When his clothes arrived he sought the Central Southern Syndicate for
      Torpenhow's address, and got it, with the intimation that there was still
      some money waiting for him.
    

      “How much?” said Dick, as one who habitually dealt in millions.
    

      “Between thirty and forty pounds. If it would be any convenience to you,
      of course we could let you have it at once; but we usually settle accounts
      monthly.”
     

      “If I show that I want anything now, I'm lost,” he said to himself. “All I
      need I'll take later on.” Then, aloud, “It's hardly worth while; and I'm
      going to the country for a month, too. Wait till I come back, and I'll see
      about it.”
     

“But we trust, Mr. Heldar, that you do not intend to sever your
connection with us?”

 Dick's business in life was the study of faces, and he watched the speaker
keenly. “That man means something,” he said. “I'll do no business till
I've seen Torpenhow. There's a big deal coming.” So he departed, making
no promises, to his one little room by the Docks. And that day was
the seventh of the month, and that month, he reckoned with awful
distinctness, had thirty-one days in it! It is not easy for a man of
catholic tastes and healthy appetites to exist for twenty-four days on
fifty shillings. Nor is it cheering to begin the experiment alone in
all the loneliness of London. Dick paid seven shillings a week for his
lodging, which left him rather less than a shilling a day for food and
drink. Naturally, his first purchase was of the materials of his craft;
he had been without them too long. Half a day's investigations and
comparison brought him to the conclusion that sausages and mashed
potatoes, twopence a plate, were the best food. Now, sausages once or
twice a week for breakfast are not unpleasant. As lunch, even, with
mashed potatoes, they become monotonous. At dinner they are impertinent.
At the end of three days Dick loathed sausages, and, going, forth,
pawned his watch to revel on sheep's head, which is not as cheap as it
looks, owing to the bones and the gravy. Then he returned to sausages
and mashed potatoes. Then he confined himself entirely to mashed
potatoes for a day, and was unhappy because of pain in his inside. Then
he pawned his waistcoat and his tie, and thought regretfully of money
thrown away in times past. There are few things more edifying unto
Art than the actual belly-pinch of hunger, and Dick in his few walks
abroad,—he did not care for exercise; it raised desires that could not
be satisfied—found himself dividing mankind into two classes,—those
who looked as if they might give him something to eat, and those who
looked otherwise. “I never knew what I had to learn about the human
face before,” he thought; and, as a reward for his humility, Providence
caused a cab-driver at a sausage-shop where Dick fed that night to leave
half eaten a great chunk of bread. Dick took it,—would have fought all
the world for its possession,—and it cheered him.


      The month dragged through at last, and, nearly prancing with impatience,
      he went to draw his money. Then he hastened to Torpenhow's address and
      smelt the smell of cooking meats all along the corridors of the chambers.
      Torpenhow was on the top floor, and Dick burst into his room, to be
      received with a hug which nearly cracked his ribs, as Torpenhow dragged
      him to the light and spoke of twenty different things in the same breath.
    

      “But you're looking tucked up,” he concluded.
    

      “Got anything to eat?” said Dick, his eye roaming round the room.
    

      “I shall be having breakfast in a minute. What do you say to sausages?”
     

      “No, anything but sausages! Torp, I've been starving on that accursed
      horse-flesh for thirty days and thirty nights.”
     

      “Now, what lunacy has been your latest?”
     

      Dick spoke of the last few weeks with unbridled speech. Then he opened his
      coat; there was no waistcoat below. “I ran it fine, awfully fine, but I've
      just scraped through.”
     

      “You haven't much sense, but you've got a backbone, anyhow. Eat, and talk
      afterwards.” Dick fell upon eggs and bacon and gorged till he could gorge
      no more. Torpenhow handed him a filled pipe, and he smoked as men smoke
      who for three weeks have been deprived of good tobacco.
    

      “Ouf!” said he. “That's heavenly! Well?”
     

      “Why in the world didn't you come to me?”
     

      “Couldn't; I owe you too much already, old man. Besides I had a sort of
      superstition that this temporary starvation—that's what it was, and
      it hurt—would bring me luck later. It's over and done with now, and
      none of the syndicate know how hard up I was. Fire away. What's the exact
      state of affairs as regards myself?”
     

      “You had my wire? You've caught on here. People like your work immensely.
      I don't know why, but they do. They say you have a fresh touch and a new
      way of drawing things. And, because they're chiefly home-bred English,
      they say you have insight. You're wanted by half a dozen papers; you're
      wanted to illustrate books.”
     

      Dick grunted scornfully.
    

      “You're wanted to work up your smaller sketches and sell them to the
      dealers. They seem to think the money sunk in you is a good investment.
      Good Lord! who can account for the fathomless folly of the public?”
     

      “They're a remarkably sensible people.”
     

      “They are subject to fits, if that's what you mean; and you happen to be
      the object of the latest fit among those who are interested in what they
      call Art. Just now you're a fashion, a phenomenon, or whatever you please.
      I appeared to be the only person who knew anything about you here, and I
      have been showing the most useful men a few of the sketches you gave me
      from time to time. Those coming after your work on the Central Southern
      Syndicate appear to have done your business. You're in luck.”
     

      “Huh! call it luck! Do call it luck, when a man has been kicking about the
      world like a dog, waiting for it to come! I'll luck 'em later on. I want a
      place to work first.”
     

      “Come here,” said Torpenhow, crossing the landing. “This place is a big
      box room really, but it will do for you. There's your skylight, or your
      north light, or whatever window you call it, and plenty of room to thrash
      about in, and a bedroom beyond. What more do you need?”
     

      “Good enough,” said Dick, looking round the large room that took up a
      third of a top story in the rickety chambers overlooking the Thames. A
      pale yellow sun shone through the skylight and showed the much dirt of the
      place. Three steps led from the door to the landing, and three more to
      Torpenhow's room. The well of the staircase disappeared into darkness,
      pricked by tiny gas-jets, and there were sounds of men talking and doors
      slamming seven flights below, in the warm gloom.
    

      “Do they give you a free hand here?” said Dick, cautiously. He was Ishmael
      enough to know the value of liberty.
    

      “Anything you like; latch-keys and license unlimited. We are permanent
      tenants for the most part here. 'Tisn't a place I would recommend for a
      Young Men's Christian Association, but it will serve. I took these rooms
      for you when I wired.”
     

 “You're a great deal too kind, old man.”
 

      “You didn't suppose you were going away from me, did you?” Torpenhow put
      his hand on Dick's shoulder, and the two walked up and down the room,
      henceforward to be called the studio, in sweet and silent communion. They
      heard rapping at Torpenhow's door. “That's some ruffian come up for a
      drink,” said Torpenhow; and he raised his voice cheerily. There entered no
      one more ruffianly than a portly middle-aged gentleman in a satin-faced
      frockcoat. His lips were parted and pale, and there were deep pouches
      under the eyes.
    

      “Weak heart,” said Dick to himself, and, as he shook hands, “very weak
      heart. His pulse is shaking his fingers.”
     

      The man introduced himself as the head of the Central Southern Syndicate
      and “one of the most ardent admirers of your work, Mr. Heldar. I assure
      you, in the name of the syndicate, that we are immensely indebted to you;
      and I trust, Mr. Heldar, you won't forget that we were largely
      instrumental in bringing you before the public.” He panted because of the
      seven flights of stairs.
    

      Dick glanced at Torpenhow, whose left eyelid lay for a moment dead on his
      cheek.
    

      “I shan't forget,” said Dick, every instinct of defence roused in him.
    

      “You've paid me so well that I couldn't, you know. By the way, when I am
      settled in this place I should like to send and get my sketches. There
      must be nearly a hundred and fifty of them with you.”
     

      “That is er—is what I came to speak about. I fear we can't allow it
      exactly, Mr. Heldar. In the absence of any specified agreement, the
      sketches are our property, of course.”
     

      “Do you mean to say that you are going to keep them?”
     

      “Yes; and we hope to have your help, on your own terms, Mr. Heldar, to
      assist us in arranging a little exhibition, which, backed by our name and
      the influence we naturally command among the press, should be of material
      service to you. Sketches such as yours——”
     

      “Belong to me. You engaged me by wire, you paid me the lowest rates you
      dared. You can't mean to keep them! Good God alive, man, they're all I've
      got in the world!”
     

      Torpenhow watched Dick's face and whistled.
    

      Dick walked up and down, thinking. He saw the whole of his little stock in
      trade, the first weapon of his equipment, annexed at the outset of his
      campaign by an elderly gentleman whose name Dick had not caught aright,
      who said that he represented a syndicate, which was a thing for which Dick
      had not the least reverence. The injustice of the proceedings did not much
      move him; he had seen the strong hand prevail too often in other places to
      be squeamish over the moral aspects of right and wrong.
    

      But he ardently desired the blood of the gentleman in the frockcoat, and
      when he spoke again, it was with a strained sweetness that Torpenhow knew
      well for the beginning of strife.
    

      “Forgive me, sir, but you have no—no younger man who can arrange
      this business with me?”
     

      “I speak for the syndicate. I see no reason for a third party to——”
     

      “You will in a minute. Be good enough to give back my sketches.”
     

      The man stared blankly at Dick, and then at Torpenhow, who was leaning
      against the wall. He was not used to ex-employees who ordered him to be
      good enough to do things.
    

      “Yes, it is rather a cold-blooded steal,” said Torpenhow, critically; “but
      I'm afraid, I am very much afraid, you've struck the wrong man. Be
      careful, Dick; remember, this isn't the Soudan.”
     

      “Considering what services the syndicate have done you in putting your
      name before the world——”
     

      This was not a fortunate remark; it reminded Dick of certain vagrant years
      lived out in loneliness and strife and unsatisfied desires. The memory did
      not contrast well with the prosperous gentleman who proposed to enjoy the
      fruit of those years.
    

      “I don't know quite what to do with you,” began Dick, meditatively. “Of
      course you're a thief, and you ought to be half killed, but in your case
      you'd probably die. I don't want you dead on this floor, and, besides,
      it's unlucky just as one's moving in. Don't hit, sir; you'll only excite
      yourself.”
     

      He put one hand on the man's forearm and ran the other down the plump body
      beneath the coat. “My goodness!” said he to Torpenhow, “and this gray oaf
      dares to be a thief! I have seen an Esneh camel-driver have the black hide
      taken off his body in strips for stealing half a pound of wet dates, and
      he was as tough as whipcord. This thing's soft all over—like a
      woman.”
     

      There are few things more poignantly humiliating than being handled by a
      man who does not intend to strike. The head of the syndicate began to
      breathe heavily. Dick walked round him, pawing him, as a cat paws a soft
      hearth-rug. Then he traced with his forefinger the leaden pouches
      underneath the eyes, and shook his head. “You were going to steal my
      things,—mine, mine, mine!—you, who don't know when you may
      die. Write a note to your office,—you say you're the head of it,—and
      order them to give Torpenhow my sketches,—every one of them. Wait a
      minute: your hand's shaking. Now!” He thrust a pocket-book before him. The
      note was written. Torpenhow took it and departed without a word, while
      Dick walked round and round the spellbound captive, giving him such advice
      as he conceived best for the welfare of his soul. When Torpenhow returned
      with a gigantic portfolio, he heard Dick say, almost soothingly, “Now, I
      hope this will be a lesson to you; and if you worry me when I have settled
      down to work with any nonsense about actions for assault, believe me, I'll
      catch you and manhandle you, and you'll die. You haven't very long to
      live, anyhow. Go! Imshi, Vootsak,—get out!” The man departed,
      staggering and dazed. Dick drew a long breath: “Phew! what a lawless lot
      these people are! The first thing a poor orphan meets is gang robbery,
      organised burglary! Think of the hideous blackness of that man's mind! Are
      my sketches all right, Torp?”
     

      “Yes; one hundred and forty-seven of them. Well, I must say, Dick, you've
      begun well.”
     

      “He was interfering with me. It only meant a few pounds to him, but it was
      everything to me. I don't think he'll bring an action. I gave him some
      medical advice gratis about the state of his body. It was cheap at the
      little flurry it cost him. Now, let's look at my things.”
     

      Two minutes later Dick had thrown himself down on the floor and was deep
      in the portfolio, chuckling lovingly as he turned the drawings over and
      thought of the price at which they had been bought.
    

      The afternoon was well advanced when Torpenhow came to the door and saw
      Dick dancing a wild saraband under the skylight.
    

      “I builded better than I knew, Torp,” he said, without stopping the dance.
      “They're good! They're damned good! They'll go like flame! I shall have an
      exhibition of them on my own brazen hook. And that man would have cheated
      me out of it! Do you know that I'm sorry now that I didn't actually hit
      him?”
     

      “Go out,” said Torpenhow,—“go out and pray to be delivered from the
      sin of arrogance, which you never will be. Bring your things up from
      whatever place you're staying in, and we'll try to make this barn a little
      more shipshape.”
     

      “And then—oh, then,” said Dick, still capering, “we will spoil the
      Egyptians!”
     







      CHAPTER IV
    

   The wolf-cub at even lay hid in the corn,
   When the smoke of the cooking hung gray:
   He knew where the doe made a couch for her fawn,
   And he looked to his strength for his prey.

   But the moon swept the smoke-wreaths away.

   And he turned from his meal in the villager's close,
   And he bayed to the moon as she rose.
             —In Seonee.


      “WELL, and how does success taste?” said Torpenhow, some three months
      later. He had just returned to chambers after a holiday in the country.
    

      “Good,” said Dick, as he sat licking his lips before the easel in the
      studio.
    

      “I want more,—heaps more. The lean years have passed, and I approve
      of these fat ones.”
     

      “Be careful, old man. That way lies bad work.”
     

      Torpenhow was sprawling in a long chair with a small fox-terrier asleep on
      his chest, while Dick was preparing a canvas. A dais, a background, and a
      lay-figure were the only fixed objects in the place. They rose from a
      wreck of oddments that began with felt-covered water-bottles, belts, and
      regimental badges, and ended with a small bale of second-hand uniforms and
      a stand of mixed arms. The mark of muddy feet on the dais showed that a
      military model had just gone away. The watery autumn sunlight was falling,
      and shadows sat in the corners of the studio.
    

      “Yes,” said Dick, deliberately, “I like the power; I like the fun; I like
      the fuss; and above all I like the money. I almost like the people who
      make the fuss and pay the money. Almost. But they're a queer gang,—an
      amazingly queer gang!”
     

      “They have been good enough to you, at any rate. That tin-pot exhibition
      of your sketches must have paid. Did you see that the papers called it the
      'Wild Work Show'?”
     

      “Never mind. I sold every shred of canvas I wanted to; and, on my word, I
      believe it was because they believed I was a self-taught flagstone artist.
      I should have got better prices if I worked my things on wool or scratched
      them on camel-bone instead of using mere black and white and colour.
      Verily, they are a queer gang, these people. Limited isn't the word to
      describe 'em. I met a fellow the other day who told me that it was
      impossible that shadows on white sand should be blue,—ultramarine,—as
      they are. I found out, later, that the man had been as far as Brighton
      beach; but he knew all about Art, confound him. He gave me a lecture on
      it, and recommended me to go to school to learn technique. I wonder what
      old Kami would have said to that.”
     

      “When were you under Kami, man of extraordinary beginnings?”
     

      “I studied with him for two years in Paris. He taught by personal
      magnetism. All he ever said was, 'Continuez, mes enfants,' and you had to
      make the best you could of that. He had a divine touch, and he knew
      something about colour. Kami used to dream colour; I swear he could never
      have seen the genuine article; but he evolved it; and it was good.”
     

      “Recollect some of those views in the Soudan?” said Torpenhow, with a
      provoking drawl.
    

      Dick squirmed in his place. “Don't! It makes me want to get out there
      again. What colour that was! Opal and umber and amber and claret and
      brick-red and sulphur—cockatoo-crest-sulphur—against brown,
      with a nigger-black rock sticking up in the middle of it all, and a
      decorative frieze of camels festooning in front of a pure pale turquoise
      sky.” He began to walk up and down. “And yet, you know, if you try to give
      these people the thing as God gave it, keyed down to their comprehension
      and according to the powers He has given you——”
     

      “Modest man! Go on.”
     

      “Half a dozen epicene young pagans who haven't even been to Algiers will
      tell you, first, that your notion is borrowed, and, secondly, that it
      isn't Art.”
     

      “This comes of my leaving town for a month. Dickie, you've been
      promenading among the toy-shops and hearing people talk.”
     

      “I couldn't help it,” said Dick, penitently. “You weren't here, and it was
      lonely these long evenings. A man can't work for ever.”
     

      “A man might have gone to a pub, and got decently drunk.”
     

      “I wish I had; but I forgathered with some men of sorts. They said they
      were artists, and I knew some of them could draw,—but they wouldn't
      draw. They gave me tea,—tea at five in the afternoon!—and
      talked about Art and the state of their souls. As if their souls mattered.
      I've heard more about Art and seen less of her in the last six months than
      in the whole of my life. Do you remember Cassavetti, who worked for some
      continental syndicate, out with the desert column? He was a regular
      Christmas-tree of contraptions when he took the field in full fig, with
      his water-bottle, lanyard, revolver, writing-case, housewife, gig-lamps,
      and the Lord knows what all. He used to fiddle about with 'em and show us
      how they worked; but he never seemed to do much except fudge his reports
      from the Nilghai. See?”
     

      “Dear old Nilghai! He's in town, fatter than ever. He ought to be up here
      this evening. I see the comparison perfectly. You should have kept clear
      of all that man-millinery. Serves you right; and I hope it will unsettle
      your mind.”
     

      “It won't. It has taught me what Art—holy sacred Art—means.”
     

      “You've learnt something while I've been away. What is Art?”
     

      “Give 'em what they know, and when you've done it once do it again.”
     

      Dick dragged forward a canvas laid face to the wall. “Here's a sample of
      real Art. It's going to be a facsimile reproduction for a weekly. I called
      it 'His Last Shot.' It's worked up from the little water-colour I made
      outside El Maghrib. Well, I lured my model, a beautiful rifleman, up here
      with drink; I drored him, and I redrored him, and I redrored him, and I
      made him a flushed, dishevelled, bedevilled scallawag, with his helmet at
      the back of his head, and the living fear of death in his eye, and the
      blood oozing out of a cut over his ankle-bone. He wasn't pretty, but he
      was all soldier and very much man.”
     

      “Once more, modest child!”
     

      Dick laughed. “Well, it's only to you I'm talking. I did him just as well
      as I knew how, making allowance for the slickness of oils. Then the
      art-manager of that abandoned paper said that his subscribers wouldn't
      like it. It was brutal and coarse and violent,—man being naturally
      gentle when he's fighting for his life. They wanted something more
      restful, with a little more colour. I could have said a good deal, but you
      might as well talk to a sheep as an art-manager. I took my 'Last Shot'
      back. Behold the result! I put him into a lovely red coat without a speck
      on it. That is Art. I polished his boots,—observe the high light on
      the toe. That is Art. I cleaned his rifle,—rifles are always clean
      on service,—because that is Art. I pipeclayed his helmet,—pipeclay
      is always used on active service, and is indispensable to Art. I shaved
      his chin, I washed his hands, and gave him an air of fatted peace. Result,
      military tailor's pattern-plate. Price, thank Heaven, twice as much as for
      the first sketch, which was moderately decent.”
     

      “And do you suppose you're going to give that thing out as your work?”
     

      “Why not? I did it. Alone I did it, in the interests of sacred, home-bred
      Art and Dickenson's Weekly.”
     

      Torpenhow smoked in silence for a while. Then came the verdict, delivered
      from rolling clouds: “If you were only a mass of blathering vanity, Dick,
      I wouldn't mind,—I'd let you go to the deuce on your own mahl-stick;
      but when I consider what you are to me, and when I find that to vanity you
      add the twopenny-halfpenny pique of a twelve-year-old girl, then I bestir
      myself in your behalf. Thus!”
     

      The canvas ripped as Torpenhow's booted foot shot through it, and the
      terrier jumped down, thinking rats were about.
    

      “If you have any bad language to use, use it. You have not. I continue.
      You are an idiot, because no man born of woman is strong enough to take
      liberties with his public, even though they be—which they ain't—all
      you say they are.”
     

      “But they don't know any better. What can you expect from creatures born
      and bred in this light?” Dick pointed to the yellow fog. “If they want
      furniture-polish, let them have furniture-polish, so long as they pay for
      it. They are only men and women. You talk as if they were gods.”
     

      “That sounds very fine, but it has nothing to do with the case. They are
      they people you have to do work for, whether you like it or not. They are
      your masters. Don't be deceived, Dickie, you aren't strong enough to
      trifle with them,—or with yourself, which is more important.
    

      “Moreover,—Come back, Binkie: that red daub isn't going anywhere,—unless
      you take precious good care, you will fall under the damnation of the
      check-book, and that's worse than death. You will get drunk—you're
      half drunk already—on easily acquired money. For that money and you
      own infernal vanity you are willing to deliberately turn out bad work.
      You'll do quite enough bad work without knowing it. And, Dickie, as I love
      you and as I know you love me, I am not going to let you cut off your nose
      to spite your face for all the gold in England. That's settled. Now
      swear.”
     

      “Don't know,” said Dick. “I've been trying to make myself angry, but I
      can't, you're so abominably reasonable. There will be a row on Dickenson's
      Weekly, I fancy.”
     

      “Why the Dickenson do you want to work on a weekly paper? It's slow
      bleeding of power.”
     

      “It brings in the very desirable dollars,” said Dick, his hands in his
      pockets.
    

      Torpenhow watched him with large contempt. “Why, I thought it was a man!”
       said he. “It's a child.”
     

      “No, it isn't,” said Dick, wheeling quickly. “You've no notion what the
      certainty of cash means to a man who has always wanted it badly. Nothing
      will pay me for some of my life's joys; on that Chinese pig-boat, for
      instance, when we ate bread and jam for every meal, because Ho-Wang
      wouldn't allow us anything better, and it all tasted of pig,—Chinese
      pig. I've worked for this, I've sweated and I've starved for this, line on
      line and month after month. And now I've got it I am going to make the
      most of it while it lasts. Let them pay—they've no knowledge.”
     

      “What does Your Majesty please to want? You can't smoke more than you do;
      you won't drink; you're a gross feeder; and you dress in the dark, by the
      look of you. You wouldn't keep a horse the other day when I suggested,
      because, you said, it might fall lame, and whenever you cross the street
      you take a hansom. Even you are not foolish enough to suppose that
      theatres and all the live things you can by thereabouts mean Life. What
      earthly need have you for money?”
     

      “It's there, bless its golden heart,” said Dick. “It's there all the time.
      Providence has sent me nuts while I have teeth to crack 'em with. I
      haven't yet found the nut I wish to crack, but I'm keeping my teeth filed.
      Perhaps some day you and I will go for a walk round the wide earth.”
     

      “With no work to do, nobody to worry us, and nobody to compete with? You
      would be unfit to speak to in a week. Besides, I shouldn't go. I don't
      care to profit by the price of a man's soul,—for that's what it
      would mean. Dick, it's no use arguing. You're a fool.”
     

      “Don't see it. When I was on that Chinese pig-boat, our captain got credit
      for saving about twenty-five thousand very seasick little pigs, when our
      old tramp of a steamer fell foul of a timber-junk. Now, taking those pigs
      as a parallel——”
     

      “Oh, confound your parallels! Whenever I try to improve your soul, you
      always drag in some anecdote from your very shady past. Pigs aren't the
      British public; and self-respect is self-respect the world over. Go out
      for a walk and try to catch some self-respect. And, I say, if the Nilghai
      comes up this evening can I show him your diggings?”
     

      “Surely.” And Dick departed, to take counsel with himself in the rapidly
      gathering London fog.
    

      Half an hour after he had left, the Nilghai laboured up the staircase. He
      was the chiefest, as he was the youngest, of the war correspondents, and
      his experiences dated from the birth of the needle-gun. Saving only his
      ally, Keneu the Great War Eagle, there was no man higher in the craft than
      he, and he always opened his conversation with the news that there would
      be trouble in the Balkans in the spring. Torpenhow laughed as he entered.
    

      “Never mind the trouble in the Balkans. Those little states are always
      screeching. You've heard about Dick's luck?”
     

      “Yes; he has been called up to notoriety, hasn't he? I hope you keep him
      properly humble. He wants suppressing from time to time.”
     

      “He does. He's beginning to take liberties with what he thinks is his
      reputation.”
     

      “Already! By Jove, he has cheek! I don't know about his reputation, but
      he'll come a cropper if he tries that sort of thing.”
     

      “So I told him. I don't think he believes it.”
     

      “They never do when they first start off. What's that wreck on the ground
      there?”
     

      “Specimen of his latest impertinence.” Torpenhow thrust the torn edges of
      the canvas together and showed the well-groomed picture to the Nilghai,
      who looked at it for a moment and whistled.
    

      “It's a chromo,” said he,—“a chromo-litholeomargarine fake! What
      possessed him to do it? And yet how thoroughly he has caught the note that
      catches a public who think with their boots and read with their elbows!
      The cold-blooded insolence of the work almost saves it; but he mustn't go
      on with this. Hasn't he been praised and cockered up too much? You know
      these people here have no sense of proportion. They'll call him a second
      Detaille and a third-hand Meissonier while his fashion lasts. It's windy
      diet for a colt.”
     

      “I don't think it affects Dick much. You might as well call a young wolf a
      lion and expect him to take the compliment in exchange for a shin-bone.
      Dick's soul is in the bank. He's working for cash.”
     

      “Now he has thrown up war work, I suppose he doesn't see that the
      obligations of the service are just the same, only the proprietors are
      changed.”
     

      “How should he know? He thinks he is his own master.”
     

      “Does he? I could undeceive him for his good, if there's any virtue in
      print. He wants the whiplash.”
     

      “Lay it on with science, then. I'd flay him myself, but I like him too
      much.”
     

      “I've no scruples. He had the audacity to try to cut me out with a woman
      at Cairo once. I forgot that, but I remember now.”
     

      “Did he cut you out?”
     

      “You'll see when I have dealt with him. But, after all, what's the good?
      Leave him alone and he'll come home, if he has any stuff in him, dragging
      or wagging his tail behind him. There's more in a week of life than in a
      lively weekly. None the less I'll slate him. I'll slate him ponderously in
      the Cataclysm.”
     

      “Good luck to you; but I fancy nothing short of a crowbar would make Dick
      wince. His soul seems to have been fired before we came across him. He's
      intensely suspicious and utterly lawless.”
     

      “Matter of temper,” said the Nilghai. “It's the same with horses. Some you
      wallop and they work, some you wallop and they jib, and some you wallop
      and they go out for a walk with their hands in their pockets.”
     

      “That's exactly what Dick has done,” said Torpenhow. “Wait till he comes
      back. In the meantime, you can begin your slating here. I'll show you some
      of his last and worst work in his studio.”
     

      Dick had instinctively sought running water for a comfort to his mood of
      mind. He was leaning over the Embankment wall, watching the rush of the
      Thames through the arches of Westminster Bridge. He began by thinking of
      Torpenhow's advice, but, as of custom, lost himself in the study of the
      faces flocking past. Some had death written on their features, and Dick
      marvelled that they could laugh. Others, clumsy and coarse-built for the
      most part, were alight with love; others were merely drawn and lined with
      work; but there was something, Dick knew, to be made out of them all. The
      poor at least should suffer that he might learn, and the rich should pay
      for the output of his learning. Thus his credit in the world and his cash
      balance at the bank would be increased. So much the better for him. He had
      suffered. Now he would take toll of the ills of others.
    

      The fog was driven apart for a moment, and the sun shone, a blood-red
      wafer, on the water. Dick watched the spot till he heard the voice of the
      tide between the piers die down like the wash of the sea at low tide. A
      girl hard pressed by her lover shouted shamelessly, “Ah, get away, you
      beast!” and a shift of the same wind that had opened the fog drove across
      Dick's face the black smoke of a river-steamer at her berth below the
      wall. He was blinded for the moment, then spun round and found himself
      face to face with—Maisie.
    

      There was no mistaking. The years had turned the child to a woman, but
      they had not altered the dark-gray eyes, the thin scarlet lips, or the
      firmly modelled mouth and chin; and, that all should be as it was of old,
      she wore a closely fitting gray dress.
    

      Since the human soul is finite and not in the least under its own command,
      Dick, advancing, said “Halloo!” after the manner of schoolboys, and Maisie
      answered, “Oh, Dick, is that you?” Then, against his will, and before the
      brain newly released from considerations of the cash balance had time to
      dictate to the nerves, every pulse of Dick's body throbbed furiously and
      his palate dried in his mouth. The fog shut down again, and Maisie's face
      was pearl-white through it. No word was spoken, but Dick fell into step at
      her side, and the two paced the Embankment together, keeping the step as
      perfectly as in their afternoon excursions to the mud-flats. Then Dick, a
      little hoarsely—“What has happened to Amomma?”
     

      “He died, Dick. Not cartridges; over-eating. He was always greedy. Isn't
      it funny?”
     

      “Yes. No. Do you mean Amomma?”
     

      “Ye—es. No. This. Where have you come from?”
     

      “Over there,” He pointed eastward through the fog. “And you?”
     

      “Oh, I'm in the north,—the black north, across all the Park. I am
      very busy.”
     

      “What do you do?”
     

      “I paint a great deal. That's all I have to do.”
     

      “Why, what's happened? You had three hundred a year.”
     

      “I have that still. I am painting; that's all.”
     

      “Are you alone, then?”
     

      “There's a girl living with me. Don't walk so fast, Dick; you're out of
      step.”
     

      “Then you noticed it too?”
     

      “Of course I did. You're always out of step.”
     

      “So I am. I'm sorry. You went on with the painting?”
     

      “Of course. I said I should. I was at the Slade, then at Merton's in St.
      John's Wood, the big studio, then I pepper-potted,—I mean I went to
      the National,—and now I'm working under Kami.”
     

      “But Kami is in Paris surely?”
     

      “No; he has his teaching studio in Vitry-sur-Marne. I work with him in the
      summer, and I live in London in the winter. I'm a householder.”
     

      “Do you sell much?”
     

      “Now and again, but not often. There is my 'bus. I must take it or lose
      half an hour. Goodbye, Dick.”
     

      “Goodbye, Maisie. Won't you tell me where you live? I must see you again;
      and perhaps I could help you. I—I paint a little myself.”
     

      “I may be in the Park tomorrow, if there is no working light. I walk from
      the Marble Arch down and back again; that is my little excursion. But of
      course I shall see you again.” She stepped into the omnibus and was
      swallowed up by the fog.
    

      “Well—I—am—damned!” exclaimed Dick, and returned to the
      chambers.
    

      Torpenhow and the Nilghai found him sitting on the steps to the studio
      door, repeating the phrase with an awful gravity.
    

      “You'll be more damned when I'm done with you,” said the Nilghai,
      upheaving his bulk from behind Torpenhow's shoulder and waving a sheaf of
      half-dry manuscript. “Dick, it is of common report that you are suffering
      from swelled head.”
     

      “Halloo, Nilghai. Back again? How are the Balkans and all the little
      Balkans? One side of your face is out of drawing, as usual.”
     

      “Never mind that. I am commissioned to smite you in print. Torpenhow
      refuses from false delicacy. I've been overhauling the pot-boilers in your
      studio. They are simply disgraceful.”
     

      “Oho! that's it, is it? If you think you can slate me, you're wrong. You
      can only describe, and you need as much room to turn in, on paper, as a P.
      and O. cargo-boat. But continue, and be swift. I'm going to bed.”
     

      “H'm! h'm! h'm! The first part only deals with your pictures. Here's the
      peroration: 'For work done without conviction, for power wasted on
      trivialities, for labour expended with levity for the deliberate purpose
      of winning the easy applause of a fashion-driven public——”
     

      “That's 'His Last Shot,' second edition. Go on.”
     

      “——'public, there remains but one end,—the oblivion that
      is preceded by toleration and cenotaphed with contempt. From that fate Mr.
      Heldar has yet to prove himself out of danger.”
     

      “Wow—wow—wow—wow—wow!” said Dick, profanely. “It's
      a clumsy ending and vile journalese, but it's quite true. And yet,”—he
      sprang to his feet and snatched at the manuscript,—“you scarred,
      deboshed, battered old gladiator! you're sent out when a war begins, to
      minister to the blind, brutal, British public's bestial thirst for blood.
      They have no arenas now, but they must have special correspondents. You're
      a fat gladiator who comes up through a trap-door and talks of what he's
      seen. You stand on precisely the same level as an energetic bishop, an
      affable actress, a devastating cyclone, or—mine own sweet self. And
      you presume to lecture me about my work! Nilghai, if it were worth while
      I'd caricature you in four papers!”
     

      The Nilghai winced. He had not thought of this.
    

      “As it is, I shall take this stuff and tear it small—so!” The
      manuscript fluttered in slips down the dark well of the staircase. “Go
      home, Nilghai,” said Dick; “go home to your lonely little bed, and leave
      me in peace. I am about to turn in till to morrow.”
     

      “Why, it isn't seven yet!” said Torpenhow, with amazement.
    

      “It shall be two in the morning, if I choose,” said Dick, backing to the
      studio door. “I go to grapple with a serious crisis, and I shan't want any
      dinner.”
     

      The door shut and was locked.
    

      “What can you do with a man like that?” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Leave him alone. He's as mad as a hatter.”
     

      At eleven there was a kicking on the studio door. “Is the Nilghai with you
      still?” said a voice from within. “Then tell him he might have condensed
      the whole of his lumbering nonsense into an epigram: 'Only the free are
      bond, and only the bond are free.' Tell him he's an idiot, Torp, and tell
      him I'm another.”
     

      “All right. Come out and have supper. You're smoking on an empty stomach.”
     

      There was no answer.
    







      CHAPTER V
    

   “I have a thousand men,” said he,
   “To wait upon my will,
   And towers nine upon the Tyne,
   And three upon the Till.”

   “And what care I for you men,” said she,
   “Or towers from Tyne to Till,
   “Sith you must go with me,” she said,
   “To wait upon my will?”
                    —Sir Hoggie and the Fairies


      Next morning Torpenhow found Dick sunk in deepest repose of tobacco.
    

      “Well, madman, how d'you feel?”
     

      “I don't know. I'm trying to find out.”
     

      “You had much better do some work.”
     

      “Maybe; but I'm in no hurry. I've made a discovery. Torp, there's too much
      Ego in my Cosmos.”
     

      “Not really! Is this revelation due to my lectures, or the Nilghai's?”
     

      “It came to me suddenly, all on my own account. Much too much Ego; and now
      I'm going to work.”
     

      He turned over a few half-finished sketches, drummed on a new canvas,
      cleaned three brushes, set Binkie to bite the toes of the lay figure,
      rattled through his collection of arms and accoutrements, and then went
      out abruptly, declaring that he had done enough for the day.
    

      “This is positively indecent,” said Torpenhow, “and the first time that
      Dick has ever broken up a light morning. Perhaps he has found out that he
      has a soul, or an artistic temperament, or something equally valuable.
      That comes of leaving him alone for a month. Perhaps he has been going out
      of evenings. I must look to this.” He rang for the bald-headed old
      housekeeper, whom nothing could astonish or annoy.
    

      “Beeton, did Mr. Heldar dine out at all while I was out of town?”
     

      “Never laid 'is dress-clothes out once, sir, all the time. Mostly 'e dined
      in; but 'e brought some most remarkable young gentlemen up 'ere after
      theatres once or twice. Remarkable fancy they was. You gentlemen on the
      top floor does very much as you likes, but it do seem to me, sir, droppin'
      a walkin'-stick down five flights o' stairs an' then goin' down four
      abreast to pick it up again at half-past two in the mornin', singin'
      'Bring back the whiskey, Willie darlin','—not once or twice, but
      scores o' times,—isn't charity to the other tenants. What I say is,
      'Do as you would be done by.' That's my motto.”
     

      “Of course! of course! I'm afraid the top floor isn't the quietest in the
      house.”
     

      “I make no complaints, sir. I have spoke to Mr. Heldar friendly, an' he
      laughed, an' did me a picture of the missis that is as good as a coloured
      print. It 'asn't the high shine of a photograph, but what I say is, 'Never
      look a gift-horse in the mouth.' Mr. Heldar's dress-clothes 'aven't been
      on him for weeks.”
     

      “Then it's all right,” said Torpenhow to himself. “Orgies are healthy, and
      Dick has a head of his own, but when it comes to women making eyes I'm not
      so certain,—Binkie, never you be a man, little dorglums. They're
      contrary brutes, and they do things without any reason.”
     

      Dick had turned northward across the Park, but he was walking in the
      spirit on the mud-flats with Maisie. He laughed aloud as he remembered the
      day when he had decked Amomma's horns with the ham-frills, and Maisie,
      white with rage, had cuffed him. How long those four years seemed in
      review, and how closely Maisie was connected with every hour of them!
      Storm across the sea, and Maisie in a gray dress on the beach, sweeping
      her drenched hair out of her eyes and laughing at the homeward race of the
      fishing-smacks; hot sunshine on the mud-flats, and Maisie sniffing
      scornfully, with her chin in the air; Maisie flying before the wind that
      threshed the foreshore and drove the sand like small shot about her ears;
      Maisie, very composed and independent, telling lies to Mrs. Jennett while
      Dick supported her with coarser perjuries; Maisie picking her way
      delicately from stone to stone, a pistol in her hand and her teeth
      firm-set; and Maisie in a gray dress sitting on the grass between the
      mouth of a cannon and a nodding yellow sea-poppy. The pictures passed
      before him one by one, and the last stayed the longest.
    

      Dick was perfectly happy with a quiet peace that was as new to his mind as
      it was foreign to his experiences. It never occurred to him that there
      might be other calls upon his time than loafing across the Park in the
      forenoon.
    

      “There's a good working light now,” he said, watching his shadow placidly.
      “Some poor devil ought to be grateful for this. And there's Maisie.”
     

      She was walking towards him from the Marble Arch, and he saw that no
      mannerism of her gait had been changed. It was good to find her still
      Maisie, and, so to speak, his next-door neighbour. No greeting passed
      between them, because there had been none in the old days.
    

      “What are you doing out of your studio at this hour?” said Dick, as one
      who was entitled to ask.
    

      “Idling. Just idling. I got angry with a chin and scraped it out. Then I
      left it in a little heap of paint-chips and came away.”
     

      “I know what palette-knifing means. What was the piccy?”
     

      “A fancy head that wouldn't come right,—horrid thing!”
     

      “I don't like working over scraped paint when I'm doing flesh. The grain
      comes up woolly as the paint dries.”
     

      “Not if you scrape properly.” Maisie waved her hand to illustrate her
      methods. There was a dab of paint on the white cuff. Dick laughed.
    

      “You're as untidy as ever.”
     

      “That comes well from you. Look at your own cuff.”
     

      “By Jove, yes! It's worse than yours. I don't think we've much altered in
      anything. Let's see, though.” He looked at Maisie critically. The pale
      blue haze of an autumn day crept between the tree-trunks of the Park and
      made a background for the gray dress, the black velvet toque above the
      black hair, and the resolute profile.
    

      “No, there's nothing changed. How good it is! D'you remember when I
      fastened your hair into the snap of a hand-bag?”
     

      Maisie nodded, with a twinkle in her eyes, and turned her full face to
      Dick.
    

      “Wait a minute,” said he. “That mouth is down at the corners a little.
      Who's been worrying you, Maisie?”
     

      “No one but myself. I never seem to get on with my work, and yet I try
      hard enough, and Kami says——”
     

      “'Continuez, mesdemoiselles. Continuez toujours, mes enfants.' Kami is
      depressing. I beg your pardon.”
     

      “Yes, that's what he says. He told me last summer that I was doing better
      and he'd let me exhibit this year.”
     

      “Not in this place, surely?”
     

      “Of course not. The Salon.”
     

      “You fly high.”
     

      “I've been beating my wings long enough. Where do you exhibit, Dick?”
     

      “I don't exhibit. I sell.”
     

      “What is your line, then?”
     

      “Haven't you heard?” Dick's eyes opened. Was this thing possible? He cast
      about for some means of conviction. They were not far from the Marble
      Arch. “Come up Oxford Street a little and I'll show you.”
     

      A small knot of people stood round a print-shop that Dick knew well.
    

      “Some reproduction of my work inside,” he said, with suppressed triumph.
      Never before had success tasted so sweet upon the tongue. “You see the
      sort of things I paint. D'you like it?”
     

      Maisie looked at the wild whirling rush of a field-battery going into
      action under fire. Two artillery-men stood behind her in the crowd.
    

      “They've chucked the off lead-'orse” said one to the other. “'E's tore up
      awful, but they're makin' good time with the others. That lead-driver
      drives better nor you, Tom. See 'ow cunnin' 'e's nursin' 'is 'orse.”
     

      “Number Three'll be off the limber, next jolt,” was the answer.
    

      “No, 'e won't. See 'ow 'is foot's braced against the iron? 'E's all
      right.”
     

      Dick watched Maisie's face and swelled with joy—fine, rank, vulgar
      triumph. She was more interested in the little crowd than in the picture.
    

      That was something that she could understand.
    

      “And I wanted it so! Oh, I did want it so!” she said at last, under her
      breath.
    

      “Me,—all me!” said Dick, placidly. “Look at their faces. It hits
      'em. They don't know what makes their eyes and mouths open; but I know.
      And I know my work's right.”
     

      “Yes. I see. Oh, what a thing to have come to one!”
     

      “Come to one, indeed! I had to go out and look for it. What do you think?”
     

      “I call it success. Tell me how you got it.”
     

      They returned to the Park, and Dick delivered himself of the saga of his
      own doings, with all the arrogance of a young man speaking to a woman.
    

      From the beginning he told the tale, the I—I—I's flashing
      through the records as telegraph-poles fly past the traveller. Maisie
      listened and nodded her head. The histories of strife and privation did
      not move her a hair's-breadth. At the end of each canto he would conclude,
      “And that gave me some notion of handling colour,” or light, or whatever
      it might be that he had set out to pursue and understand. He led her
      breathless across half the world, speaking as he had never spoken in his
      life before.
    

      And in the flood-tide of his exaltation there came upon him a great desire
      to pick up this maiden who nodded her head and said, “I understand. Go
      on,”—to pick her up and carry her away with him, because she was
      Maisie, and because she understood, and because she was his right, and a
      woman to be desired above all women.
    

      Then he checked himself abruptly. “And so I took all I wanted,” he said,
      “and I had to fight for it. Now you tell.”
     

      Maisie's tale was almost as gray as her dress. It covered years of patient
      toil backed by savage pride that would not be broken though dealers
      laughed, and fogs delayed work, and Kami was unkind and even sarcastic,
      and girls in other studios were painfully polite. It had a few bright
      spots, in pictures accepted at provincial exhibitions, but it wound up
      with the oft repeated wail, “And so you see, Dick, I had no success,
      though I worked so hard.”
     

      Then pity filled Dick. Even thus had Maisie spoken when she could not hit
      the breakwater, half an hour before she had kissed him. And that had
      happened yesterday.
    

      “Never mind,” he said. “I'll tell you something, if you'll believe it.”
       The words were shaping themselves of their own accord. “The whole thing,
      lock, stock, and barrel, isn't worth one big yellow sea-poppy below Fort
      Keeling.”
     

      Maisie flushed a little. “It's all very well for you to talk, but you've
      had the success and I haven't.”
     

      “Let me talk, then. I know you'll understand. Maisie, dear, it sounds a
      bit absurd, but those ten years never existed, and I've come back again.
      It really is just the same. Can't you see? You're alone now and I'm alone.
      What's the use of worrying? Come to me instead, darling.”
     

      Maisie poked the gravel with her parasol. They were sitting on a bench.
    

      “I understand,” she said slowly. “But I've got my work to do, and I must
      do it.”
     

      “Do it with me, then, dear. I won't interrupt.”
     

      “No, I couldn't. It's my work,—mine,—mine,—mine! I've
      been alone all my life in myself, and I'm not going to belong to anybody
      except myself. I remember things as well as you do, but that doesn't
      count. We were babies then, and we didn't know what was before us. Dick,
      don't be selfish. I think I see my way to a little success next year.
      Don't take it away from me.”
     

      “I beg your pardon, darling. It's my fault for speaking stupidly. I can't
      expect you to throw up all your life just because I'm back. I'll go to my
      own place and wait a little.”
     

      “But, Dick, I don't want you to—go—out of—my life, now
      you've just come back.”
     

      “I'm at your orders; forgive me.” Dick devoured the troubled little face
      with his eyes. There was triumph in them, because he could not conceive
      that Maisie should refuse sooner or later to love him, since he loved her.
    

      “It's wrong of me,” said Maisie, more slowly than before; “it's wrong and
      selfish; but, oh, I've been so lonely! No, you misunderstand. Now I've
      seen you again,—it's absurd, but I want to keep you in my life.”
     

      “Naturally. We belong.”
     

      “We don't; but you always understood me, and there is so much in my work
      that you could help me in. You know things and the ways of doing things.
      You must.”
     

      “I do, I fancy, or else I don't know myself. Then you won't care to lose
      sight of me altogether, and—you want me to help you in your work?”
     

      “Yes; but remember, Dick, nothing will ever come of it. That's why I feel
      so selfish. Can't things stay as they are? I do want your help.”
     

      “You shall have it. But let's consider. I must see your pics first, and
      overhaul your sketches, and find out about your tendencies. You should see
      what the papers say about my tendencies! Then I'll give you good advice,
      and you shall paint according. Isn't that it, Maisie?”
     

      Again there was triumph in Dick's eye.
    

      “It's too good of you,—much too good. Because you are consoling
      yourself with what will never happen, and I know that, and yet I want to
      keep you. Don't blame me later, please.”
     

      “I'm going into the matter with my eyes open. Moreover the Queen can do no
      wrong. It isn't your selfishness that impresses me. It's your audacity in
      proposing to make use of me.”
     

      “Pooh! You're only Dick,—and a print-shop.”
     

      “Very good: that's all I am. But, Maisie, you believe, don't you, that I
      love you? I don't want you to have any false notions about brothers and
      sisters.”
     

      Maisie looked up for a moment and dropped her eyes.
    

      “It's absurd, but—I believe. I wish I could send you away before you
      get angry with me. But—but the girl that lives with me is
      red-haired, and an impressionist, and all our notions clash.”
     

      “So do ours, I think. Never mind. Three months from today we shall be
      laughing at this together.”
     

      Maisie shook her head mournfully. “I knew you wouldn't understand, and it
      will only hurt you more when you find out. Look at my face, Dick, and tell
      me what you see.”
     

      They stood up and faced each other for a moment. The fog was gathering,
      and it stifled the roar of the traffic of London beyond the railings. Dick
      brought all his painfully acquired knowledge of faces to bear on the eyes,
      mouth, and chin underneath the black velvet toque.
    

      “It's the same Maisie, and it's the same me,” he said. “We've both nice
      little wills of our own, and one or other of us has to be broken. Now
      about the future. I must come and see your pictures some day,—I
      suppose when the red-haired girl is on the premises.”
     

      “Sundays are my best times. You must come on Sundays. There are such heaps
      of things I want to talk about and ask your advice about. Now I must get
      back to work.”
     

      “Try to find out before next Sunday what I am,” said Dick. “Don't take my
      word for anything I've told you. Good-bye, darling, and bless you.”
     

      Maisie stole away like a little gray mouse. Dick watched her till she was
      out of sight, but he did not hear her say to herself, very soberly, “I'm a
      wretch,—a horrid, selfish wretch. But it's Dick, and Dick will
      understand.”
     

      No one has yet explained what actually happens when an irresistible force
      meets the immovable post, though many have thought deeply, even as Dick
      thought. He tried to assure himself that Maisie would be led in a few
      weeks by his mere presence and discourse to a better way of thinking. Then
      he remembered much too distinctly her face and all that was written on it.
    

      “If I know anything of heads,” he said, “there's everything in that face
      but love. I shall have to put that in myself; and that chin and mouth
      won't be won for nothing. But she's right. She knows what she wants, and
      she's going to get it. What insolence! Me! Of all the people in the wide
      world, to use me! But then she's Maisie. There's no getting over that
      fact; and it's good to see her again. This business must have been
      simmering at the back of my head for years.... She'll use me as I used
      Binat at Port Said. She's quite right. It will hurt a little. I shall have
      to see her every Sunday,—like a young man courting a housemaid.
      She's sure to come around; and yet—that mouth isn't a yielding
      mouth. I shall be wanting to kiss her all the time, and I shall have to
      look at her pictures,—I don't even know what sort of work she does
      yet,—and I shall have to talk about Art,—Woman's Art!
      Therefore, particularly and perpetually, damn all varieties of Art. It did
      me a good turn once, and now it's in my way. I'll go home and do some
      Art.”
     

      Half-way to the studio, Dick was smitten with a terrible thought. The
      figure of a solitary woman in the fog suggested it.
    

      “She's all alone in London, with a red-haired impressionist girl, who
      probably has the digestion of an ostrich. Most red-haired people have.
      Maisie's a bilious little body. They'll eat like lone women,—meals
      at all hours, and tea with all meals. I remember how the students in Paris
      used to pig along. She may fall ill at any minute, and I shan't be able to
      help. Whew! this is ten times worse than owning a wife.”
     

      Torpenhow entered the studio at dusk, and looked at Dick with eyes full of
      the austere love that springs up between men who have tugged at the same
      oar together and are yoked by custom and use and the intimacies of toil.
      This is a good love, and, since it allows, and even encourages, strife,
      recrimination, and brutal sincerity, does not die, but grows, and is proof
      against any absence and evil conduct.
    

      Dick was silent after he handed Torpenhow the filled pipe of council. He
      thought of Maisie and her possible needs. It was a new thing to think of
      anybody but Torpenhow, who could think for himself. Here at last was an
      outlet for that cash balance. He could adorn Maisie barbarically with
      jewelry,—a thick gold necklace round that little neck, bracelets
      upon the rounded arms, and rings of price upon her hands,—the cool,
      temperate, ringless hands that he had taken between his own. It was an
      absurd thought, for Maisie would not even allow him to put one ring on one
      finger, and she would laugh at golden trappings. It would be better to sit
      with her quietly in the dusk, his arm around her neck and her face on his
      shoulder, as befitted husband and wife. Torpenhow's boots creaked that
      night, and his strong voice jarred. Dick's brows contracted and he
      murmured an evil word because he had taken all his success as a right and
      part payment for past discomfort, and now he was checked in his stride by
      a woman who admitted all the success and did not instantly care for him.
    

      “I say, old man,” said Torpenhow, who had made one or two vain attempts at
      conversation, “I haven't put your back up by anything I've said lately,
      have I?”
     

      “You! No. How could you?”
     

      “Liver out of order?”
     

      “The truly healthy man doesn't know he has a liver. I'm only a bit worried
      about things in general. I suppose it's my soul.”
     

      “The truly healthy man doesn't know he has a soul. What business have you
      with luxuries of that kind?”
     

      “It came of itself. Who's the man that says that we're all islands
      shouting lies to each other across seas of misunderstanding?”
     

      “He's right, whoever he is,—except about the misunderstanding. I
      don't think we could misunderstand each other.”
     

      The blue smoke curled back from the ceiling in clouds. Then Torpenhow,
      insinuatingly—“Dick, is it a woman?”
     

      “Be hanged if it's anything remotely resembling a woman; and if you begin
      to talk like that, I'll hire a red-brick studio with white paint
      trimmings, and begonias and petunias and blue Hungarias to play among
      three-and-sixpenny pot-palms, and I'll mount all my pics in aniline-dye
      plush plasters, and I'll invite every woman who maunders over what her
      guide-books tell her is Art, and you shall receive 'em, Torp,—in a
      snuff-brown velvet coat with yellow trousers and an orange tie. You'll
      like that?”
     

      “Too thin, Dick. A better man than you once denied with cursing and
      swearing. You've overdone it, just as he did. It's no business of mine, of
      course, but it's comforting to think that somewhere under the stars
      there's saving up for you a tremendous thrashing. Whether it'll come from
      heaven or earth, I don't know, but it's bound to come and break you up a
      little. You want hammering.”
     

      Dick shivered. “All right,” said he. “When this island is disintegrated,
      it will call for you.”
     

      “I shall come round the corner and help to disintegrate it some more.
      We're talking nonsense. Come along to a theatre.”
     







      CHAPTER VI
    

   “And you may lead a thousand men,
   Nor ever draw the rein,
   But ere ye lead the Faery Queen
   'Twill burst your heart in twain.”

   He has slipped his foot from the stirrup-bar,
   The bridle from his hand,
   And he is bound by hand and foot
   To the Queen 'o Faery-land.
          ——Sir Hoggie and the Fairies.


      Some weeks later, on a very foggy Sunday, Dick was returning across the
      Park to his studio. “This,” he said, “is evidently the thrashing that Torp
      meant. It hurts more than I expected; but the Queen can do no wrong; and
      she certainly has some notion of drawing.”
     

      He had just finished a Sunday visit to Maisie,—always under the
      green eyes of the red-haired impressionist girl, whom he learned to hate
      at sight,—and was tingling with a keen sense of shame. Sunday after
      Sunday, putting on his best clothes, he had walked over to the untidy
      house north of the Park, first to see Maisie's pictures, and then to
      criticise and advise upon them as he realised that they were productions
      on which advice would not be wasted. Sunday after Sunday, and his love
      grew with each visit, he had been compelled to cram his heart back from
      between his lips when it prompted him to kiss Maisie several times and
      very much indeed. Sunday after Sunday, the head above the heart had warned
      him that Maisie was not yet attainable, and that it would be better to
      talk as connectedly as possible upon the mysteries of the craft that was
      all in all to her. Therefore it was his fate to endure weekly torture in
      the studio built out over the clammy back garden of a frail stuffy little
      villa where nothing was ever in its right place and nobody every called,—to
      endure and to watch Maisie moving to and fro with the teacups. He abhorred
      tea, but, since it gave him a little longer time in her presence, he drank
      it devoutly, and the red-haired girl sat in an untidy heap and eyed him
      without speaking. She was always watching him.
    

      Once, and only once, when she had left the studio, Maisie showed him an
      album that held a few poor cuttings from provincial papers,—the
      briefest of hurried notes on some of her pictures sent to outlying
      exhibitions. Dick stooped and kissed the paint-smudged thumb on the open
      page. “Oh, my love, my love,” he muttered, “do you value these things?
      Chuck 'em into the waste-paper basket!”
     

      “Not till I get something better,” said Maisie, shutting the book.
    

      Then Dick, moved by no respect for his public and a very deep regard for
      the maiden, did deliberately propose, in order to secure more of these
      coveted cuttings, that he should paint a picture which Maisie should sign.
    

      “That's childish,” said Maisie, “and I didn't think it of you. It must be
      my work. Mine,—mine,—mine!”
     

      “Go and design decorative medallions for rich brewers' houses. You are
      thoroughly good at that.” Dick was sick and savage.
    

      “Better things than medallions, Dick,” was the answer, in tones that
      recalled a gray-eyed atom's fearless speech to Mrs. Jennett. Dick would
      have abased himself utterly, but that other girl trailed in.
    

      Next Sunday he laid at Maisie's feet small gifts of pencils that could
      almost draw of themselves and colours in whose permanence he believed, and
      he was ostentatiously attentive to the work in hand. It demanded, among
      other things, an exposition of the faith that was in him.
    

      Torpenhow's hair would have stood on end had he heard the fluency with
      which Dick preached his own gospel of Art.
    

      A month before, Dick would have been equally astonished; but it was
      Maisie's will and pleasure, and he dragged his words together to make
      plain to her comprehension all that had been hidden to himself of the whys
      and wherefores of work. There is not the least difficulty in doing a thing
      if you only know how to do it; the trouble is to explain your method.
    

      “I could put this right if I had a brush in my hand,” said Dick,
      despairingly, over the modelling of a chin that Maisie complained would
      not “look flesh,”—it was the same chin that she had scraped out with
      the palette knife,—“but I find it almost impossible to teach you.
      There's a queer grim Dutch touch about your painting that I like; but I've
      a notion that you're weak in drawing. You foreshorten as though you never
      used the model, and you've caught Kami's pasty way of dealing with flesh
      in shadow. Then, again, though you don't know it yourself, you shirk hard
      work. Suppose you spend some of your time on line lone. Line doesn't allow
      of shirking. Oils do, and three square inches of flashy, tricky stuff in
      the corner of a pic sometimes carry a bad thing off,—as I know.
      That's immoral. Do line-work for a little while, and then I can tell more
      about your powers, as old Kami used to say.”
     

      Maisie protested; she did not care for the pure line.
    

      “I know,” said Dick. “You want to do your fancy heads with a bunch of
      flowers at the base of the neck to hide bad modelling.” The red-haired
      girl laughed a little. “You want to do landscapes with cattle knee-deep in
      grass to hide bad drawing. You want to do a great deal more than you can
      do. You have sense of colour, but you want form. Colour's a gift,—put
      it aside and think no more about it,—but form you can be drilled
      into. Now, all your fancy heads—and some of them are very good—will
      keep you exactly where you are. With line you must go forward or backward,
      and it will show up all your weaknesses.”
     

      “But other people——” began Maisie.
    

      “You mustn't mind what other people do. If their souls were your soul, it
      would be different. You stand and fall by your own work, remember, and
      it's waste of time to think of any one else in this battle.”
     

      Dick paused, and the longing that had been so resolutely put away came
      back into his eyes. He looked at Maisie, and the look asked as plainly as
      words, Was it not time to leave all this barren wilderness of canvas and
      counsel and join hands with Life and Love? Maisie assented to the new
      programme of schooling so adorably that Dick could hardly restrain himself
      from picking her up then and there and carrying her off to the nearest
      registrar's office. It was the implicit obedience to the spoken word and
      the blank indifference to the unspoken desire that baffled and buffeted
      his soul. He held authority in that house,—authority limited,
      indeed, to one-half of one afternoon in seven, but very real while it
      lasted. Maisie had learned to appeal to him on many subjects, from the
      proper packing of pictures to the condition of a smoky chimney. The
      red-haired girl never consulted him about anything.
    

      On the other hand, she accepted his appearances without protest, and
      watched him always. He discovered that the meals of the establishment were
      irregular and fragmentary. They depended chiefly on tea, pickles, and
      biscuit, as he had suspected from the beginning. The girls were supposed
      to market week and week about, but they lived, with the help of a
      charwoman, as casually as the young ravens. Maisie spent most of her
      income on models, and the other girl revelled in apparatus as refined as
      her work was rough. Armed with knowledge, dear-bought from the Docks, Dick
      warned Maisie that the end of semi-starvation meant the crippling of power
      to work, which was considerably worse than death.
    

      Maisie took the warning, and gave more thought to what she ate and drank.
      When his trouble returned upon him, as it generally did in the long winter
      twilights, the remembrance of that little act of domestic authority and
      his coercion with a hearth-brush of the smoky drawing-room chimney stung
      Dick like a whip-lash.
    

      He conceived that this memory would be the extreme of his sufferings, till
      one Sunday, the red-haired girl announced that she would make a study of
      Dick's head, and that he would be good enough to sit still, and—quite
      as an afterthought—look at Maisie. He sat, because he could not well
      refuse, and for the space of half an hour he reflected on all the people
      in the past whom he had laid open for the purposes of his own craft. He
      remembered Binat most distinctly,—that Binat who had once been an
      artist and talked about degradation.
    

      It was the merest monochrome roughing in of a head, but it presented the
      dumb waiting, the longing, and, above all, the hopeless enslavement of the
      man, in a spirit of bitter mockery.
    

      “I'll buy it,” said Dick, promptly, “at your own price.”
     

      “My price is too high, but I dare say you'll be as grateful if——”
       The wet sketch, fluttered from the girl's hand and fell into the ashes of
      the studio stove. When she picked it up it was hopelessly smudged.
    

      “Oh, it's all spoiled!” said Maisie. “And I never saw it. Was it like?”
     

      “Thank you,” said Dick under his breath to the red-haired girl, and he
      removed himself swiftly.
    

      “How that man hates me!” said the girl. “And how he loves you, Maisie!”
     

      “What nonsense? I knew Dick's very fond of me, but he had his work to do,
      and I have mine.”
     

      “Yes, he is fond of you, and I think he knows there is something in
      impressionism, after all. Maisie, can't you see?”
     

      “See? See what?”
     

      “Nothing; only, I know that if I could get any man to look at me as that
      man looks at you, I'd—I don't know what I'd do. But he hates me. Oh,
      how he hates me!”
     

      She was not altogether correct. Dick's hatred was tempered with gratitude
      for a few moments, and then he forgot the girl entirely. Only the sense of
      shame remained, and he was nursing it across the Park in the fog.
      “There'll be an explosion one of these days,” he said wrathfully. “But it
      isn't Maisie's fault; she's right, quite right, as far as she knows, and I
      can't blame her. This business has been going on for three months nearly.
      Three months!—and it cost me ten years” knocking about to get at the
      notion, the merest raw notion, of my work. That's true; but then I didn't
      have pins, drawing-pins, and palette-knives, stuck into me every Sunday.
    

      “Oh, my little darling, if ever I break you, somebody will have a very bad
      time of it. No, she won't. I'd be as big a fool about her as I am now.
      I'll poison that red-haired girl on my wedding-day,—she's
      unwholesome,—and now I'll pass on these present bad times to Torp.”
     

      Torpenhow had been moved to lecture Dick more than once lately on the sin
      of levity, and Dick and listened and replied not a word. In the weeks
      between the first few Sundays of his discipline he had flung himself
      savagely into his work, resolved that Maisie should at least know the full
      stretch of his powers. Then he had taught Maisie that she must not pay the
      least attention to any work outside her own, and Maisie had obeyed him all
      too well. She took his counsels, but was not interested in his pictures.
    

      “Your things smell of tobacco and blood,” she said once. “Can't you do
      anything except soldiers?”
     

      “I could do a head of you that would startle you,” thought Dick,—this
      was before the red-haired girl had brought him under the guillotine,—but
      he only said, “I am very sorry,” and harrowed Torpenhow's soul that
      evening with blasphemies against Art. Later, insensibly and to a large
      extent against his own will, he ceased to interest himself in his own
      work.
    

      For Maisie's sake, and to soothe the self-respect that it seemed to him he
      lost each Sunday, he would not consciously turn out bad stuff, but, since
      Maisie did not care even for his best, it were better not to do anything
      at all save wait and mark time between Sunday and Sunday. Torpenhow was
      disgusted as the weeks went by fruitless, and then attacked him one Sunday
      evening when Dick felt utterly exhausted after three hours' biting
      self-restraint in Maisie's presence. There was Language, and Torpenhow
      withdrew to consult the Nilghai, who had come it to talk continental
      politics.
    

      “Bone-idle, is he? Careless, and touched in the temper?” said the Nilghai.
      “It isn't worth worrying over. Dick is probably playing the fool with a
      woman.”
     

      “Isn't that bad enough?”
     

      “No. She may throw him out of gear and knock his work to pieces for a
      while. She may even turn up here some day and make a scene on the
      staircase: one never knows. But until Dick speaks of his own accord you
      had better not touch him. He is no easy-tempered man to handle.”
     

      “No; I wish he were. He is such an aggressive, cocksure, you-be-damned
      fellow.”
     

      “He'll get that knocked out of him in time. He must learn that he can't
      storm up and down the world with a box of moist tubes and a slick brush.
      You're fond of him?”
     

      “I'd take any punishment that's in store for him if I could; but the worst
      of it is, no man can save his brother.”
     

      “No, and the worser of it is, there is no discharge in this war. Dick must
      learn his lesson like the rest of us. Talking of war, there'll be trouble
      in the Balkans in the spring.”
     

      “That trouble is long coming. I wonder if we could drag Dick out there
      when it comes off?”
     

      Dick entered the room soon afterwards, and the question was put to him.
    

      “Not good enough,” he said shortly. “I'm too comf'y where I am.”
     

      “Surely you aren't taking all the stuff in the papers seriously?” said the
      Nilghai. “Your vogue will be ended in less than six months,—the
      public will know your touch and go on to something new,—and where
      will you be then?”
     

      “Here, in England.”
     

      “When you might be doing decent work among us out there? Nonsense! I shall
      go, the Keneu will be there, Torp will be there, Cassavetti will be there,
      and the whole lot of us will be there, and we shall have as much as ever
      we can do, with unlimited fighting and the chance for you of seeing things
      that would make the reputation of three Verestchagins.”
     

      “Um!” said Dick, pulling at his pipe.
    

      “You prefer to stay here and imagine that all the world is gaping at your
      pictures? Just think how full an average man's life is of his own pursuits
      and pleasures. When twenty thousand of him find time to look up between
      mouthfuls and grunt something about something they aren't the least
      interested in, the net result is called fame, reputation, or notoriety,
      according to the taste and fancy of the speller my lord.”
     

      “I know that as well as you do. Give me credit for a little gumption.”
     

      “Be hanged if I do!”
     

      “Be hanged, then; you probably will be,—for a spy, by excited Turks.
      Heigh-ho! I'm weary, dead weary, and virtue has gone out of me.” Dick
      dropped into a chair, and was fast asleep in a minute.
    

      “That's a bad sign,” said the Nilghai, in an undertone.
    

      Torpenhow picked the pipe from the waistcoat where it was beginning to
      burn, and put a pillow behind the head. “We can't help; we can't help,” he
      said. “It's a good ugly sort of old cocoanut, and I'm fond of it. There's
      the scar of the wipe he got when he was cut over in the square.”
     

      “Shouldn't wonder if that has made him a trifle mad.”
     

      “I should. He's a most businesslike madman.”
     

      Then Dick began to snore furiously.
    

      “Oh, here, no affection can stand this sort of thing. Wake up, Dick, and
      go and sleep somewhere else, if you intend to make a noise about it.”
     

      “When a cat has been out on the tiles all night,” said the Nilghai, in his
      beard, “I notice that she usually sleeps all day. This is natural
      history.”
     

      Dick staggered away rubbing his eyes and yawning. In the night-watches he
      was overtaken with an idea, so simple and so luminous that he wondered he
      had never conceived it before. It was full of craft. He would seek Maisie
      on a week-day,—would suggest an excursion, and would take her by
      train to Fort Keeling, over the very ground that they two had trodden
      together ten years ago.
    

      “As a general rule,” he explained to his chin-lathered reflection in the
      morning, “it isn't safe to cross an old trail twice. Things remind one of
      things, and a cold wind gets up, and you feel sad; but this is an
      exception to every rule that ever was. I'll go to Maisie at once.”
     

      Fortunately, the red-haired girl was out shopping when he arrived, and
      Maisie in a paint-spattered blouse was warring with her canvas. She was
      not pleased to see him; for week-day visits were a stretch of the bond;
      and it needed all his courage to explain his errand.
    

      “I know you've been working too hard,” he concluded, with an air of
      authority. “If you do that, you'll break down. You had much better come.”
     

      “Where?” said Maisie, wearily. She had been standing before her easel too
      long, and was very tired.
    

      “Anywhere you please. We'll take a train tomorrow and see where it stops.
      We'll have lunch somewhere, and I'll bring you back in the evening.”
     

      “If there's a good working light tomorrow, I lose a day.” Maisie balanced
      the heavy white chestnut palette irresolutely.
    

      Dick bit back an oath that was hurrying to his lips. He had not yet
      learned patience with the maiden to whom her work was all in all.
    

      “You'll lose ever so many more, dear, if you use every hour of working
      light. Overwork's only murderous idleness. Don't be unreasonable. I'll
      call for you tomorrow after breakfast early.”
     

      “But surely you are going to ask——”
     

      “No, I am not. I want you and nobody else. Besides, she hates me as much
      as I hate her. She won't care to come. Tomorrow, then; and pray that we
      get sunshine.”
     

      Dick went away delighted, and by consequence did no work whatever.
    

      He strangled a wild desire to order a special train, but bought a great
      gray kangaroo cloak lined with glossy black marten, and then retired into
      himself to consider things.
    

      “I'm going out for the day tomorrow with Dick,” said Maisie to the
      red-haired girl when the latter returned, tired, from marketing in the
      Edgware road.
    

      “He deserves it. I shall have the studio floor thoroughly scrubbed while
      you're away. It's very dirty.”
     

      Maisie had enjoyed no sort of holiday for months and looked forward to the
      little excitement, but not without misgivings.
    

      “There's nobody nicer than Dick when he talks sensibly,” she thought, “but
      I'm sure he'll be silly and worry me, and I'm sure I can't tell him
      anything he'd like to hear. If he'd only be sensible, I should like him so
      much better.”
     

      Dick's eyes were full of joy when he made his appearance next morning and
      saw Maisie, gray-ulstered and black-velvet-hatted, standing in the
      hallway. Palaces of marble, and not sordid imitation of grained wood, were
      surely the fittest background for such a divinity. The red-haired girl
      drew her into the studio for a moment and kissed her hurriedly.
    

      Maisie's eyebrows climbed to the top of her forehead; she was altogether
      unused to these demonstrations. “Mind my hat,” she said, hurrying away,
      and ran down the steps to Dick waiting by the hansom.
    

      “Are you quite warm enough! Are you sure you wouldn't like some more
      breakfast? Put the cloak over your knees.”
     

      “I'm quite comf'y, thanks. Where are we going, Dick? Oh, do stop singing
      like that. People will think we're mad.”
     

      “Let 'em think,—if the exertion doesn't kill them. They don't know
      who we are, and I'm sure I don't care who they are. My faith, Maisie,
      you're looking lovely!”
     

      Maisie stared directly in front of her and did not reply. The wind of a
      keen clear winter morning had put colour into her cheeks. Overhead, the
      creamy-yellow smoke-clouds were thinning away one by one against a
      pale-blue sky, and the improvident sparrows broke off from water-spout
      committees and cab-rank cabals to clamour of the coming of spring.
    

      “It will be lovely weather in the country,” said Dick.
    

      “But where are we going?”
     

      “Wait and see.”
     

      The stopped at Victoria, and Dick sought tickets. For less than half the
      fraction of an instant it occurred to Maisie, comfortably settled by the
      waiting-room fire, that it was much more pleasant to send a man to the
      booking-office than to elbow one's own way through the crowd. Dick put her
      into a Pullman,—solely on account of the warmth there; and she
      regarded the extravagance with grave scandalised eyes as the train moved
      out into the country.
    

      “I wish I knew where we are going,” she repeated for the twentieth time.
    

      The name of a well-remembered station flashed by, towards the end of the
      run, and Maisie was delighted.
    

      “Oh, Dick, you villain!”
     

      “Well, I thought you might like to see the place again. You haven't been
      here since the old times, have you?”
     

      “No. I never cared to see Mrs. Jennett again; and she was all that was
      ever there.”
     

      “Not quite. Look out a minute. There's the windmill above the
      potato-fields; they haven't built villas there yet; d'you remember when I
      shut you up in it?”
     

      “Yes. How she beat you for it! I never told it was you.”
     

      “She guessed. I jammed a stick under the door and told you that I was
      burying Amomma alive in the potatoes, and you believed me. You had a
      trusting nature in those days.”
     

      They laughed and leaned to look out, identifying ancient landmarks with
      many reminiscences. Dick fixed his weather eye on the curve of Maisie's
      cheek, very near his own, and watched the blood rise under the clear skin.
      He congratulated himself upon his cunning, and looked that the evening
      would bring him a great reward.
    

      When the train stopped they went out to look at an old town with new eyes.
      First, but from a distance, they regarded the house of Mrs. Jennett.
    

      “Suppose she should come out now, what would you do?” said Dick, with mock
      terror.
    

      “I should make a face.”
     

      “Show, then,” said Dick, dropping into the speech of childhood.
    

      Maisie made that face in the direction of the mean little villa, and Dick
      laughed.
    

      “'This is disgraceful,'” said Maisie, mimicking Mrs. Jennett's tone.
      “'Maisie, you run in at once, and learn the collect, gospel, and epistle
      for the next three Sundays. After all I've taught you, too, and three
      helps every Sunday at dinner! Dick's always leading you into mischief. If
      you aren't a gentleman, Dick, you might at least...'”
     

      The sentence ended abruptly. Maisie remembered when it had last been used.
    

      “'Try to behave like one,'” said Dick, promptly. “Quite right. Now we'll
      get some lunch and go on to Fort Keeling,—unless you'd rather drive
      there?”
     

      “We must walk, out of respect to the place. How little changed it all is!”
     

      They turned in the direction of the sea through unaltered streets, and the
      influence of old things lay upon them. Presently they passed a
      confectioner's shop much considered in the days when their joint
      pocket-money amounted to a shilling a week.
    

      “Dick, have you any pennies?” said Maisie, half to herself.
    

      “Only three; and if you think you're going to have two of 'em to buy
      peppermints with, you're wrong. She says peppermints aren't ladylike.”
     

      Again they laughed, and again the colour came into Maisie's cheeks as the
      blood boiled through Dick's heart. After a large lunch they went down to
      the beach and to Fort Keeling across the waste, wind-bitten land that no
      builder had thought it worth his while to defile. The winter breeze came
      in from the sea and sang about their ears.
    

      “Maisie,” said Dick, “your nose is getting a crude Prussian blue at the
      tip. I'll race you as far as you please for as much as you please.”
     

      She looked round cautiously, and with a laugh set off, swiftly as the
      ulster allowed, till she was out of breath.
    

      “We used to run miles,” she panted. “It's absurd that we can't run now.”
     

      “Old age, dear. This it is to get fat and sleek in town. When I wished to
      pull your hair you generally ran for three miles, shrieking at the top of
      your voice. I ought to know, because those shrieks of yours were meant to
      call up Mrs. Jennett with a cane and——”
     

      “Dick, I never got you a beating on purpose in my life.”
     

      “No, of course you never did. Good heavens! look at the sea.”
     

      “Why, it's the same as ever!” said Maisie.
    

      Torpenhow had gathered from Mr. Beeton that Dick, properly dressed and
      shaved, had left the house at half-past eight in the morning with a
      travelling-rug over his arm. The Nilghai rolled in at mid-day for chess
      and polite conversation.
    

      “It's worse than anything I imagined,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Oh, the everlasting Dick, I suppose! You fuss over him like a hen with
      one chick. Let him run riot if he thinks it'll amuse him. You can whip a
      young pup off feather, but you can't whip a young man.”
     

      “It isn't a woman. It's one woman; and it's a girl.”
     

      “Where's your proof?”
     

      “He got up and went out at eight this morning,—got up in the middle
      of the night, by Jove! a thing he never does except when he's on service.
      Even then, remember, we had to kick him out of his blankets before the
      fight began at El-Maghrib. It's disgusting.”
     

      “It looks odd; but maybe he's decided to buy a horse at last. He might get
      up for that, mightn't he?”
     

      “Buy a blazing wheelbarrow! He'd have told us if there was a horse in the
      wind. It's a girl.”
     

      “Don't be certain. Perhaps it's only a married woman.”
     

      “Dick has some sense of humour, if you haven't. Who gets up in the gray
      dawn to call on another man's wife? It's a girl.”
     

      “Let it be a girl, then. She may teach him that there's somebody else in
      the world besides himself.”
     

      “She'll spoil his hand. She'll waste his time, and she'll marry him, and
      ruin his work for ever. He'll be a respectable married man before we can
      stop him, and—he'll ever go on the long trail again.”
     

      “All quite possible, but the earth won't spin the other way when that
      happens.... No! ho! I'd give something to see Dick 'go wooing with the
      boys.' Don't worry about it. These things be with Allah, and we can only
      look on. Get the chessmen.”
     

      The red-haired girl was lying down in her own room, staring at the
      ceiling. The footsteps of people on the pavement sounded, as they grew
      indistinct in the distance, like a many-times-repeated kiss that was all
      one long kiss. Her hands were by her side, and they opened and shut
      savagely from time to time.
    

      The charwoman in charge of the scrubbing of the studio knocked at her
      door: “Beg y' pardon, miss, but in cleanin' of a floor there's two, not to
      say three, kind of soap, which is yaller, an' mottled, an' disinfectink.
      Now, jist before I took my pail into the passage I though it would be
      pre'aps jest as well if I was to come up 'ere an' ask you what sort of
      soap you was wishful that I should use on them boards. The yaller soap,
      miss——”
     

      There was nothing in the speech to have caused the paroxysm of fury that
      drove the red-haired girl into the middle of the room, almost shouting—“Do
      you suppose I care what you use? Any kind will do!—any kind!”
     

      The woman fled, and the red-haired girl looked at her own reflection in
      the glass for an instant and covered her face with her hands. It was as
      though she had shouted some shameless secret aloud.
    







      CHAPTER VII
    

   Roses red and roses white
   Plucked I for my love's delight.

   She would none of all my posies,—
   Bade me gather her blue roses.

   Half the world I wandered through,
   Seeking where such flowers grew;
   Half the world unto my quest
   Answered but with laugh and jest.

   It may be beyond the grave
   She shall find what she would have.

   Mine was but an idle quest,—
   Roses white and red are best!
       ——Blue Roses


      Indeed the sea had not changed. Its waters were low on the mud-banks, and
      the Marazion Bell-buoy clanked and swung in the tide-way. On the white
      beach-sand dried stumps of sea-poppy shivered and chattered.
    

      “I don't see the old breakwater,” said Maisie, under her breath.
    

      “Let's be thankful that we have as much as we have. I don't believe
      they've mounted a single new gun on the fort since we were here. Come and
      look.”
     

      They came to the glacis of Fort Keeling, and sat down in a nook sheltered
      from the wind under the tarred throat of a forty-pounder cannon.
    

      “Now, if Ammoma were only here!” said Maisie.
    

      For a long time both were silent. Then Dick took Maisie's hand and called
      her by her name.
    

      She shook her head and looked out to sea.
    

      “Maisie, darling, doesn't it make any difference?”
     

      “No!” between clenched teeth. “I'd—I'd tell you if it did; but it
      doesn't. Oh, Dick, please be sensible.”
     

      “Don't you think that it ever will?”
     

      “No, I'm sure it won't.”
     

      “Why?”
     

      Maisie rested her chin on her hand, and, still regarding the sea, spoke
      hurriedly—“I know what you want perfectly well, but I can't give it
      to you, Dick. It isn't my fault; indeed, it isn't. If I felt that I could
      care for any one——But I don't feel that I care. I simply don't
      understand what the feeling means.”
     

      “Is that true, dear?”
     

      “You've been very good to me, Dickie; and the only way I can pay you back
      is by speaking the truth. I daren't tell a fib. I despise myself quite
      enough as it is.”
     

      “What in the world for?”
     

      “Because—because I take everything that you give me and I give you
      nothing in return. It's mean and selfish of me, and whenever I think of it
      it worries me.”
     

      “Understand once for all, then, that I can manage my own affairs, and if I
      choose to do anything you aren't to blame. You haven't a single thing to
      reproach yourself with, darling.”
     

      “Yes, I have, and talking only makes it worse.”
     

      “Then don't talk about it.”
     

      “How can I help myself? If you find me alone for a minute you are always
      talking about it; and when you aren't you look it. You don't know how I
      despise myself sometimes.”
     

      “Great goodness!” said Dick, nearly jumping to his feet. “Speak the truth
      now, Maisie, if you never speak it again! Do I—does this worrying
      bore you?”
     

      “No. It does not.”
     

      “You'd tell me if it did?”
     

      “I should let you know, I think.”
     

      “Thank you. The other thing is fatal. But you must learn to forgive a man
      when he's in love. He's always a nuisance. You must have known that?”
     

      Maisie did not consider the last question worth answering, and Dick was
      forced to repeat it.
    

      “There were other men, of course. They always worried just when I was in
      the middle of my work, and wanted me to listen to them.”
     

      “Did you listen?”
     

      “At first; and they couldn't understand why I didn't care. And they used
      to praise my pictures; and I thought they meant it. I used to be proud of
      the praise, and tell Kami, and—I shall never forget—once Kami
      laughed at me.”
     

      “You don't like being laughed at, Maisie, do you?”
     

      “I hate it. I never laugh at other people unless—unless they do bad
      work. Dick, tell me honestly what you think of my pictures generally,—of
      everything of mine that you've seen.”
     

      “'Honest, honest, and honest over!'” quoted Dick from a catchword of long
      ago. “Tell me what Kami always says.”
     

      Maisie hesitated. “He—he says that there is feeling in them.”
     

      “How dare you tell me a fib like that? Remember, I was under Kami for two
      years. I know exactly what he says.”
     

      “It isn't a fib.”
     

      “It's worse; it's a half-truth. Kami says, when he puts his head on one
      side,—so, 'Il y a du sentiment, mais il n'y a pas de parti pris.'”
       He rolled the r threateningly, as Kami used to do.
    

      “Yes, that is what he says; and I'm beginning to think that he is right.”
     

      “Certainly he is.” Dick admitted that two people in the world could do and
      say no wrong. Kami was the man.
    

      “And now you say the same thing. It's so disheartening.”
     

      “I'm sorry, but you asked me to speak the truth. Besides, I love you too
      much to pretend about your work. It's strong, it's patient sometimes,—not
      always,—and sometimes there's power in it, but there's no special
      reason why it should be done at all. At least, that's how it strikes me.”
     

      “There's no special reason why anything in the world should ever be done.
      You know that as well as I do. I only want success.”
     

      “You're going the wrong way to get it, then. Hasn't Kami ever told you
      so?”
     

      “Don't quote Kami to me. I want to know what you think. My work's bad, to
      begin with.”
     

      “I didn't say that, and I don't think it.”
     

      “It's amateurish, then.”
     

      “That it most certainly is not. You're a work-woman, darling, to your
      boot-heels, and I respect you for that.”
     

      “You don't laugh at me behind my back?”
     

      “No, dear. You see, you are more to me than any one else. Put this cloak
      thing round you, or you'll get chilled.”
     

      Maisie wrapped herself in the soft marten skins, turning the gray kangaroo
      fur to the outside. “This is delicious,” she said, rubbing her chin
      thoughtfully along the fur.
    

      “Well? Why am I wrong in trying to get a little success?”
     

      “Just because you try. Don't you understand, darling? Good work has
      nothing to do with—doesn't belong to—the person who does it.
      It's put into him or her from outside.”
     

      “But how does that affect——”
     

      “Wait a minute. All we can do is to learn how to do our work, to be
      masters of our materials instead of servants, and never to be afraid of
      anything.”
     

      “I understand that.”
     

      “Everything else comes from outside ourselves. Very good. If we sit down
      quietly to work out notions that are sent to us, we may or we may not do
      something that isn't bad. A great deal depends on being master of the
      bricks and mortar of the trade. But the instant we begin to think about
      success and the effect of our work—to play with one eye on the
      gallery—we lose power and touch and everything else. At least that's
      how I have found it. Instead of being quiet and giving every power you
      possess to your work, you're fretting over something which you can neither
      help no hinder by a minute. See?”
     

      “It's so easy for you to talk in that way. People like what you do. Don't
      you ever think about the gallery?”
     

      “Much too often; but I'm always punished for it by loss of power. It's as
      simple as the Rule of Three. If we make light of our work by using it for
      our own ends, our work will make light of us, and, as we're the weaker, we
      shall suffer.”
     

      “I don't treat my work lightly. You know that it's everything to me.”
     

      “Of course; but, whether you realise it or not, you give two strokes for
      yourself to one for your work. It isn't your fault, darling. I do exactly
      the same thing, and know that I'm doing it. Most of the French schools,
      and all the schools here, drive the students to work for their own credit,
      and for the sake of their pride. I was told that all the world was
      interested in my work, and everybody at Kami's talked turpentine, and I
      honestly believed that the world needed elevating and influencing, and all
      manner of impertinences, by my brushes. By Jove, I actually believed that!
      When my little head was bursting with a notion that I couldn't handle
      because I hadn't sufficient knowledge of my craft, I used to run about
      wondering at my own magnificence and getting ready to astonish the world.”
     

      “But surely one can do that sometimes?”
     

      “Very seldom with malice aforethought, darling. And when it's done it's
      such a tiny thing, and the world's so big, and all but a millionth part of
      it doesn't care. Maisie, come with me and I'll show you something of the
      size of the world. One can no more avoid working than eating,—that
      goes on by itself,—but try to see what you are working for. I know
      such little heavens that I could take you to,—islands tucked away
      under the Line. You sight them after weeks of crashing through water as
      black as black marble because it's so deep, and you sit in the fore-chains
      day after day and see the sun rise almost afraid because the sea's so
      lonely.”
     

      “Who is afraid?—you, or the sun?”
     

      “The sun, of course. And there are noises under the sea, and sounds
      overhead in a clear sky. Then you find your island alive with hot moist
      orchids that make mouths at you and can do everything except talk. There's
      a waterfall in it three hundred feet high, just like a sliver of green
      jade laced with silver; and millions of wild bees live up in the rocks;
      and you can hear the fat cocoanuts falling from the palms; and you order
      an ivory-white servant to sling you a long yellow hammock with tassels on
      it like ripe maize, and you put up your feet and hear the bees hum and the
      water fall till you go to sleep.”
     

      “Can one work there?”
     

      “Certainly. One must do something always. You hang your canvas up in a
      palm tree and let the parrots criticise. When the scuffle you heave a ripe
      custard-apple at them, and it bursts in a lather of cream. There are
      hundreds of places. Come and see them.”
     

      “I don't quite like that place. It sounds lazy. Tell me another.”
     

      “What do you think of a big, red, dead city built of red sandstone, with
      raw green aloes growing between the stones, lying out neglected on
      honey-coloured sands? There are forty dead kings there, Maisie, each in a
      gorgeous tomb finer than all the others. You look at the palaces and
      streets and shops and tanks, and think that men must live there, till you
      find a wee gray squirrel rubbing its nose all alone in the market-place,
      and a jewelled peacock struts out of a carved doorway and spreads its tail
      against a marble screen as fine pierced as point-lace. Then a monkey—a
      little black monkey—walks through the main square to get a drink
      from a tank forty feet deep. He slides down the creepers to the water's
      edge, and a friend holds him by the tail, in case he should fall in.”
     

      “Is that all true?”
     

      “I have been there and seen. Then evening comes, and the lights change
      till it's just as though you stood in the heart of a king-opal. A little
      before sundown, as punctually as clockwork, a big bristly wild boar, with
      all his family following, trots through the city gate, churning the foam
      on his tusks. You climb on the shoulder of a blind black stone god and
      watch that pig choose himself a palace for the night and stump in wagging
      his tail. Then the night-wind gets up, and the sands move, and you hear
      the desert outside the city singing, 'Now I lay me down to sleep,' and
      everything is dark till the moon rises. Maisie, darling, come with me and
      see what the world is really like. It's very lovely, and it's very
      horrible,—but I won't let you see anything horrid,—and it
      doesn't care your life or mine for pictures or anything else except doing
      its own work and making love. Come, and I'll show you how to brew
      sangaree, and sling a hammock, and—oh, thousands of things, and
      you'll see for yourself what colour means, and we'll find out together
      what love means, and then, maybe, we shall be allowed to do some good
      work. Come away!”
     

      “Why?” said Maisie.
    

      “How can you do anything until you have seen everything, or as much as you
      can? And besides, darling, I love you. Come along with me. You have no
      business here; you don't belong to this place; you're half a gipsy,—your
      face tells that; and I—even the smell of open water makes me
      restless. Come across the sea and be happy!”
     

      He had risen to his feet, and stood in the shadow of the gun, looking down
      at the girl. The very short winter afternoon had worn away, and, before
      they knew, the winter moon was walking the untroubled sea. Long ruled
      lines of silver showed where a ripple of the rising tide was turning over
      the mud-banks. The wind had dropped, and in the intense stillness they
      could hear a donkey cropping the frosty grass many yards away. A faint
      beating, like that of a muffled drum, came out of the moon-haze.
    

      “What's that?” said Maisie, quickly. “It sounds like a heart beating.
      Where is it?”
     

      Dick was so angry at this sudden wrench to his pleadings that he could not
      trust himself to speak, and in this silence caught the sound. Maisie from
      her seat under the gun watched him with a certain amount of fear.
    

      She wished so much that he would be sensible and cease to worry her with
      over-sea emotion that she both could and could not understand. She was not
      prepared, however, for the change in his face as he listened.
    

      “It's a steamer,” he said,—“a twin-screw steamer, by the beat. I
      can't make her out, but she must be standing very close inshore. Ah!” as
      the red of a rocket streaked the haze, “she's standing in to signal before
      she clears the Channel.”
     

      “Is it a wreck?” said Maisie, to whom these words were as Greek.
    

      Dick's eyes were turned to the sea. “Wreck! What nonsense! She's only
      reporting herself. Red rocket forward—there's a green light aft now,
      and two red rockets from the bridge.”
     

      “What does that mean?”
     

      “It's the signal of the Cross Keys Line running to Australia. I wonder
      which steamer it is.” The note of his voice had changed; he seemed to be
      talking to himself, and Maisie did not approve of it. The moonlight broke
      the haze for a moment, touching the black sides of a long steamer working
      down Channel. “Four masts and three funnels—she's in deep draught,
      too. That must be the Barralong, or the Bhutia. No, the Bhutia has a
      clipper bow. It's the Barralong, to Australia. She'll lift the Southern
      Cross in a week,—lucky old tub!—oh, lucky old tub!”
     

      He stared intently, and moved up the slope of the fort to get a better
      view, but the mist on the sea thickened again, and the beating of the
      screws grew fainter. Maisie called to him a little angrily, and he
      returned, still keeping his eyes to seaward. “Have you ever seen the
      Southern Cross blazing right over your head?” he asked. “It's superb!”
     

      “No,” she said shortly, “and I don't want to. If you think it's so lovely,
      why don't you go and see it yourself?”
     

      She raised her face from the soft blackness of the marten skins about her
      throat, and her eyes shone like diamonds. The moonlight on the gray
      kangaroo fur turned it to frosted silver of the coldest.
    

      “By Jove, Maisie, you look like a little heathen idol tucked up there.”
       The eyes showed that they did not appreciate the compliment. “I'm sorry,”
       he continued. “The Southern Cross isn't worth looking at unless someone
      helps you to see. That steamer's out of hearing.”
     

      “Dick,” she said quietly, “suppose I were to come to you now,—be
      quiet a minute,—just as I am, and caring for you just as much as I
      do.”
     

      “Not as a brother, though. You said you didn't—in the Park.”
     

      “I never had a brother. Suppose I said, 'Take me to those places, and in
      time, perhaps, I might really care for you,' what would you do?”
     

      “Send you straight back to where you came from, in a cab. No, I wouldn't;
      I'd let you walk. But you couldn't do it, dear. And I wouldn't run the
      risk. You're worth waiting for till you can come without reservation.”
     

      “Do you honestly believe that?”
     

      “I have a hazy sort of idea that I do. Has it never struck you in that
      light?”
     

      “Ye—es. I feel so wicked about it.”
     

      “Wickeder than usual?”
     

      “You don't know all I think. It's almost too awful to tell.”
     

      “Never mind. You promised to tell me the truth—at least.”
     

      “It's so ungrateful of me, but—but, though I know you care for me,
      and I like to have you with me, I'd—I'd even sacrifice you, if that
      would bring me what I want.”
     

      “My poor little darling! I know that state of mind. It doesn't lead to
      good work.”
     

      “You aren't angry? Remember, I do despise myself.”
     

      “I'm not exactly flattered,—I had guessed as much before,—but
      I'm not angry. I'm sorry for you. Surely you ought to have left a
      littleness like that behind you, years ago.”
     

      “You've no right to patronise me! I only want what I have worked for so
      long. It came to you without any trouble, and—and I don't think it's
      fair.”
     

      “What can I do? I'd give ten years of my life to get you what you want.
      But I can't help you; even I can't help.”
     

      A murmur of dissent from Maisie. He went on—“And I know by what you
      have just said that you're on the wrong road to success. It isn't got at
      by sacrificing other people,—I've had that much knocked into me; you
      must sacrifice yourself, and live under orders, and never think for
      yourself, and never have real satisfaction in your work except just at the
      beginning, when you're reaching out after a notion.”
     

      “How can you believe all that?”
     

      “There's no question of belief or disbelief. That's the law, and you take
      it or refuse it as you please. I try to obey, but I can't, and then my
      work turns bad on my hands. Under any circumstances, remember, four-fifths
      of everybody's work must be bad. But the remnant is worth the trouble for
      its own sake.”
     

      “Isn't it nice to get credit even for bad work?”
     

      “It's much too nice. But——May I tell you something? It isn't a
      pretty tale, but you're so like a man that I forget when I'm talking to
      you.”
     

      “Tell me.”
     

      “Once when I was out in the Soudan I went over some ground that we had
      been fighting on for three days. There were twelve hundred dead; and we
      hadn't time to bury them.”
     

      “How ghastly!”
     

      “I had been at work on a big double-sheet sketch, and I was wondering what
      people would think of it at home. The sight of that field taught me a good
      deal. It looked just like a bed of horrible toadstools in all colours, and—I'd
      never seen men in bulk go back to their beginnings before. So I began to
      understand that men and women were only material to work with, and that
      what they said or did was of no consequence. See? Strictly speaking, you
      might just as well put your ear down to the palette to catch what your
      colours are saying.”
     

      “Dick, that's disgraceful!”
     

      “Wait a minute. I said, strictly speaking. Unfortunately, everybody must
      be either a man or a woman.”
     

      “I'm glad you allow that much.”
     

      “In your case I don't. You aren't a woman. But ordinary people, Maisie,
      must behave and work as such. That's what makes me so savage.” He hurled a
      pebble towards the sea as he spoke. “I know that it is outside my business
      to care what people say; I can see that it spoils my output if I listen to
      'em; and yet, confound it all,”—another pebble flew seaward,—“I
      can't help purring when I'm rubbed the right way. Even when I can see on a
      man's forehead that he is lying his way through a clump of pretty
      speeches, those lies make me happy and play the mischief with my hand.”
     

      “And when he doesn't say pretty things?”
     

      “Then, belovedest,”—Dick grinned,—“I forget that I am the
      steward of these gifts, and I want to make that man love and appreciate my
      work with a thick stick. It's too humiliating altogether; but I suppose
      even if one were an angel and painted humans altogether from outside, one
      would lose in touch what one gained in grip.”
     

      Maisie laughed at the idea of Dick as an angel.
    

      “But you seem to think,” she said, “that everything nice spoils your
      hand.”
     

      “I don't think. It's the law,—just the same as it was at Mrs.
      Jennett's. Everything that is nice does spoil your hand. I'm glad you see
      so clearly.”
     

      “I don't like the view.”
     

      “Nor I. But—have got orders: what can do? Are you strong enough to
      face it alone?”
     

      “I suppose I must.”
     

      “Let me help, darling. We can hold each other very tight and try to walk
      straight. We shall blunder horribly, but it will be better than stumbling
      apart. Maisie, can't you see reason?”
     

      “I don't think we should get on together. We should be two of a trade, so
      we should never agree.”
     

      “How I should like to meet the man who made that proverb! He lived in a
      cave and ate raw bear, I fancy. I'd make him chew his own arrow-heads.
      Well?”
     

      “I should be only half married to you. I should worry and fuss about my
      work, as I do now. Four days out of the seven I'm not fit to speak to.”
     

      “You talk as if no one else in the world had ever used a brush. D'you
      suppose that I don't know the feeling of worry and bother and
      can't-get-at-ness? You're lucky if you only have it four days out of the
      seven. What difference would that make?”
     

      “A great deal—if you had it too.”
     

      “Yes, but I could respect it. Another man might not. He might laugh at
      you. But there's no use talking about it. If you can think in that way you
      can't care for me—yet.”
     

      The tide had nearly covered the mud-banks and twenty little ripples broke
      on the beach before Maisie chose to speak.
    

      “Dick,” she said slowly, “I believe very much that you are better than I
      am.”
     

      “This doesn't seem to bear on the argument—but in what way?”
     

      “I don't quite know, but in what you said about work and things; and then
      you're so patient. Yes, you're better than I am.”
     

      Dick considered rapidly the murkiness of an average man's life. There was
      nothing in the review to fill him with a sense of virtue. He lifted the
      hem of the cloak to his lips.
    

      “Why,” said Maisie, making as though she had not noticed, “can you see
      things that I can't? I don't believe what you believe; but you're right, I
      believe.”
     

      “If I've seen anything, God knows I couldn't have seen it but for you, and
      I know that I couldn't have said it except to you. You seemed to make
      everything clear for a minute; but I don't practice what I preach. You
      would help me... There are only us two in the world for all purposes, and—and
      you like to have me with you?”
     

      “Of course I do. I wonder if you can realise how utterly lonely I am!”
     

      “Darling, I think I can.”
     

      “Two years ago, when I first took the little house, I used to walk up and
      down the back-garden trying to cry. I never can cry. Can you?”
     

      “It's some time since I tried. What was the trouble? Overwork?”
     

      “I don't know; but I used to dream that I had broken down, and had no
      money, and was starving in London. I thought about it all day, and it
      frightened me—oh, how it frightened me!”
     

      “I know that fear. It's the most terrible of all. It wakes me up in the
      night sometimes. You oughtn't to know anything about it.”
     

      “How do you know?”
     

      “Never mind. Is your three hundred a year safe?”
     

      “It's in Consols.”
     

      “Very well. If any one comes to you and recommends a better investment,—even
      if I should come to you,—don't you listen. Never shift the money for
      a minute, and never lend a penny of it,—even to the red-haired
      girl.”
     

      “Don't scold me so! I'm not likely to be foolish.”
     

      “The earth is full of men who'd sell their souls for three hundred a year;
      and women come and talk, and borrow a five-pound note here and a ten-pound
      note there; and a woman has no conscience in a money debt. Stick to your
      money, Maisie, for there's nothing more ghastly in the world than poverty
      in London. It's scared me. By Jove, it put the fear into me! And one
      oughtn't to be afraid of anything.”
     

      To each man is appointed his particular dread,—the terror that, if
      he does not fight against it, must cow him even to the loss of his
      manhood. Dick's experience of the sordid misery of want had entered into
      the deeps of him, and, lest he might find virtue too easy, that memory
      stood behind him, tempting to shame, when dealers came to buy his wares.
      As the Nilghai quaked against his will at the still green water of a lake
      or a mill-dam, as Torpenhow flinched before any white arm that could cut
      or stab and loathed himself for flinching, Dick feared the poverty he had
      once tasted half in jest. His burden was heavier than the burdens of his
      companions.
    

      Maisie watched the face working in the moonlight.
    

      “You've plenty of pennies now,” she said soothingly.
    

      “I shall never have enough,” he began, with vicious emphasis. Then,
      laughing, “I shall always be three-pence short in my accounts.”
     

      “Why threepence?”
     

      “I carried a man's bag once from Liverpool Street Station to Blackfriar's
      Bridge. It was a sixpenny job,—you needn't laugh; indeed it was,—and
      I wanted the money desperately. He only gave me threepence; and he hadn't
      even the decency to pay in silver. Whatever money I make, I shall never
      get that odd threepence out of the world.”
     

      This was not language befitting the man who had preached of the sanctity
      of work. It jarred on Maisie, who preferred her payment in applause,
      which, since all men desire it, must be of the right. She hunted for her
      little purse and gravely took out a threepenny bit.
    

      “There it is,” she said. “I'll pay you, Dickie; and don't worry any more;
      it isn't worth while. Are you paid?”
     

      “I am,” said the very human apostle of fair craft, taking the coin. “I'm
      paid a thousand times, and we'll close that account. It shall live on my
      watch-chain; and you're an angel, Maisie.”
     

      “I'm very cramped, and I'm feeling a little cold. Good gracious! the cloak
      is all white, and so is your moustache! I never knew it was so chilly.”
     

      A light frost lay white on the shoulder of Dick's ulster. He, too, had
      forgotten the state of the weather. They laughed together, and with that
      laugh ended all serious discourse.
    

      They ran inland across the waste to warm themselves, then turned to look
      at the glory of the full tide under the moonlight and the intense black
      shadows of the furze bushes. It was an additional joy to Dick that Maisie
      could see colour even as he saw it,—could see the blue in the white
      of the mist, the violet that is in gray palings, and all things else as
      they are,—not of one hue, but a thousand. And the moonlight came
      into Maisie's soul, so that she, usually reserved, chattered of herself
      and of the things she took interest in,—of Kami, wisest of teachers,
      and of the girls in the studio,—of the Poles, who will kill
      themselves with overwork if they are not checked; of the French, who talk
      at great length of much more than they will ever accomplish; of the
      slovenly English, who toil hopelessly and cannot understand that
      inclination does not imply power; of the Americans, whose rasping voices
      in the hush of a hot afternoon strain tense-drawn nerves to
      breaking-point, and whose suppers lead to indigestion; of tempestuous
      Russians, neither to hold nor to bind, who tell the girls ghost-stories
      till the girls shriek; of stolid Germans, who come to learn one thing,
      and, having mastered that much, stolidly go away and copy pictures for
      evermore. Dick listened enraptured because it was Maisie who spoke. He
      knew the old life.
    

      “It hasn't changed much,” he said. “Do they still steal colours at
      lunch-time?”
     

      “Not steal. Attract is the word. Of course they do. I'm good—I only
      attract ultramarine; but there are students who'd attract flake-white.”
     

      “I've done it myself. You can't help it when the palettes are hung up.
      Every colour is common property once it runs down,—even though you
      do start it with a drop of oil. It teaches people not to waste their
      tubes.”
     

      “I should like to attract some of your colours, Dick. Perhaps I might
      catch your success with them.”
     

      “I mustn't say a bad word, but I should like to. What in the world, which
      you've just missed a lovely chance of seeing, does success or want of
      success, or a three-storied success, matter compared with——No,
      I won't open that question again. It's time to go back to town.”
     

      “I'm sorry, Dick, but——”
     

      “You're much more interested in that than you are in me.”
     

      “I don't know, I don't think I am.”
     

      “What will you give me if I tell you a sure short-cut to everything you
      want,—the trouble and the fuss and the tangle and all the rest? Will
      you promise to obey me?”
     

      “Of course.”
     

      “In the first place, you must never forget a meal because you happen to be
      at work. You forgot your lunch twice last week,” said Dick, at a venture,
      for he knew with whom he was dealing.
    

      “No, no,—only once, really.”
     

      “That's bad enough. And you mustn't take a cup of tea and a biscuit in
      place of a regular dinner, because dinner happens to be a trouble.”
     

      “You're making fun of me!”
     

      “I never was more in earnest in my life. Oh, my love, my love, hasn't it
      dawned on you yet what you are to me? Here's the whole earth in a
      conspiracy to give you a chill, or run over you, or drench you to the
      skin, or cheat you out of your money, or let you die of overwork and
      underfeeding, and I haven't the mere right to look after you. Why, I don't
      even know if you have sense enough to put on warm things when the
      weather's cold.”
     

      “Dick, you're the most awful boy to talk to—really! How do you
      suppose I managed when you were away?”
     

      “I wasn't here, and I didn't know. But now I'm back I'd give everything I
      have for the right of telling you to come in out of the rain.”
     

      “Your success too?”
     

      This time it cost Dick a severe struggle to refrain from bad words.
    

      “As Mrs. Jennett used to say, you're a trial, Maisie! You've been cooped
      up in the schools too long, and you think every one is looking at you.
      There aren't twelve hundred people in the world who understand pictures.
      The others pretend and don't care. Remember, I've seen twelve hundred men
      dead in toadstool-beds. It's only the voice of the tiniest little fraction
      of people that makes success. The real world doesn't care a tinker's—doesn't
      care a bit. For aught you or I know, every man in the world may be arguing
      with a Maisie of his own.”
     

      “Poor Maisie!”
     

      “Poor Dick, I think. Do you believe while he's fighting for what's dearer
      than his life he wants to look at a picture? And even if he did, and if
      all the world did, and a thousand million people rose up and shouted hymns
      to my honour and glory, would that make up to me for the knowledge that
      you were out shopping in the Edgware Road on a rainy day without an
      umbrella? Now we'll go to the station.”
     

      “But you said on the beach——” persisted Maisie, with a certain
      fear.
    

      Dick groaned aloud: “Yes, I know what I said. My work is everything I
      have, or am, or hope to be, to me, and I believe I've learnt the law that
      governs it; but I've some lingering sense of fun left,—though you've
      nearly knocked it out of me. I can just see that it isn't everything to
      all the world. Do what I say, and not what I do.”
     

      Maisie was careful not to reopen debatable matters, and they returned to
      London joyously. The terminus stopped Dick in the midst of an eloquent
      harangue on the beauties of exercise. He would buy Maisie a horse,—such
      a horse as never yet bowed head to bit,—would stable it, with a
      companion, some twenty miles from London, and Maisie, solely for her
      health's sake should ride with him twice or thrice a week.
    

      “That's absurd,” said she. “It wouldn't be proper.”
     

      “Now, who in all London tonight would have sufficient interest or audacity
      to call us two to account for anything we chose to do?”
     

      Maisie looked at the lamps, the fog, and the hideous turmoil. Dick was
      right; but horseflesh did not make for Art as she understood it.
    

      “You're very nice sometimes, but you're very foolish more times. I'm not
      going to let you give me horses, or take you out of your way tonight. I'll
      go home by myself. Only I want you to promise me something. You won't
      think any more about that extra threepence, will you? Remember, you've
      been paid; and I won't allow you to be spiteful and do bad work for a
      little thing like that. You can be so big that you mustn't be tiny.”
     

      This was turning the tables with a vengeance. There remained only to put
      Maisie into her hansom.
    

      “Goodbye,” she said simply. “You'll come on Sunday. It has been a
      beautiful day, Dick. Why can't it be like this always?”
     

      “Because love's like line-work: you must go forward or backward; you can't
      stand still. By the way, go on with your line-work. Good night, and, for
      my—for my sake, take care of yourself.”
     

      He turned to walk home, meditating. The day had brought him nothing that
      he hoped for, but—surely this was worth many days—it had
      brought him nearer to Maisie. The end was only a question of time now, and
      the prize well worth the waiting. By instinct, once more, he turned to the
      river.
    

      “And she understood at once,” he said, looking at the water. “She found
      out my pet besetting sin on the spot, and paid it off. My God, how she
      understood! And she said I was better than she was! Better than she was!”
       He laughed at the absurdity of the notion. “I wonder if girls guess at
      one-half a man's life. They can't, or—they wouldn't marry us.” He
      took her gift out of his pocket, and considered it in the light of a
      miracle and a pledge of the comprehension that, one day, would lead to
      perfect happiness. Meantime, Maisie was alone in London, with none to save
      her from danger. And the packed wilderness was very full of danger.
    

      Dick made his prayer to Fate disjointedly after the manner of the heathen
      as he threw the piece of silver into the river. If any evil were to befal,
      let him bear the burden and let Maisie go unscathed, since the threepenny
      piece was dearest to him of all his possessions. It was a small coin in
      itself, but Maisie had given it, and the Thames held it, and surely the
      Fates would be bribed for this once.
    

      The drowning of the coin seemed to cut him free from thought of Maisie for
      the moment. He took himself off the bridge and went whistling to his
      chambers with a strong yearning for some man-talk and tobacco after his
      first experience of an entire day spent in the society of a woman. There
      was a stronger desire at his heart when there rose before him an
      unsolicited vision of the Barralong dipping deep and sailing free for the
      Southern Cross.
    







      CHAPTER VIII
    

   And these two, as I have told you,
   Were the friends of Hiawatha,
   Chibiabos, the musician,
   And the very strong man, Kwasind.
            —Hiawatha


      Torpenhow was paging the last sheets of some manuscript, while the
      Nilghai, who had come for chess and remained to talk tactics, was reading
      through the first part, commenting scornfully the while.
    

      “It's picturesque enough and it's sketchy,” said he; “but as a serious
      consideration of affairs in Eastern Europe, it's not worth much.”
     

      “It's off my hands at any rate.... Thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty-nine
      slips altogether, aren't there? That should make between eleven and twelve
      pages of valuable misinformation. Heigh-ho!” Torpenhow shuffled the
      writing together and hummed—
    

    'Young lambs to sell, young lambs to sell,
    If I'd as much money as I could tell,
    I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!'”
 

      Dick entered, self-conscious and a little defiant, but in the best of
      tempers with all the world.
    

      “Back at last?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “More or less. What have you been doing?”
     

      “Work. Dickie, you behave as though the Bank of England were behind you.
      Here's Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday gone and you haven't done a line. It's
      scandalous.”
     

      “The notions come and go, my children—they come and go like our
      'baccy,” he answered, filling his pipe. “Moreover,” he stooped to thrust a
      spill into the grate, “Apollo does not always stretch his——Oh,
      confound your clumsy jests, Nilghai!”
     

      “This is not the place to preach the theory of direct inspiration,” said
      the Nilghai, returning Torpenhow's large and workmanlike bellows to their
      nail on the wall. “We believe in cobblers' wax. La!—where you sit
      down.”
     

      “If you weren't so big and fat,” said Dick, looking round for a weapon,
      “I'd——”
     

      “No skylarking in my rooms. You two smashed half my furniture last time
      you threw the cushions about. You might have the decency to say How d'you
      do? to Binkie. Look at him.”
     

      Binkie had jumped down from the sofa and was fawning round Dick's knee,
      and scratching at his boots.
    

      “Dear man!” said Dick, snatching him up, and kissing him on the black
      patch above his right eye. “Did ums was, Binks? Did that ugly Nilghai turn
      you off the sofa? Bite him, Mr. Binkie.” He pitched him on the Nilghai's
      stomach, as the big man lay at ease, and Binkie pretended to destroy the
      Nilghai inch by inch, till a sofa cushion extinguished him, and panting he
      stuck out his tongue at the company.
    

      “The Binkie-boy went for a walk this morning before you were up, Torp. I
      saw him making love to the butcher at the corner when the shutters were
      being taken down—just as if he hadn't enough to eat in his own
      proper house,” said Dick.
    

      “Binks, is that a true bill?” said Torpenhow, severely. The little dog
      retreated under the sofa cushion, and showed by the fat white back of him
      that he really had no further interest in the discussion.
    

      “Strikes me that another disreputable dog went for a walk, too,” said the
      Nilghai. “What made you get up so early? Torp said you might be buying a
      horse.”
     

      “He knows it would need three of us for a serious business like that. No,
      I felt lonesome and unhappy, so I went out to look at the sea, and watch
      the pretty ships go by.”
     

      “Where did you go?”
     

      “Somewhere on the Channel. Progly or Snigly, or some watering-place was
      its name; I've forgotten; but it was only two hours' run from London and
      the ships went by.”
     

      “Did you see anything you knew?”
     

      “Only the Barralong outwards to Australia, and an Odessa grain-boat loaded
      down by the head. It was a thick day, but the sea smelt good.”
     

      “Wherefore put on one's best trousers to see the Barralong?” said
      Torpenhow, pointing.
    

      “Because I've nothing except these things and my painting duds. Besides, I
      wanted to do honour to the sea.”
     

      “Did She make you feel restless?” asked the Nilghai, keenly.
    

      “Crazy. Don't speak of it. I'm sorry I went.”
     

      Torpenhow and the Nilghai exchanged a look as Dick, stooping, busied
      himself among the former's boots and trees.
    

      “These will do,” he said at last; “I can't say I think much of your taste
      in slippers, but the fit's the thing.” He slipped his feet into a pair of
      sock-like sambhur-skin foot coverings, found a long chair, and lay at
      length.
    

      “They're my own pet pair,” Torpenhow said. “I was just going to put them
      on myself.”
     

      “All your reprehensible selfishness. Just because you see me happy for a
      minute, you want to worry me and stir me up. Find another pair.”
     

      “Good for you that Dick can't wear your clothes, Torp. You two live
      communistically,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Dick never has anything that I can wear. He's only useful to sponge
      upon.”
     

      “Confound you, have you been rummaging round among my clothes, then?” said
      Dick. “I put a sovereign in the tobacco-jar yesterday. How do you expect a
      man to keep his accounts properly if you——”
     

      Here the Nilghai began to laugh, and Torpenhow joined him.
    

      “Hid a sovereign yesterday! You're no sort of financier. You lent me a
      fiver about a month back. Do you remember?” Torpenhow said.
    

      “Yes, of course.”
     

      “Do you remember that I paid it you ten days later, and you put it at the
      bottom of the tobacco?”
     

      “By Jove, did I? I thought it was in one of my colour-boxes.”
     

      “You thought! About a week ago I went into your studio to get some 'baccy
      and found it.”
     

      “What did you do with it?”
     

      “Took the Nilghai to a theatre and fed him.”
     

      “You couldn't feed the Nilghai under twice the money—not though you
      gave him Army beef. Well, I suppose I should have found it out sooner or
      later. What is there to laugh at?”
     

      “You're a most amazing cuckoo in many directions,” said the Nilghai, still
      chuckling over the thought of the dinner. “Never mind. We had both been
      working very hard, and it was your unearned increment we spent, and as
      you're only a loafer it didn't matter.”
     

      “That's pleasant—from the man who is bursting with my meat, too.
      I'll get that dinner back one of these days. Suppose we go to a theatre
      now.”
     

      “Put our boots on,—and dress,—and wash?” The Nilghai spoke
      very lazily.
    

      “I withdraw the motion.”
     

      “Suppose, just for a change—as a startling variety, you know—we,
      that is to say we, get our charcoal and our canvas and go on with our
      work.”
     

      Torpenhow spoke pointedly, but Dick only wriggled his toes inside the soft
      leather moccasins.
    

      “What a one-ideaed clucker that is! If I had any unfinished figures on
      hand, I haven't any model; if I had my model, I haven't any spray, and I
      never leave charcoal unfixed overnight; and if I had my spray and twenty
      photographs of backgrounds, I couldn't do anything tonight. I don't feel
      that way.”
     

      “Binkie-dog, he's a lazy hog, isn't he?” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Very good, I will do some work,” said Dick, rising swiftly. “I'll fetch
      the Nungapunga Book, and we'll add another picture to the Nilghai Saga.”
     

      “Aren't you worrying him a little too much?” asked the Nilghai, when Dick
      had left the room.
    

      “Perhaps, but I know what he can turn out if he likes. It makes me savage
      to hear him praised for past work when I know what he ought to do. You and
      I are arranged for——”
     

      “By Kismet and our own powers, more's the pity. I have dreamed of a good
      deal.”
     

      “So have I, but we know our limitations now. I'm dashed if I know what
      Dick's may be when he gives himself to his work. That's what makes me so
      keen about him.”
     

      “And when all's said and done, you will be put aside—quite rightly—for
      a female girl.”
     

      “I wonder... Where do you think he has been today?”
     

      “To the sea. Didn't you see the look in his eyes when he talked about her?
      He's as restless as a swallow in autumn.”
     

      “Yes; but did he go alone?”
     

      “I don't know, and I don't care, but he has the beginnings of the go-fever
      upon him. He wants to up-stakes and move out. There's no mistaking the
      signs. Whatever he may have said before, he has the call upon him now.”
     

      “It might be his salvation,” Torpenhow said.
    

      “Perhaps—if you care to take the responsibility of being a saviour.”
     

      Dick returned with the big clasped sketch-book that the Nilghai knew well
      and did not love too much. In it Dick had drawn all manner of moving
      incidents, experienced by himself or related to him by the others, of all
      the four corners of the earth. But the wider range of the Nilghai's body
      and life attracted him most. When truth failed he fell back on fiction of
      the wildest, and represented incidents in the Nilghai's career that were
      unseemly,—his marriages with many African princesses, his shameless
      betrayal, for Arab wives, of an army corps to the Mahdi, his tattooment by
      skilled operators in Burmah, his interview (and his fears) with the yellow
      headsman in the blood-stained execution-ground of Canton, and finally, the
      passings of his spirit into the bodies of whales, elephants, and toucans.
      Torpenhow from time to time had added rhymed descriptions, and the whole
      was a curious piece of art, because Dick decided, having regard to the
      name of the book which being interpreted means “naked,” that it would be
      wrong to draw the Nilghai with any clothes on, under any circumstances.
      Consequently the last sketch, representing that much-enduring man calling
      on the War Office to press his claims to the Egyptian medal, was hardly
      delicate. He settled himself comfortably on Torpenhow's table and turned
      over the pages.
    

      “What a fortune you would have been to Blake, Nilghai!” he said. “There's
      a succulent pinkness about some of these sketches that's more than
      life-like. 'The Nilghai surrounded while bathing by the Mahdieh'—that
      was founded on fact, eh?”
     

      “It was very nearly my last bath, you irreverent dauber. Has Binkie come
      into the Saga yet?”
     

      “No; the Binkie-boy hasn't done anything except eat and kill cats. Let's
      see. Here you are as a stained-glass saint in a church. Deuced decorative
      lines about your anatomy; you ought to be grateful for being handed down
      to posterity in this way. Fifty years hence you'll exist in rare and
      curious facsimiles at ten guineas each. What shall I try this time? The
      domestic life of the Nilghai?”
     

      “Hasn't got any.”
     

      “The undomestic life of the Nilghai, then. Of course. Mass-meeting of his
      wives in Trafalgar Square. That's it. They came from the ends of the earth
      to attend Nilghai's wedding to an English bride. This shall be an epic.
      It's a sweet material to work with.”
     

      “It's a scandalous waste of time,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Don't worry; it keeps one's hand in—specially when you begin
      without the pencil.” He set to work rapidly. “That's Nelson's Column.
      Presently the Nilghai will appear shinning up it.”
     

      “Give him some clothes this time.”
     

      “Certainly—a veil and an orange-wreath, because he's been married.”
     

      “Gad, that's clever enough!” said Torpenhow over his shoulder, as Dick
      brought out of the paper with three twirls of the brush a very fat back
      and labouring shoulder pressed against stone.
    

      “Just imagine,” Dick continued, “if we could publish a few of these dear
      little things every time the Nilghai subsidises a man who can write, to
      give the public an honest opinion of my pictures.”
     

      “Well, you'll admit I always tell you when I have done anything of that
      kind. I know I can't hammer you as you ought to be hammered, so I give the
      job to another. Young Maclagan, for instance——”
     

      “No-o—one half-minute, old man; stick your hand out against the dark
      of the wall-paper—you only burble and call me names. That left
      shoulder's out of drawing. I must literally throw a veil over that.
      Where's my pen-knife? Well, what about Maclagan?”
     

      “I only gave him his riding-orders to—to lambast you on general
      principles for not producing work that will last.”
     

      “Whereupon that young fool,”—Dick threw back his head and shut one
      eye as he shifted the page under his hand,—“being left alone with an
      ink-pot and what he conceived were his own notions, went and spilt them
      both over me in the papers. You might have engaged a grown man for the
      business, Nilghai. How do you think the bridal veil looks now, Torp?”
     

      “How the deuce do three dabs and two scratches make the stuff stand away
      from the body as it does?” said Torpenhow, to whom Dick's methods were
      always new.
    

      “It just depends on where you put 'em. If Maclagan had know that much
      about his business he might have done better.”
     

      “Why don't you put the damned dabs into something that will stay, then?”
       insisted the Nilghai, who had really taken considerable trouble in hiring
      for Dick's benefit the pen of a young gentleman who devoted most of his
      waking hours to an anxious consideration of the aims and ends of Art,
      which, he wrote, was one and indivisible.
    

      “Wait a minute till I see how I am going to manage my procession of wives.
      You seem to have married extensively, and I must rough 'em in with the
      pencil—Medes, Parthians, Edomites.... Now, setting aside the
      weakness and the wickedness and—and the fat-headedness of
      deliberately trying to do work that will live, as they call it, I'm
      content with the knowledge that I've done my best up to date, and I shan't
      do anything like it again for some hours at least—probably years.
      Most probably never.”
     

      “What! any stuff you have in stock your best work?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Anything you've sold?” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Oh no. It isn't here and it isn't sold. Better than that, it can't be
      sold, and I don't think any one knows where it is. I'm sure I don't....
      And yet more and more wives, on the north side of the square. Observe the
      virtuous horror of the lions!”
     

      “You may as well explain,” said Torpenhow, and Dick lifted his head from
      the paper.
    

      “The sea reminded me of it,” he said slowly. “I wish it hadn't. It weighs
      some few thousand tons—unless you cut it out with a cold chisel.”
     

      “Don't be an idiot. You can't pose with us here,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “There's no pose in the matter at all. It's a fact. I was loafing from
      Lima to Auckland in a big, old, condemned passenger-ship turned into a
      cargo-boat and owned by a second-hand Italian firm. She was a crazy
      basket. We were cut down to fifteen ton of coal a day, and we thought
      ourselves lucky when we kicked seven knots an hour out of her. Then we
      used to stop and let the bearings cool down, and wonder whether the crack
      in the shaft was spreading.”
     

      “Were you a steward or a stoker in those days?”
     

      “I was flush for the time being, so I was a passenger, or else I should
      have been a steward, I think,” said Dick, with perfect gravity, returning
      to the procession of angry wives. “I was the only other passenger from
      Lima, and the ship was half empty, and full of rats and cockroaches and
      scorpions.”
     

      “But what has this to do with the picture?”
     

      “Wait a minute. She had been in the China passenger trade and her lower
      decks had bunks for two thousand pigtails. Those were all taken down, and
      she was empty up to her nose, and the lights came through the port holes—most
      annoying lights to work in till you got used to them. I hadn't anything to
      do for weeks. The ship's charts were in pieces and our skipper daren't run
      south for fear of catching a storm. So he did his best to knock all the
      Society Islands out of the water one by one, and I went into the lower
      deck, and did my picture on the port side as far forward in her as I could
      go. There was some brown paint and some green paint that they used for the
      boats, and some black paint for ironwork, and that was all I had.”
     

      “The passengers must have thought you mad.”
     

      “There was only one, and it was a woman; but it gave me the notion of my
      picture.”
     

      “What was she like?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “She was a sort of Negroid-Jewess-Cuban; with morals to match. She
      couldn't read or write, and she didn't want to, but she used to come down
      and watch me paint, and the skipper didn't like it, because he was paying
      her passage and had to be on the bridge occasionally.”
     

      “I see. That must have been cheerful.”
     

      “It was the best time I ever had. To begin with, we didn't know whether we
      should go up or go down any minute when there was a sea on; and when it
      was calm it was paradise; and the woman used to mix the paints and talk
      broken English, and the skipper used to steal down every few minutes to
      the lower deck, because he said he was afraid of fire. So, you see, we
      could never tell when we might be caught, and I had a splendid notion to
      work out in only three keys of colour.”
     

      “What was the notion?”
     

      “Two lines in Poe—
    

  'Neither the angels in Heaven above nor the demons down under the sea,
  Can ever dissever my soul from the soul of the beautiful Annabel Lee.'


      It came out of the sea—all by itself. I drew that fight, fought out
      in green water over the naked, choking soul, and the woman served as the
      model for the devils and the angels both—sea-devils and sea-angels,
      and the soul half drowned between them. It doesn't sound much, but when
      there was a good light on the lower deck it looked very fine and creepy.
      It was seven by fourteen feet, all done in shifting light for shifting
      light.”
     

      “Did the woman inspire you much?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “She and the sea between them—immensely. There was a heap of bad
      drawing in that picture. I remember I went out of my way to foreshorten
      for sheer delight of doing it, and I foreshortened damnably, but for all
      that it's the best thing I've ever done; and now I suppose the ship's
      broken up or gone down. Whew! What a time that was!”
     

      “What happened after all?”
     

      “It all ended. They were loading her with wool when I left the ship, but
      even the stevedores kept the picture clear to the last. The eyes of the
      demons scared them, I honestly believe.”
     

      “And the woman?”
     

      “She was scared too when it was finished. She used to cross herself before
      she went down to look at it. Just three colours and no chance of getting
      any more, and the sea outside and unlimited love-making inside, and the
      fear of death atop of everything else, O Lord!” He had ceased to look at
      the sketch, but was staring straight in front of him across the room.
    

      “Why don't you try something of the same kind now?” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Because those things come not by fasting and prayer. When I find a
      cargo-boat and a Jewess-Cuban and another notion and the same old life, I
      may.”
     

      “You won't find them here,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “No, I shall not.” Dick shut the sketch-book with a bang. “This room's as
      hot as an oven. Open the window, some one.”
     

      He leaned into the darkness, watching the greater darkness of London below
      him. The chambers stood much higher than the other houses, commanding a
      hundred chimneys—crooked cowls that looked like sitting cats as they
      swung round, and other uncouth brick and zinc mysteries supported by iron
      stanchions and clamped by 8-pieces. Northward the lights of Piccadilly
      Circus and Leicester Square threw a copper-coloured glare above the black
      roofs, and southward by all the orderly lights of the Thames. A train
      rolled out across one of the railway bridges, and its thunder drowned for
      a minute the dull roar of the streets. The Nilghai looked at his watch and
      said shortly, “That's the Paris night-mail. You can book from here to St.
      Petersburg if you choose.”
     

      Dick crammed head and shoulders out of the window and looked across the
      river. Torpenhow came to his side, while the Nilghai passed over quietly
      to the piano and opened it. Binkie, making himself as large as possible,
      spread out upon the sofa with the air of one who is not to be lightly
      disturbed.
    

      “Well,” said the Nilghai to the two pairs of shoulders, “have you never
      seen this place before?”
     

      A steam-tug on the river hooted as she towed her barges to wharf. Then the
      boom of the traffic came into the room. Torpenhow nudged Dick.
    

      “Good place to bank in—bad place to bunk in, Dickie, isn't it?”
     

      Dick's chin was in his hand as he answered, in the words of a general not
      without fame, still looking out on the darkness—“'My God, what a
      city to loot!'”
     

      Binkie found the night air tickling his whiskers and sneezed plaintively.
    

      “We shall give the Binkie-dog a cold,” said Torpenhow. “Come in,” and they
      withdrew their heads. “You'll be buried in Kensal Green, Dick, one of
      these days, if it isn't closed by the time you want to go there—buried
      within two feet of some one else, his wife and his family.”
     

      “Allah forbid! I shall get away before that time comes. Give a man room to
      stretch his legs, Mr. Binkie.” Dick flung himself down on the sofa and
      tweaked Binkie's velvet ears, yawning heavily the while.
    

      “You'll find that wardrobe-case very much out of tune,” Torpenhow said to
      the Nilghai. “It's never touched except by you.”
     

      “A piece of gross extravagance,” Dick grunted. “The Nilghai only comes
      when I'm out.”
     

      “That's because you're always out. Howl, Nilghai, and let him hear.”
     

      “The life of the Nilghai is fraud and slaughter, His writings are watered
      Dickens and water; But the voice of the Nilghai raised on high Makes even
      the Mahdieh glad to die!”
     

      Dick quoted from Torpenhow's letterpress in the Nungapunga Book.
    

      “How do they call moose in Canada, Nilghai?”
     

      The man laughed. Singing was his one polite accomplishment, as many
      Press-tents in far-off lands had known.
    

      “What shall I sing?” said he, turning in the chair.
    

      “'Moll Roe in the Morning,'” said Torpenhow, at a venture.
    

      “No,” said Dick, sharply, and the Nilghai opened his eyes. The old chanty
      whereof he, among a very few, possessed all the words was not a pretty
      one, but Dick had heard it many times before without wincing. Without
      prelude he launched into that stately tune that calls together and
      troubles the hearts of the gipsies of the sea—
    

      “Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies, Farewell and adieu to you,
      ladies of Spain.”
     

      Dick turned uneasily on the sofa, for he could hear the bows of the
      Barralong crashing into the green seas on her way to the Southern Cross.
    

      Then came the chorus—
    

      “We'll rant and we'll roar like true British sailors, We'll rant and we'll
      roar across the salt seas, Until we take soundings in the Channel of Old
      England From Ushant to Scilly 'tis forty-five leagues.”
     

      “Thirty-five-thirty-five,” said Dick, petulantly. “Don't tamper with Holy
      Writ. Go on, Nilghai.”
     

      “The first land we made it was called the Deadman,” and they sang to the
      end very vigourously.
    

      “That would be a better song if her head were turned the other way—to
      the Ushant light, for instance,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Flinging his arms about like a mad windmill,” said Torpenhow. “Give us
      something else, Nilghai. You're in fine fog-horn form tonight.”
     

      “Give us the 'Ganges Pilot'; you sang that in the square the night before
      El-Maghrib. By the way, I wonder how many of the chorus are alive
      tonight,” said Dick.
    

      Torpenhow considered for a minute. “By Jove! I believe only you and I.
      Raynor, Vicery, and Deenes—all dead; Vincent caught smallpox in
      Cairo, carried it here and died of it. Yes, only you and I and the
      Nilghai.”
     

      “Umph! And yet the men here who've done their work in a well-warmed studio
      all their lives, with a policeman at each corner, say that I charge too
      much for my pictures.”
     

      “They are buying your work, not your insurance policies, dear child,” said
      the Nilghai.
    

      “I gambled with one to get at the other. Don't preach. Go on with the
      'Pilot.' Where in the world did you get that song?”
     

      “On a tombstone,” said the Nilghai. “On a tombstone in a distant land. I
      made it an accompaniment with heaps of base chords.”
     

      “Oh, Vanity! Begin.” And the Nilghai began—
    

      “I have slipped my cable, messmates, I'm drifting down with the tide, I
      have my sailing orders, while yet at anchor ride. And never on fair June
      morning have I put out to sea With clearer conscience or better hope, or a
      heart more light and free.
    

      “Shoulder to shoulder, Joe, my boy, into the crowd like a wedge. Strike
      with the hangers, messmates, but do not cut with the edge.” Cries
      Charnock, “Scatter the faggots, double that Brahmin in two, The tall pale
      widow for me, Joe, the little brown girl for you!”
     

      “Young Joe (you're nearing sixty), why is your hide so dark? Katie has
      soft fair blue eyes, who blackened yours?—Why, hark!”
     

      They were all singing now, Dick with the roar of the wind of the open sea
      about his ears as the deep bass voice let itself go.
    

      “The morning gun—Ho, steady! the arquebuses to me! I ha' sounded the
      Dutch High Admiral's heart as my lead doth sound the sea.
    

      “Sounding, sounding the Ganges, floating down with the tide, Moore me
      close to Charnock, next to my nut-brown bride. My blessing to Kate at
      Fairlight—Holwell, my thanks to you; Steady! We steer for heaven,
      through sand-drifts cold and blue.”
     

      “Now what is there in that nonsense to make a man restless?” said Dick,
      hauling Binkie from his feet to his chest.
    

      “It depends on the man,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “The man who has been down to look at the sea,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “I didn't know she was going to upset me in this fashion.”
     

      “That's what men say when they go to say good-bye to a woman. It's more
      easy though to get rid of three women than a piece of one's life and
      surroundings.”
     

      “But a woman can be——” began Dick, unguardedly.
    

      “A piece of one's life,” continued Torpenhow. “No, she can't.” His face
      darkened for a moment. “She says she wants to sympathise with you and help
      you in your work, and everything else that clearly a man must do for
      himself. Then she sends round five notes a day to ask why the dickens you
      haven't been wasting your time with her.”
     

      “Don't generalise,” said the Nilghai. “By the time you arrive at five
      notes a day you must have gone through a good deal and behaved
      accordingly. Shouldn't begin these things, my son.”
     

      “I shouldn't have gone down to the sea,” said Dick, just a little anxious
      to change the conversation. “And you shouldn't have sung.”
     

      “The sea isn't sending you five notes a day,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “No, but I'm fatally compromised. She's an enduring old hag, and I'm sorry
      I ever met her. Why wasn't I born and bred and dead in a three-pair back?”
     

      “Hear him blaspheming his first love! Why in the world shouldn't you
      listen to her?” said Torpenhow.
    

      Before Dick could reply the Nilghai lifted up his voice with a shout that
      shook the windows, in “The Men of the Sea,” that begins, as all know, “The
      sea is a wicked old woman,” and after wading through eight lines whose
      imagery is truthful, ends in a refrain, slow as the clacking of a capstan
      when the boat comes unwillingly up to the bars where the men sweat and
      tramp in the shingle.
    

      “'Ye that bore us, O restore us! She is kinder than ye; For the call is on
      our heart-strings!' Said The Men of the Sea.”
     

      The Nilghai sang that verse twice, with simple cunning, intending that
      Dick should hear. But Dick was waiting for the farewell of the men to
      their wives.
    

      “'Ye that love us, can ye move us? She is dearer than ye; And your sleep
      will be the sweeter,' Said The Men of the Sea.”
     

      The rough words beat like the blows of the waves on the bows of the
      rickety boat from Lima in the days when Dick was mixing paints, making
      love, drawing devils and angels in the half dark, and wondering whether
      the next minute would put the Italian captain's knife between his
      shoulder-blades. And the go-fever which is more real than many doctors'
      diseases, waked and raged, urging him who loved Maisie beyond anything in
      the world, to go away and taste the old hot, unregenerate life again,—to
      scuffle, swear, gamble, and love light loves with his fellows; to take
      ship and know the sea once more, and by her beget pictures; to talk to
      Binat among the sands of Port Said while Yellow Tina mixed the drinks; to
      hear the crackle of musketry, and see the smoke roll outward, thin and
      thicken again till the shining black faces came through, and in that hell
      every man was strictly responsible for his own head, and his own alone,
      and struck with an unfettered arm. It was impossible, utterly impossible,
      but—
    

      “'Oh, our fathers in the churchyard, She is older than ye, And our graves
      will be the greener,' Said The Men of the Sea.”
     

      “What is there to hinder?” said Torpenhow, in the long hush that followed
      the song.
    

      “You said a little time since that you wouldn't come for a walk round the
      world, Torp.”
     

      “That was months ago, and I only objected to your making money for
      travelling expenses. You've shot your bolt here and it has gone home. Go
      away and do some work, and see some things.”
     

      “Get some of the fat off you; you're disgracefully out of condition,” said
      the Nilghai, making a plunge from the chair and grasping a handful of Dick
      generally over the right ribs. “Soft as putty—pure tallow born of
      over-feeding. Train it off, Dickie.”
     

      “We're all equally gross, Nilghai. Next time you have to take the field
      you'll sit down, wink your eyes, gasp, and die in a fit.”
     

      “Never mind. You go away on a ship. Go to Lima again, or to Brazil.
      There's always trouble in South America.”
     

      “Do you suppose I want to be told where to go? Great Heavens, the only
      difficulty is to know where I'm to stop. But I shall stay here, as I told
      you before.”
     

      “Then you'll be buried in Kensal Green and turn into adipocere with the
      others,” said Torpenhow. “Are you thinking of commissions in hand? Pay
      forfeit and go. You've money enough to travel as a king if you please.”
     

      “You've the grisliest notions of amusement, Torp. I think I see myself
      shipping first class on a six-thousand-ton hotel, and asking the third
      engineer what makes the engines go round, and whether it isn't very warm
      in the stokehold. Ho! ho! I should ship as a loafer if ever I shipped at
      all, which I'm not going to do. I shall compromise, and go for a small
      trip to begin with.”
     

      “That's something at any rate. Where will you go?” said Torpenhow. “It
      would do you all the good in the world, old man.”
     

      The Nilghai saw the twinkle in Dick's eye, and refrained from speech.
    

      “I shall go in the first place to Rathray's stable, where I shall hire one
      horse, and take him very carefully as far as Richmond Hill. Then I shall
      walk him back again, in case he should accidentally burst into a lather
      and make Rathray angry. I shall do that tomorrow, for the sake of air and
      exercise.”
     

      “Bah!” Dick had barely time to throw up his arm and ward off the cushion
      that the disgusted Torpenhow heaved at his head.
    

      “Air and exercise indeed,” said the Nilghai, sitting down heavily on Dick.
    

      “Let's give him a little of both. Get the bellows, Torp.”
     

      At this point the conference broke up in disorder, because Dick would not
      open his mouth till the Nilghai held his nose fast, and there was some
      trouble in forcing the nozzle of the bellows between his teeth; and even
      when it was there he weakly tried to puff against the force of the blast,
      and his cheeks blew up with a great explosion; and the enemy becoming
      helpless with laughter he so beat them over the head with a soft sofa
      cushion that became unsewn and distributed its feathers, and Binkie,
      interfering in Torpenhow's interests, was bundled into the half-empty bag
      and advised to scratch his way out, which he did after a while, travelling
      rapidly up and down the floor in the shape of an agitated green haggis,
      and when he came out looking for satisfaction, the three pillars of his
      world were picking feathers out of their hair.
    

      “A prophet has no honour in his own country,” said Dick, ruefully, dusting
      his knees. “This filthy fluff will never brush off my legs.”
     

      “It was all for your own good,” said the Nilghai. “Nothing like air and
      exercise.”
     

      “All for your good,” said Torpenhow, not in the least with reference to
      past clowning. “It would let you focus things at their proper worth and
      prevent your becoming slack in this hothouse of a town. Indeed it would,
      old man. I shouldn't have spoken if I hadn't thought so. Only, you make a
      joke of everything.”
     

      “Before God I do no such thing,” said Dick, quickly and earnestly. “You
      don't know me if you think that.”
     

      “I don't think it,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “How can fellows like ourselves, who know what life and death really mean,
      dare to make a joke of anything? I know we pretend it, to save ourselves
      from breaking down or going to the other extreme. Can't I see, old man,
      how you're always anxious about me, and try to advise me to make my work
      better? Do you suppose I don't think about that myself? But you can't help
      me—you can't help me—not even you. I must play my own hand
      alone in my own way.”
     

      “Hear, hear,” from the Nilghai.
    

      “What's the one thing in the Nilghai Saga that I've never drawn in the
      Nungapunga Book?” Dick continued to Torpenhow, who was a little astonished
      at the outburst.
    

      Now there was one blank page in the book given over to the sketch that
      Dick had not drawn of the crowning exploit in the Nilghai's life; when
      that man, being young and forgetting that his body and bones belonged to
      the paper that employed him, had ridden over sunburned slippery grass in
      the rear of Bredow's brigade on the day that the troopers flung themselves
      at Caurobert's artillery, and for aught they knew twenty battalions in
      front, to save the battered 24th German Infantry, to give time to decide
      the fate of Vionville, and to learn ere their remnant came back to
      Flavigay that cavalry can attack and crumple and break unshaken infantry.
      Whenever he was inclined to think over a life that might have been better,
      an income that might have been larger, and a soul that might have been
      considerably cleaner, the Nilghai would comfort himself with the thought,
      “I rode with Bredow's brigade at Vionville,” and take heart for any lesser
      battle the next day might bring.
    

      “I know,” he said very gravely. “I was always glad that you left it out.”
     

      “I left it out because Nilghai taught me what the Germany army learned
      then, and what Schmidt taught their cavalry. I don't know German. What is
      it? 'Take care of the time and the dressing will take care of itself.' I
      must ride my own line to my own beat, old man.”
     

      “Tempe ist richtung. You've learned your lesson well,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “He must go alone. He speaks truth, Torp.”
     

      “Maybe I'm as wrong as I can be—hideously wrong. I must find that
      out for myself, as I have to think things out for myself, but I daren't
      turn my head to dress by the next man. It hurts me a great deal more than
      you know not to be able to go, but I cannot, that's all. I must do my own
      work and live my own life in my own way, because I'm responsible for both.
      Only don't think I frivol about it, Torp. I have my own matches and
      sulphur, and I'll make my own hell, thanks.”
     

      There was an uncomfortable pause. Then Torpenhow said blandly, “What did
      the Governor of North Carolina say to the Governor of South Carolina?”
     

      “Excellent notion. It is a long time between drinks. There are the makings
      of a very fine prig in you, Dick,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “I've liberated my mind, estimable Binkie, with the feathers in his
      mouth.” Dick picked up the still indignant one and shook him tenderly.
      “You're tied up in a sack and made to run about blind, Binkie-wee, without
      any reason, and it has hurt your little feelings. Never mind. Sic volo,
      sic jubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas, and don't sneeze in my eye because I
      talk Latin. Good night.”
     

      He went out of the room.
    

      “That's distinctly one for you,” said the Nilghai. “I told you it was
      hopeless to meddle with him. He's not pleased.”
     

      “He'd swear at me if he weren't. I can't make it out. He has the go-fever
      upon him and he won't go. I only hope that he mayn't have to go some day
      when he doesn't want to,” said Torpenhow.
    


      In his own room Dick was settling a question with himself—and the
      question was whether all the world, and all that was therein, and a
      burning desire to exploit both, was worth one threepenny piece thrown into
      the Thames.
    

      “It came of seeing the sea, and I'm a cur to think about it,” he decided.
      “After all, the honeymoon will be that tour—with reservations;
      only... only I didn't realise that the sea was so strong. I didn't feel it
      so much when I was with Maisie. These damnable songs did it. He's
      beginning again.”
     

      But it was only Herrick's Nightpiece to Julia that the Nilghai sang, and
      before it was ended Dick reappeared on the threshold, not altogether
      clothed indeed, but in his right mind, thirsty and at peace.
    

      The mood had come and gone with the rising and the falling of the tide by
      Fort Keeling.
    







      CHAPTER IX
    

   “If I have taken the common clay
   And wrought it cunningly
   In the shape of a god that was digged a clod,
   The greater honour to me.”

   “If thou hast taken the common clay,
   And thy hands be not free
   From the taint of the soil,
   thou hast made thy spoil
   The greater shame to thee.”
            —The Two Potters


      HE DID no work of any kind for the rest of the week. Then came another
      Sunday. He dreaded and longed for the day always, but since the red-haired
      girl had sketched him there was rather more dread than desire in his mind.
    

      He found that Maisie had entirely neglected his suggestions about
      line-work. She had gone off at score filed with some absurd notion for a
      “fancy head.” It cost Dick something to command his temper.
    

      “What's the good of suggesting anything?” he said pointedly.
    

      “Ah, but this will be a picture,—a real picture; and I know that
      Kami will let me send it to the Salon. You don't mind, do you?”
     

      “I suppose not. But you won't have time for the Salon.”
     

      Maisie hesitated a little. She even felt uncomfortable.
    

      “We're going over to France a month sooner because of it. I shall get the
      idea sketched out here and work it up at Kami's.”
     

      Dick's heart stood still, and he came very near to being disgusted with
      his queen who could do no wrong. “Just when I thought I had made some
      headway, she goes off chasing butterflies. It's too maddening!”
     

      There was no possibility of arguing, for the red-haired girl was in the
      studio. Dick could only look unutterable reproach.
    

      “I'm sorry,” he said, “and I think you make a mistake. But what's the idea
      of your new picture?”
     

      “I took it from a book.”
     

      “That's bad, to begin with. Books aren't the places for pictures. And——”
     

      “It's this,” said the red-haired girl behind him. “I was reading it to
      Maisie the other day from The City of Dreadful Night. D'you know the
      book?”
     

      “A little. I am sorry I spoke. There are pictures in it. What has taken
      her fancy?”
     

      “The description of the Melancolia—
    

 'Her folded wings as of a mighty eagle,
 But all too impotent to lift the regal
 Robustness of her earth-born strength and pride.


      And here again. (Maisie, get the tea, dear.)
    

   'The forehead charged with baleful thoughts and dreams,
   The household bunch of keys, the housewife's gown,
   Voluminous indented, and yet rigid
   As though a shell of burnished metal frigid,
   Her feet thick-shod to tread all weakness down.”
 

      There was no attempt to conceal the scorn of the lazy voice. Dick winced.
    

      “But that has been done already by an obscure artist by the name of
      Durer,” said he. “How does the poem run?—
    

    'Three centuries and threescore years ago,
    With phantasies of his peculiar thought.'


      You might as well try to rewrite Hamlet. It will be a waste of time.”
     

      “No, it won't,” said Maisie, putting down the teacups with a clatter to
      reassure herself. “And I mean to do it. Can't you see what a beautiful
      thing it would make?”
     

      “How in perdition can one do work when one hasn't had the proper training?
      Any fool can get a notion. It needs training to drive the thing through,—training
      and conviction; not rushing after the first fancy.” Dick spoke between his
      teeth.
    

      “You don't understand,” said Maisie. “I think I can do it.”
     

      Again the voice of the girl behind him—
    

    “Baffled and beaten back, she works on still;
    Weary and sick of soul, she works the more.

    Sustained by her indomitable will,
    The hands shall fashion, and the brain shall pore,
    And all her sorrow shall be turned to labour——


      I fancy Maisie means to embody herself in the picture.”
     

      “Sitting on a throne of rejected pictures? No, I shan't, dear. The notion
      in itself has fascinated me.—Of course you don't care for fancy
      heads, Dick. I don't think you could do them. You like blood and bones.”
     

      “That's a direct challenge. If you can do a Melancolia that isn't merely a
      sorrowful female head, I can do a better one; and I will, too. What d'you
      know about Melacolias?” Dick firmly believed that he was even then tasting
      three-quarters of all the sorrow in the world.
    

      “She was a woman,” said Maisie, “and she suffered a great deal,—till
      she could suffer no more. Then she began to laugh at it all, and then I
      painted her and sent her to the Salon.”
     

      The red-haired girl rose up and left the room, laughing.
    

      Dick looked at Maisie humbly and hopelessly.
    

      “Never mind about the picture,” he said. “Are you really going back to
      Kami's for a month before your time?”
     

      “I must, if I want to get the picture done.”
     

      “And that's all you want?”
     

      “Of course. Don't be stupid, Dick.”
     

      “You haven't the power. You have only the ideas—the ideas and the
      little cheap impulses. How you could have kept at your work for ten years
      steadily is a mystery to me. So you are really going,—a month before
      you need?”
     

      “I must do my work.”
     

      “Your work—bah!... No, I didn't mean that. It's all right, dear. Of
      course you must do your work, and—I think I'll say goodbye for this
      week.”
     

      “Won't you even stay for tea?”
     

      “No, thank you. Have I your leave to go, dear? There's nothing more you
      particularly want me to do, and the line-work doesn't matter.”
     

      “I wish you could stay, and then we could talk over my picture. If only
      one single picture's a success, it draws attention to all the others. I
      know some of my work is good, if only people could see. And you needn't
      have been so rude about it.”
     

      “I'm sorry. We'll talk the Melancolia over some one of the other Sundays.
      There are four more—yes, one, two, three, four—before you go.
      Goodbye, Maisie.”
     

      Maisie stood by the studio window, thinking, till the red-haired girl
      returned, a little white at the corners of her lips.
    

      “Dick's gone off,” said Maisie. “Just when I wanted to talk about the
      picture. Isn't it selfish of him?”
     

      Her companion opened her lips as if to speak, shut them again, and went on
      reading The City of Dreadful Night.
    

      Dick was in the Park, walking round and round a tree that he had chosen as
      his confidante for many Sundays past. He was swearing audibly, and when he
      found that the infirmities of the English tongue hemmed in his rage, he
      sought consolation in Arabic, which is expressly designed for the use of
      the afflicted. He was not pleased with the reward of his patient service;
      nor was he pleased with himself; and it was long before he arrived at the
      proposition that the queen could do no wrong.
    

      “It's a losing game,” he said. “I'm worth nothing when a whim of hers is
      in question. But in a losing game at Port Said we used to double the
      stakes and go on. She do a Melancolia! She hasn't the power, or the
      insight, or the training. Only the desire. She's cursed with the curse of
      Reuben. She won't do line-work, because it means real work; and yet she's
      stronger than I am. I'll make her understand that I can beat her on her
      own Melancolia. Even then she wouldn't care. She says I can only do blood
      and bones. I don't believe she has blood in her veins. All the same I
      lover her; and I must go on loving her; and if I can humble her inordinate
      vanity I will. I'll do a Melancolia that shall be something like a
      Melancolia 'the Melancolia that transcends all wit.' I'll do it at once,
      con—bless her.”
     

      He discovered that the notion would not come to order, and that he could
      not free his mind for an hour from the thought of Maisie's departure. He
      took very small interest in her rough studies for the Melancolia when she
      showed them next week. The Sundays were racing past, and the time was at
      hand when all the church bells in London could not ring Maisie back to
      him. Once or twice he said something to Binkie about 'hermaphroditic
      futilities,' but the little dog received so many confidences both from
      Torpenhow and Dick that he did not trouble his tulip-ears to listen.
    

      Dick was permitted to see the girls off. They were going by the Dover
      night-boat; and they hoped to return in August. It was then February, and
      Dick felt that he was being hardly used. Maisie was so busy stripping the
      small house across the Park, and packing her canvases, that she had not
      time for thought. Dick went down to Dover and wasted a day there fretting
      over a wonderful possibility. Would Maisie at the very last allow him one
      small kiss? He reflected that he might capture her by the strong arm, as
      he had seem women captured in the Southern Soudan, and lead her away; but
      Maisie would never be led. She would turn her gray eyes upon him and say,
      “Dick, how selfish you are!” Then his courage would fail him. It would be
      better, after all, to beg for that kiss.
    

      Maisie looked more than usually kissable as she stepped from the
      night-mail on to the windy pier, in a gray waterproof and a little gray
      cloth travelling-cap. The red-haired girl was not so lovely. Her green
      eyes were hollow and her lips were dry. Dick saw the trunks aboard, and
      went to Maisie's side in the darkness under the bridge. The mail-bags were
      thundering into the forehold, and the red-haired girl was watching them.
    

      “You'll have a rough passage tonight,” said Dick. “It's blowing outside. I
      suppose I may come over and see you if I'm good?”
     

      “You mustn't. I shall be busy. At least, if I want you I'll send for you.
      But I shall write from Vitry-sur-Marne. I shall have heaps of things to
      consult you about. Oh, Dick, you have been so good to me!—so good to
      me!”
     

      “Thank you for that, dear. It hasn't made any difference, has it?”
     

      “I can't tell a fib. It hasn't—in that way. But don't think I'm not
      grateful.”
     

      “Damn the gratitude!” said Dick, huskily, to the paddle-box.
    

      “What's the use of worrying? You know I should ruin your life, and you'd
      ruin mine, as things are now. You remember what you said when you were so
      angry that day in the Park? One of us has to be broken. Can't you wait
      till that day comes?”
     

      “No, love. I want you unbroken—all to myself.”
     

      Maisie shook her head. “My poor Dick, what can I say!”
     

      “Don't say anything. Give me a kiss. Only one kiss, Maisie. I'll swear I
      won't take any more. You might as well, and then I can be sure you're
      grateful.”
     

      Maisie put her cheek forward, and Dick took his reward in the darkness.
    

      It was only one kiss, but, since there was no time-limit specified, it was
      a long one. Maisie wrenched herself free angrily, and Dick stood abashed
      and tingling from head to toe.
    

      “Goodbye, darling. I didn't mean to scare you. I'm sorry. Only—keep
      well and do good work,—specially the Melancolia. I'm going to do
      one, too. Remember me to Kami, and be careful what you drink. Country
      drinking-water is bad everywhere, but it's worse in France. Write to me if
      you want anything, and good-bye. Say good-bye to the whatever-you-call-um
      girl, and—can't I have another kiss? No. You're quite right.
      Goodbye.”
     

      A shout told him that it was not seemly to charge of the mail-bag incline.
      He reached the pier as the steamer began to move off, and he followed her
      with his heart.
    

      “And there's nothing—nothing in the wide world—to keep us
      apart except her obstinacy. These Calais night-boats are much too small.
      I'll get Torp to write to the papers about it. She's beginning to pitch
      already.”
     

      Maisie stood where Dick had left her till she heard a little gasping cough
      at her elbow. The red-haired girl's eyes were alight with cold flame.
    

      “He kissed you!” she said. “How could you let him, when he wasn't anything
      to you? How dared you to take a kiss from him? Oh, Maisie, let's go to the
      ladies' cabin. I'm sick,—deadly sick.”
     

      “We aren't into open water yet. Go down, dear, and I'll stay here. I don't
      like the smell of the engines.... Poor Dick! He deserved one,—only
      one. But I didn't think he'd frighten me so.”
     

      Dick returned to town next day just in time for lunch, for which he had
      telegraphed. To his disgust, there were only empty plates in the studio.
    

      He lifted up his voice like the bears in the fairy-tale, and Torpenhow
      entered, looking guilty.
    

      “H'sh!” said he. “Don't make such a noise. I took it. Come into my rooms,
      and I'll show you why.”
     

      Dick paused amazed at the threshold, for on Torpenhow's sofa lay a girl
      asleep and breathing heavily. The little cheap sailor-hat, the
      blue-and-white dress, fitter for June than for February, dabbled with mud
      at the skirts, the jacket trimmed with imitation Astrakhan and ripped at
      the shoulder-seams, the one-and-elevenpenny umbrella, and, above all, the
      disgraceful condition of the kid-topped boots, declared all things.
    

      “Oh, I say, old man, this is too bad! You mustn't bring this sort up here.
      They steal things from the rooms.”
     

      “It looks bad, I admit, but I was coming in after lunch, and she staggered
      into the hall. I thought she was drunk at first, but it was collapse. I
      couldn't leave her as she was, so I brought her up here and gave her your
      lunch. She was fainting from want of food. She went fast asleep the minute
      she had finished.”
     

      “I know something of that complaint. She's been living on sausages, I
      suppose. Torp, you should have handed her over to a policeman for
      presuming to faint in a respectable house. Poor little wretch! Look at the
      face! There isn't an ounce of immorality in it. Only folly,—slack,
      fatuous, feeble, futile folly. It's a typical head. D'you notice how the
      skull begins to show through the flesh padding on the face and
      cheek-bone?”
     

      “What a cold-blooded barbarian it is! Don't hit a woman when she's down.
      Can't we do anything? She was simply dropping with starvation. She almost
      fell into my arms, and when she got to the food she ate like a wild beast.
      It was horrible.”
     

      “I can give her money, which she would probably spend in drinks. Is she
      going to sleep for ever?”
     

      The girl opened her eyes and glared at the men between terror and
      effrontery.
    

      “Feeling better?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Yes. Thank you. There aren't many gentlemen that are as kind as you are.
      Thank you.”
     

      “When did you leave service?” said Dick, who had been watching the scarred
      and chapped hands.
    

      “How did you know I was in service? I was. General servant. I didn't like
      it.”
     

      “And how do you like being your own mistress?”
     

      “Do I look as if I liked it?”
     

      “I suppose not. One moment. Would you be good enough to turn your face to
      the window?”
     

      The girl obeyed, and Dick watched her face keenly,—so keenly that
      she made as if to hide behind Torpenhow.
    

      “The eyes have it,” said Dick, walking up and down. “They are superb eyes
      for my business. And, after all, every head depends on the eyes. This has
      been sent from heaven to make up for—what was taken away. Now the
      weekly strain's off my shoulders, I can get to work in earnest. Evidently
      sent from heaven. Yes. Raise your chin a little, please.”
     

      “Gently, old man, gently. You're scaring somebody out of her wits,” said
      Torpenhow, who could see the girl trembling.
    

      “Don't let him hit me! Oh, please don't let him hit me! I've been hit
      cruel today because I spoke to a man. Don't let him look at me like that!
      He's reg'lar wicked, that one. Don't let him look at me like that,
      neither! Oh, I feel as if I hadn't nothing on when he looks at me like
      that!”
     

      The overstrained nerves in the frail body gave way, and the girl wept like
      a little child and began to scream. Dick threw open the window, and
      Torpenhow flung the door back.
    

      “There you are,” said Dick, soothingly. “My friend here can call for a
      policeman, and you can run through that door. Nobody is going to hurt
      you.”
     

      The girl sobbed convulsively for a few minutes, and then tried to laugh.
    

      “Nothing in the world to hurt you. Now listen to me for a minute. I'm what
      they call an artist by profession. You know what artists do?”
     

      “They draw the things in red and black ink on the pop-shop labels.”
     

      “I dare say. I haven't risen to pop-shop labels yet. Those are done by the
      Academicians. I want to draw your head.”
     

      “What for?”
     

      “Because it's pretty. That is why you will come to the room across the
      landing three times a week at eleven in the morning, and I'll give you
      three quid a week just for sitting still and being drawn. And there's a
      quid on account.”
     

      “For nothing? Oh, my!” The girl turned the sovereign in her hand, and with
      more foolish tears, “Ain't neither 'o you two gentlemen afraid of my
      bilking you?”
     

      “No. Only ugly girls do that. Try and remember this place. And, by the
      way, what's your name?”
     

      “I'm Bessie,—Bessie——It's no use giving the rest. Bessie
      Broke,—Stone-broke, if you like. What's your names? But there,—no
      one ever gives the real ones.”
     

      Dick consulted Torpenhow with his eyes.
    

      “My name's Heldar, and my friend's called Torpenhow; and you must be sure
      to come here. Where do you live?”
     

      “South-the-water,—one room,—five and sixpence a week. Aren't
      you making fun of me about that three quid?”
     

      “You'll see later on. And, Bessie, next time you come, remember, you
      needn't wear that paint. It's bad for the skin, and I have all the colours
      you'll be likely to need.”
     

      Bessie withdrew, scrubbing her cheek with a ragged pocket-handkerchief.
      The two men looked at each other.
    

      “You're a man,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “I'm afraid I've been a fool. It isn't our business to run about the earth
      reforming Bessie Brokes. And a woman of any kind has no right on this
      landing.”
     

      “Perhaps she won't come back.”
     

      “She will if she thinks she can get food and warmth here. I know she will,
      worse luck. But remember, old man, she isn't a woman; she's my model; and
      be careful.”
     

      “The idea! She's a dissolute little scarecrow,—a gutter-snippet and
      nothing more.”
     

      “So you think. Wait till she has been fed a little and freed from fear.
      That fair type recovers itself very quickly. You won't know her in a week
      or two, when that abject fear has died out of her eyes. She'll be too
      happy and smiling for my purposes.”
     

      “But surely you're not taking her out of charity?—to please me?”
     

      “I am not in the habit of playing with hot coals to please anybody. She
      has been sent from heaven, as I may have remarked before, to help me with
      my Melancolia.”
     

      “Never heard a word about the lady before.”
     

      “What's the use of having a friend, if you must sling your notions at him
      in words? You ought to know what I'm thinking about. You've heard me grunt
      lately?”
     

      “Even so; but grunts mean anything in your language, from bad 'baccy to
      wicked dealers. And I don't think I've been much in your confidence for
      some time.”
     

      “It was a high and soulful grunt. You ought to have understood that it
      meant the Melancolia.” Dick walked Torpenhow up and down the room, keeping
      silence. Then he smote him in the ribs, “Now don't you see it? Bessie's
      abject futility, and the terror in her eyes, welded on to one or two
      details in the way of sorrow that have come under my experience lately.
      Likewise some orange and black,—two keys of each. But I can't
      explain on an empty stomach.”
     

      “It sounds mad enough. You'd better stick to your soldiers, Dick, instead
      of maundering about heads and eyes and experiences.”
     

      “Think so?” Dick began to dance on his heels, singing—
    

      “They're as proud as a turkey when they hold the ready cash, You ought to
      'ear the way they laugh an' joke; They are tricky an' they're funny when
      they've got the ready money,—Ow! but see 'em when they're all
      stone-broke.”
     

      Then he sat down to pour out his heart to Maisie in a four-sheet letter of
      counsel and encouragement, and registered an oath that he would get to
      work with an undivided heart as soon as Bessie should reappear.
    

      The girl kept her appointment unpainted and unadorned, afraid and overbold
      by turns. When she found that she was merely expected to sit still, she
      grew calmer, and criticised the appointments of the studio with freedom
      and some point. She liked the warmth and the comfort and the release from
      fear of physical pain. Dick made two or three studies of her head in
      monochrome, but the actual notion of the Melancolia would not arrive.
    

      “What a mess you keep your things in!” said Bessie, some days later, when
      she felt herself thoroughly at home. “I s'pose your clothes are just as
      bad. Gentlemen never think what buttons and tape are made for.”
     

      “I buy things to wear, and wear 'em till they go to pieces. I don't know
      what Torpenhow does.”
     

      Bessie made diligent inquiry in the latter's room, and unearthed a bale of
      disreputable socks. “Some of these I'll mend now,” she said, “and some
      I'll take home. D'you know, I sit all day long at home doing nothing, just
      like a lady, and no more noticing them other girls in the house than if
      they was so many flies. I don't have any unnecessary words, but I put 'em
      down quick, I can tell you, when they talk to me. No; it's quite nice
      these days. I lock my door, and they can only call me names through the
      keyhole, and I sit inside, just like a lady, mending socks. Mr. Torpenhow
      wears his socks out both ends at once.”
     

      “Three quid a week from me, and the delights of my society. No socks
      mended. Nothing from Torp except a nod on the landing now and again, and
      all his socks mended. Bessie is very much a woman,” thought Dick; and he
      looked at her between half-shut eyes. Food and rest had transformed the
      girl, as Dick knew they would.
    

      “What are you looking at me like that for?” she said quickly. “Don't. You
      look reg'lar bad when you look that way. You don't think much o' me, do
      you?”
     

      “That depends on how you behave.”
     

      Bessie behaved beautifully. Only it was difficult at the end of a sitting
      to bid her go out into the gray streets. She very much preferred the
      studio and a big chair by the stove, with some socks in her lap as an
      excuse for delay. Then Torpenhow would come in, and Bessie would be moved
      to tell strange and wonderful stories of her past, and still stranger ones
      of her present improved circumstances. She would make them tea as though
      she had a right to make it; and once or twice on these occasions Dick
      caught Torpenhow's eyes fixed on the trim little figure, and because
      Bessie's flittings about the room made Dick ardently long for Maisie, he
      realised whither Torpenhow's thoughts were tending. And Bessie was
      exceedingly careful of the condition of Torpenhow's linen. She spoke very
      little to him, but sometimes they talked together on the landing.
    

      “I was a great fool,” Dick said to himself. “I know what red firelight
      looks like when a man's tramping through a strange town; and ours is a
      lonely, selfish sort of life at the best. I wonder Maisie doesn't feel
      that sometimes. But I can't order Bessie away. That's the worst of
      beginning things. One never knows where they stop.”
     

      One evening, after a sitting prolonged to the last limit of the light,
      Dick was roused from a nap by a broken voice in Torpenhow's room. He
      jumped to his feet. “Now what ought I to do? It looks foolish to go in.—Oh,
      bless you, Binkie!” The little terrier thrust Torpenhow's door open with
      his nose and came out to take possession of Dick's chair. The door swung
      wide unheeded, and Dick across the landing could see Bessie in the
      half-light making her little supplication to Torpenhow. She was kneeling
      by his side, and her hands were clasped across his knee.
    

      “I know,—I know,” she said thickly. “'Tisn't right 'o me to do this,
      but I can't help it; and you were so kind,—so kind; and you never
      took any notice 'o me. And I've mended all your things so carefully,—I
      did. Oh, please, 'tisn't as if I was asking you to marry me. I wouldn't
      think of it. But you—couldn't you take and live with me till Miss
      Right comes along? I'm only Miss Wrong, I know, but I'd work my hands to
      the bare bone for you. And I'm not ugly to look at. Say you will!”
     

      Dick hardly recognised Torpenhow's voice in reply—“But look here.
      It's no use. I'm liable to be ordered off anywhere at a minute's notice if
      a war breaks out. At a minute's notice—dear.”
     

      “What does that matter? Until you go, then. Until you go. 'Tisn't much I'm
      asking, and—you don't know how good I can cook.” She had put an arm
      round his neck and was drawing his head down.
    

      “Until—I—go, then.”
     

      “Torp,” said Dick, across the landing. He could hardly steady his voice.
    

      “Come here a minute, old man. I'm in trouble”—
    

      “Heaven send he'll listen to me!” There was something very like an oath
      from Bessie's lips. She was afraid of Dick, and disappeared down the
      staircase in panic, but it seemed an age before Torpenhow entered the
      studio. He went to the mantelpiece, buried his head on his arms, and
      groaned like a wounded bull.
    

      “What the devil right have you to interfere?” he said, at last.
    

      “Who's interfering with which? Your own sense told you long ago you
      couldn't be such a fool. It was a tough rack, St. Anthony, but you're all
      right now.”
     

      “I oughtn't to have seen her moving about these rooms as if they belonged
      to her. That's what upset me. It gives a lonely man a sort of hankering,
      doesn't it?” said Torpenhow, piteously.
    

      “Now you talk sense. It does. But, since you aren't in a condition to
      discuss the disadvantages of double housekeeping, do you know what you're
      going to do?”
     

      “I don't. I wish I did.”
     

      “You're going away for a season on a brilliant tour to regain tone. You're
      going to Brighton, or Scarborough, or Prawle Point, to see the ships go
      by. And you're going at once. Isn't it odd? I'll take care of Binkie, but
      out you go immediately. Never resist the devil. He holds the bank. Fly
      from him. Pack your things and go.”
     

      “I believe you're right. Where shall I go?”
     

      “And you call yourself a special correspondent! Pack first and inquire
      afterwards.”
     

      An hour later Torpenhow was despatched into the night for a hansom.
    

      “You'll probably think of some place to go to while you're moving,” said
      Dick. “On to Euston, to begin with, and—oh yes—get drunk
      tonight.”
     

      He returned to the studio, and lighted more candles, for he found the room
      very dark.
    

      “Oh, you Jezebel! you futile little Jezebel! Won't you hate me tomorrow!—Binkie,
      come here.”
     

      Binkie turned over on his back on the hearth-rug, and Dick stirred him
      with a meditative foot.
    

      “I said she was not immoral. I was wrong. She said she could cook. That
      showed premeditated sin. Oh, Binkie, if you are a man you will go to
      perdition; but if you are a woman, and say that you can cook, you will go
      to a much worse place.”
     







      CHAPTER X
    

     What's you that follows at my side?—
     The foe that ye must fight, my lord.—
     That hirples swift as I can ride?—
     The shadow of the night, my lord.—
     Then wheel my horse against the foe!—
     He's down and overpast, my lord.

     Ye war against the sunset glow;
     The darkness gathers fast, my lord.
             ——The Fight of Heriot's Ford


      “This is a cheerful life,” said Dick, some days later. “Torp's away;
      Bessie hates me; I can't get at the notion of the Melancolia; Maisie's
      letters are scrappy; and I believe I have indigestion. What give a man
      pains across the head and spots before his eyes, Binkie? Shall us take
      some liver pills?”
     

      Dick had just gone through a lively scene with Bessie. She had for the
      fiftieth time reproached him for sending Torpenhow away. She explained her
      enduring hatred for Dick, and made it clear to him that she only sat for
      the sake of his money. “And Mr. Torpenhow's ten times a better man than
      you,” she concluded.
    

      “He is. That's why he went away. I should have stayed and made love to
      you.”
     

      The girl sat with her chin on her hand, scowling. “To me! I'd like to
      catch you! If I wasn't afraid 'o being hung I'd kill you. That's what I'd
      do. D'you believe me?”
     

      Dick smiled wearily. It is not pleasant to live in the company of a notion
      that will not work out, a fox-terrier that cannot talk, and a woman who
      talks too much. He would have answered, but at that moment there unrolled
      itself from one corner of the studio a veil, as it were, of the flimsiest
      gauze. He rubbed his eyes, but the gray haze would not go.
    

      “This is disgraceful indigestion. Binkie, we will go to a medicine-man. We
      can't have our eyes interfered with, for by these we get our bread; also
      mutton-chop bones for little dogs.”
     

      The doctor was an affable local practitioner with white hair, and he said
      nothing till Dick began to describe the gray film in the studio.
    

      “We all want a little patching and repairing from time to time,” he
      chirped. “Like a ship, my dear sir,—exactly like a ship. Sometimes
      the hull is out of order, and we consult the surgeon; sometimes the
      rigging, and then I advise; sometimes the engines, and we go to the
      brain-specialist; sometimes the look-out on the bridge is tired, and then
      we see an oculist. I should recommend you to see an oculist. A little
      patching and repairing from time to time is all we want. An oculist, by
      all means.”
     

      Dick sought an oculist,—the best in London. He was certain that the
      local practitioner did not know anything about his trade, and more certain
      that Maisie would laugh at him if he were forced to wear spectacles.
    

      “I've neglected the warnings of my lord the stomach too long. Hence these
      spots before the eyes, Binkie. I can see as well as I ever could.”
     

      As he entered the dark hall that led to the consulting-room a man cannoned
      against him. Dick saw the face as it hurried out into the street.
    

      “That's the writer-type. He has the same modelling of the forehead as
      Torp. He looks very sick. Probably heard something he didn't like.”
     

      Even as he thought, a great fear came upon Dick, a fear that made him hold
      his breath as he walked into the oculist's waiting room, with the heavy
      carved furniture, the dark-green paper, and the sober-hued prints on the
      wall. He recognised a reproduction of one of his own sketches.
    

      Many people were waiting their turn before him. His eye was caught by a
      flaming red-and-gold Christmas-carol book. Little children came to that
      eye-doctor, and they needed large-type amusement.
    

      “That's idolatrous bad Art,” he said, drawing the book towards himself.
    

      “From the anatomy of the angels, it has been made in Germany.” He opened
      in mechanically, and there leaped to his eyes a verse printed in red ink—
    

 The next good joy that Mary had,
 It was the joy of three,
 To see her good Son Jesus Christ
 Making the blind to see;
 Making the blind to see, good Lord,
 And happy we may be.
 Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
 To all eternity!


      Dick read and re-read the verse till his turn came, and the doctor was
      bending above him seated in an arm-chair. The blaze of the gas-microscope
      in his eyes made him wince. The doctor's hand touched the scar of the
      sword-cut on Dick's head, and Dick explained briefly how he had come by
      it. When the flame was removed, Dick saw the doctor's face, and the fear
      came upon him again. The doctor wrapped himself in a mist of words. Dick
      caught allusions to “scar,” “frontal bone,” “optic nerve,” “extreme
      caution,” and the “avoidance of mental anxiety.”
     

      “Verdict?” he said faintly. “My business is painting, and I daren't waste
      time. What do you make of it?”
     

      Again the whirl of words, but this time they conveyed a meaning.
    

      “Can you give me anything to drink?”
     

      Many sentences were pronounced in that darkened room, and the prisoners
      often needed cheering. Dick found a glass of liqueur brandy in his hand.
    

      “As far as I can gather,” he said, coughing above the spirit, “you call it
      decay of the optic nerve, or something, and therefore hopeless. What is my
      time-limit, avoiding all strain and worry?”
     

      “Perhaps one year.”
     

      “My God! And if I don't take care of myself?”
     

      “I really could not say. One cannot ascertain the exact amount of injury
      inflicted by the sword-cut. The scar is an old one, and—exposure to
      the strong light of the desert, did you say?—with excessive
      application to fine work? I really could not say?”
     

      “I beg your pardon, but it has come without any warning. If you will let
      me, I'll sit here for a minute, and then I'll go. You have been very good
      in telling me the truth. Without any warning; without any warning.
      Thanks.”
     

      Dick went into the street, and was rapturously received by Binkie.
    

      “We've got it very badly, little dog! Just as badly as we can get it.
      We'll go to the Park to think it out.”
     

      They headed for a certain tree that Dick knew well, and they sat down to
      think, because his legs were trembling under him and there was cold fear
      at the pit of his stomach.
    

      “How could it have come without any warning? It's as sudden as being shot.
      It's the living death, Binkie. We're to be shut up in the dark in one year
      if we're careful, and we shan't see anybody, and we shall never have
      anything we want, not though we live to be a hundred!” Binkie wagged his
      tail joyously. “Binkie, we must think. Let's see how it feels to be
      blind.” Dick shut his eyes, and flaming commas and Catherine-wheels
      floated inside the lids. Yet when he looked across the Park the scope of
      his vision was not contracted. He could see perfectly, until a procession
      of slow-wheeling fireworks defiled across his eyeballs.
    

      “Little dorglums, we aren't at all well. Let's go home. If only Torp were
      back, now!”
     

      But Torpenhow was in the south of England, inspecting dockyards in the
      company of the Nilghai. His letters were brief and full of mystery.
    

      Dick had never asked anybody to help him in his joys or his sorrows. He
      argued, in the loneliness of his studio, henceforward to be decorated with
      a film of gray gauze in one corner, that, if his fate were blindness, all
      the Torpenhows in the world could not save him. “I can't call him off his
      trip to sit down and sympathise with me. I must pull through this business
      alone,” he said. He was lying on the sofa, eating his moustache and
      wondering what the darkness of the night would be like. Then came to his
      mind the memory of a quaint scene in the Soudan. A soldier had been nearly
      hacked in two by a broad-bladed Arab spear. For one instant the man felt
      no pain. Looking down, he saw that his life-blood was going from him. The
      stupid bewilderment on his face was so intensely comic that both Dick and
      Torpenhow, still panting and unstrung from a fight for life, had roared
      with laughter, in which the man seemed as if he would join, but, as his
      lips parted in a sheepish grin, the agony of death came upon him, and he
      pitched grunting at their feet. Dick laughed again, remembering the
      horror. It seemed so exactly like his own case.
    

      “But I have a little more time allowed me,” he said. He paced up and down
      the room, quietly at first, but afterwards with the hurried feet of fear.
      It was as though a black shadow stood at his elbow and urged him to go
      forward; and there were only weaving circles and floating pin-dots before
      his eyes.
    

      “We need to be calm, Binkie; we must be calm.” He talked aloud for the
      sake of distraction. “This isn't nice at all. What shall we do? We must do
      something. Our time is short. I shouldn't have believed that this morning;
      but now things are different. Binkie, where was Moses when the light went
      out?”
     

      Binkie smiled from ear to ear, as a well-bred terrier should, but made no
      suggestion.
    

      “'Were there but world enough and time, This coyness, Binkie, were not
      crime.... But at my back I always hear——'” He wiped his
      forehead, which was unpleasantly damp. “What can I do? What can I do? I
      haven't any notions left, and I can't think connectedly, but I must do
      something, or I shall go off my head.”
     

      The hurried walk recommenced, Dick stopping every now and again to drag
      forth long-neglected canvases and old note-books; for he turned to his
      work by instinct, as a thing that could not fail. “You won't do, and you
      won't do,” he said, at each inspection. “No more soldiers. I couldn't
      paint 'em. Sudden death comes home too nearly, and this is battle and
      murder for me.”
     

      The day was failing, and Dick thought for a moment that the twilight of
      the blind had come upon him unaware. “Allah Almighty!” he cried
      despairingly, “help me through the time of waiting, and I won't whine when
      my punishment comes. What can I do now, before the light goes?”
     

      There was no answer. Dick waited till he could regain some sort of control
      over himself. His hands were shaking, and he prided himself on their
      steadiness; he could feel that his lips were quivering, and the sweat was
      running down his face. He was lashed by fear, driven forward by the desire
      to get to work at once and accomplish something, and maddened by the
      refusal of his brain to do more than repeat the news that he was about to
      go blind. “It's a humiliating exhibition,” he thought, “and I'm glad Torp
      isn't here to see. The doctor said I was to avoid mental worry. Come here
      and let me pet you, Binkie.”
     

      The little dog yelped because Dick nearly squeezed the bark out of him.
    

      Then he heard the man speaking in the twilight, and, doglike, understood
      that his trouble stood off from him—“Allah is good, Binkie. Not
      quite so gentle as we could wish, but we'll discuss that later. I think I
      see my way to it now. All those studies of Bessie's head were nonsense,
      and they nearly brought your master into a scrape. I hold the notion now
      as clear as crystal, 'the Melancolia that transcends all wit.' There shall
      be Maisie in that head, because I shall never get Maisie; and Bess, of
      course, because she knows all about Melancolia, though she doesn't know
      she knows; and there shall be some drawing in it, and it shall all end up
      with a laugh. That's for myself. Shall she giggle or grin? No, she shall
      laugh right out of the canvas, and every man and woman that ever had a
      sorrow of their own shall—what is it the poem says?—
      'Understand the speech and feel a stir Of fellowship in all disastrous
      fight.'
    

      “'In all disastrous fight'? That's better than painting the thing merely
      to pique Maisie. I can do it now because I have it inside me. Binkie, I'm
      going to hold you up by your tail. You're an omen. Come here.”
     

      Binkie swung head downward for a moment without speaking.
    

      “Rather like holding a guinea-pig; but you're a brave little dog, and you
      don't yelp when you're hung up. It is an omen.”
     

      Binkie went to his own chair, and as often as he looked saw Dick walking
      up and down, rubbing his hands and chuckling. That night Dick wrote a
      letter to Maisie full of the tenderest regard for her health, but saying
      very little about his own, and dreamed of the Melancolia to be born. Not
      till morning did he remember that something might happen to him in the
      future.
    

      He fell to work, whistling softly, and was swallowed up in the clean,
      clear joy of creation, which does not come to man too often, lest he
      should consider himself the equal of his God, and so refuse to die at the
      appointed time. He forgot Maisie, Torpenhow, and Binkie at his feet, but
      remembered to stir Bessie, who needed very little stirring, into a
      tremendous rage, that he might watch the smouldering lights in her eyes.
    

      He threw himself without reservation into his work, and did not think of
      the doom that was to overtake him, for he was possessed with his notion,
      and the things of this world had no power upon him.
    

      “You're pleased today,” said Bessie.
    

      Dick waved his mahl-stick in mystic circles and went to the sideboard for
      a drink. In the evening, when the exaltation of the day had died down, he
      went to the sideboard again, and after some visits became convinced that
      the eye-doctor was a liar, since he could still see everything very
      clearly.
    

      He was of opinion that he would even make a home for Maisie, and that
      whether she liked it or not she should be his wife. The mood passed next
      morning, but the sideboard and all upon it remained for his comfort.
    

      Again he set to work, and his eyes troubled him with spots and dashes and
      blurs till he had taken counsel with the sideboard, and the Melancolia
      both on the canvas and in his own mind appeared lovelier than ever. There
      was a delightful sense of irresponsibility upon him, such as they feel who
      walking among their fellow-men know that the death-sentence of disease is
      upon them, and, seeing that fear is but waste of the little time left, are
      riotously happy. The days passed without event.
    

      Bessie arrived punctually always, and, though her voice seemed to Dick to
      come from a distance, her face was always very near. The Melancolia began
      to flame on the canvas, in the likeness of a woman who had known all the
      sorrow in the world and was laughing at it. It was true that the corners
      of the studio draped themselves in gray film and retired into the
      darkness, that the spots in his eyes and the pains across his head were
      very troublesome, and that Maisie's letters were hard to read and harder
      still to answer. He could not tell her of his trouble, and he could not
      laugh at her accounts of her own Melancolia which was always going to be
      finished. But the furious days of toil and the nights of wild dreams made
      amends for all, and the sideboard was his best friend on earth.
    

      Bessie was singularly dull. She used to shriek with rage when Dick stared
      at her between half-closed eyes. Now she sulked, or watched him with
      disgust, saying very little.
    

      Torpenhow had been absent for six weeks. An incoherent note heralded his
      return. “News! great news!” he wrote. “The Nilghai knows, and so does the
      Keneu. We're all back on Thursday. Get lunch and clean your
      accoutrements.”
     

      Dick showed Bessie the letter, and she abused him for that he had ever
      sent Torpenhow away and ruined her life.
    

      “Well,” said Dick, brutally, “you're better as you are, instead of making
      love to some drunken beast in the street.” He felt that he had rescued
      Torpenhow from great temptation.
    

      “I don't know if that's any worse than sitting to a drunken beast in a
      studio. You haven't been sober for three weeks. You've been soaking the
      whole time; and yet you pretend you're better than me!”
     

      “What d'you mean?” said Dick.
    

      “Mean! You'll see when Mr. Torpenhow comes back.”
     

      It was not long to wait. Torpenhow met Bessie on the staircase without a
      sign of feeling. He had news that was more to him than many Bessies, and
      the Keneu and the Nilghai were trampling behind him, calling for Dick.
    

      “Drinking like a fish,” Bessie whispered. “He's been at it for nearly a
      month.” She followed the men stealthily to hear judgment done.
    

      They came into the studio, rejoicing, to be welcomed over effusively by a
      drawn, lined, shrunken, haggard wreck,—unshaven, blue-white about
      the nostrils, stooping in the shoulders, and peering under his eyebrows
      nervously. The drink had been at work as steadily as Dick.
    

      “Is this you?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “All that's left of me. Sit down. Binkie's quite well, and I've been doing
      some good work.” He reeled where he stood.
    

      “You've done some of the worst work you've ever done in your life. Man
      alive, you're——”
     

      Torpenhow turned to his companions appealingly, and they left the room to
      find lunch elsewhere. Then he spoke; but, since the reproof of a friend is
      much too sacred and intimate a thing to be printed, and since Torpenhow
      used figures and metaphors which were unseemly, and contempt
      untranslatable, it will never be known what was actually said to Dick, who
      blinked and winked and picked at his hands. After a time the culprit began
      to feel the need of a little self-respect. He was quite sure that he had
      not in any way departed from virtue, and there were reasons, too, of which
      Torpenhow knew nothing. He would explain.
    

      He rose, tried to straighten his shoulders, and spoke to the face he could
      hardly see.
    

      “You are right,” he said. “But I am right, too. After you went away I had
      some trouble with my eyes. So I went to an oculist, and he turned a
      gasogene—I mean a gas-engine—into my eye. That was very long
      ago. He said, 'Scar on the head,—sword-cut and optic nerve.' Make a
      note of that. So I am going blind. I have some work to do before I go
      blind, and I suppose that I must do it. I cannot see much now, but I can
      see best when I am drunk. I did not know I was drunk till I was told, but
      I must go on with my work. If you want to see it, there it is.” He pointed
      to the all but finished Melancolia and looked for applause.
    

      Torpenhow said nothing, and Dick began to whimper feebly, for joy at
      seeing Torpenhow again, for grief at misdeeds—if indeed they were
      misdeeds—that made Torpenhow remote and unsympathetic, and for
      childish vanity hurt, since Torpenhow had not given a word of praise to
      his wonderful picture.
    

      Bessie looked through the keyhole after a long pause, and saw the two
      walking up and down as usual, Torpenhow's hand on Dick's shoulder.
    

      Hereat she said something so improper that it shocked even Binkie, who was
      dribbling patiently on the landing with the hope of seeing his master
      again.
    







      CHAPTER XI
    

   The lark will make her hymn to God,
   The partridge call her brood,
   While I forget the heath I trod,
   The fields wherein I stood.

   'Tis dule to know not night from morn,
   But deeper dule to know
   I can but hear the hunter's horn
   That once I used to blow.
           —The Only Son


      IT WAS the third day after Torpenhow's return, and his heart was heavy.
    

      “Do you mean to tell me that you can't see to work without whiskey? It's
      generally the other way about.”
     

      “Can a drunkard swear on his honour?” said Dick.
    

      “Yes, if he has been as good a man as you.”
     

      “Then I give you my word of honour,” said Dick, speaking hurriedly through
      parched lips. “Old man, I can hardly see your face now. You've kept me
      sober for two days,—if I ever was drunk,—and I've done no
      work. Don't keep me back any more. I don't know when my eyes may give out.
      The spots and dots and the pains and things are crowding worse than ever.
      I swear I can see all right when I'm—when I'm moderately screwed, as
      you say. Give me three more sittings from Bessie and all—the stuff I
      want, and the picture will be done. I can't kill myself in three days. It
      only means a touch of D. T. at the worst.”
     

      “If I give you three days more will you promise me to stop work and—the
      other thing, whether the picture's finished or not?”
     

      “I can't. You don't know what that picture means to me. But surely you
      could get the Nilghai to help you, and knock me down and tie me up. I
      shouldn't fight for the whiskey, but I should for the work.”
     

      “Go on, then. I give you three days; but you're nearly breaking my heart.”
     

      Dick returned to his work, toiling as one possessed; and the yellow devil
      of whiskey stood by him and chased away the spots in his eyes. The
      Melancolia was nearly finished, and was all or nearly all that he had
      hoped she would be. Dick jested with Bessie, who reminded him that he was
      “a drunken beast”; but the reproof did not move him.
    

      “You can't understand, Bess. We are in sight of land now, and soon we
      shall lie back and think about what we've done. I'll give you three
      months' pay when the picture's finished, and next time I have any more
      work in hand—but that doesn't matter. Won't three months' pay make
      you hate me less?”
     

      “No, it won't! I hate you, and I'll go on hating you. Mr. Torpenhow won't
      speak to me any more. He's always looking at maps.”
     

      Bessie did not say that she had again laid siege to Torpenhow, or that at
      the end of our passionate pleading he had picked her up, given her a kiss,
      and put her outside the door with the recommendation not to be a little
      fool. He spent most of his time in the company of the Nilghai, and their
      talk was of war in the near future, the hiring of transports, and secret
      preparations among the dockyards. He did not wish to see Dick till the
      picture was finished.
    

      “He's doing first-class work,” he said to the Nilghai, “and it's quite out
      of his regular line. But, for the matter of that, so's his infernal
      soaking.”
     

      “Never mind. Leave him alone. When he has come to his senses again we'll
      carry him off from this place and let him breathe clean air. Poor Dick! I
      don't envy you, Torp, when his eyes fail.”
     

      “Yes, it will be a case of 'God help the man who's chained to our Davie.'
      The worst is that we don't know when it will happen, and I believe the
      uncertainty and the waiting have sent Dick to the whiskey more than
      anything else.”
     

      “How the Arab who cut his head open would grin if he knew!”
     

      “He's at perfect liberty to grin if he can. He's dead. That's poor
      consolation now.”
     

      In the afternoon of the third day Torpenhow heard Dick calling for him.
    

      “All finished!” he shouted. “I've done it! Come in! Isn't she a beauty?
      Isn't she a darling? I've been down to hell to get her; but isn't she
      worth it?”
     

      Torpenhow looked at the head of a woman who laughed,—a full-lipped,
      hollow-eyed woman who laughed from out of the canvas as Dick had intended
      she would.
    

      “Who taught you how to do it?” said Torpenhow. “The touch and notion have
      nothing to do with your regular work. What a face it is! What eyes, and
      what insolence!” Unconsciously he threw back his head and laughed with
      her. “She's seen the game played out,—I don't think she had a good
      time of it,—and now she doesn't care. Isn't that the idea?”
     

      “Exactly.”
     

      “Where did you get the mouth and chin from? They don't belong to Bess.”
     

      “They're—some one else's. But isn't it good? Isn't it thundering
      good? Wasn't it worth the whiskey? I did it. Alone I did it, and it's the
      best I can do.” He drew his breath sharply, and whispered, “Just God! what
      could I not do ten years hence, if I can do this now!—By the way,
      what do you think of it, Bess?”
     

      The girl was biting her lips. She loathed Torpenhow because he had taken
      no notice of her.
    

      “I think it's just the horridest, beastliest thing I ever saw,” she
      answered, and turned away.
    

      “More than you will be of that way of thinking, young woman.—Dick,
      there's a sort of murderous, viperine suggestion in the poise of the head
      that I don't understand,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “That's trick-work,” said Dick, chuckling with delight at being completely
      understood. “I couldn't resist one little bit of sheer swagger. It's a
      French trick, and you wouldn't understand; but it's got at by slewing
      round the head a trifle, and a tiny, tiny foreshortening of one side of
      the face from the angle of the chin to the top of the left ear. That, and
      deepening the shadow under the lobe of the ear. It was flagrant
      trick-work; but, having the notion fixed, I felt entitled to play with it,—Oh,
      you beauty!”
     

      “Amen! She is a beauty. I can feel it.”
     

      “So will every man who has any sorrow of his own,” said Dick, slapping his
      thigh. “He shall see his trouble there, and, by the Lord Harry, just when
      he's feeling properly sorry for himself he shall throw back his head and
      laugh,—as she is laughing. I've put the life of my heart and the
      light of my eyes into her, and I don't care what comes.... I'm tired,—awfully
      tired. I think I'll get to sleep. Take away the whiskey, it has served its
      turn, and give Bessie thirty-six quid, and three over for luck. Cover the
      picture.”
     

      He dropped asleep in the long chair, hid face white and haggard, almost
      before he had finished the sentence. Bessie tried to take Torpenhow's
      hand. “Aren't you never going to speak to me any more?” she said; but
      Torpenhow was looking at Dick.
    

      “What a stock of vanity the man has! I'll take him in hand tomorrow and
      make much of him. He deserves it.—Eh! what was that, Bess?”
     

      “Nothing. I'll put things tidy here a little, and then I'll go. You
      couldn't give Me that three months' pay now, could you? He said you were
      to.”
     

      Torpenhow gave her a check and went to his own rooms. Bessie faithfully
      tidied up the studio, set the door ajar for flight, emptied half a bottle
      of turpentine on a duster, and began to scrub the face of the Melancolia
      viciously. The paint did not smudge quickly enough. She took a
      palette-knife and scraped, following each stroke with the wet duster. In
      five minutes the picture was a formless, scarred muddle of colours. She
      threw the paint-stained duster into the studio stove, stuck out her tongue
      at the sleeper, and whispered, “Bilked!” as she turned to run down the
      staircase. She would never see Torpenhow any more, but she had at least
      done harm to the man who had come between her and her desire and who used
      to make fun of her. Cashing the check was the very cream of the jest to
      Bessie. Then the little privateer sailed across the Thames, to be
      swallowed up in the gray wilderness of South-the-Water.
    

      Dick slept till late in the evening, when Torpenhow dragged him off to
      bed. His eyes were as bright as his voice was hoarse. “Let's have another
      look at the picture,” he said, insistently as a child.
    

      “You—go—to—bed,” said Torpenhow. “You aren't at all
      well, though you mayn't know it. You're as jumpy as a cat.”
     

      “I reform tomorrow. Good night.”
     

      As he repassed through the studio, Torpenhow lifted the cloth above the
      picture, and almost betrayed himself by outcries: “Wiped out!—scraped
      out and turped out! He's on the verge of jumps as it is. That's Bess,—the
      little fiend! Only a woman could have done that!—with the ink not
      dry on the check, too! Dick will be raving mad tomorrow. It was all my
      fault for trying to help gutter-devils. Oh, my poor Dick, the Lord is
      hitting you very hard!”
     

      Dick could not sleep that night, partly for pure joy, and partly because
      the well-known Catherine-wheels inside his eyes had given place to
      crackling volcanoes of many-coloured fire. “Spout away,” he said aloud.
    

      “I've done my work, and now you can do what you please.” He lay still,
      staring at the ceiling, the long-pent-up delirium of drink in his veins,
      his brain on fire with racing thoughts that would not stay to be
      considered, and his hands crisped and dry. He had just discovered that he
      was painting the face of the Melancolia on a revolving dome ribbed with
      millions of lights, and that all his wondrous thoughts stood embodied
      hundreds of feet below his tiny swinging plank, shouting together in his
      honour, when something cracked inside his temples like an overstrained
      bowstring, the glittering dome broke inward, and he was alone in the thick
      night.
    

      “I'll go to sleep. The room's very dark. Let's light a lamp and see how
      the Melancolia looks. There ought to have been a moon.”
     

      It was then that Torpenhow heard his name called by a voice that he did
      not know,—in the rattling accents of deadly fear.
    

      “He's looked at the picture,” was his first thought, as he hurried into
      the bedroom and found Dick sitting up and beating the air with his hands.
    

      “Torp! Torp! where are you? For pity's sake, come to me!”
     

      “What's the matter?”
     

      Dick clutched at his shoulder. “Matter! I've been lying here for hours in
      the dark, and you never heard me. Torp, old man, don't go away. I'm all in
      the dark. In the dark, I tell you!”
     

      Torpenhow held the candle within a foot of Dick's eyes, but there was no
      light in those eyes. He lit the gas, and Dick heard the flame catch. The
      grip of his fingers on Torpenhow's shoulder made Torpenhow wince.
    

      “Don't leave me. You wouldn't leave me alone now, would you? I can't see.
      D'you understand? It's black,—quite black,—and I feel as if I
      was falling through it all.”
     

      “Steady does it.” Torpenhow put his arm round Dick and began to rock him
      gently to and fro.
    

      “That's good. Now don't talk. If I keep very quiet for a while, this
      darkness will lift. It seems just on the point of breaking. H'sh!” Dick
      knit his brows and stared desperately in front of him. The night air was
      chilling Torpenhow's toes.
    

      “Can you stay like that a minute?” he said. “I'll get my dressing-gown and
      some slippers.”
     

      Dick clutched the bed-head with both hands and waited for the darkness to
      clear away. “What a time you've been!” he cried, when Torpenhow returned.
      “It's as black as ever. What are you banging about in the door-way?”
     

      “Long chair,—horse-blanket,—pillow. Going to sleep by you. Lie
      down now; you'll be better in the morning.”
     

      “I shan't!” The voice rose to a wail. “My God! I'm blind! I'm blind, and
      the darkness will never go away.” He made as if to leap from the bed, but
      Torpenhow's arms were round him, and Torpenhow's chin was on his shoulder,
      and his breath was squeezed out of him. He could only gasp, “Blind!” and
      wriggle feebly.
    

      “Steady, Dickie, steady!” said the deep voice in his ear, and the grip
      tightened. “Bite on the bullet, old man, and don't let them think you're
      afraid.” The grip could draw no closer. Both men were breathing heavily.
    

      Dick threw his head from side to side and groaned.
    

      “Let me go,” he panted. “You're cracking my ribs. We—we mustn't let
      them think we're afraid, must we,—all the powers of darkness and
      that lot?”
     

      “Lie down. It's all over now.”
     

      “Yes,” said Dick, obediently. “But would you mind letting me hold your
      hand? I feel as if I wanted something to hold on to. One drops through the
      dark so.”
     

      Torpenhow thrust out a large and hairy paw from the long chair. Dick
      clutched it tightly, and in half an hour had fallen asleep. Torpenhow
      withdrew his hand, and, stooping over Dick, kissed him lightly on the
      forehead, as men do sometimes kiss a wounded comrade in the hour of death,
      to ease his departure.
    

      In the gray dawn Torpenhow heard Dick talking to himself. He was adrift on
      the shoreless tides of delirium, speaking very quickly—“It's a pity,—a
      great pity; but it's helped, and it must be eaten, Master George.
      Sufficient unto the day is the blindness thereof, and, further, putting
      aside all Melancolias and false humours, it is of obvious notoriety—such
      as mine was—that the queen can do no wrong. Torp doesn't know that.
      I'll tell him when we're a little farther into the desert.
    

      “What a bungle those boatmen are making of the steamer-ropes! They'll have
      that four-inch hawser chafed through in a minute. I told you so—there
      she goes! White foam on green water, and the steamer slewing round. How
      good that looks! I'll sketch it. No, I can't. I'm afflicted with
      ophthalmia. That was one of the ten plagues of Egypt, and it extends up
      the Nile in the shape of cataract. Ha! that's a joke, Torp. Laugh, you
      graven image, and stand clear of the hawser.... It'll knock you into the
      water and make your dress all dirty, Maisie dear.”
     

      “Oh!” said Torpenhow. “This happened before. That night on the river.”
     

      “She'll be sure to say it's my fault if you get muddy, and you're quite
      near enough to the breakwater. Maisie, that's not fair. Ah! I knew you'd
      miss. Low and to the left, dear. But you've no conviction. Don't be angry,
      darling. I'd cut my hand off if it would give you anything more than
      obstinacy. My right hand, if it would serve.”
     

      “Now we mustn't listen. Here's an island shouting across seas of
      misunderstanding with a vengeance. But it's shouting truth, I fancy,” said
      Torpenhow.
    

      The babble continued. It all bore upon Maisie. Sometimes Dick lectured at
      length on his craft, then he cursed himself for his folly in being
      enslaved. He pleaded to Maisie for a kiss—only one kiss—before
      she went away, and called to her to come back from Vitry-sur-Marne, if she
      would; but through all his ravings he bade heaven and earth witness that
      the queen could do no wrong.
    

      Torpenhow listened attentively, and learned every detail of Dick's life
      that had been hidden from him. For three days Dick raved through the past,
      and then a natural sleep. “What a strain he has been running under, poor
      chap!” said Torpenhow. “Dick, of all men, handing himself over like a dog!
      And I was lecturing him on arrogance! I ought to have known that it was no
      use to judge a man. But I did it. What a demon that girl must be! Dick's
      given her his life,—confound him!—and she's given him one kiss
      apparently.”
     

      “Torp,” said Dick, from the bed, “go out for a walk. You've been here too
      long. I'll get up. Hi! This is annoying. I can't dress myself. Oh, it's
      too absurd!”
     

      Torpenhow helped him into his clothes and led him to the big chair in the
      studio. He sat quietly waiting under strained nerves for the darkness to
      lift. It did not lift that day, nor the next. Dick adventured on a voyage
      round the walls. He hit his shins against the stove, and this suggested to
      him that it would be better to crawl on all fours, one hand in front of
      him. Torpenhow found him on the floor.
    

      “I'm trying to get the geography of my new possessions,” said he. “D'you
      remember that nigger you gouged in the square? Pity you didn't keep the
      odd eye. It would have been useful. Any letters for me? Give me all the
      ones in fat gray envelopes with a sort of crown thing outside. They're of
      no importance.”
     

      Torpenhow gave him a letter with a black M. on the envelope flap. Dick put
      it into his pocket. There was nothing in it that Torpenhow might not have
      read, but it belonged to himself and to Maisie, who would never belong to
      him.
    

      “When she finds that I don't write, she'll stop writing. It's better so. I
      couldn't be any use to her now,” Dick argued, and the tempter suggested
      that he should make known his condition. Every nerve in him revolted. “I
      have fallen low enough already. I'm not going to beg for pity. Besides, it
      would be cruel to her.” He strove to put Maisie out of his thoughts; but
      the blind have many opportunities for thinking, and as the tides of his
      strength came back to him in the long employless days of dead darkness,
      Dick's soul was troubled to the core. Another letter, and another, came
      from Maisie. Then there was silence, and Dick sat by the window, the pulse
      of summer in the air, and pictured her being won by another man, stronger
      than himself. His imagination, the keener for the dark background it
      worked against, spared him no single detail that might send him raging up
      and down the studio, to stumble over the stove that seemed to be in four
      places at once. Worst of all, tobacco would not taste in the darkness. The
      arrogance of the man had disappeared, and in its place were settled
      despair that Torpenhow knew, and blind passion that Dick confided to his
      pillow at night. The intervals between the paroxysms were filled with
      intolerable waiting and the weight of intolerable darkness.
    

      “Come out into the Park,” said Torpenhow. “You haven't stirred out since
      the beginning of things.”
     

      “What's the use? There's no movement in the dark; and, besides,”—he
      paused irresolutely at the head of the stairs,—“something will run
      over me.”
     

      “Not if I'm with you. Proceed gingerly.”
     

      The roar of the streets filled Dick with nervous terror, and he clung to
      Torpenhow's arm. “Fancy having to feel for a gutter with your foot!” he
      said petulantly, as he turned into the Park. “Let's curse God and die.”
     

      “Sentries are forbidden to pay unauthorised compliments. By Jove, there
      are the Guards!”
     

      Dick's figure straightened. “Let's get near 'em. Let's go in and look.
      Let's get on the grass and run. I can smell the trees.”
     

      “Mind the low railing. That's all right!” Torpenhow kicked out a tuft of
      grass with his heel. “Smell that,” he said. “Isn't it good?” Dick sniffed
      luxuriously. “Now pick up your feet and run.” They approached as near to
      the regiment as was possible. The clank of bayonets being unfixed made
      Dick's nostrils quiver.
    

      “Let's get nearer. They're in column, aren't they?”
     

      “Yes. How did you know?”
     

      “Felt it. Oh, my men!—my beautiful men!” He edged forward as though
      he could see. “I could draw those chaps once. Who'll draw 'em now?”
     

      “They'll move off in a minute. Don't jump when the band begins.”
     

      “Huh! I'm not a new charger. It's the silences that hurt. Nearer, Torp!—nearer!
      Oh, my God, what wouldn't I give to see 'em for a minute!—one
      half-minute!”
     

      He could hear the armed life almost within reach of him, could hear the
      slings tighten across the bandsman's chest as he heaved the big drum from
      the ground.
    

      “Sticks crossed above his head,” whispered Torpenhow.
    

      “I know. I know! Who should know if I don't? H'sh!”
     

      The drum-sticks fell with a boom, and the men swung forward to the crash
      of the band. Dick felt the wind of the massed movement in his face, heard
      the maddening tramp of feet and the friction of the pouches on the belts.
      The big drum pounded out the tune. It was a music-hall refrain that made a
      perfect quickstep—
    

   “He must be a man of decent height,
   He must be a man of weight,
   He must come home on a Saturday night
   In a thoroughly sober state;
   He must know how to love me,
   And he must know how to kiss;
   And if he's enough to keep us both
   I can't refuse him bliss.”
 

      “What's the matter?” said Torpenhow, as he saw Dick's head fall when the
      last of the regiment had departed.
    

      “Nothing. I feel a little bit out of the running,—that's all. Torp,
      take me back. Why did you bring me out?”
     







      CHAPTER XII
    

   There were three friends that buried the fourth,
    The mould in his mouth and the dust in his eyes
   And they went south and east, and north,—
    The strong man fights, but the sick man dies.

   There were three friends that spoke of the dead,—
    The strong man fights, but the sick man dies.—
   “And would he were with us now,” they said,
    “The sun in our face and the wind in our eyes.”
                       —Ballad.


      The Nilghai was angry with Torpenhow. Dick had been sent to bed,—blind
      men are ever under the orders of those who can see,—and since he had
      returned from the Park had fluently sworn at Torpenhow because he was
      alive, and all the world because it was alive and could see, while he,
      Dick, was dead in the death of the blind, who, at the best, are only
      burdens upon their associates. Torpenhow had said something about a Mrs.
      Gummidge, and Dick had retired in a black fury to handle and re-handle
      three unopened letters from Maisie.
    

      The Nilghai, fat, burly, and aggressive, was in Torpenhow's rooms.
    

      Behind him sat the Keneu, the Great War Eagle, and between them lay a
      large map embellished with black-and-white-headed pins.
    

      “I was wrong about the Balkans,” said the Nilghai. “But I'm not wrong
      about this business. The whole of our work in the Southern Soudan must be
      done over again. The public doesn't care, of course, but the government
      does, and they are making their arrangements quietly. You know that as
      well as I do.”
     

      “I remember how the people cursed us when our troops withdrew from
      Omdurman. It was bound to crop up sooner or later. But I can't go,” said
      Torpenhow. He pointed through the open door; it was a hot night. “Can you
      blame me?”
     

      The Keneu purred above his pipe like a large and very happy cat—“Don't
      blame you in the least. It's uncommonly good of you, and all the rest of
      it, but every man—even you, Torp—must consider his work. I
      know it sounds brutal, but Dick's out of the race,—down,—gastados
      expended, finished, done for. He has a little money of his own. He won't
      starve, and you can't pull out of your slide for his sake. Think of your
      own reputation.”
     

      “Dick's was five times bigger than mine and yours put together.”
     

      “That was because he signed his name to everything he did. It's all ended
      now. You must hold yourself in readiness to move out. You can command your
      own prices, and you do better work than any three of us.”
     

      “Don't tell me how tempting it is. I'll stay here to look after Dick for a
      while. He's as cheerful as a bear with a sore head, but I think he likes
      to have me near him.”
     

      The Nilghai said something uncomplimentary about soft-headed fools who
      throw away their careers for other fools. Torpenhow flushed angrily. The
      constant strain of attendance on Dick had worn his nerves thin.
    

      “There remains a third fate,” said the Keneu, thoughtfully. “Consider
      this, and be not larger fools than necessary. Dick is—or rather was—an
      able-bodied man of moderate attractions and a certain amount of audacity.”
     

      “Oho!” said the Nilghai, who remembered an affair at Cairo. “I begin to
      see,—Torp, I'm sorry.”
     

      Torpenhow nodded forgiveness: “You were more sorry when he cut you out,
      though.—Go on, Keneu.”
     

      “I've often thought, when I've seen men die out in the desert, that if the
      news could be sent through the world, and the means of transport were
      quick enough, there would be one woman at least at each man's bedside.”
     

      “There would be some mighty quaint revelations. Let us be grateful things
      are as they are,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Let us rather reverently consider whether Torp's three-cornered
      ministrations are exactly what Dick needs just now.—What do you
      think yourself, Torp?”
     

      “I know they aren't. But what can I do?”
     

      “Lay the matter before the board. We are all Dick's friends here. You've
      been most in his life.”
     

      “But I picked it up when he was off his head.”
     

      “The greater chance of its being true. I thought we should arrive. Who is
      she?”
     

      Then Torpenhow told a tale in plain words, as a special correspondent who
      knows how to make a verbal precis should tell it. The men listened without
      interruption.
    

      “Is it possible that a man can come back across the years to his
      calf-love?”
     

      said the Keneu. “Is it possible?”
     

      “I give the facts. He says nothing about it now, but he sits fumbling
      three letters from her when he thinks I'm not looking. What am I to do?”
     

      “Speak to him,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “Oh yes! Write to her,—I don't know her full name, remember,—and
      ask her to accept him out of pity. I believe you once told Dick you were
      sorry for him, Nilghai. You remember what happened, eh? Go into the
      bedroom and suggest full confession and an appeal to this Maisie girl,
      whoever she is. I honestly believe he'd try to kill you; and the blindness
      has made him rather muscular.”
     

      “Torpenhow's course is perfectly clear,” said the Keneu. “He will go to
      Vitry-sur-Marne, which is on the Bezieres-Landes Railway,—single
      track from Tourgas. The Prussians shelled it out in '70 because there was
      a poplar on the top of a hill eighteen hundred yards from the church
      spire. There's a squadron of cavalry quartered there,—or ought to
      be. Where this studio Torp spoke about may be I cannot tell. That is
      Torp's business. I have given him his route. He will dispassionately
      explain the situation to the girl, and she will come back to Dick,—the
      more especially because, to use Dick's words, 'there is nothing but her
      damned obstinacy to keep them apart.'”
     

      “And they have four hundred and twenty pounds a year between 'em.”
     

      Dick never lost his head for figures, even in his delirium. “You haven't
      the shadow of an excuse for not going,” said the Nilghai.
    

      Torpenhow looked very uncomfortable. “But it's absurd and impossible. I
      can't drag her back by the hair.”
     

      “Our business—the business for which we draw our money—is to
      do absurd and impossible things,—generally with no reason whatever
      except to amuse the public. Here we have a reason. The rest doesn't
      matter. I shall share these rooms with the Nilghai till Torpenhow returns.
      There will be a batch of unbridled 'specials' coming to town in a little
      while, and these will serve as their headquarters. Another reason for
      sending Torpenhow away. Thus Providence helps those who help others, and”—here
      the Keneu dropped his measured speech—“we can't have you tied by the
      leg to Dick when the trouble begins. It's your only chance of getting
      away; and Dick will be grateful.”
     

      “He will,—worse luck! I can but go and try. I can't conceive a woman
      in her senses refusing Dick.”
     

      “Talk that out with the girl. I have seen you wheedle an angry Mahdieh
      woman into giving you dates. This won't be a tithe as difficult. You had
      better not be here tomorrow afternoon, because the Nilghai and I will be
      in possession. It is an order. Obey.”
     

      “Dick,” said Torpenhow, next morning, “can I do anything for you?”
     

      “No! Leave me alone. How often must I remind you that I'm blind?”
     

      “Nothing I could go for to fetch for to carry for to bring?”
     

      “No. Take those infernal creaking boots of yours away.”
     

      “Poor chap!” said Torpenhow to himself. “I must have been sitting on his
      nerves lately. He wants a lighter step.” Then, aloud, “Very well. Since
      you're so independent, I'm going off for four or five days. Say goodbye at
      least. The housekeeper will look after you, and Keneu has my rooms.”
     

      Dick's face fell. “You won't be longer than a week at the outside? I know
      I'm touched in the temper, but I can't get on without you.”
     

      “Can't you? You'll have to do without me in a little time, and you'll be
      glad I'm gone.”
     

      Dick felt his way back to the big chair, and wondered what these things
      might mean. He did not wish to be tended by the housekeeper, and yet
      Torpenhow's constant tenderness jarred on him. He did not exactly know
      what he wanted. The darkness would not lift, and Maisie's unopened letters
      felt worn and old from much handling. He could never read them for himself
      as long as life endured; but Maisie might have sent him some fresh ones to
      play with. The Nilghai entered with a gift,—a piece of red
      modelling-wax. He fancied that Dick might find interest in using his
      hands. Dick poked and patted the stuff for a few minutes, and, “Is it like
      anything in the world?” he said drearily. “Take it away. I may get the
      touch of the blind in fifty years. Do you know where Torpenhow has gone?”
     

      The Nilghai knew nothing. “We're staying in his rooms till he comes back.
      Can we do anything for you?”
     

      “I'd like to be left alone, please. Don't think I'm ungrateful; but I'm
      best alone.”
     

      The Nilghai chuckled, and Dick resumed his drowsy brooding and sullen
      rebellion against fate. He had long since ceased to think about the work
      he had done in the old days, and the desire to do more work had departed
      from him. He was exceedingly sorry for himself, and the completeness of
      his tender grief soothed him. But his soul and his body cried for Maisie—Maisie
      who would understand. His mind pointed out that Maisie, having her own
      work to do, would not care. His experience had taught him that when money
      was exhausted women went away, and that when a man was knocked out of the
      race the others trampled on him. “Then at the least,” said Dick, in reply,
      “she could use me as I used Binat,—for some sort of a study. I
      wouldn't ask more than to be near her again, even though I knew that
      another man was making love to her. Ugh! what a dog I am!”
     

      A voice on the staircase began to sing joyfully—
    

      “When we go—go—go away from here, Our creditors will weep and
      they will wail, Our absence much regretting when they find that we've been
      getting Out of England by next Tuesday's Indian mail.”
     

      Following the trampling of feet, slamming of Torpenhow's door, and the
      sound of voices in strenuous debate, some one squeaked, “And see, you good
      fellows, I have found a new water-bottle—firs'-class patent—eh,
      how you say? Open himself inside out.”
     

      Dick sprang to his feet. He knew the voice well. “That's Cassavetti, come
      back from the Continent. Now I know why Torp went away. There's a row
      somewhere, and—I'm out of it!”
     

      The Nilghai commanded silence in vain. “That's for my sake,” Dick said
      bitterly. “The birds are getting ready to fly, and they wouldn't tell me.
      I can hear Morten-Sutherland and Mackaye. Half the War Correspondents in
      London are there;—and I'm out of it.”
     

      He stumbled across the landing and plunged into Torpenhow's room. He could
      feel that it was full of men. “Where's the trouble?” said he. “In the
      Balkans at last? Why didn't some one tell me?”
     

      “We thought you wouldn't be interested,” said the Nilghai, shamefacedly.
    

      “It's in the Soudan, as usual.”
     

      “You lucky dogs! Let me sit here while you talk. I shan't be a skeleton at
      the feast.—Cassavetti, where are you? Your English is as bad as
      ever.”
     

      Dick was led into a chair. He heard the rustle of the maps, and the talk
      swept forward, carrying him with it. Everybody spoke at once, discussing
      press censorships, railway-routes, transport, water-supply, the capacities
      of generals,—these in language that would have horrified a trusting
      public,—ranting, asserting, denouncing, and laughing at the top of
      their voices. There was the glorious certainty of war in the Soudan at any
      moment. The Nilghai said so, and it was well to be in readiness. The Keneu
      had telegraphed to Cairo for horses; Cassavetti had stolen a perfectly
      inaccurate list of troops that would be ordered forward, and was reading
      it out amid profane interruptions, and the Keneu introduced to Dick some
      man unknown who would be employed as war artist by the Central Southern
      Syndicate. “It's his first outing,” said the Keneu. “Give him some tips—about
      riding camels.”
     

      “Oh, those camels!” groaned Cassavetti. “I shall learn to ride him again,
      and now I am so much all soft! Listen, you good fellows. I know your
      military arrangement very well. There will go the Royal Argalshire
      Sutherlanders. So it was read to me upon best authority.”
     

      A roar of laughter interrupted him.
    

      “Sit down,” said the Nilghai. “The lists aren't even made out in the War
      Office.”
     

      “Will there be any force at Suakin?” said a voice.
    

      Then the outcries redoubled, and grew mixed, thus: “How many Egyptian
      troops will they use?—God help the Fellaheen!—There's a
      railway in Plumstead marshes doing duty as a fives-court.—We shall
      have the Suakin-Berber line built at last.—Canadian voyageurs are
      too careful. Give me a half-drunk Krooman in a whale-boat.—Who
      commands the Desert column?—No, they never blew up the big rock in
      the Ghineh bend. We shall have to be hauled up, as usual.—Somebody
      tell me if there's an Indian contingent, or I'll break everybody's head.—Don't
      tear the map in two.—It's a war of occupation, I tell you, to
      connect with the African companies in the South.—There's Guinea-worm
      in most of the wells on that route.” Then the Nilghai, despairing of
      peace, bellowed like a fog-horn and beat upon the table with both hands.
    

      “But what becomes of Torpenhow?” said Dick, in the silence that followed.
    

      “Torp's in abeyance just now. He's off love-making somewhere, I suppose,”
       said the Nilghai.
    

      “He said he was going to stay at home,” said the Keneu.
    

      “Is he?” said Dick, with an oath. “He won't. I'm not much good now, but if
      you and the Nilghai hold him down I'll engage to trample on him till he
      sees reason. He'll stay behind, indeed! He's the best of you all. There'll
      be some tough work by Omdurman. We shall come there to stay, this time.
    

      “But I forgot. I wish I were going with you.”
     

      “So do we all, Dickie,” said the Keneu.
    

      “And I most of all,” said the new artist of the Central Southern
      Syndicate.
    

      “Could you tell me——”
     

      “I'll give you one piece of advice,” Dick answered, moving towards the
      door. “If you happen to be cut over the head in a scrimmage, don't guard.
      Tell the man to go on cutting. You'll find it cheapest in the end. Thanks
      for letting me look in.”
     

      “There's grit in Dick,” said the Nilghai, an hour later, when the room was
      emptied of all save the Keneu.
    

      “It was the sacred call of the war-trumpet. Did you notice how he answered
      to it? Poor fellow! Let's look at him,” said the Keneu.
    

      The excitement of the talk had died away. Dick was sitting by the studio
      table, with his head on his arms, when the men came in. He did not change
      his position.
    

      “It hurts,” he moaned. “God forgive me, but it hurts cruelly; and yet,
      y'know, the world has a knack of spinning round all by itself. Shall I see
      Torp before he goes?”
     

      “Oh, yes. You'll see him,” said the Nilghai.
    







      CHAPTER XIII
    

   The sun went down an hour ago,
   I wonder if I face towards home;
   If I lost my way in the light of day
   How shall I find it now night is come?
                 —Old Song


      “Maisie, come to bed.”
     

      “It's so hot I can't sleep. Don't worry.”
     

      Maisie put her elbows on the window-sill and looked at the moonlight on
      the straight, poplar-flanked road. Summer had come upon Vitry-sur-Marne
      and parched it to the bone. The grass was dry-burnt in the meadows, the
      clay by the bank of the river was caked to brick, the roadside flowers
      were long since dead, and the roses in the garden hung withered on their
      stalks. The heat in the little low bedroom under the eaves was almost
      intolerable. The very moonlight on the wall of Kami's studio across the
      road seemed to make the night hotter, and the shadow of the big
      bell-handle by the closed gate cast a bar of inky black that caught
      Maisie's eye and annoyed her.
    

      “Horrid thing! It should be all white,” she murmured. “And the gate isn't
      in the middle of the wall, either. I never noticed that before.”
     

      Maisie was hard to please at that hour. First, the heat of the past few
      weeks had worn her down; secondly, her work, and particularly the study of
      a female head intended to represent the Melancolia and not finished in
      time for the Salon, was unsatisfactory; thirdly, Kami had said as much two
      days before; fourthly,—but so completely fourthly that it was hardly
      worth thinking about,—Dick, her property, had not written to her for
      more than six weeks. She was angry with the heat, with Kami, and with her
      work, but she was exceedingly angry with Dick.
    

      She had written to him three times,—each time proposing a fresh
      treatment of her Melancolia. Dick had taken no notice of these
      communications. She had resolved to write no more. When she returned to
      England in the autumn—for her pride's sake she could not return
      earlier—she would speak to him. She missed the Sunday afternoon
      conferences more than she cared to admit. All that Kami said was,
      “Continuez, mademoiselle, continuez toujours,” and he had been repeating
      the wearisome counsel through the hot summer, exactly like a cicada,—an
      old gray cicada in a black alpaca coat, white trousers, and a huge felt
      hat.
    

      But Dick had tramped masterfully up and down her little studio north of
      the cool green London park, and had said things ten times worse than
      continuez, before he snatched the brush out of her hand and showed her
      where the error lay. His last letter, Maisie remembered, contained some
      trivial advice about not sketching in the sun or drinking water at wayside
      farmhouses; and he had said that not once, but three times,—as if he
      did not know that Maisie could take care of herself.
    

      But what was he doing, that he could not trouble to write? A murmur of
      voices in the road made her lean from the window. A cavalryman of the
      little garrison in the town was talking to Kami's cook. The moonlight
      glittered on the scabbard of his sabre, which he was holding in his hand
      lest it should clank inopportunely. The cook's cap cast deep shadows on
      her face, which was close to the conscript's. He slid his arm round her
      waist, and there followed the sound of a kiss.
    

      “Faugh!” said Maisie, stepping back.
    

      “What's that?” said the red-haired girl, who was tossing uneasily outside
      her bed.
    

      “Only a conscript kissing the cook,” said Maisie.
    

      “They've gone away now.” She leaned out of the window again, and put a
      shawl over her nightgown to guard against chills. There was a very small
      night-breeze abroad, and a sun-baked rose below nodded its head as one who
      knew unutterable secrets. Was it possible that Dick should turn his
      thoughts from her work and his own and descend to the degradation of
      Suzanne and the conscript? He could not! The rose nodded its head and one
      leaf therewith. It looked like a naughty little devil scratching its ear.
    

      Dick could not, “because,” thought Maisie, “he is mine,—mine,—mine.
      He said he was. I'm sure I don't care what he does. It will only spoil his
      work if he does; and it will spoil mine too.”
     

      The rose continued to nod in the futile way peculiar to flowers. There was
      no earthly reason why Dick should not disport himself as he chose, except
      that he was called by Providence, which was Maisie, to assist Maisie in
      her work. And her work was the preparation of pictures that went sometimes
      to English provincial exhibitions, as the notices in the scrap-book
      proved, and that were invariably rejected by the Salon when Kami was
      plagued into allowing her to send them up. Her work in the future, it
      seemed, would be the preparation of pictures on exactly similar lines
      which would be rejected in exactly the same way——The
      red-haired girl threshed distressfully across the sheets. “It's too hot to
      sleep,” she moaned; and the interruption jarred.
    

      Exactly the same way. Then she would divide her years between the little
      studio in England and Kami's big studio at Vitry-sur-Marne. No, she would
      go to another master, who should force her into the success that was her
      right, if patient toil and desperate endeavour gave one a right to
      anything. Dick had told her that he had worked ten years to understand his
      craft. She had worked ten years, and ten years were nothing. Dick had said
      that ten years were nothing,—but that was in regard to herself only.
      He had said—this very man who could not find time to write—that
      he would wait ten years for her, and that she was bound to come back to
      him sooner or later. He had said this in the absurd letter about sunstroke
      and diphtheria; and then he had stopped writing. He was wandering up and
      down moonlit streets, kissing cooks. She would like to lecture him now,—not
      in her nightgown, of course, but properly dressed, severely and from a
      height. Yet if he was kissing other girls he certainly would not care
      whether she lecture him or not. He would laugh at her. Very good.
    

      She would go back to her studio and prepare pictures that went, etc., etc.
    

      The mill-wheel of thought swung round slowly, that no section of it might
      be slurred over, and the red-haired girl tossed and turned behind her.
    

      Maisie put her chin in her hands and decided that there could be no doubt
      whatever of the villainy of Dick. To justify herself, she began,
      unwomanly, to weigh the evidence. There was a boy, and he had said he
      loved her. And he kissed her,—kissed her on the cheek,—by a
      yellow sea-poppy that nodded its head exactly like the maddening dry rose
      in the garden. Then there was an interval, and men had told her that they
      loved her—just when she was busiest with her work. Then the boy came
      back, and at their very second meeting had told her that he loved her.
      Then he had——But there was no end to the things he had done.
      He had given her his time and his powers. He had spoken to her of Art,
      housekeeping, technique, teacups, the abuse of pickles as a stimulant,—that
      was rude,—sable hair-brushes,—he had given her the best in her
      stock,—she used them daily; he had given her advice that she
      profited by, and now and again—a look. Such a look! The look of a
      beaten hound waiting for the word to crawl to his mistress's feet. In
      return she had given him nothing whatever, except—here she brushed
      her mouth against the open-work sleeve of her nightgown—the
      privilege of kissing her once. And on the mouth, too. Disgraceful! Was
      that not enough, and more than enough? and if it was not, had he not
      cancelled the debt by not writing and—probably kissing other girls?
      “Maisie, you'll catch a chill. Do go and lie down,” said the wearied voice
      of her companion. “I can't sleep a wink with you at the window.”
     

      Maisie shrugged her shoulders and did not answer. She was reflecting on
      the meannesses of Dick, and on other meannesses with which he had nothing
      to do. The moonlight would not let her sleep. It lay on the skylight of
      the studio across the road in cold silver; she stared at it intently and
      her thoughts began to slide one into the other. The shadow of the big
      bell-handle in the wall grew short, lengthened again, and faded out as the
      moon went down behind the pasture and a hare came limping home across the
      road. Then the dawn-wind washed through the upland grasses, and brought
      coolness with it, and the cattle lowed by the drought-shrunk river.
      Maisie's head fell forward on the window-sill, and the tangle of black
      hair covered her arms.
    

      “Maisie, wake up. You'll catch a chill.”
     

      “Yes, dear; yes, dear.” She staggered to her bed like a wearied child, and
      as she buried her face in the pillows she muttered, “I think—I think—But
      he ought to have written.”
     

      Day brought the routine of the studio, the smell of paint and turpentine,
      and the monotone wisdom of Kami, who was a leaden artist, but a golden
      teacher if the pupil were only in sympathy with him. Maisie was not in
      sympathy that day, and she waited impatiently for the end of the work.
    

      She knew when it was coming; for Kami would gather his black alpaca coat
      into a bunch behind him, and, with faded flue eyes that saw neither pupils
      nor canvas, look back into the past to recall the history of one Binat.
      “You have all done not so badly,” he would say. “But you shall remember
      that it is not enough to have the method, and the art, and the power, nor
      even that which is touch, but you shall have also the conviction that
      nails the work to the wall. Of the so many I taught,”—here the
      students would begin to unfix drawing-pins or get their tubes together,—“the
      very so many that I have taught, the best was Binat. All that comes of the
      study and the work and the knowledge was to him even when he came. After
      he left me he should have done all that could be done with the colour, the
      form, and the knowledge. Only, he had not the conviction. So today I hear
      no more of Binat,—the best of my pupils,—and that is long ago.
      So today, too, you will be glad to hear no more of me. Continuez,
      mesdemoiselles, and, above all, with conviction.”
     

      He went into the garden to smoke and mourn over the lost Binat as the
      pupils dispersed to their several cottages or loitered in the studio to
      make plans for the cool of the afternoon.
    

      Maisie looked at her very unhappy Melancolia, restrained a desire to
      grimace before it, and was hurrying across the road to write a letter to
      Dick, when she was aware of a large man on a white troop-horse. How
      Torpenhow had managed in the course of twenty hours to find his way to the
      hearts of the cavalry officers in quarters at Vitry-sur-Marne, to discuss
      with them the certainty of a glorious revenge for France, to reduce the
      colonel to tears of pure affability, and to borrow the best horse in the
      squadron for the journey to Kami's studio, is a mystery that only special
      correspondents can unravel.
    

      “I beg your pardon,” said he. “It seems an absurd question to ask, but the
      fact is that I don't know her by any other name: Is there any young lady
      here that is called Maisie?”
     

      “I am Maisie,” was the answer from the depths of a great sun-hat.
    

      “I ought to introduce myself,” he said, as the horse capered in the
      blinding white dust. “My name is Torpenhow. Dick Heldar is my best friend,
      and—and—the fact is that he has gone blind.”
     

      “Blind!” said Maisie, stupidly. “He can't be blind.”
     

      “He has been stone-blind for nearly two months.”
     

      Maisie lifted up her face, and it was pearly white. “No! No! Not blind! I
      won't have him blind!”
     

      “Would you care to see for yourself?” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Now,—at once?”
     

      “Oh, no! The Paris train doesn't go through this place till tonight. There
      will be ample time.”
     

      “Did Mr. Heldar send you to me?”
     

      “Certainly not. Dick wouldn't do that sort of thing. He's sitting in his
      studio, turning over some letters that he can't read because he's blind.”
     

      There was a sound of choking from the sun-hat. Maisie bowed her head and
      went into the cottage, where the red-haired girl was on a sofa,
      complaining of a headache.
    

      “Dick's blind!” said Maisie, taking her breath quickly as she steadied
      herself against a chair-back. “My Dick's blind!”
     

      “What?” The girl was on the sofa no longer.
    

      “A man has come from England to tell me. He hasn't written to me for six
      weeks.”
     

      “Are you going to him?”
     

      “I must think.”
     

      “Think! I should go back to London and see him and I should kiss his eyes
      and kiss them and kiss them until they got well again! If you don't go I
      shall. Oh, what am I talking about? You wicked little idiot! Go to him at
      once. Go!”
     

      Torpenhow's neck was blistering, but he preserved a smile of infinite
      patience as Maisie's appeared bareheaded in the sunshine.
    

      “I am coming,” said she, her eyes on the ground.
    

      “You will be at Vitry Station, then, at seven this evening.” This was an
      order delivered by one who was used to being obeyed. Maisie said nothing,
      but she felt grateful that there was no chance of disputing with this big
      man who took everything for granted and managed a squealing horse with one
      hand. She returned to the red-haired girl, who was weeping bitterly, and
      between tears, kisses,—very few of those,—menthol, packing,
      and an interview with Kami, the sultry afternoon wore away.
    

      Thought might come afterwards. Her present duty was to go to Dick,—Dick
      who owned the wondrous friend and sat in the dark playing with her
      unopened letters.
    

      “But what will you do,” she said to her companion.
    

      “I? Oh, I shall stay here and—finish your Melancolia,” she said,
      smiling pitifully. “Write to me afterwards.”
     

      That night there ran a legend through Vitry-sur-Marne of a mad Englishman,
      doubtless suffering from sunstroke, who had drunk all the officers of the
      garrison under the table, had borrowed a horse from the lines, and had
      then and there eloped, after the English custom, with one of those more
      mad English girls who drew pictures down there under the care of that good
      Monsieur Kami.
    

      “They are very droll,” said Suzanne to the conscript in the moonlight by
      the studio wall. “She walked always with those big eyes that saw nothing,
      and yet she kisses me on both cheeks as though she were my sister, and
      gives me—see—ten francs!”
     

      The conscript levied a contribution on both gifts; for he prided himself
      on being a good soldier.
    

      Torpenhow spoke very little to Maisie during the journey to Calais; but he
      was careful to attend to all her wants, to get her a compartment entirely
      to herself, and to leave her alone. He was amazed of the ease with which
      the matter had been accomplished.
    

      “The safest thing would be to let her think things out. By Dick's showing,—when
      he was off his head,—she must have ordered him about very
      thoroughly. Wonder how she likes being under orders.”
     

      Maisie never told. She sat in the empty compartment often with her eyes
      shut, that she might realise the sensation of blindness. It was an order
      that she should return to London swiftly, and she found herself at last
      almost beginning to enjoy the situation. This was better than looking
      after luggage and a red-haired friend who never took any interest in her
      surroundings. But there appeared to be a feeling in the air that she,
      Maisie,—of all people,—was in disgrace. Therefore she
      justified her conduct to herself with great success, till Torpenhow came
      up to her on the steamer and without preface began to tell the story of
      Dick's blindness, suppressing a few details, but dwelling at length on the
      miseries of delirium. He stopped before he reached the end, as though he
      had lost interest in the subject, and went forward to smoke. Maisie was
      furious with him and with herself.
    

      She was hurried on from Dover to London almost before she could ask for
      breakfast, and—she was past any feeling of indignation now—was
      bidden curtly to wait in a hall at the foot of some lead-covered stairs
      while Torpenhow went up to make inquiries. Again the knowledge that she
      was being treated like a naughty little girl made her pale cheeks flame.
      It was all Dick's fault for being so stupid as to go blind.
    

      Torpenhow led her up to a shut door, which he opened very softly. Dick was
      sitting by the window, with his chin on his chest. There were three
      envelopes in his hand, and he turned them over and over. The big man who
      gave orders was no longer by her side, and the studio door snapped behind
      her.
    

      Dick thrust the letters into his pocket as he heard the sound. “Hullo,
      Torp! Is that you? I've been so lonely.”
     

      His voice had taken the peculiar flatness of the blind. Maisie pressed
      herself up into a corner of the room. Her heart was beating furiously, and
      she put one hand on her breast to keep it quiet. Dick was staring directly
      at her, and she realised for the first time that he was blind.
    

      Shutting her eyes in a rail-way carriage to open them when she pleased was
      child's play. This man was blind though his eyes were wide open.
    

      “Torp, is that you? They said you were coming.” Dick looked puzzled and a
      little irritated at the silence.
    

      “No; it's only me,” was the answer, in a strained little whisper. Maisie
      could hardly move her lips.
    

      “H'm!” said Dick, composedly, without moving. “This is a new phenomenon.
      Darkness I'm getting used to; but I object to hearing voices.”
     

      Was he mad, then, as well as blind, that he talked to himself? Maisie's
      heart beat more wildly, and she breathed in gasps. Dick rose and began to
      feel his way across the room, touching each table and chair as he passed.
      Once he caught his foot on a rug, and swore, dropping on his knees to feel
      what the obstruction might be. Maisie remembered him walking in the Park
      as though all the earth belonged to him, tramping up and down her studio
      two months ago, and flying up the gangway of the Channel steamer. The
      beating of her heart was making her sick, and Dick was coming nearer,
      guided by the sound of her breathing. She put out a hand mechanically to
      ward him off or to draw him to herself, she did not know which. It touched
      his chest, and he stepped back as though he had been shot.
    

      “It's Maisie!” said he, with a dry sob. “What are you doing here?”
     

      “I came—I came—to see you, please.”
     

      Dick's lips closed firmly.
    

      “Won't you sit down, then? You see, I've had some bother with my eyes, and——”
     

      “I know. I know. Why didn't you tell me?”
     

      “I couldn't write.”
     

      “You might have told Mr. Torpenhow.”
     

      “What has he to do with my affairs?”
     

      “He—he brought me from Vitry-sur-Marne. He thought I ought to see
      you.”
     

      “Why, what has happened? Can I do anything for you? No, I can't. I
      forgot.”
     

      “Oh, Dick, I'm so sorry! I've come to tell you, and——Let me
      take you back to your chair.”
     

      “Don't! I'm not a child. You only do that out of pity. I never meant to
      tell you anything about it. I'm no good now. I'm down and done for. Let me
      alone!”
     

      He groped back to his chair, his chest labouring as he sat down.
    

      Maisie watched him, and the fear went out of her heart, to be followed by
      a very bitter shame. He had spoken a truth that had been hidden from the
      girl through every step of the impetuous flight to London; for he was,
      indeed, down and done for—masterful no longer but rather a little
      abject; neither an artist stronger than she, nor a man to be looked up to—only
      some blind one that sat in a chair and seemed on the point of crying. She
      was immensely and unfeignedly sorry for him—more sorry than she had
      ever been for any one in her life, but not sorry enough to deny his words.
    

      So she stood still and felt ashamed and a little hurt, because she had
      honestly intended that her journey should end triumphantly; and now she
      was only filled with pity most startlingly distinct from love.
    

      “Well?” said Dick, his face steadily turned away. “I never meant to worry
      you any more. What's the matter?”
     

      He was conscious that Maisie was catching her breath, but was as
      unprepared as herself for the torrent of emotion that followed. She had
      dropped into a chair and was sobbing with her face hidden in her hands.
    

      “I can't—I can't!” she cried desperately. “Indeed, I can't. It isn't
      my fault. I'm so sorry. Oh, Dickie, I'm so sorry.”
     

      Dick's shoulders straightened again, for the words lashed like a whip.
    

      Still the sobbing continued. It is not good to realise that you have
      failed in the hour of trial or flinched before the mere possibility of
      making sacrifices.
    

      “I do despise myself—indeed I do. But I can't. Oh, Dickie, you
      wouldn't ask me—would you?” wailed Maisie.
    

      She looked up for a minute, and by chance it happened that Dick's eyes
      fell on hers. The unshaven face was very white and set, and the lips were
      trying to force themselves into a smile. But it was the worn-out eyes that
      Maisie feared. Her Dick had gone blind and left in his place some one that
      she could hardly recognise till he spoke.
    

      “Who is asking you to do anything, Maisie? I told you how it would be.
      What's the use of worrying? For pity's sake don't cry like that; it isn't
      worth it.”
     

      “You don't know how I hate myself. Oh, Dick, help me—help me!” The
      passion of tears had grown beyond her control and was beginning to alarm
      the man. He stumbled forward and put his arm round her, and her head fell
      on his shoulder.
    

      “Hush, dear, hush! Don't cry. You're quite right, and you've nothing to
      reproach yourself with—you never had. You're only a little upset by
      the journey, and I don't suppose you've had any breakfast. What a brute
      Torp was to bring you over.”
     

      “I wanted to come. I did indeed,” she protested.
    

      “Very well. And now you've come and seen, and I'm—immensely
      grateful. When you're better you shall go away and get something to eat.
      What sort of a passage did you have coming over?”
     

      Maisie was crying more subduedly, for the first time in her life glad that
      she had something to lean against. Dick patted her on the shoulder
      tenderly but clumsily, for he was not quite sure where her shoulder might
      be.
    

      She drew herself out of his arms at last and waited, trembling and most
      unhappy. He had felt his way to the window to put the width of the room
      between them, and to quiet a little the tumult in his heart.
    

      “Are you better now?” he said.
    

      “Yes, but—don't you hate me?”
     

      “I hate you? My God! I?”
     

      “Isn't—isn't there anything I could do for you, then? I'll stay here
      in England to do it, if you like. Perhaps I could come and see you
      sometimes.”
     

      “I think not, dear. It would be kindest not to see me any more, please. I
      don't want to seem rude, but—don't you think—perhaps you had
      almost better go now.”
     

      He was conscious that he could not bear himself as a man if the strain
      continued much longer.
    

      “I don't deserve anything else. I'll go, Dick. Oh, I'm so miserable.”
     

      “Nonsense. You've nothing to worry about; I'd tell you if you had. Wait a
      moment, dear. I've got something to give you first. I meant it for you
      ever since this little trouble began. It's my Melancolia; she was a beauty
      when I last saw her. You can keep her for me, and if ever you're poor you
      can sell her. She's worth a few hundreds at any state of the market.” He
      groped among his canvases. “She's framed in black. Is this a black frame
      that I have my hand on? There she is. What do you think of her?”
     

      He turned a scarred formless muddle of paint towards Maisie, and the eyes
      strained as though they would catch her wonder and surprise. One thing and
      one thing only could she do for him.
    

      “Well?”
     

      The voice was fuller and more rounded, because the man knew he was
      speaking of his best work. Maisie looked at the blur, and a lunatic desire
      to laugh caught her by the throat. But for Dick's sake—whatever this
      mad blankness might mean—she must make no sign. Her voice choked
      with hard-held tears as she answered, still gazing at the wreck—“Oh,
      Dick, it is good!”
     

      He heard the little hysterical gulp and took it for tribute. “Won't you
      have it, then? I'll send it over to your house if you will.”
     

      “I? Oh yes—thank you. Ha! ha!” If she did not fly at once the
      laughter that was worse than tears would kill her. She turned and ran,
      choking and blinded, down the staircases that were empty of life to take
      refuge in a cab and go to her house across the Parks. There she sat down
      in the dismantled drawing-room and thought of Dick in his blindness,
      useless till the end of life, and of herself in her own eyes. Behind the
      sorrow, the shame, and the humiliation, lay fear of the cold wrath of the
      red-haired girl when Maisie should return. Maisie had never feared her
      companion before. Not until she found herself saying, “Well, he never
      asked me,” did she realise her scorn of herself. And that is the end of
      Maisie.
    


      For Dick was reserved more searching torment. He could not realise at
      first that Maisie, whom he had ordered to go had left him without a word
      of farewell. He was savagely angry against Torpenhow, who had brought upon
      him this humiliation and troubled his miserable peace. Then his dark hour
      came and he was alone with himself and his desires to get what help he
      could from the darkness. The queen could do no wrong, but in following the
      right, so far as it served her work, she had wounded her one subject more
      than his own brain would let him know.
    

      “It's all I had and I've lost it,” he said, as soon as the misery
      permitted clear thinking. “And Torp will think that he has been so
      infernally clever that I shan't have the heart to tell him. I must think
      this out quietly.”
     

      “Hullo!” said Torpenhow, entering the studio after Dick had enjoyed two
      hours of thought. “I'm back. Are you feeling any better?”
     

      “Torp, I don't know what to say. Come here.” Dick coughed huskily,
      wondering, indeed, what he should say, and how to say it temperately.
    

      “What's the need for saying anything? Get up and tramp.” Torpenhow was
      perfectly satisfied.
    

      They walked up and down as of custom, Torpenhow's hand on Dick's shoulder,
      and Dick buried in his own thoughts.
    

      “How in the world did you find it all out?” said Dick, at last.
    

      “You shouldn't go off your head if you want to keep secrets, Dickie. It
      was absolutely impertinent on my part; but if you'd seen me rocketing
      about on a half-trained French troop-horse under a blazing sun you'd have
      laughed. There will be a charivari in my rooms tonight. Seven other devils——”
     

      “I know—the row in the Southern Soudan. I surprised their councils
      the other day, and it made me unhappy. Have you fixed your flint to go?
      Who d'you work for?”
     

      “Haven't signed any contracts yet. I wanted to see how your business would
      turn out.”
     

      “Would you have stayed with me, then, if—things had gone wrong?” He
      put his question cautiously.
    

      “Don't ask me too much. I'm only a man.”
     

      “You've tried to be an angel very successfully.”
     

      “Oh ye—es!... Well, do you attend the function tonight? We shall be
      half screwed before the morning. All the men believe the war's a
      certainty.”
     

      “I don't think I will, old man, if it's all the same to you. I'll stay
      quiet here.”
     

      “And meditate? I don't blame you. You observe a good time if ever a man
      did.”
     

      That night there was a tumult on the stairs. The correspondents poured in
      from theatre, dinner, and music-hall to Torpenhow's room that they might
      discuss their plan of campaign in the event of military operations
      becoming a certainty. Torpenhow, the Keneu, and the Nilghai had bidden all
      the men they had worked with to the orgy; and Mr. Beeton, the housekeeper,
      declared that never before in his checkered experience had he seen quite
      such a fancy lot of gentlemen. They waked the chambers with shoutings and
      song; and the elder men were quite as bad as the younger. For the chances
      of war were in front of them, and all knew what those meant.
    

      Sitting in his own room a little perplexed by the noise across the
      landing, Dick suddenly began to laugh to himself.
    

      “When one comes to think of it the situation is intensely comic. Maisie's
      quite right—poor little thing. I didn't know she could cry like that
      before; but now I know what Torp thinks, I'm sure he'd be quite fool
      enough to stay at home and try to console me—if he knew. Besides, it
      isn't nice to own that you've been thrown over like a broken chair. I must
      carry this business through alone—as usual. If there isn't a war,
      and Torp finds out, I shall look foolish, that's all. If there is a way I
      mustn't interfere with another man's chances. Business is business, and I
      want to be alone—I want to be alone. What a row they're making!”
     

      Somebody hammered at the studio door.
    

      “Come out and frolic, Dickie,” said the Nilghai.
    

      “I should like to, but I can't. I'm not feeling frolicsome.”
     

      “Then, I'll tell the boys and they'll drag you like a badger.”
     

      “Please not, old man. On my word, I'd sooner be left alone just now.”
     

      “Very good. Can we send anything in to you? Fizz, for instance. Cassavetti
      is beginning to sing songs of the Sunny South already.”
     

      For one minute Dick considered the proposition seriously.
    

      “No, thanks, I've a headache already.”
     

      “Virtuous child. That's the effect of emotion on the young. All my
      congratulations, Dick. I also was concerned in the conspiracy for your
      welfare.”
     

      “Go to the devil—oh, send Binkie in here.”
     

      The little dog entered on elastic feet, riotous from having been made much
      of all the evening. He had helped to sing the choruses; but scarcely
      inside the studio he realised that this was no place for tail-wagging, and
      settled himself on Dick's lap till it was bedtime. Then he went to bed
      with Dick, who counted every hour as it struck, and rose in the morning
      with a painfully clear head to receive Torpenhow's more formal
      congratulations and a particular account of the last night's revels.
    

      “You aren't looking very happy for a newly accepted man,” said Torpenhow.
    

      “Never mind that—it's my own affair, and I'm all right. Do you
      really go?”
     

      “Yes. With the old Central Southern as usual. They wired, and I accepted
      on better terms than before.”
     

      “When do you start?”
     

      “The day after tomorrow—for Brindisi.”
     

      “Thank God.” Dick spoke from the bottom of his heart.
    

      “Well, that's not a pretty way of saying you're glad to get rid of me. But
      men in your condition are allowed to be selfish.”
     

      “I didn't mean that. Will you get a hundred pounds cashed for me before
      you leave?”
     

      “That's a slender amount for housekeeping, isn't it?”
     

      “Oh, it's only for—marriage expenses.”
     

      Torpenhow brought him the money, counted it out in fives and tens, and
      carefully put it away in the writing table.
    

      “Now I suppose I shall have to listen to his ravings about his girl until
      I go. Heaven send us patience with a man in love!” he said to himself.
    

      But never a word did Dick say of Maisie or marriage. He hung in the
      doorway of Torpenhow's room when the latter was packing and asked
      innumerable questions about the coming campaign, till Torpenhow began to
      feel annoyed.
    

      “You're a secretive animal, Dickie, and you consume your own smoke, don't
      you?” he said on the last evening.
    

      “I—I suppose so. By the way, how long do you think this war will
      last?”
     

      “Days, weeks, or months. One can never tell. It may go on for years.”
     

      “I wish I were going.”
     

      “Good Heavens! You're the most unaccountable creature! Hasn't it occurred
      to you that you're going to be married—thanks to me?”
     

      “Of course, yes. I'm going to be married—so I am. Going to be
      married. I'm awfully grateful to you. Haven't I told you that?”
     

      “You might be going to be hanged by the look of you,” said Torpenhow.
    

      And the next day Torpenhow bade him good-bye and left him to the
      loneliness he had so much desired.
    







      CHAPTER XIV
    

   Yet at the last, ere our spearmen had found him,
   Yet at the last, ere a sword-thrust could save,
   Yet at the last, with his masters around him,
   He of the Faith spoke as master to slave;
   Yet at the last, tho' the Kafirs had maimed him,
   Broken by bondage and wrecked by the reiver,—
   Yet at the last, tho' the darkness had claimed him,
   He called upon Allah and died a believer.—Kizzilbashi.


      “Beg your pardon, Mr. Heldar, but—but isn't nothin' going to
      happen?” said Mr. Beeton.
    

      “No!” Dick had just waked to another morning of blank despair and his
      temper was of the shortest.
    

      “'Tain't my regular business, 'o course, sir; and what I say is, 'Mind
      your own business and let other people mind theirs;' but just before Mr.
      Torpenhow went away he give me to understand, like, that you might be
      moving into a house of your own, so to speak—a sort of house with
      rooms upstairs and downstairs where you'd be better attended to, though I
      try to act just by all our tenants. Don't I?”
     

      “Ah! That must have been a mad-house. I shan't trouble you to take me
      there yet. Get me my breakfast, please, and leave me alone.”
     

      “I hope I haven't done anything wrong, sir, but you know I hope that as
      far as a man can I tries to do the proper thing by all the gentlemen in
      chambers—and more particular those whose lot is hard—such as
      you, for instance, Mr. Heldar. You likes soft-roe bloater, don't you?
      Soft-roe bloaters is scarcer than hard-roe, but what I says is, 'Never
      mind a little extra trouble so long as you give satisfaction to the
      tenants.'”
     

      Mr. Beeton withdrew and left Dick to himself. Torpenhow had been long
      away; there was no more rioting in the chambers, and Dick had settled down
      to his new life, which he was weak enough to consider nothing better than
      death.
    

      It is hard to live alone in the dark, confusing the day and night;
      dropping to sleep through sheer weariness at mid-day, and rising restless
      in the chill of the dawn. At first Dick, on his awakenings, would grope
      along the corridors of the chambers till he heard some one snore. Then he
      would know that the day had not yet come, and return wearily to his
      bedroom.
    

      Later he learned not to stir till there was a noise and movement in the
      house and Mr. Beeton advised him to get up. Once dressed—and
      dressing, now that Torpenhow was away, was a lengthy business, because
      collars, ties, and the like hid themselves in far corners of the room, and
      search meant head-beating against chairs and trunks—once dressed,
      there was nothing whatever to do except to sit still and brood till the
      three daily meals came. Centuries separated breakfast from lunch and lunch
      from dinner, and though a man prayed for hundreds of years that his mind
      might be taken from him, God would never hear. Rather the mind was
      quickened and the revolving thoughts ground against each other as
      millstones grind when there is no corn between; and yet the brain would
      not wear out and give him rest. It continued to think, at length, with
      imagery and all manner of reminiscences. It recalled Maisie and past
      success, reckless travels by land and sea, the glory of doing work and
      feeling that it was good, and suggested all that might have happened had
      the eyes only been faithful to their duty. When thinking ceased through
      sheer weariness, there poured into Dick's soul tide on tide of
      overwhelming, purposeless fear—dread of starvation always, terror
      lest the unseen ceiling should crush down upon him, fear of fire in the
      chambers and a louse's death in red flame, and agonies of fiercer horror
      that had nothing to do with any fear of death. Then Dick bowed his head,
      and clutching the arms of his chair fought with his sweating self till the
      tinkle of plates told him that something to eat was being set before him.
    

      Mr. Beeton would bring the meal when he had time to spare, and Dick
      learned to hang upon his speech, which dealt with badly fitted gas-plugs,
      waste-pipes out of repair, little tricks for driving picture-nails into
      walls, and the sins of the charwoman or the housemaids. In the lack of
      better things the small gossip of a servants' hall becomes immensely
      interesting, and the screwing of a washer on a tap an event to be talked
      over for days.
    

      Once or twice a week, too, Mr. Beeton would take Dick out with him when he
      went marketing in the morning to haggle with tradesmen over fish,
      lamp-wicks, mustard, tapioca, and so forth, while Dick rested his weight
      first on one foot and then on the other and played aimlessly with the tins
      and string-ball on the counter. Then they would perhaps meet one of Mr.
      Beeton's friends, and Dick, standing aside a little, would hold his peace
      till Mr. Beeton was willing to go on again.
    

      The life did not increase his self-respect. He abandoned shaving as a
      dangerous exercise, and being shaved in a barber's shop meant exposure of
      his infirmity. He could not see that his clothes were properly brushed,
      and since he had never taken any care of his personal appearance he became
      every known variety of sloven. A blind man cannot deal with cleanliness
      till he has been some months used to the darkness. If he demand attendance
      and grow angry at the want of it, he must assert himself and stand
      upright. Then the meanest menial can see that he is blind and, therefore,
      of no consequence. A wise man will keep his eyes on the floor and sit
      still. For amusement he may pick coal lump by lump out of the scuttle with
      the tongs and pile it in a little heap in the fender, keeping count of the
      lumps, which must all be put back again, one by one and very carefully. He
      may set himself sums if he cares to work them out; he may talk to himself
      or to the cat if she chooses to visit him; and if his trade has been that
      of an artist, he may sketch in the air with his forefinger; but that is
      too much like drawing a pig with the eyes shut. He may go to his
      bookshelves and count his books, ranging them in order of their size; or
      to his wardrobe and count his shirts, laying them in piles of two or three
      on the bed, as they suffer from frayed cuffs or lost buttons.
    

      Even this entertainment wearies after a time; and all the times are very,
      very long.
    

      Dick was allowed to sort a tool-chest where Mr. Beeton kept hammers, taps
      and nuts, lengths of gas-pipes, oil-bottles, and string.
    

      “If I don't have everything just where I know where to look for it, why,
      then, I can't find anything when I do want it. You've no idea, sir, the
      amount of little things that these chambers uses up,” said Mr. Beeton.
    

      Fumbling at the handle of the door as he went out: “It's hard on you, sir,
      I do think it's hard on you. Ain't you going to do anything, sir?”
     

      “I'll pay my rent and messing. Isn't that enough?”
     

      “I wasn't doubting for a moment that you couldn't pay your way, sir; but I
      'ave often said to my wife, 'It's 'ard on 'im because it isn't as if he
      was an old man, nor yet a middle-aged one, but quite a young gentleman.
      That's where it comes so 'ard.'”
     

      “I suppose so,” said Dick, absently. This particular nerve through long
      battering had ceased to feel—much.
    

      “I was thinking,” continued Mr. Beeton, still making as if to go, “that
      you might like to hear my boy Alf read you the papers sometimes of an
      evening. He do read beautiful, seeing he's only nine.”
     

      “I should be very grateful,” said Dick. “Only let me make it worth his
      while.”
     

      “We wasn't thinking of that, sir, but of course it's in your own 'ands;
      but only to 'ear Alf sing 'A Boy's best Friend is 'is Mother!' Ah!”
     

      “I'll hear him sing that too. Let him come this evening with the
      newspapers.”
     

      Alf was not a nice child, being puffed up with many school-board
      certificates for good conduct, and inordinately proud of his singing. Mr.
      Beeton remained, beaming, while the child wailed his way through a song of
      some eight eight-line verses in the usual whine of a young Cockney, and,
      after compliments, left him to read Dick the foreign telegrams. Ten
      minutes later Alf returned to his parents rather pale and scared.
    

      “'E said 'e couldn't stand it no more,” he explained.
    

      “He never said you read badly, Alf?” Mrs. Beeton spoke.
    

      “No. 'E said I read beautiful. Said 'e never 'eard any one read like that,
      but 'e said 'e couldn't abide the stuff in the papers.”
     

      “P'raps he's lost some money in the Stocks. Were you readin' him about
      Stocks, Alf?”
     

      “No; it was all about fightin' out there where the soldiers is gone—a
      great long piece with all the lines close together and very hard words in
      it. 'E give me 'arf a crown because I read so well. And 'e says the next
      time there's anything 'e wants read 'e'll send for me.”
     

      “That's good hearing, but I do think for all the half-crown—put it
      into the kicking-donkey money-box, Alf, and let me see you do it—he
      might have kept you longer. Why, he couldn't have begun to understand how
      beautiful you read.”
     

      “He's best left to hisself—gentlemen always are when they're
      downhearted,” said Mr. Beeton.
    

      Alf's rigorously limited powers of comprehending Torpenhow's special
      correspondence had waked the devil of unrest in Dick. He could hear,
      through the boy's nasal chant, the camels grunting in the squares behind
      the soldiers outside Suakin; could hear the men swearing and chaffing
      across the cooking pots, and could smell the acrid wood-smoke as it
      drifted over camp before the wind of the desert.
    

      That night he prayed to God that his mind might be taken from him,
      offering for proof that he was worthy of this favour the fact that he had
      not shot himself long ago. That prayer was not answered, and indeed Dick
      knew in his heart of hearts that only a lingering sense of humour and no
      special virtue had kept him alive. Suicide, he had persuaded himself,
      would be a ludicrous insult to the gravity of the situation as well as a
      weak-kneed confession of fear.
    

      “Just for the fun of the thing,” he said to the cat, who had taken
      Binkie's place in his establishment, “I should like to know how long this
      is going to last. I can live for a year on the hundred pounds Torp cashed
      for me. I must have two or three thousand at least in the Bank—twenty
      or thirty years more provided for, that is to say. Then I fall back on my
      hundred and twenty a year, which will be more by that time. Let's
      consider.
    

      “Twenty-five—thirty-five—a man's in his prime then, they say—forty-five—a
      middle-aged man just entering politics—fifty-five 'died at the
      comparatively early age of fifty-five,' according to the newspapers. Bah!
      How these Christians funk death! Sixty-five—we're only getting on in
      years. Seventy-five is just possible, though. Great hell, cat O! fifty
      years more of solitary confinement in the dark! You'll die, and Beeton
      will die, and Torp will die, and Mai—everybody else will die, but I
      shall be alive and kicking with nothing to do. I'm very sorry for myself.
      I should like some one else to be sorry for me. Evidently I'm not going
      mad before I die, but the pain's just as bad as ever. Some day when you're
      vivisected, cat O! they'll tie you down on a little table and cut you open—but
      don't be afraid; they'll take precious good care that you don't die.
      You'll live, and you'll be very sorry then that you weren't sorry for me.
      Perhaps Torp will come back or... I wish I could go to Torp and the
      Nilghai, even though I were in their way.”
     

      Pussy left the room before the speech was ended, and Alf, as he entered,
      found Dick addressing the empty hearth-rug.
    

      “There's a letter for you, sir,” he said. “Perhaps you'd like me to read
      it.”
     

      “Lend it to me for a minute and I'll tell you.”
     

      The outstretched hand shook just a little and the voice was not
      over-steady. It was within the limits of human possibility that—that
      was no letter from Maisie. He knew the heft of three closed envelopes only
      too well. It was a foolish hope that the girl should write to him, for he
      did not realise that there is a wrong which admits of no reparation though
      the evildoer may with tears and the heart's best love strive to mend all.
      It is best to forget that wrong whether it be caused or endured, since it
      is as remediless as bad work once put forward.
    

      “Read it, then,” said Dick, and Alf began intoning according to the rules
      of the Board School—“'I could have given you love, I could have
      given you loyalty, such as you never dreamed of. Do you suppose I cared
      what you were? But you chose to whistle everything down the wind for
      nothing. My only excuse for you is that you are so young.' That's all,” he
      said, returning the paper to be dropped into the fire.
    

      “What was in the letter?” asked Mrs. Beeton, when Alf returned.
    

      “I don't know. I think it was a circular or a tract about not whistlin' at
      everything when you're young.”
     

      “I must have stepped on something when I was alive and walking about and
      it has bounced up and hit me. God help it, whatever it is—unless it
      was all a joke. But I don't know any one who'd take the trouble to play a
      joke on me—Love and loyalty for nothing. It sounds tempting enough.
      I wonder whether I have lost anything really?”
     

      Dick considered for a long time but could not remember when or how he had
      put himself in the way of winning these trifles at a woman's hands.
    

      Still, the letter as touching on matters that he preferred not to think
      about stung him into a fit of frenzy that lasted for a day and night. When
      his heart was so full of despair that it would hold no more, body and soul
      together seemed to be dropping without check through the darkness.
    

      Then came fear of darkness and desperate attempts to reach the light
      again. But there was no light to be reached. When that agony had left him
      sweating and breathless, the downward flight would recommence till the
      gathering torture of it spurred him into another fight as hopeless as the
      first. Followed some few minutes of sleep in which he dreamed that he saw.
      Then the procession of events would repeat itself till he was utterly worn
      out and the brain took up its everlasting consideration of Maisie and
      might-have-beens.
    

      At the end of everything Mr. Beeton came to his room and volunteered to
      take him out. “Not marketing this time, but we'll go into the Parks if you
      like.”
     

      “Be damned if I do,” quoth Dick. “Keep to the streets and walk up and
      down. I like to hear the people round me.”
     

      This was not altogether true. The blind in the first stages of their
      infirmity dislike those who can move with a free stride and unlifted arms—but
      Dick had no earthly desire to go to the Parks. Once and only once since
      Maisie had shut her door he had gone there under Alf's charge. Alf forgot
      him and fished for minnows in the Serpentine with some companions. After
      half an hour's waiting Dick, almost weeping with rage and wrath, caught a
      passer-by, who introduced him to a friendly policeman, who led him to a
      four-wheeler opposite the Albert Hall. He never told Mr. Beeton of Alf's
      forgetfulness, but... this was not the manner in which he was used to walk
      the Parks aforetime.
    

      “What streets would you like to walk down, then?” said Mr. Beeton,
      sympathetically. His own ideas of a riotous holiday meant picnicking on
      the grass of Green Park with his family, and half a dozen paper bags full
      of food.
    

      “Keep to the river,” said Dick, and they kept to the river, and the rush
      of it was in his ears till they came to Blackfriars Bridge and struck
      thence on to the Waterloo Road, Mr. Beeton explaining the beauties of the
      scenery as he went on.
    

      “And walking on the other side of the pavement,” said he, “unless I'm much
      mistaken, is the young woman that used to come to your rooms to be drawed.
      I never forgets a face and I never remembers a name, except paying
      tenants, 'o course!”
     

      “Stop her,” said Dick. “It's Bessie Broke. Tell her I'd like to speak to
      her again. Quick, man!”
     

      Mr. Beeton crossed the road under the noses of the omnibuses and arrested
      Bessie then on her way northward. She recognised him as the man in
      authority who used to glare at her when she passed up Dick's staircase,
      and her first impulse was to run.
    

      “Wasn't you Mr. Heldar's model?” said Mr. Beeton, planting himself in
      front of her. “You was. He's on the other side of the road and he'd like
      to see you.”
     

      “Why?” said Bessie, faintly. She remembered—indeed had never for
      long forgotten—an affair connected with a newly finished picture.
    

      “Because he has asked me to do so, and because he's most particular
      blind.”
     

      “Drunk?”
     

      “No. 'Orspital blind. He can't see. That's him over there.”
     

      Dick was leaning against the parapet of the bridge as Mr. Beeton pointed
      him out—a stub-bearded, bowed creature wearing a dirty
      magenta-coloured neckcloth outside an unbrushed coat. There was nothing to
      fear from such an one. Even if he chased her, Bessie thought, he could not
      follow far. She crossed over, and Dick's face lighted up. It was long
      since a woman of any kind had taken the trouble to speak to him.
    

      “I hope you're well, Mr. Heldar?” said Bessie, a little puzzled. Mr.
      Beeton stood by with the air of an ambassador and breathed responsibly.
    

      “I'm very well indeed, and, by Jove! I'm glad to see—hear you, I
      mean, Bess. You never thought it worth while to turn up and see us again
      after you got your money. I don't know why you should. Are you going
      anywhere in particular just now?”
     

      “I was going for a walk,” said Bessie.
    

      “Not the old business?” Dick spoke under his breath.
    

      “Lor, no! I paid my premium”—Bessie was very proud of that word—“for
      a barmaid, sleeping in, and I'm at the bar now quite respectable. Indeed I
      am.”
     

      Mr. Beeton had no special reason to believe in the loftiness of human
      nature. Therefore he dissolved himself like a mist and returned to his
      gas-plugs without a word of apology. Bessie watched the flight with a
      certain uneasiness; but so long as Dick appeared to be ignorant of the
      harm that had been done to him...
    

      “It's hard work pulling the beer-handles,” she went on, “and they've got
      one of them penny-in-the-slot cash-machines, so if you get wrong by a
      penny at the end of the day—but then I don't believe the machinery
      is right. Do you?”
     

      “I've only seen it work. Mr. Beeton.”
     

      “He's gone.
    

      “I'm afraid I must ask you to help me home, then. I'll make it worth your
      while. You see.” The sightless eyes turned towards her and Bessie saw.
    

      “It isn't taking you out of your way?” he said hesitatingly. “I can ask a
      policeman if it is.”
     

      “Not at all. I come on at seven and I'm off at four. That's easy hours.”
     

      “Good God!—but I'm on all the time. I wish I had some work to do
      too. Let's go home, Bess.”
     

      He turned and cannoned into a man on the sidewalk, recoiling with an oath.
      Bessie took his arm and said nothing—as she had said nothing when he
      had ordered her to turn her face a little more to the light. They walked
      for some time in silence, the girl steering him deftly through the crowd.
    

      “And where's—where's Mr. Torpenhow?” she inquired at last.
    

      “He has gone away to the desert.”
     

      “Where's that?”
     

      Dick pointed to the right. “East—out of the mouth of the river,”
       said he.
    

      “Then west, then south, and then east again, all along the under-side of
      Europe. Then south again, God knows how far.” The explanation did not
      enlighten Bessie in the least, but she held her tongue and looked to
      Dick's patch till they came to the chambers.
    

      “We'll have tea and muffins,” he said joyously. “I can't tell you, Bessie,
      how glad I am to find you again. What made you go away so suddenly?”
     

      “I didn't think you'd want me any more,” she said, emboldened by his
      ignorance.
    

      “I didn't, as a matter of fact—but afterwards—At any rate I'm
      glad you've come. You know the stairs.”
     

      So Bessie led him home to his own place—there was no one to hinder—and
      shut the door of the studio.
    

      “What a mess!” was her first word. “All these things haven't been looked
      after for months and months.”
     

      “No, only weeks, Bess. You can't expect them to care.”
     

      “I don't know what you expect them to do. They ought to know what you've
      paid them for. The dust's just awful. It's all over the easel.”
     

      “I don't use it much now.”
     

      “All over the pictures and the floor, and all over your coat. I'd like to
      speak to them housemaids.”
     

      “Ring for tea, then.” Dick felt his way to the one chair he used by
      custom.
    

      Bessie saw the action and, as far as in her lay, was touched. But there
      remained always a keen sense of new-found superiority, and it was in her
      voice when she spoke.
    

      “How long have you been like this?” she said wrathfully, as though the
      blindness were some fault of the housemaids.
    

      “How?”
     

      “As you are.”
     

      “The day after you went away with the check, almost as soon as my picture
      was finished; I hardly saw her alive.”
     

      “Then they've been cheating you ever since, that's all. I know their nice
      little ways.”
     

      A woman may love one man and despise another, but on general feminine
      principles she will do her best to save the man she despises from being
      defrauded. Her loved one can look to himself, but the other man, being
      obviously an idiot, needs protection.
    

      “I don't think Mr. Beeton cheats much,” said Dick. Bessie was flouncing up
      and down the room, and he was conscious of a keen sense of enjoyment as he
      heard the swish of her skirts and the light step between.
    

      “Tea and muffins,” she said shortly, when the ring at the bell was
      answered; “two teaspoonfuls and one over for the pot. I don't want the old
      teapot that was here when I used to come. It don't draw. Get another.”
     

      The housemaid went away scandalised, and Dick chuckled. Then he began to
      cough as Bessie banged up and down the studio disturbing the dust.
    

      “What are you trying to do?”
     

      “Put things straight. This is like unfurnished lodgings. How could you let
      it go so?”
     

      “How could I help it? Dust away.”
     

      She dusted furiously, and in the midst of all the pother entered Mrs.
      Beeton. Her husband on his return had explained the situation, winding up
      with the peculiarly felicitous proverb, “Do unto others as you would be
      done by.” She had descended to put into her place the person who demanded
      muffins and an uncracked teapot as though she had a right to both.
    

      “Muffins ready yet?” said Bess, still dusting. She was no longer a drab of
      the streets but a young lady who, thanks to Dick's check, had paid her
      premium and was entitled to pull beer-handles with the best. Being neatly
      dressed in black she did not hesitate to face Mrs. Beeton, and there
      passed between the two women certain regards that Dick would have
      appreciated. The situation adjusted itself by eye. Bessie had won, and
      Mrs. Beeton returned to cook muffins and make scathing remarks about
      models, hussies, trollops, and the like, to her husband.
    

      “There's nothing to be got of interfering with him, Liza,” he said. “Alf,
      you go along into the street to play. When he isn't crossed he's as kindly
      as kind, but when he's crossed he's the devil and all. We took too many
      little things out of his rooms since he was blind to be that particular
      about what he does. They ain't no objects to a blind man, of course, but
      if it was to come into court we'd get the sack. Yes, I did introduce him
      to that girl because I'm a feelin' man myself.”
     

      “Much too feelin'!” Mrs. Beeton slapped the muffins into the dish, and
      thought of comely housemaids long since dismissed on suspicion.
    

      “I ain't ashamed of it, and it isn't for us to judge him hard so long as
      he pays quiet and regular as he do. I know how to manage young gentlemen,
      you know how to cook for them, and what I says is, let each stick to his
      own business and then there won't be any trouble. Take them muffins down,
      Liza, and be sure you have no words with that young woman. His lot is
      cruel hard, and if he's crossed he do swear worse than any one I've ever
      served.”
     

      “That's a little better,” said Bessie, sitting down to the tea. “You
      needn't wait, thank you, Mrs. Beeton.”
     

      “I had no intention of doing such, I do assure you.”
     

      Bessie made no answer whatever. This, she knew, was the way in which real
      ladies routed their foes, and when one is a barmaid at a first-class
      public-house one may become a real lady at ten minutes' notice.
    

      Her eyes fell on Dick opposite her and she was both shocked and
      displeased. There were droppings of food all down the front of his coat;
      the mouth under the ragged ill-grown beard drooped sullenly; the forehead
      was lined and contracted; and on the lean temples the hair was a dusty
      indeterminate colour that might or might not have been called gray. The
      utter misery and self-abandonment of the man appealed to her, and at the
      bottom of her heart lay the wicked feeling that he was humbled and brought
      low who had once humbled her.
    

      “Oh! it is good to hear you moving about,” said Dick, rubbing his hands.
      “Tell us all about your bar successes, Bessie, and the way you live now.”
     

      “Never mind that. I'm quite respectable, as you'd see by looking at me.
      You don't seem to live too well. What made you go blind that sudden? Why
      isn't there any one to look after you?”
     

      Dick was too thankful for the sound of her voice to resent the tone of it.
    

      “I was cut across the head a long time ago, and that ruined my eyes. I
      don't suppose anybody thinks it worth while to look after me any more. Why
      should they?—and Mr. Beeton really does everything I want.”
     

      “Don't you know any gentlemen and ladies, then, while you was—well?”
     

      “A few, but I don't care to have them looking at me.”
     

      “I suppose that's why you've growed a beard. Take it off, it don't become
      you.”
     

      “Good gracious, child, do you imagine that I think of what becomes of me
      these days?”
     

      “You ought. Get that taken off before I come here again. I suppose I can
      come, can't I?”
     

      “I'd be only too grateful if you did. I don't think I treated you very
      well in the old days. I used to make you angry.”
     

      “Very angry, you did.”
     

      “I'm sorry for it, then. Come and see me when you can and as often as you
      can. God knows, there isn't a soul in the world to take that trouble
      except you and Mr. Beeton.”
     

      “A lot of trouble he's taking and she too.” This with a toss of the head.
    

      “They've let you do anyhow and they haven't done anything for you. I've
      only to look and see that much. I'll come, and I'll be glad to come, but
      you must go and be shaved, and you must get some other clothes—those
      ones aren't fit to be seen.”
     

      “I have heaps somewhere,” he said helplessly.
    

      “I know you have. Tell Mr. Beeton to give you a new suit and I'll brush it
      and keep it clean. You may be as blind as a barn-door, Mr. Heldar, but it
      doesn't excuse you looking like a sweep.”
     

      “Do I look like a sweep, then?”
     

      “Oh, I'm sorry for you. I'm that sorry for you!” she cried impulsively,
      and took Dick's hands. Mechanically, he lowered his head as if to kiss—she
      was the only woman who had taken pity on him, and he was not too proud for
      a little pity now. She stood up to go.
    

      “Nothing 'o that kind till you look more like a gentleman. It's quite easy
      when you get shaved, and some clothes.”
     

      He could hear her drawing on her gloves and rose to say good-bye. She
      passed behind him, kissed him audaciously on the back of the neck, and ran
      away as swiftly as on the day when she had destroyed the Melancolia.
    

      “To think of me kissing Mr. Heldar,” she said to herself, “after all he's
      done to me and all! Well, I'm sorry for him, and if he was shaved he
      wouldn't be so bad to look at, but... Oh them Beetons, how shameful
      they've treated him! I know Beeton's wearing his shirt on his back today
      just as well as if I'd aired it. Tomorrow, I'll see... I wonder if he has
      much of his own. It might be worth more than the bar—I wouldn't have
      to do any work—and just as respectable as if no one knew.”
     

      Dick was not grateful to Bessie for her parting gift. He was acutely
      conscious of it in the nape of his neck throughout the night, but it
      seemed, among very many other things, to enforce the wisdom of getting
      shaved.
    

      He was shaved accordingly in the morning, and felt the better for it. A
      fresh suit of clothes, white linen, and the knowledge that some one in the
      world said that she took an interest in his personal appearance made him
      carry himself almost upright; for the brain was relieved for a while from
      thinking of Maisie, who, under other circumstances, might have given that
      kiss and a million others.
    

      “Let us consider,” said he, after lunch. “The girl can't care, and it's a
      toss-up whether she comes again or not, but if money can buy her to look
      after me she shall be bought. Nobody else in the world would take the
      trouble, and I can make it worth her while. She's a child of the gutter
      holding brevet rank as a barmaid; so she shall have everything she wants
      if she'll only come and talk and look after me.” He rubbed his newly shorn
      chin and began to perplex himself with the thought of her not coming. “I
      suppose I did look rather a sweep,” he went on. “I had no reason to look
      otherwise. I knew things dropped on my clothes, but it didn't matter. It
      would be cruel if she didn't come. She must. Maisie came once, and that
      was enough for her. She was quite right. She had something to work for.
      This creature has only beer-handles to pull, unless she has deluded some
      young man into keeping company with her. Fancy being cheated for the sake
      of a counter-jumper! We're falling pretty low.”
     

      Something cried aloud within him:—This will hurt more than anything
      that has gone before. It will recall and remind and suggest and tantalise,
      and in the end drive you mad.
    

      “I know it, I know it!” Dick cried, clenching his hands despairingly;
      “but, good heavens! is a poor blind beggar never to get anything out of
      his life except three meals a day and a greasy waistcoat? I wish she'd
      come.”
     

      Early in the afternoon time she came, because there was no young man in
      her life just then, and she thought of material advantages which would
      allow her to be idle for the rest of her days.
    

      “I shouldn't have known you,” she said approvingly. “You look as you used
      to look—a gentleman that was proud of himself.”
     

      “Don't you think I deserve another kiss, then?” said Dick, flushing a
      little.
    

      “Maybe—but you won't get it yet. Sit down and let's see what I can
      do for you. I'm certain sure Mr. Beeton cheats you, now that you can't go
      through the housekeeping books every month. Isn't that true?”
     

      “You'd better come and housekeep for me then, Bessie.”
     

      “Couldn't do it in these chambers—you know that as well as I do.”
     

      “I know, but we might go somewhere else, if you thought it worth your
      while.”
     

      “I'd try to look after you, anyhow; but I shouldn't care to have to work
      for both of us.” This was tentative.
    

      Dick laughed.
    

      “Do you remember where I used to keep my bank-book?” said he. “Torp took
      it to be balanced just before he went away. Look and see.”
     

      “It was generally under the tobacco-jar. Ah!”
     

      “Well?”
     

      “Oh! Four thousand two hundred and ten pounds nine shillings and a penny!
      Oh my!”
     

      “You can have the penny. That's not bad for one year's work. Is that and a
      hundred and twenty pounds a year good enough?”
     

      The idleness and the pretty clothes were almost within her reach now, but
      she must, by being housewifely, show that she deserved them.
    

      “Yes; but you'd have to move, and if we took an inventory, I think we'd
      find that Mr. Beeton has been prigging little things out of the rooms here
      and there. They don't look as full as they used.”
     

      “Never mind, we'll let him have them. The only thing I'm particularly
      anxious to take away is that picture I used you for—when you used to
      swear at me. We'll pull out of this place, Bess, and get away as far as
      ever we can.”
     

      “Oh yes,” she said uneasily.
    

      “I don't know where I can go to get away from myself, but I'll try, and
      you shall have all the pretty frocks that you care for. You'll like that.
      Give me that kiss now, Bess. Ye gods! it's good to put one's arm round a
      woman's waist again.”
     

      Then came the fulfilment of the prophecy within the brain. If his arm were
      thus round Maisie's waist and a kiss had just been given and taken between
      them,—why then... He pressed the girl more closely to himself
      because the pain whipped him. She was wondering how to explain a little
      accident to the Melancolia. At any rate, if this man really desired the
      solace of her company—and certainly he would relapse into his
      original slough if she withdrew it—he would not be more than just a
      little vexed.
    

      It would be delightful at least to see what would happen, and by her
      teachings it was good for a man to stand in certain awe of his companion.
    

      She laughed nervously, and slipped out of his reach.
    

      “I shouldn't worrit about that picture if I was you,” she began, in the
      hope of turning his attention.
    

      “It's at the back of all my canvases somewhere. Find it, Bess; you know it
      as well as I do.”
     

      “I know—but—”
     

      “But what? You've wit enough to manage the sale of it to a dealer. Women
      haggle much better than men. It might be a matter of eight or nine hundred
      pounds to—to us. I simply didn't like to think about it for a long
      time. It was mixed up with my life so.—But we'll cover up our tracks
      and get rid of everything, eh? Make a fresh start from the beginning,
      Bess.”
     

      Then she began to repent very much indeed, because she knew the value of
      money. Still, it was probable that the blind man was overestimating the
      value of his work. Gentlemen, she knew, were absurdly particular about
      their things. She giggled as a nervous housemaid giggles when she tries to
      explain the breakage of a pipe.
    

      “I'm very sorry, but you remember I was—I was angry with you before
      Mr. Torpenhow went away?”
     

      “You were very angry, child; and on my word I think you had some right to
      be.”
     

      “Then I—but aren't you sure Mr. Torpenhow didn't tell you?”
     

      “Tell me what? Good gracious, what are you making such a fuss about when
      you might just as well be giving me another kiss?”
     

      He was beginning to learn, not for the first time in his experience, that
      kissing is a cumulative poison. The more you get of it, the more you want.
    

      Bessie gave the kiss promptly, whispering, as she did so, “I was so angry
      I rubbed out that picture with the turpentine. You aren't angry, are you?”
     

      “What? Say that again.” The man's hand had closed on her wrist.
    

      “I rubbed it out with turps and the knife,” faltered Bessie. “I thought
      you'd only have to do it over again. You did do it over again, didn't you?
      Oh, let go of my wrist; you're hurting me.”
     

      “Isn't there anything left of the thing?”
     

      “N'nothing that looks like anything. I'm sorry—I didn't know you'd
      take on about it; I only meant to do it in fun. You aren't going to hit
      me?”
     

      “Hit you! No! Let's think.”
     

      He did not relax his hold upon her wrist but stood staring at the carpet.
    

      Then he shook his head as a young steer shakes it when the lash of the
      stock-whip cross his nose warns him back to the path on to the shambles
      that he would escape. For weeks he had forced himself not to think of the
      Melancolia, because she was a part of his dead life. With Bessie's return
      and certain new prospects that had developed themselves, the Melancolia—lovelier
      in his imagination than she had ever been on canvas—reappeared. By
      her aid he might have procured more money wherewith to amuse Bess and to
      forget Maisie, as well as another taste of an almost forgotten success.
      Now, thanks to a vicious little housemaid's folly, there was nothing to
      look for—not even the hope that he might some day take an abiding
      interest in the housemaid. Worst of all, he had been made to appear
      ridiculous in Maisie's eyes. A woman will forgive the man who has ruined
      her life's work so long as he gives her love; a man may forgive those who
      ruin the love of his life, but he will never forgive the destruction of
      his work.
    

      “Tck—tck—tck,” said Dick between his teeth, and then laughed
      softly. “It's an omen, Bessie, and—a good many things considered, it
      serves me right for doing what I have done. By Jove! that accounts for
      Maisie's running away. She must have thought me perfectly mad—small
      blame to her! The whole picture ruined, isn't it so? What made you do it?”
     

      “Because I was that angry. I'm not angry now—I'm awful sorry.”
     

      “I wonder.—It doesn't matter, anyhow. I'm to blame for making the
      mistake.”
     

      “What mistake?”
     

      “Something you wouldn't understand, dear. Great heavens! to think that a
      little piece of dirt like you could throw me out of stride!” Dick was
      talking to himself as Bessie tried to shake off his grip on her wrist.
    

      “I ain't a piece of dirt, and you shouldn't call me so! I did it 'cause I
      hated you, and I'm only sorry now 'cause you're 'cause you're——”
     

      “Exactly—because I'm blind. There's noting like tact in little
      things.”
     

      Bessie began to sob. She did not like being shackled against her will; she
      was afraid of the blind face and the look upon it, and was sorry too that
      her great revenge had only made Dick laugh.
    

      “Don't cry,” he said, and took her into his arms. “You only did what you
      thought right.”
     

      “I—I ain't a little piece of dirt, and if you say that I'll never
      come to you again.”
     

      “You don't know what you've done to me. I'm not angry—indeed, I'm
      not. Be quiet for a minute.”
     

      Bessie remained in his arms shrinking. Dick's first thought was connected
      with Maisie, and it hurt him as white-hot iron hurts an open sore.
    

      Not for nothing is a man permitted to ally himself to the wrong woman.
    

      The first pang—the first sense of things lost is but the prelude to
      the play, for the very just Providence who delights in causing pain has
      decreed that the agony shall return, and that in the midst of keenest
      pleasure.
    

      They know this pain equally who have forsaken or been forsaken by the love
      of their life, and in their new wives' arms are compelled to realise it.
    

      It is better to remain alone and suffer only the misery of being alone, so
      long as it is possible to find distraction in daily work. When that
      resource goes the man is to be pitied and left alone.
    

      These things and some others Dick considered while he was holding Bessie
      to his heart.
    

      “Though you mayn't know it,” he said, raising his head, “the Lord is a
      just and a terrible God, Bess; with a very strong sense of humour. It
      serves me right—how it serves me right! Torp could understand it if
      he were here; he must have suffered something at your hands, child, but
      only for a minute or so. I saved him. Set that to my credit, some one.”
     

      “Let me go,” said Bess, her face darkening. “Let me go.”
     

      “All in good time. Did you ever attend Sunday school?”
     

      “Never. Let me go, I tell you; you're making fun of me.”
     

      “Indeed, I'm not. I'm making fun of myself.... Thus. 'He saved others,
      himself he cannot save.' It isn't exactly a school-board text.” He
      released her wrist, but since he was between her and the door, she could
      not escape. “What an enormous amount of mischief one little woman can do!”
     

      “I'm sorry; I'm awful sorry about the picture.”
     

      “I'm not. I'm grateful to you for spoiling it.... What were we talking
      about before you mentioned the thing?”
     

      “About getting away—and money. Me and you going away.”
     

      “Of course. We will get away—that is to say, I will.”
     

      “And me?”
     

      “You shall have fifty whole pounds for spoiling a picture.”
     

      “Then you won't——?”
     

      “I'm afraid not, dear. Think of fifty pounds for pretty things all to
      yourself.”
     

      “You said you couldn't do anything without me.”
     

      “That was true a little while ago. I'm better now, thank you. Get me my
      hat.”
     

      “S'pose I don't?”
     

      “Beeton will, and you'll lose fifty pounds. That's all. Get it.”
     

      Bessie cursed under her breath. She had pitied the man sincerely, had
      kissed him with almost equal sincerity, for he was not unhandsome; it
      pleased her to be in a way and for a time his protector, and above all
      there were four thousand pounds to be handled by some one. Now through a
      slip of the tongue and a little feminine desire to give a little, not too
      much, pain she had lost the money, the blessed idleness and the pretty
      things, the companionship, and the chance of looking outwardly as
      respectable as a real lady.
    

      “Now fill me a pipe. Tobacco doesn't taste, but it doesn't matter, and
      I'll think things out. What's the day of the week, Bess?”
     

      “Tuesday.”
     

      “Then Thursday's mail-day. What a fool—what a blind fool I have
      been! Twenty-two pounds covers my passage home again. Allow ten for
      additional expenses. We must put up at Madam Binat's for old time's sake.
      Thirty-two pounds altogether. Add a hundred for the cost of the last trip—Gad,
      won't Torp stare to see me!—a hundred and thirty-two leaves
      seventy-eight for baksheesh—I shall need it—and to play with.
      What are you crying for, Bess? It wasn't your fault, child; it was mine
      altogether. Oh, you funny little opossum, mop your eyes and take me out! I
      want the pass-book and the check-book. Stop a minute. Four thousand pounds
      at four per cent—that's safe interest—means a hundred and
      sixty pounds a year; one hundred and twenty pounds a year—also safe—is
      two eighty, and two hundred and eighty pounds added to three hundred a
      year means gilded luxury for a single woman. Bess, we'll go to the bank.”
     

      Richer by two hundred and ten pounds stored in his money-belt, Dick caused
      Bessie, now thoroughly bewildered, to hurry from the bank to the P. and O.
      offices, where he explained things tersely.
    

      “Port Said, single first; cabin as close to the baggage-hatch as possible.
      What ship's going?”
     

      “The Colgong,” said the clerk.
    

      “She's a wet little hooker. Is it Tilbury and a tender, or Galleons and
      the docks?”
     

      “Galleons. Twelve-forty, Thursday.”
     

      “Thanks. Change, please. I can't see very well—will you count it
      into my hand?”
     

      “If they all took their passages like that instead of talking about their
      trunks, life would be worth something,” said the clerk to his neighbour,
      who was trying to explain to a harassed mother of many that condensed milk
      is just as good for babes at sea as daily dairy. Being nineteen and
      unmarried, he spoke with conviction.
    

      “We are now,” quoth Dick, as they returned to the studio, patting the
      place where his money-belt covered ticket and money, “beyond the reach of
      man, or devil, or woman—which is much more important. I've had three
      little affairs to carry through before Thursday, but I needn't ask you to
      help, Bess. Come here on Thursday morning at nine. We'll breakfast, and
      you shall take me down to Galleons Station.”
     

      “What are you going to do?”
     

      “Going away, of course. What should I stay for?”
     

      “But you can't look after yourself?”
     

      “I can do anything. I didn't realise it before, but I can. I've done a
      great deal already. Resolution shall be treated to one kiss if Bessie
      doesn't object.” Strangely enough, Bessie objected and Dick laughed. “I
      suppose you're right. Well, come at nine the day after tomorrow and you'll
      get your money.”
     

      “Shall I sure?”
     

      “I don't bilk, and you won't know whether I do or not unless you come. Oh,
      but it's long and long to wait! Good-bye, Bessie,—send Beeton here
      as you go out.”
     

      The housekeeper came.
    

      “What are all the fittings of my rooms worth?” said Dick, imperiously.
    

      “'Tisn't for me to say, sir. Some things is very pretty and some is wore
      out dreadful.”
     

      “I'm insured for two hundred and seventy.”
     

      “Insurance policies is no criterion, though I don't say——”
     

      “Oh, damn your longwindedness! You've made your pickings out of me and the
      other tenants. Why, you talked of retiring and buying a public-house the
      other day. Give a straight answer to a straight question.”
     

      “Fifty,” said Mr. Beeton, without a moment's hesitation.
    

      “Double it; or I'll break up half my sticks and burn the rest.”
     

      He felt his way to a bookstand that supported a pile of sketch-books, and
      wrenched out one of the mahogany pillars.
    

      “That's sinful, sir,” said the housekeeper, alarmed.
    

      “It's my own. One hundred or——”
     

      “One hundred it is. It'll cost me three and six to get that there pilaster
      mended.”
     

      “I thought so. What an out and out swindler you must have been to spring
      that price at once!”
     

      “I hope I've done nothing to dissatisfy any of the tenants, least of all
      you, sir.”
     

      “Never mind that. Get me the money tomorrow, and see that all my clothes
      are packed in the little brown bullock-trunk. I'm going.”
     

      “But the quarter's notice?”
     

      “I'll pay forfeit. Look after the packing and leave me alone.”
     

      Mr. Beeton discussed this new departure with his wife, who decided that
      Bessie was at the bottom of it all. Her husband took a more charitable
      view.
    

      “It's very sudden—but then he was always sudden in his ways. Listen
      to him now!”
     

      There was a sound of chanting from Dick's room.
    

      “We'll never come back any more, boys, We'll never come back no more;
      We'll go to the deuce on any excuse, And never come back no more! Oh say
      we're afloat or ashore, boys, Oh say we're afloat or ashore; But we'll
      never come back any more, boys, We'll never come back no more!”
     

      “Mr. Beeton! Mr. Beeton! Where the deuce is my pistol?”
     

      “Quick, he's going to shoot himself 'avin' gone mad!” said Mrs. Beeton.
    

      Mr. Beeton addressed Dick soothingly, but it was some time before the
      latter, threshing up and down his bedroom, could realise the intention of
      the promises to 'find everything tomorrow, sir.'
    

      “Oh, you copper-nosed old fool—you impotent Academician!” he shouted
      at last. “Do you suppose I want to shoot myself? Take the pistol in your
      silly shaking hand then. If you touch it, it will go off, because it's
      loaded. It's among my campaign-kit somewhere—in the parcel at the
      bottom of the trunk.”
     

      Long ago Dick had carefully possessed himself of a forty-pound weight
      field-equipment constructed by the knowledge of his own experience. It was
      this put-away treasure that he was trying to find and rehandle. Mr. Beeton
      whipped the revolver out of its place on the top of the package, and Dick
      drove his hand among the khaki coat and breeches, the blue cloth
      leg-bands, and the heavy flannel shirts doubled over a pair of swan-neck
      spurs. Under these and the water-bottle lay a sketch-book and a pigskin
      case of stationery.
    

      “These we don't want; you can have them, Mr. Beeton. Everything else I'll
      keep. Pack 'em on the top right-hand side of my trunk. When you've done
      that come into the studio with your wife. I want you both. Wait a minute;
      get me a pen and a sheet of notepaper.”
     

      It is not an easy thing to write when you cannot see, and Dick had
      particular reasons for wishing that his work should be clear. So he began,
      following his right hand with his left: “The badness of this writing is
      because I am blind and cannot see my pen.” H'mph!—even a lawyer
      can't mistake that. It must be signed, I suppose, but it needn't be
      witnessed. Now an inch lower—why did I never learn to use a
      type-writer?—“This is the last will and testament of me, Richard
      Heldar. I am in sound bodily and mental health, and there is no previous
      will to revoke.”—That's all right. Damn the pen! Whereabouts on the
      paper was I?—” “I leave everything that I possess in the world,
      including four thousand pounds, and two thousand seven hundred and twenty
      eight pounds held for me—oh, I can't get this straight.” He tore off
      half the sheet and began again with the caution about the handwriting.
      Then: “I leave all the money I possess in the world to”—here
      followed Maisie's name, and the names of the two banks that held the
      money.
    

      “It mayn't be quite regular, but no one has a shadow of a right to dispute
      it, and I've given Maisie's address. Come in, Mr. Beeton. This is my
      signature; I want you and your wife to witness it. Thanks. Tomorrow you
      must take me to the landlord and I'll pay forfeit for leaving without
      notice, and I'll lodge this paper with him in case anything happens while
      I'm away. Now we're going to light up the studio stove. Stay with me, and
      give me my papers as I want 'em.”
     

      No one knows until he has tried how fine a blaze a year's accumulation of
      bills, letters, and dockets can make. Dick stuffed into the stove every
      document in the studio—saving only three unopened letters; destroyed
      sketch-books, rough note-books, new and half-finished canvases alike.
    

      “What a lot of rubbish a tenant gets about him if he stays long enough in
      one place, to be sure,” said Mr. Beeton, at last.
    

      “He does. Is there anything more left?” Dick felt round the walls.
    

      “Not a thing, and the stove's nigh red-hot.”
     

      “Excellent, and you've lost about a thousand pounds' worth of sketches.
      Ho! ho! Quite a thousand pounds' worth, if I can remember what I used to
      be.”
     

      “Yes, sir,” politely. Mr. Beeton was quite sure that Dick had gone mad,
      otherwise he would have never parted with his excellent furniture for a
      song. The canvas things took up storage room and were much better out of
      the way.
    

      There remained only to leave the little will in safe hands: that could not
      be accomplished til tomorrow. Dick groped about the floor picking up the
      last pieces of paper, assured himself again and again that there remained
      no written word or sign of his past life in drawer or desk, and sat down
      before the stove till the fire died out and the contracting iron cracked
      in the silence of the night.
    







      CHAPTER XV
    

   With a heart of furious fancies,
   Whereof I am commander;
   With a burning spear and a horse of air,
   To the wilderness I wander.

   With a knight of ghosts and shadows
   I summoned am to tourney—
   Ten leagues beyond the wide world's end,
   Methinks it is no journey.
             —Tom o' Bedlam's Song


      “Goodbye, Bess; I promised you fifty. Here's a hundred—all that I
      got for my furniture from Beeton. That will keep you in pretty frocks for
      some time. You've been a good little girl, all things considered, but
      you've given me and Torpenhow a fair amount of trouble.”
     

      “Give Mr. Torpenhow my love if you see him, won't you?”
     

      “Of course I will, dear. Now take me up the gang-plank and into the cabin.
      Once aboard the lugger and the maid is—and I am free, I mean.”
     

      “Who'll look after you on this ship?”
     

      “The head-steward, if there's any use in money. The doctor when we come to
      Port Said, if I know anything of P. and O. doctors. After that, the Lord
      will provide, as He used to do.”
     

      Bess found Dick his cabin in the wild turmoil of a ship full of
      leavetakers and weeping relatives. Then he kissed her, and laid himself
      down in his bunk until the decks should be clear. He who had taken so long
      to move about his own darkened rooms well understood the geography of a
      ship, and the necessity of seeing to his own comforts was as wine to him.
    

      Before the screw began to thrash the ship along the Docks he had been
      introduced to the head-steward, had royally tipped him, secured a good
      place at table, opened out his baggage, and settled himself down with joy
      in the cabin. It was scarcely necessary to feel his way as he moved about,
      for he knew everything so well. Then God was very kind: a deep sleep of
      weariness came upon him just as he would have thought of Maisie, and he
      slept till the steamer had cleared the mouth of the Thames and was lifting
      to the pulse of the Channel.
    

      The rattle of the engines, the reek of oil and paint, and a very familiar
      sound in the next cabin roused him to his new inheritance.
    

      “Oh, it's good to be alive again!” He yawned, stretched himself
      vigorously, and went on deck to be told that they were almost abreast of
      the lights of Brighton. This is no more open water than Trafalgar Square
      is a common; the free levels begin at Ushant; but none the less Dick could
      feel the healing of the sea at work upon him already. A boisterous little
      cross-swell swung the steamer disrespectfully by the nose; and one wave
      breaking far aft spattered the quarterdeck and the pile of new
      deck-chairs. He heard the foam fall with the clash of broken glass, was
      stung in the face by a cupful, and sniffing luxuriously, felt his way to
      the smoking-room by the wheel. There a strong breeze found him, blew his
      cap off and left him bareheaded in the doorway, and the smoking-room
      steward, understanding that he was a voyager of experience, said that the
      weather would be stiff in the chops off the Channel and more than half a
      gale in the Bay. These things fell as they were foretold, and Dick enjoyed
      himself to the utmost. It is allowable and even necessary at sea to lay
      firm hold upon tables, stanchions, and ropes in moving from place to
      place. On land the man who feels with his hands is patently blind. At sea
      even a blind man who is not sea-sick can jest with the doctor over the
      weakness of his fellows. Dick told the doctor many tales—and these
      are coin of more value than silver if properly handled—smoked with
      him till unholy hours of the night, and so won his short-lived regard that
      he promised Dick a few hours of his time when they came to Port Said.
    

      And the sea roared or was still as the winds blew, and the engines sang
      their song day and night, and the sun grew stronger day by day, and Tom
      the Lascar barber shaved Dick of a morning under the opened hatch-grating
      where the cool winds blew, and the awnings were spread and the passengers
      made merry, and at last they came to Port Said.
    

      “Take me,” said Dick, to the doctor, “to Madame Binat's—if you know
      where that is.”
     

      “Whew!” said the doctor, “I do. There's not much to choose between 'em;
      but I suppose you're aware that that's one of the worst houses in the
      place. They'll rob you to begin with, and knife you later.”
     

      “Not they. Take me there, and I can look after myself.”
     

      So he was brought to Madame Binat's and filled his nostrils with the
      well-remembered smell of the East, that runs without a change from the
      Canal head to Hong-Kong, and his mouth with the villainous Lingua Franca
      of the Levant. The heat smote him between the shoulder-blades with the
      buffet of an old friend, his feet slipped on the sand, and his coat-sleeve
      was warm as new-baked bread when he lifted it to his nose.
    

      Madame Binat smiled with the smile that knows no astonishment when Dick
      entered the drinking-shop which was one source of her gains. But for a
      little accident of complete darkness he could hardly realise that he had
      ever quitted the old life that hummed in his ears. Somebody opened a
      bottle of peculiarly strong Schiedam. The smell reminded Dick of Monsieur
      Binat, who, by the way, had spoken of art and degradation.
    

      Binat was dead; Madame said as much when the doctor departed, scandalised,
      so far as a ship's doctor can be, at the warmth of Dick's reception. Dick
      was delighted at it. “They remember me here after a year. They have
      forgotten me across the water by this time. Madame, I want a long talk
      with you when you're at liberty. It is good to be back again.”
     

      In the evening she set an iron-topped cafe-table out on the sands, and
      Dick and she sat by it, while the house behind them filled with riot,
      merriment, oaths, and threats. The stars came out and the lights of the
      shipping in the harbour twinkled by the head of the Canal.
    

      “Yes. The war is good for trade, my friend; but what dost thou do here? We
      have not forgotten thee.”
     

      “I was over there in England and I went blind.”
     

      “But there was the glory first. We heard of it here, even here—I and
      Binat; and thou hast used the head of Yellow 'Tina—she is still
      alive—so often and so well that 'Tina laughed when the papers
      arrived by the mail-boats. It was always something that we here could
      recognise in the paintings. And then there was always the glory and the
      money for thee.”
     

      “I am not poor—I shall pay you well.”
     

      “Not to me. Thou hast paid for everything.” Under her breath, “Mon Dieu,
      to be blind and so young! What horror!”
     

      Dick could not see her face with the pity on it, or his own with the
      discoloured hair at the temples. He did not feel the need of pity; he was
      too anxious to get to the front once more, and explained his desire.
    

      “And where? The Canal is full of the English ships. Sometimes they fire as
      they used to do when the war was here—ten years ago. Beyond Cairo
      there is fighting, but how canst thou go there without a correspondent's
      passport? And in the desert there is always fighting, but that is
      impossible also,” said she.
    

      “I must go to Suakin.” He knew, thanks to Alf's readings, that Torpenhow
      was at work with the column that was protecting the construction of the
      Suakin-Berber line. P. and O. steamers do not touch at that port, and,
      besides, Madame Binat knew everybody whose help or advice was worth
      anything. They were not respectable folk, but they could cause things to
      be accomplished, which is much more important when there is work toward.
    

      “But at Suakin they are always fighting. That desert breeds men always—and
      always more men. And they are so bold! Why to Suakin?”
     

      “My friend is there.
    

      “Thy friend! Chtt! Thy friend is death, then.”
     

      Madame Binat dropped a fat arm on the table-top, filled Dick's glass anew,
      and looked at him closely under the stars. There was no need that he
      should bow his head in assent and say—“No. He is a man, but—if
      it should arrive... blamest thou?”
     

      “I blame?” she laughed shrilly. “Who am I that I should blame any one—except
      those who try to cheat me over their consommations. But it is very
      terrible.”
     

      “I must go to Suakin. Think for me. A great deal has changed within the
      year, and the men I knew are not here. The Egyptian lighthouse steamer
      goes down the Canal to Suakin—and the post-boats—But even then——”
     

      “Do not think any longer. I know, and it is for me to think. Thou shalt go—thou
      shalt go and see thy friend. Be wise. Sit here until the house is a little
      quiet—I must attend to my guests—and afterwards go to bed.
      Thou shalt go, in truth, thou shalt go.”
     

      “Tomorrow?”
     

      “As soon as may be.” She was talking as though he were a child.
    

      He sat at the table listening to the voices in the harbour and the
      streets, and wondering how soon the end would come, till Madame Binat
      carried him off to bed and ordered him to sleep. The house shouted and
      sang and danced and revelled, Madame Binat moving through it with one eye
      on the liquor payments and the girls and the other on Dick's interests. To
      this latter end she smiled upon scowling and furtive Turkish officers of
      fellaheen regiments, and was more than kind to camel agents of no
      nationality whatever.
    

      In the early morning, being then appropriately dressed in a flaming red
      silk ball-dress, with a front of tarnished gold embroidery and a necklace
      of plate-glass diamonds, she made chocolate and carried it in to Dick.
    

      “It is only I, and I am of discreet age, eh? Drink and eat the roll too.
      Thus in France mothers bring their sons, when those behave wisely, the
      morning chocolate.” She sat down on the side of the bed whispering:—“It
      is all arranged. Thou wilt go by the lighthouse boat. That is a bribe of
      ten pounds English. The captain is never paid by the Government. The boat
      comes to Suakin in four days. There will go with thee George, a Greek
      muleteer. Another bribe of ten pounds. I will pay; they must not know of
      thy money. George will go with thee as far as he goes with his mules. Then
      he comes back to me, for his well-beloved is here, and if I do not receive
      a telegram from Suakin saying that thou art well, the girl answers for
      George.”
     

      “Thank you.” He reached out sleepily for the cup. “You are much too kind,
      Madame.”
     

      “If there were anything that I might do I would say, stay here and be
      wise; but I do not think that would be best for thee.” She looked at her
      liquor-stained dress with a sad smile. “Nay, thou shalt go, in truth, thou
      shalt go. It is best so. My boy, it is best so.”
     

      She stooped and kissed Dick between the eyes. “That is for good-morning,”
       she said, going away. “When thou art dressed we will speak to George and
      make everything ready. But first we must open the little trunk. Give me
      the keys.”
     

      “The amount of kissing lately has been simply scandalous. I shall expect
      Torp to kiss me next. He is more likely to swear at me for getting in his
      way, though. Well, it won't last long.—Ohe, Madame, help me to my
      toilette of the guillotine! There will be no chance of dressing properly
      out yonder.”
     

      He was rummaging among his new campaign-kit, and rowelling his hands with
      the spurs. There are two ways of wearing well-oiled ankle-jacks, spotless
      blue bands, khaki coat and breeches, and a perfectly pipeclayed helmet.
      The right way is the way of the untired man, master of himself, setting
      out upon an expedition, well pleased.
    

      “Everything must be very correct,” Dick explained. “It will become dirty
      afterwards, but now it is good to feel well dressed. Is everything as it
      should be?”
     

      He patted the revolver neatly hidden under the fulness of the blouse on
      the right hip and fingered his collar.
    

      “I can do no more,” Madame said, between laughing and crying. “Look at
      thyself—but I forgot.”
     

      “I am very content.” He stroked the creaseless spirals of his leggings.
    

      “Now let us go and see the captain and George and the lighthouse boat. Be
      quick, Madame.”
     

      “But thou canst not be seen by the harbour walking with me in the
      daylight. Figure to yourself if some English ladies——”
     

      “There are no English ladies; and if there are, I have forgotten them.
      Take me there.”
     

      In spite of this burning impatience it was nearly evening ere the
      lighthouse boat began to move. Madame had said a great deal both to George
      and the captain touching the arrangements that were to be made for Dick's
      benefit. Very few men who had the honour of her acquaintance cared to
      disregard Madame's advice. That sort of contempt might end in being knifed
      by a stranger in a gambling hell upon surprisingly short provocation.
    

      For six days—two of them were wasted in the crowded Canal—the
      little steamer worked her way to Suakin, where she was to pick up the
      superintendent of the lighthouse; and Dick made it his business to
      propitiate George, who was distracted with fears for the safety of his
      light-of-love and half inclined to make Dick responsible for his own
      discomfort. When they arrived George took him under his wing, and together
      they entered the red-hot seaport, encumbered with the material and wastage
      of the Suakin-Berger line, from locomotives in disconsolate fragments to
      mounds of chairs and pot-sleepers.
    

      “If you keep with me,” said George, “nobody will ask for passports or what
      you do. They are all very busy.”
     

      “Yes; but I should like to hear some of the Englishmen talk. They might
      remember me. I was known here a long time ago—when I was some one
      indeed.”
     

      “A long time ago is a very long time ago here. The graveyards are full.
      Now listen. This new railway runs out so far as Tanai-el-Hassan—that
      is seven miles. Then there is a camp. They say that beyond Tanai-el-Hassan
      the English troops go forward, and everything that they require will be
      brought to them by this line.”
     

      “Ah! Base camp. I see. That's a better business than fighting Fuzzies in
      the open.”
     

      “For this reason even the mules go up in the iron-train.”
     

      “Iron what?”
     

      “It is all covered with iron, because it is still being shot at.”
     

      “An armoured train. Better and better! Go on, faithful George.”
     

      “And I go up with my mules tonight. Only those who particularly require to
      go to the camp go out with the train. They begin to shoot not far from the
      city.”
     

      “The dears—they always used to!” Dick snuffed the smell of parched
      dust, heated iron, and flaking paint with delight. Certainly the old life
      was welcoming him back most generously.
    

      “When I have got my mules together I go up tonight, but you must first
      send a telegram of Port Said, declaring that I have done you no harm.”
     

      “Madame has you well in hand. Would you stick a knife into me if you had
      the chance?”
     

      “I have no chance,” said the Greek. “She is there with that woman.”
     

      “I see. It's a bad thing to be divided between love of woman and the
      chance of loot. I sympathise with you, George.”
     

      They went to the telegraph-office unquestioned, for all the world was
      desperately busy and had scarcely time to turn its head, and Suakin was
      the last place under sky that would be chosen for holiday-ground. On their
      return the voice of an English subaltern asked Dick what he was doing. The
      blue goggles were over his eyes and he walked with his hand on George's
      elbow as he replied—“Egyptian Government—mules. My orders are
      to give them over to the A. C. G. at Tanai-el-Hassan. Any occasion to show
      my papers?”
     

      “Oh, certainly not. I beg your pardon. I'd no right to ask, but not seeing
      your face before I——”
     

      “I go out in the train tonight, I suppose,” said Dick, boldly. “There will
      be no difficulty in loading up the mules, will there?”
     

      “You can see the horse-platforms from here. You must have them loaded up
      early.” The young man went away wondering what sort of broken-down waif
      this might be who talked like a gentleman and consorted with Greek
      muleteers. Dick felt unhappy. To outface an English officer is no small
      thing, but the bluff loses relish when one plays it from the utter dark,
      and stumbles up and down rough ways, thinking and eternally thinking of
      what might have been if things had fallen out otherwise, and all had been
      as it was not.
    

      George shared his meal with Dick and went off to the mule-lines. His
      charge sat alone in a shed with his face in his hands. Before his
      tight-shut eyes danced the face of Maisie, laughing, with parted lips.
      There was a great bustle and clamour about him. He grew afraid and almost
      called for George.
    

      “I say, have you got your mules ready?” It was the voice of the subaltern
      over his shoulder.
    

      “My man's looking after them. The—the fact is I've a touch of
      ophthalmia and can't see very well.
    

      “By Jove! that's bad. You ought to lie up in hospital for a while. I've
      had a turn of it myself. It's as bad as being blind.”
     

      “So I find it. When does this armoured train go?”
     

      “At six o'clock. It takes an hour to cover the seven miles.”
     

      “Are the Fuzzies on the rampage—eh?”
     

      “About three nights a week. Fact is I'm in acting command of the
      night-train. It generally runs back empty to Tanai for the night.”
     

      “Big camp at Tanai, I suppose?”
     

      “Pretty big. It has to feed our desert-column somehow.”
     

      “Is that far off?”
     

      “Between thirty and forty miles—in an infernal thirsty country.”
     

      “Is the country quiet between Tanai and our men?”
     

      “More or less. I shouldn't care to cross it alone, or with a subaltern's
      command for the matter of that, but the scouts get through it in some
      extraordinary fashion.”
     

      “They always did.”
     

      “Have you been here before, then?”
     

      “I was through most of the trouble when it first broke out.”
     

      “In the service and cashiered,” was the subaltern's first thought, so he
      refrained from putting any questions.
    

      “There's your man coming up with the mules. It seems rather queer——”
     

      “That I should be mule-leading?” said Dick.
    

      “I didn't mean to say so, but it is. Forgive me—it's beastly
      impertinence I know, but you speak like a man who has been at a public
      school. There's no mistaking the tone.”
     

      “I am a public school man.”
     

      “I thought so. I say, I don't want to hurt your feelings, but you're a
      little down on your luck, aren't you? I saw you sitting with your head in
      your hands, and that's why I spoke.”
     

      “Thanks. I am about as thoroughly and completely broke as a man need be.”
     

      “Suppose—I mean I'm a public school man myself. Couldn't I perhaps—take
      it as a loan y'know and——”
     

      “You're much too good, but on my honour I've as much money as I want. ...
      I tell you what you could do for me, though, and put me under an
      everlasting obligation. Let me come into the bogie truck of the train.
      There is a fore-truck, isn't there?”
     

      “Yes. How d'you know?”
     

      “I've been in an armoured train before. Only let me see—hear some of
      the fun I mean, and I'll be grateful. I go at my own risk as a
      non-combatant.”
     

      The young man thought for a minute. “All right,” he said. “We're supposed
      to be an empty train, and there's no one to blow me up at the other end.”
     

      George and a horde of yelling amateur assistants had loaded up the mules,
      and the narrow-gauge armoured train, plated with three-eighths inch
      boiler-plate till it looked like one long coffin, stood ready to start.
    

      Two bogie trucks running before the locomotive were completely covered in
      with plating, except that the leading one was pierced in front for the
      muzzle of a machine-gun, and the second at either side for lateral fire.
    

      The trucks together made one long iron-vaulted chamber in which a score of
      artillerymen were rioting.
    

      “Whitechapel—last train! Ah, I see yer kissin' in the first class
      there!” somebody shouted, just as Dick was clamouring into the forward
      truck.
    

      “Lordy! 'Ere's a real live passenger for the Kew, Tanai, Acton, and Ealin'
      train. Echo, sir. Speshul edition! Star, sir.”—“Shall I get you a
      foot-warmer?” said another.
    

      “Thanks. I'll pay my footing,” said Dick, and relations of the most
      amiable were established ere silence came with the arrival of the
      subaltern, and the train jolted out over the rough track.
    

      “This is an immense improvement on shooting the unimpressionable Fuzzy in
      the open,” said Dick, from his place in the corner.
    

      “Oh, but he's still unimpressed. There he goes!” said the subaltern, as a
      bullet struck the outside of the truck. “We always have at least one
      demonstration against the night-train. Generally they attack the
      rear-truck, where my junior commands. He gets all the fun of the fair.”
     

      “Not tonight though! Listen!” said Dick. A flight of heavy-handed bullets
      was succeeded by yelling and shouts. The children of the desert valued
      their nightly amusement, and the train was an excellent mark.
    

      “Is it worth giving them half a hopper full?” the subaltern asked of the
      engine, which was driven by a Lieutenant of Sappers.
    

      “I should think so! This is my section of the line. They'll be playing old
      Harry with my permanent way if we don't stop 'em.”
     

      “Right O!”
     

      “Hrrmph!” said the machine gun through all its five noses as the subaltern
      drew the lever home. The empty cartridges clashed on the floor and the
      smoke blew back through the truck. There was indiscriminate firing at the
      rear of the train, and return fire from the darkness without and unlimited
      howling. Dick stretched himself on the floor, wild with delight at the
      sounds and the smells.
    

      “God is very good—I never thought I'd hear this again. Give 'em
      hell, men. Oh, give 'em hell!” he cried.
    

      The train stopped for some obstruction on the line ahead and a party went
      out to reconnoitre, but came back, cursing, for spades. The children of
      the desert had piled sand and gravel on the rails, and twenty minutes were
      lost in clearing it away. Then the slow progress recommenced, to be varied
      with more shots, more shoutings, the steady clack and kick of the machine
      guns, and a final difficulty with a half-lifted rail ere the train came
      under the protection of the roaring camp at Tanai-el-Hassan.
    

      “Now, you see why it takes an hour and a half to fetch her through,” said
      the subaltern, unshipping the cartridge-hopper above his pet gun.
    

      “It was a lark, though. I only wish it had lasted twice as long. How
      superb it must have looked from outside!” said Dick, sighing regretfully.
    

      “It palls after the first few nights. By the way, when you've settled
      about your mules, come and see what we can find to eat in my tent. I'm
      Bennil of the Gunners—in the artillery lines—and mind you
      don't fall over my tent-ropes in the dark.”
     

      But it was all dark to Dick. He could only smell the camels, the
      hay-bales, the cooking, the smoky fires, and the tanned canvas of the
      tents as he stood, where he had dropped from the train, shouting for
      George. There was a sound of light-hearted kicking on the iron skin of the
      rear trucks, with squealing and grunting. George was unloading the mules.
    

      The engine was blowing off steam nearly in Dick's ear; a cold wind of the
      desert danced between his legs; he was hungry, and felt tired and dirty—so
      dirty that he tried to brush his coat with his hands. That was a hopeless
      job; he thrust his hands into his pockets and began to count over the many
      times that he had waited in strange or remote places for trains or camels,
      mules or horses, to carry him to his business. In those days he could see—few
      men more clearly—and the spectacle of an armed camp at dinner under
      the stare was an ever fresh pleasure to the eye. There was colour, light,
      and motion, without which no man has much pleasure in living. This night
      there remained for him only one more journey through the darkness that
      never lifts to tell a man how far he has travelled. Then he would grip
      Torpenhow's hand again—Torpenhow, who was alive and strong, and
      lived in the midst of the action that had once made the reputation of a
      man called Dick Heldar: not in the least to be confused with the blind,
      bewildered vagabond who seemed to answer to the same name. Yes, he would
      find Torpenhow, and come as near to the old life as might be. Afterwards
      he would forget everything: Bessie, who had wrecked the Melancolia and so
      nearly wrecked his life; Beeton, who lived in a strange unreal city full
      of tin-tacks and gas-plugs and matters that no men needed; that irrational
      being who had offered him love and loyalty for nothing, but had not signed
      her name; and most of all Maisie, who, from her own point of view, was
      undeniably right in all she did, but oh, at this distance, so
      tantalisingly fair.
    

      George's hand on his arm pulled him back to the situation.
    

      “And what now?” said George.
    

      “Oh yes of course. What now? Take me to the camel-men. Take me to where
      the scouts sit when they come in from the desert. They sit by their
      camels, and the camels eat grain out of a black blanket held up at the
      corners, and the men eat by their side just like camels. Take me there!”
     

      The camp was rough and rutty, and Dick stumbled many times over the stumps
      of scrub. The scouts were sitting by their beasts, as Dick knew they
      would. The light of the dung-fires flickered on their bearded faces, and
      the camels bubbled and mumbled beside them at rest. It was no part of
      Dick's policy to go into the desert with a convoy of supplies. That would
      lead to impertinent questions, and since a blind non-combatant is not
      needed at the front, he would probably be forced to return to Suakin.
    

      He must go up alone, and go immediately.
    

      “Now for one last bluff—the biggest of all,” he said. “Peace be with
      you, brethren!” The watchful George steered him to the circle of the
      nearest fire. The heads of the camel-sheiks bowed gravely, and the camels,
      scenting a European, looked sideways curiously like brooding hens, half
      ready to get to their feet.
    

      “A beast and a driver to go to the fighting line tonight,” said Dick.
    

      “A Mulaid?” said a voice, scornfully naming the best baggage-breed that he
      knew.
    

      “A Bisharin,” returned Dick, with perfect gravity. “A Bisharin without
      saddle-galls. Therefore no charge of thine, shock-head.”
     

      Two or three minutes passed. Then—“We be knee-haltered for the
      night. There is no going out from the camp.”
     

      “Not for money?”
     

      “H'm! Ah! English money?”
     

      Another depressing interval of silence.
    

      “How much?”
     

      “Twenty-five pounds English paid into the hand of the driver at my
      journey's end, and as much more into the hand of the camel-sheik here, to
      be paid when the driver returns.”
     

      This was royal payment, and the sheik, who knew that he would get his
      commission on this deposit, stirred in Dick's behalf.
    

      “For scarcely one night's journey—fifty pounds. Land and wells and
      good trees and wives to make a man content for the rest of his days. Who
      speaks?” said Dick.
    

      “I,” said a voice. “I will go—but there is no going from the camp.”
     

      “Fool! I know that a camel can break his knee-halter, and the sentries do
      not fire if one goes in chase. Twenty-five pounds and another twenty-five
      pounds. But the beast must be a good Bisharin; I will take no
      baggage-camel.”
     

      Then the bargaining began, and at the end of half an hour the first
      deposit was paid over to the sheik, who talked in low tones to the driver.
    

      Dick heard the latter say: “A little way out only. Any baggage-beast will
      serve. Am I a fool to waste my cattle for a blind man?”
     

      “And though I cannot see”—Dick lifted his voice a little—“yet
      I carry that which has six eyes, and the driver will sit before me. If we
      do not reach the English troops in the dawn he will be dead.”
     

      “But where, in God's name, are the troops?”
     

      “Unless thou knowest let another man ride. Dost thou know? Remember it
      will be life or death to thee.”
     

      “I know,” said the driver, sullenly. “Stand back from my beast. I am going
      to slip him.”
     

      “Not so swiftly. George, hold the camel's head a moment. I want to feel
      his cheek.” The hands wandered over the hide till they found the branded
      half-circle that is the mark of the Biharin, the light-built riding-camel.
    

      “That is well. Cut this one loose. Remember no blessing of God comes on
      those who try to cheat the blind.”
     

      The men chuckled by the fires at the camel-driver's discomfiture. He had
      intended to substitute a slow, saddle-galled baggage-colt.
    

      “Stand back!” one shouted, lashing the Biharin under the belly with a
      quirt. Dick obeyed as soon as he felt the nose-string tighten in his hand,—and
      a cry went up, “Illaha! Aho! He is loose.”
     

      With a roar and a grunt the Biharin rose to his feet and plunged forward
      toward the desert, his driver following with shouts and lamentation.
    

      George caught Dick's arm and hurried him stumbling and tripping past a
      disgusted sentry who was used to stampeding camels.
    

      “What's the row now?” he cried.
    

      “Every stitch of my kit on that blasted dromedary,” Dick answered, after
      the manner of a common soldier.
    

      “Go on, and take care your throat's not cut outside—you and your
      dromedary's.”
     

      The outcries ceased when the camel had disappeared behind a hillock, and
      his driver had called him back and made him kneel down.
    

      “Mount first,” said Dick. Then climbing into the second seat and gently
      screwing the pistol muzzle into the small of his companion's back, “Go on
      in God's name, and swiftly. Goodbye, George. Remember me to Madame, and
      have a good time with your girl. Get forward, child of the Pit!”
     

      A few minutes later he was shut up in a great silence, hardly broken by
      the creaking of the saddle and the soft pad of the tireless feet. Dick
      adjusted himself comfortably to the rock and pitch of the pace, girthed
      his belt tighter, and felt the darkness slide past. For an hour he was
      conscious only of the sense of rapid progress.
    

      “A good camel,” he said at last.
    

      “He was never underfed. He is my own and clean bred,” the driver replied.
    

      “Go on.”
     

      His head dropped on his chest and he tried to think, but the tenor of his
      thoughts was broken because he was very sleepy. In the half doze in seemed
      that he was learning a punishment hymn at Mrs. Jennett's. He had committed
      some crime as bad as Sabbath-breaking, and she had locked him up in his
      bedroom. But he could never repeat more than the first two lines of the
      hymn—
    

      When Israel of the Lord believed Out of the land of bondage came.
    

      He said them over and over thousands of times. The driver turned in the
      saddle to see if there were any chance of capturing the revolver and
      ending the ride. Dick roused, struck him over the head with the butt, and
      stormed himself wide awake. Somebody hidden in a clump of camel-thorn
      shouted as the camel toiled up rising ground. A shot was fired, and the
      silence shut down again, bringing the desire to sleep. Dick could think no
      longer. He was too tired and stiff and cramped to do more than nod
      uneasily from time to time, waking with a start and punching the driver
      with the pistol.
    

      “Is there a moon?” he asked drowsily.
    

      “She is near her setting.”
     

      “I wish that I could see her. Halt the camel. At least let me hear the
      desert talk.”
     

      The man obeyed. Out of the utter stillness came one breath of wind. It
      rattled the dead leaves of a shrub some distance away and ceased. A
      handful of dry earth detached itself from the edge of a rail trench and
      crumbled softly to the bottom.
    

      “Go on. The night is very cold.”
     

      Those who have watched till the morning know how the last hour before the
      light lengthens itself into many eternities. It seemed to Dick that he had
      never since the beginning of original darkness done anything at all save
      jolt through the air. Once in a thousand years he would finger the
      nailheads on the saddle-front and count them all carefully. Centuries
      later he would shift his revolver from his right hand to his left and
      allow the eased arm to drop down at his side. From the safe distance of
      London he was watching himself thus employed,—watching critically.
      Yet whenever he put out his hand to the canvas that he might paint the
      tawny yellow desert under the glare of the sinking moon, the black shadow
      of a camel and the two bowed figures atop, that hand held a revolver and
      the arm was numbed from wrist to collar-bone. Moreover, he was in the
      dark, and could see no canvas of any kind whatever.
    

      The driver grunted, and Dick was conscious of a change in the air.
    

      “I smell the dawn,” he whispered.
    

      “It is here, and yonder are the troops. Have I done well?”
     

      The camel stretched out its neck and roared as there came down wind the
      pungent reek of camels in the square.
    

      “Go on. We must get there swiftly. Go on.”
     

      “They are moving in their camp. There is so much dust that I cannot see
      what they do.”
     

      “Am I in better case? Go forward.”
     

      They could hear the hum of voices ahead, the howling and the bubbling of
      the beasts and the hoarse cries of the soldiers girthing up for the day.
    

      Two or three shots were fired.
    

      “Is that at us? Surely they can see that I am English,” Dick spoke
      angrily.
    

      “Nay, it is from the desert,” the driver answered, cowering in his saddle.
    

      “Go forward, my child! Well it is that the dawn did not uncover us an hour
      ago.”
     

      The camel headed straight for the column and the shots behind multiplied.
      The children of the desert had arranged that most uncomfortable of
      surprises, a dawn attack for the English troops, and were getting their
      distance by snap-shots at the only moving object without the square.
    

      “What luck! What stupendous and imperial luck!” said Dick. “It's 'just
      before the battle, mother.' Oh, God has been most good to me! Only”—the
      agony of the thought made him screw up his eyes for an instant—“Maisie...”
     

      “Allahu! We are in,” said the man, as he drove into the rearguard and the
      camel knelt.
    

      “Who the deuce are you? Despatches or what? What's the strength of the
      enemy behind that ridge? How did you get through?” asked a dozen voices.
      For all answer Dick took a long breath, unbuckled his belt, and shouted
      from the saddle at the top of a wearied and dusty voice, “Torpenhow! Ohe,
      Torp! Coo-ee, Tor-pen-how.”
     

      A bearded man raking in the ashes of a fire for a light to his pipe moved
      very swiftly towards that cry, as the rearguard, facing about, began to
      fire at the puffs of smoke from the hillocks around. Gradually the
      scattered white cloudlets drew out into the long lines of banked white
      that hung heavily in the stillness of the dawn before they turned over
      wave-like and glided into the valleys. The soldiers in the square were
      coughing and swearing as their own smoke obstructed their view, and they
      edged forward to get beyond it. A wounded camel leaped to its feet and
      roared aloud, the cry ending in a bubbling grunt. Some one had cut its
      throat to prevent confusion. Then came the thick sob of a man receiving
      his death-wound from a bullet; then a yell of agony and redoubled firing.
    

      There was no time to ask any questions.
    

      “Get down, man! Get down behind the camel!”
     

      “No. Put me, I pray, in the forefront of the battle.” Dick turned his face
      to Torpenhow and raised his hand to set his helmet straight, but,
      miscalculating the distance, knocked it off. Torpenhow saw that his hair
      was gray on the temples, and that his face was the face of an old man.
    

      “Come down, you damned fool! Dickie, come off!”
     

      And Dick came obediently, but as a tree falls, pitching sideways from the
      Bisharin's saddle at Torpenhow's feet. His luck had held to the last, even
      to the crowning mercy of a kindly bullet through his head.
    

      Torpenhow knelt under the lee of the camel, with Dick's body in his arms.
    

 THE END








      VOLUME VII THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS
    







      Preface
    

      To THE ADDRESS OF
    

      CAPTAIN J. MAFFLIN,
    

      Duke of Derry's (Pink) Hussars.
    

      DEAR MAFFLIN,—You will remember that I wrote this story as an Awful
      Warning. None the less you have seen fit to disregard it and have followed
      Gadsby's example—as I betted you would. I acknowledge that you paid
      the money at once, but you have prejudiced the mind of Mrs. Mafflin
      against myself, for though I am almost the only respectable friend of your
      bachelor days, she has been darwaza band to me throughout the season.
      Further, she caused you to invite me to dinner at the Club, where you
      called me “a wild ass of the desert,” and went home at half-past ten,
      after discoursing for twenty minutes on the responsibilities of
      housekeeping. You now drive a mail-phaeton and sit under a Church of
      England clergyman. I am not angry, Jack. It is your kismet, as it was
      Gaddy's, and his kismet who can avoid? Do not think that I am moved by a
      spirit of revenge as I write, thus publicly, that you and you alone are
      responsible for this book. In other and more expansive days, when you
      could look at a magnum without flushing and at a cheroot without turning
      white, you supplied me with most of the material. Take it back again—would
      that I could have preserved your fetterless speech in the telling—take
      it back, and by your slippered hearth read it to the late Miss Deercourt.
      She will not be any the more willing to receive my cards, but she will
      admire you immensely, and you, I feel sure, will love me. You may even
      invite me to another very bad dinner—at the Club, which, as you and
      your wife know, is a safe neutral ground for the entertainment of wild
      asses. Then, my very dear hypocrite, we shall be quits.
    

      Yours always,
    

      RUDYARD KIPLING.
    

      P. S.—On second thoughts I should recommend you to keep the book
      away from Mrs. Mafflin.
    







      POOR DEAR MAMMA
    

   The wild hawk to the wind-swept sky,
    The deer to the wholesome wold,
   And the heart of a man to the heart of a maid,
    As it was in the days of old.
                 —Gypsy Song.


      SCENE. Interior of Miss MINNIE THREEGAN'S Bedroom at Simla. Miss THREEGAN,
      in window-seat, turning over a drawerful of things. Miss EMMA DEERCOURT,
      bosom—friend, who has come to spend the day, sitting on the bed,
      manipulating the bodice of a ballroom frock, and a bunch of artificial
      lilies of the valley. Time, 5:30 P. M. on a hot May afternoon.
    

      Miss DEERCOURT. And he said: “I shall never forget this dance,” and, of
      course, I said: “Oh, how can you be so silly!” Do you think he meant
      anything, dear?
    

      Miss THREEGAN. (Extracting long lavender silk stocking from the rubbish.)
      You know him better than I do.
    

      Miss D. Oh, do be sympathetic, Minnie! I'm sure he does. At least I would
      be sure if he wasn't always riding with that odious Mrs. Hagan.
    

      Miss T. I suppose so. How does one manage to dance through one's heels
      first? Look at this—isn't it shameful? (Spreads stocking-heel on
      open hand for inspection.)
    

      Miss D. Never mind that! You can't mend it. Help me with this hateful
      bodice. I've run the string so, and I've run the string so, and I can't
      make the fulness come right. Where would you put this? (Waves lilies of
      the valley.)
    

      Miss T. As high up on the shoulder as possible.
    

      Miss D. Am I quite tall enough? I know it makes May Older look lopsided.
    

      Miss T. Yes, but May hasn't your shoulders. Hers are like a hock-bottle.
    

      BEARER. (Rapping at door.) Captain Sahib aya.
    

      Miss D. (Jumping up wildly, and hunting for bodice, which she has
      discarded owing to the heat of the day.) Captain Sahib! What Captain
      Sahib? Oh, good gracious, and I'm only half dressed! Well, I sha'n't
      bother.
    

      Miss T. (Calmly.) You needn't. It isn't for us. That's Captain Gadsby. He
      is going for a ride with Mamma. He generally comes five days out of the
      seven.
    

      AGONIZED VOICE. (Prom an inner apartment.) Minnie, run out and give
      Captain Gadsby some tea, and tell him I shall be ready in ten minutes;
      and, O Minnie, come to me an instant, there's a dear girl!
    

      Miss T. Oh, bother! (Aloud.) Very well, Mamma.
    

      Exit, and reappears, after five minutes, flushed, and rubbing her fingers.
    

      Miss D. You look pink. What has happened?
    

      Miss T. (In a stage whisper.) A twenty-four-inch waist, and she won't let
      it out. Where are my bangles? (Rummages on the toilet-table, and dabs at
      her hair with a brush in the interval.)
    

      Miss D. Who is this Captain Gadsby? I don't think I've met him.
    

      Miss T. You must have. He belongs to the Harrar set. I've danced with him,
      but I've never talked to him. He's a big yellow man, just like a
      newly-hatched chicken, with an enormous moustache. He walks like this
      (imitates Cavalry swagger), and he goes “Ha-Hmmm!” deep down in his throat
      when he can't think of anything to say. Mamma likes him. I don't.
    

      Miss D. (Abstractedly.) Does he wax that moustache?
    

      Miss T. (Busy with Powder-puff.) Yes, I think so. Why?
    

      Miss D. (Bending over the bodice and sewing furiously.) Oh, nothing—only—
    

      Miss T. (Sternly.) Only what? Out with it, Emma.
    

      Miss D. Well, May Olger—she's engaged to Mr. Charteris, you know—said—Promise
      you won't repeat this?
    

      Miss T. Yes, I promise. What did she say?
    

      Miss D. That—that being kissed (with a rush) with a man who didn't
      wax his moustache was—like eating an egg without salt.
    

      Miss T. (At her full height, with crushing scorn.) May Olger is a horrid,
      nasty Thing, and you can tell her I said so. I'm glad she doesn't belong
      to my set—I must go and feed this man! Do I look presentable?
    

      Miss D. Yes, perfectly. Be quick and hand him over to your Mother, and
      then we can talk. I shall listen at the door to hear what you say to him.
    

      Miss T. 'Sure I don't care. I'm not afraid of Captain Gadsby.
    

      In proof of this swings into the drawing-room with a mannish stride
      followed by two short steps, which produces the effect of a restive horse
      entering. Misses CAPTAIN GADSBY, who is sitting in the shadow of the
      window-curtain, and gazes round helplessly.
    

      CAPTAIN GADSBY. (Aside.) The filly, by Jove! 'Must ha' picked up that
      action from the sire. (Aloud, rising.) Good evening, Miss Threegan.
    

      Miss T. (Conscious that she is flushing.) Good evening, Captain Gadsby.
      Mamma told me to say that she will be ready in a few minutes. Won't you
      have some tea? (Aside.) I hope Mamma will be quick. What am I to say to
      the creature? (Aloud and abruptly.) Milk and sugar?
    

      Capt. G. No sugar, tha-anks, and very little milk. Ha-Hmmm.
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) If he's going to do that, I'm lost. I shall laugh. I know
      I shall!
    

      Capt. G. (Pulling at his moustache and watching it sideways down his
      nose.) Ha-Hmmm. (Aside.) 'Wonder what the little beast can talk about.
      'Must make a shot at it.
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) Oh, this is agonizing. I must say something.
    

      Both Together. Have you Been—
    

      Capt. G. I beg your pardon. You were going to say—
    

      Miss T. (Who has been watching the moustache with awed fascination.) Won't
      you have some eggs?
    

      Capt. G. (Looking bewilderedly at the tea-table.) Eggs! (Aside.) O Hades!
      She must have a nursery-tea at this hour. S'pose they've wiped her mouth
      and sent her to me while the Mother is getting on her duds. (Aloud.) No,
      thanks.
    

      Miss T. (Crimson with confusion.) Oh! I didn't mean that. I wasn't
      thinking of mou—eggs for an instant. I mean salt. Won't you have
      some sa—sweets? (Aside.) He'll think me a raving lunatic. I wish
      Mamma would come.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) It was a nursery-tea and she's ashamed of it. By Jove!
      She doesn't look half bad when she colors up like that. (Aloud, helping
      himself from the dish.) Have you seen those new chocolates at Peliti's?
    

      Miss T. No, I made these myself. What are they like?
    

      Capt. G. These! De-licious. (Aside.) And that's a fact.
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) Oh, bother! he'll think I'm fishing for compliments.
      (Aloud.) No, Peliti's of course.
    

      Capt. G. (Enthusiastically.) Not to compare with these. How d'you make
      them? I can't get my khansamah to understand the simplest thing beyond
      mutton and fowl.
    

      Miss T. Yes? I'm not a khansamah, you know. Perhaps you frighten him. You
      should never frighten a servant. He loses his head. It's very bad policy.
    

      Capt. G. He's so awf'ly stupid.
    

      Miss T. (Folding her hands in her lap.) You should call him quietly and
      say: 'O khansamah jee!'
    

      Capt. G. (Getting interested.) Yes? (Aside.) Fancy that little
      featherweight saying, 'O khansamah jee' to my bloodthirsty Mir Khan!
    

      Miss T Then you should explain the dinner, dish by dish.
    

      Capt. G. But I can't speak the vernacular.
    

      Miss T. (Patronizingly.) You should pass the Higher Standard and try.
    

      Capt. G. I have, but I don't seem to be any the wiser. Are you?
    

      Miss T. I never passed the Higher Standard. But the khansamah is very
      patient with me. He doesn't get angry when I talk about sheep's topees, or
      order maunds of grain when I mean seers.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside with intense indignation.) I'd like to see Mir Khan being
      rude to that girl! Hullo! Steady the Buffs! (Aloud.) And do you understand
      about horses, too?
    

      Miss T. A little—not very much. I can't doctor them, but I know what
      they ought to eat, and I am in charge of our stable.
    

      Capt. G. Indeed! You might help me then. What ought a man to give his sais
      in the Hills? My ruffian says eight rupees, because everything is so dear.
    

      Miss T. Six rupees a month, and one rupee Simla allowance—neither
      more nor less. And a grass-cut gets six rupees. That's better than buying
      grass in the bazar.
    

      Capt. G. (Admiringly.) How do you know?
    

      Miss T. I have tried both ways.
    

      Capt. G. Do you ride much, then? I've never seen you on the Mall.
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) I haven't passed him more than fifty times. (Aloud.)
      Nearly every day.
    

      Capt. G. By Jove! I didn't know that. Ha-Hmmm (Pulls at his moustache and
      is silent for forty seconds.)
    

      Miss T. (Desperately, and wondering what will happen next.) It looks
      beautiful. I shouldn't touch it if I were you. (Aside.) It's all Mamma's
      fault for not coming before. I will be rude!
    

      Capt. G. (Bronzing under the tan and bringing down his hand very quickly.)
      Eh! Wha-at! Oh, yes! Ha! Ha! (Laughs uneasily.) (Aside.) Well, of all the
      dashed cheek! I never had a woman say that to me yet. She must be a cool
      hand or else—Ah! that nursery-tea!
    

      VOICE PROM THE UNKNOWN. Tchk! Tchk! Tchk!
    

      Capt. G. Good gracious! What's that?
    

      Miss T. The dog, I think. (Aside.) Emma has been listening, and I'll never
      forgive her!
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) They don't keep dogs here. (Aloud.) Didn't sound like a
      dog, did it?
    

      Miss T. Then it must have been the cat. Let's go into the veranda. What a
      lovely evening it is!
    

      Steps into veranda and looks out across the hills into sunset. The CAPTAIN
      follows.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Superb eyes! I wonder that I never noticed them before!
      (Aloud.) There's going to be a dance at Viceregal Lodge on Wednesday. Can
      you spare me one?
    

      Miss T. (Shortly.) No! I don't want any of your charity-dances. You only
      ask me because Mamma told you to. I hop and I bump. You know I do!
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) That's true, but little girls shouldn't understand these
      things. (Aloud.) No, on my word, I don't. You dance beautifully.
    

      Miss T. Then why do you always stand out after half a dozen turns? I
      thought officers in the Army didn't tell fibs.
    

      Capt. G. It wasn't a fib, believe me. I really do want the pleasure of a
      dance with you.
    

      Miss T. (Wickedly.) Why? Won't Mamma dance with you any more?
    

      Capt. G. (More earnestly than the necessity demands.) I wasn't thinking of
      your Mother. (Aside.) You little vixen!
    

      Miss T. (Still looking out of the window.) Eh? Oh, I beg your pardon. I
      was thinking of something else.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Well! I wonder what she'll say next. I've never known a
      woman treat me like this before. I might b—Dash it, I might be an
      Infantry subaltern! (Aloud.) Oh, please don't trouble. I'm not worth
      thinking about. Isn't your Mother ready yet?
    

      Miss T. I should think so; but promise me, Captain Gamsby, you won't take
      poor dear Mamma twice round Jakko any more. It tires her so.
    

      Capt. G. She says that no exercise tires her.
    

      Miss T. Yes, but she suffers afterward. You don't know what rheumatism is,
      and you oughtn't to keep her out so late, when it gets chill in the
      evenings.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Rheumatism. I thought she came off her horse rather in a
      bunch. Whew! One lives and learns. (Aloud.) I'm sorry to hear that. She
      hasn't mentioned it to me.
    

      Miss T. (Flurried.) Of course not! Poor dear Mamma never would. And you
      mustn't say that I told you either. Promise me that you won't. Oh, Captain
      Gamsby, promise me you won't!
    

      Capt. G. I am dumb, or—I shall be as soon as you've given me that
      dance, and another—if you can trouble yourself to think about me for
      a minute.
    

      Miss T. But you won't like it one little bit. You'll be awfully sorry
      afterward.
    

      Capt. G. I shall like it above all things, and I shall only be sorry that
      I didn't get more. (Aside.) Now what in the world am I saying?
    

      Miss T. Very well. You will have only yourself to thank if your toes are
      trodden on. Shall we say Seven?
    

      Capt. G. And Eleven. (Aside.) She can't be more than eight stone, but,
      even then, it's an absurdly small foot. (Looks at his own riding boots.)
    

      Miss T. They're beautifully shiny. I can almost see my face in them.
    

      Capt. G. I was thinking whether I should have to go on crutches for the
      rest of my life if you trod on my toes.
    

      Miss T. Very likely. Why not change Eleven for a square?
    

      Capt. G. No, please! I want them both waltzes. Won't you write them down?
    

      Miss T. I don't get so many dances that I shall confuse them. You will be
      the offender.
    

      Capt. G. Wait and see! (Aside.) She doesn't dance perfectly, perhaps, but—
    

      Miss T. Your tea must have got cold by this time. Won't you have another
      cup?
    

      Capt. G. No, thanks. Don't you think it's pleasanter out in the veranda?
      (Aside.) I never saw hair take that color in the sunshine before. (Aloud.)
      It's like one of Dicksee's pictures.
    

      Miss T. Yes I It's a wonderful sunset, isn't it? (Bluntly.) But what do
      you know about Dicksee's pictures?
    

      Capt. G. I go Home occasionally. And I used to know the Galleries.
      (Nervously.) You mustn't think me only a Philistine with a moustache.
    

      Miss T. Don't! Please don't. I'm so sorry for what I said then. I was
      horribly rude. It slipped out before j thought. Don't you know the
      temptation to say frightful and shocking things just for the mere sake of
      saying them? I'm afraid I gave way to it.
    

      Capt. G. (Watching the girl as she flushes.) I think I know the feeling.
      It would be terrible if we all yielded to it, wouldn't it? For instance, I
      might say—
    

      POOR DEAR MAMMA. (Entering, habited, hatted, and booted.) Ah, Captain
      Gamsby? 'Sorry to keep you waiting. 'Hope you haven't been bored. 'My
      little girl been talking to you?
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) I'm not sorry I spoke about the rheumatism. I'm not! I'm
      NOT! I only wished I'd mentioned the corns too.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) What a shame! I wonder how old she is. It never occurred
      to me before. (Aloud.) We've been discussing 'Shakespeare and the musical
      glasses' in the veranda.
    

      Miss T. (Aside.) Nice man! He knows that quotation. He isn't a Philistine
      with a moustache. (Aloud.) Goodbye, Captain Gadsby. (Aside.) What a huge
      hand and what a squeeze! I don't suppose he meant it, but he has driven
      the rings into my fingers.
    

      Poor Dear Mamma. Has Vermillion come round yet? Oh, yes! Captain Gadsby,
      don't you think that the saddle is too far forward? (They pass into the
      front veranda.)
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) How the dickens should I know what she prefers? She told
      me that she doted on horses. (Aloud.) I think it is.
    

      Miss T. (Coming out into front veranda.) Oh! Bad Buldoo! I must speak to
      him for this. He has taken up the curb two links, and Vermillion bates
      that. (Passes out and to horse's head.)
    

      Capt. G. Let me do it!
    

      Miss. T. No, Vermillion understands me. Don't you, old man? (Loosens
      curb-chain skilfully, and pats horse on nose and throttle.) Poor
      Vermillion! Did they want to cut his chin off? There!
    

      Captain Gadsby watches the interlude with undisguised admiration.
    

      Poor Dear Mamma. (Tartly to Miss T.) You've forgotten your guest, I think,
      dear.
    

      Miss T. Good gracious! So I have! Goodbye. (Retreats indoors hastily.)
    

      Poor Dear Mamma. (Bunching reins in fingers hampered by too tight
      gauntlets.) CAPTAIN Gadsby!
    

      CAPTAIN GADSBY stoops and makes the foot-rest. Poor Dear Mamma blunders,
      halts too long, and breaks through it.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Can't hold up seven stone forever. It's all your
      rheumatism. (Aloud.) Can't imagine why I was so clumsy. (Aside.) Now
      Little Featherweight would have gone up like a bird.
    

      They ride out of the garden. The Captain falls back.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) How that habit catches her under the arms! Ugh!
    

      Poor Dear Mamma. (With the worn smile of sixteen seasons, the worse for
      exchange.) You're dull this afternoon, Captain Gadsby.
    

      Capt. G. (Spurring up wearily.) Why did you keep me waiting so long?
    

      Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
    

      (AN INTERVAL OF THREE WEEKS.)
    

      GILDED YOUTH. (Sitting on railings opposite Town Hall.) Hullo, Gadsby!
      'Been trotting out the Gorgonzola! We all thought it was the Gorgon you're
      mashing.
    

      Capt. G. (With withering emphasis.) You young cub! What the—does it
      matter to you?
    

      Proceeds to read GILDED YOUTH a lecture on discretion and deportment,
      which crumbles latter like a Chinese Lantern. Departs fuming.
    

      (FURTHER INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.) SCENE. Exterior of New Simla Library on
      a foggy evening. Miss THREEGAN and Miss DEERCOURT meet among the
      'rickshaws. Miss T. is carrying a bundle of books under her left arm.
    

      Miss D. (Level intonation.) Well?
    

      Miss T. (Ascending intonation.) Well?
    

      Miss D. (Capturing her friend's left arm, taking away all the books,
      placing books in 'rickshaw, returning to arm, securing hand by third
      finger and investigating.) Well! You bad girl! And you never told me.
    

      Miss T. (Demurely.) He—he—he only spoke yesterday afternoon.
    

      Miss D. Bless you, dear! And I'm to be bridesmaid, aren't I? You know you
      promised ever so long ago.
    

      Miss T. Of course. I'll tell you all about it tomorrow. (Gets into
      'rickshaw.) O Emma!
    

      Miss D. (With intense interest.) Yes, dear?
    

      Miss T. (Piano.) It's quite true—about-the-egg.
    

      Miss D. What egg?
    

      Miss T. (Pianissimo prestissimo.) The egg without the salt. (Forte.) Chalo
      ghar ko jaldi, jhampani! (Go home, jhampani.)
    

      THE WORLD WITHOUT
    

      Certain people of importance.
    

      SCENE. Smoking-room of the Degchi Club. Time, 10.30 P. M. of a stuffy
      night in the Rains. Four men dispersed in picturesque attitudes and
      easy-chairs. To these enter BLAYNE of the Irregular Moguls, in evening
      dress.
    

      BLAYNE. Phew! The Judge ought to be hanged in his own store-godown. Hi,
      khitmatgar! Pour a whiskey-peg, to take the taste out of my mouth.
    

      CURTISS. (Royal Artillery.) That's it, is it? What the deuce made you dine
      at the Judge's? You know his bandobust.
    

      Blayne. 'Thought it couldn't be worse than the Club, but I'll swear he
      buys ullaged liquor and doctors it with gin and ink (looking round the
      room.) Is this all of you tonight?
    

      DOONE. (P.W.D.) Anthony was called out at dinner. Mingle had a pain in his
      tummy.
    

      Curtiss. Miggy dies of cholera once a week in the Rains, and gets drunk on
      chlorodyne in between. Good little chap, though. Any one at the Judge's,
      Blayne?
    

      Blayne. Cockley and his memsahib looking awfully white and fagged. Female
      girl—couldn'tcatch the name—on her way to the Hills, under the
      Cockleys' charge—the Judge, and Markyn fresh from Simla—disgustingly
      fit.
    

      Curtiss. Good Lord, how truly magnificent! Was there enough ice? When I
      mangled garbage there I got one whole lump—nearly as big as a
      walnut. What had Markyn to say for himself?
    

      Blayne. Seems that every one is having a fairly good time up there in
      spite of the rain. By Jove, that reminds me! I know I hadn'tcome across
      just for the pleasure of your society. News! Great news! Markyn told me.
    

      DOONE. Who's dead now?
    

      Blayne. No one that I know of; but Gadsby's hooked at last!
    

      DROPPING CHORUS. How much? The Devil! Markyn was pulling your leg. Not
      GADSBY!
    

      Blayne. (Humming.) “Yea, verily, verily, verily! Verily, verily, I say
      unto thee.” Theodore, the gift 'o God! Our Phillup! It's been given out up
      above.
    

      MACKESY. (Barrister-at-Law.) Huh! Women will give out anything. What does
      accused say?
    

      Blayne. Markyn told me that he congratulated him warily—one hand
      held out, t'other ready to guard. Gadsby turned pink and said it was so.
    

      Curtiss. Poor old Caddy! They all do it. Who's she? Let's hear the
      details.
    

      Blayne. She's a girl—daughter of a Colonel Somebody.
    

      Doone. Simla's stiff with Colonels' daughters. Be more explicit.
    

      Blayne. Wait a shake. What was her name? Thresomething. Three—
    

      Curtiss. Stars, perhaps. Caddy knows that brand.
    

      Blayne. Threegan—Minnie Threegan.
    

      Mackesy. Threegan Isn't she a little bit of a girl with red hair?
    

      Blayne. 'Bout that—from what from what Markyn said.
    

      Mackesy. Then I've met her. She was at Lucknow last season. 'Owned a
      permanently juvenile Mamma, and danced damnably. I say, Jervoise, you knew
      the Threegans, didn't you?
    

      JERVOISE. (Civilian of twenty-five years' service, waking up from his
      doze.) Eh? What's that? Knew who? How? I thought I was at Home, confound
      you!
    

      Mackesy. The Threegan girl's engaged, so Blayne says.
    

      Jervoise. (Slowly.) Engaged—en-gaged! Bless my soul! I'm getting an
      old man! Little Minnie Threegan engaged. It was only the other day I went
      home with them in the Surat—no, the Massilia—and she was
      crawling about on her hands and knees among the ayahs. 'Used to call me
      the “Tick Tack Sahib” because I showed her my watch. And that was in
      Sixty-Seven—no, Seventy. Good God, how time flies! I'm an old man. I
      remember when Threegan married Miss Derwent—daughter of old Hooky
      Derwent—but that was before your time. And so the little baby's
      engaged to have a little baby of her own! Who's the other fool?
    

      Mackesy. Gadsby of the Pink Hussars.
    

      Jervoise. 'Never met him. Threegan lived in debt, married in debt, and'll
      die in debt. 'Must be glad to get the girl off his hands.
    

      Blayne. Caddy has money—lucky devil. Place at Home, too.
    

      Doone. He comes of first-class stock. 'Can't quite understand his being
      caught by a Colonel's daughter, and (looking cautiously round room.) Black
      Infantry at that! No offence to you, Blayne.
    

      Blayne. (Stiffly.) Not much, thaanks.
    

      Curtiss. (Quoting motto of Irregular Moguls.) “We are what we are,” eh,
      old man? But Gadsby was such a superior animal as a rule. Why didn't he go
      Home and pick his wife there?
    

      Mackesy. They are all alike when they come to the turn into the straight.
      About thirty a man begins to get sick of living alone.
    

      Curtiss. And of the eternal mutton—chop in the morning.
    

      Doone. It's a dead goat as a rule, but go on, Mackesy.
    

      Mackesy. If a man's once taken that way nothing will hold him, Do you
      remember Benoit of your service, Doone? They transferred him to Tharanda
      when his time came, and he married a platelayer's daughter, or something
      of that kind. She was the only female about the place.
    

      Doone. Yes, poor brute. That smashed Benoit's chances of promotion
      altogether. Mrs. Benoit used to ask “Was you goin' to the dance this
      evenin'?”
     

      Curtiss. Hang it all! Gadsby hasn't married beneath him. There's no
      tar-brush in the family, I suppose.
    

      Jervoise. Tar-brush! Not an anna. You young fellows talk as though the man
      was doing the girl an honor in marrying her. You're all too conceited—nothing's
      good enough for you.
    

      Blayne. Not even an empty Club, a dam' bad dinner at the Judge's, and a
      Station as sickly as a hospital. You're quite right. We're a set of
      Sybarites.
    

      Doone. Luxurious dogs, wallowing in—
    

      Curtiss. Prickly heat between the shoulders. I'm covered with it. Let's
      hope Beora will be cooler.
    

      Blayne. Whew! Are you ordered into camp, too? I thought the Gunners had a
      clean sheet.
    

      Curtiss. No, worse luck. Two cases yesterday—one died—and if
      we have a third, out we go. Is there any shooting at Beora, Doone?
    

      Doone. The country's under water, except the patch by the Grand Trunk
      Road. I was there yesterday, looking at a bund, and came across four poor
      devils in their last stage. It's rather bad from here to Kuchara.
    

      Curtiss. Then we're pretty certain to have a heavy go of it. Heigho! I
      shouldn't mind changing places with Gaddy for a while. 'Sport with
      Amaryllis in the shade of the Town Hall, and all that. Oh, why doesn't
      somebody come and marry me, instead of letting me go into cholera-camp?
    

      Mackesy. Ask the Committee.
    

      Curtiss. You ruffian! You'll stand me another peg for that. Blayne, what
      will you take? Mackesy is fine on moral grounds. Done, have you any
      preference?
    

      Doone. Small glass Kummel, please. Excellent carminative, these days.
      Anthony told me so.
    

      Mackesy. (Signing voucher for four drinks.) Most unfair punishment. I only
      thought of Curtiss as Actaeon being chivied round the billiard tables by
      the nymphs of Diana.
    

      Blayne. Curtiss would have to import his nymphs by train. Mrs. Cockley's
      the only woman in the Station. She won't leave Cockley, and he's doing his
      best to get her to go.
    

      Curtiss. Good, indeed! Here's Mrs. Cockley's health. To the only wife in
      the Station and a damned brave woman!
    

      OMNES. (Drinking.) A damned brave woman
    

      Blayne. I suppose Gadsby will bring his wife here at the end of the cold
      weather. They are going to be married almost immediately, I believe.
    

      Curtiss. Gadsby may thank his luck that the Pink Hussars are all
      detachment and no headquarters this hot weather, or he'd be torn from the
      arms of his love as sure as death. Have you ever noticed the
      thorough-minded way British Cavalry take to cholera? It's because they are
      so expensive. If the Pinks had stood fast here, they would have been out
      in camp a month ago. Yes, I should decidedly like to be Gadsby.
    

      Mackesy. He'll go Home after he's married, and send in his papers—see
      if he doesn't.
    

      Blayne. Why shouldn't he? Hasn't he money? Would any one of us be here if
      we weren't paupers?
    

      Doone. Poor old pauper! What has become of the six hundred you rooked from
      our table last month?
    

      Blayne. It took unto itself wings. I think an enterprising tradesman got
      some of it, and a shroff gobbled the rest—or else I spent it.
    

      Curtiss. Gadsby never had dealings with a shroff in his life.
    

      Doone. Virtuous Gadsby! If I had three thousand a month, paid from
      England, I don't think I'd deal with a shroff either.
    

      Mackesy. (Yawning.) Oh, it's a sweet life! I wonder whether matrimony
      would make it sweeter.
    

      Curtiss. Ask Cockley—with his wife dying by inches!
    

      Blayne. Go home and get a fool of a girl to come out to—what is it
      Thackeray says?—“the splendid palace of an Indian pro-consul.”
     

      Doone. Which reminds me. My quarters leak like a sieve. I had fever last
      night from sleeping in a swamp. And the worst of it is, one can't do
      anything to a roof till the Rains are over.
    

      Curtiss. What's wrong with you? You haven't eighty rotting Tommies to take
      into a running stream.
    

      Doone. No: but I'm mixed boils and bad language. I'm a regular Job all
      over my body. It's sheer poverty of blood, and I don't see any chance of
      getting richer—either way.
    

      Blayne. Can't you take leave?
    

      Doone. That's the pull you Army men have over us. Ten days are nothing in
      your sight. I'm so important that Government can't find a substitute if I
      go away. Ye-es, I'd like to be Gadsby, whoever his wife may be.
    

      Curtiss. You've passed the turn of life that Mackesy was speaking of.
    

      Doone. Indeed I have, but I never yet had the brutality to ask a woman to
      share my life out here.
    

      Blayne. On my soul I believe you're right. I'm thinking of Mrs. Cockley.
      The woman's an absolute wreck.
    

      Doone. Exactly. Because she stays down here. The only way to keep her fit
      would be to send her to the Hills for eight months—and the same with
      any woman. I fancy I see myself taking a wife on those terms.
    

      Mackesy. With the rupee at one and sixpence. The little Doones would be
      little Debra Doones, with a fine Mussoorie @chi-chi anent to bring home
      for the holidays.
    

      Curtiss. And a pair of be-ewtiful sambhur—horns for Doone to wear,
      free of expense, presented by—Doone. Yes, it's an enchanting
      prospect. By the way, the rupee hasn't done falling yet. The time will
      come when we shall think ourselves lucky if we only lose half our pay.
    

      Curtiss. Surely a third's loss enough. Who gains by the arrangement?
      That's what I want to know.
    

      Blayne. The Silver Question! I'm going to bed if you begin squabbling
      Thank Goodness, here's Anthony—looking like a ghost.
    

      Enter ANTHONY, Indian Medical Staff, very white and tired.
    

      Anthony. 'Evening, Blayne. It's raining in sheets. Whiskey peg lao,
      khitmatgar. The roads are something ghastly.
    

      Curtiss. How's Mingle?
    

      Anthony. Very bad, and more frightened. I handed him over to Fewton.
      Mingle might just as well have called him in the first place, instead of
      bothering me.
    

      Blayne. He's a nervous little chap. What has he got, this time?
    

      Anthony. 'Can't quite say. A very bad tummy and a blue funk so far. He
      asked me at once if it was cholera, and I told him not to be a fool. That
      soothed him.
    

      Curtiss. Poor devil! The funk does half the business in a man of that
      build.
    

      Anthony. (Lighting a cheroot.) I firmly believe the funk will kill him if
      he stays down. You know the amount of trouble he's been giving Fewton for
      the last three weeks. He's doing his very best to frighten himself into
      the grave.
    

      GENERAL CHORUS. Poor little devil! Why doesn't he get away?
    

      Anthony. 'Can't. He has his leave all right, but he's so dipped he can't
      take it, and I don't think his name on paper would raise four annas.
      That's in confidence, though.
    

      Mackesy. All the Station knows it.
    

      Anthony. “I suppose I shall have to die here,” he said, squirming all
      across the bed. He's quite made up his mind to Kingdom Come. And I know he
      has nothing more than a wet-weather tummy if he could only keep a hand on
      himself.
    

      Blayne. That's bad. That's very bad. Poor little Miggy. Good little chap,
      too. I say—
    

      Anthony. What do you say?
    

      Blayne. Well, look here—anyhow. If it's like that—as you say—I
      say fifty.
    

      Curtiss. I say fifty.
    

      Mackesy. I go twenty better.
    

      Doone. Bloated Croesus of the Bar! I say fifty. Jervoise, what do you say?
      Hi! Wake up!
    

      Jervoise. Eh? What's that? What's that?
    

      Curtiss. We want a hundred rupees from you. You're a bachelor drawing a
      gigantic income, and there's a man in a hole.
    

      Jervoise. What man? Any one dead?
    

      Blayne. No, but he'll die if you don't—give the hundred. Here!
      Here's a peg-voucher. You can see what we've signed for, and Anthony's man
      will come round tomorrow to collect it. So there will be no trouble.
    

      Jervoise. (Signing.) One hundred, E. M. J. There you are (feebly). It
      isn't one of your jokes, is it?
    

      Blayne. No, it really is wanted. Anthony, you were the biggest
      poker-winner last week, and you've defrauded the tax-collector too long.
      Sign!
    

      Anthony. Let's see. Three fifties and a seventy-two twenty-three twenty—say
      four hundred and twenty. That'll give him a month clear at the Hills. Many
      thanks, you men. I'll send round the chaprassi tomorrow.
    

      Curtiss. You must engineer his taking the stuff, and of course you mustn't—
    

      Anthony. Of course. It would never do. He'd weep with gratitude over his
      evening drink.
    

      Blayne. That's just what he would do, damn him. Oh! I say, Anthony, you
      pretend to know everything. Have you heard about Gadsby?
    

      Anthony. No. Divorce Court at last?
    

      Blayne. Worse. He's engaged!
    

      Anthony. How much? He can't be!
    

      Blayne. He is. He's going to be married in a few weeks. Markyn told me at
      the Judge's this evening. It's pukka.
    

      Anthony. You don't say so? Holy Moses! There'll be a shine in the tents of
      Kedar.
    

      Curtiss. 'Regiment cut up rough, think you?
    

      Anthony. 'Don't know anything about the Regiment.
    

      Mackesy. It is bigamy, then?
    

      Anthony. Maybe. Do you mean to say that you men have forgotten, or is
      there more charity in the world than I thought?
    

      Doone. You don't look pretty when you are trying to keep a secret. You
      bloat. Explain.
    

      Anthony. Mrs. Herriott!
    

      Blayne. (After a long pause, to the room generally.) It's my notion that
      we are a set of fools.
    

      Mackesy. Nonsense. That business was knocked on the head last season. Why,
      young Mallard—
    

      Anthony. Mallard was a candlestick, paraded as such. Think awhile.
      Recollect last season and the talk then. Mallard or no Mallard, did Gadsby
      ever talk to any other woman?
    

      Curtiss. There's something in that. It was slightly noticeable now you
      come to mention it. But she's at Naini Tal and he's at Simla.
    

      Anthony. He had to go to Simla to look after a globe-trotter relative of
      his—a person with a title. Uncle or aunt.
    

      Blayne And there he got engaged. No law prevents a man growing tired of a
      woman.
    

      Anthony. Except that he mustn't do it till the woman is tired of him. And
      the Herriott woman was not that.
    

      Curtiss. She may be now. Two months of Naini Tal works wonders.
    

      Doone. Curious thing how some women carry a Fate with them. There was a
      Mrs. Deegie in the Central Provinces whose men invariably fell away and
      got married. It became a regular proverb with us when I was down there. I
      remember three men desperately devoted to her, and they all, one after
      another, took wives.
    

      Curtiss. That's odd. Now I should have thought that Mrs. Deegie's
      influence would have led them to take other men's wives. It ought to have
      made them afraid of the judgment of Providence.
    

      Anthony. Mrs. Herriott will make Gadsby afraid of something more than the
      judgment of Providence, I fancy.
    

      Blayne. Supposing things are as you say, he'll be a fool to face her.
      He'll sit tight at Simla.
    

      Anthony. Shouldn't be a bit surprised if he went off to Naini to explain.
      He's an unaccountable sort of man, and she's likely to be a more than
      unaccountable woman.
    

      Doone. What makes you take her character away so confidently?
    

      Anthony. Primum tempus. Caddy was her first and a woman doesn't allow her
      first man to drop away without expostulation. She justifies the first
      transfer of affection to herself by swearing that it is forever and ever.
      Consequently—
    

      Blayne. Consequently, we are sitting here till past one o'clock, talking
      scandal like a set of Station cats. Anthony, it's all your fault. We were
      perfectly respectable till you came in. Go to bed. I'm off, Good night
      all.
    

      Curtiss. Past one! It's past two by Jove, and here's the khit coming for
      the late charge. Just Heavens! One, two, three, four, five rupees to pay
      for the pleasure of saying that a poor little beast of a woman is no
      better than she should be. I'm ashamed of myself. Go to bed, you
      slanderous villains, and if I'm sent to Beora tomorrow, be prepared to
      hear I'm dead before paying my card account!
    







      THE TENTS OF KEDAR
    

    Only why should it be with pain at all?
    Why must I 'twixt the leaves of coronal
    Put any kiss of pardon on thy brow?
    Why should the other women know so much,
    And talk together—
    Such the look and such
    The smile he used to love with, then as now.

    —Any Wife to any Husband.


      SCENE. A Naini Tal dinner for thirty-four. Plate, wines, crockery, and
      khitmatgars carefully calculated to scale of Rs. 6000 per mensem, less
      Exchange. Table split lengthways by bank of flowers.
    

      MRS. HERRIOTT. (After conversation has risen to proper pitch.) Ah! 'Didn't
      see you in the crush in the drawing-room. (Sotto voce.) Where have you
      been all this while, Pip?
    

      CAPTAIN GADSBY. (Turning from regularly ordained dinner partner and
      settling hock glasses.) Good evening. (Sotto voce.) Not quite so loud
      another time. You've no notion how your voice carries. (Aside.) So much
      for shirking the written explanation. It'll have to be a verbal one now.
      Sweet prospect! How on earth am I to tell her that I am a respectable,
      engaged member of society and it's all over between us?
    

      MRS. H. I've a heavy score against you. Where were you at the Monday Pop?
      Where were you on Tuesday? Where were you at the Lamonts' tennis? I was
      looking everywhere.
    

      Capt. G. For me! Oh, I was alive somewhere, I suppose. (Aside.) It's for
      Minnie's sake, but it's going to be dashed unpleasant.
    

      Mrs. H. Have I done anything to offend you? I never meant it if I have. I
      couldn't help going for a ride with the Vaynor man. It was promised a week
      before you came up.
    

      Capt. G. I didn't know—
    

      Mrs. H. It really was.
    

      Capt. G. Anything about it, I mean.
    

      Mrs. H. What has upset you today? All these days? You haven't been near me
      for four whole days—nearly one hundred hours. Was it kind of you,
      Pip? And I've been looking forward so much to your coming.
    

      Capt. G. Have you?
    

      Mrs. H. You know I have! I've been as foolish as a schoolgirl about it. I
      made a little calendar and put it in my card-case, and every time the
      twelve o'clock gun went off I scratched out a square and said: “That
      brings me nearer to Pip. My Pip!”
     

      Capt. G. (With an uneasy laugh). What will Mackler think if you neglect
      him so?
    

      Mrs. H. And it hasn't brought you nearer. You seem farther away than ever.
      Are you sulking about something? I know your temper.
    

      Capt. G. No.
    

      Mrs. H. Have I grown old in the last few months, then? (Reaches forward to
      bank of flowers for menu-card.)
    

      PARTNER ON LEFT. Allow me. (Hands menu-card. Mrs. H. keeps her arm at full
      stretch for three seconds.)
    

      Mrs. H. (To partner.) Oh, thanks. I didn't see. (Turns right again.) Is
      anything in me changed at all?
    

      Capt. G. For Goodness's sake go on with your dinner! You must eat
      something. Try one of those cutlet arrangements. (Aside.) And I fancied
      she had good shoulders, once upon a time! What an ass a man can make of
      himself!
    

      Mrs. H. (Helping herself to a paper frill, seven peas, some stamped
      carrots and a spoonful of gravy.) That isn't an answer. Tell me whether I
      have done anything.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) If it isn't ended here there will be a ghastly scene
      some-where else. If only I'd written to her and stood the racket at long
      range! (To Khitmatgar.) Han! Simpkin do. (Aloud.) I'll tell you later on.
    

      Mrs. H. Tell me now. It must be some foolish misunderstanding, and you
      know that there was to be nothing of that sort between us. We, of all
      people in the world, can't afford it. Is it the Vaynor man, and don't you
      like to say so? On my honor—
    

      Capt. G. I haven't given the Vaynor man a thought.
    

      Mrs. H. But how d'you know that I haven't?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Here's my chance and may the Devil help me through with
      it. (Aloud and measuredly.) Believe me, I do not care how often or how
      tenderly you think of the Vaynor man.
    

      Mrs. H. I wonder if you mean that! Oh, what is the good of squabbling and
      pretending to misunderstand when you are only up for so short a time? Pip,
      don't be a stupid!
    

      Follows a pause, during which he crosses his left leg over his right and
      continues his dinner.
    

      Capt. G. (In answer to the thunderstorm in her eyes.) Corns—my
      worst.
    

      Mrs. H. Upon my word, you are the very rudest man in the world! I'll never
      do it again.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) No, I don't think you will; but I wonder what you will
      do before it's all over. (To Khitmatgar.) Thorah ur Simpkin do.
    

      Mrs. H. Well! Haven't you the grace to apologize, bad man?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) I mustn't let it drift back now. Trust a woman for being
      as blind as a bat when she won't see.
    

      Mrs. H. I'm waiting; or would you like me to dictate a form of apology?
    

      Capt. G. (Desperately.) By all means dictate.
    

      Mrs. H. (Lightly.) Very well. Rehearse your several Christian names after
      me and go on: “Profess my sincere repentance.”
     

      Capt. G. “Sincere repentance.”
     

      Mrs. H. “For having behaved”—
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) At last! I wish to Goodness she'd look away. “For having
      behaved”—as I have behaved, and declare that I am thoroughly and
      heartily sick of the whole business, and take this opportunity of making
      clear my intention of ending it, now, henceforward, and forever. (Aside.)
      If any one had told me I should be such a blackguard!—
    

      Mrs. H. (Shaking a spoonful of potato chips into her plate.) That's not a
      pretty joke.
    

      Capt. G. No. It's a reality. (Aside.) I wonder if smashes of this kind are
      always so raw.
    

      Mrs. H. Really, Pip, you're getting more absurd every day.
    

      Capt. G. I don't think you quite understand me. Shall I repeat it?
    

      Mrs. H. No! For pity's sake don't do that. It's too terrible, even in fur.
    

      Capt. G. I'll let her think it over for a while. But I ought to be
      horsewhipped.
    

      Mrs. H. I want to know what you meant by what you said just now.
    

      Capt. G. Exactly what I said. No less.
    

      Mrs. H. But what have I done to deserve it? What have I done?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) If she only wouldn't look at me. (Aloud and very slowly,
      his eyes on his plate.) D'you remember that evening in July, before the
      Rains broke, when you said that the end would have to come sooner or later—and
      you wondered for which of US it would come first?
    

      Mrs. H. Yes! I was only joking. And you swore that, as long as there was
      breath in your body, it should never come. And I believed you.
    

      Capt. G. (Fingering menu-card.) Well, it has. That's all.
    

      A long pause, during which Mrs. H. bows her head and rolls the bread-twist
      into little pellets; G. stares at the oleanders.
    

      Mrs. H. (Throwing back her head and laughing naturally.) They train us
      women well, don't they, Pip?
    

      Capt. G. (Brutally, touching shirt-stud.) So far as the expression goes.
      (Aside.) It isn't in her nature to take things quietly. There'll be an
      explosion yet.
    

      Mrs. H. (With a shudder.) Thank you. B-but even Red Indians allow people
      to wriggle when they're being tortured, I believe. (Slips fan from girdle
      and fans slowly: rim of fan level with chin.)
    

      PARTNER ON LEFT. Very close tonight, isn't it? 'You find it too much for
      you?
    

      Mrs. H. Oh, no, not in the least. But they really ought to have punkahs,
      even in your cool Naini Tal, oughtn't they? (Turns, dropping fan and
      raising eyebrows.)
    

      Capt. G. It's all right. (Aside.) Here comes the storm!
    

      Mrs. H. (Her eyes on the tablecloth: fan ready in right hand.) It was very
      cleverly managed, Pip, and I congratulate you. You swore—you never
      contented yourself with merely Saying a thing—you swore that, as far
      as lay in your power, you'd make my wretched life pleasant for me. And
      you've denied me the consolation of breaking down. I should have done it—indeed
      I should. A woman would hardly have thought of this refinement, my kind,
      considerate friend. (Fan-guard as before.) You have explained things so
      tenderly and truthfully, too! You haven't spoken or written a word of
      warning, and you have let me believe in you till the last minute. You
      haven't condescended to give me your reason yet. No! A woman could not
      have managed it half so well. Are there many men like you in the world?
    

      Capt. G. I'm sure I don't know. (To Khitmatgar.) Ohe! Simpkin do.
    

      Mrs. H. You call yourself a man of the world, don't you? Do men of the
      world behave like Devils when they do a woman the honor to get tired of
      her?
    

      Capt. G. I'm sure I don't know. Don't speak so loud!
    

      Mrs. H. Keep us respectable, O Lord, whatever happens. Don't be afraid of
      my compromising you. You've chosen your ground far too well, and I've been
      properly brought up. (Lowering fan.) Haven't you any pity, Pip, except for
      yourself?
    

      Capt. G. Wouldn't it be rather impertinent of me to say that I'm sorry for
      you?
    

      Mrs. H. I think you have said it once or twice before. You're growing very
      careful of my feelings. My God, Pip, I was a good woman once! You said I
      was. You've made me what I am. What are you going to do with me? What are
      you going to do with me? Won't you say that you are sorry? (Helps herself
      to iced asparagus.)
    

      Capt. G. I am sorry for you, if you WANT the pity of such a brute as I am.
      I'm awf'ly sorry for you.
    

      Mrs. H. Rather tame for a man of the world. Do you think that that
      admission clears you?
    

      Capt. G. What can I do? I can only tell you what I think of myself. You
      can't think worse than that?
    

      Mrs. H. Oh, yes, I can! And now, will you tell me the reason of all this?
      Remorse? Has Bayard been suddenly conscience-stricken?
    

      Capt. G. (Angrily, his eyes still lowered.) No! The thing has come to an
      end on my side. That's all. Mafisch!
    

      Mrs. H. “That's all. Mafisch!” As though I were a Cairene Dragoman. You
      used to make prettier speeches. D'you remember when you said?—
    

      Capt. G. For Heaven's sake don't bring that back! Call me anything you
      like and I'll admit it—
    

      Mrs. H. But you don't care to be reminded of old lies? If I could hope to
      hurt you one-tenth as much as you have hurt me tonight—No, I
      wouldn't—I couldn't do it—liar though you are.
    

      Capt. G. I've spoken the truth.
    

      Mrs. H. My dear Sir, you flatter yourself. You have lied over the reason.
      Pip, remember that I know you as you don't know yourself. You have been
      everything to me, though you are—(Fan-guard.) Oh, what a
      contemptible Thing it is! And so you are merely tired of me?
    

      Capt. G. Since you insist upon my repeating it—Yes.
    

      Mrs. H. Lie the first. I wish I knew a coarser word. Lie seems so
      ineffectual in your case. The fire has just died out and there is no fresh
      one? Think for a minute, Pip, if you care whether I despise you more than
      I do. Simply Mafisch, is it?
    

      Capt. G. Yes. (Aside.) I think I deserve this.
    

      Mrs. H. Lie number two. Before the next glass chokes you, tell me her
      name.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) I'll make her pay for dragging Minnie into the business!
      (Aloud.) Is it likely?
    

      Mrs. H. Very likely if you thought that it would flatter your vanity.
      You'd cry my name on the house-tops to make people turn round.
    

      Capt. G. I wish I had. There would have been an end to this business.
    

      Mrs. H. Oh, no, there would not—And so you were going to be virtuous
      and blase', were you? To come to me and say: “I've done with you. The
      incident is clo-osed.” I ought to be proud of having kept such a man so
      long.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) It only remains to pray for the end of the dinner.
      (Aloud.) You know what I think of myself.
    

      Mrs. H. As it's the only person in he world you ever do think of, and as I
      know your mind thoroughly, I do. You want to get it all over and—Oh,
      I can't keep you back! And you're going—think of it, Pip—to
      throw me over for another woman. And you swore that all other women were—Pip,
      my Pip! She can't care for you as I do. Believe me, she can't. Is it any
      one that I know?
    

      Capt. G. Thank Goodness it isn't. (Aside.) I expected a cyclone, but not
      an earthquake.
    

      Mrs. H. She can't! Is there anything that I wouldn't do for you—or
      haven't done? And to think that I should take this trouble over you,
      knowing what you are! Do you despise me for it?
    

      Capt. G. (Wiping his mouth to hide a smile.) Again? It's entirely a work
      of charity on your part.
    

      Mrs. H. Ahhh! But I have no right to resent it.—Is she
      better-looking than I? Who was it said?—
    

      Capt. G. No—not that!
    

      Mrs. H. I'll be more merciful than you were. Don't you know that all women
      are alike?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Then this is the exception that proves the rule.
    

      Mrs. H. All of them! I'll tell you anything you like. I will, upon my
      word! They only want the admiration—from anybody—no matter who—anybody!
      But there is always one man that they care for more than any one else in
      the world, and would sacrifice all the others to. Oh, do listen! I've kept
      the Vaynor man trotting after me like a poodle, and he believes that he is
      the only man I am interested in. I'll tell you what he said to me.
    

      Capt. G. Spare him. (Aside.) I wonder what his version is.
    

      Mrs. H. He's been waiting for me to look at him all through dinner. Shall
      I do it, and you can see what an idiot he looks?
    

      Capt. G. “But what imports the nomination of this gentleman?”
     

      Mrs. H. Watch! (Sends a glance to the Vaynor man, who tries vainly to
      combine a mouthful of ice pudding, a smirk of self-satisfaction, a glare
      of intense devotion, and the stolidity of a British dining countenance.)
    

      Capt. G. (Critically.) He doesn't look pretty. Why didn't you wait till
      the spoon was out of his mouth?
    

      Mrs. H. To amuse you. She'll make an exhibition of you as I've made of
      him; and people will laugh at you. Oh, Pip, can't you see that? It's as
      plain as the noonday Sun. You'll be trotted about and told lies, and made
      a fool of like the others. I never made a fool of you, did I?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) What a clever little woman it is!
    

      Mrs. H. Well, what have you to say?
    

      Capt. G. I feel better.
    

      Mrs. H. Yes, I suppose so, after I have come down to your level. I
      couldn't have done it if I hadn't cared for you so much. I have spoken the
      truth.
    

      Capt. G. It doesn't alter the situation.
    

      Mrs. H. (Passionately.) Then she has said that she cares for you! Don't
      believe her, Pip. It's a lie—as bad as yours to me!
    

      Capt. G. Ssssteady! I've a notion that a friend of yours is looking at
      you.
    

      Mrs. H. He! I hate him. He introduced you to me.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) And some people would like women to assist in making the
      laws. Introduction to imply condonement. (Aloud.) Well, you see, if you
      can remember so far back as that, I couldn't, in common politeness, refuse
      the offer.
    

      Mrs. H. In common politeness I—We have got beyond that!
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Old ground means fresh trouble. (Aloud.) On my honor—
    

      Mrs. H. Your what? Ha, ha!
    

      Capt. G. Dishonor, then. She's not what you imagine. I meant to—
    

      Mrs. H. Don't tell me anything about her! She won't care for you, and when
      you come back, after having made an exhibition of yourself, you'll find me
      occupied with—
    

      Capt. G. (Insolently.) You couldn't while I am alive. (Aside.) If that
      doesn't bring her pride to her rescue, nothing will.
    

      Mrs. H. (Drawing herself up.) Couldn't do it? I—(Softening.) You're
      right. I don't believe I could—though you are what you are—a
      coward and a liar in grain.
    

      Capt. G. It doesn't hurt so much after your little lecture—with
      demonstrations.
    

      Mrs. H. One mass of vanity! Will nothing ever touch you in this life?
      There must be a Hereafter if it's only for the benefit of—But you
      will have it all to yourself.
    

      Capt. G. (Under his eyebrows.) Are you certain of that?
    

      Mrs. H. I shall have had mine in this life; and it will serve me right,
    

      Capt. G. But the admiration that you insisted on so strongly a moment ago?
      (Aside.) Oh, I am a brute!
    

      Mrs. H. (Fiercely.) Will that console me for knowing that you will go to
      her with the same words, the same arguments, and the—the same pet
      names you used to me? And if she cares for you, you two will laugh over my
      story. Won't that be punishment heavy enough even for me—even for
      me?—And it's all useless. That's another punishment.
    

      Capt. G. (Feebly.) Oh, come! I'm not so low as you think.
    

      Mrs. H. Not now, perhaps, but you will be. Oh, Pip, if a woman flatters
      your vanity, there's nothing on earth that you would not tell her; and no
      meanness that you would not do. Have I known you so long without knowing
      that?
    

      Capt. G. If you can trust me in nothing else—and I don't see why I
      should be trusted—you can count upon my holding my tongue.
    

      Mrs. H. If you denied everything you've said this evening and declared it
      was all in fun (a long pause), I'd trust you. Not otherwise. All I ask is,
      don't tell her my name. Please don't. A man might forget: a woman never
      would. (Looks up table and sees hostess beginning to collect eyes.) So
      it's all ended, through no fault of mine—Haven't I behaved
      beautifully? I've accepted your dismissal, and you managed it as cruelly
      as you could, and I have made you respect my sex, haven't I? (Arranging
      gloves and fan.) I only pray that she'll know you some day as I know you
      now. I wouldn't be you then, for I think even your conceit will be hurt. I
      hope she'll pay you back the humiliation you've brought on me. I hope—No.
      I don't! I can't give you up! I must have something to look forward to or
      I shall go crazy. When it's all over, come back to me, come back to me,
      and you'll find that you're my Pip still!
    

      Capt. G. (Very clearly.) False move, and you pay for it. It's a girl!
    

      Mrs. H. (Rising.) Then it was true! They said—but I wouldn't insult
      you by asking. A girl! I was a girl not very long ago. Be good to her,
      Pip. I daresay she believes in you.
    

      Goes out with an uncertain smile. He watches her through the door, and
      settles into a chair as the men redistribute themselves.
    

      Capt. G. Now, if there is any Power who looks after this world, will He
      kindly tell me what I have done? (Reaching out for the claret, and half
      aloud.) What have I done?
    







      WITH ANY AMAZEMENT
    

    And are not afraid with any amazement. —Marriage Service.


      SCENE. bachelor's bedroom-toilet-table arranged with unnatural neatness.
    

      CAPTAIN GADSBY asleep and snoring heavily. Time, 10:30 A. M.—a
      glorious autumn day at Simla. Enter delicately Captain MAFFLIN of GADSBY's
      regiment. Looks at sleeper, and shakes his head murmuring “Poor Gaddy.”
       Performs violent fantasia with hair-brushes on chairback.
    

      Capt. M. Wake up, my sleeping beauty! (Roars.)
    

    “Uprouse ye, then, my merry merry men!
    It is our opening day!
    It is our opening da-ay!”
 

      Gaddy, the little dicky-birds have been billing and cooing for ever so
      long; and I'm here!
    

      Capt. G. (Sitting up and yawning.) Mornin'. This is awf'ly good of you,
      old fellow. Most awf'ly good of you. Don't know what I should do without
      you. 'Pon my soul, I don't. 'Haven't slept a wink all night.
    

      Capt. M. I didn't get in till half-past eleven. 'Had a look at you then,
      and you seemed to be sleeping as soundly as a condemned criminal.
    

      Capt. G. Jack, if you want to make those disgustingly worn-out jokes,
      you'd better go away. (With portentous gravity.) It's the happiest day in
      my life.
    

      Capt. M. (Chuckling grimly.) Not by a very long chalk, my son. You're
      going through some of the most refined torture you've ever known. But be
      calm. I am with you. 'Shun! Dress!
    

      Capt. G. Eh! Wha-at?
    

      Capt. M. Do you suppose that you are your own master for the next twelve
      hours? If you do, of course—(Makes for the door.)
    

      Capt. G. No! For Goodness' sake, old man, don't do that! You'll see me
      through, won't you? I've been mugging up that beastly drill, and can't
      remember a line of it.
    

      Capt. M. (Overturning G.'s uniform.) Go and tub. Don't bother me. I'll
      give you ten minutes to dress in.
    

      INTERVAL, filled by the noise as of one splashing in the bath-room..
    

      Capt. G. (Emerging from dressing-room.) What time is it?
    

      Capt. M. Nearly eleven.
    

      Capt. G. Five hours more. O Lord!
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) 'First sign of funk, that. 'Wonder if it's going to
      spread. (Aloud.) Come along to breakfast.
    

      Capt. G. I can't eat anything. I don't want any breakfast.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) So early! (Aloud) CAPTAIN Gadsby, I order you to eat
      breakfast, and a dashed good breakfast, too. None of your bridal airs and
      graces with me!
    

      Leads G. downstairs and stands over him while he eats two chops.
    

      Capt. G. (Who has looked at his watch thrice in the last five minutes.)
      What time is it?
    

      Capt. M. Time to come for a walk. Light up.
    

      Capt. G. I haven't smoked for ten days, and I won't now. (Takes cheroot
      which M. has cut for him, and blows smoke through his nose luxuriously.)
      We aren't going down the Mall, are we?
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) They're all alike in these stages. (Aloud.) No, my
      Vestal. We're going along the quietest road we can find.
    

      Capt. G. Any chance of seeing Her?
    

      Capt. M. Innocent! No! Come along, and, if you want me for the final
      obsequies, don't cut my eye out with your stick.
    

      Capt. G. (Spinning round.) I say, isn't She the dearest creature that ever
      walked? What's the time? What comes after “wilt thou take this woman”?
    

      Capt. M. You go for the ring. R'c'lect it'll be on the top of my
      right-hand little finger, and just be careful how you draw it off, because
      I shall have the Verger's fees somewhere in my glove.
    

      Capt. G. (Walking forward hastily.) D—the Verger! Come along! It's
      past twelve and I haven't seen Her since yesterday evening. (Spinning
      round again.) She's an absolute angel, Jack, and She's a dashed deal too
      good for me. Look here, does She come up the aisle on my arm, or how?
    

      Capt. M. If I thought that there was the least chance of your remembering
      anything for two consecutive minutes, I'd tell you. Stop passaging about
      like that!
    

      Capt. G. (Halting in the middle of the road.) I say, Jack.
    

      Capt. M. Keep quiet for another ten minutes if you can, you lunatic; and
      walk!
    

      The two tramp at five miles an hour for fifteen minutes.
    

      Capt. G. What's the time? How about the cursed wedding-cake and the
      slippers? They don't throw 'em about in church, do they?
    

      Capt. M. Invariably. The Padre leads off with his boots.
    

      Capt. G. Confound your silly soul! Don't make fun of me. I can't stand it,
      and I won't!
    

      Capt. M. (Untroubled.) So-ooo, old horse You'll have to sleep for a couple
      of hours this afternoon.
    

      Capt. G. (Spinning round.) I'm not going to be treated like a dashed
      child, understand that.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) Nerves gone to fiddle-strings. What a day we're having!
      (Tenderly putting his hand on G.'s shoulder.) My David, how long have you
      known this Jonathan? Would I come up here to make a fool of you—after
      all these years?
    

      Capt. G. (Penitently.) I know, I know, Jack—but I'm as upset as I
      can be. Don't mind what I say. Just hear me run through the drill and see
      if I've got it all right:—“To have and to hold for better or worse,
      as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,
      so help me God. Amen.”
     

      Capt. M. (Suffocating with suppressed laughter.) Yes. That's about the
      gist of it. I'll prompt if you get into a hat.
    

      Capt. G. (Earnestly.) Yes, you'll stick by me, Jack, won't you? I'm
      awfully happy, but I don't mind telling you that I'm in a blue funk!
    

      Capt. M. (Gravely.) Are you? I should never have noticed it. You don't
      look like it.
    

      Capt. G. Don't I? That's all right. (Spinning round.) On my soul and
      honor, Jack, She's the sweetest little angel that ever came down from the
      sky. There isn't a woman on earth fit to speak to Her.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) And this is old Gadsby! (Aloud.) Go on if it relieves
      you.
    

      Capt. G. You can laugh! That's all you wild asses of bachelors are fit
      for.
    

      Capt. M. (Drawling.) You never would wait for the troop to come up. You
      aren't quite married yet, y'know.
    

      Capt. G. Ugh! That reminds me. I don't believe I shall be able to get into
      any boots Let's go home and try 'em on (Hurries forward.)
    

      Capt. M. 'Wouldn't be in your shoes for anything that Asia has to offer.
    

      Capt. G. (Spinning round.) That just shows your hideous blackness of soul—your
      dense stupidity—your brutal narrow-mindedness. There's only one
      fault about you. You're the best of good fellows, and I don't know what I
      should have done without you, but—you aren't married. (Wags his head
      gravely.) Take a wife, Jack.
    

      Capt. M. (With a face like a wall.) Ya-as. Whose for choice?
    

      Capt. G. If you're going to be a blackguard, I'm going on—What's the
      time?
    

      Capt. M. (Hums.) An' since 'twas very clear we drank only ginger-beer,
      Faith, there must ha' been some stingo in the ginger. Come back, you
      maniac. I'm going to take you home, and you're going to lie down.
    

      Capt. G. What on earth do I want to lie down for?
    

      Capt. M. Give me a light from your cheroot and see.
    

      Capt. G. (Watching cheroot-butt quiver like a tuning-fork.) Sweet state
      I'm in!
    

      Capt. M. You are. I'll get you a peg and you'll go to sleep.
    

      They return and M. compounds a four-finger peg.
    

      Capt. G. O bus! bus! It'll make me as drunk as an owl.
    

      Capt. M. 'Curious thing, 'twon't have the slightest effect on you. Drink
      it off, chuck yourself down there, and go to bye-bye.
    

      Capt. G. It's absurd. I sha'n't sleep, I know I sha'n't!
    

      Falls into heavy doze at end of seven minutes. Capt. M. watches him
      tenderly.
    

      Capt. M. Poor old Gadsby! I've seen a few turned off before, but never one
      who went to the gallows in this condition. 'Can't tell how it affects 'em,
      though. It's the thoroughbreds that sweat when they're backed into
      double-harness.—And that's the man who went through the guns at
      Amdheran like a devil possessed of devils. (Leans over G.) But this is
      worse than the guns, old pal—worse than the guns, isn't it? (G.
      turns in his sleep, and M. touches him clumsily on the forehead.) Poor,
      dear old Gaddy! Going like the rest of 'em—going like the rest of
      'em—Friend that sticketh closer than a brother—eight years.
      Dashed bit of a slip of a girl—eight weeks! And—where's your
      friend? (Smokes disconsolately till church clock strikes three.)
    

      Capt. M. Up with you! Get into your kit.
    

      Capt. C. Already? Isn't it too soon? Hadn't I better have a shave?
    

      Capt. M. No! You're all right. (Aside.) He'd chip his chin to pieces.
    

      Capt. C. What's the hurry?
    

      Capt. M. You've got to be there first.
    

      Capt. C. To be stared at?
    

      Capt. M. Exactly. You're part of the show. Where's the burnisher? Your
      spurs are in a shameful state.
    

      Capt. G. (Gruffly.) Jack, I be damned if you shall do that for me.
    

      Capt. M. (More gruffly.) Dry up and get dressed! If I choose to clean your
      spurs, you're under my orders.
    

      Capt. G. dresses. M. follows suit.
    

      Capt. M. (Critically, walking round.) M'—yes, you'll do. Only don't
      look so like a criminal. Ring, gloves, fees—that's all right for me.
      Let your moustache alone. Now, if the ponies are ready, we'll go.
    

      Capt. G. (Nervously.) It's much too soon. Let's light up! Let's have a
      peg! Let's—
    

      Capt. M. Let's make bally asses of ourselves!
    

      BELLS. (Without.)—“Good-peo-ple-all To prayers-we call.”
     

      Capt. M. There go the bells! Come on—unless you'd rather not. (They
      ride off.)
    

      BELLS.—“We honor the King And Brides joy do bring—Good tidings
      we tell, And ring the Dead's knell.”
     

      Capt. G. (Dismounting at the door of the Church.) I say, aren't we much
      too soon? There are no end of people inside. I say, aren't we much too
      late? Stick by me, Jack! What the devil do I do?
    

      Capt. M. Strike an attitude at the head of the aisle and wait for Her. (G.
      groans as M. wheels him into position before three hundred eyes.)
    

      Capt. M. (Imploringly.) Gaddy, if you love me, for pity's sake, for the
      Honor of the Regiment, stand up! Chuck yourself into your uniform! Look
      like a man! I've got to speak to the Padre a minute. (G. breaks into a
      gentle Perspiration.) If you wipe your face I'll never be your best man
      again. Stand up! (G. trembles visibly.)
    

      Capt. M. (Returning.) She's coming now. Look out when the music starts.
      There's the organ beginning to clack.
    

      Bride steps out of 'rickshaw at Church door. G. catches a glimpse of her
      and takes heart.
    

      ORGAN.—“The Voice that breathed o'er Eden, That earliest marriage
      day, The primal marriage-blessing, It hath not passed away.”
     

      Capt. M. (Watching G.) By Jove! He is looking well. 'Didn't think he had
      it in him.
    

      Capt. G. How long does this hymn go on for?
    

      Capt. M. It will be over directly. (Anxiously.) (Beginning to bleach and
      gulp.) Hold on, Gabby, and think 'o the Regiment.
    

      Capt. G. (Measuredly.) I say, there's a big brown lizard crawling up that
      wall.
    

      Capt. M. My Sainted Mother! The last stage of collapse!
    

      Bride comes up to left of altar, lifts her eyes once to G., who is
      suddenly smitten mad.
    

      Capt. G. (To himself again and again.) Little Featherweight's a woman—a
      woman! And I thought she was a little girl.
    

      Capt. M. (In a whisper.) Form the halt—inward wheel.
    

      Capt. G. obeys mechanically and the ceremony proceeds.
    

      PADRE.... only unto her as ye both shall live?
    

      Capt. G. (His throat useless.) Ha-hmmm!
    

      Capt. M. Say you will or you won't. There's no second deal here.
    

      Bride gives response with perfect coolness, and is given away by the
      father.
    

      Capt. G. (Thinking to show his learning.) Jack give me away now, quick!
    

      Capt. M. You've given yourself away quite enough. Her right hand, man!
      Repeat! Repeat! “Theodore Philip.” Have you forgotten your own name?
    

      Capt. G. stumbles through Affirmation, which Bride repeats without a
      tremor.
    

      Capt. M. Now the ring! Follow the Padre! Don't pull off my glove! Here it
      is! Great Cupid, he's found his voice.
    

      Capt. G. repeats Troth in a voice to be heard to the end of the Church and
      turns on his heel.
    

      Capt. M. (Desperately.) Rein back! Back to your troop! 'Tisn't half legal
      yet.
    

      PADRE.... joined together let no man put asunder.
    

      Capt. G. paralyzed with fear jibs after Blessing.
    

      Capt. M. (Quickly.) On your own front—one length. Take her with you.
      I don't come. You've nothing to say. (Capt. G. jingles up to altar.)
    

      Capt. M. (In a piercing rattle meant to be a whisper.) Kneel, you
      stiff-necked ruffian! Kneel!
    

      PADRE... whose daughters are ye so long as ye do well and are not afraid
      with any amazement.
    

      Capt. M. Dismiss! Break off! Left wheel!
    

      All troop to vestry. They sign.
    

      Capt. M. Kiss Her, Gaddy.
    

      Capt. G. (Rubbing the ink into his glove.) Eh! Wha-at?
    

      Capt. M. (Taking one pace to Bride.) If you don't, I shall.
    

      Capt. G. (Interposing an arm.) Not this journey!
    

      General kissing, in which Capt. G. is pursued by unknown female.
    

      Capt. G. (Faintly to M.) This is Hades! Can I wipe my face now?
    

      Capt. M. My responsibility has ended. Better ask Misses GADSBY.
    

      Capt. G. winces as though shot and procession is Mendelssohned out of
      Church to house, where usual tortures take place over the wedding-cake.
    

      Capt. M. (At table.) Up with you, Gaddy. They expect a speech.
    

      Capt. G. (After three minutes' agony.) Ha-hmmm. (Thunders Of applause.)
    

      Capt. M. Doocid good, for a first attempt. Now go and change your kit
      while Mamma is weeping over “the Missus.” (Capt. G. disappears. Capt. M.
      starts up tearing his hair.) It's not half legal. Where are the shoes? Get
      an ayah.
    

      AYAH. Missie Captain Sahib done gone band karo all the jutis.
    

      Capt. M. (Brandishing scab larded sword.) Woman, produce those shoes! Some
      one lend me a bread-knife. We mustn't crack Gaddy's head more than it is.
      (Slices heel off white satin slipper and puts slipper up his sleeve.)
    

      Where is the Bride? (To the company at large.) Be tender with that rice.
      It's a heathen custom. Give me the big bag.
    


      Bride slips out quietly into 'rickshaw and departs toward the sunset.
    

      Capt. M. (In the open.) Stole away, by Jove! So much the worse for Gaddy!
      Here he is. Now Gaddy, this'll be livelier than Amdberan! Where's your
      horse?
    

      Capt. G. (Furiously, seeing that the women are out of an earshot.) Where
      the d——'s my Wife?
    

      Capt. M. Half-way to Mahasu by this time. You'll have to ride like Young
      Lochinvar.
    

      Horse comes round on his hind legs; refuses to let G. handle him.
    

      Capt. G. Oh you will, will you? Get 'round, you brute—you hog—you
      beast! Get round!
    

      Wrenches horse's head over, nearly breaking lower jaw: swings himself into
      saddle, and sends home both spurs in the midst of a spattering gale of
      Best Patna.
    

      Capt. M. For your life and your love—ride, Gaddy—And God bless
      you!
    

      Throws half a pound of rice at G. who disappears, bowed forward on the
      saddle, in a cloud of sunlit dust.
    

      Capt. M. I've lost old Gaddy. (Lights cigarette and strolls off, singing
      absently):—“You may carve it on his tombstone, you may cut it on his
      card, That a young man married is a young man marred!”
     

      Miss DEERCOURT. (From her horse.) Really, Captain Mafflin! You are more
      plain spoken than polite!
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) They say marriage is like cholera. 'Wonder who'll be the
      next victim.
    

      White satin slipper slides from his sleeve and falls at his feet. Left
      wondering.
    







      THE GARDEN OF EDEN
    

    And ye shall be as—Gods!


      SCENE. Thymy grass-plot at back of the Mahasu dak-bungalow, overlooking
      little wooded valley. On the left, glimpse of the Dead Forest of Fagoo; on
      the right, Simla Hills. In background, line of the Snows. CAPTAIN GADSBY,
      now three weeks a husband, is smoking the pipe of peace on a rug in the
      sunshine. Banjo and tobacco-pouch on rug. Overhead the Fagoo eagles. Mrs.
      G. comes out of bungalow.
    

      Mrs. G. My husband!
    

      Capt. G. (Lazily, with intense enjoyment.) Eh, wha-at? Say that again.
    

      Mrs. G. I've written to Mamma and told her that we shall be back on the
      17th.
    

      Capt. G. Did you give her my love?
    

      Mrs. G. No, I kept all that for myself. (Sitting down by his side.) I
      thought you wouldn't mind.
    

      Capt. G. (With mock sternness.) I object awf'ly. How did you know that it
      was yours to keep?
    

      Mrs. G. I guessed, Phil.
    

      Capt. G. (Rapturously.) Lit-tle Featherweight!
    

      Mrs. G. I won' t be called those sporting pet names, bad boy.
    

      Capt. G. You'll be called anything I choose. Has it ever occurred to you,
      Madam, that you are my Wife?
    

      Mrs. G. It has. I haven't ceased wondering at it yet.
    

      Capt. G. Nor I. It seems so strange; and yet, somehow, it doesn't.
      (Confidently.) You see, it could have been no one else.
    

      Mrs. G. (Softly.) No. No one else—for me or for you. It must have
      been all arranged from the beginning. Phil, tell me again what made you
      care for me.
    

      Capt. G. How could I help it? You were you, you know.
    

      Mrs. G. Did you ever want to help it? Speak the truth!
    

      Capt. G. (A twinkle in his eye.) I did, darling, just at the first. Rut
      only at the very first. (Chuckles.) I called you—stoop low and I'll
      whisper—“a little beast.” Ho! Ho! Ho!
    

      Mrs. G. (Taking him by the moustache and making him sit up.)
      “A-little-beast!” Stop laughing over your crime! And yet you had the—the—awful
      cheek to propose to me!
    

      Capt. C. I'd changed my mind then. And you weren't a little beast any
      more.
    

      Mrs. G. Thank you, sir! And when was I ever?
    

      Capt. G. Never! But that first day, when you gave me tea in that
      peach-colored muslin gown thing, you looked—you did indeed, dear—such
      an absurd little mite. And I didn't know what to say to you.
    

      Mrs. G. (Twisting moustache.) So you said “little beast.” Upon my word,
      Sir! I called you a “Crrrreature,” but I wish now I had called you
      something worse.
    

      Capt. G. (Very meekly.) I apologize, but you're hurting me awf'ly.
      (Interlude.) You're welcome to torture me again on those terms.
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, why did you let me do it?
    

      Capt. G. (Looking across valley.) No reason in particular, but—if it
      amused you or did you any good—you might—wipe those dear
      little boots of yours on me.
    

      Mrs. G. (Stretching out her hands.) Don't! Oh, don't! Philip, my King,
      please don't talk like that. It's how I feel. You're so much too good for
      me. So much too good!
    

      Capt. G. Me! I'm not fit to put my arm around you. (Puts it round.)
    

      Mrs. C. Yes, you are. But I—what have I ever done?
    

      Capt. G. Given me a wee bit of your heart, haven't you, my Queen!
    

      Mrs. G. That's nothing. Any one would do that. They cou—couldn'thelp
      it.
    

      Capt. G. Pussy, you'll make me horribly conceited. Just when I was
      beginning to feel so humble, too.
    

      Mrs. G. Humble! I don't believe it's in your character.
    

      Capt. G. What do you know of my character, Impertinence?
    

      Mrs. G. Ah, but I shall, shan't I, Phil? I shall have time in all the
      years and years to come, to know everything about you; and there will be
      no secrets between us.
    

      Capt. G. Little witch! I believe you know me thoroughly already.
    

      Mrs. G. I think I can guess. You're selfish?
    

      Capt. G. Yes.
    

      Mrs. G. Foolish?
    

      Capt. G. Very.
    

      Mrs. G. And a dear?
    

      Capt. G. That is as my lady pleases.
    

      Mrs. G. Then your lady is pleased. (A pause.) D'you know that we're two
      solemn, serious, grown-up people—
    

      Capt. G. (Tilting her straw hat over her eyes.) You grown-up! Pooh! You're
      a baby.
    

      Mrs. G. And we're talking nonsense.
    

      Capt. G. Then let's go on talking nonsense. I rather like it. Pussy, I'll
      tell you a secret. Promise not to repeat?
    

      Mrs. G. Ye-es. Only to you.
    

      Capt. G. I love you.
    

      Mrs. G. Re-ally! For how long?
    

      Capt. G. Forever and ever.
    

      Mrs. G. That's a long time.
    

      Capt. G. 'Think so? It's the shortest I can do with.
    

      Mrs. G. You're getting quite clever.
    

      Capt. G. I'm talking to you.
    

      Mrs. G. Prettily turned. Hold up your stupid old head and I'll pay you for
      it.
    

      Capt. G. (Affecting supreme contempt.) Take it yourself if you want it.
    

      Mrs. G. I've a great mind to—and I will! (Takes it and is repaid
      with interest.)
    

      Capt. G, Little Featherweight, it's my opinion that we are a couple of
      idiots.
    

      Mrs. G. We're the only two sensible people in the world. Ask the eagle.
      He's coming by.
    

      Capt. G. Ah! I dare say he's seen a good many sensible people at Mahasu.
      They say that those birds live for ever so long.
    

      Mrs. G. How long?
    

      Capt. G. A hundred and twenty years.
    

      Mrs. G. A hundred and twenty years! O-oh! And in a hundred and twenty
      years where will these two sensible people be?
    

      Capt. G. What does it matter so long as we are together now?
    

      Mrs. G. (Looking round the horizon.) Yes. Only you and I—I and you—in
      the whole wide, wide world until the end. (Sees the line of the Snows.)
      How big and quiet the hills look! D'you think they care for us?
    

      Capt. G. 'Can't say I've consulted 'em particularly. I care, and that's
      enough for me.
    

      Mrs. G. (Drawing nearer to him.) Yes, now—but afterward. What's that
      little black blur on the Snows?
    

      Capt. G. A snowstorm, forty miles away. You'll see it move, as the wind
      carries it across the face of that spur and then it will be all gone.
    

      Mrs. G. And then it will be all gone. (Shivers.)
    

      Capt. G. (Anxiously.) 'Not chilled, pet, are you? 'Better let me get your
      cloak.
    

      Mrs. G. No. Don't leave me, Phil. Stay here. I believe I am afraid. Oh,
      why are the hills so horrid! Phil, promise me that you'll always love me.
    

      Capt. G. What's the trouble, darling? I can't promise any more than I
      have; but I'll promise that again and again if you like.
    

      Mrs. G. (Her head on his shoulder.) Say it, then—say it! N-no—don't!
      The—the—eagles would laugh. (Recovering.) My husband, you've
      married a little goose.
    

      Capt. G. (Very tenderly.) Have I? I am content whatever she is, so long as
      she is mine.
    

      Mrs. G. (Quickly.) Because she is yours or because she is me mineself?
    

      Capt. G. Because she is both. (Piteously.) I'm not clever, dear, and I
      don't think I can make myself understood properly.
    

      Mrs. G. I understand. Pip, will you tell me something?
    

      Capt. G. Anything you like. (Aside.) I wonder what's coming now.
    

      Mrs. G. (Haltingly, her eyes lowered.) You told me once in the old days—centuries
      and centuries ago—that you had been engaged before. I didn't say
      anything—then.
    

      Capt. G. (Innocently.) Why not?
    

      Mrs. G. (Raising her eyes to his.) Because—because I was afraid of
      losing you, my heart. But now—tell about it—please.
    

      Capt. G. There's nothing to tell. I was awf'ly old then—nearly two
      and twenty—and she was quite that.
    

      Mrs. G. That means she was older than you. I shouldn't like her to have
      been younger. Well?
    

      Capt. G. Well, I fancied myself in love and raved about a bit, and—oh,
      yes, by Jove! I made up poetry. Ha! Ha!
    

      Mrs. G. You never wrote any for me! What happened?
    

      Capt. G. I came out here, and the whole thing went phut. She wrote to say
      that there had been a mistake, and then she married.
    

      Mrs. G. Did she care for you much?
    

      Capt. G. No. At least she didn't show it as far as I remember.
    

      Mrs. G. As far as you remember! Do you remember her name? (Hears it and
      bows her head.) Thank you, my husband.
    

      Capt. G. Who but you had the right? Now, Little Featherweight, have you
      ever been mixed up in any dark and dismal tragedy?
    

      Mrs. G. If you call me Mrs. Gadsby, p'raps I'll tell.
    

      Capt. G. (Throwing Parade rasp into his voice.) Mrs. Gadsby, confess!
    

      Mrs. G. Good Heavens, Phil! I never knew that you could speak in that
      terrible voice.
    

      Capt. G. You don't know half my accomplishments yet. Wait till we are
      settled in the Plains, and I'll show you how I bark at my troop. You were
      going to say, darling?
    

      Mrs. G. I—I don't like to, after that voice. (Tremulously.) Phil,
      never you dare to speak to me in that tone, whatever I may do!
    

      Capt. G. My poor little love! Why, you're shaking all over. I am so sorry.
      Of course I never meant to upset you Don't tell me anything, I'm a brute.
    

      Mrs. G. No, you aren't, and I will tell—There was a man.
    

      Capt. G. (Lightly.) Was there? Lucky man!
    

      Mrs. G. (In a whisper.) And I thought I cared for him.
    

      Capt. G. Still luckier man! Well?
    

      Mrs. G. And I thought I cared for him—and I didn't—and then
      you came—and I cared for you very, very much indeed. That's all.
      (Face hidden.) You aren't angry, are you?
    

      Capt. G. Angry? Not in the least. (Aside.) Good Lord, what have I done to
      deserve this angel?
    

      Mrs. G. (Aside.) And he never asked for the name! How funny men are! But
      perhaps it's as well.
    

      Capt. G. That man will go to heaven because you once thought you cared for
      him. 'Wonder if you'll ever drag me up there?
    

      Mrs. G. (Firmly.) 'Sha'n't go if you don't.
    

      Capt. G. Thanks. I say, Pussy, I don't know much about your religious
      beliefs. You were brought up to believe in a heaven and all that, weren't
      you?
    

      Mrs. G. Yes. But it was a pincushion heaven, with hymn-books in all the
      pews.
    

      Capt. G. (Wagging his head with intense conviction.) Never mind. There is
      a pukka heaven.
    

      Mrs. G. Where do you bring that message from, my prophet?
    

      Capt. G. Here! Because we care for each other. So it's all right.
    

      Mrs. G. (As a troop of langurs crash through the branches.) So it's all
      right. But Darwin says that we came from those!
    

      Capt. G. (Placidly.) Ah! Darwin was never in love with an angel. That
      settles it. Sstt, you brutes! Monkeys, indeed! You shouldn't read those
      books.
    

      Mrs. G. (Folding her hands.) If it pleases my Lord the King to issue
      proclamation.
    

      Capt. G. Don't, dear one. There are no orders between us. Only I'd rather
      you didn't. They lead to nothing, and bother people's heads.
    

      Mrs. G. Like your first engagement.
    

      Capt. G. (With an immense calm.) That was a necessary evil and led to you.
      Are you nothing?
    

      Mrs. G. Not so very much, am I?
    

      Capt. G. All this world and the next to me.
    

      Mrs. G. (Very softly.) My boy of boys! Shall I tell you something?
    

      Capt. G. Yes, if it's not dreadful—about other men.
    

      Mrs. G. It's about my own bad little self.
    

      Capt. G. Then it must be good. Go on, dear.
    

      Mrs. G. (Slowly.) I don't know why I'm telling you, Pip; but if ever you
      marry again—(Interlude.) Take your hand from my mouth or I'll bite!
      In the future, then remember—I don't know quite how to put it!
    

      Capt. G. (Snorting indignantly.) Don't try. “Marry again,” indeed!
    

      Mrs. G. I must. Listen, my husband. Never, never, never tell your wife
      anything that you do not wish her to remember and think over all her life.
      Because a woman—yes, I am a woman—can't forget.
    

      Capt. G. By Jove, how do you know that?
    

      Mrs. G. (Confusedly.) I don't. I'm only guessing. I am—I was—a
      silly little girl; but I feel that I know so much, oh, so very much more
      than you, dearest. To begin with, I'm your wife.
    

      Capt. G. So I have been led to believe.
    

      Mrs. G. And I shall want to know every one of your secrets—to share
      everything you know with you. (Stares round desperately.)
    

      Capt. G. So you shall, dear, so you shall—but don't look like that.
    

      Mrs. G. For your own sake don't stop me, Phil. I shall never talk to you
      in this way again. You must not tell me! At least, not now. Later on, when
      I'm an old matron it won't matter, but if you love me, be very good to me
      now; for this part of my life I shall never forget! Have I made you
      understand?
    

      Capt. G. I think so, child. Have I said anything yet that you disapprove
      of?
    

      Mrs. G. Will you be very angry? That—that voice, and what you said
      about the engagement—
    

      Capt. G. But you asked to be told that, darling.
    

      Mrs. G. And that's why you shouldn't have told me! You must be the Judge,
      and, oh, Pip, dearly as I love you, I shan't be able to help you! I shall
      hinder you, and you must judge in spite of me!
    

      Capt. G. (Meditatively.) We have a great many things to find out together,
      God help us both—say so, Pussy—but we shall understand each
      other better every day; and I think I'm beginning to see now. How in the
      world did you come to know just the importance of giving me just that
      lead?
    

      Mrs. G. I've told you that I don't know. Only somehow it seemed that, in
      all this new life, I was being guided for your sake as well as my own.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Then Mafflin was right! They know, and we—we're
      blind all of us. (Lightly.) 'Getting a little beyond our depth, dear,
      aren't we? I'll remember, and, if I fail, let me be punished as I deserve.
    

      Mrs. G. There shall be no punishment. We'll start into life together from
      here—you and I—and no one else.
    

      Capt. G. And no one else. (A pause.) Your eyelashes are all wet, Sweet?
      Was there ever such a quaint little Absurdity?
    

      Mrs. G. Was there ever such nonsense talked before?
    

      Capt. G. (Knocking the ashes out of his pipe.) 'Tisn't what we say, it's
      what we don't say, that helps. And it's all the profoundest philosophy.
      But no one would understand—even if it were put into a book.
    

      Mrs. G. The idea! No—only we ourselves, or people like ourselves—if
      there are any people like us.
    

      Capt. G. (Magisterially.) All people, not like ourselves, are blind
      idiots.
    

      Mrs. G. (Wiping her eyes.) Do you think, then, that there are any people
      as happy as we are?
    

      Capt. G. 'Must be—unless we've appropriated all the happiness in the
      world.
    

      Mrs. G. (Looking toward Simla.) Poor dears! Just fancy if we have!
    

      Capt. G. Then we'll hang on to the whole show, for it's a great deal too
      jolly to lose—eh, wife 'o mine?
    

      Mrs. G. O Pip! Pip! How much of you is a solemn, married man and how much
      a horrid slangy schoolboy?
    

      Capt. G. When you tell me how much of you was eighteen last birthday and
      how much is as old as the Sphinx and twice as mysterious, perhaps I'll
      attend to you. Lend me that banjo. The spirit moveth me to yowl at the
      sunset.
    

      Mrs. G. Mind! It's not tuned. Ah! How that jars!
    

      Capt. G. (Turning pegs.) It's amazingly different to keep a banjo to
      proper pitch.
    

      Mrs. G. It's the same with all musical instruments, What shall it be?
    

      Capt. G. “Vanity,” and let the hills hear. (Sings through the first and
      half of the second verse. Turning to Mrs. G.) Now, chorus! Sing, Pussy!
    

      BOTH TOGETHER. (Con brio, to the horror of the monkeys who are settling
      for the night.)—
    

      “Vanity, all is Vanity,” said Wisdom, scorning me—I clasped my true
      Love's tender hand and answered frank and free-ee “If this be Vanity who'd
      be wise? If this be Vanity who'd be wise? If this be Vanity who'd be
      wi-ise (Crescendo.) Vanity let it be!”
     

      Mrs. G. (Defiantly to the grey of the evening sky.) “Vanity let it be!”
     

      ECHO. (Prom the Fagoo spur.) Let it be!
    







      FATIMA
    

      And you may go in every room of the house and see everything that is
      there, but into the Blue Room you must not go. —The Story of Blue
      Beard.
    

      SCENE. The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains. Time, 11 A. M. on a Sunday
      morning. Captain GADSBY, in his shirt-sleeves, is bending over a complete
      set of Hussar's equipment, from saddle to picketing-rope, which is neatly
      spread over the floor of his study. He is smoking an unclean briar, and
      his forehead is puckered with thought.
    

      Capt. G. (To himself, fingering a headstall.) Jack's an ass. There's
      enough brass on this to load a mule—and, if the Americans know
      anything about anything, it can be cut down to a bit only. 'Don't want the
      watering-bridle, either. Humbug!—Half a dozen sets of chains and
      pulleys for one horse! Rot! (Scratching his head.) Now, let's consider it
      all over from the beginning. By Jove, I've forgotten the scale of weights!
      Never mind. 'Keep the bit only, and eliminate every boss from the crupper
      to breastplate. No breastplate at all. Simple leather strap across the
      breast—like the Russians. Hi! Jack never thought of that!
    

      Mrs. G. (Entering hastily, her hand bound in a cloth.) Oh, Pip, I've
      scalded my hand over that horrid, horrid Tiparee jam!
    

      Capt. G. (Absently.) Eh! Wha-at?
    

      Mrs. G. (With round-eyed reproach.) I've scalded it aw-fully! Aren't you
      sorry? And I did so want that jam to jam properly.
    

      Capt. G. Poor little woman! Let me kiss the place and make it well.
      (Unrolling bandage.) You small sinner! Where's that scald? I can't see it.
    

      Mrs. G. On the top of the little finger. There!—It's a most 'normous
      big burn!
    

      Capt. G. (Kissing little finger.) Baby! Let Hyder look after the jam. You
      know I don't care for sweets.
    

      Mrs. G. Indeed?—Pip!
    

      Capt. G. Not of that kind, anyhow. And now run along, Minnie, and leave me
      to my own base devices. I'm busy.
    

      Mrs. G. (Calmly settling herself in long chair.) So I see. What a mess
      you're making! Why have you brought all that smelly leather stuff into the
      house?
    

      Capt. G. To play with. Do you mind, dear?
    

      Mrs. G. Let me play too. I'd like it.
    

      Capt. G. I'm afraid you wouldn't. Pussy—Don't you think that jam
      will burn, or whatever it is that jam does when it's not looked after by a
      clever little housekeeper?
    

      Mrs. G. I thought you said Hyder could attend to it. I left him in the
      veranda, stirring—when I hurt myself so.
    

      Capt. G. (His eye returning to the equipment.) Po-oor little woman!—Three
      pounds four and seven is three eleven, and that can be cut down to two
      eight, with just a lee-tle care, without weakening anything. Farriery is
      all rot in incompetent hands. What's the use of a shoe-case when a man's
      scouting? He can't stick it on with a lick—like a stamp—the
      shoe! Skittles—
    

      Mrs. G. What's skittles? Pah! What is this leather cleaned with?
    

      Capt. G. Cream and champagne and—Look here, dear, do you really want
      to talk to me about anything important?
    

      Mrs. G. No. I've done my accounts, and I thought I'd like to see what
      you're doing.
    

      Capt. G. Well, love, now you've seen and—Would you mind?—That
      is to say—Minnie, I really am busy.
    

      Mrs. G. You want me to go?
    

      Capt. G, Yes, dear, for a little while. This tobacco will hang in your
      dress, and saddlery doesn't interest you.
    

      Mrs. G. Everything you do interests me, Pip.
    

      Capt. G. Yes, I know, I know, dear. I'll tell you all about it some day
      when I've put a head on this thing. In the meantime—
    

      Mrs. G. I'm to be turned out of the room like a troublesome child?
    

      Capt. G. No-o. I don't mean that exactly. But, you see, I shall be
      tramping up and down, shifting these things to and fro, and I shall be in
      your way. Don't you think so?
    

      Mrs. G. Can't I lift them about? Let me try. (Reaches forward to trooper's
      saddle.)
    

      Capt. G. Good gracious, child, don't touch it. You'll hurt yourself.
      (Picking up saddle.) Little girls aren't expected to handle numdahs. Now,
      where would you like it put? (Holds saddle above his head.)
    

      Mrs. G. (A break in her voice.) Nowhere. Pip, how good you are—and
      how strong! Oh, what's that ugly red streak inside your arm?
    

      Capt. G. (Lowering saddle quickly.) Nothing. It's a mark of sorts.
      (Aside.) And Jack's coming to tiffin with his notions all cut and dried!
    

      Mrs. G. I know it's a mark, but I've never seen it before. It runs all up
      the arm. What is it?
    

      Capt. G. A cut—if you want to know.
    

      Mrs. G. Want to know! Of course I do! I can't have my husband cut to
      pieces in this way. How did it come? Was it an accident? Tell me, Pip.
    

      Capt. G. (Grimly.) No. 'Twasn't an accident. I got it—from a man—in
      Afghanistan.
    

      Mrs. G. In action? Oh, Pip, and you never told me!
    

      Capt. G. I'd forgotten all about it.
    

      Mrs. G. Hold up your arm! What a horrid, ugly scar! Are you sure it
      doesn't hurt now! How did the man give it you?
    

      Capt. G. (Desperately looking at his watch.) With a knife. I came down—old
      Van Loo did, that's to say—and fell on my leg, so I couldn't run.
      And then this man came up and began chopping at me as I sprawled.
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, don't, don't! That's enough!—Well, what happened?
    

      Capt. G. I couldn't get to my holster, and Mafflin came round the corner
      and stopped the performance.
    

      Mrs. G. How? He's such a lazy man, I don't believe he did.
    

      Capt. G. Don't you? I don't think the man had much doubt about it. Jack
      cut his head off.
    

      Mrs. G. Cut-his-head-off! “With one blow,” as they say in the books?
    

      Capt. G. I'm not sure. I was too interested in myself to know much about
      it. Anyhow, the head was off, and Jack was punching old Van Loo in the
      ribs to make him get up. Now you know all about it, dear, and now—
    

      Mrs. G. You want me to go, of course. You never told me about this, though
      I've been married to you for ever so long; and you never would have told
      me if I hadn't found out; and you never do tell me anything about
      yourself, or what you do, or what you take an interest in.
    

      Capt. G. Darling, I'm always with you, aren't I?
    

      Mrs. G. Always in my pocket, you were going to say. I know you are; but
      you are always thinking away from me.
    

      Capt. G. (Trying to hide a smile.) Am I? I wasn't aware of it. I'm awf'ly
      sorry.
    

      Mrs. G. (Piteously.) Oh, don't make fun of me! Pip, you know what I mean.
      When you are reading one of those things about Cavalry, by that idiotic
      Prince—why doesn't he be a Prince instead of a stable-boy?
    

      Capt. G. Prince Kraft a stable-boy—Oh, my Aunt! Never mind, dear.
      You were going to say?
    

      Mrs. G. It doesn't matter; you don't care for what I say. Only—only
      you get up and walk about the room, staring in front of you, and then
      Mafflin comes in to dinner, and after I'm in the drawing-room I can hear
      you and him talking, and talking, and talking, about things I can't
      understand, and—oh, I get so tired and feel so lonely!—I don't
      want to complain and be a trouble, Pip; but I do indeed I do!
    

      Capt. G. My poor darling! I never thought of that. Why don't you ask some
      nice people in to dinner?
    

      Mrs. G. Nice people! Where am I to find them? Horrid frumps! And if I did,
      I shouldn't be amused. You know I only want you.
    

      Capt. G. And you have me surely, Sweetheart?
    

      Mrs. G. I have not! Pip why don't you take me into your life?
    

      Capt. G. More than I do? That would be difficult, dear.
    

      Mrs. G. Yes, I suppose it would—to you. I'm no help to you—no
      companion to you; and you like to have it so.
    

      Capt. G. Aren't you a little unreasonable, Pussy?
    

      Mrs. G. (Stamping her foot.) I'm the most reasonable woman in the world—when
      I'm treated properly.
    

      Capt. G. And since when have I been treating you improperly?
    

      Mrs. G. Always—and since the beginning. You know you have.
    

      Capt. G. I don't; but I'm willing to be convinced.
    

      Mrs. G. (Pointing to saddlery.) There!
    

      Capt. G. How do you mean?
    

      Mrs. G. What does all that mean? Why am I not to be told? Is it so
      precious?
    

      Capt. G. I forget its exact Government value just at present. It means
      that it is a great deal too heavy.
    

      Mrs. G. Then why do you touch it?
    

      Capt. G. To make it lighter. See here, little love, I've one notion and
      Jack has another, but we are both agreed that all this equipment is about
      thirty pounds too heavy. The thing is how to cut it down without weakening
      any part of it, and, at the same time, allowing the trooper to carry
      everything he wants for his own comfort—socks and shirts and things
      of that kind.
    

      Mrs. G. Why doesn't he pack them in a little trunk?
    

      Capt. G. (Kissing her.) Oh, you darling! Pack them in a little trunk,
      indeed! Hussars don't carry trunks, and it's a most important thing to
      make the horse do all the carrying.
    

      Mrs. G. But why need you bother about it? You're not a trooper.
    

      Capt. G. No; but I command a few score of him; and equipment is nearly
      everything in these days.
    

      Mrs. G. More than me?
    

      Capt. G. Stupid! Of course not; but it's a matter that I'm tremendously
      interested in, because if I or Jack, or I and Jack, work out some sort of
      lighter saddlery and all that, it's possible that we may get it adopted.
    

      Mrs. G. How?
    

      Capt. G. Sanctioned at Home, where they will make a sealed pattern—a
      pattern that all the saddlers must copy—and so it will be used by
      all the regiments.
    

      Mrs. G. And that interests you?
    

      Capt. G. It's part of my profession, y'know, and my profession is a good
      deal to me. Everything in a soldier's equipment is important, and if we
      can improve that equipment, so much the better for the soldiers and for
      us.
    

      Mrs. G. Who's “us”?
    

      Capt. G. Jack and I; only Jack's notions are too radical. What's that big
      sigh for, Minnie?
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, nothing—and you've kept all this a secret from me! Why?
    

      Capt. G. Not a secret, exactly, dear. I didn't say anything about it to
      you because I didn't think it would amuse you.
    

      Mrs. G. And am I only made to be amused?
    

      Capt. G. No, of course. I merely mean that it couldn't interest you.
    

      Mrs. G. It's your work and—and if you'd let me, I'd count all these
      things up. If they are too heavy, you know by how much they are too heavy,
      and you must have a list of things made out to your scale of lightness,
      and—
    

      Capt. G. I have got both scales somewhere in my head; but it's hard to
      tell how light you can make a head-stall, for instance, until you've
      actually had a model made.
    

      Mrs. G. But if you read out the list, I could copy it down, and pin it up
      there just above your table. Wouldn't that do?
    

      Capt. G. It would be awf'ly nice, dear, but it would be giving you trouble
      for nothing. I can't work that way. I go by rule of thumb. I know the
      present scale of weights, and the other one—the one that I'm trying
      to work to—will shift and vary so much that I couldn't be certain,
      even if I wrote it down.
    

      Mrs. G. I'm so sorry. I thought I might help. Is there anything else that
      I could be of use in?
    

      Capt. G. (Looking round the room.) I can't think of anything. You're
      always helping me you know.
    

      Mrs. G. Am I? How?
    

      Capt. G. You are of course, and as long as you're near me—I can't
      explain exactly, but it's in the air.
    

      Mrs. G. And that's why you wanted to send me away?
    

      Capt. G. That's only when I'm trying to do work—grubby work like
      this.
    

      Mrs. G. Mafflin's better, then, isn't he?
    

      Capt. G. (Rashly.) Of course he is. Jack and I have been thinking along
      the same groove for two or three years about this equipment. It's our hobby,
      and it may really be useful some day.
    

      Mrs. G. (After a pause.) And that's all that you have away from me?
    

      Capt. G. It isn't very far away from you now. Take care the oil on that
      bit doesn't come off on your dress.
    

      Mrs. G. I wish—I wish so much that I could really help you. I
      believe I could—if I left the room. But that's not what I mean.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Give me patience! I wish she would go. (Aloud.) I assure
      you you can't do anything for me, Minnie, and I must really settle down to
      this. Where's my pouch?
    

      Mrs. G. (Crossing to writing-table.) Here you are, Bear. What a mess you
      keep your table in!
    

      Capt. G. Don' ttouch it. There's a method in my madness, though you
      mightn't think of it.
    

      Mrs. G. (At table.) I want to look—Do you keep accounts, Pip?
    

      Capt. G. (Bending over saddlery.) Of a sort. Are you rummaging among the
      Troop papers? Be careful.
    

      Mrs. G. Why? I sha'n't disturb anything. Good gracious! I had no idea that
      you had anything to do with so many sick horses.
    

      Capt. G. 'Wish I hadn't, but they insist on falling sick. Minnie, if 1
      were you I really should not investigate those papers. You may come across
      something that you won't like.
    

      Mrs. G. Why will you always treat me like a child? I know I'm not
      displacing the horrid things.
    

      Capt. G. (Resignedly.) Very well, then. Don't blame me if anything
      happens. Play with the table and let me go on with the saddlery. (Slipping
      hand into trousers-pocket.) Oh, the deuce!
    

      Mrs. G. (Her back to G.) What's that for?
    

      Capt. G. Nothing. (Aside.) There's not much in it, but I wish I'd torn it
      up.
    

      Mrs. G. (Turning over contents of table.) I know you'll hate me for this;
      but I do want to see what your work is like. (A pause.) Pip, what are
      “farcybuds”?
    

      Capt. G. Hah! Would you really like to know? They aren't pretty things.
    

      Mrs. G. This Journal of Veterinary Science says they are of “absorbing
      interest.” Tell me.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) It may turn her attention.
    

      Gives a long and designedly loathsome account of glanders and farcy.
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, that's enough. Don't go on!
    

      Capt. G. But you wanted to know—Then these things suppurate and
      matterate and spread—
    

      Mrs. G. Pin, you're making me sick! You're a horrid, disgusting schoolboy.
    

      Capt. G. (On his knees among the bridles.) You asked to be told. It's not
      my fault if you worry me into talking about horrors.
    

      Mrs. G. Why didn't you say No?
    

      Capt. G. Good Heavens, child! Have you come in here simply to bully me?
    

      Mrs. G. I bully you? How could I! You're so strong. (Hysterically.) Strong
      enough to pick me up and put me outside the door and leave me there to
      cry. Aren't you?
    

      Capt. G. It seems to me that you're an irrational little baby. Are you
      quite well?
    

      Mrs. G. Do I look ill? (Returning to table). Who is your lady friend with
      the big grey envelope and the fat monogram outside?
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Then it wasn't locked up, confound it. (Aloud.) “God
      made her, therefore let her pass for a woman.” You remember what farcybuds
      are like?
    

      Mrs. G. (Showing envelope.) This has nothing to do with them. I'm going to
      open it. May I?
    

      Capt. G. Certainly, if you want to. I'd sooner you didn't though. I don't
      ask to look at your letters to the Deercourt girl.
    

      Mrs. G. You'd better not, Sir! (Takes letter from envelope.) Now, may I
      look? If you say no, I shall cry.
    

      Capt. G. You've never cried in my knowledge of you, and I don't believe
      you could.
    

      Mrs. G. I feel very like it today, Pip. Don't be hard on me. (Reads
      letter.) It begins in the middle, without any “Dear Captain Gadsby,” or
      anything. How funny!
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) No, it's not Dear Captain Gadsby, or anything, now. How
      funny!
    

      Mrs. G. What a strange letter! (Reads.) “And so the moth has come too near
      the candle at last, and has been singed into—shall I say
      Respectability? I congratulate him, and hope he will be as happy as he
      deserves to be.” What does that mean? Is she congratulating you about our
      marriage?
    

      Capt. G. Yes, I suppose so.
    

      Mrs. G. (Still reading letter.) She seems to be a particular friend of
      yours.
    

      Capt. G. Yes. She was an excellent matron of sorts—a Mrs. Herriott—wife
      of a Colonel Herriott. I used to know some of her people at Home long ago—before
      I came out.
    

      Mrs. G. Some Colonel's wives are young—as young as me. I knew one
      who was younger.
    

      Capt. G. Then it couldn't have been Mrs. Herriott. She was old enough to
      have been your mother, dear.
    

      Mrs. G. I remember now. Mrs. Scargill was talking about her at the
      Dutfins' tennis, before you came for me, on Tuesday. Captain Mafflin said
      she was a “dear old woman.” Do you know, I think Mafflin is a very clumsy
      man with his feet.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) Good old Jack! (Aloud.) Why, dear?
    

      Mrs. G. He had put his cup down on the ground then, and he literally
      stepped into it. Some of the tea spirted over my dress—the grey one.
      I meant to tell you about it before.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) There are the makings of a strategist about Jack though
      his methods are coarse. (Aloud.) You'd better get a new dress, then.
      (Aside.) Let us pray that that will turn her.
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, it isn't stained in the least. I only thought that I'd tell
      you. (Returning to letter.) What an extraordinary person! (Reads.) “But
      need I remind you that you have taken upon yourself a charge of wardship”—what
      in the world is a charge of wardship?—“which as you yourself know,
      may end in Consequences”—
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) It's safest to let em see everything as they come across
      it; but 'seems to me that there are exceptions to the rule. (Aloud.) I
      told you that there was nothing to be gained from rearranging my table.
    

      Mrs. G. (Absently.) What does the woman mean? She goes on talking about
      Consequences—“almost inevitable Consequences” with a capital C—for
      half a page. (Flushing scarlet.) Oh, good gracious! How abominable!
    

      Capt. G. (Promptly.) Do you think so? Doesn't it show a sort of motherly
      interest in us? (Aside.) Thank Heaven. Harry always wrapped her meaning up
      safely! (Aloud.) Is it absolutely necessary to go on with the letter,
      darling?
    

      Mrs. G. It's impertinent—it's simply horrid. What right has this
      woman to write in this way to you? She oughtn't to.
    

      Capt. G. When you write to the Deercourt girl, I notice that you generally
      fill three or four sheets. Can't you let an old woman babble on paper once
      in a way? She means well.
    

      Mrs. G. I don't care. She shouldn't write, and if she did, you ought to
      have shown me her letter.
    

      Capt. G. Can't you understand why I kept it to myself, or must I explain
      at length—as I explained the farcybuds?
    

      Mrs. G. (Furiously.) Pip I hate you! This is as bad as those idiotic
      saddle-bags on the floor. Never mind whether it would please me or not,
      you ought to have given it to me to read.
    

      Capt. G. It comes to the same thing. You took it yourself.
    

      Mrs. G. Yes, but if I hadn't taken it, you wouldn't have said a word. I
      think this Harriet Herriott—it's like a name in a book—is an
      interfering old Thing.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) So long as you thoroughly understand that she is old, I
      don't much care what you think. (Aloud.) Very good, dear. Would you like
      to write and tell her so? She's seven thousand miles away.
    

      Mrs. G. I don't want to have anything to do with her, but you ought to
      have told me. (Turning to last page of letter.) And she patronizes me,
      too. I've never seen her! (Reads.) “I do not know how the world stands
      with you; in all human probability I shall never know; but whatever I may
      have said before, I pray for her sake more than for yours that all may be
      well. I have learned what misery means, and I dare not wish that any one
      dear to you should share my knowledge.”
     

      Capt. G. Good God! Can't you leave that letter alone, or, at least, can't
      you refrain from reading it aloud? I've been through it once. Put it back
      on the desk. Do you hear me?
    

      Mrs. G. (Irresolutely.) I sh-sha'n't! (Looks at G.'s eyes.) Oh, Pip,
      please! I didn't mean to make you angry—'Deed, I didn't. Pip, I'm so
      sorry. I know I've wasted your time—
    

      Capt. G. (Grimly.) You have. Now, will you be good enough to go—if
      there is nothing more in my room that you are anxious to pry into?
    

      Mrs. G. (Putting out her hands.) Oh, Pip, don't look at me like that! I've
      never seen you look like that before and it hu-urts me! I'm sorry. I
      oughtn't to have been here at all, and—and—and—(sobbing.)
      Oh, be good to me! Be good to me! There's only you—anywhere! Breaks
      down in long chair, hiding face in cushions.
    

      Capt. G. (Aside.) She doesn't know how she flicked me on the raw. (Aloud,
      bending over chair.) I didn't mean to be harsh, dear—I didn't
      really. You can stay here as long as you please, and do what you please.
      Don't cry like that. You'll make yourself sick. (Aside.) What on earth has
      come over her? (Aloud.) Darling, what's the matter with you?
    

      Mrs. G. (Her face still hidden.) Let me go—let me go to my own room.
      Only—only say you aren't angry with me.
    

      Capt. G. Angry with you, love! Of course not. I was angry with myself. I'd
      lost my temper over the saddlery—Don't hide your face, Pussy. I want
      to kiss it.
    

      Bends lower, Mrs. G. slides right arm round his neck. Several interludes
      and much sobbing.
    

      Mrs. G. (In a whisper.) I didn't mean about the jam when I came in to tell
      you— CAPT. G. Bother the jam and the equipment! (Interlude.)
    

      Mrs. G. (Still more faintly.) My finger wasn't scalded at all. I—wanted
      to speak to you about—about—something else, and—I didn't
      know how.
    

      Capt. G. Speak away, then. (Looking into her eyes.) Eh! Wha-at? Minnie!
      Here, don't go away! You don't mean?
    

      Mrs. G. (Hysterically, backing to portiere and hiding her face in its
      folds.) The—the Almost Inevitable Consequences! (Flits through
      portiere as G. attempts to catch her, and bolts her self in her own room.)
    

      Capt. G. (His arms full of portiere.) Oh! (Sitting down heavily in chair.)
      I'm a brute, a pig—a bully, and a blackguard. My poor, poor little
      darling! “Made to be amused only?”—
    







      THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW, KNOWING GOOD AND EVIL.
    

      SCENE. The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains, in June. Punkah-coolies asleep
      in veranda where Captain GADSBY is walking up and down. DOCTOR'S trap in
      porch. JUNIOR CHAPLAIN drifting generally and uneasily through the house.
      Time, 3:40 A. M. Heat 94 degrees in veranda.
    

      DOCTOR. (Coming into veranda and touching G. on the shoulder.) You had
      better go in and see her now.
    

      Capt. G. (The color of good cigar-ash.) Eh, wha-at? Oh, yes, of course.
      What did you say?
    

      DOCTOR. (Syllable by syllable.) Go-in-to-the-room-and-see-her. She wants
      to speak to you. (Aside, testily.) I shall have him on my hands next.
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (In half-lighted dining room.) Isn't there any?—
    

      DOCTOR. (Savagely.) Ha, you little fool!
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Let me do my work. Gadsby, stop a minute—I (Edges
      after G.)
    

      DOCTOR. Wait till she sends for you at least—at least. Man alive,
      he'll kill you if you go in there! What are you bothering him for?
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Coming into veranda.) I've given him a stiff brandy-peg.
      He wants it. You've forgotten him for the last ten hours and—forgotten
      yourself too.
    

      G. enters bedroom, which is lit by one night-lamp. Ayah on the floor
      pretending to be asleep.
    

      VOICE. (From the bed.) All down the street—such bonfires! Ayah, go
      and put them out! (Appealingly.) How can I sleep with an installation of
      the C.I.E. in my room? No—not C.I.E. Something else. What was it?
    

      Capt. G. (Trying to control his voice.) Minnie, I'm here. (Bending over
      bed.) Don't you know me, Minnie? It's me—it's Phil—it's your
      husband.
    

      VOICE. (Mechanically.) It's me—it's Phil—it's your husband.
    

      Capt. G. She doesn't know me!—It's your own husband, darling.
    

      VOICE. Your own husband, darling.
    

      Ayah. (With an inspiration.) Memsahib understanding all I saying.
    

      Capt. G. Make her understand me then—quick!
    

      Ayah. (Hand on Mrs. G.'s fore-head.) Memsahib! Captain Sahib here.
    

      VOICE. Salaem do. (Fretfully.) I know I'm not fit to be seen.
    

      Ayah. (Aside to G.) Say “marneen” same as breakfash.
    

      Capt. G. Good morning, little woman. How are we today?
    

      VOICE. That's Phil. Poor old Phil. (Viciously.) Phil, you fool, I can't
      see you. Come nearer.
    

      Capt. G. Minnie! Minnie! It's me—you know me?
    

      VOICE. (Mockingly.) Of course I do. Who does not know the man who was so
      cruel to his wife—almost the only one he ever had?
    

      Capt. G. Yes, dear. Yes—of course, of course. But won't you speak to
      him? He wants to speak to you so much.
    

      VOICE. They'd never let him in. The Doctor would give darwaza band even if
      he were in the house. He'll never come. (Despairingly.) O Judas! Judas!
      Judas!
    

      Capt. G. (Putting out his arms.) They have let him in, and he always was
      in the house Oh, my love—don't you know me?
    

      VOICE. (In a half chant.) “And it came to pass at the eleventh hour that
      this poor soul repented.” It knocked at the gates, but they were shut—tight
      as a plaster—a great, burning plaster. They had pasted our marriage
      certificate all across the door, and it was made of red-hot iron—people
      really ought to be more careful, you know.
    

      Capt. G. What am I to do? (Taking her in his arms.) Minnie! speak to me—to
      Phil.
    

      VOICE. What shall I say? Oh, tell me what to say before it's too late!
      They are all going away and I can't say anything.
    

      Capt. G. Say you know me! Only say you know me!
    

      DOCTOR. (Who has entered quietly.) For pity's sake don't take it too much
      to heart, Gadsby. It's this way sometimes. They won't recognize. They say
      all sorts of queer things—don't you see?
    

      Capt. G. All right! All right! Go away now; she'll recognize me; you're
      bothering her. She must—mustn't she?
    

      DOCTOR. She will before—Have I your leave to try?—
    

      Capt. G. Anything you please, so long as she'll know me. It's only a
      question of hours, isn't it?
    

      DOCTOR. (Professionally.) While there's life there's hope y'know. But
      don't build on it.
    

      Capt. G. I don't. Pull her together if it's possible. (Aside.) What have I
      done to deserve this?
    

      DOCTOR. (Bending over bed.) Now, Mrs. Gadsby! We shall be all right
      tomorrow. You must take it, or I sha'n't let Phil see you. It isn't nasty,
      is it?
    

      Voice. Medicines! Always more medicines! Can't you leave me alone?
    

      Capt. G. Oh, leave her in peace, Doc!
    

      DOCTOR. (Stepping back,—aside.) May I be forgiven if I've done
      wrong. (Aloud.) In a few minutes she ought to be sensible; but I daren't
      tell you to look for anything. It's only—
    

      Capt. G. What? Go on, man.
    

      DOCTOR. (In a whisper.) Forcing the last rally.
    

      Capt. G. Then leave us alone.
    

      DOCTOR. Don't mind what she says at first, if you can. They—they—they
      turn against those they love most sometimes in this.—It's hard, but—
    

      Capt. G. Am I her husband or are you? Leave us alone for what time we have
      together.
    

      VOICE. (Confidentially.) And we were engaged quite suddenly, Emma. I
      assure you that I never thought of it for a moment; but, oh, my little Me!—I
      don't know what I should have done if he hadn't proposed.
    

      Capt. G. She thinks of that Deercourt girl before she thinks of me.
      (Aloud.) Minnie!
    

      VOICE. Not from the shops, Mummy dear. You can get the real leaves from
      Kaintu, and (laughing weakly) never mind about the blossoms—Dead
      white silk is only fit for widows, and I won't wear it. It's as bad as a
      winding sheet. (A long pause.)
    

      Capt. G. I never asked a favor yet. If there is anybody to listen to me,
      let her know me—even if I die too!
    

      VOICE. (Very faintly.) Pip, Pip dear.
    

      Capt. G. I'm here, darling.
    

      VOICE. What has happened? They've been bothering me so with medicines and
      things, and they wouldn't let you come and see me. I was never ill before.
      Am I ill now?
    

      Capt. G. You—you aren't quite well.
    

      VOICE. How funny! Have I been ill long?
    

      Capt. G. Some days; but you'll be all right in a little time.
    

      VOICE. Do you think so, Pip? I don't feel well and—Oh! what have
      they done to my hair?
    

      Capt. G. I d-d-on't know.
    

      VOICE. They've cut it off. What a shame!
    

      Capt. G. It must have been to make your head cooler.
    

      VOICE. Just like a boy's wig. Don't I look horrid?
    

      Capt. G. Never looked prettier in your life, dear. (Aside.) How am I to
      ask her to say goodbye?
    

      VOICE. I don't feel pretty. I feel very ill. My heart won't work. It's
      nearly dead inside me, and there's a funny feeling in my eyes. Everything
      seems the same distance—you and the almirah and the table inside my
      eyes or miles away. What does it mean, Pip?
    

      Capt. G. You're a little feverish, Sweetheart—very feverish.
      (Breaking down.) My love! my love! How can I let you go?
    

      VOICE. I thought so. Why didn't you tell me that at first?
    

      Capt. G. What?
    

      VOICE. That I am going to—die.
    

      Capt. G. But you aren't! You sha'n't.
    

      Ayah to punkah-coolie. (Stepping into veranda after a glance at the bed.
      ). Punkah chor do! (Stop pulling the punkah.)
    

      VOICE. It's hard, Pip. So very, very hard after one year—just one
      year. (Wailing.) And I'm only twenty. Most girls aren't even married at
      twenty. Can't they do anything to help me? I don't want to die.
    

      Capt. G. Hush, dear. You won't.
    

      VOICE. What's the use of talking? Help me! You've never failed me yet. Oh,
      Phil, help me to keep alive. (Feverishly.) I don't believe you wish me to
      live. You weren't a bit sorry when that horrid Baby thing died. I wish I'd
      killed it!
    

      Capt. G. (Drawing his hand across his forehead.) It's more than a man's
      meant to bear—it's not right. (Aloud.) Minnie, love, I'd die for you
      if it would help.
    

      VOICE. No more death. There's enough already. Pip, don't you die too.
    

      Capt. G. I wish I dared.
    

      VOICE. It says: “Till Death do us part.” Nothing after that—and so
      it would be no use. It stops at the dying. Why does it stop there? Only
      such a very short life, too. Pip, I'm sorry we married.
    

      Capt. G. No! Anything but that, Min!
    

      VOICE. Because you'll forget and I'll forget. Oh, Pip, don't forget! I
      always loved you, though I was cross sometimes. If I ever did anything
      that you didn't like, say you forgive me now.
    

      Capt. G. You never did, darling. On my soul and honor you never did. I
      haven't a thing to forgive you.
    

      VOICE. I sulked for a whole week about those petunias. (With a laugh.)
      What a little wretch I was, and how grieved you were! Forgive me that, Pp.
    

      Capt. G. There's nothing to forgive. It was my fault. They were too near
      the drive. For God's sake don't talk so, Minnie! There's such a lot to say
      and so little time to say it in.
    

      VOICE. Say that you'll always love me—until the end.
    

      Capt. G. Until the end. (Carried away.) It's a lie. It must be, because
      we've loved each other. This isn't the end.
    

      VOICE. (Relapsing into semi-delirium.) My Church-service has an ivory
      cross on the back, and it says so, so it must be true. “Till Death do us
      part.”—but that's a lie. (With a parody of G.'s manner.) A damned
      lie! (Recklessly.) Yes, I can swear as well as a Trooper, Pip. I can't
      make my head think, though. That's because they cut off my hair. How can
      one think with one's head all fuzzy? (Pleadingly.) Hold me, Pip! Keep me
      with you always and always. (Relapsing.) But if you marry the Thorniss
      girl when I'm dead, I'll come back and howl under our bedroom window all
      night. Oh, bother! You'll think I'm a jackal. Pip, what time is it?
    

      Capt. G. A little before the dawn, dear.
    

      VOICE. I wonder where I shall be this time tomorrow?
    

      Capt. G. Would you like to see the Padre?
    

      VOICE. Why should I? He'd tell me that I am going to heaven; and that
      wouldn't be true, because you are here. Do you recollect when he upset the
      cream-ice all over his trousers at the Gassers' tennis?
    

      Capt. G. Yes, dear.
    

      VOICE. I often wondered whether he got another pair of trousers; but then
      his are so shiny all over that you really couldn't tell unless you were
      told. Let's call him in and ask.
    

      Capt. G. (Gravely.) No. I don't think he'd like that. Your head comfy,
      Sweetheart?
    

      VOICE. (Faintly with a sigh of contentment.) Yeth! Gracious, Pip, when did
      you shave last? Your chin's worse than the barrel of a musical box.—No,
      don't lift it up. I like it. (A pause.) You said you've never cried at
      all. You're crying all over my cheek.
    

      Capt. G. I-I-I can't help it, dear.
    

      VOICE. How funny! I couldn't cry now to save my life. (G. shivers.) I want
      to sing.
    

      Capt. G. Won't it tire you? 'Better not, perhaps.
    

      VOICE. Why? I won't be bothered about. (Begins in a hoarse quaver)
    

 “Minnie bakes oaten cake, Minnie brews ale,
 All because her Johnnie's coming home from the sea.” (That's parade, Pip.)
 “And she grows red as a rose, who was so pale;
 And 'Are you sure the church-clock goes?' says she.”
 

      (Pettishly.) I knew I couldn't take the last note. How do the bass chords
      run? (Puts out her hands and begins playing piano on the sheet.)
    

      Capt. G. (Catching up hands.) Ahh! Don't do that, Pussy, if you love me.
    

      VOICE. Love you? Of course I do. Who else should it be? (A pause.)
    

      VOICE. (Very clearly.) Pip, I'm going now. Something's choking me cruelly.
      (Indistinctly.) Into the dark—without you, my heart—But it's a
      lie, dear—we mustn't believe it.—Forever and ever, living or
      dead. Don't let me go, my husband—hold me tight.—They can't—whatever
      happens. (A cough.) Pip—my Pip! Not for always—and—so—soon!
      (Voice ceases.)
    

      Pause of ten minutes. G. buries his face in the side of the bed while AYAH
      bends over bed from opposite side and feels Mrs. G.'s breast and forehead.
    

      Capt. G. (Rising.) Doctor Sahib ko salaam do.
    

      Ayah. (Still by bedside, with a shriek.) Ail Ail Tuta-phuta! My Memsahib!
      Not getting—not have got!—Pusseena agyal (The sweat has come.)
      (Fiercely to G.) TUM jao Doctor Sahib ko jaldi! (You go to the doctor.)
      Oh, my Memsahib!
    

      DOCTOR. (Entering hastily.) Come away, Gadsby. (Bends over bed.) Eh! The
      Dev—What inspired you to stop the punkah? Get out, man—go away—wait
      outside! Go! Here, Ayah! (Over his shoulder to G.) Mind I promise nothing.
    

      The dawn breaks as G. stumbles into the garden.
    

      Capt. M. (Rehung up at the gate on his way to parade and very soberly.)
      Old man, how goes?
    

      Capt. G. (Dazed.) I don't quite know. Stay a bit. Have a drink or
      something. Don't run away. You're just getting amusing. Ha! ha!
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) What am I let in for? Gaddy has aged ten years in the
      night.
    

      Capt. G. (Slowly, fingering charger's headstall.) Your curb's too loose.
    

      Capt. M. So it is. Put it straight, will you? (Aside.) I shall be late for
      parade. Poor Gaddy.
    

      Capt. G. links and unlinks curb-chain aimlessly, and finally stands
      staring toward the veranda. The day brightens.
    

      DOCTOR. (Knocked out of professional gravity, tramping across flower-beds
      and shaking G's hands.) It'-it's-it's!—Gadsby, there's a fair chance—a
      dashed fair chance. The flicker, y'know. The sweat, y'know I saw how it
      would be. The punkah, y'know. Deuced clever woman that Ayah of yours.
      Stopped the punkah just at the right time. A dashed good chance! No—you
      don't go in. We'll pull her through yet I promise on my reputation—under
      Providence. Send a man with this note to Bingle. Two heads better than
      one. 'Specially the Ayah! We'll pull her round. (Retreats hastily to
      house.)
    

      Capt. G. (His head on neck of M.'s charger.) Jack! I bub-bu-believe, I'm
      going to make a bu-bub-bloody exhibitiod of byself.
    

      Capt. M. (Sniffing openly and feeling in his left cuff.) I b-b-believe,
      I'b doing it already. Old bad, what cad I say? I'b as pleased as—Cod
      dab you, Gaddy! You're one big idiot and I'b adother. (Pulling himself
      together.) Sit tight! Here comes the Devil-dodger.
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Who is not in the Doctor's confidence.) We—we are
      only men in these things, Gadsby. I know that I can say nothing now to
      help.
    

      Capt. M. (jealously.) Then don't say it Leave him alone. It's not bad
      enough to croak over. Here, Gaddy, take the chit to Bingle and ride
      hell-for-leather. It'll do you good. I can't go.
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Do him good! (Smiling.) Give me the chit and I'll drive.
      Let him lie down. Your horse is blocking my cart—please!
    

      Capt. M. (Slowly without reining back.) I beg your pardon—I'll
      apologize. On paper if you like.
    

      JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Flicking M.'s charger.) That'll do, thanks. Turn in,
      Gadsby, and I'll bring Bingle back—ahem—“hell-for-leather.”
     

      Capt. M. (Solus.) It would have served me right if he'd cut me across the
      face. He can drive too. I shouldn't care to go that pace in a bamboo cart.
      What a faith he must have in his Maker—of harness! Come hup, you
      brute! (Gallops off to parade, blowing his nose, as the sun rises.)
    

      (INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.)
    

      Mrs. G. (Very white and pinched, in morning wrapper at breakfast table.)
      How big and strange the room looks, and how glad I am to see it again!
      What dust, though! I must talk to the servants. Sugar, Pip? I've almost
      forgotten. (Seriously.) Wasn't I very ill?
    

      Capt. G. Iller than I liked. (Tenderly.) Oh, you bad little Pussy, what a
      start you gave me!
    

      Mrs. G. I'll never do it again.
    

      Capt. G. You'd better not. And now get those poor pale cheeks pink again,
      or I shall be angry. Don't try to lift the urn. You'll upset it. Wait.
      (Comes round to head of table and lifts urn.)
    

      Mrs. G. (Quickly.) Khitmatgar, howarchikhana see kettly lao. Butler, get a
      kettle from the cook-house. (Drawing down G.'s face to her own.) Pip dear,
      I remember.
    

      Capt. G. What?
    

      Mrs. G. That last terrible night.
    

      CAPT. G. Then just you forget all about it.
    

      Mrs. G. (Softly, her eyes filling.) Never. It has brought us very close
      together, my husband. There! (Interlude.) I'm going to give Junda a saree.
    

      Capt. G. I gave her fifty dibs.
    

      Mrs. G. So she told me. It was a 'normous reward. Was I worth it? (Several
      interludes.) Don't! Here's the khitmatgar.—Two lumps or one Sir?
    







      THE SWELLING OF JORDAN
    

      If thou hast run with the footmen and they have wearied thee, then how
      canst thou contend with horses? And if in the land of peace wherein thou
      trustedst they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of
      Jordan?
    

      SCENE. The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains, on a January morning. Mrs. G.
      arguing with bearer in back veranda.
    

      Capt. M. rides up.
    

      Capt. M. 'Mornin', Mrs. Gadsby. How's the Infant Phenomenon and the Proud
      Proprietor?
    

      Mrs. G. You'll find them in the front veranda; go through the house. I'm
      Martha just now.
    

      Capt. M, 'Cumbered about with cares of Khitmatgars? I fly.
    

      Passes into front veranda, where GADSBV is watching GADSBY JUNIOR, aged
      ten months, crawling about the matting.
    

      Capt. M. What's the trouble, Gaddy-spoiling an honest man's Europe morning
      this way? (Seeing G. JUNIOR.) By Jove, that yearling's comin' on
      amazingly! Any amount of bone below the knee there.
    

      Capt. G. Yes, he's a healthy little scoundrel. Don't you think his hair's
      growing?
    

      Capt. M. Let's have a look. Hi! Hst Come here, General Luck, and we'll
      report on you.
    

      Mrs. G. (Within.) What absurd name will you give him next? Why do you call
      him that?
    

      Capt. M. Isn't he our Inspector-General of Cavalry? Doesn't he come down
      in his seventeen-two perambulator every morning the Pink Hussars parade?
      Don't wriggle, Brigadier. Give us your private opinion on the way the
      third squadron went past. 'Trifle ragged, weren't they?
    

      Capt. G. A bigger set of tailors than the new draft I don't wish to see.
      They've given me more than my fair share—knocking the squadron out
      of shape. It's sickening!
    

      Capt. M. When you're in command, you'll do better, young 'un. Can'tyou
      walk yet? Grip my finger and try. (To G.) 'Twon't hurt his hocks, will it?
    

      Capt. G. Oh, no. Don't let him flop, though, or he'll lick all the
      blacking off your boots.
    

      Mrs. G. (Within.) Who's destroying my son's character?
    

      Capt. M. And my Godson's. I'm ashamed of you, Gaddy. Punch your father in
      the eye, Jack! Don't you stand it! Hit him again!
    

      Capt. G. (Sotto voce.) Put The Butcha down and come to the end of the
      veranda. I'd rather the Wife didn't hear—just now.
    

      Capt. M. You look awf'ly serious. Anything wrong?
    

      Capt. G. 'Depends on your view entirely. I say, Jack, you won't think more
      hardly of me than you can help, will you? Come further this way.—The
      fact of the matter is, that I've made up my mind—at least I'm
      thinking seriously of—cutting the Service.
    

      Capt. M. Hwhatt?
    

      Capt. G. Don't shout. I'm going to send in my papers.
    

      Capt. M. You! Are you mad?
    

      Capt. G. No—only married.
    

      Capt. M. Look here! What's the meaning of it all? You never intend to
      leave us. You can't. Isn't the best squadron of the best regiment of the
      best cavalry in all the world good enough for you?
    

      Capt. G. (Jerking his head over his shoulder.) She doesn't seem to thrive
      in this God-forsaken country, and there's The Butcha to be considered and
      all that, you know.
    

      Capt. M. Does she say that she doesn't like India?
    

      Capt. G. That's the worst of it. She won't for fear of leaving me.
    

      Capt. M. What are the Hills made for?
    

      Capt. G. Not for my wife, at any rate.
    

      Capt. M. You know too much, Gaddy, and—I don't like you any the
      better for it!
    

      Capt. G. Never mind that. She wants England, and The Butcha would be all
      the better for it. I'm going to chuck. You don't understand.
    

      Capt. M. (Hotly.) I understand this!—One hundred and thirty-seven
      new horse to be licked into shape somehow before Luck comes round again; a
      hairy-heeled draft who'll give more trouble than the horses; a camp next
      cold weather for a certainty; ourselves the first on the roster; the
      Russian shindy ready to come to a head at five minutes' notice, and you,
      the best of us all, backing out of it all! Think a little, Gaddy. You
      won't do it.
    

      Capt. G. Hang it, a man has some duties toward his family, I suppose.
    

      Capt. M. I remember a man, though, who told me, the night after Amdheran,
      when we were picketed under Jagai, and he'd left his sword—by the
      way, did you ever pay Ranken for that sword?—in an Utmanzai's head—that
      man told me that he'd stick by me and the Pinks as long as he lived. I
      don't blame him for not sticking by me—I'm not much of a man—but
      I do blame him for not sticking by the Pink Hussars.
    

      Capt. G. (Uneasily.) We were little more than boys then. Can't you see,
      Jack, how things stand? 'Tisn't as if we were serving for our bread. We've
      all of us, more or less, got the filthy lucre. I'm luckier than some,
      perhaps. There's no call for me to serve on.
    

      Capt. M. None in the world for you or for us, except the Regimental. If
      you don't choose to answer to that, of course—
    

      Capt. G. Don't be too hard on a man. You know that a lot of us only take
      up the thing for a few years and then go back to Town and catch on with
      the rest.
    

      Capt. M. Not lots, and they aren't some of Us.
    

      Capt. G. And then there are one's affairs at Home to be considered—my
      place and the rents, and all that. I don't suppose my father can last much
      longer, and that means the title, and so on.
    

      Capt. M. 'Fraid you won't be entered in the Stud Book correctly unless you
      go Home? Take six months, then, and come out in October. If I could slay
      off a brother or two, I s'pose I should be a Marquis of sorts. Any fool
      can be that; but it needs men, Gaddy—men like you—to lead
      flanking squadrons properly. Don't you delude yourself into the belief
      that you're going Home to take your place and prance about among
      pink-nosed Kabuli dowagers. You aren't built that way. I know better.
    

      Capt. G. A man has a right to live his life as happily as he can. You
      aren't married.
    

      Capt. M. No—praise be to Providence and the one or two women who
      have had the good sense to jawab me.
    

      Capt. G. Then you don't know what it is to go into your own room and see
      your wife's head on the pillow, and when everything else is safe and the
      house shut up for the night, to wonder whether the roof-beams won't give
      and kill her.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) Revelations first and second! (Aloud.) So-o! I knew a
      man who got squiffy at our Mess once and confided to me that he never
      helped his wife on to her horse without praying that she'd break her neck
      before she came back. All husbands aren't alike, you see.
    

      Capt. G. What on earth has that to do with my case? The man must ha' been
      mad, or his wife as bad as they make 'em.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) 'No fault of yours if either weren't all you say. You've
      forgotten the time when you were insane about the Herriott woman. You
      always were a good hand at forgetting. (Aloud.) Not more mad than men who
      go to the other extreme. Be reasonable, Gaddy. Your roof-beams are sound
      enough.
    

      Capt. G. That was only a way of speaking. I've been uneasy and worried
      about the Wife ever since that awful business three years ago—when—I
      nearly lost her. Can you wonder?
    

      Capt. M. Oh, a shell never falls twice in the same place. You've paid your
      toll to misfortune—why should your Wife be picked out more than
      anybody else's?
    

      Capt. G. I can talk just as reasonably as you can, but you don't
      understand—you don't understand. And then there's The Butcha. Deuce
      knows where the Ayah takes him to sit in the evening! He has a bit of a
      cough. Haven't you noticed it?
    

      Capt. M. Bosh! The Brigadier's jumping out of his skin with pure
      condition. He's got a muzzle like a rose-leaf and the chest of a
      two-year-old. What's demoralized you?
    

      Capt. G. Funk. That's the long and the short of it. Funk!
    

      Capt. M. But what is there to funk?
    

      Capt. G. Everything. It's ghastly.
    

Capt. M. Ah! I see. You don't want to fight, And by Jingo when we do,
 You've got the kid, you've got the Wife,
 You've got the money, too.
That's about the case, eh?


      Capt. G. I suppose that's it. But it's not for myself. It's because of
      them. At least I think it is.
    

      Capt. M. Are you sure? Looking at the matter in a cold-blooded light, the
      Wife is provided for even if you were wiped out tonight. She has an
      ancestral home to go to, money and the Brigadier to carry on the
      illustrious name.
    

      Capt. G. Then it is for myself or because they are part of me. You don't
      see it. My life's so good, so pleasant, as it is, that I want to make it
      quite safe. Can't you understand?
    

      Capt. M. Perfectly. “Shelter-pit for the Off'cer's charger,” as they say
      in the Line.
    

      Capt. G. And I have everything to my hand to make it so. I'm sick of the
      strain and the worry for their sakes out here; and there isn't a single
      real difficulty to prevent my dropping it altogether. It'll only cost me—Jack,
      I hope you'll never know the shame that I've been going through for the
      past six months.
    

      Capt. M. Hold on there! I don't wish to be told. Every man has his moods
      and tenses sometimes.
    

      Capt. G. (Laughing bitterly.) Has he? What do you call craning over to see
      where your near-fore lands?
    

      Capt. M. In my case it means that I have been on the Considerable Bend,
      and have come to parade with a Head and a Hand. It passes in three
      strides.
    

      Capt. G. (Lowering voice.) It never passes with me, Jack. I'm always
      thinking about it. Phil Gadsby funking a fall on parade! Sweet picture,
      isn't it! Draw it for me.
    

      Capt. M. (Gravely.) Heaven forbid! A man like you can't be as bad as that.
      A fall is no nice thing, but one never gives it a thought.
    

      Capt. G. Doesn't one? Wait till you've got a wife and a youngster of your
      own, and then you'll know how the roar of the squadron behind you turns
      you cold all up the back.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) And this man led at Amdheran after Bagal Deasin went
      under, and we were all mixed up together, and he came out of the snow
      dripping like a butcher. (Aloud.) Skittles! The men can always open out,
      and you can always pick your way more or less. We haven't the dust to
      bother us, as the men have, and whoever heard of a horse stepping on a
      man?
    

      Capt. G. Never—as long as he can see. But did they open out for poor
      Errington?
    

      Capt. M. Oh, this is childish!
    

      Capt. G. I know it is, worse than that. I don't care. You've ridden Van
      Loo. Is he the sort of brute to pick his way—'specially when we're
      coming up in column of troop with any pace on?
    

      Capt. M. Once in a Blue Moon do we gallop in column of troop, and then
      only to save time. Aren't three lengths enough for you?
    

      Capt. G. Yes—quite enough. They just allow for the full development
      of the smash. I'm talking like a cur, I know: but I tell you that, for the
      past three months, I've felt every hoof of the squadron in the small of my
      back every time that I've led.
    

      Capt. M. But, Gaddy, this is awful!
    

      Capt. G. Isn't it lovely? Isn't it royal? A Captain of the Pink Hussars
      watering up his charger before parade like the blasted boozing Colonel of
      a Black Regiment!
    

      Capt. M. You never did!
    

      Capt. G. Once only. He squelched like a mussuck, and the
      Troop-Sergeant-Major cocked his eye at me. You know old Haffy's eye. I was
      afraid to do it again.
    

      Capt. M. I should think so. That was the best way to rupture old Van Loo's
      tummy, and make him crumple you up. You knew that.
    

      Capt. G. I didn't care. It took the edge off him.
    

      Capt. M. “Took the edge off him”? Gaddy, you—you—you mustn't,
      you know! Think of the men.
    

      Capt. G. That's another thing I am afraid of. D'you s'pose they know?
    

      Capt. M. Let's hope not; but they're deadly quick to spot skirm—little
      things of that kind. See here, old man, send the Wife Home for the hot
      weather and come to Kashmir with me. We'll start a boat on the Dal or
      cross the Rhotang—shoot ibex or loaf—which you please. Only
      come! You're a bit off your oats and you're talking nonsense. Look at the
      Colonel—swag-bellied rascal that he is. He has a wife and no end of
      a bow-window of his own. Can any one of us ride round him—chalkstones
      and all? I can't, and I think I can shove a crock along a bit.
    

      Capt. G. Some men are different. I haven't any nerve. Lord help me, I
      haven't the nerve! I've taken up a hole and a half to get my knees well
      under the wallets. I can't help it. I'm so afraid of anything happening to
      me. On my soul, I ought to be broke in front of the squadron, for
      cowardice.
    

      Capt. M. Ugly word, that. I should never have the courage to own up.
    

      Capt. G. I meant to lie about my reasons when I began, but—I've got
      out of the habit of lying to you, old man. Jack, you won't?—But I
      know you won't.
    

      Capt. M. Of course not. (Half aloud.) The Pinks are paying dearly for
      their Pride.
    

      Capt. G. Eh! Wha-at?
    

      Capt. M. Don't you know? The men have called Mrs. Gadsby the Pride of the
      Pink Hussars ever since she came to us.
    

      Capt. G. 'Tisn't her fault. Don't think that. It's all mine.
    

      Capt. M. What does she say?
    

      Capt. G. I haven't exactly put it before her. She's the best little woman
      in the world, Jack, and all that—but she wouldn't counsel a man to
      stick to his calling if it came between him and her. At least, I think—
    

      Capt. M. Never mind. Don't tell her what you told me. Go on the Peerage
      and Landed-Gentry tack.
    

      Capt. G. She'd see through it. She's five times cleverer than I am.
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) Then she'll accept the sacrifice and think a little bit
      worse of him for the rest of her days.
    

      Capt. G. (Absently.) I say, do you despise me?
    

      Capt. M. 'Queer way of putting it. Have you ever been asked that question?
      Think a minute. What answer used you to give?
    

      Capt. G. So bad as that? I'm not entitled to expect anything more, but
      it's a bit hard when one's best friend turns round and—
    

      Capt. M. So I have found. But you will have consolations—Bailiffs
      and Drains and Liquid Manure and the Primrose League, and, perhaps, if
      you're lucky, the Colonelcy of a Yeomanry Cav-al-ry Regiment—all
      uniform and no riding, I believe. How old are you?
    

      Capt. G. Thirty-three. I know it's—
    

      Capt. M. At forty you'll be a fool of a J. P. landlord. At fifty you'll
      own a bath-chair, and The Brigadier, if he takes after you, will be
      fluttering the dovecotes of—what's the particular dunghill you're
      going to? Also, Mrs. Gadsby will be fat.
    

      Capt. G. (Limply.) This is rather more than a joke.
    

      Capt. M. D'you think so? Isn't cutting the Service a joke? It generally
      takes a man fifty years to arrive at it. You're quite right, though. It is
      more than a joke. You've managed it in thirty-three.
    

      Capt. G. Don't make me feel worse than I do. Will it satisfy you if I own
      that I am a shirker, a skrim-shanker, and a coward?
    

      Capt. M. It will not, because I'm the only man in the world who can talk
      to you like this without being knocked down. You mustn't take all that
      I've said to heart in this way. I only spoke—a lot of it at least—out
      of pure selfishness, because, because—Oh, damn it all, old man,—I
      don't know what I shall do without you. Of course, you've got the money
      and the place and all that—and there are two very good reasons why
      you should take care of yourself.
    

      Capt. G. 'Doesn't make it any sweeter. I'm backing out—I know I am.
      I always had a soft drop in me somewhere—and I daren't risk any
      danger to them.
    

      Capt. M. Why in the world should you? You're bound to think of your family—bound
      to think. Er—hmm. If I wasn't a younger son I'd go too—be shot
      if I wouldn't!
    

      Capt. G. Thank you, Jack. It's a kind lie, but it's the blackest you've
      told for some time. I know what I'm doing, and I'm going into it with my
      eyes open. Old man, I can't help it. What would you do if you were in my
      place?
    

      Capt. M. (Aside.) 'Couldn't conceive any woman getting permanently between
      me and the Regiment. (Aloud.) 'Can't say. 'Very likely I should do no
      better. I'm sorry for you—awf'ly sorry—but “if them's your
      sentiments,” I believe, I really do, that you are acting wisely.
    

      Capt. G. Do you? I hope you do. (In a whisper.) Jack, be very sure of
      yourself before you marry. I'm an ungrateful ruffian to say this, but
      marriage—even as good a marriage as mine has been—hampers a
      man's work, it cripples his sword-arm, and oh, it plays Hell with his
      notions of duty. Sometimes—good and sweet as she is—sometimes
      I could wish that I had kept my freedom—No, I don't mean that
      exactly.
    

      Mrs. G. (Coming down veranda.) What are you wagging your head over, Pip?
    

      Capt. M. (Turning quickly.) Me, as usual. The old sermon. Your husband is
      recommending me to get married. 'Never saw such a one-ideaed man.
    

      Mrs. G. Well, why don't you? I dare say you would make some woman very
      happy.
    

      Capt. G. There's the Law and the Prophets, Jack. Never mind the Regiment.
      Make a woman happy. (Aside.) O Lord!
    

      Capt. M. We'll see. I must be off to make a Troop Cook desperately
      unhappy. I won't have the wily Hussar fed on Government Bullock Train
      shinbones—(Hastily.) Surely black ants can't be good for The
      Brigadier. He's picking em off the matting and eating 'em. Here, Senor
      Comandante Don Grubbynose, come and talk to me. (Lifts G. JUNIOR in his
      arms.) 'Want my watch? You won't be able to put it into your mouth, but
      you can try. (G. JUNIOR drops watch, breaking dial and hands.)
    

      Mrs. G. Oh, Captain Mafflin, I am so sorry! Jack, you bad, bad little
      villain. Ahhh!
    

      Capt. M. It's not the least consequence, I assure you. He'd treat the
      world in the same way if he could get it into his hands. Everything's made
      to be played, with and broken, isn't it, young 'un?
    


      Mrs. G. Mafflin didn't at all like his watch being broken, though he was
      too polite to say so. It was entirely his fault for giving it to the
      child. Dem little puds are werry, werry feeble, aren't dey, by
      Jack-in-de-box? (To G.) What did he want to see you for?
    

      Capt. G. Regimental shop as usual.
    

      Mrs. G. The Regiment! Always the Regiment. On my word, I sometimes feel
      jealous of Mafflin.
    

      Capt. G. (Wearily.) Poor old Jack? I don't think you need. Isn't it time
      for The Butcha to have his nap? Bring a chair out here, dear. I've got
      some thing to talk over with you.
    

      THIS IS THE END OF THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS
    







      VOLUME VIII from MINE OWN PEOPLE
    

   Bimi
   Namgay Doola
   The Recrudescence Of Imray
   Moti Guj—Mutineer