THE WOLF
    

      This is what the old Marquis d'Arville told us after St. Hubert's dinner
      at the house of the Baron des Ravels.
    

      We had killed a stag that day. The marquis was the only one of the guests
      who had not taken part in this chase. He never hunted.
    

      During that long repast we had talked about hardly anything but the
      slaughter of animals. The ladies themselves were interested in bloody and
      exaggerated tales, and the orators imitated the attacks and the combats of
      men against beasts, raised their arms, romanced in a thundering voice.
    

      M. d Arville talked well, in a certain flowery, high-sounding, but
      effective style. He must have told this story frequently, for he told it
      fluently, never hesitating for words, choosing them with skill to make his
      description vivid.
    

      Gentlemen, I have never hunted, neither did my father, nor my grandfather,
      nor my great-grandfather. This last was the son of a man who hunted more
      than all of you put together. He died in 1764. I will tell you the story
      of his death.
    

      His name was Jean. He was married, father of that child who became my
      great-grandfather, and he lived with his younger brother, Francois
      d'Arville, in our castle in Lorraine, in the midst of the forest.
    

      Francois d'Arville had remained a bachelor for love of the chase.
    

      They both hunted from one end of the year to the other, without stopping
      and seemingly without fatigue. They loved only hunting, understood nothing
      else, talked only of that, lived only for that.
    

      They had at heart that one passion, which was terrible and inexorable. It
      consumed them, had completely absorbed them, leaving room for no other
      thought.
    

      They had given orders that they should not be interrupted in the chase for
      any reason whatever. My great-grandfather was born while his father was
      following a fox, and Jean d'Arville did not stop the chase, but exclaimed:
      “The deuce! The rascal might have waited till after the view —halloo!”
    

      His brother Francois was still more infatuated. On rising he went to see
      the dogs, then the horses, then he shot little birds about the castle
      until the time came to hunt some large game.
    

      In the countryside they were called M. le Marquis and M. le Cadet, the
      nobles then not being at all like the chance nobility of our time, which
      wishes to establish an hereditary hierarchy in titles; for the son of a
      marquis is no more a count, nor the son of a viscount a baron, than a son
      of a general is a colonel by birth. But the contemptible vanity of today
      finds profit in that arrangement.
    

      My ancestors were unusually tall, bony, hairy, violent and vigorous. The
      younger, still taller than the older, had a voice so strong that,
      according to a legend of which he was proud, all the leaves of the forest
      shook when he shouted.
    

      When they were both mounted to set out hunting, it must have been a superb
      sight to see those two giants straddling their huge horses.
    

      Now, toward the midwinter of that year, 1764, the frosts were excessive,
      and the wolves became ferocious.
    

      They even attacked belated peasants, roamed at night outside the houses,
      howled from sunset to sunrise, and robbed the stables.
    

      And soon a rumor began to circulate. People talked of a colossal wolf with
      gray fur, almost white, who had eaten two children, gnawed off a woman's
      arm, strangled all the watch dogs in the district, and even come without
      fear into the farmyards. The people in the houses affirmed that they had
      felt his breath, and that it made the flame of the lights flicker. And
      soon a panic ran through all the province. No one dared go out any more
      after nightfall. The darkness seemed haunted by the image of the beast.
    

      The brothers d'Arville determined to find and kill him, and several times
      they brought together all the gentlemen of the country to a great hunt.
    

      They beat the forests and searched the coverts in vain; they never met
      him. They killed wolves, but not that one. And every night after a battue
      the beast, as if to avenge himself, attacked some traveller or killed some
      one's cattle, always far from the place where they had looked for him.
    

      Finally, one night he stole into the pigpen of the Chateau d'Arville and
      ate the two fattest pigs.
    

      The brothers were roused to anger, considering this attack as a direct
      insult and a defiance. They took their strong bloodhounds, used to pursue
      dangerous animals, and they set off to hunt, their hearts filled with
      rage.
    

      From dawn until the hour when the empurpled sun descended behind the great
      naked trees, they beat the woods without finding anything.
    

      At last, furious and disgusted, both were returning, walking their horses
      along a lane bordered with hedges, and they marvelled that their skill as
      huntsmen should be baffled by this wolf, and they were suddenly seized
      with a mysterious fear.
    

      The elder said:
    

      “That beast is not an ordinary one. You would say it had a mind like
      a man.”
    

      The younger answered:
    

      “Perhaps we should have a bullet blessed by our cousin, the bishop,
      or pray some priest to pronounce the words which are needed.”
    

      Then they were silent.
    

      Jean continued:
    

      “Look how red the sun is. The great wolf will do some harm to-night.”
    

      He had hardly finished speaking when his horse reared; that of Franqois
      began to kick. A large thicket covered with dead leaves opened before
      them, and a mammoth beast, entirely gray, jumped up and ran off through
      the wood.
    

      Both uttered a kind of grunt of joy, and bending over the necks of their
      heavy horses, they threw them forward with an impulse from all their body,
      hurling them on at such a pace, urging them, hurrying them away, exciting
      them so with voice and with gesture and with spur that the experienced
      riders seemed to be carrying the heavy beasts between their thighs and
      to bear them off as if they were flying.
    

      Thus they went, plunging through the thickets, dashing across the beds of
      streams, climbing the hillsides, descending the gorges, and blowing the
      horn as loud as they could to attract their people and the dogs.
    

      And now, suddenly, in that mad race, my ancestor struck his forehead
      against an enormous branch which split his skull; and he fell dead on the
      ground, while his frightened horse took himself off, disappearing in the
      gloom which enveloped the woods.
    

      The younger d'Arville stopped quick, leaped to the earth, seized his
      brother in his arms, and saw that the brains were escaping from the wound
      with the blood.
    

      Then he sat down beside the body, rested the head, disfigured and red, on
      his knees, and waited, regarding the immobile face of his elder brother.
      Little by little a fear possessed him, a strange fear which he had never
      felt before, the fear of the dark, the fear of loneliness, the fear of the
      deserted wood, and the fear also of the weird wolf who had just killed his
      brother to avenge himself upon them both.
    

      The gloom thickened; the acute cold made the trees crack. Francois got up,
      shivering, unable to remain there longer, feeling himself growing faint.
      Nothing was to be heard, neither the voice of the dogs nor the sound of
      the horns-all was silent along the invisible horizon; and this mournful
      silence of the frozen night had something about it terrific and strange.
    

      He seized in his immense hands the great body of Jean, straightened it,
      and laid it across the saddle to carry it back to the chateau; then he
      went on his way softly, his mind troubled as if he were in a stupor,
      pursued by horrible and fear-giving images.
    

      And all at once, in the growing darkness a great shape crossed his path.
      It was the beast. A shock of terror shook the hunter; something cold, like
      a drop of water, seemed to glide down his back, and, like a monk haunted
      of the devil, he made a great sign of the cross, dismayed at this abrupt
      return of the horrible prowler. But his eyes fell again on the inert body
      before him, and passing abruptly from fear to anger, he shook with an
      indescribable rage.
    

      Then he spurred his horse and rushed after the wolf.
    

      He followed it through the copses, the ravines, and the tall trees,
      traversing woods which he no longer recognized, his eyes fixed on the
      white speck which fled before him through the night.
    

      His horse also seemed animated by a force and strength hitherto unknown.
      It galloped straight ahead with outstretched neck, striking against trees,
      and rocks, the head and the feet of the dead man thrown across the saddle.
      The limbs tore out his hair; the brow, beating the huge trunks, spattered
      them with blood; the spurs tore their ragged coats of bark. Suddenly the
      beast and the horseman issued from the forest and rushed into a valley,
      just as the moon appeared above the mountains. The valley here was stony,
      inclosed by enormous rocks.
    

      Francois then uttered a yell of joy which the echoes repeated like a peal
      of thunder, and he leaped from his horse, his cutlass in his hand.
    

      The beast, with bristling hair, the back arched, awaited him, its eyes
      gleaming like two stars. But, before beginning battle, the strong hunter,
      seizing his brother, seated him on a rock, and, placing stones under his
      head, which was no more than a mass of blood, he shouted in the ears as if
      he was talking to a deaf man: “Look, Jean; look at this!”
    

      Then he attacked the monster. He felt himself strong enough to overturn a
      mountain, to bruise stones in his hands. The beast tried to bite him,
      aiming for his stomach; but he had seized the fierce animal by the neck,
      without even using his weapon, and he strangled it gently, listening to
      the cessation of breathing in its throat and the beatings of its heart. He
      laughed, wild with joy, pressing closer and closer his formidable embrace,
      crying in a delirium of joy, “Look, Jean, look!” All
      resistance ceased; the body of the wolf became limp. He was dead.
    

      Francois took him up in his arms and carried him to the feet of the elder
      brother, where he laid him, repeating, in a tender voice: “There,
      there, there, my little Jean, see him!”
    

      Then he replaced on the saddle the two bodies, one upon the other, and
      rode away.
    

      He returned to the chateau, laughing and crying, like Gargantua at the
      birth of Pantagruel, uttering shouts of triumph, and boisterous with joy
      as he related the death of the beast, and grieving and tearing his beard
      in telling of that of his brother.
    

      And often, later, when he talked again of that day, he would say, with
      tears in his eyes: “If only poor Jean could have seen me strangle
      the beast, he would have died content, that I am sure!”
    

      The widow of my ancestor inspired her orphan son with that horror of the
      chase which has transmitted itself from father to son as far down as
      myself.
    

      The Marquis d'Arville was silent. Some one asked:
    

      “That story is a legend, isn't it?”
    

      And the story teller answered:
    

      “I swear to you that it is true from beginning to end.”
    

      Then a lady declared, in a little, soft voice
    

      “All the same, it is fine to have passions like that.”
    







      THE INN
    

      Resembling in appearance all the wooden hostelries of the High Alps
      situated at the foot of glaciers in the barren rocky gorges that intersect
      the summits of the mountains, the Inn of Schwarenbach serves as a resting
      place for travellers crossing the Gemini Pass.
    

      It remains open for six months in the year and is inhabited by the family
      of Jean Hauser; then, as soon as the snow begins to fall and to fill the
      valley so as to make the road down to Loeche impassable, the father and
      his three sons go away and leave the house in charge of the old guide,
      Gaspard Hari, with the young guide, Ulrich Kunsi, and Sam, the great
      mountain dog.
    

      The two men and the dog remain till the spring in their snowy prison, with
      nothing before their eyes except the immense white slopes of the Balmhorn,
      surrounded by light, glistening summits, and are shut in, blocked up and
      buried by the snow which rises around them and which envelops, binds and
      crushes the little house, which lies piled on the roof, covering the
      windows and blocking up the door.
    

      It was the day on which the Hauser family were going to return to Loeche,
      as winter was approaching, and the descent was becoming dangerous. Three
      mules started first, laden with baggage and led by the three sons. Then
      the mother, Jeanne Hauser, and her daughter Louise mounted a fourth mule
      and set off in their turn and the father followed them, accompanied by the
      two men in charge, who were to escort the family as far as the brow of the
      descent. First of all they passed round the small lake, which was now
      frozen over, at the bottom of the mass of rocks which stretched in front
      of the inn, and then they followed the valley, which was dominated on all
      sides by the snow-covered summits.
    

      A ray of sunlight fell into that little white, glistening, frozen desert
      and illuminated it with a cold and dazzling flame. No living thing
      appeared among this ocean of mountains. There was no motion in this
      immeasurable solitude and no noise disturbed the profound silence.
    

      By degrees the young guide, Ulrich Kunsi, a tall, long-legged Swiss, left
      old man Hauser and old Gaspard behind, in order to catch up the mule which
      bore the two women. The younger one looked at him as he approached and
      appeared to be calling him with her sad eyes. She was a young, fairhaired
      little peasant girl, whose milk-white cheeks and pale hair looked as if
      they had lost their color by their long abode amid the ice. When he had
      got up to the animal she was riding he put his hand on the crupper and
      relaxed his speed. Mother Hauser began to talk to him, enumerating with
      the minutest details all that he would have to attend to during the
      winter. It was the first time that he was going to stay up there, while
      old Hari had already spent fourteen winters amid the snow, at the inn of
      Schwarenbach.
    

      Ulrich Kunsi listened, without appearing to understand and looked
      incessantly at the girl. From time to time he replied: “Yes, Madame
      Hauser,” but his thoughts seemed far away and his calm features
      remained unmoved.
    

      They reached Lake Daube, whose broad, frozen surface extended to the end
      of the valley. On the right one saw the black, pointed, rocky summits of
      the Daubenhorn beside the enormous moraines of the Lommern glacier, above
      which rose the Wildstrubel. As they approached the Gemmi pass, where the
      descent of Loeche begins, they suddenly beheld the immense horizon of the
      Alps of the Valais, from which the broad, deep valley of the Rhone
      separated them.
    

      In the distance there was a group of white, unequal, flat, or pointed
      mountain summits, which glistened in the sun; the Mischabel with its two
      peaks, the huge group of the Weisshorn, the heavy Brunegghorn, the lofty
      and formidable pyramid of Mount Cervin, that slayer of men, and the
      Dent-Blanche, that monstrous coquette.
    

      Then beneath them, in a tremendous hole, at the bottom of a terrific
      abyss, they perceived Loeche, where houses looked as grains of sand which
      had been thrown into that enormous crevice that is ended and closed by the
      Gemmi and which opens, down below, on the Rhone.
    

      The mule stopped at the edge of the path, which winds and turns
      continually, doubling backward, then, fantastically and strangely, along
      the side of the mountain as far as the almost invisible little village at
      its feet. The women jumped into the snow and the two old men joined them.
      “Well,” father Hauser said, “good-by, and keep up your
      spirits till next year, my friends,” and old Hari replied: “Till
      next year.”
    

      They embraced each other and then Madame Hauser in her turn offered her
      cheek, and the girl did the same.
    

      When Ulrich Kunsi's turn came, he whispered in Louise's ear, “Do not
      forget those up yonder,” and she replied, “No,” in such
      a low voice that he guessed what she had said without hearing it. “Well,
      adieu,” Jean Hauser repeated, “and don't fall ill.” And
      going before the two women, he commenced the descent, and soon all three
      disappeared at the first turn in the road, while the two men returned to
      the inn at Schwarenbach.
    

      They walked slowly, side by side, without speaking. It was over, and they
      would be alone together for four or five months. Then Gaspard Hari began
      to relate his life last winter. He had remained with Michael Canol, who
      was too old now to stand it, for an accident might happen during that long
      solitude. They had not been dull, however; the only thing was to make up
      one's mind to it from the first, and in the end one would find plenty of
      distraction, games and other means of whiling away the time.
    

      Ulrich Kunsi listened to him with his eyes on the ground, for in his
      thoughts he was following those who were descending to the village. They
      soon came in sight of the inn, which was, however, scarcely visible, so
      small did it look, a black speck at the foot of that enormous billow of
      snow, and when they opened the door Sam, the great curly dog, began to
      romp round them.
    

      “Come, my boy,” old Gaspard said, “we have no women now,
      so we must get our own dinner ready. Go and peel the potatoes.” And
      they both sat down on wooden stools and began to prepare the soup.
    

      The next morning seemed very long to Kunsi. Old Hari smoked and spat on
      the hearth, while the young man looked out of the window at the
      snow-covered mountain opposite the house.
    

      In the afternoon he went out, and going over yesterday's ground again, he
      looked for the traces of the mule that had carried the two women. Then
      when he had reached the Gemmi Pass, he laid himself down on his stomach
      and looked at Loeche.
    

      The village, in its rocky pit, was not yet buried under the snow, from
      which it was sheltered by the pine woods which protected it on all sides.
      Its low houses looked like paving stones in a large meadow from above.
      Hauser's little daughter was there now in one of those gray-colored
      houses. In which? Ulrich Kunsi was too far away to be able to make them
      out separately. How he would have liked to go down while he was yet able!
    

      But the sun had disappeared behind the lofty crest of the Wildstrubel and
      the young man returned to the chalet. Daddy Hari was smoking, and when he
      saw his mate come in he proposed a game of cards to him, and they sat down
      opposite each other, on either side of the table. They played for a long
      time a simple game called brisque and then they had supper and went to
      bed.
    

      The following days were like the first, bright and cold, without any fresh
      snow. Old Gaspard spent his afternoons in watching the eagles and other
      rare birds which ventured on those frozen heights, while Ulrich returned
      regularly to the Gemmi Pass to look at the village. Then they played
      cards, dice or dominoes and lost and won a trifle, just to create an
      interest in the game.
    

      One morning Hari, who was up first, called his companion. A moving, deep
      and light cloud of white spray was falling on them noiselessly and was by
      degrees burying them under a thick, heavy coverlet of foam. That lasted
      four days and four nights. It was necessary to free the door and the
      windows, to dig out a passage and to cut steps to get over this frozen
      powder, which a twelve hours' frost had made as hard as the granite of the
      moraines.
    

      They lived like prisoners and did not venture outside their abode. They
      had divided their duties, which they performed regularly. Ulrich Kunsi
      undertook the scouring, washing and everything that belonged to
      cleanliness. He also chopped up the wood while Gaspard Hari did the
      cooking and attended to the fire. Their regular and monotonous work was
      interrupted by long games at cards or dice, and they never quarrelled, but
      were always calm and placid. They were never seen impatient or
      ill-humored, nor did they ever use hard words, for they had laid in a
      stock of patience for their wintering on the top of the mountain.
    

      Sometimes old Gaspard took his rifle and went after chamois, and
      occasionally he killed one. Then there was a feast in the inn at
      Schwarenbach and they revelled in fresh meat. One morning he went out as
      usual. The thermometer outside marked eighteen degrees of frost, and as
      the sun had not yet risen, the hunter hoped to surprise the animals at the
      approaches to the Wildstrubel, and Ulrich, being alone, remained in bed
      until ten o'clock. He was of a sleepy nature, but he would not have dared
      to give way like that to his inclination in the presence of the old guide,
      who was ever an early riser. He breakfasted leisurely with Sam, who also
      spent his days and nights in sleeping in front of the fire; then he felt
      low-spirited and even frightened at the solitude, and was seized by a
      longing for his daily game of cards, as one is by the craving of a
      confirmed habit, and so he went out to meet his companion, who was to
      return at four o'clock.
    

      The snow had levelled the whole deep valley, filled up the crevasses,
      obliterated all signs of the two lakes and covered the rocks, so that
      between the high summits there was nothing but an immense, white, regular,
      dazzling and frozen surface. For three weeks Ulrich had not been to the
      edge of the precipice from which he had looked down on the village, and he
      wanted to go there before climbing the slopes which led to Wildstrubel.
      Loeche was now also covered by the snow and the houses could scarcely be
      distinguished, covered as they were by that white cloak.
    

      Then, turning to the right, he reached the Loemmern glacier. He went along
      with a mountaineer's long strides, striking the snow, which was as hard as
      a rock, with his iron-pointed stick, and with his piercing eyes he looked
      for the little black, moving speck in the distance, on that enormous,
      white expanse.
    

      When he reached the end of the glacier he stopped and asked himself
      whether the old man had taken that road, and then he began to walk along
      the moraines with rapid and uneasy steps. The day was declining, the snow
      was assuming a rosy tint, and a dry, frozen wind blew in rough gusts over
      its crystal surface. Ulrich uttered a long, shrill, vibrating call. His
      voice sped through the deathlike silence in which the mountains were
      sleeping; it reached the distance, across profound and motionless waves of
      glacial foam, like the cry of a bird across the waves of the sea. Then it
      died away and nothing answered him.
    

      He began to walk again. The sun had sunk yonder behind the mountain tops,
      which were still purple with the reflection from the sky, but the depths
      of the valley were becoming gray, and suddenly the young man felt
      frightened. It seemed to him as if the silence, the cold, the solitude,
      the winter death of these mountains were taking possession of him, were
      going to stop and to freeze his blood, to make his limbs grow stiff and to
      turn him into a motionless and frozen object, and he set off running,
      fleeing toward his dwelling. The old man, he thought, would have returned
      during his absence. He had taken another road; he would, no doubt, be
      sitting before the fire, with a dead chamois at his feet. He soon came in
      sight of the inn, but no smoke rose from it. Ulrich walked faster and
      opened the door. Sam ran up to him to greet him, but Gaspard Hari had not
      returned. Kunsi, in his alarm, turned round suddenly, as if he had
      expected to find his comrade hidden in a corner. Then he relighted the
      fire and made the soup, hoping every moment to see the old man come in.
      From time to time he went out to see if he were not coming. It was quite
      night now, that wan, livid night of the mountains, lighted by a thin,
      yellow crescent moon, just disappearing behind the mountain tops.
    

      Then the young man went in and sat down to warm his hands and feet, while
      he pictured to himself every possible accident. Gaspard might have broken
      a leg, have fallen into a crevasse, taken a false step and dislocated his
      ankle. And, perhaps, he was lying on the snow, overcome and stiff with the
      cold, in agony of mind, lost and, perhaps, shouting for help, calling with
      all his might in the silence of the night.. But where? The mountain was so
      vast, so rugged, so dangerous in places, especially at that time of the
      year, that it would have required ten or twenty guides to walk for a week
      in all directions to find a man in that immense space. Ulrich Kunsi,
      however, made up his mind to set out with Sam if Gaspard did not return by
      one in the morning, and he made his preparations.
    

      He put provisions for two days into a bag, took his steel climbing iron,
      tied a long, thin, strong rope round his waist, and looked to see that his
      iron-shod stick and his axe, which served to cut steps in the ice, were in
      order. Then he waited. The fire was burning on the hearth, the great dog
      was snoring in front of it, and the clock was ticking, as regularly as a
      heart beating, in its resounding wooden case. He waited, with his ears on
      the alert for distant sounds, and he shivered when the wind blew against
      the roof and the walls. It struck twelve and he trembled: Then, frightened
      and shivering, he put some water on the fire, so that he might have some
      hot coffee before starting, and when the clock struck one he got up, woke
      Sam, opened the door and went off in the direction of the Wildstrubel. For
      five hours he mounted, scaling the rocks by means of his climbing irons,
      cutting into the ice, advancing continually, and occasionally hauling up
      the dog, who remained below at the foot of some slope that was too steep
      for him, by means of the rope. It was about six o'clock when he reached
      one of the summits to which old Gaspard often came after chamois, and he
      waited till it should be daylight.
    

      The sky was growing pale overhead, and a strange light, springing nobody
      could tell whence, suddenly illuminated the immense ocean of pale mountain
      summits, which extended for a hundred leagues around him. One might have
      said that this vague brightness arose from the snow itself and spread
      abroad in space. By degrees the highest distant summits assumed a
      delicate, pink flesh color, and the red sun appeared behind the ponderous
      giants of the Bernese Alps.
    

      Ulrich Kunsi set off again, walking like a hunter, bent over, looking for
      tracks, and saying to his dog: “Seek, old fellow, seek!”
    

      He was descending the mountain now, scanning the depths closely, and from
      time to time shouting, uttering aloud, prolonged cry, which soon died away
      in that silent vastness. Then he put his ear to the ground to listen. He
      thought he could distinguish a voice, and he began to run and shouted
      again, but he heard nothing more and sat down, exhausted and in despair.
      Toward midday he breakfasted and gave Sam, who was as tired as himself,
      something to eat also, and then he recommenced his search.
    

      When evening came he was still walking, and he had walked more than thirty
      miles over the mountains. As he was too far away to return home and too
      tired to drag himself along any further, he dug a hole in the snow and
      crouched in it with his dog under a blanket which he had brought with him.
      And the man and the dog lay side by side, trying to keep warm, but frozen
      to the marrow nevertheless. Ulrich scarcely slept, his mind haunted by
      visions and his limbs shaking with cold.
    

      Day was breaking when he got up. His legs were as stiff as iron bars and
      his spirits so low that he was ready to cry with anguish, while his heart
      was beating so that he almost fell over with agitation, when he thought he
      heard a noise.
    

      Suddenly he imagined that he also was going to die of cold in the midst of
      this vast solitude, and the terror of such a death roused his energies and
      gave him renewed vigor. He was descending toward the inn, falling down and
      getting up again, and followed at a distance by Sam, who was limping on
      three legs, and they did not reach Schwarenbach until four o'clock in the
      afternoon. The house was empty and the young man made a fire, had
      something to eat and went to sleep, so worn out that he did not think of
      anything more.
    

      He slept for a long time, for a very long time, an irresistible sleep. But
      suddenly a voice, a cry, a name, “Ulrich!” aroused him from
      his profound torpor and made him sit up in bed. Had he been dreaming? Was
      it one of those strange appeals which cross the dreams of disquieted
      minds? No, he heard it still, that reverberating cry-which had entered his
      ears and remained in his flesh-to the tips of his sinewy fingers.
      Certainly somebody had cried out and called “Ulrich!” There
      was somebody there near the house, there could be no doubt of that, and he
      opened the door and shouted, “Is it you, Gaspard?” with all
      the strength of his lungs. But there was no reply, no murmur, no groan,
      nothing. It was quite dark and the snow looked wan.
    

      The wind had risen, that icy wind that cracks the rocks and leaves nothing
      alive on those deserted heights, and it came in sudden gusts, which were
      more parching and more deadly than the burning wind of the desert, and
      again Ulrich shouted: “Gaspard! Gaspard! Gaspard.” And then he
      waited again. Everything was silent on the mountain.
    

      Then he shook with terror and with a bound he was inside the inn, when he
      shut and bolted the door, and then he fell into a chair trembling all
      over, for he felt certain that his comrade had called him at the moment he
      was expiring.
    

      He was sure of that, as sure as one is of being alive or of eating a piece
      of bread. Old Gaspard Hari had been dying for two days and three nights
      somewhere, in some hole, in one of those deep, untrodden ravines whose
      whiteness is more sinister than subterranean darkness. He had been dying
      for two days and three nights and he had just then died, thinking of his
      comrade. His soul, almost before it was released, had taken its flight to
      the inn where Ulrich was sleeping, and it had called him by that terrible
      and mysterious power which the spirits of the dead have to haunt the
      living. That voiceless soul had cried to the worn-out soul of the sleeper;
      it had uttered its last farewell, or its reproach, or its curse on the man
      who had not searched carefully enough.
    

      And Ulrich felt that it was there, quite close to him, behind the wall,
      behind the door which he had just fastened. It was wandering about, like a
      night bird which lightly touches a lighted window with his wings, and the
      terrified young man was ready to scream with horror. He wanted to run
      away, but did not dare to go out; he did not dare, and he should never
      dare to do it in the future, for that phantom would remain there day and
      night, round the inn, as long as the old man's body was not recovered and
      had not been deposited in the consecrated earth of a churchyard.
    

      When it was daylight Kunsi recovered some of his courage at the return of
      the bright sun. He prepared his meal, gave his dog some food and then
      remained motionless on a chair, tortured at heart as he thought of the old
      man lying on the snow, and then, as soon as night once more covered the
      mountains, new terrors assailed him. He now walked up and down the dark
      kitchen, which was scarcely lighted by the flame of one candle, and he
      walked from one end of it to the other with great strides, listening,
      listening whether the terrible cry of the other night would again break
      the dreary silence outside. He felt himself alone, unhappy man, as no man
      had ever been alone before! He was alone in this immense desert of Snow,
      alone five thousand feet above the inhabited earth, above human
      habitation, above that stirring, noisy, palpitating life, alone under an
      icy sky! A mad longing impelled him to run away, no matter where, to get
      down to Loeche by flinging himself over the precipice; but he did not even
      dare to open the door, as he felt sure that the other, the dead man, would
      bar his road, so that he might not be obliged to remain up there alone:
    

      Toward midnight, tired with walking, worn out by grief and fear, he at
      last fell into a doze in his chair, for he was afraid of his bed as one is
      of a haunted spot. But suddenly the strident cry of the other evening
      pierced his ears, and it was so shrill that Ulrich stretched out his arms
      to repulse the ghost, and he fell backward with his chair.
    

      Sam, who was awakened by the noise, began to howl as frightened dogs do
      howl, and he walked all about the house trying to find out where the
      danger came from. When he got to the door, he sniffed beneath it, smelling
      vigorously, with his coat bristling and his tail stiff, while he growled
      angrily. Kunsi, who was terrified, jumped up, and, holding his chair by
      one leg, he cried: “Don't come in, don't come in, or I shall kill
      you.” And the dog, excited by this threat, barked angrily at that
      invisible enemy who defied his master's voice. By degrees, however, he
      quieted down and came back and stretched himself in front of the fire, but
      he was uneasy and kept his head up and growled between his teeth.
    

      Ulrich, in turn, recovered his senses, but as he felt faint with terror,
      he went and got a bottle of brandy out of the sideboard, and he drank off
      several glasses, one after anther, at a gulp. His ideas became vague, his
      courage revived and a feverish glow ran through his veins.
    

      He ate scarcely anything the next day and limited himself to alcohol, and
      so he lived for several days, like a drunken brute. As soon as he thought
      of Gaspard Hari, he began to drink again, and went on drinking until he
      fell to the ground, overcome by intoxication. And there he remained lying
      on his face, dead drunk, his limbs benumbed, and snoring loudly. But
      scarcely had he digested the maddening and burning liquor than the same
      cry, “Ulrich!” woke him like a bullet piercing his brain, and
      he got up, still staggering, stretching out his hands to save himself from
      falling, and calling to Sam to help him. And the dog, who appeared to be
      going mad like his master, rushed to the door, scratched it with his claws
      and gnawed it with his long white teeth, while the young man, with his
      head thrown back drank the brandy in draughts, as if it had been cold
      water, so that it might by and by send his thoughts, his frantic terror,
      and his memory to sleep again.
    

      In three weeks he had consumed all his stock of ardent spirits. But his
      continual drunkenness only lulled his terror, which awoke more furiously
      than ever as soon as it was impossible for him to calm it. His fixed idea
      then, which had been intensified by a month of drunkenness, and which was
      continually increasing in his absolute solitude, penetrated him like a
      gimlet. He now walked about the house like a wild beast in its cage,
      putting his ear to the door to listen if the other were there and defying
      him through the wall. Then, as soon as he dozed, overcome by fatigue, he
      heard the voice which made him leap to his feet.
    

      At last one night, as cowards do when driven to extremities, he sprang to
      the door and opened it, to see who was calling him and to force him to
      keep quiet, but such a gust of cold wind blew into his face that it
      chilled him to the bone, and he closed and bolted the door again
      immediately, without noticing that Sam had rushed out. Then, as he was
      shivering with cold, he threw some wood on the fire and sat down in front
      of it to warm himself, but suddenly he started, for somebody was
      scratching at the wall and crying. In desperation he called out: “Go
      away!” but was answered by another long, sorrowful wail.
    

      Then all his remaining senses forsook him from sheer fright. He repeated:
      “Go away!” and turned round to try to find some corner in
      which to hide, while the other person went round the house still crying
      and rubbing against the wall. Ulrich went to the oak sideboard, which was
      full of plates and dishes and of provisions, and lifting it up with
      superhuman strength, he dragged it to the door, so as to form a barricade.
      Then piling up all the rest of the furniture, the mattresses, palliasses
      and chairs, he stopped up the windows as one does when assailed by an
      enemy.
    

      But the person outside now uttered long, plaintive, mournful groans, to
      which the young man replied by similar groans, and thus days and nights
      passed without their ceasing to howl at each other. The one was
      continually walking round the house and scraped the walls with his nails
      so vigorously that it seemed as if he wished to destroy them, while the
      other, inside, followed all his movements, stooping down and holding his
      ear to the walls and replying to all his appeals with terrible cries. One
      evening, however, Ulrich heard nothing more, and he sat down, so overcome
      by fatigue, that he went to sleep immediately and awoke in the morning
      without a thought, without any recollection of what had happened, just as
      if his head had been emptied during his heavy sleep, but he felt hungry,
      and he ate.
    

      The winter was over and the Gemmi Pass was practicable again, so the
      Hauser family started off to return to their inn. As soon as they had
      reached the top of the ascent the women mounted their mule and spoke about
      the two men whom they would meet again shortly. They were, indeed, rather
      surprised that neither of them had come down a few days before, as soon as
      the road was open, in order to tell them all about their long winter
      sojourn. At last, however, they saw the inn, still covered with snow, like
      a quilt. The door and the window were closed, but a little smoke was
      coming out of the chimney, which reassured old Hauser. On going up to the
      door, however, he saw the skeleton of an animal which had been torn to
      pieces by the eagles, a large skeleton lying on its side.
    

      They all looked close at it and the mother said:
    

      “That must be Sam,” and then she shouted: “Hi, Gaspard!”
      A cry from the interior of the house answered her and a sharp cry that one
      might have thought some animal had uttered it. Old Hauser repeated,
      “Hi, Gaspard!” and they heard another cry similar to the
      first.
    

      Then the three men, the father and the two sons, tried to open the door,
      but it resisted their efforts. From the empty cow-stall they took a beam
      to serve as a battering-ram and hurled it against the door with all their
      might. The wood gave way and the boards flew into splinters. Then the
      house was shaken by a loud voice, and inside, behind the side board which
      was overturned, they saw a man standing upright, with his hair falling on
      his shoulders and a beard descending to his breast, with shining eyes, and
      nothing but rags to cover him. They did not recognize him, but Louise
      Hauser exclaimed:
    

      “It is Ulrich, mother.” And her mother declared that it was
      Ulrich, although his hair was white.
    

      He allowed them to go up to him and to touch him, but he did not reply to
      any of their questions, and they were obliged to take him to Loeche, where
      the doctors found that he was mad, and nobody ever found out what had
      become of his companion.
    

      Little Louise Hauser nearly died that summer of decline, which the
      physicians attributed to the cold air of the mountains.
    







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 5.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME V.