THE DOOR

 “Bah!” exclaimed Karl Massouligny, “the question of
      complaisant husbands is a difficult one. I have seen many kinds, and yet I
      am unable to give an opinion about any of them. I have often tried to
      determine whether they are blind, weak or clairvoyant. I believe that
      there are some which belong to each of these categories.

 “Let us quickly pass over the blind ones. They cannot rightly be
      called complaisant, since they do not know, but they are good creatures
      who cannot see farther than their nose. It is a curious and interesting
      thing to notice the ease with which men and women can, be deceived. We are
      taken in by the slightest trick of those who surround us, by our children,
      our friends, our servants, our tradespeople. Humanity is credulous, and in
      order to discover deceit in others, we do not display one-tenth the
      shrewdness which we use when we, in turn, wish to deceive some one else.

 “Clairvoyant husbands may be divided into three classes: Those who
      have some interest, pecuniary, ambitious or otherwise, in their wife's
      having love affairs. These ask only to safeguard appearances as much as
      possible, and they are satisfied.

 “Next come those who get angry. What a beautiful novel one could
      write about them!

 “Finally the weak ones! Those who are afraid of scandal.

 “There are also those who are powerless, or, rather, tired, who flee
      from the duties of matrimony through fear of ataxia or apoplexy, who are
      satisfied to see a friend run these risks.

 “But I once met a husband of a rare species, who guarded against the
      common accident in a strange and witty manner.

 “In Paris I had made the acquaintance of an elegant, fashionable
      couple. The woman, nervous, tall, slender, courted, was supposed to have
      had many love adventures. She pleased me with her wit, and I believe that
      I pleased her also. I courted her, a trial courting to which she answered
      with evident provocations. Soon we got to tender glances, hand pressures,
      all the little gallantries which precede the final attack.

 “Nevertheless, I hesitated. I consider that, as a rule, the majority
      of society intrigues, however short they may be, are not worth the trouble
      which they give us and the difficulties which may arise. I therefore
      mentally compared the advantages and disadvantages which I might expect,
      and I thought I noticed that the husband suspected me.

 “One evening, at a ball, as I was saying tender things to the young
      woman in a little parlor leading from the big hall where the dancing was
      going on, I noticed in a mirror the reflection of some one who was
      watching me. It was he. Our looks met and then I saw him turn his head and
      walk away.

 “I murmured: 'Your husband is spying on us.'

 “She seemed dumbfounded and asked: 'My husband?'

 “'Yes, he has been watching us for some time:

 “'Nonsense! Are you sure?'

 “'Very sure.'

 “'How strange! He is usually extraordinarily pleasant to all my
      friends.'

 “'Perhaps he guessed that I love you!'

 “'Nonsense! You are not the first one to pay attention to me. Every
      woman who is a little in view drags behind her a herd of admirers.'

 “'Yes. But I love you deeply.'

 “'Admitting that that is true, does a husband ever guess those
      things?'

 “'Then he is not jealous?'

 “'No-no!'

 “She thought for an instant and then continued: 'No. I do not think
      that I ever noticed any jealousy on his part.'

 “'Has he never watched you?'

 “'No. As I said, he is always agreeable to my friends.'

 “From that day my courting became much more assiduous. The woman did
      not please me any more than before, but the probable jealousy of her
      husband tempted me greatly.

 “As for her, I judged her coolly and clearly. She had a certain
      worldly charm, due to a quick, gay, amiable and superficial mind, but no
      real, deep attraction. She was, as I have already said, an excitable
      little being, all on the surface, with rather a showy elegance. How can I
      explain myself? She was an ornament, not a home.

 “One day, after taking dinner with her, her husband said to me, just
      as I was leaving: 'My dear friend' (he now called me 'friend'), 'we soon
      leave for the country. It is a great pleasure to my wife and myself to
      entertain people whom we like. We would be very pleased to have you spend
      a month with us. It would be very nice of you to do so.'

 “I was dumbfounded, but I accepted.

 “A month later I arrived at their estate of Vertcresson, in
      Touraine. They were waiting for me at the station, five miles from the
      chateau. There were three of them, she, the husband and a gentleman
      unknown to me, the Comte de Morterade, to whom I was introduced. He
      appeared to be delighted to make my acquaintance, and the strangest ideas
      passed through my mind while we trotted along the beautiful road between
      two hedges. I was saying to myself: 'Let's see, what can this mean? Here
      is a husband who cannot doubt that his wife and I are on more than
      friendly terms, and yet he invites me to his house, receives me like an
      old friend and seems to say: “Go ahead, my friend, the road is
      clear!”'

 “Then I am introduced to a very pleasant gentleman, who seems
      already to have settled down in the house, and—and who is perhaps
      trying to get out of it, and who seems as pleased at my arrival as the
      husband himself.

 “Is it some former admirer who wishes to retire? One might think so.
      But, then, would these two men tacitly have come to one of these infamous
      little agreements so common in society? And it is proposed to me that I
      should quietly enter into the pact and carry it out. All hands and arms
      are held out to me. All doors and hearts are open to me.

 “And what about her? An enigma. She cannot be ignorant of
      everything. However—however—Well, I cannot understand it.

 “The dinner was very gay and cordial. On leaving the table the
      husband and his friend began to play cards, while I went out on the porch
      to look at the moonlight with madame. She seemed to be greatly affected by
      nature, and I judged that the moment for my happiness was near. That
      evening she was really delightful. The country had seemed to make her more
      tender. Her long, slender waist looked pretty on this stone porch beside a
      great vase in which grew some flowers. I felt like dragging her out under
      the trees, throwing myself at her feet and speaking to her words of love.

 “Her husband's voice called 'Louise!'

 “'Yes, dear.'

 “'You are forgetting the tea.'

 “'I'll go and see about it, my friend.'

 “We returned to the house, and she gave us some tea. When the two
      men had finished playing cards, they were visibly tired. I had to go to my
      room. I did not get to sleep till late, and then I slept badly.

 “An excursion was decided upon for the following afternoon, and we
      went in an open carriage to visit some ruins. She and I were in the back
      of the vehicle and they were opposite us, riding backward. The
      conversation was sympathetic and agreeable. I am an orphan, and it seemed
      to me as though I had just found my family, I felt so at home with them.

 “Suddenly, as she had stretched out her foot between her husband's
      legs, he murmured reproachfully: 'Louise, please don't wear out your old
      shoes yourself. There is no reason for being neater in Paris than in the
      country.'

 “I lowered my eyes. She was indeed wearing worn-out shoes, and I
      noticed that her stockings were not pulled up tight.

 “She had blushed and hidden her foot under her dress. The friend was
      looking out in the distance with an indifferent and unconcerned look.

 “The husband offered me a cigar, which I accepted. For a few days it
      was impossible for me to be alone with her for two minutes; he was with us
      everywhere. He was delightful to me, however.

 “One morning he came to get me to take a walk before breakfast, and
      the conversation happened to turn on marriage. I spoke a little about
      solitude and about how charming life can be made by the affection of a
      woman. Suddenly he interrupted me, saying: 'My friend, don't talk about
      things you know nothing about. A woman who has no other reason for loving
      you will not love you long. All the little coquetries which make them so
      exquisite when they do not definitely belong to us cease as soon as they
      become ours. And then—the respectable women—that is to say our
      wives—are—are not—in fact do not understand their
      profession of wife. Do you understand?'

 “He said no more, and I could not guess his thoughts.

 “Two days after this conversation he called me to his room quite
      early, in order to show me a collection of engravings. I sat in an easy
      chair opposite the big door which separated his apartment from his wife's,
      and behind this door I heard some one walking and moving, and I was
      thinking very little of the engravings, although I kept exclaiming: 'Oh,
      charming! delightful! exquisite!'

 “He suddenly said: 'Oh, I have a beautiful specimen in the next
      room. I'll go and get it.'

 “He ran to the door quickly, and both sides opened as though for a
      theatrical effect.

 “In a large room, all in disorder, in the midst of skirts, collars,
      waists lying around on the floor, stood a tall, dried-up creature. The
      lower part of her body was covered with an old, worn-out silk petticoat,
      which was hanging limply on her shapeless form, and she was standing in
      front of a mirror brushing some short, sparse blond hairs. Her arms formed
      two acute angles, and as she turned around in astonishment I saw under a
      common cotton chemise a regular cemetery of ribs, which were hidden from
      the public gaze by well-arranged pads.

 “The husband uttered a natural exclamation and came back, closing
      the doors, and said: 'Gracious! how stupid I am! Oh, how thoughtless! My
      wife will never forgive me for that!'

 “I already felt like thanking him. I left three days later, after
      cordially shaking hands with the two men and kissing the lady's fingers.
      She bade me a cold good-by.”

 Karl Massouligny was silent. Some one asked: “But what was the
      friend?”

 “I don't know—however—however he looked greatly
      distressed to see me leaving so soon.”