THE FOREST REVERIE
    

     ‘Tis said that when
     The hands of men
     Tamed this primeval wood,
     And hoary trees with groans of woe,
     Like warriors by an unknown foe,
     Were in their strength subdued,
     The virgin Earth Gave instant birth
     To springs that ne’er did flow
     That in the sun Did rivulets run,
     And all around rare flowers did blow
     The wild rose pale Perfumed the gale
     And the queenly lily adown the dale
     (Whom the sun and the dew
     And the winds did woo),
     With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.

     So when in tears
     The love of years
     Is wasted like the snow,
     And the fine fibrils of its life
     By the rude wrong of instant strife
     Are broken at a blow
     Within the heart
     Do springs upstart
     Of which it doth now know,
     And strange, sweet dreams,
     Like silent streams
     That from new fountains overflow,
     With the earlier tide
     Of rivers glide
     Deep in the heart whose hope has died—
     Quenching the fires its ashes hide,—
     Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
     Sweet flowers, ere long,
     The rare and radiant flowers of song!








      NOTES
    

      Of the many verses from time to time ascribed to the pen of Edgar Poe, and
      not included among his known writings, the lines entitled “Alone”
      have the chief claim to our notice. Fac-similecopies of this piece
      had been in possession of the present editor some time previous to its
      publication in “Scribner’s Magazine” for September,
      1875; but as proofs of the authorship claimed for it were not forthcoming,
      he refrained from publishing it as requested. The desired proofs have not
      yet been adduced, and there is, at present, nothing but internal evidence
      to guide us. “Alone” is stated to have been written by Poe in
      the album of a Baltimore lady (Mrs. Balderstone?), on March 17th, 1829,
      and the facsimile given in “Scribner’s” is alleged to be
      of his handwriting. If the caligraphy be Poe’s, it is different in
      all essential respects from all the many specimens known to us, and
      strongly resembles that of the writer of the heading and dating of the
      manuscript, both of which the contributor of the poem acknowledges to have
      been recently added. The lines, however, if not by Poe, are the most
      successful imitation of his early mannerisms yet made public, and, in the
      opinion of one well qualified to speak, “are not unworthy on the
      whole of the parentage claimed for them.”
    

      While Edgar Poe was editor of the “Broadway Journal,” some
      lines “To Isadore” appeared therein, and, like several of his
      known pieces, bore no signature. They were at once ascribed to Poe, and in
      order to satisfy questioners, an editorial paragraph subsequently appeared
      saying they were by “A. Ide, junior.” Two previous poems had
      appeared in the “Broadway journal” over the signature of
      “A. M. Ide,” and whoever wrote them was also the author of the
      lines “To Isadore.” In order, doubtless, to give a show of
      variety, Poe was then publishing some of his known works in his journal
      over noms de plume,and as no other writings whatever can be traced
      to any person bearing the name of “A. M. Ide,” it is not
      impossible that the poems now republished in this collection may be by the
      author of “The Raven.” Having been published without his usual
      elaborate revision, Poe may have wished to hidehis hasty work
      under an assumed name. The three pieces are included in the present
      collection, so the reader can judge for himself what pretensions they
      possess to be by the author of “The Raven.”