IX 

 

THE SON OF RASHMANI

 I

 Kalipada

's mother was Rashmani, but she had to
do the duty of the father as well, because when both
of the parents are "mother" then it is bad for the
child. Bhavani, her husband, was wholly incapable
of keeping his children under discipline. To know
why he was bent on spoiling his son, you must hear
something of the former history of the family.

 Bhavani was born in the famous house of
Saniari. His father, Abhaya Charan, had a son,
Shyama Charan, by his first wife. When he married
again after her death he had himself passed the
marriageable age, and his new father-in-law took
advantage of the weakness of his position to have a
special portion of his estate settled on his daughter.
In this way he was satisfied that proper provision
had been made, if his daughter should become a
widow early in life. She would be independent of
the charity of Shyama Charan.  The first part of his anticipation came true. For
very soon after the birth of a son, whom she called
Bhavani, Abhaya Charan died. It gave the father-in-law
great peace and consolation, as he looked forward
to his own death, to know that his daughter
was properly looked after.

 Shyama Charan was quite grown up. In fact his
own eldest boy was a year older than Bhavani. He
brought up the latter with his own son. In doing
this he never took a farthing from the property
allotted to his step-mother, and every year he got a
receipt from her after submitting accounts.
His honesty in this affair surprised the neighbourhood.
In fact they thought that such honesty was
another name for foolishness. They did not like
the idea of a division being made in the undivided
ancestral property. If Shyama Charan in some
underhand manner had been able to annul the dowry,
his neighbours would have admired his sagacity; and
there were good advisers ready to hand who could
have rendered him material aid in the attainment of
such an object. But Shyama Charan, in spite of the
risk of crippling his , strictly set aside the
dowry which came to the share of his step-mother;
and the widow, Vraja Sundari, being naturally
affectionate and trustful, had every confidence in
Shyama Charan whom she trusted as her own son. More than once she had chided him for being so
particular about her portion of the property. She
would tell him that, as she was not going to take her
property with her when she died, and as it would in
any case to the family, it was not necessary
to be so very strict about rendering accounts. But
he never listened to her.

 Shyama Charan was a severe disciplinarian by
habit and his children were perfectly aware of the
fact. But Bhavani had every possible freedom, and
this gave rise to the impression that he was more
partial to his step-brother than to his own sons.
But Bhavani's education was sadly neglected and he
completely relied on Shyama Charan for the management
of his share of the property. He merely had
to sign documents occasionally without ever spending
a thought on their contents. On the other hand,
Tarapada, the eldest son of Shyama Charan, was
quite an expert in the management of the estate,
having to act as an assistant to his father.

 After the death of Shyama Charan, Tarapada
said to Bhavani, "Uncle, we must not live together
as we have done for so long, because some trifling
misunderstanding may come at any moment and
cause utter disruption."

 Bhavani never imagined, even in his dream, that
a day might come when he would have to manage his own affairs. The world in which he had been
born and bred ever appeared to him complete and
entire in itself. It was an incomprehensible calamity
to him that there could be a dividing line somewhere
and that this world of his could be split into two.
When he found that Tarapada was immovable and
indifferent to the grief and dishonour that such a
step would bring to the family, he began to rack his
brain to find out how the property could be divided
with the least possible strain.

 Tarapada showed surprise at his uncle's anxiety
and said that there was no need to trouble about
this, because the division had already been made in
the life-time of his grandfather. Bhavani said in , "But I know nothing of this!" Tarapada
said in answer, "Then you must be the only
one in the whole neighbourhood who does not.
For, lest there should be ruinous litigation after he
had gone, my grandfather had already given a portion
of the property to your mother." Bhavani
thought this not unlikely and asked, "What about
the house?" Tarapada said, "If you wish, you
can keep this house to yourself and we shall be contented
with the other house in the district town."

 As Bhavani had never been to this town-house, he
had neither knowledge of it, nor affection for it.
He was astounded at the magnanimity of Tarapada for so easily relinquishing his right to the house in
the village where they had been brought up. But
when Bhavani told everything to his mother, she
struck her forehead with her hand and said: "This
is ! What I got from my husband was
my own dowry and its income is very small. I do
not see why you should be deprived of your share
in your father's property."

 Bhavani said, "Tarapada is quite positive that
his grandfather never gave us any thing except this
land."

 Vraja Sundari was astonished and informed her
son that her husband had made two copies of his
will, one of which was still lying in her own box.
The box was opened and it was found that there
was only the deed of gift for the property belonging
to the mother and nothing else. The copy of the
will had been taken out.

 The help of advisers was sought. The man who
came to their rescue was Bagala, the son of their
family guru . It was the profession of the father
to look after the spiritual needs of the village; the
material side was left to the son. The two of them
had divided between themselves the other world and
this. Whatever might be the result for others, they
themselves had nothing to suffer from this division.
Bagala said that, even if the will was missing, the shares in the ancestral property must be equal, as
between the brothers.

 Just at this time, a copy of a will made its appearance
supporting the claims of the other side. In this
document there was no mention of Bhavani and the
whole property was given to the grandsons at the
time when no son was born to Bhavani. With
Bagala as his captain Bhavani set out on his voyage
across the perilous sea of litigation. When his
vessel at last reached harbour his funds were nearly
exhausted and the ancestral property was in the
hands of the other party. The land which was
given to his mother had dwindled to such an extent,
that it could barely give them shelter, or keep up the
family dignity. Then Tarapada went away to the
district town and they never met again.

 II

 Shyama Charan's pierced the heart of
the widow like an assassin's knife. To the end of
her life, almost every day she would heave a sigh
and say that God would never suffer such an injustice
to be done. She was quite firm in her faith
when she said to Bhavani, "I do not know your
law or your law courts, but I am certain that my
husband's true will and testament will someday be
recovered. You will find it again."  Because Bhavani was helpless in worldly matters
such assurances as these gave him great consolation.
He settled down in his inactivity, certain in
his own mind that his pious mother's prophecy could
never remain unfulfilled. After his mother's death
his faith became all the stronger, since the memory
of her piety acquired greater radiance through death's
mystery. He felt quite unconcerned about the stress
of their poverty which became more and more
formidable as the years went by. The necessities of
life and the maintenance of family traditions,—these
seemed to him like play acting on a temporary stage,
not real things. When his former expensive clothing
was outworn and he had to buy cheap materials
in the shop, this amused him almost like a joke.
He smiled and said to himself,—"These people do
not know that this is only a passing phase of my
fortune. Their surprise will be all the greater,
when some day I shall celebrate the Puja Festival
with unwonted magnificence."

 This certainty of future prodigality was so clear
to his mind's eye that present penury escaped his attention.
His servant, Noto, was the principal companion
with whom he had discussions about these
things. They used to have animated conversations,
in which sometimes his opinion differed from his
master's, as to the propriety of bringing down a theatrical troupe from Calcutta for these future
occasions. Noto used to get reprimands from
Bhavani for his natural miserliness in these items of
future expenditure.

 While Bhavani's one anxiety was about the
absence of an heir, who could inherit his vast possible
wealth, a son was born to him. The horoscope
plainly indicated that the lost property would come
back to this boy.

 From the time of the birth of his son, Bhavani's
attitude was changed. It became cruelly difficult for
him now to bear his poverty with his old amused
equanimity, because he felt that he had a duty
towards this new representative of the illustrious
house of Saniari, who had such a glorious future before
him. That the traditional extravagance could
not be maintained on the occasion of the birth of his
child gave him the keenest sorrow. He felt as if
he were cheating his own son. So he compensated
his boy with an inordinate amount of spoiling.

 Bhavani's wife, Rashmani, had a different temperament
from her husband. She never felt any anxiety
about the family traditions of the Chowdhuris of
Saniari. Bhavani was quite aware of the fact and
indulgently smiled to himself, as though nothing
better could be expected from a woman who came from a Vaishnava family of very humble lineage.
Rashmani frankly acknowledged that she could not
share the family sentiments: what concerned her
most was the welfare of her own child.

 There was hardly an acquaintance in the neighbourhood
with whom Bhavani did not discuss the
question of the lost will; but he never spoke a word
about it to his wife. Once or twice he had tried,
but her perfect unconcern had made him drop the
subject. She neither paid attention to the past greatness
of the family, nor to its future glories,—she
kept her mind busy with the actual necessities of the
present, and those necessities were not small in
number or quality.

 When the Goddess of Fortune deserts a house, she
usually leaves some of her burdens behind, and this
ancient family was still encumbered with its host of
dependents, though its own shelter was nearly
crumbling to dust. These take it to be
an insult if they are asked to do any service. They
get head-aches at the least touch of the kitchen
smoke. They are visited with sudden rheumatism
the moment they are asked to run errands. Therefore
all the responsibilities of maintaining the family
were laid upon Rashmani herself. Women lose
their delicacy of refinement, when they are compelled night and day to with their destiny over things
which are pitifully small, and for this they are
blamed by those for whom they toil.

 Besides her household affairs Rashmani had to
keep all the accounts of the little landed which remained and also to make arrangements for
collecting rents. Never before was the estate
managed with such strictness. Bhavani had been
quite incapable of collecting his dues: Rashmani
never made any remission of the least fraction of
rent. The tenants, and even her own agents, reviled
her behind her back for the meanness of the family
from which she came. Even her husband occasionally
used to enter his protest against the harsh
economy which went against the grain of the world-famed
house of Saniari.

 Rashmani quite ungrudgingly took the blame of all
this upon herself and openly confessed the poverty
of her parents. Tying the end of her sari tightly
round her waist she went on with her household
duties in her own vigorous fashion and made herself
thoroughly disagreeable both to the inmates of the
house and to her neighbours. But nobody ever had
the courage to interfere. Only one thing she carefully
avoided. She never asked her husband to
help her in any work and she was nervously afraid
of his taking up any responsibilities. Indeed she was always furiously engaged in keeping her husband
idle; and because he had received the best possible
training in this direction she was wholly successful
in her mission.

 Rashmani had attained middle age before her son
came. Up to this time all the pent-up tenderness of
the mother in her and all the love of the wife had
their centre of devotion in this simple-hearted husband. Bhavani was a child grown
up by mistake beyond its natural age. This was
the reason why, after the death of her husband's
mother, she had to assume the position of mother
and mistress in one.

 In order to protect her husband from invasions of
Bagala, the son of the guru , and other calamities,
Rashmani adopted such a stern demeanour, that the
companions of her husband used to be terribly afraid
of her. She never had the opportunity, which a
woman usually has, of keeping her fierceness hidden
and of softening the keen edge of her words,—maintaining
a dignified reserve towards men such as
is proper for a woman.

 Bhavani meekly accepted his wife's authority with
regard to himself, but it became extremely hard
for him to obey her when it related to Kalipada,
his son. The reason was, that Rashmani never regarded
Bhavani's son from the point of view of Bhavani himself. In her heart she pitied her husband
and said, "Poor man, it was no fault of his,
but his misfortune, to be born into a rich family."
That is why she never could expect her husband
to be deprived of any comfort to which he had been
accustomed. Whatever might be the condition of
the household finance, she tried hard to keep him in
his habitual ease and luxury. Under her all
expense was strictly limited except in the case of
Bhavani. She would never allow him to notice if
some inevitable occurred in the preparation of
his meals or his apparel. She would blame some
imaginary dog for spoiling dishes that were never
made and would blame herself for her carelessness.
She would attack Noto for letting some fictitious
article of dress be stolen or lost. This had the usual
effect of rousing Bhavani's on behalf of his
favourite servant and he would take up his defence.
Indeed it had often happened that Bhavani had confessed
with bare-faced shamelessness that he had
used the dress which had never been bought, and for
whose loss Noto was blamed; but what happened
afterwards, he had not the power to invent and was
obliged to rely upon the fertile imagination of his
wife who was also the accuser!

 Thus Rashmani treated her husband, but she
never put her son in the same category. For he was her own child and why should he be allowed to give
himself airs? Kalipada had to be content for his
breakfast with a few handfuls of puffed rice and
some treacle. During the cold weather he had to
wrap his body as well as his head with a thick rough
cotton chaddar . She would call his teacher before
her and warn him never to spare her boy, if he was
the least neglectful with his lessons. This treatment
of his own son was the hardest blow that
Bhavani Charan suffered since the days of his destitution.
But as he had always acknowledged defeat at
the hands of the powerful, he had not the spirit to
stand up against his wife in her method of dealing
with the boy.

 The dress which Rashmani provided for her son,
during the Puja festivities, was made of such poor
material that in former days the very servants of
the house would have rebelled if it had been offered
to them. But Rashmani more than once tried her
best to explain to her husband that Kalipada, being
the most recent addition to the Chowdhuri family,
had never known their former splendour and so was
quite glad to get what was given to him. But this
pathetic innocence of the boy about his own destiny
hurt Bhavani more than anything else, and he could
not forgive himself for deceiving the child. When
Kalipada would dance for joy and rush to him to show him some present from his mother, which was
ridiculously trivial, Bhavani's heart would suffer
torture.

 Bagala, the guru's son, was now in an affluent condition
owing to his agency in the which had
brought about the ruin of Bhavani. With the money
which he had in hand he used to buy cheap tinsel
wares from Calcutta before the Puja holidays. Invisible
ink,— combinations of stick, fishing-rod
and umbrella,—letter-paper with pictures in the
corner,—silk fabrics bought at auctions, and other
things of this kind, attractive to the simple villagers,—these
were his stock in trade. All the forward
young men of the village vied with one another in
rising above their rusticity by purchasing these
sweepings of the Calcutta market which, they were
told, were absolutely necessary for the city gentry.

 Once Bagala had bought a wonderful toy,—a in the form of a woman,—which, when
wound up, would rise from her chair and begin to
fan herself with sudden alacrity. Kalipada was
fascinated by it. He had a very good reason to
avoid asking his mother about the toy; so he went
straight to his father and begged him to purchase it
for him. Bhavani answered "yes" at once, but
when he heard the price his face fell. Rashmani
kept all the money and he went to her as a timid beggar. He began with all sorts of irrelevant remarks
and then took a desperate plunge into the
subject with startling .

 Rashmani briefly remarked: "Are you mad?"
Bhavani Charan sat silent revolving in his mind what
to say next.

 "Look here," he exclaimed, "I don't think I
need milk pudding daily with my dinner."

 "Who told you?" said Rashmani sharply.

 "The doctor says it's very bad for biliousness."

 "The doctor's a fool!"

 "But I'm sure that rice agrees with me better than
your luchis . They are too indigestible."

 "I've never seen the least sign of indigestion in
you. You have been accustomed to them all your
life!"

 Bhavani Charan was ready enough to make
sacrifices, but there his passage was barred. Butter
might rise in price, but the number of his luchis never
diminished. Milk was quite enough for him at his
midday meal, but curds also had to be supplied because
that was the family tradition. Rashmani
could not have borne seeing him sit down to his
meal, if curds were not supplied. Therefore all his
attempts to make a breach in his daily provisions,
through which the fanning foreign woman might
enter, were an utter failure.  Then Bhavani paid a visit to Bagala for no reason
whatever, and after a great deal of round about
talk asked concerning the foreign doll. Of course
his straightened circumstances had long been known
to Bagala, yet it was a perfect misery to Bhavani
to have to hesitate to buy this doll for his son owing
to want of ready money. Swallowing his pride, he
brought out from under his arm an expensive old
Kashmir , and said in a voice: "My circumstances

are bad just at present and I haven't
got much cash. So I have determined to mortgage
this shawl and buy that doll for Kalipada."

 If the object offered had been less expensive than
this Kashmir shawl, Bagala would at once have
closed the . But knowing that it would not
be possible for him to take possession of this shawl
in face of the village opinion, and still more in face
of Rashmani's watchfulness, he refused to accept it;
and Bhavani had to go back home disappointed with
the Kashmir shawl hidden under his arm.

 Kalipada asked every day for that foreign fanning
toy, and Bhavani smiled every day and said,—"Wait,
a bit, my boy, till the seventh day of the
moon comes round." But every new day it became
more and more difficult to keep up that smile.

 On the fourth day of the moon Bhavani made
a sudden inroad upon his wife and said:  "I've noticed that there's something wrong with
Kalipada,—something the matter with his health."

 "Nonsense," said Rashmani, "he's in the best of
health."

 "Haven't you noticed him sitting silent for hours
together?"

 "I should be very greatly relieved if he could sit
still for as many minutes."

 When all his arrows had missed their mark, and
no impression had been made, Bhavani Charan
heaved a deep sigh and passing his fingers through
his hair went away and sat down on the verandah
and began to smoke with fearful assiduity.

 On the fifth day, at his morning meal, Bhavani
passed by the curds and the milk pudding without
touching them. In the evening he simply took one
single piece of sandesh . The luchis were left unheeded.
He complained of want of appetite.
This time a considerable breach was made in the
fortifications.

 On the sixth day, Rashmani took Kalipada into
the room and sweetly calling him by his pet name
said, "Betu, you are old enough to know that it is
the halfway house to stealing to desire that which
you can't have."

 Kalipada whimpered and said, "What do I know
about it? Father promised to give me that doll."  Rashmani sat down to explain to him how much
lay behind his father's promise,—how much pain,
how much affection, how much loss and privation.
Rashmani had never in her life before talked thus
to Kalipada, because it was her habit to give short
and sharp commands. It filled the boy with amazement
when he found his mother coaxing him and
explaining things at such a length, and mere child
though he was, he could fathom something of the
deep suffering of his mother's heart. Yet at the
same time it will be easily understood, that it
was hard for this boy to turn his mind away altogether
from that captivating foreign fanning woman.
He pulled a long face and began to scratch the
ground.

 This made Rashmani's heart at once hard, and
she said in her severe tone: "Yes, you may weep
and cry, or become angry, but you shall never get
that which is not for you to have." And she
hastened away without another word.

 Kalipada went out. Bhavani Charan was still
smoking his hookah. Noticing Kalipada from a distance
he got up and walked in the opposite direction
as if he had some urgent business. Kalipada ran to
him and said,—"But that doll?" Bhavani could
not raise a smile that day. He put his arm round
Kalipada's neck and said:  "Baba, wait a little. I have some pressing business
to get through. Let me finish it first, and then
we will talk about it." Saying this, he went out of
his house.

 Kalipada saw him brush a tear from his eyes.
He stood at the door and watched his father, and
it was quite evident, even to this boy, that he was
going nowhere in particular, and that he was dragging
the weight of a despair which could not be relieved.

 Kalipada at once went back to his mother and
said:

 "Mother, I don't want that foreign doll."

 That morning Bhavani Charan returned late.
When he sat down to his meal, after his bath, it was
quite evident, by the look on his face, that the curds
and the milk pudding would fare no better with him
than on the day before, and that the best part of
the fish would go to the cat.

 Just at this critical juncture Rashmani brought in
a card-board box, bound round with twine, and set
it before her husband. Her intention had been to
reveal the mystery of this packet to her husband
when he went to take his nap after his meal. But in
order to remove the undeserved neglect of the curds
and the milk and the fish, she had to disclose its contents
before the time. So the foreign doll came out of the box and without more ado began to fan
itself vigorously.

 After this, the cat had to go away disappointed.
Bhavani remarked to his wife that the cooking was
the best he had ever tasted. The fish was incomparable:
the curds had set themselves with an
exactness that was rarely attained, and the milk
pudding was superb.

 On the seventh day of the moon, Kalipada got the
toy for which he had been pining. During the whole
of that day he allowed the foreigner to go on fanning
herself and thereby made his boy companions jealous.
In any other case this performance would have
seemed to him monotonously tiresome, but knowing
that on the following day he would have to give
the toy back, his constancy to it on that single occasion
remained unabated. At the rental of two
rupees per diem Rashmani had hired it from
Bagala.

 On the eighth day of the moon, Kalipada heaved
a deep sigh and returned the toy, along with the box
and twine, to Bagala with his own hands. From
that day forward Kalipada began to share the confidences
of his mother, and it became so absurdly easy
for Bhavani to give expensive presents every year,
that it surprised even himself.

 When, with the help of his mother, Kalipada came to know that nothing in this world could be gained
without paying for it with the inevitable price of
suffering, he rapidly grew up in his mind and became
a valued assistant to his mother in her daily tasks.
It come to be a natural rule of life with him that
no one should add to the burden of the world, but
that each should try to lighten it.

 When Kalipada won a scholarship at the
Vernacular examination, Bhavani proposed that he
should give up his studies and take in hand the supervision
of the estate. Kalipada went to his mother
and said,—"I shall never be a man, if I do not
complete my education."

 The mother said,—"You are right, Baba, you
must go to Calcutta."

 Kalipada explained to her that it would not be
necessary to spend a single pice on him; his scholarship
would be sufficient, and he would try to get some
work to supplement it.

 But it was necessary to convince Bhavani of the
wisdom of the course. Rashmani did not wish to
employ the argument that there was very little of
the estate remaining to require supervision; for she
knew how it would hurt him. She said that Kalipada
must become a man whom everyone could
respect. But all the members of the Chowdhuri
family had attained their respectability without ever going a step outside the limits of Saniari. The
outer world was as unknown to them as the world
beyond the grave. Bhavani, therefore, could not
conceive how anybody could think of a boy like Kalipada
going to Calcutta. But the cleverest man in
the village, Bagala, fortunately agreed with Rashmani.

 "It is perfectly clear," he said, "that, one day,
Kalipada will become a lawyer; and then he will set
matters right concerning the property of which the
family has been deprived."

 This was a great consolation to Bhavani Charan
and he brought out the file of records about the theft
of the will and tried to explain the whole thing to
Kalipada by dint of daily discussion. But his son
was lacking in proper enthusiasm and merely echoed
his father's sentiment about this solemn wrong.

 The day before Kalipada's departure for Calcutta
Rashmani hung round his neck an amulet containing
some mantras to protect him from evils. She gave
him at the same time a fifty-rupee currency note,
advising him to keep it for any special emergency.
This note, which was the symbol of his mother's
numberless daily acts of self-denial, was the truest
amulet of all for Kalipada. He determined to keep
it by him and never to spend it, whatever might
happen.  III

 From this time onward the old interminable discussions
about the theft of the will became less frequent
on the part of Bhavani. His one topic of
conversation was the marvellous adventure of Kalipada
in search of his education. Kalipada was
actually engaged in his studies in the city of Calcutta!
Kalipada knew Calcutta as well as the palm
of his hand! Kalipada had been the first to hear
the great news that another bridge was going to be
built over the Ganges near Hughli! The day on
which the father received his son's letter, he would
go to every house in the village to read it to his
neighbours and he would hardly find time even to take
his spectacles from his nose. On arriving at a
fresh house he would remove them from their case
with the utmost deliberation; then he would wipe
them carefully with the end of his dhoti ; then, word
by word, he would slowly read the letter through to
one neighbour after another, with something like the
following comment:—

 "Brother, just listen! What is the world coming
to? Even the dogs and the jackals are to cross the
holy Ganges without washing the dust from their
feet! Who could imagine such a sacrilege?"

 No doubt it was very deplorable; but all the same it gave Bhavani Charan a peculiar pleasure to communicate
at first hand such important news from his
own son's letter, and this more than compensated for
the spiritual disaster which must surely overtake the
numberless creatures of this present age. To everyone
he met he solemnly nodded his head and prophesied
that the days were soon coming when Mother
Ganges would disappear altogether; all the while
cherishing the hope that the news of such a momentous
event would come to him by letter from his own
son in the proper time.

 Kalipada, with very great difficulty, scraped
together just enough money to pay his expenses till
he passed his Matriculation and again won a
scholarship. Bhavani at once made up his mind to
invite all the village to a feast, for he imagined that
his son's good ship of fortune had now reached its
haven and there would be no more occasion for
economy. But he received no encouragement from
Rashmani.

 Kalipada was fortunate enough to secure a place
of study in a students' lodging house near his college.
The proprietor allowed him to occupy a small room
on the ground floor which was absolutely useless
for other lodgers. In exchange for this and his
board, he had to coach the son of the owner of the
house. The one great advantage was that there would be no chance of any fellow lodger ever sharing
his quarters. So, although ventilation was lacking,
his studies were uninterrupted.

 Those of the students who paid their rent and
lived in the upper story had no concern with Kalipada;
but soon it became painfully evident that those
who are up above have the power to hurl missiles at
those below with all the more deadly force because
of their distance. The leader of those above was
Sailen.

 Sailen was the scion of a rich family. It was
unnecessary for him to live in a students' mess, but
he successfully convinced his guardians that this
would be best for his studies. The real reason was
that Sailen was naturally fond of company, and the
students' lodging house was an ideal place where he
could have all the pleasure of companionship without
any of its responsibilities. It was the firm conviction
of Sailen that he was a good fellow and a
man of feeling. The advantage of harbouring such
a conviction was that it needed no proof in practice.
Vanity is not like a horse or an elephant requiring
expensive fodder.

 Nevertheless, as Sailen had plenty of money he
did not allow his vanity merely to graze at large; he
took special pride in keeping it stall-fed. It must
be said to his credit that he had a genuine desire to help people in their need, but the desire in him
was of such a character, that if a man in difficulty
refused to come to him for help, he would turn
round on him and do his best to add to his trouble.
His mess mates had their s for the theatre
bought for them by Sailen, and it cost them nothing
to have occasional feasts. They could borrow
money from him without meaning to pay it back.
When a newly married youth was in doubt about the
choice of some gift for his wife, he could fully rely
on Sailen's good taste in the matter. On these occasions
the love-lorn youth would take Sailen to the
shop and pretend to select the cheapest and least
suitable presents: then Sailen, with a contemptuous
laugh would intervene and select the right thing. At
the mention of the price the young husband would
pull a long face, but Sailen would always be ready
to abide by his own superior choice and to pay the
cost.

 In this manner Sailen became the acknowledged
patron of the students upstairs. It made him intolerant
of the insolence of any one who refused to
accept his help. Indeed, to help others in this way
had become his hobby.

 Kalipada, in his tattered , used to sit on a
dirty mat in his damp room below and recite his
lessons, swinging himself from side to side to the rhythm of the sentence. It was a sheer necessity
for him to get that scholarship next year.

 Kalipada's mother had made him promise, before
he left home for Calcutta that he would avoid the
company of rich young men. Therefore he bore
the burden of his indigence alone, strictly keeping
himself from those who had been more favoured by
fortune. But to Sailen, it seemed a sheer that a student as poor as Kalipada should yet
have the pride to keep away from his patronage.
Besides this, in his food and dress and everything,
Kalipada's poverty was so blatantly exposed, it
hurt Sailen's sense of decency. Every time he
looked down into Kalipada's room, he was offended
by the sight of the cheap clothing, the dingy net and the tattered bedding. Whenever he passed
on his way to his own room in the upper story the
sight of these things was unavoidable. To crown
it all there was that absurd amulet which Kalipada
always had hanging round his neck, and those daily
rites of devotion which were so ridiculously out of
fashion!

 One day Sailen and his followers condescended to
invite Kalipada to a feast, thinking that his gratitude
would know no bounds. But Kalipada sent an
answer saying that his habits were different and it
would not be wholesome for him to accept the invitation. Sailen was unaccustomed to such a refusal,
and it roused up in him all the ferocity of his insulted
benevolence. For some days after this, the noise on
the upper story became so loudly insistent that it
was impossible for Kalipada to go on with his
studies. He was compelled to spend the greater
part of his days studying in the Park, and to get up
very early and sit down to his work long before it
was light.

 Owing to his half-starved condition, his mental
overwork, and badly-ventilated room, Kalipada
began to suffer from continual attacks of headache.
There were times when he was obliged to lie down
on his bed for three or four days together. But
he made no mention of his illness in his letters to his
father. Bhavani himself was certain that, just as
vegetation grew rank in his village surroundings, so
comforts of all kinds sprang up of themselves from
the soil of Calcutta. Kalipada never for a moment
disabused his mind of that misconception. He did
not fail to write to his father, even when suffering
from one of these paroxysms of pain. The deliberate
rowdiness of the students in the upper story
added at such times to his distress.

 Kalipada tried to make himself as scarce and small
as possible, in order to avoid notice; but this did not
bring him relief. One day, he found that a cheap shoe of his own had been taken away and replaced
by an expensive foreign one. It was impossible for
him to go to college with such an incongruous pair.
He made no complaint, however, but bought some
old second-hand shoes from the cobbler. One day,
a student from the upper story came into his room
and asked him:

 "Have you, by any mistake, brought away my
silver cigarette case with you?"

 Kalipada got annoyed and answered:

 "I have never been inside your room in my life."

 The student stooped down. "Hullo!" he said,
"here it is!" And the valuable cigarette case was
picked up from the corner of the room.

 Kalipada determined to leave this lodging house
as soon as ever he had passed his Intermediate Examination,
provided only he could get a scholarship to
enable him to do so.

 Every year the students of the house used to have
their annual Saraswati Puja. Though the greater
part of the expenses fell to the share of Sailen, every
one else contributed according to his means. The
year before, they had contemptuously left out Kalipada
from the list of contributors; but this year,
merely to tease him, they came with their subscription
book. Kalipada instantly paid five rupees to
the fund, though he had no intention of participating in the feast. His penury had long brought on him
the contempt of his fellow lodgers, but this unexpected
gift of five rupees became to them insufferable.
The Saraswati Puja was performed with great éclat
and the five rupees could easily have been spared.
It had been hard indeed for Kalipada to part with
it. While he took the food given him in his landlord's
house he had no control over the time at which
it was served. Besides this, since the servants
brought him the food, he did not like to criticise the
dishes. He preferred to provide himself with some
extra things; and after the forced extravagance of
his five-rupee subscription he had to forgo all this
and suffered in consequence. His paroxysms of
headache became more frequent, and though he
passed his examination, he failed to obtain the scholarship
that he desired.

 The loss of the scholarship drove Kalipada to do
extra work as a private tutor and to stick to the
same unhealthy room in the lodging house. The
students overhead had hoped that they would be relieved
of his presence. But punctually to the day the
room was unlocked on the lower floor. Kalipada
entered, clad in the same old dirty check Parsee coat.
A coolie from Sealdah Station took down from his
head a steel trunk and other miscellaneous packages
and laid them on the floor of the room; and a long wrangle ensued as to the proper amount of pice that
were due.

 In the depths of those packages there were mango
chutnies and other condiments which his mother had
specially prepared. Kalipada was aware that, in his
absence, the upper-story students, in search of a jest,
did not to come into his room by stealth.

 He was especially anxious to keep these home gifts
from their cruel scrutiny. As tokens of home affection
they were supremely precious to him; but to the
town students, they denoted merely the boorishness
of poverty-stricken villagers. The vessels were
crude and earthen, fastened up by an earthen lid
fixed on with paste of flour. They were neither
glass nor porcelain, and therefore sure to be regarded
with insolent disdain by rich town-bred people.

 Formerly Kalipada used to keep these stores hidden
under his bed, covering them up with old newspapers.
But this time he took the precaution of
always locking up his door, even if he went out for
a few minutes. This still further roused the spleen
of Sailen and his party. It seemed to them preposterous
that the room which was poor enough to draw
tears from the eyes of the most hardened burglar
should be as carefully guarded as if it were a second
Bank of Bengal.

 "Does he actually believe," they said among themselves, "that the temptation will be irresistible for
us to steal that Parsee coat?"

 Sailen had never visited this dark and mildewed
room from which the plaster was dropping. The
glimpses that he had taken, while going up-stairs,—especially
when, in the evening, Kalipada, the upper
part of his body bare, would sit poring over his
books with a smoky lamp beside him,—were
enough to give him a sense of suffocation. Sailen
asked his boon companions to explore the room
below and find out the treasure which Kalipada had
hidden. Everybody felt intensely amused at the
proposal.

 The lock on Kalipada's door was a cheap one,
which had the magnanimity to lend itself to any key.
One evening when Kalipada had gone out to his
private tuition, two or three of the students with an sense of humour took a lantern and unlocked
the room and entered. It did not need a
moment to discover the pots of chutney under the
bed, but these hardly seemed valuable enough to
demand such watchful care on the part of Kalipada.
A further search disclosed a key on a ring under the
pillow. They opened the steel trunk with the key
and found a few soiled clothes, books and writing
material. They were about to shut the box in disgust
when they saw, at the very bottom, a packet covered by a dirty . On uncovering
three or four wrappers they found a currency note
of fifty rupees. This made them burst out into
peals of laughter. They felt certain that Kalipada
was harbouring suspicion against the whole world
in his mind because of this fifty rupees!

 The meanness of this suspicious precaution deepened
the intensity of their contempt for Kalipada.
Just then, they heard a foot-step outside. They
hastily shut the box, locked the door, and ran upstairs
with the note in their possession.

 Sailen was vastly amused. Though fifty rupees
was a mere trifle, he could never have believed that
Kalipada had so much money in his trunk. They
all decided to watch the result of this loss upon that
queer creature downstairs.

 When Kalipada came home that night after his
tuition was over, he was too tired to notice any disorder
in his room. One of his worst attacks of
nervous headache was coming on and he went
straight to bed.

 The next day, when he brought out his trunk from
under the bed and took out his clothes, he found it
open. He was naturally careful, but it was not
unlikely, he thought, that he had forgotten to lock
it on the day before. But when he lifted the lid he
found all the contents , and his heart gave a great thud when he discovered that the note, given
to him by his mother, was missing. He searched
the box over and over again in the vain hope of
finding it, and when his loss was made certain, he
flung himself upon his bed and lay like one dead.

 Just then, he heard footsteps following one another
on the stairs, and every now and then an outburst
of laughter from the upper room. It struck
him, all of a sudden, that this was not a theft: Sailen
and his party must have taken the note to amuse
themselves and make laughter out of it. It would
have given him less pain if a thief had stolen it. It
seemed to him that these young men had laid their
impious hands upon his mother herself.

 This was the first time that Kalipada had ascended
those stairs. He ran to the upper floor,—the old
jersey on his shoulders,—his face flushed with anger
and the pain of his illness. As it was Sunday, Sailen
and his company were seated in the verandah, laughing
and talking. Without any warning, Kalipada
burst upon them and shouted:

 "Give me back my note!"

 If he had begged it of them, they would have
relented; but the sight of his anger made them
furious. They started up from their chairs and
exclaimed:  "What do you mean, sir? What do you mean?
What note?"

 Kalipada shouted: "The note you have taken
from my box!"

 "How dare you?" they shouted back. "Do you
take us to be thieves?"

 If Kalipada had held any weapon in his hand at
that moment he certainly would have killed some one
among them. But when he was about to spring,
they fell on him, and four or five of them dragged
him down to his room and thrust him inside.

 Sailen said to his companions: "Here, take this
hundred-rupee note, and throw it to that dog !"

 They all loudly exclaimed: "No! Let him
climb down first and give us a written apology.
Then we shall consider it!"

 Sailen's party all went to bed at the proper time
and slept the sleep of the innocent. In the morning
they had almost forgotten Kalipada. But some of
them, while passing his room, heard the sound of talking
and they thought that possibly he was busy consulting
some lawyer. The door was shut from the
inside. They tried to overhear, but what they heard
had nothing legal about it. It was quite incoherent.

 They informed Sailen. He came down and stood
with his ear close to the door. The only thing that could be distinctly heard was the word 'Father.'
This frightened Sailen. He thought that possibly
Kalipada had gone mad on account of the grief of
losing that fifty-rupee note. Sailen shouted "Kalipada
Babu!" two or three times, but got no answer.
Only that muttering sound continued. Sailen called,—"Kalipada
Babu,—please open the door. Your
note has been found." But still the door was not
opened and that muttering sound went on.

 Sailen had never anticipated such a result as this.
He did not express a word of repentance to his followers,
but he felt the sting of it all the same. Some
advised him to break open the door: others thought
that the police should be called in,—for Kalipada
might be in a dangerous state of . Sailen at
once sent for a doctor who lived close at hand.
When they burst open the door they found the
bedding hanging from the bed and Kalipada lying
on the floor unconscious. He was tossing about and
throwing up his arms and muttering, with his eyes
red and open and his face all flushed. The doctor
examined him and asked if there were any relative
near at hand; for the case was serious.

 Sailen answered that he knew nothing, but would
make inquiries. The doctor then advised the removal
of the patient at once to an upstairs room and
proper nursing arrangements day and night. Sailen took him up to his own room and dismissed his followers.
He got some ice and put it on Kalipada's
head and began to fan him with his own hand.

 Kalipada, fearing that mocking references would
be made, had concealed the names and address of his
parents from these people with special care. So
Sailen had no alternative but to open his box. He
found two bundles of letters tied up with ribbon.
One of them contained his mother's letters, the other
contained his father's. His mother's letters were
fewer in number than his father's. Sailen closed the
door and began to read the letters. He was startled
when he saw the address,—Saniari, the house of the
Chowdhuries,—and then the name of the father,
Bhavani. He folded up the letters and sat still,
gazing at Kalipada's face. Some of his friends had
casually mentioned, that there was a resemblance
between Kalipada and himself. But he was offended
at the remark and did not believe it. To-day he
discovered the truth. He knew that his own grandfather,
Shyama Charan, had a step-brother named
Bhavani; but the later history to the family had remained
a secret to him. He did not even know that
Bhavani had a son named Kalipada; and he never
suspected that Bhavani had come to such an abject
state of poverty as this. He now felt not only relieved,
but proud of his own relative, Kalipada, that he had refused to enter himself on the list of protégés.

 IV

 Knowing that his party had insulted Kalipada almost
every day, Sailen felt reluctant to keep him in
the lodging house with them. So he rented another
suitable house and kept him there. Bhavani came
down in haste to Calcutta the moment he received a
letter from Sailen informing him of his son's illness.
Rashmani parted with all her savings giving instructions
to her husband to spare no expense upon her
son. It was not considered proper for the daughters
of the great Chowdhuri family to leave their
home and go to Calcutta unless absolutely obliged,
and therefore she had to remain behind offering
prayers to all the tutelary gods. When Bhavani
Charan arrived he found Kalipada still unconscious
and delirious. It nearly broke Bhavani's heart
when he heard himself called 'Master Mashai.'
Kalipada often called him in his delirium and he
tried to make himself recognized by his son, but in
vain.

 The doctor came again and said the fever was
getting less. He thought the case was taking a more
favourable turn. For Bhavani, it was an impossibility
to imagine that his son would not recover. He  must live: it was his destiny to live. Bhavani was
much struck with the behaviour of Sailen. It was
difficult to believe that he was not of their own kith
and kin. He supposed all this kindness to be due to
the town training which Sailen had received. Bhavani
spoke to Sailen disparagingly of the country
habits which village people like himself got into.

 Gradually the fever went down and Kalipada recovered
consciousness. He was astonished beyond
measure when he saw his father sitting in the room
beside him. His first anxiety was lest he should
discover the miserable state in which he had been
living. But what would be harder still to bear was,
if his father with his rustic manners became the butt
of the people upstairs. He looked round him, but
could not recognize his own room and wondered if
he had been dreaming. But he found himself too
weak to think.

 He supposed that it had been his father who had
removed him to this better lodging, but he had no
power to calculate how he could possibly bear the
expense. The only thing that concerned him at that
moment was that he felt he must live, and for that
he had a claim upon the world.

 Once when his father was absent Sailen came in
with a plate of grapes in his hand. Kalipada could
not understand this at all and wondered if there was some practical joke behind it. He at once became
excited and wondered how he could save his father
from annoyance. Sailen set the plate down on the
table and touched Kalipada's feet humbly and said:
"My offence has been great: pray forgive me."

 Kalipada started and sat up on his bed. He could
see that Sailen's repentance was sincere and he was
greatly moved.

 When Kalipada had first come to the students'
lodging house he had felt strongly drawn towards
this handsome youth. He never missed a chance of
looking at his face when Sailen passed by his room
on his way upstairs. He would have given all the
world to be friends with him, but the barrier was
too great to overcome. Now to-day when Sailen
brought him the grapes and asked his forgiveness,
he silently looked at his face and silently accepted
the grapes which spoke of his repentance.

 It amused Kalipada greatly when he noticed the
intimacy that had sprung up between his father and
Sailen. Sailen used to call Bhavani Charan "grandfather"
and exercised to the full the grandchild's
privilege of joking with him. The principal object
of the jokes was the absent "grandmother." Sailen
made the confession that he had taken the opportunity
of Kalipada's illness to steal all the delicious chutnies which his "grandmother" had made with
her own hand. The news of his act of "thieving"
gave Kalipada very great joy. He found it easy
to deprive himself, if he could find any one who could
appreciate the good things made by his mother.
Thus this time of his convalescence became the happiest
period in the whole of Kalipada's life.

 There was only one flaw in this unalloyed happiness.
Kalipada had a fierce pride in his poverty
which prevented him ever speaking about his family's
better days. Therefore when his father used to
talk of his former prosperity Kalipada winced.
Bhavani could not keep to himself the one great event
of his life,—the theft of that will which he was
absolutely certain that he would some day recover.
Kalipada had always regarded this as a kind of
mania of his father's, and in collusion with his mother
he had often humoured his father concerning this
amiable weakness. But he shrank in shame when
his father talked about this to Sailen. He noticed
particularly that Sailen did not relish such conversation
and that he often tried to prove, with a certain
amount of feeling, its absurdity. But Bhavani,
who was ready to give in to others in matters much
more serious, in this matter was adamant. Kalipada
tried to pacify him by saying that there was no great need to worry about it, because those who were enjoying
its benefit were almost the same as his own
children, since they were his nephews.

 Such talk Sailen could not bear for long and he
used to leave the room. This pained Kalipada, because
he thought that Sailen might get quite a wrong
conception of his father and imagine him to be a
grasping worldly old man. Sailen would have revealed
his own relationship to Kalipada and his
father long before, but this discussion about the theft
of the will prevented him. It was hard for him to
believe that his grandfather or father had stolen
the will; on the other hand he could not but think
that some cruel injustice had been done in depriving
Bhavani of his share of the ancestral property.
Therefore he gave up arguing when the subject was
brought forward and took some occasion to leave
as soon as possible.

 Though Kalipada still had headaches in the evening,
with a slight rise in temperature, he did not
take it at all seriously. He became anxious to resume
his studies because he felt it would be a calamity
to him if he again missed his scholarship. He secretly
began to read once more, without taking any
notice of the strict orders of the doctor. Kalipada
asked his father to return home, assuring him that
he was in the best of health. Bhavani had been all his life fed and nourished and cooked for by
his wife; he was pining to get back. He did not
therefore wait to be pressed.

 On the morning of his intended departure, when
he went to say good-bye to Kalipada, he found him
very ill indeed, his face red with fever and his whole
body burning. He had been committing to memory
page after page of his text book of Logic half
through the night, and for the remainder he could
not sleep at all. The doctor took Sailen aside.
"This relapse," he said, "is fatal." Sailen came
to Bhavani and said, "The patient requires a
mother's nursing: she must be brought to Calcutta."

 It was evening when Rashmani came, and she
only saw her son alive for a few hours. Not knowing
how her husband could survive such a terrible
shock she altogether suppressed her own sorrow.
Her son was merged in her husband again, and she
took up this burden of the dead and the living on
her own aching heart. She said to her God,—"It
is too much for me to bear." But she did bear it.

 V

 It was midnight. With the very weariness of
her sorrow Rashmani had fallen asleep soon after
reaching her own home in the village. But Bhavani
had no sleep that night. Tossing on his bed for hours he heaved a deep sigh saying,—"Merciful
God!" Then he got up from his bed and went out.
He entered the room where Kalipada had been wont
to do his lessons in his childhood. The lamp shook
as he held it in his hand. On the wooden settle
there was still the torn, ink-stained quilt, made long
ago by Rashmani herself. On the wall were figures
of and drawn in charcoal. The remains
of a Royal Reader No. III and a few exercise
books were lying about; and the one odd slipper of
his infancy, which had evaded notice so long, was
keeping its place in the dusty obscurity of the corner
of the room. To-day it had become so important
that nothing in the world, however great, could
keep it hidden any longer. Bhavani put the lamp
in the niche on the wall and silently sat on the settle;
his eyes were dry, but he felt choked as if with want
of breath.

 Bhavani opened the shutters on the eastern side
and stood still, grasping the iron bars, gazing into
the darkness. Through the drizzling rain he could
see the outline of the clump of trees at the end of
the outer wall. At this spot Kalipada had made
his own garden. The passion flowers which he had
planted with his own hand had grown densely thick.
While he gazed at this Bhavani felt his heart come
up into his throat with choking pain. There was nobody now to wait for and expect daily. The summer
vacation had come, but no one would come back
home to fill the vacant room and use its old familiar
furniture.

 "O Baba mine!" he cried, "O Baba! O Baba
mine!"

 He sat down. The rain came faster. A sound
of footsteps was heard among the grass and withered
leaves. Bhavani's heart stood still. He
hoped it was ... that which was beyond all
hope. He thought it was Kalipada himself come
to see his own garden,—and in this downpour of
rain how wet he would be! Anxiety about this made
him restless. Then somebody stood for a moment
in front of the iron window bars. The cloak round
his head made it impossible for Bhavani to see his
face clearly, but his height was the same as that of
Kalipada.

 "Darling!" cried Bhavani, "You have come!"
and he rushed to open the door.

 But when he came outside to the spot where the
figure had stood, there was no one to be seen. He
walked up and down in the garden through the
drenching rain, but no one was there. He stood
still for a moment raising his voice and calling,—"Kalipada,"
but no answer came. The servant,
Noto, who was sleeping in the cowshed, heard his cry and came out and coaxed him back to his room.

 Next day, in the morning, Noto, while sweeping
the room found a bundle just underneath the grated
window. He brought it to Bhavani who opened it
and found it was an old document. He put on his
spectacles and after reading a few lines came rushing
in to Rashmani and gave the paper into her hand.

 Rashmani asked, "What is it?"

 Bhavani replied, "It is the will!"

 "Who gave it you?"

 "He himself came last night to give it to me."

 "What are you going to do with it?"

 Bhavani said: "I have no need of it now."
And he tore the will to pieces.

 When the news reached the village Bagala proudly
nodded his head and said: "Didn't I prophesy
that the will would be recovered through Kalipada?"

 But the grocer Ramcharan replied: "Last night
when the ten o'clock train reached the Station a
handsome looking young man came to my shop and
asked the way to the Chowdhuri's house and I
thought he had some kind of bundle in his hand."

 "Absurd," said Bagala.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . From the French "tailler," to cut. Compare tailor , entail , retail .  . From the Latin "pater," a father. Compare paternal , patriarch , patriot . The ending -mony is from
the Latin -monium. Compare testimony , matrimony , sanctimony .

 . From the Latin "vertere," to turn. Compare convert , subvert , divert , invert , advert , version , conversion , adverse .

 . This word is of doubtful origin. We have
the simpler form "maze" but do not know how it has
come into English.

 . The Latin word "pre" means "before,"
and the Latin word "posterus" behind. The literal
meaning, therefore, is "before-behind" and so "absurd,"
"outrageous."

 . This comes from the Old French "treacher,"
to trick. It is to be distinguished from the word
"traitor," which comes from the Latin "traditor," one
who gives up another. Compare intricate , trickery , trick , intrigue .

 . From the Greek word "sitos," food,—one who
feeds on another.

 . From the Latin "proprius," meaning "one's
own." Compare proper , appropriate , improper .

 . This is an Old Norwegian word which has come
into English, meaning literally to chop.

 . Such "phrase" words as these are not
very common in English. They are more common in
French. Compare the English ne'er-do-well , lazybones , out-of-the-way , and the French coup-d'état , nom-de-plume , fin-de-siécle . On the other hand, adjectives
made up of two words are quite common in English.
Compare simple-hearted , middle-aged.  . This word still retains its French form and accent
and pronunciation. Little by little such French words
become pronounced and spelt in an English form and
take a permanent place in the language. For instance, the French word "morale" with accent on the last
syllable is now becoming a common English word. In
time it will probably be accented on the first syllable
like ordinary English words and will drop its final "e."

 . This is another Old Norwegian word meaning a
wide opening. Compare gape . These Norwegian
words came into English somewhat plentifully at the
time of the Danish Conquest.

 . From the Greek "syn" with, and "pathos"
suffering. It should be noted that the word "compassion"
from the Latin "cum" with, and "passio" suffering,
has the same root meaning, viz. "suffering with another."

 . The English word "suit" comes from the Latin
"sequi," to follow, which in French becomes "suivre."
We have two English forms, one form directly from
the Latin, the other from the French. From the Latin prosecute , persecute , consecutive , execute . From the
French pursue , ensue , sue . 

 A "suit" in a game of cards means the cards that
follow one another in a sequence.



 A "suit" of clothes means the trousers, coat, waistcoat,
following the same pattern. Compare also the
French word suite which has now been taken into English,
e.g. a suite of rooms, a suite of furniture (pronounced
like "sweet").

 . From the Latin "haerere," to stick. Compare adhere , cohere , inherent , coherence .

 . From the Old French "forain," out of doors.
The letter "g" has become wrongly inserted in this
word as also in "sovereign."

 . From the late Latin "barca," a boat, because
trade was carried on by boats along the rivers. Compare barque , barge , bark .

 . From the noun husk,—as dry as a husk.

 . From the Persian word "shāl." A considerable number of words are coming into use in English now
from the East. One of the most curious recent ones is
Blighty which is a corruption of wilayati, bilaiti. For
words introduced into English compare karma , sanyasi , fakir , brahmin , ghat , puggaree , pyjama , pucca , curry , chutney , chintz , cummerbund , khaki , rupee , durrie , turban , sepoy .

 . This is a shortened form of the English girl's name
Dorothy, Dolly, Doll. Compare poll-parrot from
Polly or Poll.

 . This word still retains its French form, without the
final "e" (French soupe ), but the English words sup , supper have dropped their French spelling altogether.

 . From the Old French "estiquette," meaning something
fixed like a bill on the wall. (Compare the English
word to "stick" which comes from the same root.) 

 We have here a case of a French word branching off
into two quite distinct English words,—"etiquette"
and "ticket," each having its own meaning.

 . One of the islands in the English Channel called
Jersey first made this special form of woollen vest.
Many English words are thus taken from the names of
places. Compare currant (Corinth), argosy (Ragusa), calico (Calicut), bronze (Brundusium), gipsy (Egyptian), cashmere (Kashmir).

 . Originally this word means that which is
not "pertinent," and so something "out-of-place."
Later on it got the present meaning of something insolent.

 . From the Spanish. The word is the diminutive
of the Latin "musca," a fly.

 . From the Latin "scrupulus," a small sharp stone.
This word meant first in English a very small weight
of twenty grains; then it came to mean a slight weight
on the mind or conscience. In the Trial Scene of
Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice we have the original sense used,—"the twentieth part of one poor scruple."

 . From the Latin "uber," udder. Thus it
comes to mean "flowing from the udder" and so "overflowing."

 . "Kerchief" came from two French words
"couvre," to cover, and "chef," the head. It meant a
head cloth. Then a smaller cloth was used in the hand
and this was called a hand-kerchief.

 . From the Latin "luna," the moon. In former
times Europeans used to think that madness was due
to some influence of the moon. Compare the word moonstruck .

 . This is one of the many words from Arabic beginning
with "al," the. Compare alkali , albatross , alcohol , alembic , alchemy , alcove .

 . This word was originally the name of a great
Greek mathematical writer. His writings were called
"Books of Euclid." Now the subject is usually called
Geometry.

 . From the Latin "surdus," deaf. Deaf people
generally appear stupid to those who can hear. So this
word has come to mean foolish or ridiculous.

 . This probably is a shortened form of topside-turvy,—"turvy"
being a colloquial corruption for
"turned" or "turned over."

   THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE