[

179 ] 

THE MISSION TO DINGO CREEK.

 An Apostolical Sketch.

 ‘ Bad

work, this!’ exclaimed the Bishop of B——

to one
of a recent consignment of curates. ‘Bad work this, in
the North! TN: original has superfluous closing quote That part of the diocese evidently wants
looking to again. Nice trip for you, Greenwell. Give
you some idea of the country, too,’ continued the
Bishop. ‘Yes, decidedly; the very man! Let me see;
steamer to R——

, then overland. Of course, you may
have to rough it a little; but that will only add a zest to
the change.’

 The ‘bad work’ that his lordship alluded to was the
substance of some reports that had just arrived from one
of the new gold rushes, situated in the extreme north of
his immense diocese, reports of a terrible state of immorality,
drunkenness, and general godlessness existing
there amongst far-off members of his flock—to wit, rough
diggers and bushmen, together with a sprinkling of
nondescripts, characterless vagrants, defaulters, horse-thieves,
and worse, who had flocked there from the
neighbouring colonies as to an Alsatia, where they [

180 ]

could remain, at least, for the time being, secure from
even the far-reaching arm of the law.

 On such material as this had the good Bishop, shortly
after his arrival in his new see, from his snug English
vicarage, essayed the power of his eloquence on his only
visit to that part of his charge: a visit, be it whispered,
he was not in the least anxious to repeat.

 The Reverend Spicer Greenwell fairly shuddered at
the thought of trusting his precious person amongst such
a set of savages as his imagination at once conjured up.
But all his excuses and demurrings were without avail,
his superior having, by some curious mischance, got it
into his head that his senior curate was the very man
qualified for such a mission to the heathen.

 Though getting well on towards middle age, Mr Greenwell was a failure. He had completely mistaken
his vocation; but he did not think so, and nobody had,
as yet, been rude enough to tell him so.

 Mrs Jellyby’s mission was, if we remember aright, to
cultivate coffee and the natives of Borioboola-Gha. Mr Greenwell’s was to cultivate teas—afternoon ones—and
at the same time to, if possible, capture a fair ‘Native,’
rich in those goods of this world, in which he himself
was so unhappily deficient.

 For the rest, he was a gaunt, waxen-visaged man, who
always wore the highest waistcoats, longest coats, and
whitest neckties obtainable; was never seen without a
large diamond ring on his little finger; and seldom
deigned to consort or even converse with the other
clergymen of the district, unless brought into direct [

181 ]

communication with them by his position—into which
he had partly thrust himself, partly had conferred upon
him through home influence—of the Bishop’s chargé
d’affaires . He had, he flattered himself, before this untoward
affair happened, been making rapid progress with
the damsels of the Banana city; and, indeed, amongst
some of the more elderly spinsters of the congregation of
St Jude’s, he was voted as ‘quite too nice.’

 Imagine then, if you can, the horror and disgust of
such a man at being chosen for such an errand. But
the Bishop was adamant; and I have many a time
thought since that he purposely hardened his heart, and
that, whilst dilating on his curate’s especial fitness for the
work, his energy and push—as already illustrated in
parish matters—his suave and polished manners, alone
a vast handicap in his favour amongst the rude and
illiterate people he was about to visit, the good prelate
privately hoped within himself that if the shepherd he
was sending forth did little benefit to the flock, yet,
that the latter might possibly succeed in some unforeseen
way in toning down the self-sufficiency, egoism and
vanity of the pastor.

 Seeing, at length, that there was no help for it, and
that go he must, the luckless curate, taking a mournful
and solemn farewell of his lady friends, went forth to
preach the Gospel to the heathen of the Dingo Creek
diggings.

 Things went well enough with our traveller till he
reached R——

, the nearest township of any size to
Dingo Creek, which last place lay still further ahead [

182 ]

nearly ninety miles through rough and lonely country. At
intervals on his route he had held services and preached
sermons—little marrowless exhortations that he had long
known by heart, and that, if they did no harm, assuredly
did little good. From R——

, whence he set out on
horseback, a road led sixty miles to a bush public-house,
where he was told he could be accommodated with a
buggy, and, perhaps, a guide to his destination.

 Duly arriving, sore and jaded, at the sign of the ‘Jolly
Bushman,’ he found the host an obliging sort of a fellow
enough, who said he would himself have driven the
gentleman to Dingo Creek, but that his wife was ill.
However, his buggy should be at his disposal the next
morning; and also the publican promised Cooronga
Billy should go as guide, and, if necessary, bring
both buggy and parson back again. Early on the
following morning the buggy and a pair of good-looking
ponies put in an appearance at the door of the ‘Jolly
Bushman’; so did Cooronga Billy.

 But now we must for a while drop the thread of
the story, and go back to the time when, as a baby,
Billy lay sound asleep in his black mother’s arms under
the shadow of the far-away Cooronga ranges—back to
that fearful morning whose earliest dawn heralded the
pitiless swoop of the native troopers on to the quiet
camp. His tribe ‘dispersed,’ baby Billy, the sole survivor,
was brought to B——

, sent, in due course, to
the best schools, and received a special education, with
a view to fitting him for the ministry, and a sphere of
what, it was fervently hoped by many good men, would [

183 ]

prove congenial and profitable labour amongst his own
benighted countrymen.

 As he grew towards man’s estate, Billy became quite
one of the lions of B——

, and was proudly exhibited
and put through his paces before distinguished strangers,
as a splendid specimen of ‘what can be done with our
aborigines.’

 Suddenly, and just when all this gratulation was at
its height, William Cooronga Morris—he was indebted
to the white officer who had commanded the ‘dispersers’
of his tribe for the first and last of these names, duly
received at the font of St Jude’s—disappeared totally,
turning up months afterwards, clad in his native skins,
armed with his native weapons, at one of the far-out
townships; and had ever since loafed around the outskirts
of Northern Settlement, a degrading example of
what over-civilisation can do for a black-fellow.

 Periodical visits would Billy make far out in the
Bush towards the wild Coorongas—for some strange
instinct had led him at his first departure towards the
land of his birth—and there, instead of, as had been
so fondly expected, bending his energies towards the
cure of souls amongst his dark brethren, it was freely
reported that Mr W. C. Morris constituted himself
their leader in many a fat-cattle spearing expedition,
if nothing worse.

 Billy, at the moment we have chosen to introduce
him to the reader, had just returned from one of those
forays, and a terrible figure he appeared to the Reverend
Spicer.

 [

184 ] 

Nearly naked, with the exception of a short ’possum
cloak, his skin plentifully covered with red and white
ochre, and his hair decorated with cockatoo feathers;
whilst across one side of his face ran a long, gaping
scar, a relic of some recent corrobboree—what wonder
that the reverend gentleman gazed more than doubtfully TN: hyphen invisible at the person introduced to him by the publican
as his guide. The landlord observed his hesitation and
the cause of it.

 ‘Never mind, sir,’ said he, ‘he’s as quiet as a sheep.
Dessay his ’ed’s sore, though. Have a nobbler, Cooronga?
It’ll make him lively like, you see,’ he concluded,
addressing the curate, who evidently thought
that Billy looked quite lively enough.

 At length they started, Billy driving, sulky and taciturn,
answering questions as shortly as possible, and in
the vilest of pigeon English.

 Nearly three parts of the journey was accomplished—for
Billy drove like a very Jehu—when the curate
began to feel hungry. So, as they came to a deep
gully where the rain-water lay in pools amongst the
rocks, he made his guide pull up, and prepared to
comfort the inner man.

 Taking no notice of his companion, he sat down
by the edge of the water, and began with immense
gusto to demolish a roast fowl and other materials for
a very fair repast.

  [

184a ] 

[Illustration:

Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow? Who hath contentions?
( .) ]



 At R——

the reverend gentleman had provided himself
with two bottles of port, a wine which he had been
told was a first-class specific in cases of bush-fever and [

185 ]

dysentery. The bottles were by this gone; but out of
the last one he had filled a large travelling flask, which
now producing, along with a tumbler, he proceeded—first
qualifying his liquor with a modicum of water—to
wash down his lunch.

 Billy’s eyes sparkled. He at once recognised the
smell and colour, but would have preferred rum.

 However, little of anything, solid or fluid, seemed
likely to fall to his share, for the weather was hot, and
our curate thirsty.

 Presently, addressing Cooronga, the Reverend Spicer,
who had no idea of entering the scene of his ministrations,
with such a figure as Billy for his charioteer, said,—

 ‘How many miles did you say it was from here to
Dingo Creek?’

 ‘Lebn,’ grunted Billy.

 ‘Is the road as plain all the way as it is here?’

 ‘Ess,’ again grunted the tantalised Cooronga.

 ‘Very well, then,’ replied the curate, ‘ TN: opening quote invisible you can walk
on. I will follow with the buggy when it gets a little
cooler.’

 But this was out of Billy’s programme altogether.
Pointing to the capacious flask, to which the thirsty
divine was paying repeated attention, he said abruptly,—

 ‘You gib it Cooronga. Him dry too!’

 ‘That is medicine, my friend,’ was the reply, ‘and it
would do you no good. If, as you seem to imply, you
are thirsty, there lies water in abundance.’

 [

186 ] 

Billy’s first impulse was to drive his spear through the
curate. But, restraining himself with a sigh, another
idea entered into his mischievous head. A large stump
stood close by, overlooking the unsuspecting Spicer and
the débris of his meal. Upon this stump, with a bound,
Billy sprung, and, letting fall his cloak, disclosing to
view his whole body, hideously chalked, skeleton-wise,
he began, in a tone and with an enunciation far superior
to that of the reverend gentleman himself, to declaim,
with pointed spear,—

 ‘ Who hath sorrow? Who hath
contentions? Who hath babbling? Who hath wounds
without cause? Who hath redness of eyes?  ‘ They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek
mixed wine.  ‘ Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when
it giveth its colour in the cup, when it moveth itself
aright.  ‘ At the last —’

 But here, poor Spicer, who had risen to his feet, and
stood horror-stricken at hearing himself, as he imagined,
reproved and threatened for his bibbing propensities
through the mouth of a fiend, or even, as his staring eyes
took in Billy’s tout ensemble , it might be the Arch Enemy
of mankind himself, uttered a shriek and fled, terror
lending unwonted speed to his legs, down the gully;
whilst Billy, with a wild whoop, descending from
his perch, took the flask and what remained of the
provisions to the buggy, and drove off into the
Bush.

 [

187 ] 

Late that night, a weary, footsore traveller entered
the principal public-house in Dingo Creek, and
began to ask incoherent questions about a buggy
and a black-fellow, the latter, he averred, an emissary
of Satan, who had led him into the wilderness,
and there deserted him—a story that the rough host
and his equally rough customers could make neither
head nor tail of.

 ‘It’s a rum go altogether,’ said the former to one of
his digger friends, after poor Spicer had retired, nearly
dead beat, to his rough-slabbed room, whence he could
hear all that went on in the bar.

 ‘The rummest thing I’ve heard on for some
time,’ assented the other. ‘He looks somethin’
like as a parson should look, right enough. But
either he’s just off of a rather heavy spree, or else
he’s more’n a shingle short. Sez he seen Ole Nick
back there in the Bush, an’ the old ’un shook his
buggy.’

 ’Bin on the bust, down at the “Jolly Bushman’s,” I
’spects,’ put in another. ‘You fellers knows as some do

see the old chap arter a ’ard bust. As for me, I takes it
out in snakes mostly. But there’s my mate, Bill, he allus
has cats. I seen him one time a-huntin’ ’em round
the tent all night long, arter bein’ on the spree for a
week.’

 Confidence in the Reverend Spicer was, however, a
little restored, when, next morning, the buggy was found
intact in the public-house yard; and his confused appearance
and rambling statements of the previous night were [

188 ]

charitably ascribed by the majority to ‘a touch of the
sun.’

 During the day it was announced throughout the place
that the Reverend gentleman would address the inhabitants
in the ‘dance-room’ of the public-house, as being
the only one available for such a purpose. Figure to
yourself a long, low room, on the earthen floor of which
tree stumps still stood. At the far end, behind a sort of
bar formed by sheets of galvanised iron, supported on
trestles, waits, manuscript in hand, still in a rather unsettled
state of mind, the Reverend Spicer. The place
is dimly lit by flaring candles and slush lamps, and is
crowded by an assembly of as mixed nationalities,
customs and creeds, as could be found out of, say,
Alexandria or Singapore. A strong smell of stale spirits
and tobacco smoke pervades everything. All the men,
as our curate sees, are armed with a sheath-knife and
revolver; and, as he looks, he trembles and handles the
address as gingerly as if it were a parcel of dynamite, and
liable to explode at any moment, for it is not one of his
own pithless compositions, but the work of the Bishop
himself, a powerful and emphatic remonstrance—penned
in his quiet study at Bishopstowe—against the sinful and
dissolute lives of the Dingo Creekers. But, had the
frightened curate only known it, the mob, mixed and uncontrolled
as it was, would have as soon thought of ill-treating
a grasshopper as himself. And, all roughened
and uncivilised as were the best of them, there were
still men amongst them in whom the mere sight of a
clergyman awoke memories long forgotten and buried [

189 ]

under the combats and toils of life—men who had once
‘looked on better days,’ and whom Sabbath-bells had
once ‘knoll’d to church,’ and this portion it was who,
after awhile, obtained silence, and set the example of
doffing their hats and putting away their pipes.

 Very picturesque was the scene, with the lights flickering—now
on the bronzed features of some stalwart
European, now on the dark face of a negro, or the yellow
expressionless countenance of a Chinaman—as the motley
audience stood or squatted silent and attentive, whilst
our curate quavered and stammered through the opening
sentences of the address. And favourable, beyond all
hope, would have seemed the opportunity to a true
soldier of the Cross for softening the hearts of the poor
heathen of Dingo Creek.

 But never, perhaps, since the days when William C.
Morris, arrayed in black broadcloth, was qualifying as
an evangelist, has anyone felt himself more of a square
peg in a round hole than did poor Spicer Greenwell,
as he droned away, presently, amidst exclamations of
disgust and disapproval from his curious congregation.

 ‘Give it lip, man!’ shouted a gigantic digger, whose
beard reached almost to his waist. ‘Give it lip, an’
let’s hear what it’s all about.’ Then, turning to the
publican: ‘Give him a nobbler, Jimmy; it’ll keep his
pecker up. He’s mighty scared o’ somethin’.’ Declining
the offered half-tumblerful of rum with a gesture of
disgust, the curate, intent only on getting to the end
of his task, resumed his reading.

 [

190 ] 

At this moment Cooronga Billy, who had passed the
day in the adjacent black’s camp, entered, and was at
once warmly greeted by the crowd, to all of whom he
was well known, and to whom he proceeded, amidst
shouts of laughter, to relate the story of his escapade
at the gully.

 The curate, disturbed by the noise, lifted up his head,
and, seeing Billy now standing just in front of him, he
dropped his papers, and pointing to the grinning black
fellow, shouted,—

 ‘Men! men! Satan himself is amongst you!’

 The truth of the affair, helped out by Billy’s story,
now broke on all hands, and roars of unrestrained
laughter, accompanied by wild impromptu dancing and
cheers for ‘Cooronga,’ put an end, for the time at least,
to any hopes that the Reverend Spicer might have once
entertained as to his being instrumental to even a
slight degree in the regeneration of Dingo Creek, the
dust of which, a sadder and a wiser man, he shook
without the least delay from off his feet.

 Cooronga Billy has long since rejoined his tribe in
the happy hunting grounds; but stories, many and
wonderful, of the effect produced by the exercise of
his perverted abilities are still told by the pioneers of
the region in which he flourished.

 The Reverend Spicer Greenwell still exists; but,
should the reader feel inclined to seek him, his quest
must lie well within the precincts of the highest civilisation
to be found in our colonies, and he must be careful
that no reference, be it ever so remote, to the [

191 ]

adventure herein described, pass his lips; for, though
his life has ‘fallen into the sere, the yellow leaf,’ still
is the reverend gentleman strangely susceptible to
any allusion to that episode of his earlier Australian
experience.