THE MAN WHO WOULD BE KING
    

   Brother to a Prince and fellow to a beggar if he be found worthy.


      The Law, as quoted, lays down a fair conduct of life, and one not easy to
      follow. I have been fellow to a beggar again and again under circumstances
      which prevented either of us finding out whether the other was worthy. I
      have still to be brother to a Prince, though I once came near to kinship
      with what might have been a veritable King, and was promised the reversion
      of a Kingdom—army, law-courts, revenue, and policy all complete.
      But, today, I greatly fear that my King is dead, and if I want a crown I
      must go hunt it for myself.
    

      The beginning of everything was in a railway-train upon the road to Mhow
      from Ajmir. There had been a Deficit in the Budget, which necessitated
      travelling, not Second-class, which is only half as dear as First-Class,
      but by Intermediate, which is very awful indeed. There are no cushions in
      the Intermediate class, and the population are either Intermediate, which
      is Eurasian, or native, which for a long night journey is nasty, or
      Loafer, which is amusing though intoxicated. Intermediates do not buy from
      refreshment-rooms. They carry their food in bundles and pots, and buy
      sweets from the native sweetmeat-sellers, and drink the roadside water.
      This is why in hot weather Intermediates are taken out of the carriages
      dead, and in all weathers are most properly looked down upon.
    

      My particular Intermediate happened to be empty till I reached Nasirabad,
      when the big black-browed gentleman in shirt-sleeves entered, and,
      following the custom of Intermediates, passed the time of day. He was a
      wanderer and a vagabond like myself, but with an educated taste for
      whisky. He told tales of things he had seen and done, of out-of-the-way
      corners of the Empire into which he had penetrated, and of adventures in
      which he risked his life for a few days' food.
    

      “If India was filled with men like you and me, not knowing more than the
      crows where they'd get their next day's rations, it isn't seventy millions
      of revenue the land would be paying—it's seven hundred millions,”
       said he; and as I looked at his mouth and chin I was disposed to agree
      with him.
    

      We talked politics,—the politics of Loaferdom that sees things from
      the under side where the lath and plaster is not smoothed off,—and
      we talked postal arrangements because my friend wanted to send a telegram
      back from the next station to Ajmir, the turning-off place from the Bombay
      to the Mhow line as you travel westward. My friend had no money beyond
      eight annas which he wanted for dinner, and I had no money at all, owing
      to the hitch in the Budget before mentioned. Further, I was going into a
      wilderness where, though I should resume touch with the Treasury, there
      were no telegraph offices. I was, therefore, unable to help him in any
      way.
    

      “We might threaten a Station-master, and make him send a wire on tick,”
       said my friend, “but that'd mean inquiries for you and for me, and I've
      got my hands full these days. Did you say you were travelling back along
      this line within any days?”
     

      “Within ten,” I said.
    

      “Can't you make it eight?” said he. “Mine is rather urgent business.”
     

      “I can send your telegrams within ten days if that will serve you,” I
      said.
    

      “I couldn't trust the wire to fetch him, now I think of it. It's this way.
      He leaves Delhi on the 23rd for Bombay. That means he'll be running
      through Ajmir about the night of the 23rd.”
     

      “But I'm going into the Indian Desert,” I explained.
    

      “Well and good,” said he. “You'll be changing at Marwar Junction to get
      into Jodhpore territory,—you must do that,—and he'll be coming
      through Marwar Junction in the early morning of the 24th by the Bombay
      Mail. Can you be at Marwar Junction on that time? 'T won't be
      inconveniencing you, because I know that there's precious few pickings to
      be got out of these Central India States—even though you pretend to
      be correspondent of the 'Backwoodsman.'”
     

      “Have you ever tried that trick?” I asked.
    

      “Again and again, but the Residents find you out, and then you get
      escorted to the Border before you've time to get your knife into them. But
      about my friend here. I must give him a word o' mouth to tell him what's
      come to me, or else he won't know where to go. I would take it more than
      kind of you if you was to come out of Central India in time to catch him
      at Marwar Junction, and say to him, 'He has gone South for the week.'
      He'll know what that means. He's a big man with a red beard, and a great
      swell he is.
    

      “You'll find him sleeping like a gentleman with all his luggage round him
      in a Second-class apartment. But don't you be afraid.
    

      “Slip down the window and say, 'He has gone South for the week,' and he'll
      tumble. It's only cutting your time of stay in those parts by two days. I
      ask you as a stranger—going to the West,” he said, with emphasis.
    

      “Where have you come from?” said I.
    

      “From the East,” said he, “and I am hoping that you will give him the
      message on the square—for the sake of my Mother as well as your
      own.”
     

      Englishmen are not usually softened by appeals to the memory of their
      mothers; but for certain reasons, which will be fully apparent, I saw fit
      to agree.
    

      “It's more than a little matter,” said he, “and that's why I asked you to
      do it—and now I know that I can depend on you doing it. A
      Second-class carriage at Marwar Junction, and a red-haired man asleep in
      it. You'll be sure to remember. I get out at the next station, and I must
      hold on there till he comes or sends me what I want.”
     

      “I'll give the message if I catch him,” I said, “and for the sake of your
      Mother as well as mine I'll give you a word of advice. Don't try to run
      the Central India States just now as the correspondent of the
      'Backwoodsman.' There's a real one knocking about here, and it might lead
      to trouble.”
     

      “Thank you,” said he, simply; “and when will the swine be gone? I can't
      starve because he's ruining my work. I wanted to get hold of the Degumber
      Rajah down here about his father's widow, and give him a jump.”
     

      “What did he do to his father's widow, then?”
     

      “Filled her up with red pepper and slippered her to death as she hung from
      a beam. I found that out myself, and I'm the only man that would dare
      going into the State to get hush-money for it. They'll try to poison me,
      same as they did in Chortumna when I went on the loot there. But you'll
      give the man at Marwar Junction my message?”
     

      He got out at a little roadside station, and I reflected. I had heard,
      more than once, of men personating correspondents of newspapers and
      bleeding small Native States with threats of exposure, but I had never met
      any of the caste before. They lead a hard life, and generally die with
      great suddenness. The Native States have a wholesome horror of English
      newspapers, which may throw light on their peculiar methods of government,
      and do their best to choke correspondents with champagne, or drive them
      out of their mind with four-in-hand barouches. They do not understand that
      nobody cares a straw for the internal administration of Native States so
      long as oppression and crime are kept within decent limits, and the ruler
      is not drugged, drunk, or diseased from one end of the year to the other.
      They are the dark places of the earth, full of unimaginable cruelty,
      touching the Railway and the Telegraph on one side, and, on the other, the
      days of Harun-al-Raschid. When I left the train I did business with divers
      Kings, and in eight days passed through many changes of life. Sometimes I
      wore dress-clothes and consorted with Princes and Politicals, drinking
      from crystal and eating from silver. Sometimes I lay out upon the ground
      and devoured what I could get, from a plate made of leaves, and drank the
      running water, and slept under the same rug as my servant. It was all in
      the day's work.
    

      Then I headed for the Great Indian Desert upon the proper date, as I had
      promised, and the night Mail set me down at Marwar Junction, where a funny
      little, happy-go-lucky, native managed railway runs to Jodhpore. The
      Bombay Mail from Delhi makes a short halt at Marwar. She arrived just as I
      got in, and I had just time to hurry to her platform and go down the
      carriages. There was only one Second-class on the train. I slipped the
      window and looked down upon a flaming-red beard, half covered by a
      railway-rug. That was my man, fast asleep, and I dug him gently in the
      ribs.
    

      He woke with a grunt, and I saw his face in the light of the lamps.
    

      It was a great and shining face.
    

      “Tickets again?” said he.
    

      “No,” said I. “I am to tell you that he is gone South for the week. He has
      gone South for the week!”
     

      The train had begun to move out. The red man rubbed his eyes.
    

      “He has gone South for the week,” he repeated. “Now that's just like his
      impidence. Did he say that I was to give you anything? 'Cause I won't.”
     

      “He didn't,” I said, and dropped away, and watched the red lights die out
      in the dark. It was horribly cold because the wind was blowing off the
      sands. I climbed into my own train—not an Intermediate carriage this
      time—and went to sleep.
    

      If the man with the beard had given me a rupee I should have kept it as a
      memento of a rather curious affair. But the consciousness of having done
      my duty was my only reward.
    

      Later on I reflected that two gentlemen like my friends could not do any
      good if they foregathered and personated correspondents of newspapers, and
      might, if they blackmailed one of the little rat-trap States of Central
      India or Southern Rajputana, get themselves into serious difficulties. I
      therefore took some trouble to describe them as accurately as I could
      remember to people who would be interested in deporting them; and
      succeeded, so I was later informed, in having them headed back from the
      Degumber borders.
    

      Then I became respectable, and returned to an office where there were no
      Kings and no incidents outside the daily manufacture of a newspaper. A
      newspaper office seems to attract every conceivable sort of person, to the
      prejudice of discipline. Zenana-mission ladies arrive, and beg that the
      Editor will instantly abandon all his duties to describe a Christian
      prize-giving in a back slum of a perfectly inaccessible village; Colonels
      who have been overpassed for command sit down and sketch the outline of a
      series of ten, twelve, or twenty-four leading articles on Seniority versus
      Selection; missionaries wish to know why they have not been permitted to
      escape from their regular vehicles of abuse, and swear at a brother
      missionary under special patronage of the editorial We. Stranded
      theatrical companies troop up to explain that they cannot pay for their
      advertisements, but on their return from New Zealand or Tahiti will do so
      with interest; inventors of patent punka-pulling machines, carriage
      couplings, and unbreakable swords and axletrees call with specifications
      in their pockets and hours at their disposal; tea companies enter and
      elaborate their prospectuses with the office pens; secretaries of ball
      committees clamour to have the glories of their last dance more fully
      described; strange ladies rustle in and say, “I want a hundred lady's
      cards printed at once, please,” which is manifestly part of an Editor's
      duty; and every dissolute ruffian that ever tramped the Grand Trunk Road
      makes it his business to ask for employment as a proof-reader. And, all
      the time, the telephone-bell is ringing madly, and Kings are being killed
      on the Continent, and Empires are saying, “You're another,” and Mister
      Gladstone is calling down brimstone upon the British Dominions, and the
      little black copyboys are whining, “kaa-pi chay-ha-yeh” (“Copy wanted”),
      like tired bees, and most of the paper is as blank as Modred's shield.
    

      But that is the amusing part of the year. There are six other months when
      none ever come to call, and the thermometer walks inch by inch up to the
      top of the glass, and the office is darkened to just above reading-light,
      and the press-machines are red-hot to touch, and nobody writes anything
      but accounts of amusements in the Hill-stations or obituary notices. Then
      the telephone becomes a tinkling terror, because it tells you of the
      sudden deaths of men and women that you knew intimately, and the prickly
      heat covers you with a garment, and you sit down and write: “A slight
      increase of sickness is reported from the Khuda Janta Khan District. The
      outbreak is purely sporadic in its nature, and, thanks to the energetic
      efforts of the District authorities, is now almost at an end. It is,
      however, with deep regret we record the death,” etc.
    

      Then the sickness really breaks out, and the less recording and reporting
      the better for the peace of the subscribers. But the Empires and the Kings
      continue to divert themselves as selfishly as before, and the Foreman
      thinks that a daily paper really ought to come out once in twenty-four
      hours, and all the people at the Hill-stations in the middle of their
      amusements say, “Good gracious! why can't the paper be sparkling? I'm sure
      there's plenty going on up here.”
     

      That is the dark half of the moon, and, as the advertisements say, “must
      be experienced to be appreciated.”
     

      It was in that season, and a remarkably evil season, that the paper began
      running the last issue of the week on Saturday night, which is to say
      Sunday morning, after the custom of a London paper. This was a great
      convenience, for immediately after the paper was put to bed the dawn would
      lower the thermometer from 96 degrees to almost 84 degrees for half an
      hour, and in that chill—you have no idea how cold is 84 degrees on
      the grass until you begin to pray for it—a very tired man could get
      off to sleep ere the heat roused him.
    

      One Saturday night it was my pleasant duty to put the paper to bed alone.
      A King or courtier or a courtesan or a Community was going to die or get a
      new Constitution, or do something that was important on the other side of
      the world, and the paper was to be held open till the latest possible
      minute in order to catch the telegram.
    

      It was a pitchy-black night, as stifling as a June night can be, and the
      loo, the red-hot wind from the westward, was booming among the tinder-dry
      trees and pretending that the rain was on its heels.
    

      Now and again a spot of almost boiling water would fall on the dust with
      the flop of a frog, but all our weary world knew that was only pretence.
      It was a shade cooler in the press-room than the office, so I sat there,
      while the type ticked and clicked, and the night-jars hooted at the
      windows, and the all but naked compositors wiped the sweat from their
      foreheads and called for water. The thing that was keeping us back,
      whatever it was, would not come off, though the loo dropped and the last
      type was set, and the whole round earth stood still in the choking heat,
      with its finger on its lip, to wait the event. I drowsed, and wondered
      whether the telegraph was a blessing, and whether this dying man, or
      struggling people, might be aware of the inconvenience the delay was
      causing. There was no special reason beyond the heat and worry to make
      tension, but, as the clock-hands crept up to three o'clock and the
      machines spun their fly-wheels two and three times to see that all was in
      order, before I said the word that would set them off, I could have
      shrieked aloud.
    

      Then the roar and rattle of the wheels shivered the quiet into little
      bits. I rose to go away, but two men in white clothes stood in front of
      me. The first one said, “It's him!” The second said, “So it is!” And they
      both laughed almost as loudly as the machinery roared, and mopped their
      foreheads. We seed there was a light burning across the road, and we were
      sleeping in that ditch there for coolness, and I said to my friend here,
      “The office is open. Let's come along and speak to him as turned us back
      from Degumber State,” said the smaller of the two. He was the man I had
      met in the Mhow train, and his fellow was the red-bearded man of Marwar
      Junction. There was no mistaking the eyebrows of the one or the beard of
      the other.
    

      I was not pleased, because I wished to go to sleep, not to squabble with
      loafers. “What do you want?” I asked.
    

      “Half an hour's talk with you, cool and comfortable, in the office,” said
      the red-bearded man. “We'd like some drink,—the Contrack doesn't
      begin yet, Peachey, so you needn't look,—but what we really want is
      advice. We don't want money. We ask you as a favour, because we found out
      you did us a bad turn about Degumber State.”
     

      I led from the press-room to the stifling office with the maps on the
      walls, and the red-haired man rubbed his hands. “That's something like,”
       said he. “This was the proper shop to come to.
    

      “Now, Sir, let me introduce you to Brother Peachey Carnehan, that's him,
      and Brother Daniel Dravot, that is me, and the less said about our
      professions the better, for we have been most things in our time—soldier,
      sailor, compositor, photographer, proof-reader, street-preacher, and
      correspondents of the 'Backwoodsman' when we thought the paper wanted one.
      Carnehan is sober, and so am I. Look at us first, and see that's sure. It
      will save you cutting into my talk. We'll take one of your cigars apiece,
      and you shall see us light up.”
     

      I watched the test. The men were absolutely sober, so I gave them each a
      tepid whisky-and-soda.
    

      “Well and good,” said Carnehan of the eyebrows, wiping the froth from his
      moustache. “Let me talk now, Dan. We have been all over India, mostly on
      foot. We have been boiler-fitters, engine-drivers, petty contractors, and
      all that, and we have decided that India isn't big enough for such as us.”
     

      They certainly were too big for the office. Dravot's beard seemed to fill
      half the room and Carnehan's shoulders the other half, as they sat on the
      big table. Carnehan continued: “The country isn't half worked out because
      they that governs it won't let you touch it. They spend all their blessed
      time in governing it, and you can't lift a spade, nor chip a rock, nor
      look for oil, nor anything like that, without all the Government saying,
      'Leave it alone, and let us govern.' Therefore, such as it is, we will let
      it alone, and go away to some other place where a man isn't crowded and
      can come to his own. We are not little men, and there is nothing that we
      are afraid of except Drink, and we have signed a Contrack on that.
    

      “Therefore we are going away to be Kings.”
     

      “Kings in our own right,” muttered Dravot.
    

      “Yes, of course,” I said. “You've been tramping in the sun, and it's a
      very warm night, and hadn't you better sleep over the notion? Come
      tomorrow.”
     

      “Neither drunk nor sunstruck,” said Dravot. “We have slept over the notion
      half a year, and require to see Books and Atlases, and we have decided
      that there is only one place now in the world that two strong men can
      Sar-a-whack. They call it Kafiristan. By my reckoning it's the top
      right-hand corner of Afghanistan, not more than three hundred miles from
      Peshawar. They have two and thirty heathen idols there, and we'll be the
      thirty-third and fourth. It's a mountaineous country, the women of those
      parts are very beautiful.”
     

      “But that is provided against in the Contrack,” said Carnehan. “Neither
      Women nor Liquor, Daniel.”
     

      “And that's all we know, except that no one has gone there, and they
      fight, and in any place where they fight a man who knows how to drill men
      can always be a King. We shall go to those parts and say to any King we
      find, 'D' you want to vanquish your foes?' and we will show him how to
      drill men; for that we know better than anything else. Then we will
      subvert that King and seize his Throne and establish a Dy-nasty.”
     

      “You'll be cut to pieces before you're fifty miles across the Border,” I
      said. “You have to travel through Afghanistan to get to that country. It's
      one mass of mountains and peaks and glaciers, and no Englishman has been
      through it. The people are utter brutes, and even if you reached them you
      couldn't do anything.”
     

      “That's more like,” said Carnehan. “If you could think us a little more
      mad we would be more pleased. We have come to you to know about this
      country, to read a book about it, and to be shown maps. We want you to
      tell us that we are fools and to show us your books.” He turned to the
      bookcases.
    

      “Are you at all in earnest?” I said.
    

      “A little,” said Dravot, sweetly. “As big a map as you have got, even if
      it's all blank where Kafiristan is, and any books you've got. We can read,
      though we aren't very educated.”
     

      I uncased the big thirty-two-miles-to-the-inch map of India and two
      smaller Frontier maps, hauled down volume INF-KAN of the “Encyclopaedia
      Britannica,” and the men consulted them.
    

      “See here!” said Dravot, his thumb on the map. “Up to Jagdallak, Peachey
      and me know the road. We was there with Robert's Army. We'll have to turn
      off to the right at Jagdallak through Laghmann territory. Then we get
      among the hills—fourteen thousand feet—fifteen thousand—it
      will be cold work there, but it don't look very far on the map.”
     

      I handed him Wood on the “Sources of the Oxus.” Carnehan was deep in the
      “Encyclopaedia.”
     

      “They're a mixed lot,” said Dravot, reflectively; “and it won't help us to
      know the names of their tribes. The more tribes the more they'll fight,
      and the better for us. From Jagdallak to Ashang. H'mm!”
     

      “But all the information about the country is as sketchy and inaccurate as
      can be,” I protested. “No one knows anything about it really. Here's the
      file of the 'United Services' Institute.' Read what Bellew says.”
     

      “Blow Bellew!” said Carnehan. “Dan, they're a stinkin' lot of heathens,
      but this book here says they think they're related to us English.”
     

      I smoked while the men poured over Raverty, Wood, the maps, and the
      “Encyclopaedia.”
     

      “There is no use your waiting,” said Dravot, politely. “It's about four
      o'clock now. We'll go before six o'clock if you want to sleep, and we
      won't steal any of the papers. Don't you sit up. We're two harmless
      lunatics, and if you come tomorrow evening down to the Serai we'll say
      goodbye to you.”
     

      “You are two fools,” I answered. “You'll be turned back at the Frontier or
      cut up the minute you set foot in Afghanistan. Do you want any money or a
      recommendation down-country? I can help you to the chance of work next
      week.”
     

      “Next week we shall be hard at work ourselves, thank you,” said Dravot.
      “It isn't so easy being a King as it looks. When we've got our Kingdom in
      going order we'll let you know, and you can come up and help us govern
      it.”
     

      “Would two lunatics make a Contrack like that?” said Carnehan, with
      subdued pride, showing me a greasy half-sheet of notepaper on which was
      written the following. I copied it, then and there, as a curiosity.
    

      This Contrack between me and you persuing witnesseth in the name of God—Amen
      and so forth.
    

      (One) That me and you will settle this matter together; i.e., to be Kings
      of Kafiristan.
    

      (Two)That you and me will not, while this matter is being settled, look at
      any Liquor, nor any Woman, black, white, or brown, so as to get mixed up
      with one or the other harmful.
    

      (Three) That we conduct ourselves with Dignity and Discretion, and if one
      of us gets into trouble the other will stay by him.
    

      Signed by you and me this day.
    

      Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan.
    

      Daniel Dravot.
    

      Both Gentlemen at Large.
    

      “There was no need for the last article,” said Carnehan, blushing
      modestly; “but it looks regular. Now you know the sort of men that loafers
      are,—we are loafers, Dan, until we get out of India,—and do
      you think that we would sign a Contrack like that unless we was in
      earnest? We have kept away from the two things that make life worth
      having.”
     

      “You won't enjoy your lives much longer if you are going to try this
      idiotic adventure. Don't set the office on fire,” I said, “and go away
      before nine o'clock.”
     

      I left them still poring over the maps and making notes on the back of the
      “Contrack.” “Be sure to come down to the Serai tomorrow,” were their
      parting words.
    

      The Kumharsen Serai is the great foursquare sink of humanity where the
      strings of camels and horses from the North load and unload. All the
      nationalities of Central Asia may be found there, and most of the folk of
      India proper. Balkh and Bokhara there meet Bengal and Bombay, and try to
      draw eye-teeth. You can buy ponies, turquoises, Persian pussy-cats,
      saddle-bags, fat-tailed sheep, and musk in the Kumharsen Serai, and get
      many strange things for nothing. In the afternoon I went down to see
      whether my friends intended to keep their word or were lying there drunk.
    

      A priest attired in fragments of ribbons and rags stalked up to me,
      gravely twisting a child's paper whirligig. Behind him was his servant
      bending under the load of a crate of mud toys. The two were loading up two
      camels, and the inhabitants of the Serai watched them with shrieks of
      laughter.
    

      “The priest is mad,” said a horse-dealer to me. “He is going up to Kabul
      to sell toys to the Amir. He will either be raised to honour or have his
      head cut off. He came in here this morning and has been behaving madly
      ever since.”
     

      “The witless are under the protection of God,” stammered a flat-cheeked
      Usbeg in broken Hindi. “They foretell future events.”
     

      “Would they could have foretold that my caravan would have been cut up by
      the Shinwaris almost within shadow of the Pass!” grunted the Eusufzai
      agent of a Rajputana trading-house whose goods had been diverted into the
      hands of other robbers just across the Border, and whose misfortunes were
      the laughing-stock of the bazaar. “Ohe', priest, whence come you and
      whither do you go?”
     

      “From Roum have I come,” shouted the priest, waving his whirligig; “from
      Roum, blown by the breath of a hundred devils across the sea! O thieves,
      robbers, liars, the blessing of Pir Khan on pigs, dogs, and perjurers! Who
      will take the Protected of God to the North to sell charms that are never
      still to the Amir? The camels shall not gall, the sons shall not fall
      sick, and the wives shall remain faithful while they are away, of the men
      who give me place in their caravan. Who will assist me to slipper the King
      of the Roos with a golden slipper with a silver heel? The protection of
      Pir Khan be upon his labours!” He spread out the skirts of his gabardine
      and pirouetted between the lines of tethered horses.
    

      “There starts a caravan from Peshawar to Kabul in twenty days, Huzrut,”
       said the Eusufzai trader. “My camels go therewith. Do thou also go and
      bring us good luck.”
     

      “I will go even now!” shouted the priest. “I will depart upon my winged
      camels, and be at Peshawar in a day! Ho! Hazar Mir Khan,” he yelled to his
      servant, “drive out the camels, but let me first mount my own.”
     

      He leaped on the back of his beast as it knelt, and, turning round to me,
      cried, “Come thou also, Sahib, a little along the road, and I will sell
      thee a charm—an amulet that shall make thee King of Kafiristan.”
     

      Then the light broke upon me, and I followed the two camels out of the
      Serai till we reached open road and the priest halted.
    

      “What d' you think o' that?” said he in English. “Carnehan can't talk
      their patter, so I've made him my servant. He makes a handsome servant. 'T
      isn't for nothing that I've been knocking about the country for fourteen
      years. Didn't I do that talk neat? We'll hitch on to a caravan at Peshawar
      till we get to Jagdallak, and then we'll see if we can get donkeys for our
      camels, and strike into Kafiristan. Whirligigs for the Amir, O Lor'! Put
      your hand under the camelbags and tell me what you feel.”
     

      I felt the butt of a Martini, and another and another.
    

      “Twenty of 'em,” said Dravot, placidly. “Twenty of 'em and ammunition to
      correspond, under the whirligigs and the mud dolls.”
     

      “Heaven help you if you are caught with those things!” I said. “A Martini
      is worth her weight in silver among the Pathans.”
     

      “Fifteen hundred rupees of capital—every rupee we could beg, borrow,
      or steal—are invested on these two camels,” said Dravot.
    

      “We won't get caught. We're going through the Khaiber with a regular
      caravan. Who'd touch a poor mad priest?”
     

      “Have you got everything you want?” I asked, overcome with astonishment.
    

      “Not yet, but we shall soon. Give us a memento of your kindness, Brother.
      You did me a service yesterday, and that time in Marwar. Half my Kingdom
      shall you have, as the saying is.” I slipped a small charm compass from my
      watch-chain and handed it up to the priest.
    

      “Goodbye,” said Dravot, giving me hand cautiously. “It's the last time
      we'll shake hands with an Englishman these many days. Shake hands with
      him, Carnehan,” he cried, as the second camel passed me.
    

      Carnehan leaned down and shook hands. Then the camels passed away along
      the dusty road, and I was left alone to wonder. My eye could detect no
      failure in the disguises. The scene in the Serai proved that they were
      complete to the native mind. There was just the chance, therefore, that
      Carnehan and Dravot would be able to wander through Afghanistan without
      detection. But, beyond, they would find death—certain and awful
      death.
    

      Ten days later a native correspondent, giving me the news of the day from
      Peshawar, wound up his letter with: “There has been much laughter here on
      account of a certain mad priest who is going in his estimation to sell
      petty gauds and insignificant trinkets which he ascribes as great charms
      to H. H. the Amir of Bokhara. He passed through Peshawar and associated
      himself to the Second Summer caravan that goes to Kabul. The merchants are
      pleased because through superstition they imagine that such mad fellows
      bring good fortune.”
     

      The two, then, were beyond the Border. I would have prayed for them, but
      that night a real King died in Europe, and demanded an obituary notice.
    

      The wheel of the world swings through the same phases again and again.
      Summer passed and winter thereafter, and came and passed again. The daily
      paper continued and I with it, and upon the third summer there fell a hot
      night, a night issue, and a strained waiting for something to be
      telegraphed from the other side of the world, exactly as had happened
      before. A few great men had died in the past two years, the machines
      worked with more clatter, and some of the trees in the office garden were
      a few feet taller. But that was all the difference.
    

      I passed over to the press-room, and went through just such a scene as I
      have already described. The nervous tension was stronger than it had been
      two years before, and I felt the heat more acutely. At three o'clock I
      cried, “Print off,” and turned to go, when there crept to my chair what
      was left of a man. He was bent into a circle, his head was sunk between
      his shoulders, and he moved his feet one over the other like a bear. I
      could hardly see whether he walked or crawled—this rag-wrapped,
      whining cripple who addressed me by name, crying that he was come back.
      “Can you give me a drink?” he whimpered. “For the Lord's sake, give me a
      drink!”
     

      I went back to the office, the man following with groans of pain, and I
      turned up the lamp.
    

      “Don't you know me?” he gasped, dropping into a chair, and he turned his
      drawn face, surmounted by a shock of gray hair, to the light.
    

      I looked at him intently. Once before had I seen eyebrows that met over
      the nose in an inch-broad black band, but for the life of me I could not
      tell where.
    

      “I don't know you,” I said, handing him the whisky. “What can I do for
      you?”
     

      He took a gulp of the spirit raw, and shivered in spite of the suffocating
      heat.
    

      “I've come back,” he repeated; “and I was the King of Kafiristan—me
      and Dravot—crowned Kings we was! In this office we settled it—you
      setting there and giving us the books. I am Peachey,—Peachey
      Taliaferro Carnehan,—and you've been setting here ever since—O
      Lord!”
     

      I was more than a little astonished, and expressed my feelings
      accordingly.
    

      “It's true,” said Carnehan, with a dry cackle, nursing his feet, which
      were wrapped in rags—“true as gospel. Kings we were, with crowns
      upon our heads—me and Dravot—poor Dan—oh, poor, poor
      Dan, that would never take advice, not though I begged of him!”
     

      “Take the whisky,” I said, “and take your own time. Tell me all you can
      recollect of everything from beginning to end. You got across the Border
      on your camels, Dravot dressed as a mad priest and you his servant. Do you
      remember that?”
     

      “I ain't mad—yet, but I shall be that way soon. Of course I
      remember. Keep looking at me, or maybe my words will go all to pieces.
      Keep looking at me in my eyes and don't say anything.”
     

      I leaned forward and looked into his face as steadily as I could. He
      dropped one hand upon the table and I grasped it by the wrist. It was
      twisted like a bird's claw, and upon the back was a ragged, red,
      diamond-shaped scar.
    

      “No, don't look there. Look at me,” said Carnehan. “That comes afterward,
      but for the Lord's sake don't distrack me. We left with that caravan, me
      and Dravot playing all sorts of antics to amuse the people we were with.
      Dravot used to make us laugh in the evenings when all the people was
      cooking their dinners—cooking their dinners, and... what did they do
      then? They lit little fires with sparks that went into Dravot's beard, and
      we all laughed—fit to die. Little red fires they was, going into
      Dravot's big red beard—so funny.” His eyes left mine and he smiled
      foolishly.
    

      “You went as far as Jagdallak with that caravan,” I said, at a venture,
      “after you had lit those fires. To Jagdallak, where you turned off to try
      to get into Kafiristan.”
     

      “No, we didn't, neither. What are you talking about? We turned off before
      Jagdallak, because we heard the roads was good. But they wasn't good
      enough for our two camels—mine and Dravot's. When we left the
      caravan, Dravot took off all his clothes and mine too, and said we would
      be heathen, because the Kafirs didn't allow Mohammedans to talk to them.
      So we dressed betwixt and between, and such a sight as Daniel Dravot I
      never saw yet nor expect to see again. He burned half his beard, and slung
      a sheepskin over his shoulder, and shaved his head into patterns. He
      shaved mine too, and made me wear outrageous things to look like a
      heathen. That was in a most mountaineous country, and our camels couldn't
      go along any more because of the mountains. They were tall and black, and
      coming home I saw them fight like wild goats—there are lots of goats
      in Kafiristan. And these mountains, they never keep still, no more than
      the goats. Always fighting they are, and don't let you sleep at night.”
     

      “Take some more whisky,” I said, very slowly. “What did you and Daniel
      Dravot do when the camels could go no farther because of the rough roads
      that led into Kafiristan?”
     

      “What did which do? There was a party called Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan
      that was with Dravot. Shall I tell you about him? He died out there in the
      cold. Slap from the bridge fell old Peachey, turning and twisting in the
      air like a penny whirligig that you can sell to the Amir. No; they was two
      for three ha'pence, those whirligigs, or I am much mistaken and woful
      sore... And then these camels were no use, and Peachey said to Dravot,
      'For the Lord's sake let's get out of this before our heads are chopped
      off,' and with that they killed the camels all among the mountains, not
      having anything in particular to eat, but first they took off the boxes
      with the guns and the ammunition, till two men came along driving four
      mules. Dravot up and dances in front of them, singing, 'Sell me four
      mules.' Says the first man, 'If you are rich enough to buy, you are rich
      enough to rob;' but before ever he could put his hand to his knife, Dravot
      breaks his neck over his knee, and the other party runs away. So Carnehan
      loaded the mules with the rifles that was taken off the camels, and
      together we starts forward into those bitter-cold mountaineous parts, and
      never a road broader than the back of your hand.”
     

      He paused for a moment, while I asked him if he could remember the nature
      of the country through which he had journeyed.
    

      “I am telling you as straight as I can, but my head isn't as good as it
      might be. They drove nails through it to make me hear better how Dravot
      died. The country was mountaineous and the mules were most contrary, and
      the inhabitants was dispersed and solitary. They went up and up, and down
      and down, and that other party, Carnehan, was imploring of Dravot not to
      sing and whistle so loud, for fear of bringing down the tremenjus
      avalanches. But Dravot says that if a King couldn't sing it wasn't worth
      being King, and whacked the mules over the rump, and never took no heed
      for ten cold days. We came to a big level valley all among the mountains,
      and the mules were near dead, so we killed them, not having anything in
      special for them or us to eat. We sat upon the boxes, and played odd and
      even with the cartridges that was jolted out.
    

      “Then ten men with bows and arrows ran down that valley, chasing twenty
      men with bows and arrows, and the row was tremenjus.
    

      “They was fair men—fairer than you or me—with yellow hair and
      remarkable well built. Says Dravot, unpacking the guns, 'This is the
      beginning of the business. We'll fight for the ten men,' and with that he
      fires two rifles at the twenty men, and drops one of them at two hundred
      yards from the rock where he was sitting. The other men began to run, but
      Carnehan and Dravot sits on the boxes picking them off at all ranges, up
      and down the valley. Then we goes up to the ten men that had run across
      the snow too, and they fires a footy little arrow at us. Dravot he shoots
      above their heads, and they all falls down flat. Then he walks over them
      and kicks them, and then he lifts them up and shakes hands all round to
      make them friendly like. He calls them and gives them the boxes to carry,
      and waves his hand for all the world as though he was King already. They
      takes the boxes and him across the valley and up the hill into a pine wood
      on the top, where there was half a dozen big stone idols. Dravot he goes
      to the biggest—a fellow they call Imbra—and lays a rifle and a
      cartridge at his feet, rubbing his nose respectfully with his own nose,
      patting him on the head, and nods his head, and says, 'That's all right.
      I'm in the know too, and these old jimjams are my friends.' Then he opens
      his mouth and points down it, and when the first man brings him food, he
      says, 'No;' and when the second man brings him food, he says 'no;' but
      when one of the old priests and the boss of the village brings him food,
      he says, 'Yes;' very haughty, and eats it slow. That was how he came to
      our first village without any trouble, just as though we had tumbled from
      the skies. But we tumbled from one of those damned rope-bridges, you see,
      and—you couldn't expect a man to laugh much after that?”
     

      “Take some more whisky and go on,” I said. “That was the first village you
      came into. How did you get to be King?”
     

      “I wasn't King,” said Carnehan. “Dravot he was the King, and a handsome
      man he looked with the gold crown on his head and all. Him and the other
      party stayed in that village, and every morning Dravot sat by the side of
      old Imbra, and the people came and worshipped. That was Dravot's order.
      Then a lot of men came into the valley, and Carnehan Dravot picks them off
      with the rifles before they knew where they was, and runs down into the
      valley and up again the other side, and finds another village, same as the
      first one, and the people all falls down flat on their faces, and Dravot
      says, 'Now what is the trouble between you two villages?' and the people
      points to a woman, as fair as you or me, that was carried off, and Dravot
      takes her back to the first village and counts up the dead—eight
      there was. For each dead man Dravot pours a little milk on the ground and
      waves his arms like a whirligig, and 'That's all right,' says he. Then he
      and Carnehan takes the big boss of each village by the arm, and walks them
      down the valley, and shows them how to scratch a line with a spear right
      down the valley, and gives each a sod of turf from both sides of the line.
      Then all the people comes down and shouts like the devil and all, and
      Dravot says, 'Go and dig the land, and be fruitful and multiply,' which
      they did, though they didn't understand. Then we asks the names of things
      in their lingo—bread and water and fire and idols and such; and
      Dravot leads the priest of each village up to the idol, and says he must
      sit there and judge the people, and if anything goes wrong he is to be
      shot.
    

      “Next week they was all turning up the land in the valley as quiet as bees
      and much prettier, and the priests heard all the complaints and told
      Dravot in dumb-show what it was about. 'That's just the beginning,' says
      Dravot. 'They think we're Gods.' He and Carnehan picks out twenty good men
      and shows them how to click off a rifle and form fours and advance in
      line; and they was very pleased to do so, and clever to see the hang of
      it. Then he takes out his pipe and his baccy-pouch, and leaves one at one
      village and one at the other, and off we two goes to see what was to be
      done in the next valley. That was all rock, and there was a little village
      there, and Carnehan says, 'Send 'em to the old valley to plant,' and takes
      'em there and gives 'em some land that wasn't took before. They were a
      poor lot, and we blooded 'em with a kid before letting 'em into the new
      Kingdom. That was to impress the people, and then they settled down quiet,
      and Carnehan went back to Dravot, who had got into another valley, all
      snow and ice and most mountaineous.
    

      “There was no people there, and the Army got afraid; so Dravot shoots one
      of them, and goes on till he finds some people in a village, and the Army
      explains that unless the people wants to be killed they had better not
      shoot their little matchlocks, for they had matchlocks. We makes friends
      with the priest, and I stays there alone with two of the Army, teaching
      the men how to drill; and a thundering big Chief comes across the snow
      with kettledrums and horns twanging, because he heard there was a new God
      kicking about. Carnehan sights for the brown of the men half a mile across
      the snow and wings one of them. Then he sends a message to the Chief that,
      unless he wished to be killed, he must come and shake hands with me and
      leave his arms behind. The Chief comes alone first, and Carnehan shakes
      hands with him and whirls his arms about, same as Dravot used, and very
      much surprised that Chief was, and strokes my eyebrows. Then Carnehan goes
      alone to the Chief, and asks him in dumb-show if he had an enemy he hated.
      'I have,' says the chief. So Carnehan weeds out the pick of his men, and
      sets the two of the Army to show them drill, and at the end of two weeks
      the men can manoeuvre about as well as Volunteers. So he marches with the
      Chief to a great big plain on the top of a mountain, and the Chief's men
      rushes into a village and takes it, we three Martinis firing into the
      brown of the enemy. So we took that village too, and I gives the Chief a
      rag from my coat, and says, 'Occupy till I come;' which was scriptural. By
      way of a reminder, when me and the Army was eighteen hundred yards away, I
      drops a bullet near him standing on the snow, and all the people falls
      flat on their faces. Then I sends a letter to Dravot wherever he be by
      land or by sea.”
     

      At the risk of throwing the creature out of train I interrupted: “How
      could you write a letter up yonder?”
     

      “The letter?—oh!—the letter! Keep looking at me between the
      eyes, please. It was a string-talk letter, that we'd learned the way of it
      from a blind beggar in the Punjab.”
     

      I remember that there had once come to the office a blind man with a
      knotted twig, and a piece of string which he wound round the twig
      according to some cipher of his own. He could, after the lapse of days or
      hours, repeat the sentence which he had reeled up.
    

      He had reduced the alphabet to eleven primitive sounds, and tried to teach
      me his method, but I could not understand.
    

      “I sent that letter to Dravot,” said Carnehan, “and told him to come back
      because this Kingdom was growing too big for me to handle; and then I
      struck for the first valley, to see how the priests were working. They
      called the village we took along with the Chief, Bashkai, and the first
      village we took, Er-Heb. The priests at Er-Heb was doing all right, but
      they had a lot of pending cases about land to show me, and some men from
      another village had been firing arrows at night. I went out and looked for
      that village, and fired four rounds at it from a thousand yards. That used
      all the cartridges I cared to spend, and I waited for Dravot, who had been
      away two or three months, and I kept my people quiet.
    

      “One morning I heard the devil's own noise of drums and horns, and Dan
      Dravot marches down the hill with his Army and a tail of hundreds of men,
      and, which was the most amazing, a great gold crown on his head. 'My Gord,
      Carnehan,' says Daniel, 'this is a tremenjus business, and we've got the
      whole country as far as it's worth having. I am the son of Alexander by
      Queen Semiramis, and you're my younger brother and a God too! It's the
      biggest thing we've ever seen. I've been marching and fighting for six
      weeks with the Army, and every footy little village for fifty miles has
      come in rejoiceful; and more than that, I've got the key of the whole
      show, as you'll see, and I've got a crown for you! I told 'em to make two
      of 'em at a place called Shu, where the gold lies in the rock like suet in
      mutton. Gold I've seen, and turquoise I've kicked out of the cliffs, and
      there's garnets in the sands of the river, and here's a chunk of amber
      that a man brought me. Call up all the priests and, here, take your
      crown.'
    

      “One of the men opens a black hair bag, and I slips the crown on. It was
      too small and too heavy, but I wore it for the glory. Hammered gold it was—five
      pounds weight, like a hoop of a barrel.
    

      “'Peachey,' says Dravot, 'we don't want to fight no more. The Craft's the
      trick, so help me!' and he brings forward that same Chief that I left at
      Bashkai—Billy Fish we called him afterward, because he was so like
      Billy Fish that drove the big tank-engine at Mach on the Bolan in the old
      days. 'Shake hands with him,' says Dravot; and I shook hands and nearly
      dropped, for Billy Fish gave me the Grip. I said nothing, but tried him
      with the Fellow-craft Grip. He answers all right, and I tried the Master's
      Grip, but that was a slip. 'A Fellow-craft he is!' I says to Dan. 'Does he
      know the word?' 'He does,' says Dan, 'and all the priests know. It's a
      miracle! The Chiefs and the priests can work a Fellow-craft Lodge in a way
      that's very like ours, and they've cut the marks on the rocks, but they
      don't know the Third Degree, and they've come to find out. It's Gord's
      Truth. I've known these long years that the Afghans knew up to the
      Fellow-craft Degree, but this is a miracle. A God and a Grand Master of
      the Craft am I, and a Lodge in the Third Degree I will open, and we'll
      raise the head priests and the Chiefs of the villages.'
    

      “'It's against all the law,' I says, 'holding a Lodge without warrant from
      any one; and you know we never held office in any Lodge.'
    

      “'It's a master stroke o' policy,' says Dravot. 'It means running the
      country as easy as a four-wheeled bogie on a down grade. We can't stop to
      inquire now, or they'll turn against us. I've forty Chiefs at my heel, and
      passed and raised according to their merit they shall be. Billet these men
      on the villages, and see that we run up a Lodge of some kind. The temple
      of Imbra will do for a Lodge-room. The women must make aprons as you show
      them. I'll hold a levee of Chiefs tonight and Lodge tomorrow.'
    

      “I was fair run off my legs, but I wasn't such a fool as not to see what a
      pull this Craft business gave us. I showed the priests' families how to
      make aprons of the degrees, but for Dravot's apron the blue border and
      marks was made of turquoise lumps on white hide, not cloth. We took a
      great square stone in the temple for the Master's chair, and little stones
      for the officer's chairs, and painted the black pavement with white
      squares, and did what we could to make things regular.
    

      “At the levee which was held that night on the hillside with big bonfires,
      Dravot gives out that him and me were Gods and sons of Alexander, and
      Passed Grand Masters in the Craft, and was come to make Kafiristan a
      country where every man should eat in peace and drink in quiet, and
      specially obey us. Then the Chiefs come round to shake hands, and they
      were so hairy and white and fair it was just shaking hands with old
      friends. We gave them names according as they was like men we had known in
      India—Billy Fish, Holly Dilworth, Pikky Kergan, that was
      Bazaar-master when I was at Mhow, and so on, and so on.
    

      “The most amazing miracles was at Lodge next night. One of the old priests
      was watching us continuous, and I felt uneasy, for I knew we'd have to
      fudge the Ritual, and I didn't know what the men knew. The old priest was
      a stranger come in from beyond the village of Bashkai. The minute Dravot
      puts on the Master's apron that the girls had made for him, the priest
      fetches a whoop and a howl, and tries to overturn the stone that Dravot
      was sitting on. 'It's all up now,' I says. 'That comes of meddling with
      the Craft without warrant!' Dravot never winked an eye, not when ten
      priests took and tilted over the Grand Master's chair—which was to
      say, the stone of Imbra. The priest begins rubbing the bottom end of it to
      clear away the black dirt, and presently he shows all the other priests
      the Master's Mark, same as was on Dravot's apron, cut into the stone. Not
      even the priests of the temple of Imbra knew it was there. The old chap
      falls flat on his face at Dravot's feet and kisses 'em. 'Luck again,' says
      Dravot, across the Lodge, to me; 'they say it's the missing Mark that no
      one could understand the why of.
    

      “'We're more than safe now.' Then he bangs the butt of his gun for a gavel
      and says, 'By virtue of the authority vested in me by my own right hand
      and the help of Peachey, I declare myself Grand Master of all Freemasonry
      in Kafiristan in this the Mother Lodge o' the country, and King of
      Kafiristan equally with Peachey!' At that he puts on his crown and I puts
      on mine,—I was doing Senior Warden,—and we opens the Lodge in
      most ample form. It was an amazing miracle! The priests moved in Lodge
      through the first two degrees almost without telling, as if the memory was
      coming back to them. After that Peachey and Dravot raised such as was
      worthy—high priests and Chiefs of far-off villages. Billy Fish was
      the first, and I can tell you we scared the soul out of him. It was not in
      any way according to Ritual, but it served our turn. We didn't raise more
      than ten of the biggest men, because we didn't want to make the Degree
      common. And they was clamouring to be raised.
    

      “'In another six months,' says Dravot, 'we'll hold another Communication
      and see how you are working.' Then he asks them about their villages, and
      learns that they was fighting one against the other, and were sick and
      tired of it. And when they wasn't doing that they was fighting with the
      Mohammedans. 'You can fight those when they come into our country,' says
      Dravot. 'Tell off every tenth man of your tribes for a Frontier guard, and
      send two hundred at a time to this valley to be drilled. Nobody is going
      to be shot or speared any more so long as he does well, and I know that
      you won't cheat me, because you're white people—sons of Alexander—and
      not like common black Mohammedans. You are my people, and, by God,' says
      he, running off into English at the end, 'I'll make a damned fine Nation
      of you, or I'll die in the making!'
    

      “I can't tell all we did for the next six months, because Dravot did a lot
      I couldn't see the hang of, and he learned their lingo in a way I never
      could. My work was to help the people plough, and now and again go out
      with some of the Army and see what the other villages were doing, and make
      'em throw rope bridges across the ravines which cut up the country horrid.
      Dravot was very kind to me, but when he walked up and down in the pine
      wood pulling that bloody red beard of his with both fists I knew he was
      thinking plans I could not advise about, and I just waited for orders.
    

      “But Dravot never showed me disrespect before the people. They were afraid
      of me and the Army, but they loved Dan. He was the best of friends with
      the priests and the Chiefs; but any one could come across the hills with a
      complaint, and Dravot would hear him out fair, and call four priests
      together and say what was to be done.
    

      “He used to call in Billy Fish from Bashkai, and Pikky Kergan from Shu,
      and an old Chief we called Kafuzelum,—it was like enough to his real
      name,—and hold councils with 'em when there was any fighting to be
      done in small villages. That was his Council of War, and the four priests
      of Bashkai, Shu, Khawak, and Madora was his Privy Council. Between the lot
      of 'em they sent me, with forty men and twenty rifles, and sixty men
      carrying turquoises, into the Ghorband country to buy those hand-made
      Martini rifles, that come out of the Amir's workshops at Kabul, from one
      of the Amir's Herati regiments that would have sold the very teeth out of
      their mouths for turquoises.
    

      “I stayed in Ghorband a month, and gave the Governor there the pick of my
      baskets for hush-money, and bribed the Colonel of the regiment some more,
      and, between the two and the tribes-people, we got more than a hundred
      hand-made Martinis, a hundred good Kohat Jezails that'll throw to six
      hundred yards, and forty man—loads of very bad ammunition for the
      rifles. I came back with what I had, and distributed 'em among the men
      that the Chiefs sent in to me to drill. Dravot was too busy to attend to
      those things, but the old Army that we first made helped me, and we turned
      out five hundred men that could drill, and two hundred that knew how to
      hold arms pretty straight. Even those cork-screwed, hand-made guns was a
      miracle to them. Dravot talked big about powder-shops and factories,
      walking up and down in the pine wood when the winter was coming on.
    

      “'I won't make a Nation,' says he. 'I'll make an Empire! These men aren't
      niggers; they're English! Look at their eyes—look at their mouths.
      Look at the way they stand up. They sit on chairs in their own houses.
      They're the Lost Tribes, or something like it, and they've grown to be
      English. I'll take a census in the spring if the priests don't get
      frightened. There must be a fair two million of 'em in these hills. The
      villages are full o' little children. Two million people—two hundred
      and fifty thousand fighting men—and all English! They only want the
      rifles and a little drilling. Two hundred and fifty thousand men, ready to
      cut in on Russia's right flank when she tries for India! Peachey, man,' he
      says, chewing his beard in great hunks, 'we shall be Emperors—Emperors
      of the Earth! Rajah Brooke will be a suckling to us. I'll treat with the
      Viceroy on equal terms. I'll ask him to send me twelve picked English—twelve
      that I know of—to help us govern a bit. There's Mackray, Serjeant
      Pensioner at Segowli—many's the good dinner he's given me, and his
      wife a pair of trousers. There's Donkin, the Warder of Tounghoo Jail;
      there's hundreds that I could lay my hand on if I was in India. The
      Viceroy shall do it for me; I'll send a man through in the spring for
      those men, and I'll write for a dispensation from the Grand Lodge for what
      I've done as Grand Master. That—and all the Sniders that'll be
      thrown out when the native troops in India take up the Martini. They'll be
      worn smooth, but they'll do for fighting in these hills. Twelve English, a
      hundred thousand Sniders run through the Amir's country in driblets,—I'd
      be content with twenty thousand in one year,—and we'd be an Empire.
    

      “When everything was shipshape I'd hand over the crown—this crown
      I'm wearing now—to Queen Victoria on my knees, and she'd say, 'Rise
      up, Sir Daniel Dravot.' Oh, it's big! It's big, I tell you! But there's so
      much to be done in every place—Bashkai, Khawak, Shu, and everywhere
      else.
    

      “'What is it?' I says. 'There are no more men coming in to be drilled this
      autumn. Look at those fat black clouds. They're bringing the snow.'
    

      “'It isn't that,' says Daniel, putting his hand very hard on my shoulder;
      'and I don't wish to say anything that's against you, for no other living
      man would have followed me and made me what I am as you have done. You're
      a first-class Commander-in-Chief, and the people know you; but—it's
      a big country, and somehow you can't help me, Peachey, in the way I want
      to be helped.'
    

      “'Go to your blasted priests, then!' I said, and I was sorry when I made
      that remark, but it did hurt me sore to find Daniel talking so superior,
      when I'd drilled all the men and done all he told me.
    

      “'Don't let's quarrel, Peachey,' says Daniel, without cursing. 'You're a
      King too, and the half of this Kingdom is yours; but can't you see,
      Peachey, we want cleverer men than us now—three or four of 'em, that
      we can scatter about for our Deputies. It's a hugeous great State, and I
      can't always tell the right thing to do, and I haven't time for all I want
      to do, and here's the winter coming on and all.'
    

      “He put half his beard into his mouth, all red like the gold of his crown.
    

      “'I'm sorry, Daniel,' says I. 'I've done all I could. I've drilled the men
      and shown the people how to stack their oats better; and I've brought in
      those tinware rifles from Ghorband—but I know what you're driving
      at. I take it Kings always feel oppressed that way.'
    

      “'There's another thing too,' says Dravot, walking up and down. 'The
      winter's coming, and these people won't be giving much trouble, and if
      they do we can't move about. I want a wife.'
    

      “'For Gord's sake leave the women alone!' I says. 'We've both got all the
      work we can, though I am a fool. Remember the Contrack, and keep clear o'
      women.'”
     

      “'The Contrack only lasted till such time as we was Kings; and Kings we
      have been these months past,' says Dravot, weighing his crown in his hand.
      'You go get a wife too, Peachey—a nice, strappin', plump girl
      that'll keep you warm in the winter. They're prettier than English girls,
      and we can take the pick of 'em. Boil 'em once or twice in hot water, and
      they'll come out like chicken and ham.'
    

      “'Don't tempt me!' I says. 'I will not have any dealings with a woman, not
      till we are a dam' side more settled than we are now. I've been doing the
      work o' two men, and you've been doing the work of three. Let's lie off a
      bit, and see if we can get some better tobacco from Afghan country and run
      in some good liquor; and no women.'”
     

      “'Who's talking o' women?' says Dravot. 'I said wife—a Queen to
      breed a King's son for the King. A Queen out of the strongest tribe,
      that'll make them your blood-brothers, and that'll lie by your side and
      tell you all the people thinks about you and their own affairs. That's
      what I want.'
    

      “'Do you remember that Bengali woman I kept at Mogul Serai when I was a
      plate-layer?' says I. 'A fat lot o' good she was to me. She taught me the
      lingo and one or two other things; but what happened? She ran away with
      the Station-master's servant and half my month's pay. Then she turned up
      at Dadur Junction in tow of a half-caste, and had the impidence to say I
      was her husband—all among the drivers in the running-shed too!'
    

      “'We've done with that,' says Dravot; 'these women are whiter than you or
      me, and a Queen I will have for the winter months.'
    

      “'For the last time o' asking, Dan, do not,' I says. 'It'll only bring us
      harm. The Bible says that Kings ain't to waste their strength on women,
      'specially when they've got a new raw Kingdom to work over.'
    

      “'For the last time of answering, I will,' said Dravot, and he went away
      through the pine trees looking like a big red devil, the sun being on his
      crown and beard and all.
    

      “But getting a wife was not as easy as Dan thought. He put it before the
      Council, and there was no answer till Billy Fish said that he'd better ask
      the girls. Dravot damned them all round.
    

      “'What's wrong with me?' he shouts, standing by the idol Imbra. 'Am I a
      dog, or am I not enough of a man for your wenches? Haven't I put the
      shadow of my hand over this country? Who stopped the last Afghan raid?' It
      was me really, but Dravot was too angry to remember. 'Who bought your
      guns? Who repaired the bridges? Who's the Grand Master of the sign cut in
      the stone?' says he, and he thumped his hand on the block that he used to
      sit on in Lodge, and at Council, which opened like Lodge always. Billy
      Fish said nothing, and no more did the others. 'Keep your hair on, Dan,'
      said I, 'and ask the girls. That's how it's done at Home, and these people
      are quite English.'
    

      “'The marriage of the King is a matter of State,' says Dan, in a white-hot
      rage, for he could feel, I hope, that he was going against his better
      mind. He walked out of the Council-room, and the others sat still, looking
      at the ground.
    

      “'Billy Fish,' says I to the Chief of Bashkai, 'what's the difficulty
      here? A straight answer to a true friend.'
    

      “'You know,' says Billy Fish. 'How should a man tell you who knows
      everything? How can daughters of men marry Gods or Devils? It's not
      proper.'
    

      “I remembered something like that in the Bible; but, if after seeing us as
      long as they had, they still believed we were Gods, it wasn't for me to
      undeceive them.
    

      “'A God can do anything,' says I. 'If the King is fond of a girl he'll not
      let her die.' 'She'll have to,' said Billy Fish. 'There are all sorts of
      Gods and Devils in these mountains, and now and again a girl marries one
      of them and isn't seen any more. Besides, you two know the Mark cut in the
      stone. Only the Gods know that. We thought you were men till you showed
      the sign of the Master.'
    

      “I wished then that we had explained about the loss of the genuine secrets
      of a Master Mason at the first go-off; but I said nothing. All that night
      there was a blowing of horns in a little dark temple half-way down the
      hill, and I heard the girl crying fit to die. One of the priests told us
      that she was being prepared to marry the King.
    

      “'I'll have no nonsense of that kind,' says Dan. 'I don't want to
      interfere with your customs, but I'll take my own wife.' 'The girl's a
      little bit afraid,' says the priest. 'She thinks she's going to die, and
      they are a-heartening of her up down in the temple.'
    

      “'Hearten her very tender, then,' says Dravot, 'or I'll hearten you with
      the butt of a gun so you'll never want to be heartened again.'
    

      “He licked his lips, did Dan, and stayed up walking about more than half
      the night, thinking of the wife that he was going to get in the morning. I
      wasn't any means comfortable, for I knew that dealings with a woman in
      foreign parts, though you was a crowned King twenty times over, could not
      but be risky. I got up very early in the morning while Dravot was asleep,
      and I saw the priests talking together in whispers, and the Chiefs talking
      together too, and they looked at me out of the corners of their eyes.
    

      “'What is up, Fish?' I say to the Bashkai man, who was wrapped up in his
      furs and looking splendid to behold.
    

      “'I can't rightly say,' says he; 'but if you can make the King drop all
      this nonsense about marriage, you'll be doing him and me and yourself a
      great service.'
    

      “'That I do believe,' says I. 'But sure, you know, Billy, as well as me,
      having fought against and for us, that the King and me are nothing more
      than two of the finest men that God Almighty ever made. Nothing more, I do
      assure you.'
    

      “'That may be,' says Billy Fish, 'and yet I should be sorry if it was.' He
      sinks his head upon his great fur cloak for a minute and thinks. 'King,'
      says he, 'be you man or God or Devil, I'll stick by you today. I have
      twenty of my men with me, and they will follow me. We'll go to Bashkai
      until the storm blows over.'
    

      “A little snow had fallen in the night, and everything was white except
      the greasy fat clouds that blew down and down from the north. Dravot came
      out with his crown on his head, swinging his arms and stamping his feet,
      and looking more pleased than Punch.
    

      “'For the last time, drop it, Dan,' says I, in a whisper; 'Billy Fish here
      says that there will be a row.'
    

      “'A row among my people!' says Dravot. 'Not much. Peachey, you're a fool
      not to get a wife too. Where's the girl?' says he, with a voice as loud as
      the braying of a jackass. 'Call up all the Chiefs and priests, and let the
      Emperor see if his wife suits him.'
    

      “There was no need to call any one. They were all there leaning on their
      guns and spears round the clearing in the centre of the pine wood. A lot
      of priests went down to the little temple to bring up the girl, and the
      horns blew fit to wake the dead. Billy Fish saunters round and gets as
      close to Daniel as he could, and behind him stood his twenty men with
      matchlocks—not a man of them under six feet. I was next to Dravot,
      and behind me was twenty men of the regular Army. Up comes the girl, and a
      strapping wench she was, covered with silver and turquoises, but white as
      death, and looking back every minute at the priests.
    

      “'She'll do,' said Dan, looking her over. 'What's to be afraid of, lass?
      Come and kiss me.' He puts his arm round her. She shuts her eyes, gives a
      bit of a squeak, and down goes her face in the side of Dan's flaming-red
      beard.
    

      “'The slut's bitten me!' says he, clapping his hand to his neck, and, sure
      enough, his hand was red with blood. Billy Fish and two of his matchlock
      men catches hold of Dan by the shoulders and drags him into the Bashkai
      lot, while the priests howls in their lingo, 'Neither God nor Devil, but a
      man!' I was all taken aback, for a priest cut at me in front, and the Army
      behind began firing into the Bashkai men.
    

      “'God A'mighty!' says Dan, 'what is the meaning o' this?'
    

      “'Come back! Come away!' says Billy Fish. 'Ruin and Mutiny is the matter.
      We'll break for Bashkai if we can.'
    

      “I tried to give some sort of orders to my men,—the men o' the
      regular Army,—but it was no use, so I fired into the brown of 'em
      with an English Martini and drilled three beggars in a line. The valley
      was full of shouting, howling creatures, and every soul was shrieking,
      'Not a God nor a Devil, but only a man!' The Bashkai troops stuck to Billy
      Fish all they were worth, but their matchlocks wasn't half as good as the
      Kabul breech-loaders, and four of them dropped. Dan was bellowing like a
      bull, for he was very wrathy; and Billy Fish had a hard job to prevent him
      running out at the crowd.
    

      “'We can't stand,' says Billy Fish. 'Make a run for it down the valley!
      The whole place is against us.' The matchlock-men ran, and we went down
      the valley in spite of Dravot. He was swearing horrible and crying out
      that he was a King. The priests rolled great stones on us, and the regular
      Army fired hard, and there wasn't more than six men, not counting Dan,
      Billy Fish, and Me, that came down to the bottom of the valley alive.
    

      “Then they stopped firing, and the horns in the temple blew again.
    

      “'Come away—for Gord's sake come away!' says Billy Fish. 'They'll
      send runners out to all the villages before ever we get to Bashkai. I can
      protect you there, but I can't do anything now.”
     

      “My own notion is that Dan began to go mad in his head from that hour. He
      stared up and down like a stuck pig. Then he was all for walking back
      alone and killing the priests with his bare hands; which he could have
      done. 'An Emperor am I,' says Daniel, 'and next year I shall be a Knight
      of the Queen.'
    

      “'All right, Dan,' says I; 'but come along now while there's time.'
    

      “'It's your fault,' says he, 'for not looking after your Army better.
      There was mutiny in the midst, and you didn't know—you damned
      engine-driving, plate-laying, missionary's-pass-hunting hound!' He sat
      upon a rock and called me every foul name he could lay tongue to. I was
      too heart-sick to care, though it was all his foolishness that brought the
      smash.
    

      “'I'm sorry, Dan,' says I, 'but there's no accounting for natives. This
      business is our Fifty-seven. Maybe we'll make something out of it yet,
      when we've got to Bashkai.'
    

      “'Let's get to Bashkai, then,' says Dan, 'and, by God, when I come back
      here again I'll sweep the valley so there isn't a bug in a blanket left!'
    

      “We walked all that day, and all that night Dan was stumping up and down
      on the snow, chewing his beard and muttering to himself.
    

      “'There's no hope o' getting clear,' said Billy Fish. 'The priests have
      sent runners to the villages to say that you are only men. Why didn't you
      stick on as Gods till things was more settled? I'm a dead man,' says Billy
      Fish, and he throws himself down on the snow and begins to pray to his
      Gods.
    

      “Next morning we was in a cruel bad country—all up and down, no
      level ground at all, and no food, either. The six Bashkai men looked at
      Billy Fish hungry-way as if they wanted to ask something, but they never
      said a word. At noon we came to the top of a flat mountain all covered
      with snow, and when we climbed up into it, behold, there was an Army in
      position waiting in the middle!
    

      “'The runners have been very quick,' says Billy Fish, with a little bit of
      a laugh. 'They are waiting for us.'
    

      “Three or four men began to fire from the enemy's side, and a chance shot
      took Daniel in the calf of the leg. That brought him to his senses. He
      looks across the snow at the Army, and sees the rifles that we had brought
      into the country.
    

      “'We're done for,' says he. 'They are Englishmen, these people,—and
      it's my blasted nonsense that has brought you to this. Get back, Billy
      Fish, and take your men away; you've done what you could, and now cut for
      it. Carnehan,' says he, 'shake hands with me and go along with Billy,
      Maybe they won't kill you. I'll go and meet 'em alone. It's me that did
      it! Me, the King!'
    

      “'Go!' says I. 'Go to Hell, Dan! I'm with you here. Billy Fish, you clear
      out, and we two will meet those folk.'
    

      “'I'm a Chief,' says Billy Fish, quite quiet. 'I stay with you. My men can
      go.'
    

      “The Bashkai fellows didn't wait for a second word, but ran off, and Dan
      and Me and Billy Fish walked across to where the drums were drumming and
      the horns were horning. It was cold—awful cold. I've got that cold
      in the back of my head now. There's a lump of it there.”
     

      The punka-coolies had gone to sleep. Two kerosene lamps were blazing in
      the office, and the perspiration poured down my face and splashed on the
      blotter as I leaned forward. Carnehan was shivering, and I feared that his
      mind might go. I wiped my face, took a fresh grip of the piteously mangled
      hands, and said, “What happened after that?”
     

      The momentary shift of my eyes had broken the clear current.
    

      “What was you pleased to say?” whined Carnehan. “They took them without
      any sound. Not a little whisper all along the snow, not though the King
      knocked down the first man that set hand on him—not though old
      Peachey fired his last cartridge into the brown of 'em. Not a single
      solitary sound did those swines make. They just closed up tight, and I
      tell you their furs stunk. There was a man called Billy Fish, a good
      friend of us all, and they cut his throat, Sir, then and there, like a
      pig; and the King kicks up the bloody snow and says, 'We've had a dashed
      fine run for our money. What's coming next?' But Peachey, Peachey
      Taliaferro, I tell you, Sir, in confidence as betwixt two friends, he lost
      his head, Sir. No, he didn't, neither. The King lost his head, so he did,
      all along o' one of those cunning rope bridges. Kindly let me have the
      paper-cutter, Sir. It tilted this way. They marched him a mile across that
      snow to a rope bridge over a ravine with a river at the bottom. You may
      have seen such. They prodded him behind like an ox. 'Damn your eyes!' says
      the King. 'D' you suppose I can't die like a gentleman?'
    

      “He turns to Peachey—Peachey that was crying like a child. 'I've
      brought you to this, Peachey,' says he. 'Brought you out of your happy
      life to be killed in Kafiristan, where you was late Commander-in-Chief of
      the Emperor's forces. Say you forgive me, Peachey.' 'I do,' says Peachey.
      'Fully and freely do I forgive you, Dan.' 'Shake hands, Peachey,' says he.
      'I'm going now.' Out he goes, looking neither right nor left, and when he
      was plumb in the middle of those dizzy dancing ropes, 'Cut you beggars,'
      he shouts; and they cut, and old Dan fell, turning round and round and
      round, twenty thousand miles, for he took half an hour to fall till he
      struck the water, and I could see his body caught on a rock with the gold
      crown close beside.
    

      “But do you know what they did to Peachey between two pine trees? They
      crucified him, Sir, as Peachey's hand will show. They used wooden pegs for
      his hands and feet; but he didn't die. He hung there and screamed, and
      they took him down next day, and said it was a miracle that he wasn't
      dead. They took him down—poor old Peachey that hadn't done them any
      harm—that hadn't done them any—”
     

      He rocked to and fro and wept bitterly, wiping his eyes with the back of
      his scarred hands and moaning like a child for some ten minutes.
    

      “They was cruel enough to feed him up in the temple, because they said he
      was more of a God than old Daniel that was a man. Then they turned him out
      on the snow, and told him to go home, and Peachey came home in about a
      year, begging along the roads quite safe; for Daniel Dravot he walked
      before and said, 'Come along, Peachey. It's a big thing we're doing.' The
      mountains they danced at night, and the mountains they tried to fall on
      Peachey's head, but Dan he held up his hand, and Peachey came along bent
      double. He never let go of Dan's hand, and he never let go of Dan's head.
      They gave it to him as a present in the temple, to remind him not to come
      again; and though the crown was pure gold and Peachey was starving, never
      would Peachey sell the same. You know Dravot, Sir! You knew Right
      Worshipful Brother Dravot! Look at him now!”
     

      He fumbled in the mass of rags round his bent waist; brought out a black
      horsehair bag embroidered with silver thread; and shook therefrom on to my
      table—the dried, withered head of Daniel Dravot! The morning sun,
      that had long been paling the lamps, struck the red beard and blind sunken
      eyes; struck, too, a heavy circlet of gold studded with raw turquoises,
      that Carnehan placed tenderly on the battered temples.
    

      “You be'old now,” said Carnehan, “the Emperor in his 'abit as he lived—the
      King of Kafiristan with his crown upon his head. Poor old Daniel that was
      a monarch once!”
     

      I shuddered, for, in spite of defacements manifold, I recognised the head
      of the man of Marwar Junction. Carnehan rose to go. I attempted to stop
      him. He was not fit to walk abroad. “Let me take away the whisky, and give
      me a little money,” he gasped. “I was a King once. I'll go to the Deputy
      Commissioner and ask to set in the Poorhouse till I get my health. No,
      thank you, I can't wait till you get a carriage for me. I've urgent
      private affairs—in the south—at Marwar.”
     

      He shambled out of the office and departed in the direction of the Deputy
      Commissioner's house. That day at noon I had occasion to go down the
      blinding-hot Mall, and I saw a crooked man crawling along the white dust
      of the roadside, his hat in his hand, quavering dolorously after the
      fashion of street-singers at Home. There was not a soul in sight, and he
      was out of all possible earshot of the houses. And he sang through his
      nose, turning his head from right to left:
    

    “The Son of Man goes forth to war,
    A golden crown to gain;
    His blood-red banner streams afar—
    Who follows in His train?”
 

      I waited to hear no more, but put the poor wretch into my carriage and
      drove him off to the nearest missionary for eventual transfer to the
      Asylum. He repeated the hymn twice while he was with me, whom he did not
      in the least recognise, and I left him singing it to the missionary.
    

      Two days later I inquired after his welfare of the Superintendent of the
      Asylum.
    

      “He was admitted suffering from sunstroke. He died early yesterday
      morning,” said the Superintendent. “Is it true that he was half an hour
      bareheaded in the sun at midday?”
     

      “Yes,” said I; “but do you happen to know if he had anything upon him by
      any chance when he died?”
     

      “Not to my knowledge,” said the Superintendent.
    

      And there the matter rests.
    








      “THE FINEST STORY IN THE WORLD”
     

  “O' ever the knightly years were gone
  With the old world to the grave,
  I was a king in Babylon
  And you were a Christian slave.”
                 —W. E. Henley.


      His name was Charlie Mears; he was the only son of his mother who was a
      widow, and he lived in the north of London, coming into the City every day
      to work in a bank. He was twenty years old and suffered from aspirations.
      I met him in a public billiard-saloon where the marker called him by his
      given name, and he called the marker “Bulls-eyes.” Charley explained, a
      little nervously, that he had only come to the place to look on, and since
      looking on at games of skill is not a cheap amusement for the young, I
      suggested that Charlie should go back to his mother.
    

      That was our first step toward better acquaintance. He would call on me
      sometimes in the evenings instead of running about London with his
      fellow-clerks; and before long, speaking of himself as a young man must,
      he told me of his aspirations, which were all literary. He desired to make
      himself an undying name chiefly through verse, though he was not above
      sending stories of love and death to the drop-a-penny-in-the-slot
      journals. It was my fate to sit still while Charlie read me poems of many
      hundred lines, and bulky fragments of plays that would surely shake the
      world. My reward was his unreserved confidence, and the self-revelations
      and troubles of a young man are almost as holy as those of a maiden.
    

      Charlie had never fallen in love, but was anxious to do so on the first
      opportunity; he believed in all things good and all things honorable, but,
      at the same time, was curiously careful to let me see that he knew his way
      about the world as befitted a bank clerk on twenty-five shillings a week.
      He rhymed “dove” with “love” and “moon” with “June,” and devoutly believed
      that they had never so been rhymed before. The long lame gaps in his plays
      he filled up with hasty words of apology and description and swept on,
      seeing all that he intended to do so clearly that he esteemed it already
      done, and turned to me for applause.
    

      I fancy that his mother did not encourage his aspirations, and I know that
      his writing-table at home was the edge of his washstand. This he told me
      almost at the outset of our acquaintance; when he was ravaging my
      bookshelves, and a little before I was implored to speak the truth as to
      his chances of “writing something really great, you know.” Maybe I
      encouraged him too much, for, one night, he called on me, his eyes flaming
      with excitement, and said breathlessly:
    

      “Do you mind—can you let me stay here and write all this evening? I
      won't interrupt you, I won't really. There's no place for me to write in
      at my mother's.”
     

      “What's the trouble?” I said, knowing well what that trouble was.
    

      “I've a notion in my head that would make the most splendid story that was
      ever written. Do let me write it out here. It's such a notion!”
     

      There was no resisting the appeal. I set him a table; he hardly thanked
      me, but plunged into the work at once. For half an hour the pen scratched
      without stopping. Then Charlie sighed and tugged his hair. The scratching
      grew slower, there were more erasures, and at last ceased. The finest
      story in the world would not come forth.
    

      “It looks such awful rot now” he said, mournfully. “And yet it seemed so
      good when I was thinking about it. What's wrong?”
     

      I could not dishearten him by saying the truth. So I answered: “Perhaps
      you don't feel in the mood for writing.”
     

      “Yes I do—except when I look at this stuff. Ugh!”
     

      “Read me what you've done,” I said. He read, and it was wondrous bad and
      he paused at all the specially turgid sentences, expecting a little
      approval; for he was proud of those sentences, as I knew he would be.
    

      “It needs compression,” I suggested, cautiously.
    

      “I hate cutting my things down. I don't think you could alter a word here
      without spoiling the sense. It reads better aloud than when I was writing
      it.”
     

      “Charlie, you're suffering from an alarming disease afflicting a numerous
      class. Put the thing by, and tackle it again in a week.”
     

      “I want to do it at once. What do you think of it?”
     

      “How can I judge from a half-written tale? Tell me the story as it lies in
      your head.”
     

      Charlie told, and in the telling there was everything that his ignorance
      had so carefully prevented from escaping into the written word. I looked
      at him, and wondering whether it were possible, that he did not know the
      originality, the power of the notion that had come in his way? It was
      distinctly a Notion among notions. Men had been puffed up with pride by
      notions not a tithe as excellent and practicable. But Charlie babbled on
      serenely, interrupting the current of pure fancy with samples of horrible
      sentences that he purposed to use. I heard him out to the end. It would be
      folly to allow his idea to remain in his own inept hands, when I could do
      so much with it. Not all that could be done indeed; but, oh so much!
    

      “What do you think?” he said, at last. “I fancy I shall call it 'The Story
      of a Ship.'”
     

      “I think the idea's pretty good; but you won't Be able to handle it for
      ever so long. Now I—”
     

      “Would it be of any use to you? Would you care to take it? I should be
      proud,” said Charlie, promptly.
    

      There are few things sweeter in this world than the guileless, hot-headed,
      intemperate, open admiration of a junior. Even a woman in her blindest
      devotion does not fall into the gait of the man she adores, tilt her
      bonnet to the angle at which he wears his hat, or interlard her speech
      with his pet oaths. And Charlie did all these things. Still it was
      necessary to salve my conscience before I possessed myself of Charlie's
      thoughts.
    

      “Let's make a bargain. I'll give you a fiver for the notion,” I said.
    

      Charlie became a bank-clerk at once.
    

      “Oh, that's impossible. Between two pals, you know, if I may call you so,
      and speaking as a man of the world, I couldn't. Take the notion if it's
      any use to you. I've heaps more.”
     

      He had—none knew this better than I—but they were the notions
      of other men.
    

      “Look at it as a matter of business—between men of the world,” I
      returned. “Five pounds will buy you any number of poetry-books. Business
      is business, and you may be sure I shouldn't give that price unless—”
     

      “Oh, if you put it that way,” said Charlie, visibly moved by the thought
      of the books. The bargain was clinched with an agreement that he should at
      unstated intervals come to me with all the notions that he possessed,
      should have a table of his own to write at, and unquestioned right to
      inflict upon me all his poems and fragments of poems. Then I said, “Now
      tell me how you came by this idea.”
     

      “It came by itself.” Charlie's eyes opened a little.
    

      “Yes, but you told me a great deal about the hero that you must have read
      before somewhere.”
     

      “I haven't any time for reading, except when you let me sit here, and on
      Sundays I'm on my bicycle or down the river all day. There's nothing wrong
      about the hero, is there?”
     

      “Tell me again and I shall understand clearly. You say that your hero went
      pirating. How did he live?”
     

      “He was on the lower deck of this ship-thing that I was telling you
      about.”
     

      “What sort of ship?”
     

      “It was the kind rowed with oars, and the sea spurts through the oar-holes
      and the men row sitting up to their knees in water. Then there's a bench
      running down between the two lines of oars and an overseer with a whip
      walks up and down the bench to make the men work.”
     

      “How do you know that?”
     

      “It's in the table. There's a rope running overhead, looped to the upper
      deck, for the overseer to catch hold of when the ship rolls. When the
      overseer misses the rope once and falls among the rowers, remember the
      hero laughs at him and gets licked for it. He's chained to his oar of
      course—the hero.”
     

      “How is he chained?”
     

      “With an iron band round his waist fixed to the bench he sits on, and a
      sort of handcuff on his left wrist chaining him to the oar. He's on the
      lower deck where the worst men are sent, and the only light comes from the
      hatchways and through the oar-holes. Can't you imagine the sunlight just
      squeezing through between the handle and the hole and wobbling about as
      the ship moves?”
     

      “I can, but I can't imagine your imagining it.”
     

      “How could it be any other way? Now you listen to me. The long oars on the
      upper deck are managed by four men to each bench, the lower ones by three,
      and the lowest of all by two. Remember it's quite dark on the lowest deck
      and all the men there go mad. When a man dies at his oar on that deck he
      isn't thrown overboard, but cut up in his chains and stuffed through the
      oar-hole in little pieces.”
     

      “Why?” I demanded, amazed, not so much at the information as the tone of
      command in which it was flung out.
    

      “To save trouble and to frighten the others. It needs two overseers to
      drag a man's body up to the top deck; and if the men at the lower deck
      oars were left alone, of course they'd stop rowing and try to pull up the
      benches by all standing up together in their chains.”
     

      “You've a most provident imagination. Where have you been reading about
      galleys and galley-slaves?”
     

      “Nowhere that I remember. I row a little when I get the chance. But,
      perhaps, if you say so, I may have read something.”
     

      He went away shortly afterward to deal with booksellers, and I wondered
      how a bank clerk aged twenty could put into my hands with a profligate
      abundance of detail, all given with absolute assurance, the story of
      extravagant and bloodthirsty adventure, riot, piracy, and death in unnamed
      seas. He had led his hero a desperate dance through revolt against the
      overseas, to command of a ship of his own, and ultimate establishment of a
      kingdom on an island “somewhere in the sea, you know”; and, delighted with
      my paltry five pounds, had gone out to buy the notions of other men, that
      these might teach him how to write. I had the consolation of knowing that
      this notion was mine by right of purchase, and I thought that I could make
      something of it.
    

      When next he came to me he was drunk—royally drunk on many poets for
      the first time revealed to him. His pupils were dilated, his words tumbled
      over each other, and he wrapped himself in quotations. Most of all was he
      drunk with Longfellow.
    

      “Isn't it splendid? Isn't it superb?” he cried, after hasty greetings.
    

      “Listen to this—
    

      “'Wouldst thou,' so the helmsman answered, 'Know the secret of the sea?
      Only those who brave its dangers Comprehend its mystery.'
    

      “By gum!
    

      “'Only those who brave its dangers Comprehend its mystery.'” he repeated
      twenty times, walking up and down the room and forgetting me. “But I can
      understand it too,” he said to himself. “I don't know how to thank you for
      that fiver. And this; listen—
    

      “'I remember the black wharves and the ships And the sea-tides tossing
      free, And the Spanish sailors with bearded lips, And the beauty and
      mystery of the ships, And the magic of the sea.'
    

      “I haven't braved any dangers, but I feel as if I knew all about it.”
     

      “You certainly seem to have a grip of the sea. Have you ever seen it?”
     

      “When I was a little chap I went to Brighton once; we used to live in
      Coventry, though, before we came to London. I never saw it.
    

      “'When descends on the Atlantic The gigantic Storm-wind of the Equinox.'”
     

      He shook me by the shoulder to make me understand the passion that was
      shaking himself.
    

      “When that storm comes,” he continued, “I think that all the oars in the
      ship that I was talking about get broken, and the rowers have their chests
      smashed in by the bucking oar-heads. By the way, have you done anything
      with that notion of mine yet?”
     

      “No. I was waiting to hear more of it from you. Tell me how in the world
      you're so certain about the fittings of the ship. You know nothing of
      ships.”
     

      “I don't know. It's as real as anything to me until I try to write it
      down. I was thinking about it only last night in bed, after you had loaned
      me 'Treasure Island'; and I made up a whole lot of new things to go into
      the story.”
     

      “What sort of things?”
     

      “About the food the men ate; rotten figs and black beans and wine in a
      skin bag, passed from bench to bench.”
     

      “Was the ship built so long ago as that?”
     

      “As what? I don't know whether it was long ago or not. It's only a notion,
      but sometimes it seems just as real as if it was true. Do I bother you
      with talking about it?”
     

      “Not in the least. Did you make up anything else?”
     

      “Yes, but it's nonsense.” Charlie flushed a little.
    

      “Never mind; let's hear about it.”
     

      “Well, I was thinking over the story, and after awhile I got out of bed
      and wrote down on a piece of paper the sort of stuff the men might be
      supposed to scratch on their oars with the edges of their handcuffs. It
      seemed to make the thing more lifelike. It is so real to me, y'know.”
     

      “Have you the paper on you?”
     

      “Ye-es, but what's the use of showing it? It's only a lot of scratches.
      All the same, we might have 'em reproduced in the book on the front page.”
     

      “I'll attend to those details. Show me what your men wrote.”
     

      He pulled out of his pocket a sheet of note-paper, with a single line of
      scratches upon it, and I put this carefully away.
    

      “What is it supposed to mean in English?” I said.
    

      “Oh, I don't know. Perhaps it means 'I'm beastly tired.' It's great
      nonsense,” he repeated, “but all those men in the ship seem as real people
      to me. Do do something to the notion soon; I should like to see it written
      and printed.”
     

      “But all you've told me would make a long book.”
     

      “Make it then. You've only to sit down and write it out.”
     

      “Give me a little time. Have you any more notions?”
     

      “Not just now. I'm reading all the books I've bought. They're splendid.”
     

      When he had left I looked at the sheet of note-paper with the inscription
      upon it. Then I took my head tenderly between both hands, to make certain
      that it was not coming off or turning round.
    

      Then—but there seemed to be no interval between quitting my rooms
      and finding myself arguing with a policeman outside a door marked Private
      in a corridor of the British Museum. All I demanded, as politely as
      possible, was “the Greek antiquity man.” The policeman knew nothing except
      the rules of the Museum, and it became necessary to forage through all the
      houses and offices inside the gates. An elderly gentleman called away from
      his lunch put an end to my search by holding the note-paper between finger
      and thumb and sniffing at it scornfully.
    

      “What does this mean? H'mm,” said he. “So far as I can ascertain it is an
      attempt to write extremely corrupt Greek on the part”—here he glared
      at me with intention—“of an extremely illiterate—ah—person.”
       He read slowly from the paper, “Pollock, Erckman, Tauchnitz, Henniker”—four
      names familiar to me.
    

      “Can you tell me what the corruption is supposed to mean—the gist of
      the thing?” I asked.
    

      “'I have been—many times—overcome with weariness in this
      particular employment. That is the meaning.'” He returned me the paper,
      and I fled without a word of thanks, explanation, or apology.
    

      I might have been excused for forgetting much. To me of all men had been
      given the chance to write the most marvelous tale in the world, nothing
      less than the story of a Greek galley-slave, as told by himself. Small
      wonder that his dreaming had seemed real to Charlie. The Fates that are so
      careful to shut the doors of each successive life behind us had, in this
      case, been neglectful, and Charlie was looking, though that he did not
      know, where never man had been permitted to look with full knowledge since
      Time began. Above all he was absolutely ignorant of the knowledge sold to
      me for five pounds; and he would retain that ignorance, for bank-clerks do
      not understand metempsychosis, and a sound commercial education does not
      include Greek. He would supply me—here I capered among the dumb gods
      of Egypt and laughed in their battered faces—with material to make
      my tale sure—so sure that the world would hail it as an impudent and
      vamped fiction. And I—I alone would know that it was absolutely and
      literally true. I alone held this jewel to my hand for the cutting and
      polishing.
    

      Therefore I danced again among the gods till a policeman saw me and took
      steps in my direction.
    

      It remained now only to encourage Charlie to talk, and here there was no
      difficulty. But I had forgotten those accursed books of poetry. He came to
      me time after time, as useless as a surcharged phonograph—drunk on
      Byron, Shelley, or Keats. Knowing now what the boy had been in his past
      lives, and desperately anxious not to lose one word of his babble, I could
      not hide from him my respect and interest. He misconstrued both into
      respect for the present soul of Charlie Mears, to whom life was as new as
      it was to Adam, and interest in his readings; and stretched my patience to
      breaking point by reciting poetry—not his own now, but that of
      others. I wished every English poet blotted out of the memory of mankind.
      I blasphemed the mightiest names of song because they had drawn Charlie
      from the path of direct narrative, and would, later, spur him to imitate
      them; but I choked down my impatience until the first flood of enthusiasm
      should have spent itself and the boy returned to his dreams.
    

      “What's the use of my telling you what I think, when these chaps wrote
      things for the angels to read?” he growled, one evening. “Why don't you
      write something like theirs?”
     

      “I don't think you're treating me quite fairly,” I said, speaking under
      strong restraint.
    

      “I've given you the story,” he said, shortly replunging into “Lara.”
     

      “But I want the details.”
     

      “The things I make up about that damned ship that you call a galley?
      They're quite easy. You can just make 'em up yourself. Turn up the gas a
      little, I want to go on reading.”
     

      I could have broken the gas globe over his head for his amazing stupidity.
      I could indeed make up things for myself did I only know what Charlie did
      not know that he knew. But since the doors were shut behind me I could
      only wait his youthful pleasure and strive to keep him in good temper. One
      minute's want of guard might spoil a priceless revelation: now and again
      he would toss his books aside—he kept them in my rooms, for his
      mother would have been shocked at the waste of good money had she seen
      them—and launched into his sea dreams. Again I cursed all the poets
      of England. The plastic mind of the bank-clerk had been overlaid, colored
      and distorted by that which he had read, and the result as delivered was a
      confused tangle of other voices most like the muttered song through a City
      telephone in the busiest part of the day.
    

      He talked of the galley—his own galley had he but known it—with
      illustrations borrowed from the “Bride of Abydos.” He pointed the
      experiences of his hero with quotations from “The Corsair,” and threw in
      deep and desperate moral reflections from “Cain” and “Manfred,” expecting
      me to use them all. Only when the talk turned on Longfellow were the
      jarring cross-currents dumb, and I knew that Charlie was speaking the
      truth as he remembered it.
    

      “What do you think of this?” I said one evening, as soon as I understood
      the medium in which his memory worked best, and, before he could
      expostulate read him the whole of “The Saga of King Olaf!”
     

      He listened open-mouthed, flushed his hands drumming on the back of the
      sofa where he lay, till I came to the Songs of Emar Tamberskelver and the
      verse:
    

      “Emar then, the arrow taking From the loosened string, Answered: 'That was
      Norway breaking 'Neath thy hand, O King.'”
     

      He gasped with pure delight of sound.
    

      “That's better than Byron, a little,” I ventured.
    

      “Better? Why it's true! How could he have known?”
     

      I went back and repeated:
    

    “'What was that?' said Olaf, standing
    On the quarter-deck,
    'Something heard I like the stranding
    Of a shattered wreck.'”
 

      “How could he have known how the ships crash and the oars rip out and go
      z-zzp all along the line? Why only the other night—But go back
      please and read 'The Skerry of Shrieks' again.”
     

      “No, I'm tired. Let's talk. What happened the other night?”
     

      “I had an awful nightmare about that galley of ours. I dreamed I was
      drowned in a fight. You see we ran alongside another ship in harbor. The
      water was dead still except where our oars whipped it up. You know where I
      always sit in the galley?” He spoke haltingly at first, under a fine
      English fear of being laughed at.
    

      “No. That's news to me,” I answered, meekly, my heart beginning to beat.
    

      “On the fourth oar from the bow on the right side on the upper deck. There
      were four of us at the oar, all chained. I remember watching the water and
      trying to get my handcuffs off before the row began. Then we closed up on
      the other ship, and all their fighting men jumped over our bulwarks, and
      my bench broke and I was pinned down with the three other fellows on top
      of me, and the big oar jammed across our backs.”
     

      “Well?” Charlie's eyes were alive and alight. He was looking at the wall
      behind my chair.
    

      “I don't know how we fought. The men were trampling all over my back, and
      I lay low. Then our rowers on the left side—tied to their oars, you
      know—began to yell and back water. I could hear the water sizzle,
      and we spun round like a cockchafer and I knew, lying where I was, that
      there was a galley coming up bow-on, to ram us on the left side. I could
      just lift up my head and see her sail over the bulwarks. We wanted to meet
      her bow to bow, but it was too late. We could only turn a little bit
      because the galley on our right had hooked herself on to us and stopped
      our moving. Then, by gum! there was a crash! Our left oars began to break
      as the other galley, the moving one y'know, stuck her nose into them. Then
      the lower-deck oars shot up through the deck-planking, butt first, and one
      of them jumped clean up into the air and came down again close to my
      head.”
     

      “How was that managed?”
     

      “The moving galley's bow was plunking them back through their own
      oarholes, and I could hear the devil of a shindy in the decks below. Then
      her nose caught us nearly in the middle, and we tilted sideways, and the
      fellows in the right-hand galley unhitched their hooks and ropes, and
      threw things on to our upper deck—arrows, and hot pitch or something
      that stung, and we went up and up and up on the left side, and the right
      side dipped, and I twisted my head round and saw the water stand still as
      it topped the right bulwarks, and then it curled over and crashed down on
      the whole lot of us on the right side, and I felt it hit my back, and I
      woke.”
     

      “One minute, Charlie. When the sea topped the bulwarks, what did it look
      like?” I had my reasons for asking. A man of my acquaintance had once gone
      down with a leaking ship in a still sea, and had seen the water-level
      pause for an instant ere it fell on the deck.
    

      “It looked just like a banjo-string drawn tight, and it seemed to stay
      there for years,” said Charlie.
    

      Exactly! The other man had said: “It looked like a silver wire laid down
      along the bulwarks, and I thought it was never going to break.” He had
      paid everything except the bare life for this little valueless piece of
      knowledge, and I had traveled ten thousand weary miles to meet him and
      take his knowledge at second hand. But Charlie, the bank-clerk, on
      twenty-five shillings a week, he who had never been out of sight of a
      London omnibus, knew it all. It was no consolation to me that once in his
      lives he had been forced to die for his gains. I also must have died
      scores of times, but behind me, because I could have used my knowledge,
      the doors were shut.
    

      “And then?” I said, trying to put away the devil of envy.
    

      “The funny thing was, though, in all the mess I didn't feel a bit
      astonished or frightened. It seemed as if I'd been in a good many fights,
      because I told my next man so when the row began. But that cad of an
      overseer on my deck wouldn't unloose our chains and give us a chance. He
      always said that we'd all Be set free after a battle, but we never were;
      We never were.” Charlie shook his head mournfully.
    

      “What a scoundrel!”
     

      “I should say he was. He never gave us enough to eat, and sometimes we
      were so thirsty that we used to drink salt-water. I can taste that
      salt-water still.''
    

      “Now tell me something about the harbor where the fight was fought.”
     

      “I didn't dream about that. I know it was a harbor, though; because we
      were tied up to a ring on a white wall and all the face of the stone under
      water was covered with wood to prevent our ram getting chipped when the
      tide made us rock.”
     

      “That's curious. Our hero commanded the galley? Didn't he?”
     

      “Didn't he just! He stood by the bows and shouted like a good 'un. He was
      the man who killed the overseer.”
     

      “But you were all drowned together, Charlie, weren't you?”
     

      “I can't make that fit quite,” he said with a puzzled look. “The galley
      must have gone down with all hands and yet I fancy that the hero went on
      living afterward. Perhaps he climbed into the attacking ship. I wouldn't
      see that, of course. I was dead, you know.”
     

      He shivered slightly and protested that he could remember no more.
    

      I did not press him further, but to satisfy myself that he lay in
      ignorance of the workings of his own mind, deliberately introduced him to
      Mortimer Collins's “Transmigration,” and gave him a sketch of the plot
      before he opened the pages.
    

      “What rot it all is!” he said, frankly, at the end of an hour. “I don't
      understand his nonsense about the Red Planet Mars and the King, and the
      rest of it. Chuck me the Longfellow again.”
     

      I handed him the book and wrote out as much as I could remember of his
      description of the sea-fight, appealing to him from time to time for
      confirmation of fact or detail. He would answer without raising his eyes
      from the book, as assuredly as though all his knowledge lay before flint
      on the printed page. I spoke under the normal key of my voice that the
      current might not be broken, and I know that he was not aware of what he
      was saying, for his thoughts were out on the sea with Longfellow.
    

      “Charlie,” I asked, “when the rowers on the galleys mutinied how did they
      kill their overseers?”
     

      “Tore up the benches and brained 'em. That happened when a heavy sea was
      running. An overseer on the lower deck slipped from the centre plank and
      fell among the rowers. They choked him to death against the side of the
      ship with their chained hands quite quietly, and it was too dark for the
      other overseer to see what had happened. When he asked, he was pulled down
      too and choked, and the lower deck fought their way up deck by deck, with
      the pieces of the broken benches banging behind 'em. How they howled!”
     

      “And what happened after that?”
     

      “I don't know. The hero went away—red hair and red beard and all.
      That was after he had captured our galley, I think.”
     

      The sound of my voice irritated him, and he motioned slightly with his
      left hand as a man does when interruption jars.
    

      “You never told me he was redheaded before, or that he captured your
      galley,” I said, after a discreet interval.
    

      Charlie did not raise his eyes.
    

      “He was as red as a red bear,” said he, abstractedly. “He came from the
      north; they said so in the galley when he looked for rowers—not
      slaves, but free men. Afterward—years and years afterward—news
      came from another ship, or else he came back”—His lips moved in
      silence. He was rapturously retasting some poem before him.
    

      “Where had he been, then?” I was almost whispering that the sentence might
      come gentle to whichever section of Charlie's brain was working on my
      behalf.
    

      “To the Beaches—the Long and Wonderful Beaches!” was the reply,
      after a minute of silence.
    

      “To Furdurstrandi?” I asked, tingling from head to foot.
    

      “Yes, to Furdurstrandi,” he pronounced the word in a new fashion “And I
      too saw”—The voice failed.
    

      “Do you know what you have said?” I shouted, incautiously.
    

      He lifted his eyes, fully roused now. “No!” he snapped. “I wish you'd let
      a chap go on reading. Hark to this:
    

      “'But Othere, the old sea captain, He neither paused nor stirred Till the
      king listened, and then
    

   Once more took up his pen
   And wrote down every word.

   “'And to the King of the Saxons
   In witness of the truth,
   Raising his noble head,
   He stretched his brown hand and said,
   “Behold this walrus tooth.”
 

      “By Jove, what chaps those must have been, to go sailing all over the shop
      never knowing where they'd fetch the land! Hah!”
     

      “Charlie,” I pleaded, “if you'll only be sensible for a minute or two I'll
      make our hero in our tale every inch as good as Othere.”
     

      “Umph! Longfellow wrote that poem. I don't care about writing things any
      more. I want to read.” He was thoroughly out of tune now, and raging over
      my own ill-luck, I left him.
    

      Conceive yourself at the door of the world's treasure-house guarded by a
      child—an idle irresponsible child playing knuckle-bones—on
      whose favor depends the gift of the key, and you will imagine one-half my
      torment. Till that evening Charlie had spoken nothing that might not lie
      within the experiences of a Greek galley-slave. But now, or there was no
      virtue in books, he had talked of some desperate adventure of the Vikings,
      of Thorfin Karlsefne's sailing to Wineland, which is America, in the ninth
      or tenth century. The battle in the harbor he had seen; and his own death
      he had described. But this was a much more startling plunge into the past.
      Was it possible that he had skipped half a dozen lives and was then dimly
      remembering some episode of a thousand years later? It was a maddening
      jumble, and the worst of it was that Charlie Mears in his normal condition
      was the last person in the world to clear it up. I could only wait and
      watch, but I went to bed that night full of the wildest imaginings. There
      was nothing that was not possible if Charlie's detestable memory only held
      good.
    

      I might rewrite the Saga of Thorfin Karlsefne as it had never been written
      before, might tell the story of the first discovery of America, myself the
      discoverer. But I was entirely at Charlie's mercy, and so long as there
      was a three-and-six-penny Bohn volume within his reach Charlie would not
      tell. I dared not curse him openly; I hardly dared jog his memory, for I
      was dealing with the experiences of a thousand years ago, told through the
      mouth of a boy of today; and a boy of today is affected by every change of
      tone and gust of opinion, so that he lies even when he desires to speak
      the truth.
    

      I saw no more of him for nearly a week. When next I met him it was in
      Gracechurch Street with a billbook chained to his waist.
    

      Business took him over London Bridge and I accompanied him. He was very
      full of the importance of that book and magnified it.
    

      As we passed over the Thames we paused to look at a steamer unloading
      great slabs of white and brown marble. A barge drifted under the steamer's
      stern and a lonely cow in that barge bellowed.
    

      Charlie's face changed from the face of the bank-clerk to that of an
      unknown and—though he would not have believed this—a much
      shrewder man. He flung out his arm across the parapet of the bridge, and
      laughing very loudly, said: “When they heard our bulls bellow the
      Skroelings ran away!”
     

      I waited only for an instant, but the barge and the cow had disappeared
      under the bows of the steamer before I answered.
    

      “Charlie, what do you suppose are Skroelings?”
     

      “Never heard of 'em before. They sound like a new kind of seagull. What a
      chap you are for asking questions!” he replied. “I have to go to the
      cashier of the Omnibus Company yonder. Will you wait for me and we can
      lunch somewhere together? I've a notion for a poem.”
     

      “No, thanks. I'm off. You're sure you know nothing about Skroelings?”
     

      “Not unless he's been entered for the Liverpool Handicap.” He nodded and
      disappeared in the crowd.
    

      Now it is written in the Saga of Eric the Red or that of Thorfin
      Karlsefne, that nine hundred years ago when Karlsefne's galleys came to
      Leif's booths, which Leif had erected in the unknown land called Markland,
      which may or may not have been Rhode Island, the Skroelings—and the
      Lord He knows who these may or may not have been—came to trade with
      the Vikings, and ran away because they were frightened at the bellowing of
      the cattle which Thorfin had brought with him in the ships. But what in
      the world could a Greek slave know of that affair? I wandered up and down
      among the streets trying to unravel the mystery, and the more I considered
      it, the more baffling it grew. One thing only seemed certain and that
      certainty took away my breath for the moment. If I came to full knowledge
      of anything at all, it would not be one life of the soul in Charlie
      Mears's body, but half a dozen—half a dozen several and separate
      existences spent on blue water in the morning of the world!
    

      Then I walked round the situation.
    

      Obviously if I used my knowledge I should stand alone and unapproachable
      until all men were as wise as myself. That would be something, but manlike
      I was ungrateful. It seemed bitterly unfair that Charlie's memory should
      fail me when I needed it most.
    

      Great Powers above—I looked up at them through the fog smoke—did
      the Lords of Life and Death know what this meant to me? Nothing less than
      eternal fame of the best kind; that comes from One, and is shared by one
      alone. I would be content—remembering Clive, I stood astounded at my
      own moderation,—with the mere right to tell one story, to work out
      one little contribution to the light literature of the day. If Charlie
      were permitted full recollection for one hour—for sixty short
      minutes—of existences that had extended over a thousand years—I
      would forego all profit and honor from all that I should make of his
      speech. I would take no share in the commotion that would follow
      throughout the particular corner of the earth that calls itself “the
      world.” The thing should be put forth anonymously. Nay, I would make other
      men believe that they had written it. They would hire bull-hided
      self-advertising Englishmen to bellow it abroad. Preachers would found a
      fresh conduct of life upon it, swearing that it was new and that they had
      lifted the fear of death from all mankind. Every Orientalist in Europe
      would patronize it discursively with Sanskrit and Pali texts. Terrible
      women would invent unclean variants of the men's belief for the elevation
      of their sisters. Churches and religions would war over it. Between the
      hailing and re-starting of an omnibus I foresaw the scuffles that would
      arise among half a dozen denominations all professing “the doctrine of the
      True Metempsychosis as applied to the world and the New Era”; and saw,
      too, the respectable English newspapers shying, like frightened kine, over
      the beautiful simplicity of the tale. The mind leaped forward a hundred—two
      hundred—a thousand years. I saw with sorrow that men would mutilate
      and garble the story; that rival creeds would turn it upside down till, at
      last, the western world which clings to the dread of death more closely
      than the hope of life, would set it aside as an interesting superstition
      and stampede after some faith so long forgotten that it seemed altogether
      new. Upon this I changed the terms of the bargain that I would make with
      the Lords of Life and Death. Only let me know, let me write, the story
      with sure knowledge that I wrote the truth, and I would burn the
      manuscript as a solemn sacrifice. Five minutes after the last line was
      written I would destroy it all. But I must be allowed to write it with
      absolute certainty.
    

      There was no answer. The flaming colors of an Aquarium poster caught my
      eye and I wondered whether it would be wise or prudent to lure Charlie
      into the hands of the professional mesmerist, and whether, if he were
      under his power, he would speak of his past lives. If he did, and if
      people believed him—but Charlie would be frightened and flustered,
      or made conceited by the interviews. In either case he would begin to lie,
      through fear or vanity. He was safest in my own hands.
    

      “They are very funny fools, your English,” said a voice at my elbow, and
      turning round I recognized a casual acquaintance, a young Bengali law
      student, called Grish Chunder, whose father had sent him to England to
      become civilized. The old man was a retired native official, and on an
      income of five pounds a month contrived to allow his son two hundred
      pounds a year, and the run of his teeth in a city where he could pretend
      to be the cadet of a royal house, and tell stories of the brutal Indian
      bureaucrats who ground the faces of the poor.
    

      Grish Chunder was a young, fat, full-bodied Bengali dressed with
      scrupulous care in frock coat, tall hat, light trousers and tan gloves.
      But I had known him in the days when the brutal Indian Government paid for
      his university education, and he contributed cheap sedition to Sachi
      Durpan, and intrigued with the wives of his schoolmates.
    

      “That is very funny and very foolish,” he said, nodding at the poster. “I
      am going down to the Northbrook Club. Will you come too?”
     

      I walked with him for some time. “You are not well,” he said. “What is
      there in your mind? You do not talk.”
     

      “Grish Chunder, you've been too well educated to believe in a God, haven't
      you?”
     

      “Oah, yes, here! But when I go home I must conciliate popular
      superstition, and make ceremonies of purification, and my women will
      anoint idols.”
     

      “And bang up tulsi and feast the purohit, and take you back into caste
      again and make a good khuttri of you again, you advanced social
      Free-thinker. And you'll eat desi food, and like it all, from the smell in
      the courtyard to the mustard oil over you.”
     

      “I shall very much like it,” said Grish Chunder, unguardedly. “Once a
      Hindu—always a Hindu. But I like to know what the English think they
      know.”
     

      “I'll tell you something that one Englishman knows. It's an old tale to
      you.”
     

      I began to tell the story of Charlie in English, but Grish Chunder put a
      question in the vernacular, and the history went forward naturally in the
      tongue best suited for its telling. After all it could never have been
      told in English. Grish Chunder heard me, nodding from time to time, and
      then came up to my rooms where I finished the tale.
    

      “Beshak,” he said, philosophically. “Lekin darwaza band hai. (Without
      doubt, but the door is shut.) I have heard of this remembering of previous
      existences among my people. It is of course an old tale with us, but, to
      happen to an Englishman—a cow-fed Malechk—an outcast. By Jove,
      that is most peculiar!”
     

      “Outcast yourself, Grish Chunder! You eat cow-beef every day. Let's think
      the thing over. The boy remembers his incarnations.”
     

      “Does he know that?” said Grish Chunder, quietly, swinging his legs as he
      sat on my table. He was speaking in English now.
    

      “He does not know anything. Would I speak to you if he did? Go on!”
     

      “There is no going on at all. If you tell that to your friends they will
      say you are mad and put it in the papers. Suppose, now, you prosecute for
      libel.”
     

      “Let's leave that out of the question entirely. Is there any chance of his
      being made to speak?”
     

      “There is a chance. Oah, yess! But if he spoke it would mean that all this
      world would end now—instanto—fall down on your head. These
      things are not allowed, you know. As I said, the door is shut.”
     

      “Not a ghost of a chance?”
     

      “How can there be? You are a Christian, and it is forbidden to eat, in
      your books, of the Tree of Life, or else you would never die. How shall
      you all fear death if you all know what your friend does not know that he
      knows? I am afraid to be kicked, but I am not afraid to die, because I
      know what I know. You are not afraid to be kicked, but you are afraid to
      die. If you were not, by God! you English would be all over the shop in an
      hour, upsetting the balances of power, and making commotions. It would not
      be good. But no fear. He will remember a little and a little less, and he
      will call it dreams. Then he will forget altogether. When I passed my
      First Arts Examination in Calcutta that was all in the cram-book on
      Wordsworth. Trailing clouds of glory, you know.”
     

      “This seems to be an exception to the rule.”
     

      “There are no exceptions to rules. Some are not so hard-looking as others,
      but they are all the same when you touch. If this friend of yours said
      so-and-so and so-and-so, indicating that he remembered all his lost lives,
      or one piece of a lost life, he would not be in the bank another hour. He
      would be what you called sack because he was mad, and they would send him
      to an asylum for lunatics. You can see that, my friend.”
     

      “Of course I can, but I wasn't thinking of him. His name need never appear
      in the story.”
     

      “Ah! I see. That story will never be written. You can try.”
     

      “I am going to.”
     

      “For your own credit and for the sake of money, of course?”
     

      “No. For the sake of writing the story. On my honor that will be all.”
     

      “Even then there is no chance. You cannot play with the Gods. It is a very
      pretty story now. As they say, Let it go on that—I mean at that. Be
      quick; he will not last long.”
     

      “How do you mean?”
     

      “What I say. He has never, so far, thought about a woman.”
     

      “Hasn't he though!” I remembered some of Charlie's confidences.
    

      “I mean no woman has thought about him. When that comes; bushogya—all
      up' I know. There are millions of women here. Housemaids, for instance.”
     

      I winced at the thought of my story being ruined by a housemaid.
    

      And yet nothing was more probable.
    

      Grish Chunder grinned.
    

      “Yes—also pretty girls—cousins of his house, and perhaps not
      of his house. One kiss that he gives back again and remembers will cure
      all this nonsense or else”—
    

      “Or else what? Remember he does not know that he knows.”
     

      “I know that. Or else, if nothing happens he will become immersed in the
      trade and the financial speculations like the rest. It must be so. You can
      see that it must be so. But the woman will come first, I think.”
     

      There was a rap at the door, and Charlie charged in impetuously. He had
      been released from office, and by the look in his eyes I could see that he
      had come over for a long talk; most probably with poems in his pockets.
      Charlie's poems were very wearying, but sometimes they led him to talk
      about the galley.
    

      Grish Chunder looked at him keenly for a minute.
    

      “I beg your pardon,” Charlie said, uneasily; “I didn't know you had any
      one with you.”
     

      “I am going,” said Grish Chunder.
    

      He drew me into the lobby as he departed.
    

      “That is your man,” he said, quickly. “I tell you he will never speak all
      you wish. That is rot—bosh. But he would be most good to make to see
      things. Suppose now we pretend that it was only play”—I had never
      seen Grish Chunder so excited—“and pour the ink-pool into his hand.
      Eh, what do you think? I tell you that he could see anything that a man
      could see. Let me get the ink and the camphor. He is a seer and he will
      tell us very many things.”
     

      “He may be all you say, but I'm not going to trust him to your Gods and
      devils.”
     

      “It will not hurt him. He will only feel a little stupid and dull when he
      wakes up. You have seen boys look into the ink-pool before.”
     

      “That is the reason why I am not going to see it any more. You'd better
      go, Grish Chunder.”
     

      He went, declaring far down the staircase that it was throwing away my
      only chance of looking into the future.
    

      This left me unmoved, for I was concerned for the past, and no peering of
      hypnotized boys into mirrors and ink-pools would help me do that. But I
      recognized Grish Chunder's point of view and sympathized with it.
    

      “What a big black brute that was!” said Charlie, when I returned to him.
      “Well, look here, I've just done a poem; dil it instead of playing
      dominoes after lunch. May I read it?”
     

      “Let me read it to myself.”
     

      “Then you miss the proper expression. Besides, you always make my things
      sound as if the rhymes were all wrong.”
     

      “Read it aloud, then. You're like the rest of 'em.”
     

      Charlie mouthed me his poem, and it was not much worse than the average of
      his verses. He had been reading his book faithfully, but he was not
      pleased when I told him that I preferred my Longfellow undiluted with
      Charlie.
    

      Then we began to go through the MS. line by line; Charlie parrying every
      objection and correction with: “Yes, that may be better, but you don't
      catch what I'm driving at.”
     

      Charlie was, in one way at least, very like one kind of poet.
    

      There was a pencil scrawl at the back of the paper and “What's that?” I
      said.
    

      “Oh that's not poetry 't all. It's some rot I wrote last night before I
      went to bed and it was too much bother to hunt for rhymes; so I made it a
      sort of a blank verse instead.”
     

      Here is Charlie's “blank verse”:
    

      “We pulled for you when the wind was against us and the sails were low.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “We ate bread and onions when you took towns or ran aboard quickly when
      you were beaten back by the foe,
    

      “The captains walked up and down the deck in fair weather singing songs,
      but we were below,
    

      “We fainted with our chins on the oars and you did not see that we were
      idle for we still swung to and fro.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “The salt made the oar handles like sharkskin; our knees were cut to the
      bone with salt cracks; our hair was stuck to our foreheads; and our lips
      were cut to our gums and you whipped us because we could not row.
    

      “Will you never let us go?
    

      “But in a little time we shall run out of the portholes as the water runs
      along the oarblade, and though you tell the others to row after us you
      will never catch us till you catch the oar-thresh and tie up the winds in
      the belly of the sail. Aho! “Will you never let us go?”
     

      “H'm. What's oar-thresh, Charlie?”
     

      “The water washed up by the oars. That's the sort of song they might sing
      in the galley, y'know. Aren't you ever going to finish that story and give
      me some of the profits?”
     

      “It depends on yourself. If you had only told me more about your hero in
      the first instance it might have been finished by now. You're so hazy in
      your notions.”
     

      “I only want to give you the general notion of it—the knocking about
      from place to place and the fighting and all that. Can't you fill in the
      rest yourself? Make the hero save a girl on a pirate-galley and marry her
      or do something.”
     

      “You're a really helpful collaborator. I suppose the hero went through
      some few adventures before he married.”
     

      “Well then, make him a very artful card—a low sort of man—a
      sort of political man who went about making treaties and breaking them—a
      black-haired chap who hid behind the mast when the fighting began.”
     

      “But you said the other day that he was red-haired.”
     

      “I couldn't have. Make him black-haired of course. You've no imagination.”
     

      Seeing that I had just discovered the entire principles upon which the
      half-memory falsely called imagination is based, I felt entitled to laugh,
      but forbore, for the sake of the tale.
    

      “You're right. You're the man with imagination. A black-haired chap in a
      decked ship,” I said.
    

      “No, an open ship—like a big boat.”
     

      This was maddening.
    

      “Your ship has been built and designed, closed and decked in; you said so
      yourself,” I protested.
    

      “No, no, not that ship. That was open, or half decked because—By
      Jove you're right. You made me think of the hero as a red-haired chap. Of
      course if he were red, the ship would be an open one with painted sails.”
     

      Surely, I thought he would remember now that he had served in two galleys
      at least—in a three-decked Greek one under the black-haired
      “political man,” and again in a Viking's open sea-serpent under the man
      “red as a red bear” who went to Markland. The devil prompted me to speak.
    

      “Why, 'of course,' Charlie?” said I. “I don't know. Are you making fun of
      me?”
     

      The current was broken for the time being. I took up a notebook and
      pretended to make many entries in it.
    

      “It's a pleasure to work with an imaginative chap like yourself,” I said
      after a pause. “The way that you've brought out the character of the hero
      is simply wonderful.”
     

      “Do you think so?” he answered, with a pleased flush. “I often tell myself
      that there's more in me than my—than people think.”
     

      “There's an enormous amount in you.”
     

      “Then, won't you let me send an essay on The Ways of Bank Clerks to
      Tit-Bits, and get the guinea prize?”
     

      “That wasn't exactly what I meant, old fellow: perhaps it would be better
      to wait a little and go ahead with the galley-story.”
     

      “Ah, but I sha'n't get the credit of that. Tit-Bits would publish my name
      and address if I win. What are you grinning at? They would.”
     

      “I know it. Suppose you go for a walk. I want to look through my notes
      about our story.”
     

      Now this reprehensible youth who left me, a little hurt and put back,
      might for aught he or I knew have been one of the crew of the Argo—had
      been certainly slave or comrade to Thorfin Karlsefne. Therefore he was
      deeply interested in guinea competitions. Remembering what Grish Chunder
      had said I laughed aloud. The Lords of Life and Death would never allow
      Charlie Mears to speak with full knowledge of his pasts, and I must even
      piece out what he had told me with my own poor inventions while Charlie
      wrote of the ways of bank-clerks.
    

      I got together and placed on one file all my notes; and the net result was
      not cheering. I read them a second time. There was nothing that might not
      have been compiled at second-hand from other people's books—except,
      perhaps, the story of the fight in the harbor. The adventures of a Viking
      bad been written many times before; the history of a Greek galley-slave
      was no new thing, and though I wrote both, who could challenge or confirm
      the accuracy of my details? I might as well tell a tale of two thousand
      years hence. The Lords of Life and Death were as cunning as Grish Chunder
      had hinted. They would allow nothing to escape that might trouble or make
      easy the minds of men. Though I was convinced of this, yet I could not
      leave the tale alone. Exaltation followed reaction, not once, but twenty
      times in the next few weeks. My moods varied with the March sunlight and
      flying clouds. By night or in the beauty of a spring morning I perceived
      that I could write that tale and shift continents thereby. In the wet,
      windy afternoons, I saw that the tale might indeed be written, but would
      be nothing more than a faked, false-varnished, sham-rusted piece of
      Wardour Street work at the end. Then I blessed Charlie in many ways—though
      it was no fault of his. He seemed to be busy with prize competitions, and
      I saw less and less of him as the weeks went by and the earth cracked and
      grew ripe to spring, and the buds swelled in their sheaths. He did not
      care to read or talk of what he had read, and there was a new ring of
      self-assertion in his voice. I hardly cared to remind him of the galley
      when we met; but Charlie alluded to it on every occasion, always as a
      story from which money was to be made.
    

      “I think I deserve twenty-five per cent., don't I, at least,” he said,
      with beautiful frankness. “I supplied all the ideas, didn't I?”
     

      This greediness for silver was a new side in his nature. I assumed that it
      had been developed in the City, where Charlie was picking up the curious
      nasal drawl of the underbred City man.
    

      “When the thing's done we'll talk about it. I can't make anything of it at
      present. Red-haired or black-haired hero are equally difficult.”
     

      He was sitting by the fire staring at the red coals. “I can't understand
      what you find so difficult. It's all as clean as mud to me,” he replied. A
      jet of gas puffed out between the bars, took light and whistled softly.
      “Suppose we take the red-haired hero's adventures first, from the time
      that he came south to my galley and captured it and sailed to the
      Beaches.”
     

      I knew better now than to interrupt Charlie. I was out of reach of pen and
      paper, and dared not move to get them lest I should break the current. The
      gas-jet puffed and whinnied, Charlie's voice dropped almost to a whisper,
      and he told a tale of the sailing of an open galley to Furdurstrandi, of
      sunsets on the open sea, seen under the curve of the one sail evening
      after evening when the galley's beak was notched into the centre of the
      sinking disc, and “we sailed by that for we had no other guide,” quoth
      Charlie. He spoke of a landing on an island and explorations in its woods,
      where the crew killed three men whom they found asleep under the pines.
      Their ghosts, Charlie said, followed the galley, swimming and choking in
      the water, and the crew cast lots and threw one of their number overboard
      as a sacrifice to the strange gods whom they had offended. Then they ate
      sea-weed when their provisions failed, and their legs swelled, and their
      leader, the red-haired man, killed two rowers who mutinied, and after a
      year spent among the woods they set sail for their own country, and a wind
      that never failed carried them back so safely that they all slept at
      night. This and much more Charlie told. Sometimes the voice fell so low
      that I could not catch the words, though every nerve was on the strain. He
      spoke of their leader, the red-haired man, as a pagan speaks of his God;
      for it was he who cheered them and slew them impartially as he thought
      best for their needs; and it was he who steered them for three days among
      floating ice, each floe crowded with strange beasts that “tried to sail
      with us,” said Charlie, “and we beat them back with the handles of the
      oars.”
     

      The gas-jet went out, a burned coal gave way, and the fire settled down
      with a tiny crash to the bottom of the grate. Charlie ceased speaking, and
      I said no word.
    

      “By Jove!” he said, at last, shaking his head. “I've been staring at the
      fire till I'm dizzy. What was I going to say?”
     

      “Something about the galley.”
     

      “I remember now. It's 25 per cent. of the profits, isn't it?”
     

      “It's anything you like when I've done the tale.”
     

      “I wanted to be sure of that. I must go now. I've, I've an appointment.”
       And he left me.
    

      Had my eyes not been held I might have known that that broken muttering
      over the fire was the swan-song of Charlie Mears. But I thought it the
      prelude to fuller revelation. At last and at last I should cheat the Lords
      of Life and Death!
    

      When next Charlie came to me I received him with rapture. He was nervous
      and embarrassed, but his eyes were very full of light, and his lips a
      little parted.
    

      “I've done a poem,” he said; and then quickly: “it's the best I've ever
      done. Read it.” He thrust it into my hand and retreated to the window.
    

      I groaned inwardly. It would be the work of half an hour to criticise—that
      is to say praise—the poem sufficiently to please Charlie. Then I had
      good reason to groan, for Charlie, discarding his favorite centipede
      metres, had launched into shorter and choppier verse, and verse with a
      motive at the back of it. This is what I read:
    

    “The day is most fair, the cheery wind
    Halloos behind the hill,
    Where bends the wood as seemeth good,

    And the sapling to his will!
    Riot O wind; there is that in my blood
    That would not have thee still!

    “She gave me herself, O Earth, O Sky:
    Grey sea, she is mine alone—I
    Let the sullen boulders hear my cry,
    And rejoice tho' they be but stone!

    'Mine! I have won her O good brown earth,
    Make merry! 'Tis bard on Spring;
    Make merry; my love is doubly worth
    All worship your fields can bring!
    Let the hind that tills you feel my mirth
    At the early harrowing.”
 

      “Yes, it's the early harrowing, past a doubt,” I said, with a dread at my
      heart. Charlie smiled, but did not answer.
    

   “Red cloud of the sunset, tell it abroad; I am victor.
    Greet me O Sun, Dominant master and absolute lord
    Over the soul of one!”
 

      “Well?” said Charlie, looking over my shoulder.
    

      I thought it far from well, and very evil indeed, when he silently laid a
      photograph on the paper—the photograph of a girl with a curly head,
      and a foolish slack mouth.
    

      “Isn't it—isn't it wonderful?” he whispered, pink to the tips of his
      ears, wrapped in the rosy mystery of first love. “I didn't know; I didn't
      think—it came like a thunderclap.”
     

      “Yes. It comes like a thunderclap. Are you very happy, Charlie?”
     

      “My God—she—she loves me!” He sat down repeating the last
      words to himself. I looked at the hairless face, the narrow shoulders
      already bowed by desk-work, and wondered when, where, and bow he had loved
      in his past lives.
    

      “What will your mother say?” I asked, cheerfully.
    

      “I don't care a damn what she says.”
     

      At twenty the things for which one does not care a damn should, properly,
      be many, but one must not include mothers in the list. I told him this
      gently; and he described Her, even as Adam must have described to the
      newly named beasts the glory and tenderness and beauty of Eve.
      Incidentally I learned that She was a tobacconist's assistant with a
      weakness for pretty dress, and had told him four or five times already
      that She had never been kissed by a man before.
    

      Charlie spoke on, and on, and on; while I, separated from him by thousands
      of years, was considering the beginnings of things. Now I understood why
      the Lords of Life and Death shut the doors so carefully behind us. It is
      that we may not remember our first wooings. Were it not so, our world
      would be without inhabitants in a hundred years.
    

      “Now, about that galley-story,” I said, still more cheerfully, in a pause
      in the rush of the speech.
    

      Charlie looked up as though he had been hit. “The galley—what
      galley? Good heavens, don't joke, man! This is serious! You don't know how
      serious it is!”
     

      Grish Chunder was right. Charlie had tasted the love of woman that kills
      remembrance, and the “finest story” in the world would never be written.
    








      VOLUME IV UNDER THE DEODARS