THE MASK
    

      There was a masquerade ball at the Elysee-Montmartre that evening. It was
      the 'Mi-Careme', and the crowds were pouring into the brightly lighted
      passage which leads to the dance ball, like water flowing through the open
      lock of a canal. The loud call of the orchestra, bursting like a storm of
      sound, shook the rafters, swelled through the whole neighborhood and
      awoke, in the streets and in the depths of the houses, an irresistible
      desire to jump, to get warm, to have fun, which slumbers within each human
      animal.
    

      The patrons came from every quarter of Paris; there were people of all
      classes who love noisy pleasures, a little low and tinged with debauch.
      There were clerks and girls—girls of every description, some wearing
      common cotton, some the finest batiste; rich girls, old and covered with
      diamonds, and poor girls of sixteen, full of the desire to revel, to
      belong to men, to spend money. Elegant black evening suits, in search of
      fresh or faded but appetizing novelty, wandering through the excited
      crowds, looking, searching, while the masqueraders seemed moved above all
      by the desire for amusement. Already the far-famed quadrilles had
      attracted around them a curious crowd. The moving hedge which encircled
      the four dancers swayed in and out like a snake, sometimes nearer and
      sometimes farther away, according to the motions of the performers. The
      two women, whose lower limbs seemed to be attached to their bodies by
      rubber springs, were making wonderful and surprising motions with their
      legs. Their partners hopped and skipped about, waving their arms about.
      One could imagine their panting breath beneath their masks.
    

      One of them, who had taken his place in the most famous quadrille, as
      substitute for an absent celebrity, the handsome “Songe-au-Gosse,”
      was trying to keep up with the tireless “Arete-de-Veau” and
      was making strange fancy steps which aroused the joy and sarcasm of the
      audience.
    

      He was thin, dressed like a dandy, with a pretty varnished mask on his
      face. It had a curly blond mustache and a wavy wig. He looked like a wax
      figure from the Musee Grevin, like a strange and fantastic caricature of
      the charming young man of fashion plates, and he danced with visible
      effort, clumsily, with a comical impetuosity. He appeared rusty beside the
      others when he tried to imitate their gambols: he seemed overcome by
      rheumatism, as heavy as a great Dane playing with greyhounds. Mocking
      bravos encouraged him. And he, carried away with enthusiasm, jigged about
      with such frenzy that suddenly, carried away by a wild spurt, he pitched
      head foremost into the living wall formed by the audience, which opened up
      before him to allow him to pass, then closed around the inanimate body of
      the dancer, stretched out on his face.
    

      Some men picked him up and carried him away, calling for a doctor. A
      gentleman stepped forward, young and elegant, in well-fitting evening
      clothes, with large pearl studs. “I am a professor of the Faculty of
      Medicine,” he said in a modest voice. He was allowed to pass, and he
      entered a small room full of little cardboard boxes, where the still
      lifeless dancer had been stretched out on some chairs. The doctor at first
      wished to take off the mask, and he noticed that it was attached in a
      complicated manner, with a perfect network of small metal wires which
      cleverly bound it to his wig and covered the whole head. Even the neck was
      imprisoned in a false skin which continued the chin and was painted the
      color of flesh, being attached to the collar of the shirt.
    

      All this had to be cut with strong scissors. When the physician had slit
      open this surprising arrangement, from the shoulder to the temple, he
      opened this armor and found the face of an old man, worn out, thin and
      wrinkled. The surprise among those who had brought in this seemingly young
      dancer was so great that no one laughed, no one said a word.
    

      All were watching this sad face as he lay on the straw chairs, his eyes
      closed, his face covered with white hair, some long, falling from the
      forehead over the face, others short, growing around the face and the
      chin, and beside this poor head, that pretty little, neat varnished,
      smiling mask.
    

      The man regained consciousness after being inanimate for a long time, but
      he still seemed to be so weak and sick that the physician feared some
      dangerous complication. He asked: “Where do you live?”
    

      The old dancer seemed to be making an effort to remember, and then he
      mentioned the name of the street, which no one knew. He was asked for more
      definite information about the neighborhood. He answered with a great
      slowness, indecision and difficulty, which revealed his upset state of
      mind. The physician continued:
    

      “I will take you home myself.”
    

      Curiosity had overcome him to find out who this strange dancer, this
      phenomenal jumper might be. Soon the two rolled away in a cab to the other
      side of Montmartre.
    

      They stopped before a high building of poor appearance. They went up a
      winding staircase. The doctor held to the banister, which was so grimy
      that the hand stuck to it, and he supported the dizzy old man, whose
      forces were beginning to return. They stopped at the fourth floor.
    

      The door at which they had knocked was opened by an old woman, neat
      looking, with a white nightcap enclosing a thin face with sharp features,
      one of those good, rough faces of a hard-working and faithful woman. She
      cried out:
    

      “For goodness sake! What's the matter?”
    

      He told her the whole affair in a few words. She became reassured and even
      calmed the physician himself by telling him that the same thing had
      happened many times. She said: “He must be put to bed, monsieur,
      that is all. Let him sleep and tomorrow he will be all right.”
    

      The doctor continued: “But he can hardly speak.”
    

      “Oh! that's just a little drink, nothing more; he has eaten no
      dinner, in order to be nimble, and then he took a few absinthes in order
      to work himself up to the proper pitch. You see, drink gives strength to
      his legs, but it stops his thoughts and words. He is too old to dance as
      he does. Really, his lack of common sense is enough to drive one mad!”
    

      The doctor, surprised, insisted:
    

      “But why does he dance like that at his age?”
    

      She shrugged her shoulders and turned red from the anger which was slowly
      rising within her and she cried out:
    

      “Ah! yes, why? So that the people will think him young under his
      mask; so that the women will still take him for a young dandy and whisper
      nasty things into his ears; so that he can rub up against all their dirty
      skins, with their perfumes and powders and cosmetics. Ah! it's a fine
      business! What a life I have had for the last forty years! But we must
      first get him to bed, so that he may have no ill effects. Would you mind
      helping me? When he is like that I can't do anything with him alone.”
    

      The old man was sitting on his bed, with a tipsy look, his long white hair
      falling over his face. His companion looked at him with tender yet
      indignant eyes. She continued:
    

      “Just see the fine head he has for his age, and yet he has to go and
      disguise himself in order to make people think that he is young. It's a
      perfect shame! Really, he has a fine head, monsieur! Wait, I'll show it to
      you before putting him to bed.”
    

      She went to a table on which stood the washbasin a pitcher of water, soap
      and a comb and brush. She took the brush, returned to the bed and pushed
      back the drunkard's tangled hair. In a few seconds she made him look like
      a model fit for a great painter, with his long white locks flowing on his
      neck. Then she stepped back in order to observe him, saying: “There!
      Isn't he fine for his age?”
    

      “Very,” agreed the doctor, who was beginning to be highly
      amused.
    

      She added: “And if you had known him when he was twenty-five! But we
      must get him to bed, otherwise the drink will make him sick. Do you mind
      drawing off that sleeve? Higher-like that-that's right. Now the trousers.
      Wait, I will take his shoes off—that's right. Now, hold him upright
      while I open the bed. There—let us put him in. If you think that he
      is going to disturb himself when it is time for me to get in you are
      mistaken. I have to find a little corner any place I can. That doesn't
      bother him! Bah! You old pleasure seeker!”
    

      As soon as he felt himself stretched out in his sheets the old man closed
      his eyes, opened them closed them again, and over his whole face appeared
      an energetic resolve to sleep. The doctor examined him with an
      ever-increasing interest and asked: “Does he go to all the fancy
      balls and try to be a young man?” “To all of them, monsieur,
      and he comes back to me in the morning in a deplorable condition. You see,
      it's regret that leads him on and that makes him put a pasteboard face
      over his own. Yes, the regret of no longer being what he was and of no
      longer making any conquests!”
    

      He was sleeping now and beginning to snore. She looked at him with a
      pitying expression and continued: “Oh! how many conquests that man
      has made! More than one could believe, monsieur, more than the finest
      gentlemen of the world, than all the tenors and all the generals.”
    

      “Really? What did he do?”
    

      “Oh! it will surprise you at first, as you did not know him in his
      palmy days. When I met him it was also at a ball, for he has always
      frequented them. As soon as I saw him I was caught—caught like a
      fish on a hook. Ah! how pretty he was, monsieur, with his curly raven
      locks and black eyes as large as saucers! Indeed, he was good looking! He
      took me away that evening and I never have left him since, never, not even
      for a day, no matter what he did to me! Oh! he has often made it hard for
      me!”
    

      The doctor asked: “Are you married?”
    

      She answered simply: “Yes, monsieur, otherwise he would have dropped
      me as he did the others. I have been his wife and his servant, everything,
      everything that he wished. How he has made me cry—tears which I did
      not show him; for he would tell all his adventures to me—to me,
      monsieur—without understanding how it hurt me to listen.”
    

      “But what was his business?”
    

      “That's so. I forgot to tell you. He was the foreman at Martel's—a
      foreman such as they never had had—an artist who averaged ten francs
      an hour.”
    

      “Martel?—who is Martel?”
    

      “The hairdresser, monsieur, the great hairdresser of the Opera, who
      had all the actresses for customers. Yes, sir, all the smartest actresses
      had their hair dressed by Ambrose and they would give him tips that made a
      fortune for him. Ah! monsieur, all the women are alike, yes, all of them.
      When a man pleases their fancy they offer themselves to him. It is so easy—and
      it hurt me so to hear about it. For he would tell me everything—he
      simply could not hold his tongue—it was impossible. Those things
      please the men so much! They seem to get even more enjoyment out of
      telling than doing.
    

      “When I would see him coming in the evening, a little pale, with a
      pleased look and a bright eye, would say to myself: 'One more. I am sure
      that he has caught one more.' Then I felt a wild desire to question him
      and then, again, not to know, to stop his talking if he should begin. And
      we would look at each other.
    

      “I knew that he would not keep still, that he would come to the
      point. I could feel that from his manner, which seemed to laugh and say:
      'I had a fine adventure to-day, Madeleine.' I would pretend to notice
      nothing, to guess nothing; I would set the table, bring on the soup and
      sit down opposite him.
    

      “At those times, monsieur, it was as if my friendship for him had
      been crushed in my body as with a stone. It hurt. But he did not
      understand; he did not know; he felt a need to tell all those things to
      some one, to boast, to show how much he was loved, and I was the only one
      he had to whom he could talk-the only one. And I would have to listen and
      drink it in, like poison.
    

      “He would begin to take his soup and then he would say: 'One more,
      Madeleine.'
    

      “And I would think: 'Here it comes! Goodness! what a man! Why did I
      ever meet him?'
    

      “Then he would begin: 'One more! And a beauty, too.' And it would be
      some little one from the Vaudeville or else from the Varietes, and some of
      the big ones, too, some of the most famous. He would tell me their names,
      how their apartments were furnished, everything, everything, monsieur.
      Heartbreaking details. And he would go over them and tell his story over
      again from beginning to end, so pleased with himself that I would pretend
      to laugh so that he would not get angry with me.
    

      “Everything may not have been true! He liked to glorify himself and
      was quite capable of inventing such things! They may perhaps also have
      been true! On those evenings he would pretend to be tired and wish to go
      to bed after supper. We would take supper at eleven, monsieur, for he
      could never get back from work earlier.
    

      “When he had finished telling about his adventure he would walk
      round the room and smoke cigarettes, and he was so handsome, with his
      mustache and curly hair, that I would think: 'It's true, just the same,
      what he is telling. Since I myself am crazy about that man, why should not
      others be the same?' Then I would feel like crying, shrieking, running
      away and jumping out of the window while I was clearing the table and he
      was smoking. He would yawn in order to show how tired he was, and he would
      say two or three times before going to bed: 'Ah! how well I shall sleep
      this evening!'
    

      “I bear him no ill will, because he did not know how he was hurting
      me. No, he could not know! He loved to boast about the women just as a
      peacock loves to show his feathers. He got to the point where he thought
      that all of them looked at him and desired him.
    

      “It was hard when he grew old. Oh, monsieur, when I saw his first
      white hair I felt a terrible shock and then a great joy—a wicked joy—but
      so great, so great! I said to myself: 'It's the end-it's the end.' It
      seemed as if I were about to be released from prison. At last I could have
      him to myself, all to myself, when the others would no longer want him.
    

      “It was one morning in bed. He was still sleeping and I leaned over
      him to wake him up with a kiss, when I noticed in his curls, over his
      temple, a little thread which shone like silver. What a surprise! I should
      not have thought it possible! At first I thought of tearing it out so that
      he would not see it, but as I looked carefully I noticed another farther
      up. White hair! He was going to have white hair! My heart began to thump
      and perspiration stood out all over me, but away down at the bottom I was
      happy.
    

      “It was mean to feel thus, but I did my housework with a light heart
      that morning, without waking him up, and, as soon as he opened his eyes of
      his own accord, I said to him: 'Do you know what I discovered while you
      were asleep?'
    

      “'No.'
    

      “'I found white hairs.'
    

      “He started up as if I had tickled him and said angrily: 'It's not
      true!'
    

      “'Yes, it is. There are four of them over your left temple.'
    

      “He jumped out of bed and ran over to the mirror. He could not find
      them. Then I showed him the first one, the lowest, the little curly one,
      and I said: 'It's no wonder, after the life that you have been leading. In
      two years all will be over for you.'
    

      “Well, monsieur, I had spoken true; two years later one could not
      recognize him. How quickly a man changes! He was still handsome, but he
      had lost his freshness, and the women no longer ran after him. Ah! what a
      life I led at that time! How he treated me! Nothing suited him. He left
      his trade to go into the hat business, in which he ate up all his money.
      Then he unsuccessfully tried to be an actor, and finally he began to
      frequent public balls. Fortunately, he had had common sense enough to save
      a little something on which we now live. It is sufficient, but it is not
      enormous. And to think that at one time he had almost a fortune.
    

      “Now you see what he does. This habit holds him like a frenzy. He
      has to be young; he has to dance with women who smell of perfume and
      cosmetics. You poor old darling!”
    

      She was looking at her old snoring husband fondly, ready to cry. Then,
      gently tiptoeing up to him, she kissed his hair. The physician had risen
      and was getting ready to leave, finding nothing to say to this strange
      couple. Just as he was leaving she asked:
    

      “Would you mind giving me your address? If he should grow worse, I
      could go and get you.”