THE CALIFORNIAN'S TALE

 Thirty-five years ago I was out prospecting on the Stanislaus, tramping
      all day long with pick and pan and horn, and washing a hatful of dirt here
      and there, always expecting to make a rich strike, and never doing it. It
      was a lovely region, woodsy, balmy, delicious, and had once been populous,
      long years before, but now the people had vanished and the charming
      paradise was a solitude. They went away when the surface diggings gave
      out. In one place, where a busy little city with banks and newspapers and
      fire companies and a mayor and aldermen had been, was nothing but a wide
      expanse of emerald turf, with not even the faintest sign that human life
      had ever been present there. This was down toward Tuttletown. In the
      country neighborhood thereabouts, along the dusty roads, one found at
      intervals the prettiest little cottage homes, snug and cozy, and so
      cobwebbed with vines snowed thick with roses that the doors and windows
      were wholly hidden from sight—sign that these were deserted homes,
      forsaken years ago by defeated and disappointed families who could neither
      sell them nor give them away. Now and then, half an hour apart, one came
      across solitary log cabins of the earliest mining days, built by the first
      gold-miners, the predecessors of the cottage-builders. In some few cases
      these cabins were still occupied; and when this was so, you could depend
      upon it that the occupant was the very pioneer who had built the cabin;
      and you could depend on another thing, too—that he was there because
      he had once had his opportunity to go home to the States rich, and had not
      done it; had rather lost his wealth, and had then in his humiliation
      resolved to sever all communication with his home relatives and friends,
      and be to them thenceforth as one dead. Round about California in that day
      were scattered a host of these living dead men—pride-smitten poor
      fellows, grizzled and old at forty, whose secret thoughts were made all of
      regrets and longings—regrets for their wasted lives, and longings to
      be out of the struggle and done with it all.

 It was a lonesome land! Not a sound in all those peaceful expanses of
      grass and woods but the drowsy hum of insects; no glimpse of man or beast;
      nothing to keep up your spirits and make you glad to be alive. And so, at
      last, in the early part of the afternoon, when I caught sight of a human
      creature, I felt a most grateful uplift. This person was a man about
      forty-five years old, and he was standing at the gate of one of those cozy
      little rose-clad cottages of the sort already referred to. However, this
      one hadn't a deserted look; it had the look of being lived in and petted
      and cared for and looked after; and so had its front yard, which was a
      garden of flowers, abundant, gay, and flourishing. I was invited in, of
      course, and required to make myself at home—it was the custom of the
      country.

 It was delightful to be in such a place, after long weeks of daily and
      nightly familiarity with miners' cabins—with all which this implies
      of dirt floor, never-made beds, tin plates and cups, bacon and beans and
      black coffee, and nothing of ornament but war pictures from the Eastern
      illustrated papers tacked to the log walls. That was all hard, cheerless,
      materialistic desolation, but here was a nest which had aspects to rest
      the tired eye and refresh that something in one's nature which, after long
      fasting, recognizes, when confronted by the belongings of art, howsoever
      cheap and modest they may be, that it has unconsciously been famishing and
      now has found nourishment. I could not have believed that a rag carpet
      could feast me so, and so content me; or that there could be such solace
      to the soul in wall-paper and framed lithographs, and bright-colored
      tidies and lamp-mats, and Windsor chairs, and varnished what-nots, with
      sea-shells and books and china vases on them, and the score of little
      unclassifiable tricks and touches that a woman's hand distributes about a
      home, which one sees without knowing he sees them, yet would miss in a
      moment if they were taken away. The delight that was in my heart showed in
      my face, and the man saw it and was pleased; saw it so plainly that he
      answered it as if it had been spoken.

 “All her work,” he said, caressingly; “she did it all herself—every
      bit,” and he took the room in with a glance which was full of affectionate
      worship. One of those soft Japanese fabrics with which women drape with
      careful negligence the upper part of a picture-frame was out of
      adjustment. He noticed it, and rearranged it with cautious pains, stepping
      back several times to gauge the effect before he got it to suit him. Then
      he gave it a light finishing pat or two with his hand, and said: “She
      always does that. You can't tell just what it lacks, but it does lack
      something until you've done that—you can see it yourself after it's
      done, but that is all you know; you can't find out the law of it. It's
      like the finishing pats a mother gives the child's hair after she's got it
      combed and brushed, I reckon. I've seen her fix all these things so much
      that I can do them all just her way, though I don't know the law of any of
      them. But she knows the law. She knows the why and the how both; but I
      don't know the why; I only know the how.”

 He took me into a bedroom so that I might wash my hands; such a bedroom as
      I had not seen for years: white counterpane, white pillows, carpeted
      floor, papered walls, pictures, dressing-table, with mirror and
      pin-cushion and dainty toilet things; and in the corner a wash-stand, with
      real china-ware bowl and pitcher, and with soap in a china dish, and on a
      rack more than a dozen towels—towels too clean and white for one out
      of practice to use without some vague sense of profanation. So my face
      spoke again, and he answered with gratified words:

 “All her work; she did it all herself—every bit. Nothing here that
      hasn't felt the touch of her hand. Now you would think—But I mustn't
      talk so much.”

 By this time I was wiping my hands and glancing from detail to detail of
      the room's belongings, as one is apt to do when he is in a new place,
      where everything he sees is a comfort to his eye and his spirit; and I
      became conscious, in one of those unaccountable ways, you know, that there
      was something there somewhere that the man wanted me to discover for
      myself. I knew it perfectly, and I knew he was trying to help me by
      furtive indications with his eye, so I tried hard to get on the right
      track, being eager to gratify him. I failed several times, as I could see
      out of the corner of my eye without being told; but at last I knew I must
      be looking straight at the thing—knew it from the pleasure issuing
      in invisible waves from him. He broke into a happy laugh, and rubbed his
      hands together, and cried out:

 “That's it! You've found it. I knew you would. It's her picture.”

 I went to the little black-walnut bracket on the farther wall, and did
      find there what I had not yet noticed—a daguerreotype-case. It
      contained the sweetest girlish face, and the most beautiful, as it seemed
      to me, that I had ever seen. The man drank the admiration from my face,
      and was fully satisfied.

 “Nineteen her last birthday,” he said, as he put the picture back; “and
      that was the day we were married. When you see her—ah, just wait
      till you see her!”

 “Where is she? When will she be in?”

 “Oh, she's away now. She's gone to see her people. They live forty or
      fifty miles from here. She's been gone two weeks today.”

 “When do you expect her back?”

 “This is Wednesday. She'll be back Saturday, in the evening—about
      nine o'clock, likely.”

 I felt a sharp sense of disappointment.

 “I'm sorry, because I'll be gone then,” I said, regretfully.

 “Gone? No—why should you go? Don't go. She'll be disappointed.”

 She would be disappointed—that beautiful creature! If she had said
      the words herself they could hardly have blessed me more. I was feeling a
      deep, strong longing to see her—a longing so supplicating, so
      insistent, that it made me afraid. I said to myself: “I will go straight
      away from this place, for my peace of mind's sake.”

 “You see, she likes to have people come and stop with us—people who
      know things, and can talk—people like you. She delights in it; for
      she knows—oh, she knows nearly everything herself, and can talk, oh,
      like a bird—and the books she reads, why, you would be astonished.
      Don't go; it's only a little while, you know, and she'll be so
      disappointed.”

 I heard the words, but hardly noticed them, I was so deep in my thinkings
      and strugglings. He left me, but I didn't know. Presently he was back,
      with the picture case in his hand, and he held it open before me and said:

 “There, now, tell her to her face you could have stayed to see her, and
      you wouldn't.”

 That second glimpse broke down my good resolution. I would stay and take
      the risk. That night we smoked the tranquil pipe, and talked till late
      about various things, but mainly about her; and certainly I had had no
      such pleasant and restful time for many a day. The Thursday followed and
      slipped comfortably away. Toward twilight a big miner from three miles
      away came—one of the grizzled, stranded pioneers—and gave us
      warm salutation, clothed in grave and sober speech. Then he said:

 “I only just dropped over to ask about the little madam, and when is she
      coming home. Any news from her?”

 “Oh, yes, a letter. Would you like to hear it, Tom?”

 “Well, I should think I would, if you don't mind, Henry!”

 Henry got the letter out of his wallet, and said he would skip some of the
      private phrases, if we were willing; then he went on and read the bulk of
      it—a loving, sedate, and altogether charming and gracious piece of
      handiwork, with a postscript full of affectionate regards and messages to
      Tom, and Joe, and Charley, and other close friends and neighbors.

 As the reader finished, he glanced at Tom, and cried out:

 “Oho, you're at it again! Take your hands away, and let me see your eyes.
      You always do that when I read a letter from her. I will write and tell
      her.”

 “Oh no, you mustn't, Henry. I'm getting old, you know, and any little
      disappointment makes me want to cry. I thought she'd be here herself, and
      now you've got only a letter.”

 “Well, now, what put that in your head? I thought everybody knew she
      wasn't coming till Saturday.”

 “Saturday! Why, come to think, I did know it. I wonder what's the matter
      with me lately? Certainly I knew it. Ain't we all getting ready for her?
      Well, I must be going now. But I'll be on hand when she comes, old man!”

 Late Friday afternoon another gray veteran tramped over from his cabin a
      mile or so away, and said the boys wanted to have a little gaiety and a
      good time Saturday night, if Henry thought she wouldn't be too tired after
      her journey to be kept up.

 “Tired? She tired! Oh, hear the man! Joe, you know she'd sit up six
      weeks to please any one of you!”

 When Joe heard that there was a letter, he asked to have it read, and the
      loving messages in it for him broke the old fellow all up; but he said he
      was such an old wreck that that would happen to him if she only
      just mentioned his name. “Lord, we miss her so!” he said.

 Saturday afternoon I found I was taking out my watch pretty often. Henry
      noticed it, and said, with a startled look:

 “You don't think she ought to be here soon, do you?”

 I felt caught, and a little embarrassed; but I laughed, and said it was a
      habit of mine when I was in a state of expenctancy. But he didn't seem
      quite satisfied; and from that time on he began to show uneasiness. Four
      times he walked me up the road to a point whence we could see a long
      distance; and there he would stand, shading his eyes with his hand, and
      looking. Several times he said:

 “I'm getting worried, I'm getting right down worried. I know she's not due
      till about nine o'clock, and yet something seems to be trying to warn me
      that something's happened. You don't think anything has happened, do you?”

 I began to get pretty thoroughly ashamed of him for his childishness; and
      at last, when he repeated that imploring question still another time, I
      lost my patience for the moment, and spoke pretty brutally to him. It
      seemed to shrivel him up and cow him; and he looked so wounded and so
      humble after that, that I detested myself for having done the cruel and
      unnecessary thing. And so I was glad when Charley, another veteran,
      arrived toward the edge of the evening, and nestled up to Henry to hear
      the letter read, and talked over the preparations for the welcome. Charley
      fetched out one hearty speech after another, and did his best to drive
      away his friend's bodings and apprehensions.

 “Anything happened to her? Henry, that's pure nonsense. There isn't
      anything going to happen to her; just make your mind easy as to that. What
      did the letter say? Said she was well, didn't it? And said she'd be here
      by nine o'clock, didn't it? Did you ever know her to fail of her word?
      Why, you know you never did. Well, then, don't you fret; she'll be here, and that's absolutely certain, and as sure as you are born. Come,
      now, let's get to decorating—not much time left.”

 Pretty soon Tom and Joe arrived, and then all hands set about adorning the
      house with flowers. Toward nine the three miners said that as they had
      brought their instruments they might as well tune up, for the boys and
      girls would soon be arriving now, and hungry for a good, old-fashioned
      break-down. A fiddle, a banjo, and a clarinet—these were the
      instruments. The trio took their places side by side, and began to play
      some rattling dance-music, and beat time with their big boots.

 It was getting very close to nine. Henry was standing in the door with his
      eyes directed up the road, his body swaying to the torture of his mental
      distress. He had been made to drink his wife's health and safety several
      times, and now Tom shouted:

 “All hands stand by! One more drink, and she's here!”

 Joe brought the glasses on a waiter, and served the party. I reached for
      one of the two remaining glasses, but Joe growled under his breath:

 “Drop that! Take the other.”

 Which I did. Henry was served last. He had hardly swallowed his drink when
      the clock began to strike. He listened till it finished, his face growing
      pale and paler; then he said:

 “Boys, I'm sick with fear. Help me—I want to lie down!”

 They helped him to the sofa. He began to nestle and drowse, but presently
      spoke like one talking in his sleep, and said: “Did I hear horses' feet?
      Have they come?”

 One of the veterans answered, close to his ear: “It was Jimmy Parish come
      to say the party got delayed, but they're right up the road a piece, and
      coming along. Her horse is lame, but she'll be here in half an hour.”

 “Oh, I'm so thankful nothing has happened!”

 He was asleep almost before the words were out of his mouth. In a moment
      those handy men had his clothes off, and had tucked him into his bed in
      the chamber where I had washed my hands. They closed the door and came
      back. Then they seemed preparing to leave; but I said: “Please don't go,
      gentlemen. She won't know me; I am a stranger.”

 They glanced at each other. Then Joe said:

 “She? Poor thing, she's been dead nineteen years!”

 “Dead?”

 “That or worse. She went to see her folks half a year after she was
      married, and on her way back, on a Saturday evening, the Indians captured
      her within five miles of this place, and she's never been heard of since.”

 “And he lost his mind in consequence?”

 “Never has been sane an hour since. But he only gets bad when that time of
      year comes round. Then we begin to drop in here, three days before she's
      due, to encourage him up, and ask if he's heard from her, and Saturday we
      all come and fix up the house with flowers, and get everything ready for a
      dance. We've done it every year for nineteen years. The first Saturday
      there was twenty-seven of us, without counting the girls; there's only
      three of us now, and the girls are gone. We drug him to sleep, or he would
      go wild; then he's all right for another year—thinks she's with him
      till the last three or four days come round; then he begins to look for
      her, and gets out his poor old letter, and we come and ask him to read it
      to us. Lord, she was a darling!”