THE MAISON TELLIER

 They went there every evening about eleven o'clock, just as they would go
      to the club. Six or eight of them; always the same set, not fast men, but
      respectable tradesmen, and young men in government or some other employ,
      and they would drink their Chartreuse, and laugh with the girls, or else
      talk seriously with Madame Tellier, whom everybody respected, and then
      they would go home at twelve o'clock! The younger men would sometimes stay
      later.

 It was a small, comfortable house painted yellow, at the corner of a
      street behind Saint Etienne's Church, and from the windows one could see
      the docks full of ships being unloaded, the big salt marsh, and, rising
      beyond it, the Virgin's Hill with its old gray chapel.

 Madame Tellier, who came of a respectable family of peasant proprietors in
      the Department of the Eure, had taken up her profession, just as she would
      have become a milliner or dressmaker. The prejudice which is so violent
      and deeply rooted in large towns, does not exist in the country places in
      Normandy. The peasant says:

 “It is a paying-business,” and he sends his daughter to keep
      an establishment of this character just as he would send her to keep a
      girls' school.

 She had inherited the house from an old uncle, to whom it had belonged.
      Monsieur and Madame Tellier, who had formerly been innkeepers near Yvetot,
      had immediately sold their house, as they thought that the business at
      Fecamp was more profitable, and they arrived one fine morning to assume
      the direction of the enterprise, which was declining on account of the
      absence of the proprietors. They were good people enough in their way, and
      soon made themselves liked by their staff and their neighbors.

 Monsieur died of apoplexy two years later, for as the new place kept him
      in idleness and without any exercise, he had grown excessively stout, and
      his health had suffered. Since she had been a widow, all the frequenters
      of the establishment made much of her; but people said that, personally,
      she was quite virtuous, and even the girls in the house could not discover
      anything against her. She was tall, stout and affable, and her complexion,
      which had become pale in the dimness of her house, the shutters of which
      were scarcely ever opened, shone as if it had been varnished. She had a
      fringe of curly false hair, which gave her a juvenile look, that
      contrasted strongly with the ripeness of her figure. She was always
      smiling and cheerful, and was fond of a joke, but there was a shade of
      reserve about her, which her occupation had not quite made her lose.
      Coarse words always shocked her, and when any young fellow who had been
      badly brought up called her establishment a hard name, she was angry and
      disgusted.

 In a word, she had a refined mind, and although she treated her women as
      friends, yet she very frequently used to say that “she and they were
      not made of the same stuff.”

 Sometimes during the week she would hire a carriage and take some of her
      girls into the country, where they used to enjoy themselves on the grass
      by the side of the little river. They were like a lot of girls let out
      from school, and would run races and play childish games. They had a cold
      dinner on the grass, and drank cider, and went home at night with a
      delicious feeling of fatigue, and in the carriage they kissed Madame'
      Tellier as their kind mother, who was full of goodness and complaisance.

 The house had two entrances. At the corner there was a sort of tap-room,
      which sailors and the lower orders frequented at night, and she had two
      girls whose special duty it was to wait on them with the assistance of
      Frederic, a short, light-haired, beardless fellow, as strong as a horse.
      They set the half bottles of wine and the jugs of beer on the shaky marble
      tables before the customers, and then urged the men to drink.

 The three other girls—there were only five of them—formed a
      kind of aristocracy, and they remained with the company on the first
      floor, unless they were wanted downstairs and there was nobody on the
      first floor. The salon de Jupiter, where the tradesmen used to meet, was
      papered in blue, and embellished with a large drawing representing Leda
      and the swan. The room was reached by a winding staircase, through a
      narrow door opening on the street, and above this door a lantern inclosed
      in wire, such as one still sees in some towns, at the foot of the shrine
      of some saint, burned all night long.

 The house, which was old and damp, smelled slightly of mildew. At times
      there was an odor of eau de Cologne in the passages, or sometimes from a
      half-open door downstairs the noisy mirth of the common men sitting and
      drinking rose to the first floor, much to the disgust of the gentlemen who
      were there. Madame Tellier, who was on friendly terms with her customers,
      did not leave the room, and took much interest in what was going on in the
      town, and they regularly told her all the news. Her serious conversation
      was a change from the ceaseless chatter of the three women; it was a rest
      from the obscene jokes of those stout individuals who every evening
      indulged in the commonplace debauchery of drinking a glass of liqueur in
      company with common women.

 The names of the girls on the first floor were Fernande, Raphaele, and
      Rosa, the Jade. As the staff was limited, madame had endeavored that each
      member of it should be a pattern, an epitome of the feminine type, so that
      every customer might find as nearly as possible the realization of his
      ideal. Fernande represented the handsome blonde; she was very tall, rather
      fat, and lazy; a country girl, who could not get rid of her freckles, and
      whose short, light, almost colorless, tow-like hair, like combed-out hemp,
      barely covered her head.

 Raphaele, who came from Marseilles, played the indispensable part of the
      handsome Jewess, and was thin, with high cheekbones, which were covered
      with rouge, and black hair covered with pomatum, which curled on her
      forehead. Her eyes would have been handsome, if the right one had not had
      a speck in it. Her Roman nose came down over a square jaw, where two false
      upper teeth contrasted strangely with the bad color of the rest.

 Rosa was a little roll of fat, nearly all body, with very short legs, and
      from morning till night she sang songs, which were alternately risque or
      sentimental, in a harsh voice; told silly, interminable tales, and only
      stopped talking in order to eat, and left off eating in order to talk; she
      was never still, and was active as a squirrel, in spite of her embonpoint
      and her short legs; her laugh, which was a torrent of shrill cries,
      resounded here and there, ceaselessly, in a bedroom, in the loft, in the
      cafe, everywhere, and all about nothing.

 The two women on the ground floor, Lodise, who was nicknamed La Cocotte,
      and Flora, whom they called Balancoise, because she limped a little, the
      former always dressed as the Goddess of Liberty, with a tri-colored sash,
      and the other as a Spanish woman, with a string of copper coins in her
      carroty hair, which jingled at every uneven step, looked like cooks
      dressed up for the carnival. They were like all other women of the lower
      orders, neither uglier nor better looking than they usually are.

 They looked just like servants at an inn, and were generally called
      “the two pumps.”

 A jealous peace, which was, however, very rarely disturbed, reigned among
      these five women, thanks to Madame Tellier's conciliatory wisdom, and to
      her constant good humor, and the establishment, which was the only one of
      the kind in the little town, was very much frequented. Madame Tellier had
      succeeded in giving it such a respectable appearance, she was so amiable
      and obliging to everybody, her good heart was so well known, that she was
      treated with a certain amount of consideration. The regular customers
      spent money on her, and were delighted when she was especially friendly
      toward them, and when they met during the day, they would say: “Until
      this evening, you know where,” just as men say: “At the club,
      after dinner.” In a word, Madame Tellier's house was somewhere to go
      to, and they very rarely missed their daily meetings there.

 One evening toward the end of May, the first arrival, Monsieur Poulin, who
      was a timber merchant, and had been mayor, found the door shut. The
      lantern behind the grating was not alight; there was not a sound in the
      house; everything seemed dead. He knocked, gently at first, but then more
      loudly, but nobody answered the door. Then he went slowly up the street,
      and when he got to the market place he met Monsieur Duvert, the gunmaker,
      who was going to the same place, so they went back together, but did not
      meet with any better success. But suddenly they heard a loud noise, close
      to them, and on going round the house, they saw a number of English and
      French sailors, who were hammering at the closed shutters of the taproom
      with their fists.

 The two tradesmen immediately made their escape, but a low “Pst!”
      stopped them; it was Monsieur Tournevau, the fish curer, who had
      recognized them, and was trying to attract their attention. They told him
      what had happened, and he was all the more annoyed, as he was a married
      man and father of a family, and only went on Saturdays. That was his
      regular evening, and now he should be deprived of this dissipation for the
      whole week.

 The three men went as far as the quay together, and on the way they met
      young Monsieur Philippe, the banker's son, who frequented the place
      regularly, and Monsieur Pinipesse, the collector, and they all returned to
      the Rue aux Juifs together, to make a last attempt. But the exasperated
      sailors were besieging the house, throwing stones at the shutters, and
      shouting, and the five first-floor customers went away as quickly as
      possible, and walked aimlessly about the streets.

 Presently they met Monsieur Dupuis, the insurance agent, and then Monsieur
      Vasse, the Judge of the Tribunal of Commerce, and they took a long walk,
      going to the pier first of all, where they sat down in a row on the
      granite parapet and watched the rising tide, and when the promenaders had
      sat there for some time, Monsieur Tournevau said:

 “This is not very amusing!”

 “Decidedly not,” Monsieur Pinipesse replied, and they started
      off to walk again.

 After going through the street alongside the hill, they returned over the
      wooden bridge which crosses the Retenue, passed close to the railway, and
      came out again on the market place, when, suddenly, a quarrel arose
      between Monsieur Pinipesse, the collector, and Monsieur Tournevau about an
      edible mushroom which one of them declared he had found in the
      neighborhood.

 As they were out of temper already from having nothing to do, they would
      very probably have come to blows, if the others had not interfered.
      Monsieur Pinipesse went off furious, and soon another altercation arose
      between the ex-mayor, Monsieur Poulin, and Monsieur Dupuis, the insurance
      agent, on the subject of the tax collector's salary and the profits which
      he might make. Insulting remarks were freely passing between them, when a
      torrent of formidable cries was heard, and the body of sailors, who were
      tired of waiting so long outside a closed house, came into the square.
      They were walking arm in arm, two and two, and formed a long procession,
      and were shouting furiously. The townsmen hid themselves in a doorway, and
      the yelling crew disappeared in the direction of the abbey. For a long
      time they still heard the noise, which diminished like a storm in the
      distance, and then silence was restored. Monsieur Poulin and Monsieur
      Dupuis, who were angry with each other, went in different directions,
      without wishing each other good-by.

 The other four set off again, and instinctively went in the direction of
      Madame Tellier's establishment, which was still closed, silent,
      impenetrable. A quiet, but obstinate drunken man was knocking at the door
      of the lower room, antd then stopped and called Frederic, in a low voice,
      but finding that he got no answer, he sat down on the doorstep, and waited
      the course of events.

 The others were just going to retire, when the noisy band of sailors
      reappeared at the end of the street. The French sailors were shouting the
      “Marseillaise,” and the Englishmen “Rule Britannia.”
      There was a general lurching against the wall, and then the drunken
      fellows went on their way toward the quay, where a fight broke out between
      the two nations, in the course of which an Englishman had his arm broken
      and a Frenchman his nose split.

 The drunken man who had waited outside the door, was crying by that time,
      as drunken men and children cry when they are vexed, and the others went
      away. By degrees, calm was restored in the noisy town; here and there, at
      moments, the distant sound of voices could be heard, and then died away in
      the distance.

 One man only was still wandering about, Monsieur Tournevau, the fish
      curer, who was annoyed at having to wait until the following Saturday, and
      he hoped something would turn up, he did not know what; but he was
      exasperated at the police for thus allowing an establishment of such
      public utility, which they had under their control, to be closed.

 He went back to it and examined the walls, trying to find out some reason,
      and on the shutter he saw a notice stuck up. He struck a wax match and
      read the following, in a large, uneven hand: “Closed on account of
      the Confirmation.”

 Then he went away, as he saw it was useless to remain, and left the
      drunken man lying on the pavement fast asleep, outside that inhospitable
      door.

 The next day, all the regular customers, one after the other, found some
      reason for going through the street, with a bundle of papers under their
      arm to keep them in countenance, and with a furtive glance they all read
      that mysterious notice:

 “Closed on account of the Confirmation.”

  









 PART II

 Madame Tellier had a brother, who was a carpenter in their native place,
      Virville, in the Department of Eure. When she still kept the inn at
      Yvetot, she had stood godmother to that brother's daughter, who had
      received the name of Constance—Constance Rivet; she herself being a
      Rivet on her father's side. The carpenter, who knew that his sister was in
      a good position, did not lose sight of her, although they did not meet
      often, for they were both kept at home by their occupations, and lived a
      long way from each other. But as the girl was twelve years old, and going
      to be confirmed, he seized that opportunity to write to his sister, asking
      her to come and be present at the ceremony. Their old parents were dead,
      and as she could not well refuse her goddaughter, she accepted the
      invitation. Her brother, whose name was Joseph, hoped that by dint of
      showing his sister attention, she might be induced to make her will in the
      girl's favor, as she had no children of her own.

 His sister's occupation did not trouble his scruples in the least, and,
      besides, nobody knew anything about it at Virville. When they spoke of
      her, they only said: “Madame Tellier is living at Fecamp,”
      which might mean that she was living on her own private income. It was
      quite twenty leagues from Fecamp to Virville, and for a peasant, twenty
      leagues on land is as long a journey as crossing the ocean would be to
      city people. The people at Virville had never been further than Rouen, and
      nothing attracted the people from Fecamp to a village of five hundred
      houses in the middle of a plain, and situated in another department; at
      any rate, nothing was known about her business.

 But the Confirmation was coming on, and Madame Tellier was in great
      embarrassment. She had no substitute, and did not at all care to leave her
      house, even for a day; for all the rivalries between the girls upstairs
      and those downstairs would infallibly break out. No doubt Frederic would
      get drunk, and when he was in that state, he would knock anybody down for
      a mere word. At last, however, she made up her mind to take them all with
      her, with the exception of the man, to whom she gave a holiday until the
      next day but one.

 When she asked her brother, he made no objection, but undertook to put
      them all up for a night, and so on Saturday morning the eight-o'clock
      express carried off Madame Tellier and her companions in a second-class
      carriage. As far as Beuzeville they were alone, and chattered like
      magpies, but at that station a couple got in. The man, an old peasant,
      dressed in a blue blouse with a turned-down collar, wide sleeves tight at
      the wrist, ornamented with white embroidery, wearing an old high hat with
      long nap, held an enormous green umbrella in one hand, and a large basket
      in the other, from which the heads of three frightened ducks protruded.
      The woman, who sat up stiffly in her rustic finery, had a face like a
      fowl, with a nose that was as pointed as a bill. She sat down opposite her
      husband and did not stir, as she was startled at finding herself in such
      smart company.

 There was certainly an array of striking colors in the carriage. Madame
      Tellier was dressed in blue silk from head to foot, and had on a dazzling
      red imitation French cashmere shawl. Fernande was puffing in a Scotch
      plaid dress, of which her companions had laced the bodice as tight as they
      could, forcing up her full bust, that was continually heaving up and down.
      Raphaele, with a bonnet covered with feathers, so that it looked like a
      bird's nest, had on a lilac dress with gold spots on it, and there was
      something Oriental about it that suited her Jewish face. Rosa had on a
      pink skirt with largo flounces, and looked like a very fat child, an obese
      dwarf; while the two Pumps looked as if they had cut their dresses out of
      old flowered curtains dating from the Restoration.

 As soon as they were no longer alone in the compartment, the ladies put on
      staid looks, and began to talk of subjects which might give others a high
      opinion of them. But at Bolbeck a gentleman with light whiskers, a gold
      chain, and wearing two or three rings, got in, and put several parcels
      wrapped in oilcloth on the rack over his head. He looked inclined for a
      joke, and seemed a good-hearted fellow.

 “Are you ladies changing your quarters?” he said, and that
      question embarrassed them all considerably. Madame Tellier, however,
      quickly regained her composure, and said sharply, to avenge the honor of
      her corps:

 “I think you might try and be polite!”

 He excused himself, and said: “I beg your pardon, I ought to have
      said your nunnery.”

 She could not think of a retort, so, perhaps thinking she had said enough,
      madame gave him a dignified bow and compressed her lips.

 Then the gentleman, who was sitting between Rosa and the old peasant,
      began to wink knowingly at the ducks whose heads were sticking out of the
      basket, and when he felt that he had fixed the attention of his public, he
      began to tickle them under the bills and spoke funnily to them to make the
      company smile.

 “We have left our little pond, quack! quack! to make the
      acquaintance of the little spit, qu-ack! qu-ack!”

 The unfortunate creatures turned their necks away, to avoid his caresses,
      and made desperate efforts to get out of their wicker prison, and then,
      suddenly, all at once, uttered the most lamentable quacks of distress. The
      women exploded with laughter. They leaned forward and pushed each other,
      so as to see better; they were very much interested in the ducks, and the
      gentleman redoubled his airs, his wit and his teasing.

 Rosa joined in, and leaning over her neighbor's legs, she kissed the three
      animals on the head, and immediately all the girls wanted to kiss them, in
      turn, and as they did so the gentleman took them on his knee, jumped them
      up and down and pinched their arms. The two peasants, who were even in
      greater consternation than their poultry, rolled their eyes as if they
      were possessed, without venturing to move, and their old wrinkled faces
      had not a smile, not a twitch.

 Then the gentleman, who was a commercial traveller, offered the ladies
      suspenders by way of a joke, and taking up one of his packages, he opened
      it. It was a joke, for the parcel contained garters. There were blue silk,
      pink silk, red silk, violet silk, mauve silk garters, and the buckles were
      made of two gilt metal cupids embracing each other. The girls uttered
      exclamations of delight and looked at them with that gravity natural to
      all women when they are considering an article of dress. They consulted
      one another by their looks or in a whisper, and replied in the same
      manner, and Madame Tellier was longingly handling a pair of orange garters
      that were broader and more imposing looking than the rest; really fit for
      the mistress of such an establishment.

 The gentleman waited, for he had an idea.

 “Come, my kittens,” he said, “you must try them on.”

 There was a torrent of exclamations, and they squeezed their petticoats
      between their legs, but he quietly waited his time and said: “Well,
      if you will not try them on I shall pack them up again.”

 And he added cunningly: “I offer any pair they like to those who
      will try them on.”

 But they would not, and sat up very straight and looked dignified.

 But the two Pumps looked so distressed that he renewed his offer to them,
      and Flora, especially, visibly hesitated, and he insisted: “Come, my
      dear, a little courage! Just look at that lilac pair; it will suit your
      dress admirably.”

 That decided her, and pulling up her dress she showed a thick leg fit for
      a milkmaid, in a badly fitting, coarse stocking. The commercial traveller
      stooped down and fastened the garter. When he had done this, he gave her
      the lilac pair and asked: “Who next?”

 “I! I!” they all shouted at once, and he began on Rosa, who
      uncovered a shapeless, round thing without any ankle, a regular “sausage
      of a leg,” as Raphaele used to say.

 Lastly, Madame Tellier herself put out her leg, a handsome, muscular
      Norman leg, and in his surprise and pleasure, the commercial traveller
      gallantly took off his hat to salute that master calf, like a true French
      cavalier.

 The two peasants, who were speechless from surprise, glanced sideways out
      of the corner of one eye, and they looked so exactly like fowls that the
      man with the light whiskers, when he sat up, said: “Co—co—ri—co”
      under their very noses, and that gave rise to another storm of amusement.

 The old people got out at Motteville with their basket, their ducks and
      their umbrella, and they heard the woman say to her husband as they went
      away:

 “They are no good and are off to that cursed place, Paris.”

 The funny commercial traveller himself got out at Rouen, after behaving so
      coarsely that Madame Tellier was obliged sharply to put him in his right
      place, and she added, as a moral: “This will teach us not to talk to
      the first comer.”

 At Oissel they changed trains, and at a little station further on Monsieur
      Joseph Rivet was waiting for them with a large cart with a number of
      chairs in it, drawn by a white horse.

 The carpenter politely kissed all the ladies and then helped them into his
      conveyance.

 Three of them sat on three chairs at the back, Raphaele, Madame Tellier
      and her brother on the three chairs in front, while Rosa, who had no seat,
      settled herself as comfortably as she could on tall Fernande's knees, and
      then they set off.

 But the horse's jerky trot shook the cart so terribly that the chairs
      began to dance and threw the travellers about, to the right and to the
      left, as if they were dancing puppets, which made them scream and make
      horrible grimaces.

 They clung on to the sides of the vehicle, their bonnets fell on their
      backs, over their faces and on their shoulders, and the white horse went
      on stretching out his head and holding out his little hairless tail like a
      rat's, with which he whisked his buttocks from time to time.

 Joseph Rivet, with one leg on the shafts and the other doubled under him,
      held the reins with his elbows very high, and kept uttering a kind of
      clucking sound, which made the horse prick up its ears and go faster.

 The green country extended on either side of the road, and here and there
      the colza in flower presented a waving expanse of yellow, from which arose
      a strong, wholesome, sweet and penetrating odor, which the wind carried to
      some distance.

 The cornflowers showed their little blue heads amid the rye, and the women
      wanted to pick them, but Monsieur Rivet refused to stop.

 Then, sometimes, a whole field appeared to be covered with blood, so thick
      were the poppies, and the cart, which looked as if it were filled with
      flowers of more brilliant hue, jogged on through fields bright with wild
      flowers, and disappeared behind the trees of a farm, only to reappear and
      to go on again through the yellow or green standing crops, which were
      studded with red or blue.

 One o'clock struck as they drove up to the carpenter's door. They were
      tired out and pale with hunger, as they had eaten nothing since they left
      home. Madame Rivet ran out and made them alight, one after another, and
      kissed them as soon as they were on the ground, and she seemed as if she
      would never tire of kissing her sister-in-law, whom she apparently wanted
      to monopolize. They had lunch in the workshop, which had been cleared out
      for the next day's dinner.

 The capital omelet, followed by boiled chitterlings and washed down with
      good hard cider, made them all feel comfortable.

 Rivet had taken a glass so that he might drink with them, and his wife
      cooked, waited on them, brought in the dishes, took them out and asked
      each of them in a whisper whether they had everything they wanted. A
      number of boards standing against the walls and heaps of shavings that had
      been swept into the corners gave out a smell of planed wood, a smell of a
      carpenter's shop, that resinous odor which penetrates to the lungs.

 They wanted to see the little girl, but she had gone to church and would
      not be back again until evening, so they all went out for a stroll in the
      country.

 It was a small village, through which the highroad passed. Ten or a dozen
      houses on either side of the single street were inhabited by the butcher,
      the grocer, the carpenter, the innkeeper, the shoemaker and the baker.

 The church was at the end of the street and was surrounded by a small
      churchyard, and four immense lime-trees, which stood just outside the
      porch, shaded it completely. It was built of flint, in no particular
      style, and had a slate-roofed steeple. When you got past it, you were
      again in the open country, which was varied here and there by clumps of
      trees which hid the homesteads.

 Rivet had given his arm to his sister, out of politeness, although he was
      in his working clothes, and was walking with her in a dignified manner.
      His wife, who was overwhelmed by Raphaele's gold-striped dress, walked
      between her and Fernande, and roly-poly Rosa was trotting behind with
      Louise and Flora, the Seesaw, who was limping along, quite tired out.

 The inhabitants came to their doors, the children left off playing, and a
      window curtain would be raised, so as to show a muslin cap, while an old
      woman with a crutch, who was almost blind, crossed herself as if it were a
      religious procession, and they all gazed for a long time at those handsome
      ladies from town, who had come so far to be present at the confirmation of
      Joseph Rivet's little girl, and the carpenter rose very much in the public
      estimation.

 As they passed the church they heard some children singing. Little shrill
      voices were singing a hymn, but Madame Tellier would not let them go in,
      for fear of disturbing the little cherubs.

 After the walk, during which Joseph Rivet enumerated the principal landed
      proprietors, spoke about the yield of the land and the productiveness of
      the cows and sheep, he took his tribe of women home and installed them in
      his house, and as it was very small, they had to put them into the rooms,
      two and two.

 Just for once Rivet would sleep in the workshop on the shavings; his wife
      was to share her bed with her sister-in-law, and Fernande and Raphaele
      were to sleep together in the next room. Louise and Flora were put into
      the kitchen, where they had a mattress on the floor, and Rosa had a little
      dark cupboard to herself at the top of the stairs, close to the loft,
      where the candidate for confirmation was to sleep.

 When the little girl came in she was overwhelmed with kisses; all the
      women wished to caress her with that need of tender expansion, that habit
      of professional affection which had made them kiss the ducks in the
      railway carriage.

 They each of them took her on their knees, stroked her soft, light hair
      and pressed her in their arms with vehement and spontaneous outbursts of
      affection, and the child, who was very good and religious, bore it all
      patiently.

 As the day had been a fatiguing one for everybody, they all went to bed
      soon after dinner. The whole village was wrapped in that perfect stillness
      of the country, which is almost like a religious silence, and the girls,
      who were accustomed to the noisy evenings of their establishment, felt
      rather impressed by the perfect repose of the sleeping village, and they
      shivered, not with cold, but with those little shivers of loneliness which
      come over uneasy and troubled hearts.

 As soon as they were in bed, two and two together, they clasped each other
      in their arms, as if to protect themselves against this feeling of the
      calm and profound slumber of the earth. But Rosa, who was alone in her
      little dark cupboard, felt a vague and painful emotion come over her.

 She was tossing about in bed, unable to get to sleep, when she heard the
      faint sobs of a crying child close to her head, through the partition. She
      was frightened, and called out, and was answered by a weak voice, broken
      by sobs. It was the little girl, who was always used to sleeping in her
      mother's room, and who was afraid in her small attic.

 Rosa was delighted, got up softly so as not to awaken any one, and went
      and fetched the child. She took her into her warm bed, kissed her and
      pressed her to her bosom, lavished exaggerated manifestations of
      tenderness on her, and at last grew calmer herself and went to sleep. And
      till morning the candidate for confirmation slept with her head on Rosa's
      bosom.

 At five o'clock the little church bell, ringing the Angelus, woke the
      women, who usually slept the whole morning long.

 The villagers were up already, and the women went busily from house to
      house, carefully bringing short, starched muslin dresses or very long wax
      tapers tied in the middle with a bow of silk fringed with gold, and with
      dents in the wax for the fingers.

 The sun was already high in the blue sky, which still had a rosy tint
      toward the horizon, like a faint remaining trace of dawn. Families of
      fowls were walking about outside the houses, and here and there a black
      cock, with a glistening breast, raised his head, which was crowned by his
      red comb, flapped his wings and uttered his shrill crow, which the other
      cocks repeated.

 Vehicles of all sorts came from neighboring parishes, stopping at the
      different houses, and tall Norman women dismounted, wearing dark dresses,
      with kerchiefs crossed over the bosom, fastened with silver brooches a
      hundred years old.

 The men had put on their blue smocks over their new frock-coats or over
      their old dress-coats of green-cloth, the two tails of which hung down
      below their blouses. When the horses were in the stable there was a double
      line of rustic conveyances along the road: carts, cabriolets, tilburies,
      wagonettes, traps of every shape and age, tipping forward on their shafts
      or else tipping backward with the shafts up in the air.

 The carpenter's house was as busy as a bee-hive. The women, in
      dressing-jackets and petticoats, with their thin, short hair, which looked
      faded and worn, hanging down their backs, were busy dressing the child,
      who was standing quietly on a table, while Madame Tellier was directing
      the movements of her battalion. They washed her, did her hair, dressed
      her, and with the help of a number of pins, they arranged the folds of her
      dress and took in the waist, which was too large.

 Then, when she was ready, she was told to sit down and not to move, and
      the women hurried off to get ready themselves.

 The church bell began to ring again, and its tinkle was lost in the air,
      like a feeble voice which is soon drowned in space. The candidates came
      out of the houses and went toward the parochial building, which contained
      the two schools and the mansion house, and which stood quite at one end of
      the village, while the church was situated at the other.

 The parents, in their very best clothes, followed their children, with
      embarrassed looks, and those clumsy movements of a body bent by toil.

 The little girls disappeared in a cloud of muslin, which looked like
      whipped cream, while the lads, who looked like embryo waiters in a cafe
      and whose heads shone with pomatum, walked with their legs apart, so as
      not to get any dust or dirt on their black trousers.

 It was something for a family, to be proud of, when a large number of
      relatives, who had come from a distance, surrounded the child, and the
      carpenter's triumph was complete.

 Madame Tellier's regiment, with its leader at its head, followed
      Constance; her father gave his arm to his sister, her mother walked by the
      side of Raphaele, Fernande with Rosa and Louise and Flora together, and
      thus they proceeded majestically through the village, like a general's
      staff in full uniform, while the effect on the village was startling.

 At the school the girls ranged themselves under the Sister of Mercy and
      the boys under the schoolmaster, and they started off, singing a hymn as
      they went. The boys led the way, in two files, between the two rows of
      vehicles, from which the horses had been taken out, and the girls followed
      in the same order; and as all the people in the village had given the town
      ladies the precedence out of politeness, they came immediately behind the
      girls, and lengthened the double line of the procession still more, three
      on the right and three on the left, while their dresses were as striking
      as a display of fireworks.

 When they went into the church the congregation grew quite excited. They
      pressed against each other, turned round and jostled one another in order
      to see, and some of the devout ones spoke almost aloud, for they were so
      astonished at the sight of those ladies whose dresses were more elaborate
      than the priest's vestments.

 The mayor offered them his pew, the first one on the right, close to the
      choir, and Madame Tellier sat there with her sister-in-law, Fernande and
      Raphaele. Rosa, Louise and Flora occupied the second seat, in company with
      the carpenter.

 The choir was full of kneeling children, the girls on one side and the
      boys on the other, and the long wax tapers which they held looked like
      lances pointing in all directions, and three men were standing in front of
      the lectern, singing as loud as they could.

 They prolonged the syllables of the sonorous Latin indefinitely, holding
      on to “Amens” with interminable “a-a's,” which the
      reed stop of the organ sustained in a monotonous, long-drawn-out tone.

 A child's shrill voice took up the reply, and from time to time a priest
      sitting in a stall and wearing a biretta got up, muttered something and
      sat down again, while the three singers continued, their eyes fixed on the
      big book of plain chant lying open before them on the outstretched wings
      of a wooden eagle.

 Then silence ensued and the service went on. Toward the close Rosa, with
      her head in both hands, suddenly thought of her mother, her village church
      and her first communion. She almost fancied that that day had returned,
      when she was so small and was almost hidden in her white dress, and she
      began to cry.

 First of all she wept silently, and the tears dropped slowly from her
      eyes, but her emotion in creased with her recollections, and she began to
      sob. She took out her pocket handkerchief, wiped her eyes and held it to
      her mouth, so as not to scream, but it was in vain. A sort of rattle
      escaped her throat, and she was answered by two other profound,
      heartbreaking sobs, for her two neighbors, Louise and Flora, who were
      kneeling near her, overcome by similar recollections, were sobbing by her
      side, amid a flood of tears; and as tears are contagious, Madame Tellier
      soon in turn found that her eyes were wet, and on turning to her
      sister-in-law, she saw that all the occupants of her seat were also
      crying.

 Soon, throughout the church, here and there, a wife, a mother, a sister,
      seized by the strange sympathy of poignant emotion, and affected at the
      sight of those handsome ladies on their knees, shaken with sobs was
      moistening her cambric pocket handkerchief and pressing her beating heart
      with her left hand.

 Just as the sparks from an engine will set fire to dry grass, so the tears
      of Rosa and of her companions infected the whole congregation in a moment.
      Men, women, old men and lads in new smocks were soon all sobbing, and
      something superhuman seemed to be hovering over their heads—a
      spirit, the powerful breath of an invisible and all powerful Being.

 Suddenly a species of madness seemed to pervade the church, the noise of a
      crowd in a state of frenzy, a tempest of sobs and stifled cries. It came
      like gusts of wind which blow the trees in a forest, and the priest,
      paralyzed by emotion, stammered out incoherent prayers, without finding
      words, ardent prayers of the soul soaring to heaven.

 The people behind him gradually grew calmer. The cantors, in all the
      dignity of their white surplices, went on in somewhat uncertain voices,
      and the reed stop itself seemed hoarse, as if the instrument had been
      weeping; the priest, however, raised his hand to command silence and went
      and stood on the chancel steps, when everybody was silent at once.

 After a few remarks on what had just taken place, and which he attributed
      to a miracle, he continued, turning to the seats where the carpenter's
      guests were sitting; “I especially thank you, my dear sisters, who
      have come from such a distance, and whose presence among us, whose evident
      faith and ardent piety have set such a salutary example to all. You have
      edified my parish; your emotion has warmed all hearts; without you, this
      great day would not, perhaps, have had this really divine character. It is
      sufficient, at times, that there should be one chosen lamb, for the Lord
      to descend on His flock.”

 His voice failed him again, from emotion, and he said no more, but
      concluded the service.

 They now left the church as quickly as possible; the children themselves
      were restless and tired with such a prolonged tension of the mind. The
      parents left the church by degrees to see about dinner.

 There was a crowd outside, a noisy crowd, a babel of loud voices, where
      the shrill Norman accent was discernible. The villagers formed two ranks,
      and when the children appeared, each family took possession of their own.

 The whole houseful of women caught hold of Constance, surrounded her and
      kissed her, and Rosa was especially demonstrative. At last she took hold
      of one hand, while Madame Tellier took the other, and Raphaele and
      Fernande held up her long muslin skirt, so that it might not drag in the
      dust; Louise and Flora brought up the rear with Madame Rivet; and the
      child, who was very silent and thoughtful, set off for home in the midst
      of this guard of honor.

 Dinner was served in the workshop on long boards supported by trestles,
      and through the open door they could see all the enjoyment that was going
      on in the village. Everywhere they were feasting, and through every window
      were to be seen tables surrounded by people in their Sunday best, and a
      cheerful noise was heard in every house, while the men sat in their
      shirt-sleeves, drinking glass after glass of cider.

 In the carpenter's house the gaiety maintained somewhat of an air of
      reserve, the consequence of the emotion of the girls in the morning, and
      Rivet was the only one who was in a jolly mood, and he was drinking to
      excess. Madame Tellier looked at the clock every moment, for, in order not
      to lose two days running, they must take the 3:55 train, which would bring
      them to Fecamp by dark.

 The carpenter tried very hard to distract her attention, so as to keep his
      guests until the next day, but he did not succeed, for she never joked
      when there was business on hand, and as soon as they had had their coffee
      she ordered her girls to make haste and get ready, and then, turning to
      her brother, she said:

 “You must put in the horse immediately,” and she herself went
      to finish her last preparations.

 When she came down again, her sister-in-law was waiting to speak to her
      about the child, and a long conversation took place, in which, however,
      nothing was settled. The carpenter's wife was artful and pretended to be
      very much affected, and Madame Tellier, who was holding the girl on her
      knee, would not pledge herself to anything definite, but merely gave vague
      promises—she would not forget her, there was plenty of time, and
      besides, they would meet again.

 But the conveyance did not come to the door and the women did not come
      downstairs. Upstairs they even heard loud laughter, romping, little
      screams, and much clapping of hands, and so, while the carpenter's wife
      went to the stable to see whether the cart was ready, madame went
      upstairs.

 Rivet, who was very drunk, was plaguing Rosa, who was half choking with
      laughter. Louise and Flora were holding him by the arms and trying to calm
      him, as they were shocked at his levity after that morning's ceremony; but
      Raphaele and Fernande were urging him on, writhing and holding their sides
      with laughter, and they uttered shrill cries at every rebuff the drunken
      fellow received.

 The man was furious, his face was red, and he was trying to shake off the
      two women who were clinging to him, while he was pulling Rosa's skirt with
      all his might and stammering incoherently.

 But Madame Tellier, who was very indignant, went up to her brother, seized
      him by the shoulders, and threw him out of the room with such violence
      that he fell against the wall in the passage, and a minute afterward they
      heard him pumping water on his head in the yard, and when he reappeared
      with the cart he was quite calm.

 They started off in the same way as they had come the day before, and the
      little white horse started off with his quick, dancing trot. Under the hot
      sun, their fun, which had been checked during dinner, broke out again. The
      girls now were amused at the jolting of the cart, pushed their neighbors'
      chairs, and burst out laughing every moment.

 There was a glare of light over the country, which dazzled their eyes, and
      the wheels raised two trails of dust along the highroad. Presently,
      Fernande, who was fond of music, asked Rosa to sing something, and she
      boldly struck up the “Gros Cure de Meudon,” but Madame Tellier
      made her stop immediately, as she thought it a very unsuitable song for
      such a day, and she added:

 “Sing us something of Beranger's.” And so, after a moment's
      hesitation, Rosa began Beranger's song “The Grandmother” in
      her worn-out voice, and all the girls, and even Madame Tellier herself,
      joined in the chorus:

 “How I regret
        My dimpled arms,
        My nimble legs,
        And vanished charms.”

 “That is first rate,” Rivet declared, carried away by the
      rhythm, and they shouted the refrain to every verse, while Rivet beat time
      on the shaft with his foot, and with the reins on the back of the horse,
      who, as if he himself were carried away by the rhythm, broke into a wild
      gallop, and threw all the women in a heap, one on top of the other, on the
      bottom of the conveyance.

 They got up, laughing as if they were mad, and the Gong went on, shouted
      at the top of their voices, beneath the burning sky, among the ripening
      grain, to the rapid gallop of the little horse, who set off every time the
      refrain was sung, and galloped a hundred yards, to their great delight,
      while occasionally a stone-breaker by the roadside sat up and looked at
      the load of shouting females through his wire spectacles.

 When they got out at the station, the carpenter said:

 “I am sorry you are going; we might have had some good times
      together.” But Madame Tellier replied very sensibly: “Everything
      has its right time, and we cannot always be enjoying ourselves.” And
      then he had a sudden inspiration:

 “Look here, I will come and see you at Fecamp next month.” And
      he gave Rosa a roguish and knowing look.

 “Come,” his sister replied, “you must be sensible; you
      may come if you like, but you are not to be up to any of your tricks.”

 He did not reply, and as they heard the whistle of the train, he
      immediately began to kiss them all. When it came to Rosa's turn, he tried
      to get to her mouth, which she, however, smiling with her lips closed,
      turned away from him each time by a rapid movement of her head to one
      side. He held her in his arms, but he could not attain his object, as his
      large whip, which he was holding in his hand and waving behind the girl's
      back in desperation, interfered with his movements.

 “Passengers for Rouen, take your seats!” a guard cried, and
      they got in. There was a slight whistle, followed by a loud whistle from
      the engine, which noisily puffed out its first jet of steam, while the
      wheels began to turn a little with a visible effort, and Rivet left the
      station and ran along by the track to get another look at Rosa, and as the
      carriage passed him, he began to crack his whip and to jump, while he sang
      at the top of his voice:

 “How I regret
          My dimpled arms,
          My nimble legs,
          And vanished charms.”

 And then he watched a white pocket-handkerchief, which somebody was
      waving, as it disappeared in the distance.

  









 PART III

 They slept the peaceful sleep of a quiet conscience, until they got to
      Rouen, and when they returned to the house, refreshed and rested, Madame
      Tellier could not help saying:

 “It was all very well, but I was longing to get home.”

 They hurried over their supper, and then, when they had put on their usual
      evening costume, waited for their regular customers, and the little
      colored lamp outside the door told the passers-by that Madame Tellier had
      returned, and in a moment the news spread, nobody knew how or through
      whom.

 Monsieur Philippe, the banker's son, even carried his friendliness so far
      as to send a special messenger to Monsieur Tournevau, who was in the bosom
      of his family.

 The fish curer had several cousins to dinner every Sunday, and they were
      having coffee, when a man came in with a letter in his hand. Monsieur
      Tournevau was much excited; he opened the envelope and grew pale; it
      contained only these words in pencil:

 “The cargo of cod has been found; the ship has come into port; good
      business for you. Come immediately.”

 He felt in his pockets, gave the messenger two sons, and suddenly blushing
      to his ears, he said: “I must go out.” He handed his wife the
      laconic and mysterious note, rang the bell, and when the servant came in,
      he asked her to bring him has hat and overcoat immediately. As soon as he
      was in the street, he began to hurry, and the way seemed to him to be
      twice as long as usual, in consequence of his impatience.

 Madame Tellier's establishment had put on quite a holiday look. On the
      ground floor, a number of sailors were making a deafening noise, and
      Louise and Flora drank with one and the other, and were being called for
      in every direction at once.

 The upstairs room was full by nine o'clock. Monsieur Vasse, the Judge of
      the Tribunal of Commerce, Madame Tellier's regular but Platonic wooer, was
      talking to her in a corner in a low voice, and they were both smiling, as
      if they were about to come to an understanding.

 Monsieur Poulin, the ex-mayor, was talking to Rosa, and she was running
      her hands through the old gentleman's white whiskers.

 Tall Fernande was on the sofa, her feet on the coat of Monsieur Pinipesse,
      the tax collector, and leaning back against young Monsieur Philippe, her
      right arm around his neck, while she held a cigarette in her left hand.

 Raphaele appeared to be talking seriously with Monsieur Dupuis, the
      insurance agent, and she finished by saying: “Yes, I will, yes.”

 Just then, the door opened suddenly, and Monsieur Tournevau came in, and
      was greeted with enthusiastic cries of “Long live Tournevau!”
      And Raphaele, who was dancing alone up and down the room, went and threw
      herself into his arms. He seized her in a vigorous embrace and, without
      saying a word, lifted her up as if she had been a feather.

 Rosa was chatting to the ex-mayor, kissing him and puffing; both his
      whiskers at the same time, in order to keep his head straight.

 Fernanad and Madame Tellier remained with the four men, and Monsieur
      Philippe exclaimed: “I will pay for some champagne; get three
      bottles, Madame Tellier.” And Fernande gave him a hug, and whispered
      to him: “Play us a waltz, will you?” So he rose and sat down
      at the old piano in the corner, and managed to get a hoarse waltz out of
      the depths of the instrument.

 The tall girl put her arms round the tax collector, Madame Tellier let
      Monsieur Vasse take her round the waist, and the two couples turned round,
      kissing as they danced. Monsieur Vasse, who had formerly danced in good
      society, waltzed with such elegance that Madame Tellier was quite
      captivated.

 Frederic brought the champagne; the first cork popped, and Monsieur
      Philippe played the introduction to a quadrille, through which the four
      dancers walked in society fashion, decorously, with propriety, deportment,
      bows and curtsies, and then they began to drink.

 Monsieur Philippe next struck up a lively polka, and Monsieur Tournevau
      started off with the handsome Jewess, whom he held without letting her
      feet touch the ground. Monsieur Pinipesse and Monsieur Vasse had started
      off with renewed vigor, and from time to time one or other couple would
      stop to toss off a long draught of sparkling wine, and that dance was
      threatening to become never-ending, when Rosa opened the door.

 “I want to dance,” she exclaimed. And she caught hold of
      Monsieur Dupuis, who was sitting idle on the couch, and the dance began
      again.

 But the bottles were empty. “I will pay for one,” Monsieur
      Tournevau said. “So will I,” Monsieur Vasse declared. “And.
      I will do the same,” Monsieur Dupuis remarked.

 They all began to clap their hands, and it soon became a regular ball, and
      from time to time Louise and Flora ran upstairs quickly and had a few
      turns, while their customers downstairs grew impatient, and then they
      returned regretfully to the tap-room. At midnight they were still dancing.

 Madame Tellier let them amuse themselves while she had long private talks
      in corners with Monsieur Vasse, as if to settle the last details of
      something that had already been settled.

 At last, at one o'clock, the two married men, Monsieur Tournevau and
      Monsieur Pinipesse, declared that they were going home, and wanted to pay.
      Nothing was charged for except the champagne, and that cost only six
      francs a bottle, instead of ten, which was the usual price, and when they
      expressed their surprise at such generosity, Madame Tellier, who was
      beaming, said to them:

 “We don't have a holiday every day.”