THE FALSE GEMS
    

      Monsieur Lantin had met the young girl at a reception at the house of the
      second head of his department, and had fallen head over heels in love with
      her.
    

      She was the daughter of a provincial tax collector, who had been dead
      several years. She and her mother came to live in Paris, where the latter,
      who made the acquaintance of some of the families in her neighborhood,
      hoped to find a husband for her daughter.
    

      They had very moderate means, and were honorable, gentle, and quiet.
    

      The young girl was a perfect type of the virtuous woman in whose hands
      every sensible young man dreams of one day intrusting his happiness. Her
      simple beauty had the charm of angelic modesty, and the imperceptible
      smile which constantly hovered about the lips seemed to be the reflection
      of a pure and lovely soul. Her praises resounded on every side. People
      never tired of repeating: “Happy the man who wins her love! He could
      not find a better wife.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin, then chief clerk in the Department of the Interior,
      enjoyed a snug little salary of three thousand five hundred francs, and he
      proposed to this model young girl, and was accepted.
    

      He was unspeakably happy with her. She governed his household with such
      clever economy that they seemed to live in luxury. She lavished the most
      delicate attentions on her husband, coaxed and fondled him; and so great
      was her charm that six years after their marriage, Monsieur Lantin
      discovered that he loved his wife even more than during the first days of
      their honeymoon.
    

      He found fault with only two of her tastes: Her love for the theatre, and
      her taste for imitation jewelry. Her friends (the wives of some petty
      officials) frequently procured for her a box at the theatre, often for the
      first representations of the new plays; and her husband was obliged to
      accompany her, whether he wished it or not, to these entertainments which
      bored him excessively after his day's work at the office.
    

      After a time, Monsieur Lantin begged his wife to request some lady of her
      acquaintance to accompany her, and to bring her home after the theatre.
      She opposed this arrangement, at first; but, after much persuasion,
      finally consented, to the infinite delight of her husband.
    

      Now, with her love for the theatre, came also the desire for ornaments.
      Her costumes remained as before, simple, in good taste, and always modest;
      but she soon began to adorn her ears with huge rhinestones, which
      glittered and sparkled like real diamonds. Around her neck she wore
      strings of false pearls, on her arms bracelets of imitation gold, and
      combs set with glass jewels.
    

      Her husband frequently remonstrated with her, saying:
    

      “My dear, as you cannot afford to buy real jewelry, you ought to
      appear adorned with your beauty and modesty alone, which are the rarest
      ornaments of your sex.”
    

      But she would smile sweetly, and say:
    

      “What can I do? I am so fond of jewelry. It is my only weakness. We
      cannot change our nature.”
    

      Then she would wind the pearl necklace round her fingers, make the facets
      of the crystal gems sparkle, and say:
    

      “Look! are they not lovely? One would swear they were real.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin would then answer, smilingly:
    

      “You have bohemian tastes, my dear.”
    

      Sometimes, of an evening, when they were enjoying a tete-a-tete by the
      fireside, she would place on the tea table the morocco leather box
      containing the “trash,” as Monsieur Lantin called it. She
      would examine the false gems with a passionate attention, as though they
      imparted some deep and secret joy; and she often persisted in passing a
      necklace around her husband's neck, and, laughing heartily, would exclaim:
      “How droll you look!” Then she would throw herself into his
      arms, and kiss him affectionately.
    

      One evening, in winter, she had been to the opera, and returned home
      chilled through and through. The next morning she coughed, and eight days
      later she died of inflammation of the lungs.
    

      Monsieur Lantin's despair was so great that his hair became white in one
      month. He wept unceasingly; his heart was broken as he remembered her
      smile, her voice, every charm of his dead wife.
    

      Time did not assuage his grief. Often, during office hours, while his
      colleagues were discussing the topics of the day, his eyes would suddenly
      fill with tears, and he would give vent to his grief in heartrending sobs.
      Everything in his wife's room remained as it was during her lifetime; all
      her furniture, even her clothing, being left as it was on the day of her
      death. Here he was wont to seclude himself daily and think of her who had
      been his treasure-the joy of his existence.
    

      But life soon became a struggle. His income, which, in the hands of his
      wife, covered all household expenses, was now no longer sufficient for his
      own immediate wants; and he wondered how she could have managed to buy
      such excellent wine and the rare delicacies which he could no longer
      procure with his modest resources.
    

      He incurred some debts, and was soon reduced to absolute poverty. One
      morning, finding himself without a cent in his pocket, he resolved to sell
      something, and immediately the thought occurred to him of disposing of his
      wife's paste jewels, for he cherished in his heart a sort of rancor
      against these “deceptions,” which had always irritated him in
      the past. The very sight of them spoiled, somewhat, the memory of his lost
      darling.
    

      To the last days of her life she had continued to make purchases, bringing
      home new gems almost every evening, and he turned them over some time
      before finally deciding to sell the heavy necklace, which she seemed to
      prefer, and which, he thought, ought to be worth about six or seven
      francs; for it was of very fine workmanship, though only imitation.
    

      He put it in his pocket, and started out in search of what seemed a
      reliable jeweler's shop. At length he found one, and went in, feeling a
      little ashamed to expose his misery, and also to offer such a worthless
      article for sale.
    

      “Sir,” said he to the merchant, “I would like to know
      what this is worth.”
    

      The man took the necklace, examined it, called his clerk, and made some
      remarks in an undertone; he then put the ornament back on the counter, and
      looked at it from a distance to judge of the effect.
    

      Monsieur Lantin, annoyed at all these ceremonies, was on the point of
      saying: “Oh! I know well enough it is not worth anything,”
      when the jeweler said: “Sir, that necklace is worth from twelve to
      fifteen thousand francs; but I could not buy it, unless you can tell me
      exactly where it came from.”
    

      The widower opened his eyes wide and remained gaping, not comprehending
      the merchant's meaning. Finally he stammered: “You say—are you
      sure?” The other replied, drily: “You can try elsewhere and
      see if any one will offer you more. I consider it worth fifteen thousand
      at the most. Come back; here, if you cannot do better.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin, beside himself with astonishment, took up the necklace
      and left the store. He wished time for reflection.
    

      Once outside, he felt inclined to laugh, and said to himself: “The
      fool! Oh, the fool! Had I only taken him at his word! That jeweler cannot
      distinguish real diamonds from the imitation article.”
    

      A few minutes after, he entered another store, in the Rue de la Paix. As
      soon as the proprietor glanced at the necklace, he cried out:
    

      “Ah, parbleu! I know it well; it was bought here.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin, greatly disturbed, asked:
    

      “How much is it worth?”
    

      “Well, I sold it for twenty thousand francs. I am willing to take it
      back for eighteen thousand, when you inform me, according to our legal
      formality, how it came to be in your possession.”
    

      This time, Monsieur Lantin was dumfounded. He replied:
    

      “But—but—examine it well. Until this moment I was under
      the impression that it was imitation.”
    

      The jeweler asked:
    

      “What is your name, sir?”
    

      “Lantin—I am in the employ of the Minister of the Interior. I
      live at number sixteen Rue des Martyrs.”
    

      The merchant looked through his books, found the entry, and said: “That
      necklace was sent to Madame Lantin's address, sixteen Rue des Martyrs,
      July 20, 1876.”
    

      The two men looked into each other's eyes—the widower speechless
      with astonishment; the jeweler scenting a thief. The latter broke the
      silence.
    

      “Will you leave this necklace here for twenty-four hours?”
      said he; “I will give you a receipt.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin answered hastily: “Yes, certainly.” Then,
      putting the ticket in his pocket, he left the store.
    

      He wandered aimlessly through the streets, his mind in a state of dreadful
      confusion. He tried to reason, to understand. His wife could not afford to
      purchase such a costly ornament. Certainly not.
    

      But, then, it must have been a present!—a present!—a present,
      from whom? Why was it given her?
    

      He stopped, and remained standing in the middle of the street. A horrible
      doubt entered his mind—She? Then, all the other jewels must have
      been presents, too! The earth seemed to tremble beneath him—the tree
      before him to be falling; he threw up his arms, and fell to the ground,
      unconscious. He recovered his senses in a pharmacy, into which the
      passers-by had borne him. He asked to be taken home, and, when he reached
      the house, he shut himself up in his room, and wept until nightfall.
      Finally, overcome with fatigue, he went to bed and fell into a heavy
      sleep.
    

      The sun awoke him next morning, and he began to dress slowly to go to the
      office. It was hard to work after such shocks. He sent a letter to his
      employer, requesting to be excused. Then he remembered that he had to
      return to the jeweler's. He did not like the idea; but he could not leave
      the necklace with that man. He dressed and went out.
    

      It was a lovely day; a clear, blue sky smiled on the busy city below. Men
      of leisure were strolling about with their hands in their pockets.
    

      Monsieur Lantin, observing them, said to himself: “The rich, indeed,
      are happy. With money it is possible to forget even the deepest sorrow.
      One can go where one pleases, and in travel find that distraction which is
      the surest cure for grief. Oh if I were only rich!”
    

      He perceived that he was hungry, but his pocket was empty. He again
      remembered the necklace. Eighteen thousand francs! Eighteen thousand
      francs! What a sum!
    

      He soon arrived in the Rue de la Paix, opposite the jeweler's. Eighteen
      thousand francs! Twenty times he resolved to go in, but shame kept him
      back. He was hungry, however—very hungry—and not a cent in his
      pocket. He decided quickly, ran across the street, in order not to have
      time for reflection, and rushed into the store.
    

      The proprietor immediately came forward, and politely offered him a chair;
      the clerks glanced at him knowingly.
    

      “I have made inquiries, Monsieur Lantin,” said the jeweler,
      “and if you are still resolved to dispose of the gems, I am ready to
      pay you the price I offered.”
    

      “Certainly, sir,” stammered Monsieur Lantin.
    

      Whereupon the proprietor took from a drawer eighteen large bills, counted,
      and handed them to Monsieur Lantin, who signed a receipt; and, with
      trembling hand, put the money into his pocket.
    

      As he was about to leave the store, he turned toward the merchant, who
      still wore the same knowing smile, and lowering his eyes, said:
    

      “I have—I have other gems, which came from the same source.
      Will you buy them, also?”
    

      The merchant bowed: “Certainly, sir.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin said gravely: “I will bring them to you.” An
      hour later, he returned with the gems.
    

      The large diamond earrings were worth twenty thousand francs; the
      bracelets, thirty-five thousand; the rings, sixteen thousand; a set of
      emeralds and sapphires, fourteen thousand; a gold chain with solitaire
      pendant, forty thousand—making the sum of one hundred and
      forty-three thousand francs.
    

      The jeweler remarked, jokingly:
    

      “There was a person who invested all her savings in precious stones.”
    

      Monsieur Lantin replied, seriously:
    

      “It is only another way of investing one's money.”
    

      That day he lunched at Voisin's, and drank wine worth twenty francs a
      bottle. Then he hired a carriage and made a tour of the Bois. He gazed at
      the various turnouts with a kind of disdain, and could hardly refrain from
      crying out to the occupants:
    

      “I, too, am rich!—I am worth two hundred thousand francs.”
    

      Suddenly he thought of his employer. He drove up to the bureau, and
      entered gaily, saying:
    

      “Sir, I have come to resign my position. I have just inherited three
      hundred thousand francs.”
    

      He shook hands with his former colleagues, and confided to them some of
      his projects for the future; he then went off to dine at the Cafe Anglais.
    

      He seated himself beside a gentleman of aristocratic bearing; and, during
      the meal, informed the latter confidentially that he had just inherited a
      fortune of four hundred thousand francs.
    

      For the first time in his life, he was not bored at the theatre, and spent
      the remainder of the night in a gay frolic.
    

      Six months afterward, he married again. His second wife was a very
      virtuous woman; but had a violent temper. She caused him much sorrow.