IV 

 

THE CHILD'S RETURN

 I

 Raicharan

was twelve years old when he came as a
servant to his master's house. He belonged to the
same caste as his master and was given his master's
little son to nurse. As time went on the boy left
Raicharan's arms to go to school. From school he
went on to college, and after college he entered the service. Always, until he married, Raicharan
was his sole attendant.

 But when a mistress came into the house, Raicharan
found two masters instead of one. All his
former influence passed to the new mistress. This
was d by a fresh arrival. Anukul had a
son born to him and Raicharan by his unsparing attentions
soon got a complete hold over the child.
He used to toss him up in his arms, call to him in
absurd baby language, put his face close to the baby's
and draw it away again with a laugh.

 Presently the child was able to crawl and cross the
doorway. When Raicharan went to catch him, he would scream with mischievous laughter and make
for safety. Raicharan was amazed at the profound
skill and exact judgment the baby showed when pursued.
He would say to his mistress with a look of
awe and mystery: "Your son will be a judge some
day."

 New wonders came in their turn. When the baby
began to toddle, that was to Raicharan an epoch in
human history. When he called his father Ba-ba
and his mother Ma-ma and Raicharan Chan-na, then
Raicharan's knew no bounds. He went out
to tell the news to all the world.

 After a while Raicharan was asked to show his
ingenuity in other ways. He had, for instance, to
play the part of a horse, holding the reins between
his teeth and prancing with his feet. He had also
to wrestle with his little charge; and if he could not,
by a wrestler's trick, fall on his back defeated at the
end a great outcry was certain.

 About this time Anukul was to a district
on the banks of the Padma. On his way
through Calcutta he bought his son a little go-cart.
He bought him also a yellow satin waistcoat, a gold-laced
cap, and some gold bracelets and anklets.
Raicharan was wont to take these out and put them
on his little charge, with ceremonial pride, whenever
they went for a walk.  Then came the rainy season and day after day the
rain poured down in torrents. The hungry river,
like an enormous serpent, swallowed down terraces,
villages, cornfields, and covered with its flood the tall
grasses and wild casuarinas on the sandbanks.
From time to time there was a deep thud as the
river-banks d. The unceasing roar of the
main current could be heard from far away.
Masses of foam, carried swiftly past, proved to the
eye the swiftness of the stream.

 One afternoon the rain cleared. It was cloudy,
but cool and bright. Raicharan's little despot
did not want to stay in on such a fine afternoon.
His lordship climbed into the go-cart. Raicharan,
between the shafts, dragged him slowly along till
he reached the rice-fields on the banks of the river.
There was no one in the fields and no boat on the
stream. Across the water, on the farther side, the
clouds were rifted in the west. The silent ceremonial
of the setting sun was revealed in all its glowing
splendour. In the midst of that stillness the
child, all of a sudden, pointed with his finger in front
of him and cried: "Chan-na! Pitty fow."

 Close by on a mud-flat stood a large Kadamba tree in full flower. My lord, the baby, looked at it
with greedy eyes and Raicharan knew his meaning.
Only a short time before he had made, out of these very flower balls, a small go-cart; and the child had
been so entirely happy dragging it about with a
string, that for the whole day Raicharan was not
asked to put on the reins at all. He was from a horse into a groom.

 But Raicharan had no wish that evening to go
splashing knee-deep through the mud to reach the
flowers. So he quickly pointed his finger in the opposite
direction, calling out: "Look, baby, look!
Look at the bird." And with all sorts of curious
noises he pushed the go-cart rapidly away from the
tree.

 But a child, destined to be a judge, cannot be put
off so easily. And besides, there was at the time
nothing to attract his eyes. And you cannot keep up
for ever the pretence of an imaginary bird.

 The little Master's mind was made up, and Raicharan
was at his wits' end. "Very well, baby," he
said at last, "you sit still in the cart, and I'll go and
get you the pretty flower. Only mind you don't go
near the water."

 As he said this, he made his legs bare to the knee,
and waded through the oozing mud towards the
tree.

 The moment Raicharan had gone, his little Master's
thoughts went off at racing speed to the forbidden
water. The baby saw the river rushing by, splashing and gurgling as it went. It seemed as
though the disobedient wavelets themselves were running
away from some greater Raicharan with the
laughter of a thousand children. At the sight of
their mischief, the heart of the human child grew and restless. He got down stealthily from
the go-cart and toddled off towards the river. On
his way he picked up a small stick and leant over the
bank of the stream pretending to fish. The mischievous
fairies of the river with their mysterious
voices seemed inviting him into their play-house.

 Raicharan had plucked a handful of flowers from
the tree and was carrying them back in the end of
his cloth, with his face wreathed in smiles. But when
he reached the go-cart there was no one there. He
looked on all sides and there was no one there. He
looked back at the cart and there was no one there.

 In that first terrible moment his blood froze within
him. Before his eyes the whole universe swam
round like a dark mist. From the depth of his
broken heart he gave one piercing cry: "Master,
Master, little Master."

 But no voice answered "Chan-na." No child
laughed mischievously back: no scream of baby delight
welcomed his return. Only the river ran on
with its splashing, gurgling noise as before,—as
though it knew nothing at all and had no time to attend to such a tiny human event as the death of a
child.

 As the evening passed by Raicharan's mistress became
very anxious. She sent men out on all sides
to search. They went with in their hands
and reached at last the banks of the Padma. There
they found Raicharan rushing up and down the fields,
like a stormy wind, shouting the cry of despair:
"Master, Master, little Master!"

 When they got Raicharan home at last, he fell
prostrate at the feet of his mistress. They shook
him, and questioned him, and asked him repeatedly
where he had left the child; but all he could say was
that he knew nothing.

 Though every one held the opinion that the Padma
had swallowed the child, there was a lurking doubt
left in the mind. For a band of had been
noticed outside the village that afternoon, and some
suspicion rested on them. The mother went so far
in her wild grief as to think it possible that Raicharan
himself had stolen the child. She called him
aside with piteous entreaty and said: "Raicharan,
give me back my baby. Give me back my child.
Take from me any money you ask, but give me back
my child!"

 Raicharan only beat his forehead in reply. His
mistress ordered him out of the house.  Anukul tried to reason his wife out of this wholly
unjust suspicion: "Why on earth," he said,
"should he commit such a crime as that?"

 The mother only replied: "The baby had gold
ornaments on his body. Who knows?"

 It was impossible to reason with her after that.

 II

 Raicharan

went back to his own village. Up to
this time he had had no son, and there was no hope
that any child would now be born to him. But it
came about before the end of a year that his wife
gave birth to a son and died.

 An overwhelming resentment at first grew up in
Raicharan's heart at the sight of this new baby. At
the back of his mind was resentful suspicion that it
had come as a in place of the little Master.
He also thought it would be a grave offence to be
happy with a son of his own after what had happened
to his master's little child. Indeed, if it had
not been for a widowed sister, who mothered the
new baby, it would not have lived long.

 But a change gradually came over Raicharan's
mind. A wonderful thing happened. This new
baby in turn began to crawl about, and cross the
doorway with mischief in its face. It also showed
an amusing cleverness in making its escape to safety. Its voice, its sounds of laughter and tears, its gestures,
were those of the little Master. On some
days, when Raicharan listened to its crying, his heart
suddenly began thumping wildly against his ribs, and
it seemed to him that his former little Master was
crying somewhere in the unknown land of death
because he had lost his Chan-na.

 Phailna (for that was the name Raicharan's sister
gave to the new baby) soon began to talk. It learnt
to say Ba-ba and Ma-ma with a baby accent. When
Raicharan heard those familiar sounds the mystery
suddenly became clear. The little Master could not
cast off the spell of his Chan-na and therefore he had
been reborn in his own house.

 The three arguments in favour of this were, to
Raicharan, altogether beyond dispute:

 The new baby was born soon after his little master's
death.

 His wife could never have accumulated such merit
as to give birth to a son in middle age.

 The new baby walked with a toddle and called
out Ba-ba and Ma-ma.—There was no sign lacking
which marked out the future judge.

 Then suddenly Raicharan remembered that terrible
accusation of the mother. "Ah," he said to
himself with amazement, "the mother's heart was
right. She knew I had stolen her child."  When once he had come to this conclusion, he
was filled with remorse for his past neglect. He now
gave himself over, body and soul, to the new baby
and became its devoted attendant. He began to
bring it up as if it were the son of a rich man. He
bought a go-cart, a yellow satin waistcoat, and a
gold-embroidered cap. He melted down the ornaments
of his dead wife and made gold bangles and
anklets. He refused to let the little child play with
any one of the neighbourhood and became himself
its sole companion day and night. As the baby
grew up to boyhood, he was so petted and spoilt and
clad in such finery that the village children would
call him "Your Lordship," and jeer at him; and
older people regarded Raicharan as unaccountably
crazy about the child.

 At last the time came for the boy to go to school.
Raicharan sold his small piece of land and went to
Calcutta. There he got employment with great difficulty
as a servant and sent Phailna to school. He
spared no pains to give him the best education, the
best clothes, the best food. Meanwhile, he himself
lived on a mere handful of rice and would say in secret:
"Ah, my little Master, my dear little Master,
you loved me so much that you came back to my
house! You shall never suffer from any neglect of
mine."  Twelve years passed away in this manner. The
boy was able to read and write well. He was bright
and healthy and good-looking. He paid a great deal
of attention to his personal appearance and was
specially careful in parting his hair. He was inclined
to extravagance and finery and spent money
freely. He could never quite look on Raicharan as
a father, because, though fatherly in affection, he
had the manner of a servant. A further fault was
this, that Raicharan kept secret from every one that
he himself was the father of the child.

 The students of the hostel, where Phailna was a
boarder, were greatly amused by Raicharan's country
manners, and I have to confess that behind his father's
back Phailna joined in their fun. But, in
the bottom of their hearts, all the students loved
the innocent and tender-hearted old man, and
Phailna was very fond of him also. But, as I have
said before, he loved him with a kind of condescension.

 Raicharan grew older and older, and his employer
was continually finding fault with him for his incompetent
work. He had been starving himself for the
boy's sake, so he had grown physically weak and no
longer up to his daily task. He would forget things
and his mind became dull and stupid. But his employer
expected a full servant's work out of him and would not brook excuses. The money that Raicharan
had brought with him from the sale of his land
was exhausted. The boy was continually grumbling
about his clothes and asking for more money.

 III

 Raicharan made up his mind. He gave up the situation
where he was working as a servant, and
left some money with Phailna and said: "I have
some business to do at home in my village, and shall
be back soon."

 He went off at once to Baraset where Anukul was
magistrate. Anukul's wife was still broken down
with grief. She had had no other child.

 One day Anukul was resting after a long and
weary day in court. His wife was buying, at an
exorbitant price, a herb from a mendicant quack,
which was said to ensure the birth of a child. A
voice of greeting was heard in the courtyard.
Anukul went out to see who was there. It was
Raicharan. Anukul's heart was softened when he
saw his old servant. He asked him many questions
and offered to take him back into service.

 Raicharan smiled faintly and said in reply: "I
want to make obeisance to my mistress."

 Anukul went with Raicharan into the house,
where the mistress did not receive him as warmly as his old master. Raicharan took no notice of this,
but folded his hands and said: "It was not the
Padma that stole your baby. It was I."

 Anukul exclaimed: "Great God! Eh! What!
Where is he?"

 Raicharan replied: "He is with me. I will
bring him the day after to-morrow."

 It was Sunday. There was no magistrate's court
sitting. Both husband and wife were looking expectantly
along the road, waiting from early morning
for Raicharan's appearance. At ten o'clock he
came leading Phailna by the hand.

 Anukul's wife, without a question, took the boy
into her lap and was wild with excitement, sometimes
laughing, sometimes weeping, touching him, kissing
his hair and his forehead, and gazing into his face
with hungry, eager eyes. The boy was very good-looking
and dressed like a gentleman's son. The
heart of Anukul brimmed over with a sudden rush
of affection.

 Nevertheless the magistrate in him asked:
"Have you any proofs?"

 Raicharan said: "How could there be any proof
of such a deed? God alone knows that I stole your
boy, and no one else in the world."

 When Anukul saw how eagerly his wife was
clinging to the boy, he realised the futility of asking for proofs. It would be wiser to believe. And
then,—where could an old man like Raicharan get
such a boy from? And why should his faithful servant
deceive him for nothing?

 "But," he added severely, "Raicharan, you must
not stay here."

 "Where shall I go, Master?" said Raicharan, in
a choking voice, folding his hands. "I am old.
Who will take in an old man as a servant?"

 The mistress said: "Let him stay. My child
will be pleased. I forgive him."

 But Anukul's conscience would not allow
him. "No," he said, "he cannot be forgiven
for what he has done."

 Raicharan bowed to the ground and clasped Anukul's
feet. "Master," he cried, "let me stay. It
was not I who did it. It was God."

 Anukul's conscience was more shocked than ever
when Raicharan tried to put the blame on God's
shoulders.

 "No," he said, "I could not allow it. I cannot
trust you any more. You have done an act of
treachery."

 Raicharan rose to his feet and said: "It was not
I who did it."

 "Who was it then?" asked Anukul.

 Raicharan replied: "It was my fate."  But no educated man could take this for an excuse.
Anukul remained .

 When Phailna saw that he was the wealthy magistrate's
son, and not Raicharan's, he was angry at
first, thinking that he had been cheated all this time
of his birthright. But seeing Raicharan in distress,
he generously said to his father: "Father, forgive
him. Even if you don't let him live with us, let him
have a small monthly pension."

 After hearing this, Raicharan did not utter another
word. He looked for the last time on the
face of his son. He made obeisance to his old master
and mistress. Then he went out and was mingled
with the numberless people of the world.

 At the end of the month Anukul sent him some
money to his village. But the money came back.
There was no one there of the name of Raicharan.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . From the Latin word "judex," a judge. Compare judicious , judge , judgment , just .

 . From the Latin word "pensare," to weigh.
Compare dispense , dispensary , compensation . (This
must not be confused with the Latin word "pendere,"
to hang. Compare suspend , expend , depend .)

 . From two Greek words "ex" and "stasis,"
meaning standing outside oneself.

 . From the Latin word "ferre," to carry.
Compare offer , defer , confer , prefer , proffer , infer , conference , fertile .

  . To break into crumbs or little pieces.

 . From the Latin word "movēre," to move.
Compare motive , motion , motor , promotion , commotion .

 . From the Latin word "ciere," to set in motion.
Compare incite , excitement , exciting , cite .

 . A French word derived from the Greek "lampein,"
to shine. Compare, magic-lantern , lamp .

 . Also spelt gypsy, from "Egyptian"; because the
gipsies were supposed to come from Egypt.

 . From the Latin word "usurpare." This word is
made up of "usus," use and "rapere," to snatch.
Compare use , usual , usufruct , rapid , rapt , rapture .

 . From the Latin word "magister," a judge.
Compare magistrate , magistracy .

 . From the Latin word "dūrus," hard. Compare endure , endurance , obduracy .

    MASTER MASHAI