VII 

 

THE POSTMASTER

 The

postmaster first took up his duties in the village
of Ulapur. Though the village was a small one,
there was an factory near by, and the
proprietor, an Englishman, had managed to get a
post office established.

 Our postmaster belonged to Calcutta. He felt
like a fish out of water in this remote village. His
office and living-room were in a dark thatched shed,
not far from a green, slimy pond, surrounded on all
sides by a dense growth.

 The men employed in the indigo factory had no
leisure; moreover, they were hardly desirable companions
for decent folk. Nor is a Calcutta boy
an adept in the art of associating with others.
Among strangers he appears either proud or ill at
ease. At any rate, the postmaster had but little
company; nor had he much to do.

 At times he tried his hand at writing a verse or
two. That the movement of the leaves and the
clouds of the sky were enough to fill life with joy—such were the sentiments to which he sought to
give expression. But God knows that the poor
fellow would have felt it as the gift of a new life,
if some of the Arabian Nights had in one
night swept away the trees, leaves and all, and replaced
them with a road, hiding the
clouds from view with rows of tall houses.

 The postmaster's salary was small. He had to
cook his own meals, which he used to share with
Ratan, an orphan girl of the village, who did odd
jobs for him.

 When in the evening the smoke began to curl up
from the village cowsheds, and the cicalas chirped
in every bush; when the mendicants of the Baül
sect sang their shrill songs in their daily meeting-place,
when any poet, who had attempted to watch
the movement of the leaves in the dense bamboo
thickets, would have felt a ghostly shiver run down
his back, the postmaster would light his little lamp,
and call out "Ratan."

 Ratan would sit outside waiting for this call, and,
instead of coming in at once, would reply, "Did
you call me, sir?"

 "What are you doing?" the postmaster would
ask.

 "I must be going to light the kitchen fire," would
be the answer.  And the postmaster would say: "Oh, let the
kitchen fire be for awhile; light me my pipe first."

 At last Ratan would enter, with puffed-out cheeks,
vigorously blowing into a flame a live coal to light
the tobacco. This would give the postmaster an
opportunity of conversing. "Well, Ratan," perhaps
he would begin, "do you remember anything
of your mother?" That was a fertile subject.
Ratan partly remembered, and partly didn't. Her
father had been fonder of her than her mother;
him she recollected more vividly. He used to come
home in the evening after his work, and one or two
evenings stood out more clearly than others, like
pictures in her memory. Ratan would sit on the
floor near the postmaster's feet, as memories
crowded in upon her. She called to mind a little
brother that she had—and how on some bygone
cloudy day she had played at fishing with him on the
edge of the pond, with a twig for a make-believe
fishing-rod. Such little incidents would drive out
greater events from her mind. Thus, as they talked,
it would often get very late, and the postmaster
would feel too lazy to do any cooking at all. Ratan
would then hastily light the fire, and toast some unleavened
bread, which, with the cold remnants of the
morning meal, was enough for their supper.

 On some evenings, seated at his desk in the corner of the big empty shed, the postmaster too would call
up memories of his own home, of his mother and
his sister, of those for whom in his exile his heart
was sad,—memories which were always haunting
him, but which he could not talk about with the men
of the factory, though he found himself naturally
recalling them aloud in the presence of the simple
little girl. And so it came about that the girl would to his people as mother, brother, and sister,
as if she had known them all her life. In fact, she
had a complete picture of each one of them painted
in her little heart.

 One noon, during a break in the rains, there was
a cool soft breeze blowing; the smell of the damp
grass and leaves in the hot sun felt like the warm
breathing of the tired earth on one's body. A persistent
bird went on all the afternoon repeating the
burden of its one complaint in Nature's audience
chamber.

 The postmaster had nothing to do. The shimmer
of the freshly washed leaves, and the banked-up
remnants of the retreating rain-clouds were sights to
see; and the postmaster was watching them and
thinking to himself: "Oh, if only some kindred soul
were near—just one loving human being whom I
could hold near my heart!" This was exactly, he
went on to think, what that bird was trying to say, and it was the same feeling which the murmuring
leaves were striving to express. But no one knows,
or would believe, that such an idea might also take
possession of an ill-paid village postmaster in the
deep, silent mid-day interval of his work.

 The postmaster sighed, and called out "Ratan."
Ratan was then sprawling beneath the -tree,
busily engaged in eating unripe guavas. At the voice
of her master, she ran up breathlessly, saying:
"Were you calling me, Dada?" "I was thinking,"
said the postmaster, "of teaching

you to read."
And then for the rest of the afternoon he taught her
the .

 Thus, in a very short time, Ratan had got as far
as the double .

 It seemed as though the showers of the season
would never end. , ditches, and hollows were
all overflowing with water. Day and night the
patter of rain was heard, and the croaking of frogs.
The village roads became impassable, and marketing
had to be done in punts.

 One heavily clouded morning, the postmaster's
little pupil had been long waiting outside the door
for her call, but, not hearing it as usual, she took
up her dog-eared book, and slowly entered the room.
She found her master stretched out on his bed, and,
thinking that he was resting, she was about to retire on tip-toe, when she suddenly heard her name—"Ratan!"
She turned at once and asked:
"Were you sleeping, Dada?" The postmaster in
a plaintive voice said: "I am not well. Feel my
head; is it very hot?"

 In the loneliness of his exile, and in the gloom
of the rains, his ailing body needed a little tender
nursing. He longed to remember the touch on the
forehead of soft hands with tinkling bracelets, to
imagine the presence of loving womanhood, the nearness
of mother and sister. And the exile was not
disappointed. Ratan ceased to be a little girl. She
at once stepped into the post of mother, called in
the village doctor, gave the patient his pills at the
proper intervals, sat up all night by his pillow, cooked
his gruel for him, and every now and then asked:
"Are you feeling a little better, Dada?"

 It was some time before the postmaster, with
weakened body, was able to leave his sick-bed.
"No more of this," said he with decision. "I must
get a transfer." He at once wrote off to Calcutta
an application for a transfer, on the ground of the
unhealthiness of the place.

 Relieved from her duties as nurse, Ratan again
took up her old place outside the door. But she no
longer heard the same old call. She would sometimes
peep inside furtively to find the postmaster sitting on his chair, or stretched on his bed, and
staring absent-mindedly into the air. While Ratan
was awaiting her call, the postmaster was awaiting
a reply to his application. The girl read her old
lessons over and over again,—her great fear was
lest, when the call came, she might be found wanting
in the double consonants. At last, after a week,
the call did come one evening. With an overflowing
heart Ratan rushed into the room with her—"Were
you calling me, Dada?"

 The postmaster said: "I am going away to-morrow,
Ratan."

 "Where are you going, Dada?"

 "I am going home."

 "When will you come back?"

 "I am not coming back."

 Ratan asked no other question. The postmaster,
of his own accord, went on to tell her that his application
for a transfer had been rejected, so he had
resigned his post and was going home.

 For a long time neither of them spoke another
word. The lamp went on dimly burning, and from
a leak in one corner of the thatch water dripped
steadily into an earthen vessel on the floor beneath
it.

 After a while Ratan rose, and went off to the
kitchen to prepare the meal; but she was not so quick about it as on other days. Many new things
to think of had entered her little brain. When the
postmaster had finished his supper, the girl suddenly
asked him: "Dada, will you take me to your
home?"

 The postmaster laughed. "What an idea!" said
he; but he did not think it necessary to explain to the
girl wherein lay the absurdity.

 That whole night, in her waking and in her
dreams, the postmaster's laughing reply haunted her—"What
an idea!"

 On getting up in the morning, the postmaster
found his bath ready. He had stuck to his Calcutta
habit of bathing in water drawn and kept in pitchers,
instead of taking a plunge in the river as was the
custom of the village. For some reason or other,
the girl could not ask him about the time of his
departure, so she had fetched the water from the
river long before sunrise, that it should be ready
as early as he might want it. After the bath came a
call for Ratan. She entered noiselessly, and looked
silently into her master's face for orders. The
master said: "You need not be anxious about my
going away, Ratan; I shall tell my successor to look
after you." These words were kindly meant, no
doubt: but inscrutable are the ways of a woman's
heart!  Ratan had borne many a scolding from her
master without complaint, but these kind words she
could not bear. She burst out weeping, and said:
"No, no, you need not tell anybody anything at all
about me; I don't want to stay on here."

 The postmaster was . He had
never seen Ratan like this before.

 The new incumbent duly arrived, and the postmaster,
having given over charge, prepared to depart.
Just before starting he called Ratan and
said: "Here is something for you; I hope it will
keep you for some little time." He brought out
from his pocket the whole of his month's salary, retaining
only a trifle for his travelling expenses.
Then Ratan fell at his feet and cried: "Oh, Dada,
I pray you, don't give me anything, don't in
any way trouble about me," and then she ran away
out of sight.

 The postmaster heaved a sigh, took up his carpet
bag, put his umbrella over his shoulder, and, accompanied
by a man carrying his many-coloured tin
trunk, he slowly made for the boat.

 When he got in and the boat was under way,
and the rain-swollen river, like a stream of tears
welling up from the earth, swirled and sobbed at her
bows, then he felt a pain at heart; the grief-stricken
face of a village girl seemed to represent for him the great unspoken pervading grief of Mother Earth
herself. At one time he had an impulse to go back,
and bring away along with him that lonesome waif,
forsaken of the world. But the wind had just filled
the sails, the boat had got well into the middle of
the turbulent current, and already the village was left
behind, and its outlying burning-ground came in
sight.

 So the traveller, borne on the breast of the swift-flowing
river, consoled himself with philosophical
reflections on the numberless meetings and partings
going on in the world—on death, the great parting,
from which none returns.

 But Ratan had no philosophy. She was wandering
about the post office in a flood of tears. It may
be that she had still a lurking hope in some corner
of her heart that her Dada would return, and that
is why she could not tear herself away. Alas for
our foolish human nature! Its fond mistakes are
persistent. The dictates of reason take a long time
to assert their own sway. The surest proofs meanwhile
are disbelieved. False hope is clung to with
all one's might and main, till a day comes when it
has sucked the heart dry and it forcibly breaks
through its bonds and departs. After that comes
the misery of awakening, and then once again the longing to get back into the maze of the same mistakes.

 WORDS TO BE STUDIED

 . This word has a very interesting history. It
means "Indian." The celebrated dark-blue dye came
from India. This dye was first known to the Greeks
who called it "Indikon," then to the Latins who called
it Indicum, then to the Italians and Spaniards who
called it Indigo. It was introduced into England from
Italy by artists and painters who kept the Italian word
"indigo" without change.

 . There is a Latin word "genius," meaning originally
a spirit inhabiting a special place. It is from this
word that our English common noun "genius" is
taken, meaning a specially gifted or inspired person,
e.g. "a man of genius." But in the Arabian Nights a
completely different Arabic word is found, viz. "jinn"
with its feminine form "jinni." This was written in
English "genie" and was confused with the word
"genius." The plural of genie when used in this sense
is genii, which is really the plural of the Latin word
genius.

 . This is quite a modern word in English.
It comes from the name of the inventor of this kind of
road-paving, who was Mr. J. L. Macadam. He discovered
that different layers of small stone rolled in,
one after the other, can stand the wear and tear of
traffic. We have similar words from proper names.
Compare, boycott , burke , lynch , etc.

 . From the Latin "ludere," to play. Compare prelude , interlude , delude , collusion , elude , elusive , allusion .

 . This word came into English from the Spanish.
It is of great interest to trace the names of the fruits in English back to their sources, e.g. currant , comes from
Corinth; mango from the Portuguese manga (from
the Tamil "mankay" fruit-tree ); orange from the
Arabic "narang" and Hindustani "narangi"; apricot from Arabic al-burquq; date from the Greek "daktulos,"
meaning "finger."

 . The two first letters in the Greek language are
called "alpha" and "beta." Then the whole series
of letters was named an alphabeta or alphabet.

 . From the Latin "sonare," meaning to sound.
Consonants are letters which "sound with" the vowels.
Compare dissonant , assonance , sonant , sonorous , sonata .

 . This is one example of a word taken into English
from the Latin, through the French, having a companion
word in English. The companion word in this
case is channel . Compare cavalry and chivalry , legal and loyal , guard and ward .

 . This word has come into the English language
from common speech. It is a mixture of the
English word dumb, and the Latin "fundere," "to
pour" which we find in confound , profound , confusion .
It is not often that we get such hybrid words in earlier
English, though to-day they are becoming common in
the case of new words such as motorcar , speedometer , airplane , waterplane , automobile , etc. The old rule
used to be that a compound word in English should
have both its parts from the same language (e.g. both
parts Latin, or Greek, or Saxon, etc.). But this rule
is rapidly breaking down in common practice as new
words rush into the English language to express all the
new discoveries of science. We have English and
Greek roots mixed (such as airplane ), and Latin and
Greek roots mixed (such as oleograph ).

   THE CASTAWAY