THE WILL
    

      I knew that tall young fellow, Rene de Bourneval. He was an agreeable man,
      though rather melancholy and seemed prejudiced against everything, was
      very skeptical, and he could with a word tear down social hypocrisy. He
      would often say:
    

      “There are no honorable men, or, at least, they are only relatively
      so when compared with those lower than themselves.”
    

      He had two brothers, whom he never saw, the Messieurs de Courcils. I
      always supposed they were by another father, on account of the difference
      in the name. I had frequently heard that the family had a strange history,
      but did not know the details. As I took a great liking to Rene we soon
      became intimate friends, and one evening, when I had been dining with him
      alone, I asked him, by chance: “Are you a son of the first or second
      marriage?” He grew rather pale, and then flushed, and did not speak
      for a few moments; he was visibly embarrassed. Then he smiled in the
      melancholy, gentle manner, which was peculiar to him, and said:
    

      “My dear friend, if it will not weary you, I can give you some very
      strange particulars about my life. I know that you are a sensible man, so
      I do not fear that our friendship will suffer by my  revelations; and
      should it suffer, I should not care about having you for my friend any
      longer.
    

      “My mother, Madame de Courcils, was a poor little, timid woman, whom
      her husband had married for the sake of her fortune, and her whole life
      was one of martyrdom. Of a loving, timid, sensitive disposition, she was
      constantly being ill-treated by the man who ought to have been my father,
      one of those boors called country gentlemen. A month after their marriage
      he was living a licentious life and carrying on liaisons with the wives
      and daughters of his tenants. This did not prevent him from having three
      children by his wife, that is, if you count me in. My mother said nothing,
      and lived in that noisy house like a little mouse. Set aside, unnoticed,
      nervous, she looked at people with her bright, uneasy, restless eyes, the
      eyes of some terrified creature which can never shake off its fear. And
      yet she was pretty, very pretty and fair, a pale blonde, as if her hair
      had lost its color through her constant fear.
    

      “Among the friends of Monsieur de Courcils who constantly came to
      her chateau, there was an ex-cavalry officer, a widower, a man who was
      feared, who was at the same time tender and violent, capable of the most
      determined resolves, Monsieur de Bourneval, whose name I bear. He was a
      tall, thin man, with a heavy black mustache. I am very like him. He was a
      man who had read a great deal, and his ideas were not like those of most
      of his class. His great-grandmother had been a friend of J. J. Rousseau's,
      and one might have said that he had inherited something of this ancestral
      connection. He knew the Contrat Social, and the Nouvelle Heloise by heart,
      and all those philosophical books which prepared in advance the overthrow
      of our old usages, prejudices, superannuated laws and imbecile morality.
    

      “It seems that he loved my mother, and she loved him, but their
      liaison was carried on so secretly that no one guessed at its existence.
      The poor, neglected, unhappy woman must have clung to him in despair, and
      in her intimacy with him must have imbibed all his ways of thinking,
      theories of free thought, audacious ideas of independent love; but being
      so timid she never ventured to speak out, and it was all driven back,
      condensed, shut up in her heart.
    

      “My two brothers were very hard towards her, like their father, and
      never gave her a caress, and, accustomed to seeing her count for nothing
      in the house, they treated her rather like a servant. I was the only one
      of her sons who really loved her and whom she loved.
    

      “When she died I was seventeen, and I must add, in order that you
      may understand what follows, that a lawsuit between my father and mother
      had been decided in my mother's favor, giving her the bulk of the
      property, and, thanks to the tricks of the law, and the intelligent
      devotion of a lawyer to her interests, the right to make her will in favor
      of whom she pleased.
    

      “We were told that there was a will at the lawyer's office and were
      invited to be present at the reading of it. I can remember it, as if it
      were yesterday. It was an imposing scene, dramatic, burlesque and
      surprising, occasioned by the posthumous revolt of that dead woman, by the
      cry for liberty, by the demands of that martyred one who had been crushed
      by our oppression during her lifetime and who, from her closed tomb,
      uttered a despairing appeal for independence.
    

      “The man who believed he was my father, a stout, ruddy-faced man,
      who looked like a butcher, and my brothers, two great fellows of twenty
      and twenty-two, were waiting quietly in their chairs. Monsieur de
      Bourneval, who had been invited to be present, came in and stood behind
      me. He was very pale and bit his mustache, which was turning gray. No
      doubt he was prepared for what was going to happen. The lawyer
      double-locked the door and began to read the will, after having opened, in
      our presence, the envelope, sealed with red wax, of the contents of which
      he was ignorant.”
    

      My friend stopped talking abruptly, and rising, took from his
      writing-table an old paper, unfolded it, kissed it and then continued:
      “This is the will of my beloved mother:
    

   “'I, the undersigned, Anne Catherine-Genevieve-Mathilde de
   Croixluce, the legitimate wife of Leopold-Joseph Gontran de Councils
   sound in body and mind, here express my last wishes.

   “I first of all ask God, and then my dear son Rene to pardon me for
   the act I am about to commit. I believe that my child's heart is
   great enough to understand me, and to forgive me. I have suffered
   my whole life long. I was married out of calculation, then
   despised, misunderstood, oppressed and constantly deceived by my
   husband.

   “'I forgive him, but I owe him nothing.

   “'My elder sons never loved me, never petted me, scarcely treated me
   as a mother, but during my whole life I did my duty towards them,
   and I owe them nothing more after my death. The ties of blood
   cannot exist without daily and constant affection. An ungrateful
   son is less than a stranger; he is a culprit, for he has no right
   to be indifferent towards his mother.

   “'I have always trembled before men, before their unjust laws, their
   inhuman customs, their shameful prejudices. Before God, I have no
   longer any fear. Dead, I fling aside disgraceful hypocrisy; I dare
   to speak my thoughts, and to avow and to sign the secret of my
   heart.

   “'I therefore leave that part of my fortune of which the law allows
   me to dispose, in trust to my dear lover, Pierre-Germer-Simon de
   Bourneval, to revert afterwards to our dear son Rene.

   “'(This bequest is specified more precisely in a deed drawn
   up by a notary.)

   “'And I declare before the Supreme Judge who hears me, that I should
   have cursed heaven and my own existence, if I had not found the
   deep, devoted, tender, unshaken affection of my lover; if I had not
   felt in his arms that the Creator made His creatures to love,
   sustain and console each other, and to weep together in the hours of
   sadness.

   “'Monsieur de Courcils is the father of my two eldest sons; Rene,
   alone, owes his life to Monsieur de Bourneval. I pray the Master of
   men and of their destinies, to place father and son above social
   prejudices, to make them love each other until they die, and to love
   me also in my coffin.

   “'These are my last thoughts, and my last wish.

   “'MATHILDE DE CROIXLUCE.'”
 

      “Monsieur de Courcils had risen and he cried:
    

      “'It is the will of a madwoman.'
    

      “Then Monsieur de Bourneval stepped forward and said in a loud,
      penetrating voice: 'I, Simon de Bourneval, solemnly declare that this
      writing contains nothing but the strict truth, and I am ready to prove it
      by letters which I possess.'
    

      “On hearing that, Monsieur de Courcils went up to him, and I
      thought that they were going to attack each other. There they stood, both
      of them tall, one stout and the other thin, both trembling. My mother's
      husband stammered out: 'You are a worthless wretch!' And the other replied
      in a loud, dry voice: 'We will meet elsewhere, monsieur. I should have
      already slapped your ugly face and challenged you long since if I had not,
      before everything else, thought of the peace of mind during her lifetime
      of that poor woman whom you caused to suffer so greatly.'
    

      “Then, turning to me, he said: 'You are my son; will you come with
      me? I have no right to take you away, but I shall assume it, if you are
      willing to come with me: I shook his hand without replying, and we went
      out together. I was certainly three parts mad.
    

      “Two days later Monsieur de Bourneval killed Monsieur de Courcils in
      a duel. My brothers, to avoid a terrible scandal, held their tongues. I
      offered them and they accepted half the fortune which my mother had left
      me. I took my real father's name, renouncing that which the law gave me,
      but which was not really mine. Monsieur de Bourneval died three years
      later and I am still inconsolable.”
    

      He rose from his chair, walked up and down the room, and, standing in
      front of me, said:
    

      “Well, I say that my mother's will was one of the most beautiful,
      the most loyal, as well as one of the grandest acts that a woman could
      perform. Do you not think so?”
    

      I held out both hands to him, saying:
    

      “I most certainly do, my friend.”