THE BROKEN LINK HANDICAPPED.

 While the snaffle holds, or the “long-neck” stings,
   While the big beam tilts, or the last bell rings,
   While horses are horses to train and to race,
   Then women and wine take a second place
       For me—for me—
        While a short “ten-three”
    Has a field to squander or fence to face!
                  ——Song of the G. R.

 There are more ways of running a horse to suit your book than pulling his
      head off in the straight. Some men forget this.

 Understand clearly that all racing is rotten—as everything connected
      with losing money must be. Out here, in addition to its inherent
      rottenness, it has the merit of being two-thirds sham; looking pretty on
      paper only. Every one knows every one else far too well for business
      purposes. How on earth can you rack and harry and post a man for his
      losings, when you are fond of his wife, and live in the same Station with
      him? He says, “on the Monday following,” “I can't settle just yet.” “You
      say, 'All right, old man,'” and think your self lucky if you pull off nine
      hundred out of a two-thousand rupee debt. Any way you look at it, Indian
      racing is immoral, and expensively immoral. Which is much worse. If a man
      wants your money, he ought to ask for it, or send round a
      subscription-list, instead of juggling about the country, with an
      Australian larrikin; a “brumby,” with as much breed as the boy; a brace of
      chumars in gold-laced caps; three or four ekka-ponies with hogged manes,
      and a switch-tailed demirep of a mare called Arab because she has a kink
      in her flag. Racing leads to the shroff quicker than anything else. But if
      you have no conscience and no sentiments, and good hands, and some
      knowledge of pace, and ten years' experience of horses, and several
      thousand rupees a month, I believe that you can occasionally contrive to
      pay your shoeing-bills.

 Did you ever know Shackles—b. w. g., 15.13.8—coarse, loose,
      mule-like ears—barrel as long as a gate-post—tough as a
      telegraph-wire—and the queerest brute that ever looked through a
      bridle? He was of no brand, being one of an ear-nicked mob taken into the
      Bucephalus at 4l.-10s. a head to make up freight, and sold raw and out of
      condition at Calcutta for Rs. 275. People who lost money on him called him
      a “brumby;” but if ever any horse had Harpoon's shoulders and The Gin's
      temper, Shackles was that horse. Two miles was his own particular
      distance. He trained himself, ran himself, and rode himself; and, if his
      jockey insulted him by giving him hints, he shut up at once and bucked the
      boy off. He objected to dictation. Two or three of his owners did not
      understand this, and lost money in consequence. At last he was bought by a
      man who discovered that, if a race was to be won, Shackles, and Shackles
      only, would win it in his own way, so long as his jockey sat still.

 This man had a riding-boy called Brunt—a lad from Perth, West
      Australia—and he taught Brunt, with a trainer's whip, the hardest
      thing a jock can learn—to sit still, to sit still, and to keep on
      sitting still. When Brunt fairly grasped this truth, Shackles devastated
      the country. No weight could stop him at his own distance; and The fame of
      Shackles spread from Ajmir in the South, to Chedputter in the North. There
      was no horse like Shackles, so long as he was allowed to do his work in
      his own way. But he was beaten in the end; and the story of his fall is
      enough to make angels weep.

 At the lower end of the Chedputter racecourse, just before the turn into
      the straight, the track passes close to a couple of old brick-mounds
      enclosing a funnel-shaped hollow. The big end of the funnel is not six
      feet from the railings on the off-side. The astounding peculiarity of the
      course is that, if you stand at one particular place, about half a mile
      away, inside the course, and speak at an ordinary pitch, your voice just
      hits the funnel of the brick-mounds and makes a curious whining echo
      there. A man discovered this one morning by accident while out training
      with a friend. He marked the place to stand and speak from with a couple
      of bricks, and he kept his knowledge to himself. EVERY peculiarity of a
      course is worth remembering in a country where rats play the mischief with
      the elephant-litter, and Stewards build jumps to suit their own stables.

 This man ran a very fairish country-bred, a long, racking high mare with
      the temper of a fiend, and the paces of an airy wandering seraph—a
      drifty, glidy stretch. The mare was, as a delicate tribute to Mrs. Reiver,
      called “The Lady Regula Baddun”—or for short, Regula Baddun.

 Shackles' jockey, Brunt, was a quiet, well-behaved boy, but his nerves had
      been shaken. He began his career by riding jump-races in Melbourne, where
      a few Stewards want lynching, and was one of the jockeys who came through
      the awful butchery—perhaps you will recollect it—of the
      Maribyrnong Plate. The walls were colonial ramparts—logs of jarrak
      spiked into masonry—with wings as strong as Church buttresses. Once
      in his stride, a horse had to jump or fall. He couldn't run out. In the
      Maribyrnong Plate, twelve horses were jammed at the second wall. Red Hat,
      leading, fell this side, and threw out The Glen, and the ruck came up
      behind and the space between wing and wing was one struggling, screaming,
      kicking shambles. Four jockeys were taken out dead; three were very badly
      hurt, and Brunt was among the three. He told the story of the Maribyrnong
      Plate sometimes; and when he described how Whalley on Red Hat, said, as
      the mare fell under him:—“God ha' mercy, I'm done for!” and how,
      next instant, Sithee There and White Otter had crushed the life out of
      poor Whalley, and the dust hid a small hell of men and horses, no one
      marvelled that Brunt had dropped jump-races and Australia together. Regula
      Baddun's owner knew that story by heart. Brunt never varied it in the
      telling. He had no education.

 Shackles came to the Chedputter Autumn races one year, and his owner
      walked about insulting the sportsmen of Chedputter generally, till they
      went to the Honorary Secretary in a body and said:—“Appoint
      Handicappers, and arrange a race which shall break Shackles and humble the
      pride of his owner.” The Districts rose against Shackles and sent up of
      their best; Ousel, who was supposed to be able to do his mile in 1-53;
      Petard, the stud-bred, trained by a cavalry regiment who knew how to
      train; Gringalet, the ewe-lamb of the 75th; Bobolink, the pride of
      Peshawar; and many others.

 They called that race The Broken-Link Handicap, because it was to smash
      Shackles; and the Handicappers piled on the weights, and the Fund gave
      eight hundred rupees, and the distance was “round the course for all
      horses.” Shackles' owner said:—“You can arrange the race with regard
      to Shackles only. So long as you don't bury him under weight-cloths, I
      don't mind.” Regula Baddun's owner said:—“I throw in my mare to fret
      Ousel. Six furlongs is Regula's distance, and she will then lie down and
      die. So also will Ousel, for his jockey doesn't understand a waiting
      race.” Now, this was a lie, for Regula had been in work for two months at
      Dehra, and her chances were good, always supposing that Shackles broke a
      blood-vessel—OR BRUNT MOVED ON HIM.

 The plunging in the lotteries was fine. They filled eight thousand rupee
      lotteries on the Broken Link Handicap, and the account in the Pioneer said
      that “favoritism was divided.” In plain English, the various contingents
      were wild on their respective horses; for the Handicappers had done their
      work well. The Honorary Secretary shouted himself hoarse through the din;
      and the smoke of the cheroots was like the smoke, and the rattling of the
      dice-boxes like the rattle of small-arm fire.

 Ten horses started—very level—and Regula Baddun's owner
      cantered out on his back to a place inside the circle of the course, where
      two bricks had been thrown. He faced towards the brick-mounds at the lower
      end of the course and waited.

 he story of the running is in the Pioneer. At the end of the first mile,
      Shackles crept out of the ruck, well on the outside, ready to get round
      the turn, lay hold of the bit and spin up the straight before the others
      knew he had got away. Brunt was sitting still, perfectly happy, listening
      to the “drum, drum, drum” of the hoofs behind, and knowing that, in about
      twenty strides, Shackles would draw one deep breath and go up the last
      half-mile like the “Flying Dutchman.” As Shackles went short to take the
      turn and came abreast of the brick-mound, Brunt heard, above the noise of
      the wind in his ears, a whining, wailing voice on the offside, saying:—“God
      ha' mercy, I'm done for!” In one stride, Brunt saw the whole seething
      smash of the Maribyrnong Plate before him, started in his saddle and gave
      a yell of terror. The start brought the heels into Shackles' side, and the
      scream hurt Shackles' feelings. He couldn't stop dead; but he put out his
      feet and slid along for fifty yards, and then, very gravely and
      judicially, bucked off Brunt—a shaking, terror-stricken lump, while
      Regula Baddun made a neck-and-neck race with Bobolink up the straight, and
      won by a short head—Petard a bad third. Shackles' owner, in the
      Stand, tried to think that his field-glasses had gone wrong. Regula
      Baddun's owner, waiting by the two bricks, gave one deep sigh of relief,
      and cantered back to the stand. He had won, in lotteries and bets, about
      fifteen thousand.

 It was a broken-link Handicap with a vengeance. It broke nearly all the
      men concerned, and nearly broke the heart of Shackles' owner.

 He went down to interview Brunt. The boy lay, livid and gasping with
      fright, where he had tumbled off. The sin of losing the race never seemed
      to strike him. All he knew was that Whalley had “called” him, that the
      “call” was a warning; and, were he cut in two for it, he would never get
      up again. His nerve had gone altogether, and he only asked his master to
      give him a good thrashing, and let him go. He was fit for nothing, he
      said. He got his dismissal, and crept up to the paddock, white as chalk,
      with blue lips, his knees giving way under him. People said nasty things
      in the paddock; but Brunt never heeded. He changed into tweeds, took his
      stick and went down the road, still shaking with fright, and muttering
      over and over again:—“God ha' mercy, I'm done for!” To the best of
      my knowledge and belief he spoke the truth.

 So now you know how the Broken-Link Handicap was run and won. Of course
      you don't believe it. You would credit anything about Russia's designs on
      India, or the recommendations of the Currency Commission; but a little bit
      of sober fact is more than you can stand!